A HEARTY PRAYER, In a needful time of trouble.

THE SERMON Preached at THEOBALDS, before his Majesty, and the Lords of the
Privy Council, an hour before the Death of our late Sovereign KING JAMES.
On Sunday, March 27.

By D. PRICE, Deane of Hereford, then in Attendance, and now Chaplain in
Ordinary to his MAJESTY.

IER. 30.7. Alas for that day was great, so that none was like it: it was even
the time of JACOBS trouble, but he is saved out of it.

LONDON, Printed by M. FLESHER, for JOHN GRISMAND, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Sign of the Gun in Paul's Alley. 1625.

TO THE KINGS MAJESTY.
Royal Master: Your gracious aspect to my poor endeavors, often presented in
your religious presence, has encouraged me to this Dedication of my last
service to your blessed Father; and first, to your Majesty: for the whole
world has no greater Patronage of goodness, then your self: and our daily
bread, and hourly breath serves us to beseech the Almighty, that you long be
the gracious Patron and Pattern of Religion.

That I presume to offer it unto your Majesty, in this time of our just cause
of joy, wherein the Lillies and Roses, the Olive and Vine, are conjoined; I
excuse it by the Pattern I see in Mount Thabor, wherein our blessed Savior,
when he showed his Disciples a glympse of his glory in his Transfiguration; he
seasoned their Souls, rapt up in those unspeakable joys with the remembrance
of his Passion: What this is, is like Benjamin, the birth of sorrow, and of so
much sorrow to me, as had almost sequestered my Soul from my Body. The hand of
Heaven that has wiped away our tears, keep us long and long from such
occasion of tears, and Crown your Royal Person, and Gracious Queen, with the
blessings of Goodness; which is the continual Prayer

of your Majesty's most humble Chaplain, DANIEL PRICE.

The Sermon at Theobalds, an hour before the death of King JAMES.
PSALM. 118.25. Save now I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee send now
prosperity.


THE first fruits of Sin, are Shame and Sorrow; and ever since Sin brought
in Death, Death the lodge of all men's lives, drives out Sin, and triumphs
over Sinners. Look on the four first Fathers of the World; Adam signifies
earthy; Abel, mourning vanity; Enosh, sorrow; Kenan, lamentation: and ever
since, all times and all places, were and are (as this time and place,
represents unto us) a time of mortality. and a Region of death in the shadow
of Death, Nonne haec est regio mortuorum, says Ambrose, Ambr.
vbi vmbra mortis, janua mortis, vincula mortis, and corpus mortis.

The present Cloud wherein we are inueloped, and stand all as an amazed poor
flock of sheep, beholding a savage Wolf worrying our Royal Shepherd;
looking upon the wrestling of our Royal Jacob, he that is spiritus oris
nostri, Christus Domini, the very breath of our nostrils, the Lords Anointed,
now in Combat with the last enemy that shall be destroyed; the contemplation of
it strikes us with a terrible terror: our sighs, and tears, and prayers
witness it; and unless the tender mercy of our God, whereby the day springs
from on high, do now visit us, to give light to us that sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death, we shall find, that our strange neglect of the
Sabbath, the Lords day, does portend our fatal flight upon this Sabbath day.
But Lord, whatsoever shall become of us the poor sheep of thy pasture, O
look upon thy Royal Servant, O hide not thy face from thine Anointed: save
now, and hear our gracious Sovereign, O King of heaven, now he calls on
thee: now that the Angel of Death strugleth with him, let the Angel of the
Covenant bless him; and as the Angel of Death strives with him, so let the
Angel of the Covenant strive for him, and free his precious soul from all
pain, all sorrow, all adversity, and present it to thy divine Majesty
without spot or wrinckle. O Lord God save our King, mercifully hear us now we
call upon thee, Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts, Favorably with
mercy hear our prayers, Both now and ever, vouchsafe to hear us O Christ,
Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously hear us O Lord Christ. O Son of
God, O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, mediate with thy
blessed Father, if it be possible that this cup may pass from him, or else
that his gracious soul may be bound up in the bundle of life, to live for
evermore with thee in glory.

In the time of Jeremy, it was the style of mourning for Royal Personages,
Alas, Alas: Ier. 22.18.
for that noble Prince, we may take up that Alas, Alas. How lately have we
celebrated David's diem solennitatis, Psalm. 77.2.
our sacred Sovereigns Inauguration? on which day, Thursday before his
Majesty's death.
he that crowns the year with good things, crowned the Crown of our Head,
our Royal King, with an especial measure of grace, in manifesting his hearty
and devout profession of the Faith and Protestant truth, which he had lived
in, and maintained, and resolved to dye in, desiring us all that were present,
to bear witness, sealing that resolution with the blessed Sacrament: after
which divine repast, his soul was settled in so joyful a repose, as that all
worldly content could not compare with it. But Alas, that day, dies
solennitatis, Psalm. 81.3.
is become dies tribulationis: and as Jeremy spoke, Lam. 2.22.
in this solemn day our terrors are round about us: and this Lords day is the
day of the Lords anger. And therefore let every sorrowful and faithful heart,
pray heartily, and cry mightily into heaven, Save now I beseech thee O Lord: O
Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity.

We need not now to call for Sorrow before she come, it is now the time that
the Church has allotted to eat the sour herbs of repentance in Lent, that
we may the more sauourly relish the sweet Passover of Easter, it is the
spiritual Seedtime which ought to be waterish, and we are wont to be content
with a wet Spring, to be sure of a joyful Harvest. Our true sorrow is
Repentance which is (...) an after-wit, and after-wisdome, wherein when we
see, how we have betrayed our selves into the hands of Satan, we may justly wish
that the Heavens above would weep with us, the Earth lament, the Rocks rend,
the Mountains echo groans, and rivers run with tears: and indeed I had
provided by Gods good hand, such a portion of food for this daily bread, and
would have endeavored by his Spirit, to have watered this Gedeons fleece with
that deaw of Heaven. For as Ezekiel describing the Temple, the Image of Gods
Church, calls it, Ezekiel. 48.35.
Jehovah Shammah, (...)
the Lord is there; So all our Prayers and preaching are only to stir up these
graces of God in your holy devotion and conversation, that your light may shine
before men, to stop the mouths of any interloping Priest, or Iesuited
Proselyte, that comes to pry and spy, that he may see, that this place is,
Jehovah shammah, the Lord is here, though he does not know it. But as Saint
Paul was called by an Angel in a Vision, when about to go to Bythinia, one of
Macedonia appeared unto him, and said, O Paul come and help us: Act. 16.9.
so when my intentions were settled on meditations of repentance, the sad face
of this sorrowful family represented it self unto me, and diverse wise and
religious desired the Conclusion of this text, begun on Thursday last, unto
which sudden motion I the rather yielded, because S. Paul had taught me, and
encouraged me in that confidence, that he that begins every good work,
will perform it, Phil. 3.6.
and perfect it unto the day of Jesus Christ. The Text is like that Petition in
the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive, Sola petitio
orationis Dominicae cum repetitione. There be two twins in the womb of my
Text. Genesis 38.30.
Pharez and Zarah were twins, but they were of an incestuous birth. Genesis 24.22.
Jacob and Esau were twins, but there was a battle between them in the womb
before they were borne; but these two twins, two petitions, are like Esayes two
Zeraphins singing one with the other: or like two fiery Cherubins taking wing
together, and flying up to heaven, in a needful time of trouble, to seek
divine assistance. In this later Petition, observe plainly as in the former, 1.
Cui, to whom it is directed, Lord. 2. Quis, the person who it is by who^ it is
vttred, I. 3. Quomodo, the manner how earnestly inplored, Lord I beseech thee,
I beseech thee. 4. Quid, the matter of the suit so required, Lord I beseech
thee send prosperity. Lastly, Quando, the time so vrgently, instantly
importuned; Lord I beseech thee send now prosperity. The sad presence and
representation of this day, delights not in descant. Our Royal Master is in
his sad Passover, and my meditations shall keep the Passover; The Lord Jesus
who was our true Passover, be present with us.

It was a wise speech, Justin Martyr does cite out of Pythagoras, in his book
de Monarchia, (...), If any shall say, I am God, besides that only one God,
let him create and make another world like to this, that we may believe him.
And Tully in his 2. book de legibus, speaks to this purpose, Nemo separatim
habuisset Deos, neque novos neque advenas: for God says St. Bernard is not
only vnus but vnissimus: and as St. Gregory, Deus est intra omnia, extra omnia,
supra omnia, infra omnia: superior per potentiam, inferior per sustentationem,
exterior per magnitudinem, interior per subtilitatem: creating all things,
disposing all things, ruling all things, directing all things; and therefore
God only to be invocated as the Psalmist admonishes, whom have I in heaven but
thee, and in earth none in comparison of thee. It is the Lords day, and to
bestow this precious time impertinently, were but to gather sticks upon the
Sabbath day. In this religious assembly, you may ask as he did after a long
Oration spent in the praise of Hercules, Quis vituperavit? who dare derogate
from this great part of Gods service, which indeed contains the whole worship
of God? so Scripture expresses it, Gen 3.
men began to call upon the name of the Lord. I answer, we know, and God
knows that the Land mourns for the apish Popish Idolatry of many who call
upon, not only imaginary saints, but upon Statues, and pictures, and medalls,
and Idols, creeping to Crosses, bowing to Images, like those who turned the
glory of the invisible God, Psalm. 106.20.
into the similitude of a Calfe that eats hay. Give me leave therefore most
briefly to put my Sith into this Harvest, not only, to cut down those cursed
tares, but also to gather some sheaues for the present occasion of this
distressed Family, who when they see all help to be vain, may the more
earnestly rely upon the God of Jacob for their refuge: It is enough to stifle
and strangle this monster of Idolatrous Superstition, that in all the Bible
there is no one called upon but God only; the godly in all ages never knew any
other, and Rome has no argument out of all the Scripture, but of damned Dives
in hell, and let the wicked be turned into hell, with all the people that
forget God. The voice of the Church is, Te Deum laudamus, We praise thee O
God, we acknowledge thee to be the Lord: All the earth does worship thee: To
thee all Angels cry aloud: To thee Cherubin and Seraphin, continually do cry:
The glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets,
the noble army of Martyrs, the holy Church throughout the world, does knowledge
thee. Hear our Prophet David for all the rest, as collecting this from all the
rest before him, and commending this practice unto all that shall be after him,
Thou Lord art the hope of all the ends of the Earth: Thou art God only to be
feared: Thou art God over all the Earth: Among the Gods none is like unto thee:
Thou art my rock, my refuge, my shield, my buckler, my castle of defense, my
deliverance in whom I trust. O love the Lord all ye that are his. And let me
draw you with a threefold cord of this love, not easily to be broken, twisted
of the most precious twines of his presence, his omnipotence, his beneficence.
For his presence, he is a present help in trouble, he fills Heaven and
Earth: and as there is no place, where there is vacuitie, so there is no place,
where there is not the presence of the Deity. Non est locus, vbi non est Deus:
in the field with Isaac, in the highway with Jacob, in the pit with Joseph, in
the prison with Micheas, in the dungeon with Jeremy, on the dunghill with
Job, in the wilderness with John Baptist, on the Sea with Peter, in the Sea
with Jonas, in the nethermost hell with David, Thou have brought my soul from
the nethermost hell. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, so nigh
as that he prepares their hearts to call, hearkeneth to them when they call,
inclines himself to receive their call, boweth down his care unto their
call; nay more, boweth the Heavens and comes down upon their call; nay more,
he comes into them, stays with them, suppeth with them, lodges with them;
nay yet more, will never be absent from them, but be about their beds, about
their paths, about all their ways, and will for ever dwell in their hearts by
faith. And as for his presence, so for his Omnipotence, He is Creator adesse,
Conseruator in esse, Recreator in been esse, Glorificator in optimo esse, He
that measures the Heavens with a span, holds the Sea in his palm, weighs
the mountains in scales, binds the earth in a girdle; He that out of the
Stones in the street can raise children unto Abraham, open the windows of
heaven and rain plenty, can make fruitful land barren, and water-springs of a
dry land: He that brings down the high tree, and exalts the low tree, and
dries up the green tree, Eccle. 17.24.
and makes the dry tree to flourish: he who with a word made all things, and
with the same facility does govern all things, and with the same ability
shall destroy all things: he who works all things, and is never troubled;
who works always, and is never disquieted: who is in all places, and never
moves; who both fills and incloseth all things: He that is able to do
exceeding abundantly, above all that we can ask or think, unto him be glory
in the Church by Christ Jesus throghout all ages. Ephesians. 3.20.
And as in his presence and omnipotence, so in his beneficence: his grace, his
good will toward men* the tender mercies, the bowels of his mercies, the
merciful loving kindness of the Lord, the height, the depth, the breadth, the
length of the love of God in Christ Jesus. Deus meus, misericordia mea: not
misericors Deus, but Deus meus, misericordia mea: not, my merciful God, or God
of mercy; but, my God, my mercy. O nomen sub quo nemini desperandum.

Come hither then sorrowful Christians, Use.
that feel an invisible hand cutting down our Royal Cedar, under whose
gracious branches we thought to have seen many good days; now ye see that
they whom God has called Gods, and sons of the most high, Quos homines,
coelestibus aequat, has taught them that lesson, they must dye like men, Et
Sceptra ligonibus aequat. O then trust not in Princes. O blessed is the man
that has the God of Jacob for his help: Psalm: 146.4.
whose hope is in the Lord his God. It was a good Speech in a bad King, who
when the poor woman cried out, Help me O my Lord the King, 1 Kings 6.29.
he answered, How should I help thee when the Lord has not helped me. Alas,
vain is the help of man whatsoever he be.

The first and last, highest and lowest of all the sons of Adam, are all
vanity. Some few of them may be Honorable because Princes; but they are
borne sinful, the sons of men; and borne weak, there is no help in them;
and borne mortal, their breath departs; and borne corruptible, they return
to their earth: Trust not then in Princes. And sure, if the great Characters of
Nobility, whose mortality this year has made a large Commentary upon those
words, serve not, The fatal Earthquake under which this great Pile, and every
person therein, now labors in the bitter conflict between life and death of
our Royal Master, (wherein O Lord send help unto Jacob;) his sad and heavy
day, this disastrous hour, might seal this lesson to us all our days, and
lay it up till the last hour of our life, Trust not in Princes, Blessed is the
man, who has the God of Jacob for his help. Alas, how has the witchcraft of
Court so enticed and entangled many, that settling their eyes upon sublunary
objects: with the Israelites, they forget God their helper, who still haunt the
Court, because an unquiet spirit haunteth them, whose ambitious wits being as
high houses upon weak pillars, are easily blasted and blown down, from
advancement or hope, from fruition, or possibility, though they thought to
steal away preferment without Gods knowledge, besides Gods will, and so they
remain bladders puffed up with the wind of false hope and self love, confused
heaps of envy, pride, and emptiness: and why, because they called not upon
God: Happy is he, and blessed be God there be in Court many so happy, that know
that the Court of heaven and earth, are not contrary but subordinate, and that
the best Courtship springs from devotion, when neither the name of Court, nor
grace of a Prince, nor applause of inferiors can make them look above
themselves, or forget God or goodness; to whom honesty, reason and religion
be their chiefest compass, the Dial which they observe how to spend their
time: Providebam Dominum, I did set the Lord always before my eyes: and so
live that though they know Princes favors nor lives be permanent, yet in the
great ecclipses of Court, such as this our present distraction is, they
remember there is a wide world besides the Court, and a heaven above this
world, where there is a God not subject to change, but ready to hear, to help
in a needful time of trouble, as David's own experience here, Lord I beseech
thee send now prosperity. And so we are past our first step.

I beseech thee: 2.
The person who it is by whom it is uttered. The Author of the Ecclesiastical
story relates, that when the Temple was to be built, there was a stone often
taken up, but as often refused by the workmen, sometimes too big, sometimes
too little, till at length it was placed as a conspicuous corner stone above
all the rest. Mist. Eccl. in 3. Reg.
David passed through the Zodiac subject to many disastrous influences, and
yet remains still the same, until the storm of tyranny be ouer-past: Envy
is like the Sunbeams, that beat more upon a rising ground, then upon a
level; by many indignities he came unto that dignity he had, his standing
was slippery, constrained to fly into the Rock, to wander in the wilderness,
to lodge in a Cave, to beg his bread of Abimelech, to make himself a madman
before Achish, to serve the Philistines his enemies; yet, all eyes are fixed
upon him, all tongues, all hearts, entertaining him the object of their
discourse and desires; he being young and lusty as an Eagle, strong as a
Unicorn, bold as a Lion; running his race as a Giant, flourishing as an
Oliue-tree; established as Mount Zion which cannot be removed. I will not
launch forth into the Ocean of David's life, I will content my self to walk by
some rivulets of the waters of comfort, which fall into the great Sea, wherein
are things innumerable to be observed. In the Genealogy of Christ; among all
the Kings there is not one styled a King, but David, Math. 1.6. Iesse begat
David the King, and David the King begat Solomon. And of all the Kings of Judah
or Israel, David was the Pattern. Amasiah did uprightly in the sight of the
Lord, 2 King. 14.
yet not like David his Father. And Asa did right in the sight of the Lord as
did David his Father, 1 King. 15.
and so of the rest; David is so much renowned, as the principal and Paramount
Pattern of all the Royal line, that as in the Catalogue of bad Kings,
Rehoboam did ill, and Jeroboam worse, and Omri worse then he, and Ahab worse
then all; so in the number of the good, though Solomon did well, Iehoshaphat
better then he, and Josias better then both, yet David best of all, and
therefore David the King, the Diamond of the Diadem of all Kings, and of all
other Kings this attribute in Scripture is given David above all Kings, and
before all Kings, David the King. When David was with Achish at Gath, Achish
gives this testimony unto him, Thou art good in my sight as an Angel of God: 1 Samuel 29.9.
when the woman of Tekoa, came with a pretense of getting a pardon for her
banished son, she uses the same terms to David, As an Angel of God, 2 Samuel
14:17.
so is my Lord the King to discern good and bad: when David found the
imposture, that she was Ioabs instrument, the Tekoite applies this again to
him, My Lord is wise according to the wisdom of an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 14.20.
to know all things that are in the earth: when Ziba had slandered
Mephibosheth, and Mephibosheth came being lame, somewhat late to answer for
himself to David, My Lord the King, says he, is an Angel of God: An
attribute given him especially among all the Kings, before all the Kings, and
above all the Kings in Scripture, by enemies, strangers, subjects, servants,
friends, good, bad, all, 2 Samuel 19.27.
David as an Angel of God.

St. Gregory's observation is true, Per incrementa temporu^, Greg. 16. Hom. in
Ezekiel.
creuisse scientiam spiritualium Patrum: Moses partaked more divine knowledge
then Abraham, the Prophets then Moses, the Apostles then the Prophets; Chrysostom.
Ep. 6. ad Theodorum.
but of David St. Chrysostom notes, vt in ordine regum, sic in numero
Prophetarum electum fuisse, Regum vero constable at omnium optimum fuisse, etc. And
Philaster in the same kind, Sicut sanctis alijs diuersam tribuit Christus
Dominus gratiam, it a majorem huic concessit scientiam, dicente Domino, Dabo
vobis sancta fidelia David. Aquinas proves all the premises, quia Dauidi modus
Prophetiae nobilior, videlicet per immediatam illustrationem intellectus: and
David himself explaineth the manner of his Illumination in Prophecy, as the
light of the morning when the Sun arises, 2 Samuel 24.4.
even as a morning without clouds, as the tender grass springing out of the
earth, by clear shining after rain: Summing up Gods extraordinary graces in
this kind, Lord says he, Psalm. 119.99.100.
thou have given me more understanding then mine enemies, then my teachers,
then my Elders. So that David a Prophet, and more then a Prophet, a King, and
the most worthy of al Kings, an Angel of God, and more then an Angel, as I
shall now prove: for if the distinction of Angels and their Hierarchy do hold,
and that of Cherubins be true, Dion. Arcop.
which the Ancients teach us, Cherubin ordo Angelorum qui velocissime pareant
Deo, I say David was as a swift winged Cherubin, of all others; through all the
Scripture none so divinely inspired, with a hearty, holy, fiery zeal, flying
up into the sphere of divine and sacred contemplation; none but he that was
the son of David excelled David in this kind. I know it is a strange curiosity
to make a mans-selfe so skillful in the orders of heaven, as to advance Angel
above Angel, and here it is little less then an Impertinency; and I remember
St. Austin dares not positiuely affirm it; but when I find of all other orders
of Angels the Cherubins at the gate of Paradise, Cherubins over the Arc,
Cherubins in the Temple, the Oracle placed between the Cherubins, and the
Chariot of Majesty drawn by Cherubins, according to that, Psalm. 18.11. Nyss.
de Asc. Domini, Dauidem maiorem esse Apostolis; and Euangelica voce,
sublimiorem.
He rode upon the Cherubins and did fly, I then think, that as one star
differs from another star, so one Angel may differ from another Angel in
glory; and if any Angel excel, the Cherubins do; and if David were as an
Angel of God, because he excelled other men, I dare say by his devotion
wherein he excelled, he was a glorious Cherubin: devotion was his daily bread,
his meat, his drink, his divine and dearest exercise; I give my self, says
he, unto Prayer: does dedicate and consecrate his time and study and labor
and endeavor, his heart and tongue, and body and soul unto this blessed duty
and service, to this divine and heavenly exercise, I give my self unto Praeyer.

The Lord has chose unto himself the man that is godly; that is, says the
Chalde Paraphrase, Psalm. 4.4.
the man that can pray. The Lord has magnifyed, so St. Austin reads
magnificavit, or as Jerome, mirificauit. Surely blessed is that man that the
Lord has endowed with the least measure of his spirit, with one dram of
goodness, with one spark of godliness, one drop of heavenly dew, one mite of
grace, one grain of faith, one Iota of firm obedience; but when the Lord has
showred so plentiful a dew upon his inheritance, and so variously magnified
and multiplied all these blessings upon a man, then we may say as it was of
Mordochai, Thus shall it be done unto the man, Est. 6.11.
whom the King of heaven delights to honor; and such honor have all his
Saints; but above all David had this honor, which being distilled and infused
on him, he deriueth to others, Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that
delights greatly in his Commandment, Ps. 112.1.2.
his seed shall be great upon earth, his generation shall be blessed, wealth
and riches shall be in his house, and his righteousness shall endure for ever.
To close up my observation of David's person, he was not only Gods friend as his
name imports, but Gods favorite, like the Disciple whom Jesus loved, and
therefore most familiar in Gods bosom, and chief of his sacred and privy
Council. Six times we read of David's familiar access, to consult God
himself; David enquired of the Lord, 1. Sam. 23 2.
Shall I go smite the Philistius. David again enquired of the Lord, 1 Samuel
23.4.
Shall I go down to Keilah. David yet again enquired of the Lord, whether
he should pursue the troop that had sacked Ziglag. 1 Samuel 30.8.
When he newly came to the Crown; David enquired of the Lord, 2 Samuel 2:1.
Shall I go into any of the Cities of Judah: when all the Tribes had anointed
him King in Hebron, 2 Samuel 5.19.
and the Philistines came against him, David enquired of the Lord* when the
famine came upon Israel for Saul's bloody act in slaying the Gibeonites. David
enquired of the Lord; or, as in the Original, 2 Samuel 21.1.
Sought the favor of the Lord.

The Imitation whereof will bless your gracious Highness; for as Gregory
proposes the examples of Moses, and David, of all others, to incite Rulers to
enter into the Tabernacle, to consult with God; not to come to their
Counsell-Table, before they ask counsel, and pray for counsel from God; and
even Pliny gives a reason hereof, Nihilrecte, nihil prudenter, nihil
prouidenter, homines sine Deorum immortalium open, consilio, honor, auspicari:
Let it not be unseasonable, that I press this at this instant, now your
Royal Father lies upon the Altar of his Deathbed, for the sacrificing of his
blessed Soul to his Redeemer, The Lord help him in this Day of trouble, the
name of the God of Jacob defend him. I will not say that trouble is hard at
hand; and yet Corona gemmarum, is but Corona spinarum; but a great and weighty
Charge, is ready to fall upon your Princely shoulders, a great door is opening
to your Highness, and there be many Adversaries: upon whom are all the hearts
and eyes, I say, not of these Kingdoms, but of the Christian World, set, but
upon your Highness? and as Mordecai spoke, who knows whether you are come to
the Kingdom for such a time as this is? to be the glory of the Christian,
Ester 4.14.
and envy of the Antichristian World; for, since the Savior of the World went
down into Egypt, vt qui populus persecutor fuit populi primogeniti, fieret
custos filii Primogeniti, never was any Prince so delivered out of the hands of
his Enemies, that he might serve the Lord without fear; never any Prince
brought back from the imminent, eminent, emergent Jaws of death, as your
Gracious Person: O, let it never be unsavory to remember that miraculous
safety of your Highness return; wherein the right hand of the Lord had the
pre-eminence, Psalm. 116.
the right hand of the Lord brought mighty things to pass. O, let it be your
Religious care, that ever your Soul may be satisfied with the blessings of
good things by prayer, that your Sacred Person may be, as ever hitherto you
have been, a blessed Pattern of this holy practice; for such as your
Highness shall appear to be by example and proucation, such will your
Servants be by imitation: For, as all in Alexanders time, did affect Chiualry,
because he was a Soldier; and Poetry in Augustus time, because he loved
Poets; and Music in Nero's time, because he was a Musician; and Fencing in
Commodus time, because he delighted in Fencers: so all were forward in
Christianity in Constantines time, because he loved Christians; of whom as the
powerful examples of other ages in Hercules fortitude, Guevar. Epist.
Marcus Aurelius his wisdom, Antonius Pius his care of the Commonwealth,
Aristotle his learning, Cato his Severity, Scipio his Continency, and Laelius
his Amity, were Presidents to all succeeding Ages; so was Constantine of devout
Piety: who, the better to instruct his People in Devotion, by his own example,
ordained that his Image, which we know Princes do use to coin upon their
money, should be stamped with the resemblance of him praying: And to say no
more herein, Eusebius. de vita Constan. C. 15. Cyp. de coena Dom.
I close this with Cyprian, Quoties in conspectu Domini video aliquem
suspirantem, toties Spiritum sanctu^ non dubito inspirantem: As often as I see
any one in Gods fight sighing out prayers; so often I doubt not God is present,
breathing his Spirit upon such a holy suppliant. Divinity builds upon this,
Christianity does require it, necessity does enforce it, and no faithful man
makes doubt of it; and he that shall be frequent in it, shall be sure to
find favor of the Almighty: O, did they consider this that dote upon Courtly
favor, the Courts diety, Ambitions Darling: upon favor that flower, vapor,
meteor; palea, festuca, vmbra, pluma, spuma; that shadow, that dust, that mote,
that feather, that froth: upon favor that ebbeth as the Sea, passes as a
wind, and droppeth down as the leaves in the fall, they would learn David's
lesson, to seek favor and familiarity with God, for that shall bring a man
peace at the last, Psalm. 37.37.
and would make this their daily suit, as David, a King, being Master of
Requests for himself, here does, I beseech thee O Lord, O Lord I beseech thee:
and so I have done with the second step.

I beseech thee: 3.
the manner how he prays. Devotion delayed or lingered, is soon quenched,
but when heated, and hastened, when the passions are lively and strong, when an
earnest, Zealous, impetuous Petition is offered to God, not drawn from the lips
or lungs, but from the inwards of a contrite, confident Soul, it never wants
success; for not only the Body but the Soul has a mouth, and language; and
as the heart gives aspiration to the arteries, so does the conscience to the
affections; and as we breathe in the air, so grace is breathed into us from
Heaven; the motions of Gods Spirit are the lungs, knowledge and devotion are as
the lips, faith as the tongue, zeal as a string that passes from the heart
unto the tongue; Prayer is the language of Canaan, the holy Tongue; for she
was bred in the holy Land, and the elegance of this Tongue, is the eloquence of
importunity. Chrysostom.
Quam grata apud Deum importunitas* how gracious and grateful is importunity
in the ears of God? Non importunus neque impudens, Aug. de verb. Apost.
says S. Austin, it is not a saucy or a shameless part in thee to ask any
thing of God with great importunity, he bids thee ask, and seek, and knock,
and knock not only til he hear, but till he answer, and open, and grant thy
request. David has a double supplication, it is like the former and the latter
rain, the ingemination notes an unremovable and constant affection to the
suit he desires; man's impatience in prayer can never offend Gods patience,
the Music of Angels does not more delight the Lord, then the redoubled
obsecrations of his Servants, whereby he does suspend their desires in
expectation, and extend them by the (...), their earnest importunity: Note only
the Parables of a friend called up at midnight, the most unseasonable and
deadest time, wherein any would be loath to be troubled, the doors shut, the
children asleep, the sable mantle of the silent night, covering all the World;
yet upon importunity the friend rises at midnight, answers, opens,
grants, Luke 11.
the request, tendreth and gives, because of the importunity; so also that
Parable of the unjust Judge, that cared neither for God nor man; yet because of
the constant, continual Solicitation of the poor woman, he heard her, and
granted her suit: we cannot hold a meaner opinion of God, then of a common
vulgar Friend, (which were too base to conceive) or a more unrighteous
judgment of him, then of the most unrighteous Judge, (then which, Aqu. Cat.
Aug.
what can be thought more blasphemous) they both were woone, non amicitia, non
iustitia compulsi, sed taedio. Famous is the importunity of the poor woman of
Canaan, miserere fili David. 1. She cries, and calls, and follows: our
Savior vouchsafes not an answer, not a word, not a look, yet she surceaseth
not, but calls and cries out still. 2. The Disciples her back-frinds, they
would have her sent back, Send her away, she cries after us, and yet she is
not retarded, but continues her calling. 3. Our Savior answers her, and
rejects her, as not capable of any good from him, I am not sent but to the
lost sheep of Israel: she a Canaanite, yet neither Disciples nor Master can
beat back her Faith, she follows, and falls down, and worshippeth, and
cries Lord help me. 4. Our Savior replieth in the most bitter Phrase that
ever he used to any poor Suitor, It is not meet to take the childrens bread
and to give it to dogs. Mat. 6.
The daughter possessed with a Devil, the mother accounted a dog, and holy
things not to be given to dogs, this had bin enough to have blasted her hope,
and rooted up her faith, and have confounded her confidence, and wounded her
distressed soul, and silenced her importunity; yet behold, she that had all
these discouragements, replieth, and by her reply crowns her confidence with
a blessed conquest, Truth Lord, but the dogs eat of the crummes that fall from
their Masters table. She wrought a miracle upon her Savior, made the deaf
ears to hear, and the dumb tongue to speak: to tongue and ears, she cried
as Christ to the eyes of the blind, Ephata, be opened, hear and answer my
petition, and grant my request. O how well pleased is the Lord with the
importunity of his servants when they cry day and night, and double their
ingeminated obsecrations.

Look upon blessed Hezekias his manner of Prayer, Isay 37.17.
Incline thine ears O Lord and hear, open thine eyes O Lord and see, and
hear; and when he lay upon his deathbed chattering like a swallow, mourning
like a Dove, I am deprived of the residue of my years, I said I shall not see
the Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the living: he knew that no balm in
Gilead, no unguent of the Apothecaries, no skill of Physicians, no fruits of
the fields, no flowers of the garden, no mineralls of the ground, Esaias 38.
could give the least allay unto his sick and sorrowful soul, but only the
Lord, whom therefore he remembers, and six times in his Prayer repeateth
that sacred name of the Lord. It is observed that God himself does seem to be
pleased to use often an ingemination of the names of those he best loved, in
Scripture; Genesis 22.11. Exodus 3.4. 1 Samuel 3.10.
as when he called Abraham, Abraham, Moses, Moses, and Samuel, Samuel: and in a
like manner we ought to be well pleased and much delighted in the blessed
remembrance and invocation of his name. And sure when the heart is full of God,
the tongue will not refrain to talk of him, they that rarely think on God,
show how miserable their estate of grace is. If the Lord be not in our hearts
we are godless; if in our hearts without joy, we are hopeless: If we
rejoice in him, and speak not of him, we are shamefully thanklesse; If he be
in our hearts in our tongues, in our joy, coldly and perfunctorily, we are
negligently faithless: and therefore as we must think on the Lord always,
so speak on him often, and when we pray to him, do it earnestly, and
zealously; in faith without wavering, in confidence without doubting, in
perseverance without desisting, crying out as Jonas Mariners, Ion. 1.
We beseech thee O Lord, we beeseech thee; or as David here, I beseech thee O
Lord, O Lord I beseech thee.

To land this point, remember that the Church has appointed us to pray, in all
time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, and in the hour of death.
In all time of our tribulation we are ready to pray, but in the time of our
wealth and prosperity we are strangers to devotion; yet in the time of thy
wealth and health remember tribulation, remember in the days of thy peace, thy
visitation; remember thy hour of death: for when riot has been master of
mis-rule, and turned sobriety the good steward out of door, and Intemperance
an unbidden guest, has got in, and defiled all the rooms of thy body; Nature
like a good-huswife would willingly cleanse the house, and desires the help of
Physic, as a Scauinger, to make clean the rooms; but alas, she finds that
sin lies like a dog at the door, and death the cruel Sergeant threatens to
serve an extent upon the whole house, there is no such means to quit thee of
thy disease and of thy direful enemy as prayer: it is David's Antidote, but
thou must take it fasting, and be sure to take it warm, it must be fervent
prayer; and take it not only morning and evening, but take it as a continual
Cordial, and cry mightily, Have mercy, have mercy, Spare me O Lord, spare me O
Lord, I beseech thee to hear me good Lord, I beseech thee to hear me. And so
being steadfast, and immovable, and always abounding in this work of the
Lord, thou shall find that thy labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. And
so I have ended my third step, the manner how he earnestly implored: I will
mend my pace, for it is the day of our Royal Jacobs wrestling, and I fear, as
Elisha heard the sound of Iehorams feet following the bloody messenger sent to
take away his life, so my heart trembles to think it, and my cares tingle to
hear, the heavy and sad approach of pale Death entering into this Kingly
Palace. O that we could with Elisha look heedfully now this messenger, this
murderer comes, 2. Kings 6.32.
and that we could by our prayers shut the door, and hold him fast at the
door, and this prayer might prevail, O Lord I beseech thee save now, O Lord I
beseech thee send now prosperity.

Send Prosperity: Praeuentions of Paliticians, presumptions of the foolish,
circumspection of the wise, circumuention of the wits, are all Arts Cobwebs,
and experience paper Castles, the Silkworms work, and the fools wonder,
Prosperity is only the gift of the father of lights. The old Speech is, that
wise men cause prosperous times: But alas, Policy trippeth up sacred Wisdom,
for Policy and Wisdom differ as much as Scripture and Apocrypha; and Policy
is often as offensive to true Wisdom, as Hagar to Sarah, and sometimes as
injurious, as Elimas the Sorcerer was to Peter, or Alexander the Copper-smith
to Paul. Laertius tells us of certain young men of Ionia, Diog. Laer. de vit.
Philos.
standing on the shore, agreed with certain Fishermen for the next draught,
in which there being a rich and precious piece of Plate, they not agreeing
whose by right it was, they went to consult the Oracle; the Oracle enjoined
them to send it to the wisest man alive, they thereupon sent it to Thales, he
disclaimed it, and sent it to another, who also refused it, till having passed
through many, who all denied that attribute of the wisest, to belong to them,
at length they bring it to Solon, and he wished them to send it to the Temple
at Delphos, and to present it to God, as being the most wife, according to that
of S. Paul, To God only-wise. And surely, as God is called by the name of
Wisdom; so men come near to God in nothing more then the study of Wisdom;
wherein all the Politicians of the World out of their Chemical limbiques, with all their extraction, can never do good, unless their wisdom be seasoned
from above. It is God only that can both make wise men and prosperous times:
and therefore our Prophet directs his Prayer aright, O Lord send prosperity:
The Hebrew reads, (...) Hosanna, which was sung before Christ, is now sung
before David: a word that is variously interpreted by the Ancients and Modern,
signifying, says Euthymius, a Hymn or Song: or the branches of Olives and
Palms, born before Christ, as Caninius: or the redemption of the house of
David, as Ambrose: or grace and glory, as Chrysostom: it is interiectio
gaudentis, and obsecrantis, as Austine: and as much as (...), processus,
successus, a voice and vote of happy success. It is like that in the first
Psalm, Omnia quaecunque faciet prosperabuntur. All the four Evangelists
mention this Iubilation at the coming of our Savior to Jerusalem, wherein
Disciples and followers, and young, and old, men, women, and children bare a
part. It is a frequent acclamation in Scripture, God save the King, not only
to Solomon the good, but to Saul the bad, and to Adonijah the Usurper; 1 Kin.
1.39. 1 Samuel 10.24. 1 Kin. 1.25.
but Hosanna only sung to David, and to the Soune of David, Christ Jesus. I
will not strive to enter into the meaning or mystery of this word of
Iubilation; Alas, it is a word out of season, and all our Instruments are out
of tune, and we are here as they that sat weeping at the waters of Babylon,
we have hanged up our harps upon the willowes; this is not a time to sing the
songs of Sion, none may require this song of us in our heaviness. Lorinus
observes, Lor. in Ps. 116.
that of all other the Evangelists, S. Luke omitteth this word Hosanna, Qui
Graeci sermonis eruditissimus, videns se proprietatem sermonis transfer non
posse, melius arbitratus est tacere, quam id ponere quod legenti faceret
quaestionem, and therefore I will content my self as it is here rendered, Lord
send prosperity. It was an usual form of Morning Prayer among the Jews,
Prosper us O Lord, O Lord send us now prosperity; prosper thou the work of our
hands unto us, O prosper thou our handy work. It was the Religious care of
Abraham's Servant, when being sent to solicit for a Wife for Isaac, and
knowing that it was not to be enterprised unadvisedly or lightly, he prayed
in his Journey: Genesis 24.12.21.
O Lord God I beseech thee send me good speed, or prosperity, this day. And
when he came unto the Well, he stood wavering in contemplation, whether the
Lord had made his journey prosperous or not; and when the Match was concluded,
Hinder me not says he, seeing the Lord has prospered my way.

Prosperity is not the fair Gale of temporal carnal security, puffing up the
superstitious sails of pride and ambition. If thou had, Aug.
says Austin, the wise dome of Solomon, the strength of Sampson, the beauty of
Absolon, the long life of Methushelah, the riches of Dives, the diet of the
Glutton, who fared deliciously every day. Quid prosunt haec, cum caro datur
vermibus, Anima Daemonibus? Look upon David's two trees, the Bay Tree, and the
Oliue-tree, and then observe the difference between true and seeming
prosperity. I have seen the wicked in great power, Psalm. 37.36.
and spreading like a green Bay Tree: yet he passed away and lo he was not:
I sought him, but he could not be found. Here is that enticing trap, sugared
poison, venomous pill, stupifying perfume, that golden net, and goodly,
Babylonish garment, like that Fruit which our first Parents tasted: Pro. 1.31.
Pulcher in visu, mollis in tactie, dulcis in gustu, mortifer in effectu. The
prosperity of fools shall destroy them, possessing them with irreligious
profaneness, and so infatuating them, that their hearts are as dead pieces of
flesh, without sense of fear, or love, or care, or pain, from the deaf
strokes of a revenging conscience. This drew that strange expostulation from
Jeremy: Ier. 12.1.2.
Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee; yet let me talk with thee
of thy Judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are
they happy that deal trecherously? Thou have planted them, and they have taken
root, and grow and bring forth; thou art near in their mouth, but far from
their reins: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for
the day of slaughter. But now, if you please, look upon David's Oliue-tree, or
rather David as an Oliue-tree; I am like a green Oliue-tree in the house of my
God for ever; Psalm. 52.9.
not as Nebuchadonozors tree, hewed down; or as the wicked man's Bay tree,
fel'd down; or as John Baptists tree, cut down and cast into the fire: but
the green, pleasant, fragrant, flourishing, Oliue-tree: Gen 8.11.
Noah's Dove came to him with an Olive branch, in her mouth, and that branch was
the Emblem of a blessing: St. Chrysostom gives the reason, why an Olive
branch; not only because the leaves thereof are most beautiful, but that they
live under water, as it is certain the Oliue-tree continued in the great
Cataclisme and Inundation of Waters: And indeed, the Spirit of God, of all
trees, makes especial mention of the Oliue-tree, that whereas Job compares
the Rich-man to the Palm Tree, and Solomon the Old man to the Almond-tree, and
Esaias the Great man to the Cedaer, and Ezekiel the Poor man to the Firre-tree;
David compares the wicked man to the Bay Tree, and the good man to the
Oliue-tree, among the rest, and above the rest ever flourishing. It was the
conceit of the Jews, that the Dove brought this Olive branch from Paradise:
surely, whencesoeuer, or howsoever it came, it was a blessed token, and ever
since the Olive branch has been the Emblem of a blessing; and happy is that
man that may bear an Olive branch, in all the waves of this troublesome world,
that may be as an Olive tree, steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and
rooted in charity, and can think his Prosperity enough to live out of the
noise of the world, as far from staruing as burning, and when heavenly
contentments have possessed his Soul, he looks down upon the earth
displeasedly, as the region of his sorrow and banishment, still praying for the
prosperity of Jerusalem, and peace upon Israel, as our Royal Prophet now does.

Now, the last Circumstance.

This Psalm was made by David, when he was first invested into his Kingdom.
Of all other persons it concerns Kings to pray, and of all other times, at
their first entrance to their Government: David and Solomon begun their Rule
with the rule of Prayer: The goodness of a private man is his own; of a
Prince, the whole worlds; his words are Maxims, his actions examples, his
examples rules. David, both privately alone, and publicly in the Congregation,
prepares himself to prayer, in this Psalm, and the people provoked by their
Kings example, pray for the continuance, and long life of their Prince and
Prosperity, That God may distribute to the King gifts proportionable to his
greatness, that the head may enjoy all the senses of the whole body, that the
Church and Commonwealth, the King, and Judges, Heraclit.
and Laws, and all, may flourish; for as Heraclitus observes (...). The King
is the Image of God, the Judge is the Image of the King, the Law the work of
the Judge, and Justice the end of the Law. And David had especial reason to
pray, at this his Inauguration; for he knew a great and dangerous war was in
hand, the Philistines were his deadly enemies, he had been among them, and
knew them, and was now to make provision against them. And therefore, as Numa,
Lor in Ps. 44. p. 915.
when a rumor of War was raised; Sacrificabo, says he, I will sacrifice;
so, when David foreseeth this fear of foreign enemies, he betaketh himself
unto prayer. But I must leave David at his Prayer, and conclude with our times:
Time is the conclusion of all things. Lord send now prosperity.

And if we look upon our times, upon this sad, swift, speedy time, feathered
with flying hours, upon this fatal Year; Senec. Epist. 18.
Mensis olim December, says Seneca, nunc annus est. This whole Year has
been composed of the fall of the leaf, and Winter. O ye Mountains of
Gilboa, how many noble and valiant have fallen this year, D. of Richmond. E.
of Dorset. D. of Lennox. E. of Notingh. E. of Southampton and his Son. L.
Belfost. M. Hamilton.
they that were lovely and pleasant in their lives, swifter then Eagles,
stronger then Lions: How many noble Families have been like the naked twigs of
Winter, shiuering all for cold, and dropping down their tears abundantly? How
many of the choice Peers and Pearls has Death stolen out of the Coronet of
our Nobility? How many poor Firre-trees may mourn, for their Cedars be
fallen? And is not this an ill boading prodigious time, wherein with hearts, and
tongues, and tears, and prayers we had need to cry, Lord, now send
prosperity.

Cast your watery eyes upon the fatality of this bloody Month, and not to look
upon the ancient Triumph of Funeral Solemnities in March; March. 24.
remember how in this Month we were deprived of blessed Queen Elizabeth, the
Paragon of mortal Princes, the Woman after Gods own heart, the Virgin-Queene
of the Earth, the glory of the Christian, the envy of the Infidel World; who
came so near unto the blessed Virgin Mary, that she was borne upon the Vigil
of her birth, and dyed upon the Vigil of her Annunciation: Remember the sable
time since the Death of the Royal Vine of this Kingdom, Martij 20. 1618. die
Martis.
Queen Anne in this very month; a Queen not superstitious, not factious, not
tyrannous; but religious to her God, and most gracious to all the Subjects of
this Land, and her well deserving servants: Not a Lioness hunting for the prey
as Iezabel, or a Typer greedy of the spoil as Athaliah; but a sweetly tempered
and Royal Lady, whom Grace and Peace crowned, and Glory has made Conqueror,
and God, Martij 23. 1618. die martis.
in this Month not many years since, took from us, as one, of whom the world
was not worthy of,

Inter foelices and foelicissima quondam
Regis enim Conjux, Eilia, Matter, erat.
Remember the fatal sickness at Royston, when that acute and violent disease,
seized upon our Royal Sovereign, in this very month, when our fears
increased with the minutes, and every messenger was as one of the Chorus in a
Tragedy; as Jobs messengers, every one adding to the sorrows of those sad
times, and when

-- Duxisset mox fila secanda sorores,
Non sic est visum Sceptris: --
Our Royal Hezekias recovered miraculously to Gods glory, Lam. 4.20.
the good of the Church and State, and great comfort of all his good Subjects.
But alas, our sins have fought against our good, and now Death the ledge of
all men's lives, that sets upon men with stealing steps, and insensible degrees,
threatens a final arest upon our Royal Master. The breath of our nostrils, the
Anointed of the Lord is taken in the snare, of whom we said, Lam 4 20.
Under his shadow we shall live. The Crown is falling from our head, woe unto
us that we have sinned; for this, Lam. 5.16.
our heart is faint, for these things our eyes are dim. O thou God of Jacob
defend him; send him help from thy Sanctuary, and strengthen him out of Zion,
for thou Lord remainest for ever and ever, thy Throne from generation to
generation, Lord we beseech thee save now, Lord we beseech thee send now
prosperity.

It was a divine Canticle of a sweet Singer of Israel, upon his Majesty's last
recovery, D. Goodwine Deane of Christ. Church.
why this Month was so infestuous to our King.

Tu Martem odisti, Mars odit pacis amantem,
Hinc tantae clades, hinc tot conamina Martis,
It was about this very time of the year say some that the first foundation of
Venice was laid, Hosp. de Orig. F
sure I am we stand here upon a watery foundation, the water-Springs of our own
tears are able to sink us: The computation of some is approved, who hold,
that the world was created about this very time, and I remember the first work
in the Creation was that the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
We are now laboring under a new Creation, the same blessed spirit of God move
upon our watery faces, and dry up the tears of our eyes.

It is the Liturgy of our Church that teaches us, that in the midst of life
we are in death. But blessed be our God in the midst of death we are now in
life; there is present a gracious Dove with an O live branch, that shall bring
comfortable news to our world, and the waters shall cease: I never was like to
that (...), that base flatterer, who is, In vita Constan.
as Aurelius Victor well observed, sorex and tinea Palatij: I know his Princely
disposition has ever hated a Parasite as the worst Traitor; God keep two
mischiefs ever from within the smoke of his Court, Flattery and Treachery;
the Inquitie of the times may make us fear these, not his gracious
inclination: but this I may say before God, and men, and Angels, seldom ever
have those years promised, seldom have performed so much, and we have seen
enough to make us think we can never be enough thankful to God for him. I
remember an observation of an Historian, concerning Charles the Fifth, Knolls in
the Ger. Histor.
who being borne upon Mathias day, and having an Elder brother alive, his
Grandmother applied by a Phrophecy, that of Mathias election unto Charles the
newborn Prince, that as the Lot fell upon Mathias, though last in place, so
the Lot of the Empire should fall from the Elder brother upon Prince Charles,
though last in birth. The like Lot is now falling unto your Princely Highness,
and my prayers be, that all your days may be like the two Saints days of
this month, Foelix and Perpetua, that when your Royal Father shall pass a
Corona ad Coronam, as it was one of the Divine meditations proposed this
morning to his Majesty by that most honorable Bishop, and that he shall
exchange this mortal for a Crown of immortality; The Lord Keeper.
that the spirit of your gracious Father may be doubled upon your Highness, as
the spirit of Elias was upon Elisha, that true Religion may flourish under you;
and that you may ride on in Majesty prosperously, because of truth, and
meekness, and righteousness: That you may ride on in truth, for State without
truth, is like Pride without Power, an vmbrageous Pageant for sight not for
service. That you may ride on in truth and Majesty, for truth without Majesty
is like a Talent hid in a bank, or a Candle under a bushel: That you may ride
on in truth and Majesty and meekness, for Majesty without weeknesse, is
like greatness without goodness, the Politicians Character, but the Peoples
curse: That you may ride on with truth and Majesty and meekness and
prosperity, for Majesty without prosperity is like Heaven without a sun, or
the Summer without a Harvest. That you may ride on in Majesty, truth,
meekness, and prosperity and righteousness, for Majesty without
righteousness, is like beauty without honesty, a wanton dead soul in a
painted sepulcher: but when your Canopie of Majesty is supported by truth, and
meekness, and prosperity and righteousness, Blessings and prayers will be
showred upon you, God, even your own God shall give you his blessing, and God,
even our own God shall send us prosperity; Which the Lord grant, for his
mercy, for his promise, for his Zion, for his Sons sake Christ Jesus, Amen.

FINIS.

