SPIRITVALL ODOVRS TO THE MEMORY OF PRINCE HENRY IN FOUR OF THE LAST SERmons
preached in St JAMES after his Highness death, the last being the Sermon
before the body, the day before the Funeral.

BY DANIEL PRICE then Chaplain in Attendance.

ECCLVS. 49.1. The remembrance of Josias is like the composition of the perfume
made by the Apothecary.

AT OXFORD Printed by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold by John Barnes dwelling
near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, VIRTUOUS AND GRACIOUS PRINCE, PRINCE CHARLES, THE
BEAVTY OF THE COURT, AND THE BLESSING OF THIS COUNTRY, DANIEL PRICE, WITH HIS
MOST DEVOTED OBSERVANCE, OFFERS THESE HIS LAST SERVICES TO BLESSED PRINCE
HENRY.

PSALM. 90.15. Comfort us now, according as thou have afflicted us.


HONORABLE, mournful, worthy Auditory

I stand here, as that amazed servaunt of Elias, crying and lamenting for my
MASTER feeling the pain, fearing the peril of his loss; Ps. 19.5.
o what a thunderbolt of astonishment is it to us all, that the sun, coming
forth as a bridegroom, out of his chamber, and reioicng as a Giant to run
his course, should set even before the Meridian and midday! it is a thought
that beats the breath out of my body and makes my soul ready to fly from me:
yet seeing it is your own desire and expectation that we should frequently
gather to these sad, and solemn exercises in this holy place of this house of
mourning, though my worthy Colleagues sickness and mine own weakness might
be Apologies, I forbear rather the excuse then the exercise, seeing Apologies
be as obvious as odious, not only Heralds to blaunch, but vshers to blame such
delinquencie.

You have heard how our Savior his servants, his disciples, daily waiters,
were scattered; Mat. 26.13.
in the same chapter, I find small argument of comfort for these distressed
dispersed souls, but at the same time, as may be collected out of S. John, our
Savior comfort his servants thus, Ioh. 16.22.
Ye are now in sorrow but I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice:
which meditation now has moved me, Genesis 8.
to bring you an Olive branch, in these waves and waters of sorrow, not
thereby to wish an end, to your mourning, but to season it that it may be
better and stronger, Genesis 8 8. Mat. 3.16.
and hereafter more for your pleasure, more for your profit: when the Arc was
on the waters the Dove was sent out, when Christ was in the waters the Dove was
sent down, Greg. in Moral.
Columba est spiritus consolationis says Gregory, the Dove represents the
spirit of comfort, and when the flood is come to full tide, the Dove shall be
sent that the waters may cease, when sorrow is at full age, sweet wood must be
cast into the bitter waters, Psalm. 85.8.
peace shall come says the Prophet, Comfort shall have a time, worldly
contentments may end in bitterness, Joseph. Antiq.
Jordan may run a long race, sweetly and pleasantly, and afterward fall
into the dead sea, and never recover it self again, but the joy, and comfort
of Gods servants (notwithstanding all ecclipses) shall finally never be
obscured, Chrysostom.
times twins day and night shall be changed, the four colors of the veil of
man's Temple, the Elements, shall be consumed, the soul and body of the world,
Heaven and earth shall be destroyed, but the comforts of Gods children shall
never be extinguished, you may believe him without an oath, but I have sworn
by my holiness says the Lord, Psalm. 89.25. 1. Kings. 19.12
I will never forsake David. As he dealt by Elias, to send first the whirlewind,
then the Earthquake, then the fire, but then the small still voice, so has he
dealt with all his Prophets after all the threatenings, and thundrings, he sends
messages of Consolation, by Esaias thus, Comfort ye, Comfort ye, Esaias. 40.1.
Ier. 31.13.
my people, will God say; By Jeremy thus, I will comfort them and give them
ioies for sorrows; By Ezechiel thus, Ezekiel 14 22.
ye shall be comforted concerning all the evil I have brought upon you; By
Zachary thus, The Lord will yet comfort Syon, Zech. 1.17.
and as Christ spoke, so may COMFORT say, of me all the Prophets bare witness:
but among al Prophecies, none so comfortable, none so watered with the dew of
heaven, as the book of Psalms, this is the Spowses garden, Cant. 4.12.13
here be the lilies and roses, here be Apples and Pomegranats, and sweet
fruits, here be the mirre, aloes, Cassia and sweet spices, here be the
fountains of the garden, wels of living water, the springs of Lebanon, sweet
waters: every Psalm is as the fou^t of Bethel, Basil. in. 1. Ps.
and as Basil by experience speaks (...), every Psalm is a message of Peace,
and embassage of mercy. Hence had the servants of God in all ages the balm of
Gilead to apply to their soars and sorrows. Eusebius lib. 12. and prep. cap. 13.
I need not tell you how many Prophets and Apostles in the old and new
Testament have used authorities hence, Eusebius.
or how Plato is by Eusebius reported to receive instruction from this book,
or how Babilas the Bishop, or Mauritius the Emperor seasoned the misery of
their Martyrdom with a Ca^ticle of a Psalm, or how many holy Martyrs, all the
ancient Fathers, all the Saints of God have made blessed use of this book, that
begins with blessedness, In Maz. and Concord.
and contains nothing but blessedness, being repeated in the Concreat 27.
times in this one book, which like the tree that bears fruit every month
twelve times a year, Reu. 21.
so the Church has appointed every month that this book bring forth fruit in
due season, Ps. 1.
and among all uses of Comfort our blessed Savior hence commended his soul
sent up in a Psalm unto his father, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

This Psalm I have taken up for your use, in this sad and sable time, it is
the first of all the Psalms in order, though not in number, it was made 300.
years before David or this book were extant; for when Moses the man of God,
Deuteronomy. 32.
had passed the Meridian of his life, Mart. in. Is.
being now in the afternoon of his age, seeing and foreseeing the night of
death approaching, Gods heavy indignation increasing, Israel still disobeying,
he enters into the consideration of man's transitory station, showing how many
waves are ready to devour this little I Will of man, how he is turned to
destruction, scattered and consumed, cut down, Psalm 90.
dried up and withered: our misdeeds (says Moses) are before thee, our sins
are in the fight of thy countenance, our years are a tale that is told, our
strength is but labor and loss, so far you see man's sun is in the
Eclipse, here is nothing but lachrymae and suspiria, tears, sighs, sobs, and
sorrows, deploration, lamentation, fit meditations for our souls. But behold
what follows, Amb.
O turn thee unto us again, O be gracious, O teach us, O satisfy us, O
comfort us, O show us the light of thy countenance, O prosper thou the works
of our hands unto us, O prosper thou our handy works. Here be preces and vota,
prayers and Consolations, amulets of comfort, the Sunshine in brightest luster
and splendour. Our of those five stones that David took out of the brook, he
used but one, 1 Samuel 17.40.
so out of all these I have singled this singular petition for consolation.
Comfort us now, according as thou have afflicted us. And my hearty desire is as
that of S. Austin in the like kind, Deus faciet hunc textum tam commodum, Aust.
quam accommodatum, God grant it may be as fruitful and profitable as it is
fit and commendable for these sorrowful seasons. The text it self is a
prayer; and a prayer you know is a present help in trouble, it is the language
of heaven, it is a messenger as speedy as happy, faithful for speed, fruitful
for success, and partaketh much of omnipotency, no hinderance of the way, no
difficulty of the passage can hinder, Prayer dispatches in a minute all the way
betwixt heaven and earth, and as a fiery chariot mounteth into the presence of
the Almighty to seek his assistance: Si in terrore mentis, si in agone mortis,
if in any anxiety of mind, if in any agony of mortality* Chrysostom.
thou fly to this Tower here be the arms and Armory of the strong men, it is
the incense of the Church, it is the spikenard of the Tabernacle, it was Moses
rod, Can. 5 5. Exodus 30.34. Exodus 17 5. Iam 5.17.
it was Elias key, it was to Jacob his sword and bow, it was to David his sling
and spear, so is Prayer in general; and this one text in particular, to make
no more excursions, is as the Angel that came down into the poole of Shiloa,
it is a healing prayer, a prayer never is more necessary then now, especially
this kind of prayer, Comfort thou us now according as thou have afflicted us.
[Comfort thou] thou have plagued, as in the former verse, Thou turnest man to
destruction, turn thou, therefore unto us again, it is the same God, vulnus
opemque tulit, he casts down and raises, kills and quickneth, scatters
and gathers, plagueth and comfort. [Comfort thou] God is Lord of the
soil, as well of the waters of Mara as the waters of Shiloa. Comfort thou us
now, The eyes of us all look up and trust in thee, thou give us meat in due
season, O give us comfort in due season, in this needful time of trouble,
Divisio.
now that sorrow clothes us, and mourning clouds us.

I might devide this fountain into many streams, God plaging, Moses praying,
the time when he prayed, the cause why he prayed, the manner how he prayed, but
I remember that positio^ to devide a little into many parts, is to make every
part less then it should, and the whole less then it self. 2 ae Parts.
My meditations shall only be fixed upon these 2. The Comforts desired, and
persons afflicted, and of these in that order.

Comfort is the soul of a Christians soul, the sweetest Companion, that ever
accompanied man in this vale of mortality, never did the dew of Hermon, so
sweetly fall upon the hill of Sion, as comfort when it is distilled into the
distressed soul of a Christian. In our travail through the wilderness of
SIN, hateful for the name harmefull for the nature of the place, comfort is
the fiery pillar to lead us through this wilderness of our wills, it is the
brook in the way to refresh us, the Manna of the desert to feed us, the Angel
of the Lord to conduct us, Psalm. 121.
I may truly say as David in the Psalm, It is our defense upon our right hand
so that the sun shall not burn us by day nor the moon by night, it is even
this that shall keep our soul. The names of mercy and love and grace and
Peace, be precious and glorious, Zeged.
sweeter then honey and the honey comb, Ps. 19.
more to be desired then gold yea then fine gold, and where these be there
is truly, The family of Love: But I may say, that Comfort is as much as all
these, Greg. in Mor. in Job.
for as Gregory writing upon that, Manna habuit omne delectamentum, says that
no variety of delicacy, in the touch and relish of the taste was wanting in
that Angels food; and as the Opall resembles in it self the fiery luster of
the Carbuncle, the fieldy greenesse of the Emerauld, the heave^ly cleerenesse
of the Diamond, the aierie azure of the Sapphire, so Comfort contains in her
regiment the effects of peace, the comforted soul is reconciled to God, it
contains the adjuncts of grace, the soul is endowed with heavenly gifts, it
contains the protection of mercy, the soul is compassed with defense on
every side: In a word it contains in it, the affections of love, the
comforted soul loves others as friends, God as a father, loves his enemies
for Gods sake, loves affliction for hits own sake, remission of sins,
communion of Saints, protection of Angels, faith, hope, charity, repentance,
fasting, praying, obaying, all blessed spirits, all Tutelar powers dwell in such
a comforted sanctified soul, the soul is then like the Kings daughter all
glorious within, her clothing is then of wrought gold. She shall be brought
unto the King in raiment of needle work, Ps 45.13.
the virgins that be her fellows shall keep her company, so that soul, that
is blessed with these five, Comfort, and Peace, and Grace, and mercy, and love,
is attended as Abigail when she went to meet David, she was followed by her
five virgins. 1. King. 25.42
In the Canticles I find that there is hortus conclusus, and fons signatus, a
garden enclosed, and a fountain sealed, in the Gospel I find that there is
Thesaurus absconditus, Chrysostom. Aug. Greg.
a hidden treasure; I want not testimonies of some ancients applying there,
both the fountain sealed, and the Treasure concealed unto comfort, for as the
Lord only knows who are his, so they only that are his, know what his
comfort is. To all others comfort is hortus conclusus, a Paradise closed up,
kept with the brandishing swords of two heavenly soldiers. These seek and
find not, because they seek amiss, Mat. 7.
they knock and it is not opened because they knock being not prepared. Aust.
Non nisi post pluviam sequitur serenitas, sunshines be never so pleasant and
seasonable as after showers: Such as are not acquainted with sorrow never knew
the mystery of godly holy comfort, which is the Christians heaven upon earth,
joy in life, hope in death, prosperity in adversity, staff in affliction,
anchor in desperation, brestplate of preservation, golden Chain of
glorification in the heavens. Which we hope to possess in joy, as the Saints
do now enjoy in glory.

Sorrow is the burden of every Christian, Confidence is the shoulder to hold up
this burden, Comfort is the hand to help this shoulder, he that is without
comfort in the world is without God in the world. If the well of Gods mercies
be deep to him, and he have nothing to draw, Eccl. 12.
If the silver cord be not lengthened, and the golden Ewer be broken, and the
pitcher broken at the well, Bucer.
and the wheel broken at the Cesterne, illic desolatio, non consolatio, to
such there is misery, and an unspeakable degree, an unmeasurable measure of
misery, they are dead being alive as S. Paul speaks, for the comfort of
Gods holy spirit is taken from them. And how great a loss it is to loose Gods
spirit, and to loose the comfort of Gods spirit, David mentions in the Psalm
of his sorrow, Ps. 51.
when he ingeminateth O take not away thy holy spirit from me, O give me the
comfort of thy spirit. He found how great a curse this loss was to his
Predecessor, for God took away the comfort of his spirit and an evil spirit
came upon Saul. Bernard.
S. Bernard comparing the Repentance of David and Saul observes, that when
they both had sinned, and God had answered them both, the answer unto both
was, Dominus transtulit, the Lord has taken away. Saul repents, and his word
is Peccaui, 1. Sam. 15.24. David sins and repents, 1. Sam. 15. 2 Samuel 12.
1 Samuel 15. 2 Samuel 12.
his word is Peccaui. 2. Sam. 12.13. The words of confession the same. The
answer to Saul was Dominus transtulit, 1. Sam. 15.28. The answer to David was
Dominus transtulit, 2. Sam. 12.13. They were both Kings, both sinned, both were
warned by n="*" Sam. and Nath
Prophets, both confessed, both repented, both were answered, their both words
alike to the Prophet, their answers both alike in part from the Prophet,
Dominus transtulit. Yet never so much difference between words as between
these two answers, for to David the answer was transtulit peccatum the Lord
has taken away thy sin, but to Saul a double transtulit, but a curse with
both Dominus transtulit regnum, the Lord has taken away thy kingdom, 1. Sam.
15.26. again, 1. Sam. 15.
Dominus transtulit spiritum, the Lord has taken away his spirit 1. Sam.
16.14. This latter was the greater, 1. Sam. 16.
it was the plague, and the utter overthrow of Saul, Gods spirit was taken from
him, the sun was for ever ecclypsed to him, the life of his life was
extinguished, his soul was dead within him, Dominus transtulit spiritum. David
knew this and remembered it O take not the comfort of thy holy spirit is his
prayer, he prays not, take not away my children, or my health, or my goods,
or my subjects, but spiritum sanctu^ tuum ne aufer as a me. Psalm. 51.
In which words Athanasius proves that David does manifest that the holy Ghost
was known to the Jews under the law, and especially by this place, which that
father thus reads (...), Take not from me that spirit of thine which is holy,
Athan. in Ep ad Scrap. long.
and as that father expounds this place of the third person, Hier. in. Ps. 51.
so S. Hierom upon the words following, Give me the comfort of thy salvation,
again proves the knowledge of Christ foreknowne and foreseen by the Jews, for
that father reads it. Restore me the comfort or joy Iesutui, and the Hebrew
word there (...) is expounded by the learned in that tongue to be Jesus. But to
the purpose.

Moses here, as David there, shows that al comforts come from God: Take not
the comfort of thy spirit, says the one, O comfort thou us, says the other;
from which this observatio^ necessarily arises, No comforts are truly
comforts, Obseru.
unless they be divine proceeding from God. No dew to Hermon, no joy to
heaven, no food to the Manna of God, no content to the mercy of God, Summa
consolatio, says S. Bernard, non a creatura, sed a creatore concipitur* quam
cum conceperis nemo tollet a te, Bern. Ep. ad Vig.
cui aliunde quodcunque comparatu^, omnis iocu^ditas maeror est, omnis suauitas
dolor est, omne dulce amarum est, omne postremo quod delectare potest molestum
est; The chief comfort is that which is conceived in the Creator not in the
creature, unto which whatsoever thou do compare, all sweet is sower, all
pleasure is pain, Genesis 3.16. Genesis 26 31. Rev. 17.4.
all things that seem delightsome, prove loathsome; Adams apple loosing the
blessing, Esaws broth selling the birthright, Babylons cup full of poison, or
Judas sop the earnest of perdition: Mat. 24.23.
the pleasures taken by them in the time of Noah, were ended in bitterness,
they were eating and drinking marrying and giving in marriage, but says the
Text, The flood came and took them away. Job. 21. and 24.
The Rioters in Job are described often especially in the 21. and 24. Chapters,
but his sons might have served for examples, Job. 1.18.
they were eating and drinking in their eldest brothers house, but says the
Text there came a wind from the wilderness, and smote the house and it fell
upon the young men. Or if there be not curses upon these assimilated comforts,
Job. 15.
yet some cross or other will fall upon them; Branches may be green says
Job, but they fall of before their days, the sweet vine may have sower grapes,
or the fair olive may cast her flowers. Ada^s Paradise notwithout a serpent,
Jonas guord notwithout a worm to destroy and engaster it in the most time of
use of it. Whereas true, solid, real, co^forts they shall never be divorced, or
sequestered from Gods Saints, they will ever look upon them with a mutual,
reciprocal, interchangeable aspect, as the cherubins from the mercy seat;
they will ever be inseparable individual companions, peregrinantur, Pro Arch.
Poet
rusticantur, as the Orator spoke of Arts, these divine comforts, will sleep
and feed, and travel, and live and die, with those that be possessed of them.
How therefore are the gallants of the world, as well passive as active guls, in
this that they suffer themselves to be cheated by becoming slaves to the
pleasures of the world, Tit. 3 3.
as S. Paul to Titus calls the^! they believe Satan upon his offer, and
believe not God upon his oath, whereas Satan promises to some that which he
ca^ not, to others that which he will not give, to some seeming to give what is
not his, to others giving that which were better not theirs. Moses in his last
farewell to the world, considers this, and lamenteth for his people, Deuteronomy.
32.29.
o that they were wise, then they would consider this, they would remember the
later end; it is the end, that does give grace, to every action, the world
could not be possessed with a general witchcraft, if they co^sidred the end:
Innocentius.
they then might find, that of Innocentius true, that al sublunary passages,
had either a vain, a vile, or a wicked object, ex opibus prava, ex
voluptatibus turpia, ex honoribus vana, Honors make men vain, pleasures make
men vile, riches make men servile: wretchedness and wickedness beget these,
vanity and servilitie attend these, sin brings them in, shame leads the^ out,
and when the world has been glutted with the^, the Apostles question is what
comfort have ye in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed?

I will end amplyfying of this point, if before we leave the Court, we may be
bold to go through the best and bravest rooms therein and see, now our MASTER
is gone, whether any thing can give us a sure, and settled comfort, nay, I say
more, whether any thing remaining may give us any manner of content. At the
best state of Court, he spoke true that said, Paucos beauit Aula, plures
perdidit, and quos beavit ipsos perdidit, Bern. ad. Eugen
at the best state Courtly offices are consciences burdens, and favors
bondslaues; courtly services, daily attendances, howrely encombrances; courtly
feeding, the bodies surfeit, and the souls surquedry; courtly clothing, worms
excrements, worms make them, moathes eat the^: courtly friends, affections
weathercocke, a Northwinde settles them, and a Southwinde turns them; courtly
hopes they be the aires attomes, a sunshine engenders them, and a frost kills
them. This house of this Court where we thought, Comfort had said, as God
sometimes spoke, here will I dwell for ever, this house now is the prison of
our sorrow, as our bodies be the prison of our souls, we sit here as Rahell
sat, Ier. 32.15. Mat. 3.18.
weeping and weeping refusing comfort, so that unless comfort come from God,
who is the God of all comfort as the Apostle speaks, we may sit here, til our
eyes fall into the holes of our heads, and we our selves become as stupid as the
seats we sit on: wherefore beloved let us all take up this Petition, this part
of my Text, Comfort thou us now O Lord.

author of Comfort, and not only so Deus Consolationis, but Deus omnis
consolationis the God of all consolation, and that we may take the wings of the
morning and fly into the uttermost parts of the earth we may travel from the
East to the West, even to the nethermost parts of the sea and not obtain
Comfort, but only from God. Let our use hereof be that of Martial, Martial.
Episc.
Quid ad nos consolatio mundi? what does the pleasure of the world belong to
us? the world is vices nurse, Natures stepmother, virtues murderer, it is
Thefts refuge, whordomes Pander, Nil mu^dum in mundo, the comfort of the world,
is a Strens song, Philo.
Sodoms fruit, (...) as Philo calls it, a bitter sweet, pleasure a spur,
riches a thorn, honor a blast life a flower, glory a feather, beauty a fancy,
joy a frenzy, every one of these like the book in the Revelatio^, sweet in the
mouth, bitter in the belly. The mercy-seat stood not in atrio Gentium nor in
Templo Iudaeorum, nor near Altar sacerdotum, but in Sancto Sanctorum, in the
holy place: Comforts be ever in scripture either attributed to God, or derived
from him, God is the God of comfort 2. Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.3.
Christ Jesus the Savior sent to comfort, Esaias 61.2. The holy Ghost is the
comforter* Ioh. 16.7. His Angels deliver glad tidings of comfort, Ioh. 16.7.
Luk 2.10. Esaias. 40 1.
Luke. 2 10. His Prophets are commanded to pronounce comfort, Esaias. 40.1. The
office of his Apostles was to teach comfort, Act. 16.40. Act 16.40. Ferus.
Deus intus exhilarat animum sibi been conscium, etc. God does make the bones
that he has broken to rejoice, the soul that is truly humbled he does
comfort and satisfy, no other means, but his, can do it, he and he only can
bring it to pass. Pompilius may write epistles to Tully, Theat. mun di.
as that he should rid away his sorrow by reading, Antimachus makes verses to
rhyme away sorrow, Archilochus calls for wine to drink away sorrow, some call
for mirth to jest it away, others for music to play it away; but the Saints of
God, Job 19.23. Psalm.
they know all this serves not, Job comfortes himself by remembering his
redeemer, David by hoping to see the Lord in the land of the living, Jonas by
looking back to the Temple, Paul by assuring himself that he shall be helped.
Ion 2.7.
Confidence has been the Comfort of the Saints in all ages, in all places,
Joseph in the prison, Job on the dung hill, Jeremy in the dungion, Abraham in
exile, Jacob in the field, David in the Cave, Daniel in the Den. Abulens.
It is God that comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, 2. Cor. 4.1.
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted, here is comfort
transient, immane^t, permanent, Gods comfort descending to us, and by us
derived to others, that as the Apostle there speaks if we be comforted it is
for the consolation not only of our selves but others.

sorrows those our comforts. In this inundation wherein we are overwhelmed
though not drowned, or rather as Jonas drowned and devoured yet not dead, let
us take breathing, and dry our eyes a little. Paul bids be wise according to
sobriety, so say I, sorrow, but according to sobriety, let comfort enterchange
and have her time, it must not be a Quotidia^ fever to dry up our souls in
this salt liquor of discontent. Oramus, fiat voluntas Domini says Zanchius,
we pray thus, Zarch.
let thy will be done facta est voluntas Domini feramus, Gods will is done, let
us bear it, shall we think either God to be so angry that he will not, or
heaven so poor that it cannot help us, shall we pray every day, that God
would perform his will one day, and shall we repine at it when he has
performed it. It is true, our blessed PRINCE had such Princely, holy, gracious,
religious endowments, that we would have rather thought him sent from heaven
to us, then so soon to be called thither from us. It is true, the very outside
and rind, the very raiment of his soul, his body was so fair and strong that
a soul might have been pleased to live an age in it. It is true his soul
kept tune so well, that reason sat regent, and the understanding Counsailour,
never captiuated with violence of passions, nor hurried with the virulence of
affections, virtue and valor, beauty and chastity, arms and arts, met and
kissed in him, and his goodness lent so much mintage to other Princes, that if
Xenophon were now to describe a Prince, Prince HENRY had been his Pattern.
All this I confess, and I confess when I think on this, my soul almost
refuses comfort, because we shall never enjoy him again.

Yet in our best ordered, recollected thoughts, who that duly honored him, can
repine that he is freed from the world, and now being enfranchised enioyes
greater good in greater liberty? when like a true Hebrewe, he has gone his
Passover from death to life, where there is more grace and more capacity, where
a soul cannot be surbated with fears, nor surfeited with ryots, where earthly
bodies shall be more celestial, then man in his Innocence or Angels in their
glory, for they could fall: He is there with those Patriarchs that have
expected Christ in earth, longer then they have enjoyed him in heaven; He is
with those holy Penmen of the holy spirit, they be now his partners, who were
here his teachers; He is with all the Elect Angels, with the Congregation of
the first borne; In a word HE is with him by whose precious blood, his blessed
soul is bathed, and sealed by his death to the day of redemption; He is in
joy, though we in sorrow. Shall we be in sorrow, because he is in joy? No;
my Beloved be ye not deceived, so sure as ye have sorrow, so sure shall ye
be comforted if ye can faithfully and fervently pray with Moses, Comfort thou
us O Lord, after thou have plagued us. And so I pass from the comforts
desired, to the persons afflicted my second aim.

Christian has no other Passage then Jonathan and his armorhearer had, a sharp
rock on the one side, 1. Sam. 14.4.
and a sharp rock on the other side, Bozez on the one side, Seneh on the other,
an anfractuous, dangerous passage, that flintie stones under him, briers and
thorns on the side of him, mountainous craggs and promontories over him, sic
petitur coelum, so heaven is caught by pains, by patience, by violence,
affliction is the most inseparable associate. Cor contritum and humiliatum non
despicies, Ps. 11.19.
says David, a broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise. The
ancients have observed that David offered no offering, no sacrifice, for that
sin which he acknowledges in that 51. Psalm; he had shed blood, and knew
that the blood shed of sacrifice would not serve to expiate. Thou desire no
sacrifice, Ps. 51.18.
thou delightest not in burnt offerings, says the Prophet. Did not God delight
in sacrifice? not require burnt offerings? when he had so precisely commanded
them, distinguished the diverse forms of them, segregated especial times for
them, and been so well pleased with them. And yet Noluisti sacrificium, Did
not God delight in burnt offerings? when the son of David at one time, in one
place, offered a sacrifice of peace offering of twenty thousand oxen, and an
hundred and twenty thousand sheep, 1. King. 8.62.
the greatest sacrifice that ever was read of, either in divine or profane, in
rude or polite story. Yet you hear, Noluisti sacrificium, is David's words;
Cass.
Noluisti holocaustum, voluisti cor humiliatum, says one, a burnt sacrifice
will not serve, but a broken sacrifice thou requirest, it is the speech of
Christ to the Spouse, the smell of thy ointments is better the^ spices, Cant. 4
10.
Meliora vnguenta quam aromata, ointments better then spices: which words
Nyssenus expounds of this place, Nyss. Hom. 9. in Cant.
broken hearts rather then burnt sacrifices are accepted of God. Broken hearts,
whether they be broken moerore interno, Greg.
as Gregory expounds the place, by inward grief, or broken humiliatione as
Innocentius interprets, Innocent.
by humiliation, or broken by frequent tribulation, as Cassiodore glosseth, or
broken by vehement grief and anguish of spirit in repentance, Cassiod.
as Thomas and the Schools do judge; the meaning of all is this, that the
heart that is softened and mollified, the heart that has been the anvile for
sorrows and afflictions, is most fit to be consecrated to God. Joel mentions a
rent heart, Joel 2.13.
David a broken, a contrite heart, S. Chrysostom of both them speaks,
fractum cor haud quaqua^ se in altu^ extulerit, Hom. 4. l ^. 2. ad Cor. and
hom. in epist. ad Hebr.
contritum haud quaquam exurrexerit, scissum non inflatur ad superbiam, no^
concitatur ad vindictam; A broken heart is not exalted on high, a contrite
heart has made no insurrection, a rent heart is not inflamed by pride, not
incited to reve^ge. The sacrifice of God is a broken and Contrite heart. God in
the old Testament, would accept no sacrifice, if it were maimed, yet will now
admit no sacrifice unless it be broken and bruised, he that then commanded
sacrifices of the Law to be offered by fire, will now receive no sacrifice of
the gospel, but offered by water. The earth, yields not corn, till it be
plowed, the grape yields no wine, until it be pressed, gold is not pure,
till it be fined, the stones of the Temple not brought into the Temple till
they were polished, Rev. 7.9.
the Saints in the Revelation are not clothed with white robes and have palms
in their hands, before they have passed through many tribulatio^s, the Prophet
Moses here expects not comfort, before affliction; and as in Ecclesiastes a
time of weeping, Eccl. 3.4.
a time of reioicing, and no weeping, no reioicing, so here first affliction
then consolation, Comfort thou us, according as thou have afflicted us. It were
impertinent I should roaue so far back to Deuteronomy to show how they were
afflicted, seeing the Psalm has no other Tenor, then the memory of
mortality, and Moses himself being the Prince of the people, being himself
presently to pass the way of all the world, whether it were that his people
might be comforted for his loss, or whether for the lives of those many, that
had dyed in the desert. You see that the manner of his prayer yields us this
observation. the comfortes of Gods spirit are not ministered by God, nor can be
expected by man, until man has been thoroughly seasoned with sorrow. None
can come to Paradise, but by the burning Seraphins of affliction none return
from Canaan, but they must pass by the waters of Marah; no passing back to
Jerusalem, but by the valley of weeping, no seeing of Mount Sion, before we have
sit at the waters of Babylon. Christ came only to comfort the mourners, Esaias.
61.2.
Esaias 61.2. The second blessing that he pronounces in his first sermon is to
mourners, Mat. 5.4.
Mat. 5.4. appoints none to be marked in Jerusalem to be preserved but
mourners, Ezech. 9.4. Ezekiel. 9.4.
Our Savior then only promised comfort to his disciples when they were
mourners; Ioh. 16* 22.
Ye are now in sorrow, but I will see you again, and you shall rejoice, and
your joy shall no man take from you. All the days of our life be as the fits
of a fever, as the changes of day and night, darkness and light, the moon
has not more alterations the^ man; so that as that of Jeremy must be
acknowledged, Ierem. Lam.
were it not for the mercies of the Lord we should be utterly consumed, Hierom.
so also that of S. Jerome his observatio^ upon Arcturus in the heavens, semper
versatur nu^quam mergitur, may be applied unto the sons of men, 2. Cor. 6.
these are often turned never overwhelmed, but especially unto the sons of
God, they are, as Paul speaks, as dying and behold they live, as chastened
and not killed, as sorrowful yet always reioicing, as poor and yet make many
rich, as having nothing and yet possessing all things: for God does so sweeten
his visitations, and sends such a gracious dew upon his inheritance, as that
in affliction and after affliction he sends unspeakable consolation. In die
tribulationis exaudiam te, in the day of Tribulation I will hear thee. is his
promise, and more then so, it is not only, that then he will hear, and
afterward will help, but both in the day, and after the day he will hear,
he will help, he will comfort. In the affliction, because the affliction
remains for a moment, after the affliction, 2. Cor. 4.17. 1. Cor. 11.32.
Prove. 3.12.
because when after we are chastened of the Lord, we are sure not to be
condemned with the world; Comforted in the affliction for we know, he
corrects only whom he loves, Comforted after the affliction, Ps 64.16. 2.
Cor. 1.5.
for he has assured us that according to the multitude of Troubles that are in
our hearts his comforts shall refresh our souls, and again by S. Paul, as the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation abounds by Christ. So
that here it is manifested which was in the observatio^ proposed, no comfort
but after affliction, no consolation but after Tribulation and therefore Moses
prayer is, Comfort us according as thou have afflect us.

blessed then ought our afflictions to be esteemed, seeing that in them we
shall be comforted, after them we shall be rewarded, and by them we shall be
admitted into glory, for through many afflictions, we must enter into heaven.
Are there comforts therefore laid up in store for the Godly? are there
pleasures at Gods right hand for ever more? O the^ come, and hear, and so,
and taste how good the Lord is, O come unto him all ye that labor and are heavy
laden under the burden of your sorrow. It is impossible to escape Esaus sword,
or Ismaels tongue, Gen 27.41. Genesis 21.9. 2. Sam. 16.
or Shemeis stones, or Doegs sclander, or Hamans envy, or Ioabs treachery. When
there were but four in all the world there was a Caine, and afterward when
there were but eight that number but doubled, there was a Cham, Philistines shall
be left in the land to try and to exercise the Israelites: or suppose thou
escape all these yet either loss of health, or loss of friends, or want, or
some means or other shall be appointed to polish thee if thou belong to
heaven. The Martyrs and Saints of God who now carry Triumphant Palms they
have bin thus afflicted, and hereby their glorious luster like unto the sun,
gave greatest light in the lowest places, and in their patient content and
contempt of affliction, they gave grace to the greatest miseries Tyranny could
devise, God distilling into their souls, the apparent supply of his grace, in
the midst of their pressures to encourage and enable them in their
perseverance. Esaias. 3.
O ye then that with those minsing dames in Jerusalem, are loath that the
soles of your feet should tread upon the face of the earth, ye may be
hurried between heaven and earth, but never will be carried as Elias unless
in a fiery chariot. Ye that set more by Agar then Sara, more esteem your
bodies then your souls, fear and tremble if no afflicton has ever visited
you; Luke 16.25.
you know whose words they be, son remember thou in thy life time receivedst
all thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, now he is comforted,
and thou art tormented: it is a time if ever to lay the axe to the root of the
tree, especially of those trees that bear nothing but leaves and liuelesse
branches, you know what a stroke is given to the fairest Cedar of the
gorrest, our fig tree is blasted eve^ before it was its time to beat fruit,
the green tree, the glory of the trees is stricken, and were it not I should
break the peace of my meditations of comfort, I should draw Paul's sword,
and make use of Ieremies hammer to lay home some strokes to your consciences
in this point. But I proceed.

If the Saints of God and their afflictions will not invite you I say not to
endure, but to welcome sorrow, yet let the brave resolutions of heathens as
gallant as the most, nay more glorious the^ the best of you, amase you: they
bare their troubles with undaunted comfortable honorable minds, so that
neither force of fire in Scaeuola, violence of poverty in Fabritius,
perplexities of banishment in Rutilius, Torments in Regulus, Poison in
Socrates, Ingratitude in Scipio, Persecution in Caesar, Guevar. in Ep.
or death in Cato could ever eclipse their valor or honor. How few such noble
martial spirits breath among us!

How many of those that do live, be truly humbled among us! Alas, none ever
shall be truly comforted, but those truly humbled. Think ye any to be
truly comforted, whom nothing did ever amate? Think they that are in opinion
obstinate, in good purposes inconstant, resolute in evil action, in humility
false, in charity fained, in desires violent, in mischeefes virulent in hate
implacable, to be truly comforted? They that are so rash in censuring,
peremptory in hearing, hard hearted in obeying, hypocryticall in professing the
word of God think they to be truly comforted? They whose sins are so many,
whose prayers so few, their oaths so frequent, their alms so few, that serve
themselves by the Ephah, and scarcely serve God by the Gomer, think they to be
truly comforted? I assure my self, that all ye of this expiring family have
better learned Christ Jesus, my knowledge of many, hope of others, charity to
all makes me believe it. And therefore I hope ye shall be truly Comforted,
even according as ye have been afflicted, in as full measure as ye have
been humbled. Yet I know in this last close, you can be scarcely persuaded of
this [according] my own soul silently tells me, it is beyond expectation,
that we should so recover our losses as that according to our sorrows we
should receive Comforts. Cambden. Brit. 164 1 Ed. 1. son to Hen. 3. 2 Edw.
black Prince son to Edw. 3. 3. Rich. of Bordeaux son to Ed. black Prince 4
Hen. son of Hen 4. 5 Ed. son, H. 6. 6 Ed. son K. Hen 4. 7 Ed. son K
Richard. 8 Arthur son to Hen. 8. No more created but those: Ed. 6. not
invested by Patent, nor created.
For if the Romans called the heir apparent Princeps Inventutis, Prince of the
youth, and Prince Edgar the last heir male of that blood royal was long after
called Englands dearling, and when Prince Arthur died, the Poets then
complained that Arcturus was vanished in the heavens; what can we say of him,
that would have been subject for all pens, and object for all eyes, as if the
worthiness of all the eight created Princes of Walls of the English blood, and
of the eight Henry's his Highness Royal Ancestors, had met in him as in the
Confluence I will say of him as S. Paul to the Hebrews spoke of those with
whom our Master is now in Company, Prince HENRY was he of whom the world was
not worthy. Yet beloved let me still say as my Text, God may Comfort us even
according to the greatness of our loss, his power is not weakened, his arm is
not shortened: It was a blasphemous speech in the Governor in the days of
Elisha that doubted whether there might after that great dearth be so great
plenty, though, 2. Kings 7.3.
says he, God would make windows in heaven. He is able to do, whatsoever in
faith we are able to believe. We have yet the sun and moon, and stars of
a Royal firmament; and though we have lost the morning star, yet we have
Charls-waine in our Horizon; we have a Prince, if stars be of any truth,
like to be of long life, and great learning, most hopeful for his time, most
fruitful for his hopes: we hope that God has said to our Jacob, Genesis
as Jacob said of his Judah, sceptrum non auferetur a Judah, so the scepter shall
not be taken from our Jacob til Shiloah come again into the world. Let this
Comfort serve us, so long as we are Gods servants, so long he will be our
Lord. Send out Comfort in ambush against all fears, al enemies, and when she
returns with conquest, Judge. 5.
say to thy soul as Debora did to hers, thou have marched valiantly O my
soul. Think not that our Master is dead -- Musa vetat mori: say as Christ
said of Lazarus, He is not dead but sleeps. Ioh. 11.3.
In a word after all these Clouds be past, the sunshine will appear, or we
shall appear before God our selves: sure I am this Text will be uncontrolled
for ever, Heaven and earth shall pass, but no jot of this word shall pass;
Act. 1.
After the Lord has afflicted us, he will comfort us. Let us therefore with
the Apostles who staid at Jerusalem expecting the Comforter, continue in holy
devotions, hearing, praying, fasting, falling down before his presence for he
is holy: And thou O Lord, that see all hearts, unto to thee let our cry
come, and let comfort descend unto us, in this house of mourning and valley of
tears. Now like poor distressed sinners we beseech thee then with thy Saints
and Angels we shall glorify thee: Lord grant this for thy promise, for thy
mercy, for thy Zyon, for thy sons sake CHRIST JESUS.

Amen.
2. SAM. 12.23. Now he is dead wherefore should I fast, can I bring him again,
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.


THE story shows you David the king in a sorrowful case, weeping, mourning,
crying for his son, lying all day and night on the earth; Hewept, and wept,
and would not be comforted. S. Bernard mentions, Bern. in Passione Dom.
Heb domadam dolorum, a week of sorrows David had no less, the child died the
seventh day, 2. Sam. 12.18.
and the 7 day David arose from his low and lamentable lodging; his meditation
could be no other the^ this, O who shall deliver his soul from death? His cause
of mourning was non propter vitam, sed propter animam, Chrysostom.
non propter animam, non propter filium, sed propter adulterium, not so much
for the life, as for the soul of his child, not so much for his son, as for
that sin by which his mother conceived him. The child was messis in herba,
life was spes in mess, but the soul of the child was gloria messis, the joy
and glory of the harvest, this is the cause that David mournes bitterly.

There is a strange sentence in the former verses, Non Morieris, thou shall not
die, David's sin is acquitted, sed Morietur filius, but thy child shall die,
the innocent babe is punished. 2. Sam. 12.13.
I need not to uncover the nakedness of this father further then scripture takes
away the veil from him: he committed adultery, heaven sees it, God sends
Nathan, 2. Sam. 11 4.
Nathan wounds David through the sides of one of his own subjects, David
sentenceth himself in another thus, He that has done this shall die and pay
fourefold. At hoc iustum est, and iniustum iudicium, This judgment is both
just and unjust. The trespass is but a lamb, to pay fourefold is satisfaction
enough for a lamb: if it be the life of a man, to die for it is the
satisfaction required, enough for a Man's life, but suppose it what it may be
to die and pay, pay and pay fourefold is injustice, it is to much. Therefore
God took one part of David's sentence against himself; though Non morieris
stood as God had promised, 2. Sam. 28.
yet David shall pay fourefold as himself had sentenced, 1. He paid the life
of Ammon his son, 2. Sam. 18.9.
by the sword of Absalon, here is one satisfaction, 2. he paid the life of
Absalon, hanging in the Oak by the sword of Ioab, the 2 satisfaction. 3 the
life of Adoniah by the sword of Iehoiada, 1. King. 2.25.
the 3 satisfaction; and fourthly the life of a child here by the sword of
God, the fourth satisfaction. For the life of one Vrias, no less the^ four of
his own children must die the death. verse. 14.
The first of this Tragical Chorus is this child, sentenced in the 14 verse;
in the 15. ye find him sick, poor infant, silly innocent, after his panting
and striving for breath he is deceased in the 18. verse. ver. 15. verse. 18.
while he was sick, David did sorrow, wept, and fasted, and prayed, and lay on
the ground; but being dead, rises, apparelleth, washes, worshippeth, eats:
hereupon his servants expostulate, What thing is this that thou do, ver. 21.
thou did fast and weep for the child, while it was alive, but when the
child was dead, thou do rise and eat? David answers, and the best part of
his answer is this my Text, Being dead, why should I now fast? Can I bring him
again any more, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. These two
be points very remarkable, that usher the meditations of my Text; the first
the punishment of the child: for the father David commits adultery, the child
dies for it, as after, David numbers the people, 2. Sam. 24.14.
the people die for it.

Secondly, when the child is sick, David sorroweth, the child being dead he
rises, and eats. He will be no longer in pain then the child is in
peril. Benoni is the son of sorrow at his birth, this shall be no longer the
subject of sorrow then his death: He is dead, no hope, no help, no recovery,
it is impossible

Revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras, David cannot infuse life into
him, the child is dead, he is gone, all the world cannot revine him, David
must follow, the child must not return. Thus the words were occasioned, thus
opened, thus they fall in sunder and impart themselves unto us.

David's patient consideration in forbearing further sorrow. Being dead why
should I now fast? 2. His wife resolution implying the impossibility of
reviving him. Can I bring him again? Thirdly, his considerate acknowledgement
of the inevitable stroke of death, I shall go to him, he shall not return to
me. I confess there be many disproportions between this story and our state,
our misery is without all parallel, scripture does nor yield a fitting example,
no king of Israel or Judah had such a loss, I had almost said nor such a son.
I am therefore constrained to choose not as I would but as I may, though not so
plentifully fitting the subject, yet sorrowfully fitting with our sable
thoughts: In these therefore I crave patient attentio^, the rather because the
1. part offering it self to us, is David's patient consideration in forbearing
more mourning.

Some have observed that it was a custom in David to fast and pray, 1. Part.
Lor. in Ps. Ps. 35.13.
and mourn, for the sickness of his friend, his own words give warrant,
Psalm. 35.13. when they were sick, 1 clothed my self with sackcloath, and
humbled my soul with fasting. And these both were used either in sorrow, or
repentance; in sorrow, so the Orator testifies, sackeloath and fasting be
moeroris insignia, Tully.
the ensigns of sorrow: in repentance, so S. Hierome witnesses, they were
Penitentiae arma, the weapons of Repentance. In this place by fasting David
means all the Circumstances of mourning. Aret. Flac. Illyr.
To mourn and weep is common and commendable in sickness, or death of
friends; profit there may be in it, but you will think there is small
pleasure, yet says the Poet, Est quaedam flere voluptas, There is pleasure in
this pain of weeping, to disburden the soul, to open the sluices, to discharge
conchas in canales, Bern.
the Cesterns into conduit pipes, to eclipse the light of our etes with
tears, because those eyes shall never behold those dear deceased friends
till we our selves pass into the Chambers of death. This is natural and
common, yet I may say Christian. But to fast in these occasions is not so
common, as commendable, and profitable; for indeed in true sorrow there should
be a neglect of all the offices of the body, a sequestration of all
contentment, a forgetting and forsaking of ordinary food, a shutting up and
imprisoning of the body from all pleasures of life, thereby to pull down the
height and strength and pride of the soul, that the soul hear not, think
not, mind not mirth, that the body see not, touch not, taste not meat, such
should be our sorrows when we see Corporal punishments for spiritual
judgments. Such was David's diet, it was a real, hearty sorrow, not
cou^tenanced with a heavy look, or with a solemn sigh blown from the lips
and lungs, but it was a weeping, watching, fasting sorrow.

I hate excursions, but seeing I meet in the words of my Text with so great a
stranger as fasting, give me leave to salute it. It was the first precept that
ever was given, it is as ancient as Paradise, Ieiuny canitiem sivelis, Epise.
Land. in Ion.
perscrutare ieiunium prime homini coaevu^. The forbidding of that tree, was
the first rule of abstine^ce. The antiquity, necessity, perpetuity of it
enforce it, Nature law, Gospel enioine it, Divinity commands it, Physic
commends it, law prescribes it, it is the life of the Saints, and the food of
the soul, in the court of heaven there is no other diet, and in the Church on
earth the children of the bridechamber must be acquainted with it; as David
was, whose fasting days I could easily conjecture, if I should look but into
the Galender of the Psalms: but my Text tells me, at this time he did eat
and drink and therefore here he seems to be, as in the Psalm he speaks,
Psalm. 42.4.
as among those that keep holy-daie. His fasting ends the seventh day, and
he questioneth, why should I now fast? which words do bring forth this
observation, That as there is a time to sorrow, so also a time to leave of the
act of sorrowing. His example proves this, Nemo in lachrymis, nemo in
Ca^ticis, no man was more frequent in songs or sorrows then David, Lud.
his meat were his Tears, he mingled his drink with Tears, washed his bed
and watered his couch with his tears: you would scarce believe, that he ever
enioied good day, that ever the sun shined on him, he is so full of anguish
and care, and feate, sometimes biding, some times flying, Psalm. 32 10.
still almost lamenting. Yet how frequent be his joyful acclamations in the
Psalms, Rejoice in the Lord; Ps. 103.1.
Be glad o ye righteous; Be joyful all ye that are true of heart; Praise the
Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name; Praise the
Lord, O my soul and forget not all his benefits: how sweetly does he exalt his
exultation of joyful praise, Ps. 145.
I will praise the Lord my God, I will praise his name for ever and ever, every
day will I praise the Lord, and praise his name for ever and ever: and again,
Praise the Lord O my soul, while I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing
praises to my God, while I have any breathing. Look upon this good King at
other times you would scarsly think that ever he could have had joy to cast
his cies up to heaven, Psalm.
you may find him on a couch, nay more on the cold earth, crying out, I am at
the point to die, from my youth up thy Terrors have I suffered with a troubled
soul. Yet after all this, you shall find him reioicing, triumphing singing,
harping, dancing, making melody unto God, and calling for his consort Trumpets,
Timbrels, Psalteries, Harpes, Organs, Cymbals, Ps. 150.3.4.5.6.
Pipe and string, low and loud instrument, nay heaven and earth must bear a
part, nay every thing that has breath must praise the Lord. Here be the
passages through fire and water, here he is brought from the wilderness into a
wealthy place. Here be his fits good and bad days, crosses and comforts, ioies
and sorrows.

Dolor and volupt as invice^ cedunt -- Brevior voluptas; Seneca.
his grief and pleasure came successively, but his co^forts were not extended
to the same measure, that his sorrows, yet as the cause gave occasion, so he
ever altered his note.

Yet is it a wonder to observe how upon the same passion Gods best servants
have been diversely affected, the same persons, and the same passions, and yet
so stra^gely altered, and their passages in and upon the very same causes so
diametrally opposed, as if they were not the same men. In some miseries how
sweetly have they carried themselves, In others how boisteroufly; Shiloa never
ran so quietly as they have in some, in others Torrents never so raged. Job. 1.
Pineda in Job.
Look upon Job in his 1 chapter, he is Patience mirror, never did or could man
behave himself better in such a bitter storm. His Oxen taken away by the
Sabeans, Camels by the Chaldeans, fire devoures his sheep, his servants slain,
his children killed, yeet being so near touched, he opens not his mouth
against heaven, Ps. 3.
but as if with the Psalmist he had laid down to sleep and taken his rest
he makes no other exclamation, or lamentation, but this, Dominus dedit, the
Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord.
You may wonder to see the same man, Job. 13.
so contrarily affected afterward; Challenging God to his face, I will
dispute with the Almighty, I will fill my self with arguments, what is it
that God can answer me; Cursing his birth, let the day perish wherein I was
borne, Job. 3.
let that day be darkness, let not God regard it, let darkness and the
shadow of death stain it, let the Clouds remain upon it, let it be a
fearful bitter day, let it not be joined with the days of the year,
desolate for ever be that night, let the stars of the twilight be dim, let it
look for light but see none, let it never see the dawning of the day. What
tragical and bloody heavy cursed clamours be these! Nay look upon our own
Prophet, how did grace attend him in all the ambushments between Saul and him!
Saul was his enemy, he has now his opportunity, the place, the privacy, the
obscurity of the Cave might incite him to kill his enemy, but he bows down
and cries, 1. Sam. 14.
O my Lord the King, I will not lay hand on my Master, he is the Lords
anointed, the Lord keep me from doing this unto my Master: how sweetly, how
graciously, how wisely, does he carry himself in the time that Shemei cursed
him, 2. Sam. 16.
and cast stones' at him! he endures him, and rebukes them that reprove him,
The Lord has bidden him curse, suffer him, the Lord has bidden him who shall
forbid him? But look upon him in the story of Nabal you would think him
another Saul, 1. Sam. 25.
Nabal only denies him a request, he swears and frets, and girds to his sword,
takes 6 hundred men with him, vows to kill Nabal, nor only so but whatsoever is
Nabals, yea and before the dawning of the day he will not leave a man, no not a
creature of Nabals alive. Nabal only denied him, Shemet cursed him, Nabal was
but a fool, 1. Sam. 25.25. 2. Sam. 16.7.
Shemei a Dog, as the Text terms him, yet he is much more violent against
Nabal then against Shemet. Look upon him in this particular, Job was not more
patient then he is here, while the poor innocent infant is sick panting, and
fainting, and striving for life, he weepeth, the child died, he rises, and
apparelleth, washes, worshippeth, eats, goes into Barsheba answers all the
world, that should ask him his resolution is, calmely and religiously this,
being dead, why should I fast? Nothing could savor more of Religion, wisdom,
patience, and a holy spirit: what a sweet behavior and heavenly temper is
here, Pattern him with Patriarch, or Prophet, or Apostle, or Angel, None could
go further then he did. But look upon him in his obsequies for his Absolo^, he
was oppressed, surcharged, distracted, he continues his note as if with the
Philomele he would never give over. Ovid. Met.
O Absolon, Absolon my son, my son, Absolon my son! No content but
Absolon, his dainty pretty Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.
his dearling, fondling Absolon, Absolon the Idol of his affection, as if
Absolon had been the beauty of his name, and the glory of his Nation, as if
Absolon had been the best of his seed, and the cheifest of his sons, Absolon,
so fair and ruddy, as that none in all Israel was so commended for beauty,
from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head, no blemish in Absolon; O
entreat the young man Absolon well, and if Absolon die, David will not live,
he will dislolue into tears, O my son Absolon, 2. Sam. 18.31.
my son, my son Absolon, would God I had died for thee o Absolon my son,
my son. Observe the circumstances; 1. the King was moved, exceedingly moved,
great alteration in his affection, there was an earthquake in his soul, his
passions were as flames, his eyes as floods. 2. He avoids the room; Joseph
weeps and puts all out of the room but remains there himself; Genesis 45.3.
David puts all out, and goes himself out, puts even himself out of
himself. 3. He cannot contain, breaks forth on the stairs, his sorrow must
have a vent, it is a precipitat torrent, with Oceans in his eyes, and a tongue
fired at the altar of his heart. 4. He calls (the traitor) Absolon, his
son. Happy had it been that Absolons birth had been his burial, the sun
in the firmament never beheld such a disobedient son on earth, yet his burden
is my son, my son. David remembers not how Absolon had slain his brother,
enveigled the subjects, betrayed the Crown, aspired to the kingdom, en tred
Jerusalem with violence, abused his Concubines upon the top of the house in the
sight of heaven, none of these be remembered; David will not live, if Absolon
be dead. He considers not, that Absolons beauty was but effections fancy
and natures frailty, a blister might blast it, dor a fever blemish it, but age
would surely parch and perish and wither it: Ludolph.
he considreth not, that Absolon was neither vnigenitus, no nor primogenitus
neither the first begotten, nor the only begotten son of his father, that he so
bewaileth him. Aust.
Abraham pater credentium the father of the believing could not have deplored
his son Isaac had he been offered, Nor Aaam, pater viventium the father of
all things living could have more wept over his slain Abel, then David over
Absolon. What great alteration is in the carriage of this passion, in the death
of one son, from this calm contentation this holy patient resolution in the
death of this other, Being dead, why should I now fast?

learn, that seeing the best of Gods children have bin so various in their
passions, and so subject to infirmity in some others of them, we ought to
crave the assistant power of Gods spirit in all sorrows, so to season and
sweeten them, and to direct them to right ends, that we look not only upon the
power of God, herein as to forget his favor, we so much consider not the
greatness of the affliction, as the goodness of his affection, that has laid
it on us for our good: and therefore so to cast anchor in all storms of our
life, Pet. Martyr. Common places.
as that this Passion of sorrow (as Peter Martyr co^pareth it) may direct our
sails as a prosperous wind to the haven, and not rend our souls and sink our
ships, that the masts of our faith be shaken, and the anchors of our hopes
broken, that we show our selves wise men, not mad men, not distracting our
spirits, not distrusting our God, but with David here temper our souls, or
rather tune them to that song of his, Ps. 121.1.
I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help; Help
shall come from the Lord which has made heaven and earth.

Hence also we may learn, to stay our carnal, and to increase our spiritual
sorrow, bodily labor avails not, bodily sorrow profits not. Fasting spoken
of in the Text of it self is but an outward ceremony, Externum signum saccus
and ieiunium. Hier.
true abstinence consists in holiness of life: mistake me not as if I
derogated from fasting, that venerable daughter of repentance one of the best
mothers in Israel. I would we might imitate either Patriarchs or Prophets
herein, or even at this time the French and Dutch Churches in this city, who
in consideration of Gods judgment upon us lament with fasting and praying as
may be seen in their congregations weekly. But I say fasting is but the
outward countenance, it is the inward motions that God is pleased with. And in
them none more acceptable unto him, then an humble obedience to his will, when
his hand has given the stroke, and the Lord has done what pleased him, Ion.
2.
a sweet and comfortable carriage of our afflictions will be pleasing unto him,
and a blessing to us.

Priamus in Homer bewailing his son Hector, Homer.
fasteth, and mourns after his death, David does this before his sons
death: when it is past, he rises, washes eats, worshippeth and does comfort
himself. How did the Patriach Jacob carry al those pressures laid upon him
with a holy calm disposition, Genesis
ye never find him tempestuous, and yet who ever endured so successiue
storms: In all the days of his pilgrimage scarce any fair weather, he is rent
from his fathers family, flies for the fear of his brother, he is cheated by
his uncle, his place vile and servile, Genesis 31.40.
in the day the drought consumed him, in the night the frost, the sleep
departs from his eyes, serves for Rahel seven years, and a bleere eied Leah is
given him, serves seven more for Rahel and she is barre^, at length a child
she shall have, but the childs life is the mothers death; when his children
increase, his sorrows increase, not Benjamin alone, but almost every one of
them is Benoni, the son of sorrow, Incestuous Reuben, Adulterous Judah, Levi
that is to be consecrated to God in his Church, is bloody, Er and Onan struck
dead before him, Joseph lost, Simeon imprisoned, Be^iamin endangered, his only
daughter young Dinah, his dearling, ravished by an alien from Israel. Yet you
never find in all these perils among his own, that he staggereth. These
meditations be best fitting, the practice and imitation of these examples will
be fruitful. And as the Apostle speaks give no place to wrath, so say I,
give not place to sorrow, especially to worldly sorrow, 2. Cor. 7.10.
for Godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, but
the sorrow of the world works death, and yet cannot redeem from death, as it
follows in David's words, Can I bring him again? His wise resolution implying
the impossibility of his reviving him.

ab invtili, there is no profit, no hope, no help, no means by fasting to
recover him, Being dead, why should I fast? this second is ab impossibili from
the improbability and impossibility of recalling him, Can I bring him again?
David was not ignorant of the reduction, restitution, resurrection of the body*
there be no less then 13. places that may be collected out of the Psalms to
this purpose, Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, Ab^lens.
nor suffer thy holy one to see corruption; Thou O Lord, shall raise me up at
the last; I shall see the Lord in the land of the living, etc. These and other
frequent places be commonly noted to this purpose. The Resurrection as it is
most certain, so also most comfortable; Job had nothing to sweeten his
dunghill but the hope of the resurrection, Job. 11.
and Paul had no other doctrine to preach to the devout Greeks at
Thessalonica, Act. 17.3. Act. 17.32. Act 23 6. Act. 26.23.
to the Stoickes at Athens, to the Pharisees at Jerusalem, to Festus the
Governor at Cesarea, nay almost in every place he preaches the resurrection
of the dead; and our blessed Savior of all other mysteries of our redemption,
makes none more plain then this points and though it seem a doctrine so far
beyond al sense, yet he has so sensibly proved it to all the senses by his
own rising, that all the world may with S. Paul confess, 1. Cor. 15.
Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
sleep. Christ is risen and we shall rise, and this is the manner how. He
manifested himself by sight, C. proves his resurrection by the 5. senses.
when he showed his wounds, by hearing, in his salutation Peace be unto you, by
tasting, he did eat of the broiled fish with them, by touching, Thomas put his
fingers into the print of the nails, by smelling, for he breathed upon the^.
Here be the senses: They that have seen this have believed, and blessed, says
Christ, are they that have not seen, and yet believed. But because our Savior
foresaw that upon his resurrection the ground of this point would for ever be
settled, He as Luke speaks showed himself to be alive by many infallible
arguments, by necessary, true, evide^t proofs, such as the Philosopher calls
(...). Act 1. Arislot. in Rhet. c. 2.
He left no circumstance of time, place, persons vnmanifested, that this might
be believed he appears after his resurrection, early in the morning and
late at night, in both the times of the day, to the disciples abroad and
gathered together in the house, in both the places, to the soldiers and
Apostles, both conditions of men, to the Jews and Gentiles both religions of
men, to men and women both the sexes, to the living in the world, to the dead
in the grave, both states, to Angels, devils, friends, foes, disciples,
strangers; al shall bear witness that Christ did rise from the dead, and is
become the first fruits of them that sleep. And he only can by his power
whereby he subdueth al things to himself, raise us again from the dead; no
other power, or means but his: and therefore every man may say with David
here, Can I bring him again? which in some copies is read thus, I cannot bring
him again, and ministers this observation. 2. Obs.
That though it be not in the power of man to raise any from the dead, yet
there is a power whereby al shall be raised and revived. Our Prophet proves it
before Christ came, It is thou O Lord that shall raise me up at the last. This
power shall change our vile bodies, to be made like his glorious body, our weak
diseased, naked, mortal, sickly, earthly, momentary bodies shall be like his
glorious body. Jews did know this, Gentiles did confess this: The Jews
before Christ's coming, had knowledge and made faith of this point, how soever
S. Chrysostom makes doubt whether or no this mystery were revealed in the old
Testament. Chrysostom. Hom. 1. de Lazaro.
Indeed it was not so generally or so manifestly delivered till Christ came
who was to be Oriens ex imo, as Oriens ex alto, Aug.
the day sprung from an high, and the truth budding out of the earth sprung
from below. But known it was, and taught it was; Esays testimony is this, The
dead men shall live, Esa. 26.19.
with my body they shall rise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust. Ezekiel
37.10.
Ezekiel proves it by the Emblem of the dry bones united together. Daniel
thus, They that sleep in the dust shall arise. Dan. 12.2. Hos. 13.14.
Hosea pronounces this in the person of God, I will redeem them from the
power of the grave. Hier. in Ep. 61 and 101.
Job as S. Hierom collecteth has most absolute proof for this, I know that my
redeemer lives, and when worms have consumed this body, I shall see God in my
flesh, yea I my self shall behold him, and mine eyes shall see him, as if Job
had been the Prophet of the resurrection, Job. 9.13.
or the trumpet sounding to judgment, or the star to lead to this mystery of
Christian belief. And Gentilisme was not without some notions of this
Restoration and reparation of bodies; Lor. in Act 24.
and they among them that believed this were esteemed as worthy men, and
favorers of the good of the Commonwealth. So that it being plain that Jews
and Gentiles before Christ knew and professed it, it is manifest that among
the Jews, the sweet singer of Israel, David the man after Gods own heart, the
Type of Christ, the Penman of the holy Ghost was not ignorant of the
resurrection, as not only in the Psalms, especially in the 15. it is plain,
and by implication out of these words, Can I bring him again? enforcing thus
much; Brought again from death he may be, but in my power it is not. Before I
land this point I must not omit one place for proof of the resurrection, Exodus
3.6.
known even to the Israelites in their younger days in Exodus. It is the
only place of all scripture that our Savior makes show of to convince the
Sadduces, God is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, Mat. 22 32.
the God of Jacob, but God is not the God of the dead but of the living.
Therefore these holy Patriarchs, they are not dead, but in respect of the
resurrection they sleep in peace, and to use the phrase of David, Psalm. 3.
they laid them down in peace, and have taken their rest, but the Lord shall
raise them up at the last. But this one question being resolved will make way
to some fruitful use of that already spoken, why could not David bring again
the soul of his son? Elias besides his many miracles in this kind could do
so much and Elisha did more then Elias, for the spirit of Elias was doubled
upon Elisha, that as he received a mantle from Elias at the first time he saw
him, 1. King, 19.9.
and another mantle fell from Elias, at the last time that Elisha beheld him,
when he was caught into heaven: 2. King 2.13.
So also a double spirit, as appeared by his wonders, was bestowed upon Elisha.
For Elias caused that the oil in the widows one vessel, 2. King. 4.6.
wasted not; But Elisha caused the Pot of oil of another woman to increase to
the filling of many vessels. 1. King. 17.27.
Elias revived the dying son of the woman of Sarepta, Elisha by prayer did
obtain a child to the barren Shunamite, and obtain life to this child being
dead. Elias in a great famine obtained rain, 1. King. 4 18.
but Elisha in another famine, obtained incredible plenty without rain, 1.
King. 18.41.
incredible victory without bloodshed. 1. King 17.
Elias raised but one from death in his life, 2. King. 13.20.
but Elisha being dead, his bones in his grave raised the dead. Could Elias,
and Elisha do so much, and cannot David do it? Ludoloh.
No. Non est Davidi donum hoc concessum, this gift was not granted to him,
David may kill the bear, the lion, Goliath, David may overcome the Philistines,
the Ammonites, but cannot deliver a soul from death, cannot bring back a
soul to life. David by prayer may bring back his soul from sorrow, Bernard.
Hezekias by prayer raise himself from sickness, Elias and Eliseus by prayer
raise from death, but alteros non seipsos, others, not themselves, as Bernard
notes. Only Christ by his power did raise himself and others, Aust.
Praedixit and revixit, as Austin notes, he foretold it, and by rising he
performed it: Tertul.
Mori dignatus ex voluntate, sed resurrexit ex potestate, He died by his own
will and was raised by his own power, a gift never given to any of the sons
of men. S. Paul's speech to the Corinthians may serve to this purpose, 1. Cor. 3.
secundum gratiam mihi concessam, according to the grace given to him, every
man may perform what Gods spirit does enable him, he can go no farther, he
can do no more. Gods spirit says as Gods son, Math.
sine me nihil potestis facere, without me ye can do nothing. To life we may be
revived, and when these our bodies shall be laid low in the womb and tomb of
the earth we shall be raised, Phil. 3.
but it can only be by that power which is able to subdue all things to
himself.

weakness, rejoice in the power of our God, who shall raise our vile bodies,
let us so express the virtue and power of the first resurrection in this life,
as that we may receive the honor and joy of the second resurrection, in the
life to come. Rev. 20.6.
That divine speech of John in his revelation should rap us up into heaven with
Paul. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, for on
such the second death has no power. The Godly only die once, but rise twice,
they die only the death of the body but rise in soul and body: the wicked they
die twice, and rise but once, they rise in body but die the death of soul and
body, a part they have in the second death of the damned, but no part in the
second resurrection of the just, or if any part, such a part as Judas had in
the Sacrament, a sop that poisoned his soul, or such a part as Simeon and
Levi had in their fathers legacy; Beaux in Harm
Parte^ habent no^ redemptionis etiamsi resurrectionis, a part not of
redemption, though of resurrection. O then, who will cause his eyes to be the
Pander for his lust, if with these eyes he hope to behold God? who will cause
his body to be the curse of his soul, if he hope in his soul and body to
attend God for ever more? When that all that have been kept fast and fettred
in the chains of death, from all the ages of the world shall meet, their bodies
cursing their souls, crying against them, that either the soul should please
the body that loathsome lump; or the body should be the snare, and prison for
the soul, either to abuse it or abase it to perdition by subjection.

What shall then be the comfort of the Godly! who shall rise to joy and
immortality, and be restored to glory, I say to more glory then the bounds of
imagination can contain, that the Lord shall show them the paths of life, and
in his light they shall see light, and shall be filled with the joy of his
countenance for evermore; That they shall rise to the resurrection of the just,
to the everlasting length of days, Aquin.
to the beholding of Gods glorious face, in which blessed vision omnis sit a
est beatitudo al blessedness consists as the schools determine; and all this
joy Christ has purchased with his blood and is gone to possess in his body.
Heb. 12.1.
Wherefore beloved, to use the exhortation of the Apostle to the Hebrews, lay
aside every weight of sin, and the sin which hangs on, and run with
patience, the race which is set before you. The holy Patriarchs have run it,
and now be with Christ, whom they have longer expected then yet enjoyed; the
blessed Prophets, have run this race, though through a sea of blood the
Apostles, Martyrs, Saints this race victoriously have run in the suns course
with more light then the sun up. Up then and the Lord shall be with you, 1.
Cor. 15.
pray, fast, watch, weep, endeavor, labor, and your labor will not be in
vain in the Lord. You shall lay down your bodies in grace, and peace, and
resume them again in joy and glory. You must go this journey, the decree of
this Tax is come our, it is as the law of the Medes and Persians not to be
revoked. Every one of us may say of our Master as David of his son, I shall
go to him, he shall never return to me, which leads me to my third and last
part, the acknowledgement of the inevitable stroke of death; I shall go to
him, he shall not return to me.

In the 3. of Genesis, Pars 3. Genesis 3.
you may find man's Exodus, Thou shall dye, it is the first Text of mortality
in Scripture, al Comments do concur to the exposition of this. The cause of
Adams death was the breach of diet: God forbad him fruit of one tree, this he
hungreth for, and taste it he will though it cost him his life. S. Austin
brings our first parents thus disputing in a dialogue concerning that fruit;
if this fruit be good, Aug
why may I not eat of it? if it be not good, why grows it in Paradise? Domine
dedisti hortum and negasti pomum, Lord haste thou given us the garden, and
denied us the apple? therefore says Austin, God has given thee the benefit of
Paradise, because thou may know his favor and mercy, and therefore has he
denied this one fruit to thee, because he may find thy obedience and duty.
This duty and obedience neglected by our Grand-sire, ever since death the lodge
of all men's lives comes with insensible degrees upon the children of men, no
wisdom shall appease, no policy prevent no riches correct it. The impartial
hand of death is ever destroying, the insatiable throat of the earth ever
devouring; death the usurper of Kingdoms, and the intruder into Countries,
breaks the studies of the learned, interrupteth the enterprises of the
wisest, croppeth of the hopes of the fairest; in a calm a tempest overtakes
them and sinkes them, delay may repriue them, but death will serve the execution
of that sentence upon them. It is a statute, statutum est omnibus semel mori,
It is appointed that all men must die. David knew this and therefore his words
be, I must go to him, he shall not reture to me.

It is the conceit of some Thalmudists, that if ever any had escaped this
fatal general sentence, Miscel. Thalm.
Moses and Christ had been freed. Moses saw God, spoke with him, asked him,
answered him, beheld him, and a kind of co^municatio^ of some divine luster was
imparted to him, his face did shine: never face to face did man behold God, as
Moses did, yet Moses must die, he must ascend the Mount, and there expire. The
oracle of Israel, Terror of Egypt, discoverer of Canaan, Prophet, Priest,
Captain, Guider, leader of his people must yield to death, though he lived to
behold the God of life. Though Moses died, and yielded to death, yet Christ
might have been freed, he was equal to the father touching his Godhead, and
concerning his manhood his body was not begot in sin, not conceived in sin;
yet the death of this son of God if ever any one was so sealed and ratified,
as far as either the justice of the father, or the engines of Tyranny of men
could devise, this Virgin son of the Virgin mother, Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, lamb of God gave up the Ghost.

Every true Hebrewe must celebrate this Passover, every man may say for his
Master, Father, neighbor, brother, friend, child, as David here, I must go to
him, he shall never return to me. They cannot come from that joy and glory
they are in, a Cloud of witnesses give testimony of the blessed state of their
abode. No return, no coming back, no passage from them as Abraham told Dives
in the Parable, they be in refrigerio, in that sweet refreshing says Austin,
Aust. de Sanctis Ambr. Chrysostom. Hom. Greg.
they be in gaudio, in joyful rest says Ambrose, they be in atrio Domint
says Chrysostom in the Court of the Lords house, they be in manu Dei, in the
hand of God says Gregory, in sinu Abrahae, says the Gospel, Phil. 3.
(...) says Paul they be with Christ: Return cannot be, misery shall not be
unto them. that every man shall have his pass in death, but none his return,
till the day of judgment. The Term of death has no essoynes, no returns.
All must celebrat this Passover, all must trusse up their loins, all must take
up their staves in their hands, al must pass to their lower rooms, all must
lay forth their shrowds, napkins to bind their heads, annointings for their
bodies to the burial, I mean preparation, meditation for their death that
their names rot not, but that their memories may remain in the posterities
that are to come. None shall return til the earths great Iayle delivery,
heavens great summons to the sessio^s. A point that may be of much comfort, to
ease and mitigate the gripings of the pangs, and fangs, and jaws of death,
when our bodies lie upon the altars of our beds for the sacrifice of our souls,
when the Evening of our life is even at the end, and shutting up, this is a
sweet smelling savor, to remember that all our holy friends, that we leave
behind us, shall follow us, all that are gone before shall meet with us, none
fail for following, none want for meeting, Villand.
and therefore not to fear death to be so horrid, think thy sickness thy
prison, thy pangs of death, thy last fits, thou art upon recovery, thy Pantings
be but the sem briefes, the notes of division of the harmony that they ever
have in heaven, the bells that call for thee be but to tole thee to the
triu^phant Church, thy friends that weep grieve because they cannot go with
thee, Devils that gape upon thee look but for legacies, leave one thy pride,
another thy lust, another thy ambition, and so as sin brought in death, let
death drive out sin. Death is but a ferrey, a boat, a bridge to waft thee over
into another place, or a groom that lights a Taper into another Room; thy soul
like a Trito^ lying in the water, is presently to be mounted upon the wave,
Angels carry thee, and thou shall (having thy Nunc dimittis, Chrysostom.
) pass into Abraham's bosom. Thus the Lord shall let his servants depart in
peace according to his word: and it will be their comfort, that they have run
their race, and fought their fight, and finished their course, and receive the
glory of the better life.

for conclusion, give me leave to repeat the words of my Text, and so end. Our
MASTER is dead, wherefore should we now fast? Can we bring him again? we shall
go to him, he shall never return to us.

But do I ask? wherefore should I now fast? where fore should we now mourn?
shall I say there is no cause now of mourning for our Master? I dare not say
so; Seneca. Hectora flem us
for his death is like an Ecclypse, the event whereof appears many years
after, and the future generations shall lament his loss, and I fear out of
the sides of their sorrow shall run both water and blood.

I confess it is in vain, to ad new showers to our late streams of tears:
the loss was such, that if after all our sighs and groans, we should herein
weep out all the humors of our bodies, and wast out all the marrow of our
bones all were but vanity and vexation of spirit.

Yet there is a cause to draw the Cesternes of our sorrow dry, and to make us
vow, not superstitiously but religiously, an everlasting lent of fasting and
mourning, and humbling our selves before God; the reason is, Cananeus non est
occisus, nec factus tributarius, Greg. in Moral.
and this brought such plagues upon Israel. The Cananite is amongst us, the
basphemous Traitorous Papist is neither exiled, nor suppressed, but has more
countenance and maintenance secretly, then good men openly, and more pleasure
and content in prisons, then many holy men in their houses. This snake lies
close in the City, this spider creeps up into the Court, and has feeding in
our Church, and housing in our universities. My thoughts be not bloody, I shall
heartily pray for them, though they be our enemies, though they rejoice and
triumph at our present miseries, and though they have evil will at our Sio^, yet
my wishes and devotions shall be rather for their conversion, the^ confusion. But
for our selves, let our prayers be daily and howrely powered out, that the Lord
add not so heavy and grievous a misery unto this present, so great an eclipse
of his glory and our good to this present cloud of both, as that this his
Church ever become an Egypt, a Sodom, a Rome, a Babylon, a prostituted stews
for all comers: but that all good hearts may be encouraged, and all good laws
may be executed to bring all the people of this kingdom to the knowledge of the
Lord. And for this purpose let us fast, and pray, and weep and watch, and cry
between the porch and the Altar, Spare us good Lord, spare thy people and be
not angry with thine inheritance; Open their eyes that they may see the
wondrous things of thy law; Open thy hid treasures that we may receive from the
hidden fountains of thy love, Grace mercy and peace, in our days and the
days of our posterities, from thee O God the father and from thy son Jesus
Christ, To whom both with the eternal spirit of thee holy Father be all
honor and glory in both worlds. Amen.

FINIS.
SORROVV FOR THE SINS OF THE TIME.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. JAMES on the third Sunday after the PRINCE his death.

BY DANIEL PRICE then Chaplain in Attendance.

EZEKIEL. 9.4. Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of
Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and cry for
all the abominations that be done in the midst of her.

AT OXFORD Printed by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold by John Barnes dwelling
near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

TO THE RIGHTLY HONORABLE, AND TRVELY RELIgious LADY the LADY CAREY, wife to
the Noble and worthy SIR ROBERT CAREY.
ELect Lady, 2. Ioh. 1.2.
(for so S. John styleth an Honorable Matrone to whom he sent his second
Epistle) your holy sorrow for the loss of the former Illustrious, and former
service to the excellent gracious Prince CHARLES, deserve much respect of all
good hearts. With these, another argument particularly does incite me to offer
this service, a sacrifice of my sorrow to your worthy hands: The grace and
Countenance you afford Religion and her followers, which will bring a blessing
upon you and your posterity, as is already apparent in those fruitful
beautiful Olive branches your sons, of whom our ( ollege is much joyful,
because they are so truly hopeful adding to Nobility of birth Nobility of
virtue. Continue Noble Lady to be a faithful client for truth, your sex in
scripture has had honorable examples, and this age has a holy example of
you. Painted sepulchers shall rot, and Popish Hypocrites shall rise to sorrow,
when, after many and happy years in this world, you shall appear with joy
before God with Sara, Rebecca, Debora, David's Abigail, Salomons Sulamite, and
the Noble Sunamite in the better world. And so with my devotions for your Noble
husband, your virtuous self and all yours, wishing you all the blessing of
both Testaments, and both lives, I rest

In all Christian duty to be commanded, DANIEL PRICE.

EZEKIEL. 9.4. Set a mark upon the foreheads of them that sigh and that cry for
all the Abominations.


Jerusalem the largest Map of misery, that ever eye beheld, having been
often threatened, often battred, and her visitation growing nearer and greater
then before, Salem being to become a tributary City, Lam. 1.4.
Jerusalem to become a solitary widow, the ways of Zion to mourn, her
streets to be empty, her gates desolate, her feasts unfrequented, her Priests
to sigh, and her Virgins to be afflicted, she her self, the object of this
sight and subject of this sorrow, to weep day and night, and the tears to
run down her cheeks continually; Lam. 1.2.
her Plagues growing mighty because her sins were waxed many, Many committing
them, few mourning for them: The Lord now sends six to destroy this City,
comma^ding them, to spare none, to take no pity, Ezekiel 9.6.
but to destroy young and old, the maids and children, and women, yet to touch
none that had the Mark, and what this mark is, my Text tells you.

A Public Notarie is sent to take the list of the Mourners, their sorrow is
their safety, their lamentation the cause of their preservation; Exodus 12.
houses marked in Egypt, are delivered because marked, me^ marked in Jerusalem,
marked that they may be delivered. Mercy has her lodgings taken up in all
Cities or Countries, be the Judgments never so great mercy cannot, Genesis 7.1.
Genesis 19.22. Exodus 12.
will not be excluded. The Saints are privileged men, they have special
immunities, an Arc, a Goshen, a Zoar, a City of refuge, shall be ever
prepared: or if the breaches of the City be many, yet some shall be marked to
be delivered, the meek, Mat. 8.5.
or merciful, or peacemaker, or persecuted, or poor in spirit, or pure in
heart, or those that hunger and thirst for righteousness. These only shall
not be blessed; Mourning shall have a part. Judge. 1.15.
Acsaph cannot want a blessing, she shall be endowed with springs above and
springs beneath: the godly may sow in tears, but shall reap in joy, thousands
shall fall before them, and ten thousands at their right hand, but the plague
shall not come nigh them. My Text is the patent of the privilege granted to
Mourners, set a mark upon the foreheade of them that mourn and cry for all
the abomination? But were any in Jerusalem to be marked? there was a time
there were none to be found; In another Prophecy you shall find Jerusalem
without a man. The Philosopher through Athens was not more careful to find a
wiseman then Jeremy in Jerusalem to find one good man. Ier. 5.1.
A wonder it was, Inventus est vnus in Sodoma, non iustus inventus est vnus in
Civitate sancta. Sodom yielded one Lot, but Jerusalem yielded not one just man
then. At this time the state was better, though not many, some there were,
these seek and find, they loose not their labor, some children of the
bridechamber mourned, their sight was bestowed intromittendo, extramittendo,
they saw and shed tears to see the abominations: Mourning was as the
Shiboleth be tweene an Ephraimite and a Gileadite, mourning is the Marriage
garment; Eccl. 3.4. Ps 126.6. Ps. 90.11. Mat. 5.4.
Ecclesiastes appoints a time for mourning, David mentions the fruit of
mourning, Moses prays for comfort in mourning, Christ promises blessedness
for mourning, but a mark for mourning a seal, a character, an emblem, an
ensign is never found before, never after. I know in the life to come,
mourning shall not be unrewarded, Revel. 1.
all Tears shall be wiped away; but in this life, where the 12 fountains of
Elim do continually flow, in this vale of misery, in this valley of Tears,
in this way of the wilderness, full of stony ways and bitter waters, that not
only Consolation, but preservation is assured to Mourners, may seem strange,
yet is true, my Text gives evidence. Set a mark upon those that mourn and
cry for all the abominations. Spices cannot preserve the dead by embalming, as
Tears will preserve the living by mourning. who the is not desirous to sow in
tears, Ps. 126.6.
that he may reap in joy and to go on his way weeping and bring this good
seed, that he doubtless may come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with
him? That not a sigh is sent out but is heard in heaven, not a Tear but is
kept, not a groan, but comes before God, he that sees him in secret to
reward him openly; These poor souls to be rewarded with joy in their tears,
when the wicked that were in joy before their faces wallow in their blood, Ps.
101.1.
This is an extraordinary song of judgment and mercy, set a mark upon the
foreheads of them that mourn, and cry for all the abominations.

Privilege of mourning, set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn. 2.
The spiritual cause of true mourning, for all the abhominatio^s. In the 1
there is a separation and distinction; not as the Prophet distinguishes them
marshalling the inhabitants of Jerusalem thus, Ier.
the strong man and man of war, Judge and Prophet, prudent and aged Captain of
fifty, Honorable man and Counselor, Artificer and Eloquent man, but
whosoever of any state of life, any age, any sex, that mourned are all
preserved. Gedeon divides, and separateth his company by lapping of waters,
Judge 7.1.
God distinguishes his Saints here by shedding of watery tears, set a mark
upon those that mourn and cry in Jerusalem. Secondly, as no man saved but the
mourners, so no mourning is approved but that which is for the abhominatio^s of
the time: though their friends, neighbors, the wives of their bosom, their
children, the fruit of their bodies were slain before their face, that no
Myrmidon, no savage Barbarian could abstain from weeping at such Ruthful
woeful spectacles, Aencad. lib. 4.
that standers by would brand the^ with the cursed character of hard-harts
with a Quis temperet a lachrimis? Yet their mourning is not allowed unless it
be for the abominations. The desolation is spiritual, because the
abomination is spiritual all, the lamentation must be no other, must be no
less: Set a mark upon the foreheads of them that mourn and weep for the
Abominations. But 1 of the Privilege of mourners.

question of these people, when they saw this day of their visitation coming
upon them, O who shall bring Salvation unto Israel out of Syon? They had heard
the fearful denunciation of God in the last verse of the former Chapter, Ezekiel.
8.18.
I will deal in my fury, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have any
pity, though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear
them: this word was a sword able to devide between the bones and the marrow.
They had heard of fettring, scattring, consuming, banishing, and that their
Virgins, Nazorites, Priests, Prophets, and Princely Citizens should be diuoured
by the sword, and other plagues, the bitter blasts of the breath of Gods
displeasure, they could expect no better: yet he, Aust.
who had and nomina and membra, in whose roll were their names, and in whose
book were all their members wrtiten, sends to comfort them: he had them in
his hand, and none could take them from him, his eyes were set upon them, Psalm.
and with his eie-lids he considers these children of men, no evil shall
come near their dwelling, though they were dejected in their own eyes,
despised of their neighbors, and their enemies laugh them to scorn to see
them go mourning all the day long, yet these mourners shall without any peril
go about in the street, every one of them might have said Posui Deum adiutorem
meum, In God is my help, in the Lord will I rejoice, he has regarded the
lowly estate of his servants, Luke 1.41.
he has put down the mighty from their seats, and has remembered the humble
and meek mourners. God could not forget to be gracious, but will visit this his
vine, Habet ille vineas semper lachrymantes suas, Magis frugifeferae sunt
lachry mantes vincae.
he has vine-trees dropping of Tears in the winter of this world that they
may flourish in the summer of a better life. Pined. 2 de Salom* c. 4 number 4.
Virga tua and baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt, Thy rod and staff do
comfort me. Pineda has a strange interpretation hereof, that hereby the kingly
Prophet means his Lictors, or the Chelethites and Petethites who were his
guard. And as this is forced, so be there many fained and various others,
wresting this holy speech to ridiculous senses. Some interpret this rod to be
Moses rod, whereby he did miracles, Exodus* 4.2. Zeno veronens. ser. de Iud.
some the Rod of Aaron, which only rod flourished among the Rods of the
Tribes. Some this Rod to be the root of Iesse as Justin Martyr, and Eusebius.
In Triphon.
But the better opintons do sentence it of afflictions and humiliations, these
do comfort, these encourage, Ps. 23.
these do strengthen the godly. There by affliction David is strengthened and
encouraged, here by afflaction these sorrowful souls are preserved. It was
with them, as with Mordecai; one day he walks through the midst of the
City with rent clothes, Ester. 4 1.
and put on sackcloath, and cried with a loud, and bitter cry; on another day,
the royal apparel that the king uses to wear, he is apparelled with, Ester.
6.8.
and the horse that the king rides on, fitted for Mordecai, and the Crown
Royal which is set upon the kings head, is put upon Mordecai, and one of the
noblest Princes do lead him through the same city where Mordecai mourned. No
man imagined such an alteration. Could any man think that God would so
remember and provide for these pitiful sorrowful souls, whose tears were their
meat day and night, their heads aching, and their eyes streaming, sitting as the
Doves in the holes of the Rocks, their souls weeping in secret, Cant. 2.
and their eyes dropping down day and night, Lam 2.
that in this great destruction, when neither the aged have reverence for their
gray hairs, nor the suckling relief for innocence of his tender age, nor the
Virgin nor Matrone privileged for their Modesty, nor the Priest or Senator
respected for their dignity; yet these marked for preservatio^, and honored to
posterity, brought out of their private cells, out of their dark, and loathsome,
fulsome, fuliginous dwellings into the light, vbi non lux sed luctus luceat,
where not only their light shall shine before men but even very darkness shall be
turned into light, Chrysostom.
and as Esaias speaks, they shall have beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, Esaias 61.3.
the garment of gladness for the spirit of heavines. David may fly from Country
to Country, from Samuel in Ramah to Abimelech in Nob, then to Achish in Gath,
sometimes be in a Cave, sometimes in the fields, sometimes in the Rocks,
sometimes in the Wilderness, but an eye shall behold him, whom no eye can
perceive, a hand shall lead him, that he dash not his foot. Jonas the most
admirable pattern of misery that ever humane understanding co^ceaved, the most
absolute Model of misery, seek (as a Reverend father of ours worthily says)
from the Ce^ter to the Circle, no Parallel (being only man) to Jonas, of whom
the interpreters deliver miranda ed vix orede^da, were we nor bound to the word
by the obligation of faith, Jonas I say, cast out of the ship into another
vessel, the bowels of a whale, the very belly of hell and being so imbarkt
worse the^ shipwrackt, Ovid. Trist.
that he might truly have said Mors mihi munus erit, Epis. Land. in I on.
he is wafted a long the bottom of the sea, and promonteries of the earth,
from sea to sea, through the Syriacke sea, thence to the Egean, thence through
the Hellespont where Asia and Europe be divided, thence through Propontis, from
thence to Thracius Bosphorus betwixt Constantinople and Natolia, and from
thence to the Euxine sea, where he was vomited out of the Guts and Garhadge of
the fish. In all this time, the Deep drowned him not, the stomach of the
Whale digested him not, al his misery devoured him not, all the surges, all the
waves cannot wash away his mark his character, but preservation shall ever
follow him, and bring him unto the have^ where he would be. There is a root
that keeps life in the winter of misery, there is a good Angel that leads
the Saints through fire and water, a guide there is that leads them through
the chambers of death and breaks the bonds of iron in pieces. Psalm. 1. Cor.
The foundation of the Lord is sure, says Paul, and has this seal, the Lord
knows who are his, he has signed and sealed the^ with a mark, sometimes
invisible, always indelible, never to be expunged, never removed. You may ask
why this privilege is given to mourners? For if the Righteous only be Gods
servants, and that of S. Austin be true, vbi Iustitia ibi laetitia, where
there is righteousness there is gladness, then what place has sorrow in the
assembly of the Just; again in Habacuc in the great preservation the Prophet
speaking of the deliveraunce of the Godly says, the just man shall line by his
faith. Hab. 2 4. Ps. 118 15. Esaias. 61 3.
Now the just man is said to have vocem laetitiae, vestom laetitiae, and oleum
letitiae, the voice of gladness, the garment of gladness, and the oil of
gladness, here is no mourning taken notice of. But S. Ambrose answers, Non
solum dolor, sed and laetitia habet suas lachrymas, Ambros.
Not only sorrow but even the joy of the just has private tears, and groans
and sorrows. The ioyfullest feast, that ever the Israelites had, was the
Passover, and yet the Rasseover must not be eaten without bitter herbs: Exodus
12.8.
and the most content that ever this life can afford, is but a bitter sweet.
Therefore as the Apostle warns, They that rejoice must be as though they
reioiced not; for all the joy that the godly have in this world is but vva
acerba, a sour grape. The counsel of S. Gregory upon the rainebow fitteth us
in it at one time there seems to be the representation of fire and water,
Greg^in Mor.
not only thereby symbolum vtriusque iudicij, a plain manifestation that as
the world was drowned by water, so it shall be burnt by fire, but more
properly in those colors of fire and water is represented joy and sorrow, so
interchangeably appearing as not to be divided, a sorrowful joy, and a joyful
sorrow, a shower in a sunshine, a bright star in a dark night. So here these
servants of the Lord do mourn, and therefore are marked, and being marked
rejoice, because they are preserved: set a mark upon them that mourn and cry.
observation as out of a clear fountain is derived, It is an inseperable sign
of the true children of God, to be sorrowful concerning this world, while
they are in this life. The reason is because we ought to conform our selves,
not only to the old Saints under the Law, but to our Savior, whose actions
in this kind be our instructions he was never found resting, or reioicing, but
solitary, and sorrowing, and traveling; you may behold him, at a well solitary
sitting, at the grave of Lazarus weeping, Luke 2.3.
in the Temple displeased and greeving, in the garden sweating and sighing, on
the Cross sorrowing and expiring. He was not borne in the year of Iubile,
the year of reioicing, but in the year of Augustus the first year Taxing of
the world. His servants before had their marks, and practices of mourning, the
ancient Prophets often received their prophecies, in sorrowful solitary places
by the waters, as heavenly doves upon the floods of waters: Ezekiel by Cohar,
Daniel by the river Tigris, Joseph the Prophet and more then a Prophet by the
river Jordan; and others though they received them not by the rivers, yet they
dissolved their messages into waters, Ps. 119. 1 Cor.
mine eyes gush out, says David, I have writ unto you with many tears, says
Paul, Non atramento magis quam lachrymis Chartas inficiebat Paulus, says an
expositor upon the Acts. Among all the fathers, none more abundant in tears
then S. Austin, Lor. in Act. 22. v 19. Aust.
he wept in praying and prayed in weeping, Da mihi lachrymarum fontem tum
prae^ipue cu^ preces and orationes tibi Domine offero, O Lord, says he, give
me then a fountain of tears, especially then O Lord, when I offer up my
prayers unto thee. Not to be able to weep is hellish, a Mark of infernal
accomplices, the furies are so descried by the Poets, Horat. 2. Carm. 12. Ode.
and Bodinus affirms the same of witches, and sorcerers. Certain it is that
Gods servants are well acquainted with such sacrifices, for with such
sacrifices God is pleased.

I find in Scripture 3 especial times of marking, 3. Times of marking in
Scripture. Exodus 12.22.
the first in Goshen, the houses to be preserved were marked ye shall take a
bunch of Isop and dip it in blood, that is in the basin, and strike the
Lintell, and the two side posts and the Lord will pass over the door, and will
not suffer the destroyer to come into your houses to smite you. And the same
Text says, there was a great cry in Egypt, Exodus 12.29.
for there was not a house wherein there was not one dead. Rev. 7.3.
The second marking is in the Revelatio^ by an Angel ascending from the East,
having the seal of the living God and he cried with a loud voice, to the
four Angels, to whom it was given to hurt the earth, and the sea. The third
marking is this of my Text, set a mark upon them that mourn, and cry for the
abominations. When the Israelites were marked in Goshen, the Egyptians had
sorrow but no marks, when the servants of God are marked in the Revelation,
they have marks, but no sorrow, but in my Text here we find sorrow and marks
together. The sorrow in Egypt, where there were no marks, does describe the
estate of the wicked, who drink deep of sorrow, but are estranged from all
privilege of preservation. The Saints in the Revelation who had marks but no
sorrow, describe the estate of the Godly, whose sorrow is ended here, and in
the life to come have Palms, Laurels, white Garments, the seals and signs of
the Lords eternal love. These marks do design the glory of Martyrs, Roses of
the field red by their death, and the beauty of Saints, Lilies of the valleys,
white in the innocence of their life, these shall never hunger, nor thirst, nor
sorrow, for the Lamb is their light and Lord for evermore. But the Saints
marked in my Text, do design the militant Church, ever as the woman in the
Revelation traveling, ever like Rachell weeping, and therefore marked to be
preserved.

In the 1 of Chronicles the 4 and ninth, 1. Chr. 4 9.
Iabez the son of Ashur is said to be more honorable then al his brethren, the
reason is because his mother bare him in sorrow, and his name is a name of
sorrow. In the next verse Iabez called upon the God of Israel to be delivered
from evil, 1. Chr. 4.10.
and the Lord, says the Text, heard him and granted it to him; here is the
fruit of sorrow. Of all the Trees in the world, we read of none remaining, but
the Olive tree after the flood, from this tree the Dove had the bough. Many
ancients do observe much hereupon, Genesis 7.
and attribute much to this Olive tree as being most green when it is most
watered, most fruitful when it droppeth and distilleth. David compares
himself to an Olive tree, Psalm.
I am as a green Olive tree in the Temple, in the house of the Lord, and
Christ was more conversant in the Mount of Olivet, then on any other place. I
infer nothing upon these places but only this, that after the flood of
sorrow our Olive branches shall be green, and flourishing. Elisha cast salt
into the bitter waters to make them sweet, salsum in amarum, says one, Lud.
did he cast salt into bitter, can salt make sweet? Yes the sorrow which is as
salt (cast into the passages of our life which of themselves be bitter) does
sweeten and relish our whole state in this life. We never read that our
Savior took the book out of the Priests hand in the Temple but once, and
then the Text he opened, was that of Esaias, the spirit of the Lord is upon me,
Esaias. 61. 1. Luke 4.18.
because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent
me to heal the broken hearted, and as it follows in Esaias to comfort tho^
that mourn in Zion. A great comfort it is, that comfort was the Embassage of
Christ, the only Text of Christ, in his first sermon, the second blessing
pronounced by Christ, and in the day of judgment the assured retribution of
Christ. Mourners shall be marked, and by this shall be preserved examples to
all posterity, and Saints hereafter in eternal glory.

Doctrine fitting us the scattered flock of this family, who mourn for loss
of our service. If we be true mourners here is entertainment, mainetenance,
Countenance and protection: we are sure to be defended in the perilous times,
and to be delivered in the day of adversity, then if we hear of dangers, or
fears, or rumors of war, we may lift up our heads on high, as knowing our
salvation is near at hand, nay, we shall be dearer to God then ever we were,
we shall be as the apple of his eye, or as the signet on his right hand, Tender
as his own bowels, he will water us with the dew of heaven, keep us in the
quiver of his providence, and cover us with the wings of his protection, we
shall then no longer sit by the waters of Babell or drink of the waters of
Marah.

O what an honor will it be, to be Gods servants, to be chosen by him, to be
set apart by him, to be his privileged men, honored and remembered by the
posterities that come after! His servant Moyse, shall bring Manna from heaven,
Exodus 16.16. 1. King. 18.41 Numb. 25.11. Genesis 19 22.
his servant Elias bring Rain from heaven, Phinehas stay a plague, Lot shall
have such power as that God can do nothing while he is in the city, to these
he promises that he will destroy none of all Jerusalem till they be marked.
Who so is wise, says the Psalmist, will ponder these things and will consider
the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm.
But alas, we are give^ to affect Courtship, and the service of court so much,
Job.
to seek the face of the ruler as Job in his time spoke, or as Elisha is there
any thing to be spoken to the king or to the Captain of the host? ever we
seek great preferments, and desire continuance in the blandishments of Court.
2. King 4.13.
O, it is a brave thing to be counted a Courtyer, and yet a matter no happier
then Salamons spider the worms and moathes of greatness do hang upon many
here, Prove.
it may be some have vipers hanging on their hands, and the beholders do daily
expect their downefull. Acts. 27.
At the best Courtship is but splendida miseria* envy may eat, Bern,
or slander bite thee, ambition may break thy heart, or pride break thy neck,
Pro.
or at best ease slays the foolish. I have already remembered you of the kings
speech in the Psalm, I will ingeminate it, for it is penned for this purpose,
Ps. 146.5.
the misery and uncertainty of our Courtly dependances Blessed is he that has
the God of Jacob for his refuge and whose help is in the Lord his God. To this
refuge we may have recourse he is not as Baal is said by Elias to be, busy, or
slumbring, he that keeps Israel neither slumbreth, nor sleeps; To this
refuge we may fly as the Grecians did to Themistocles, or as travailers in a
storm to a shelter. Thuc.


Secondly therefore let us examine our selves, whether we are marked to be his
servants or no: marks we have, yet not his; Caine had a mark set on him, Genesis
the mark of murder; Edom had the mark of Horror, Esau the mark of shame,
Jeroboam the brand and mark of his sin* never to be removed. There be marks of
damnation, as well as of preservation. God has divided between Jacob and Esau
in the same womb, between Pharisie and Publican in the same Temple, between
Ephraim and Manasses in the same place, No doubt many men of Note at this time
in Jerusalem were without this Note of preservation: And so now in the world if
such another seale-day came among us, many great me^, the magnificoes of this
age, would bear part in the Common desolation, having no part in this Patent
granted only Christi fidelibus. How many be there whose mouths serve only to
breath out the unsavory speches of the soul, corrupting not the Company only
but the air they are in! whose eyes are the windows, whose ears the doors of
their own destruction, whose understanding represents their will, whose will is
a common Curtiza^ of pollution, whose memory a treasury of corruption. Nay
among our selves, how many of us have but laid aside in this mourning time our
common sins with our common garments, our ordinary sins in these
extraordinary judgments? It was an honest dutiful speech of Vriah when David
bid him go home, and eat, 2. Sam 11.11.
and drink, and sleep; he answered, The Arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in
tents, and my Lord Ioah, and the servants of my Lord lie in the fields, shall I
then go into my house, to eat, to drink, to lie with my wife? As the Lord
lives and as thy soul lives, I will not do it. He denies to take his
honest ease, I pray God none of us have presumed to take dishonest courses,
since our misery has been so eminent, and our dangers so imminent. This now
should be our meditation; our blessed MASTER lies now in his sheet and Sindon,
Terras reliquit Astroea, our sunshine is darkened, that place of Job seems to
be pend for us, Job. 21.18.
WHERE IS NOW THE HOUSE OF THE PRINCE? the sun of our glory is gone down,
the Philistines rejoice, the Popish uncircumcised triumph, what shall I do?
Shall I be unmindful of my Savior, unfaithful to my present sorrow,
ungrateful to the memory of that my deceased Master, continue in Lies, lusts,
oaths, aspiring proiects, or malicious trapps? No I will make and observe this
vow, I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eielids to slumber, I will
neither continue my tongue to betray my brother, nor my body to betray my own
soul, I will endeavor to live a just and holy, and sober life, this I desire,
for this I hunger, and thirst, this I vow, for this I pray, the Lord hear and
grant me this petition.

examine whether you have so mourned as ye ought, in this our last loss.
Alas, where now be our Tears? Its a Prodigy that fountains be dried up in
winter. Heathe^s in their ritual books, deliver their order of Lamentation for
common men to be 30 days: the Hebrews lamented Moses, and Aaron, and Jacob 40
days; the Egyptians went beyond both, and mourned for Jacob 70 days: Gen 50 3.
and I know in this company some will go far beyond these Egyptians, making
their whole lives remembrances of their Masters death, and entertaining no
guest into their soul but sorrow. Yet herein also others have gone further
then any of you intend: Amorits by laming their bodies, Grecians shaving their
heads, Tibracians by howling and roaring for the dead, and so many other
Countries by horrid and unnatural Geromonies. But in all this causes rather
then effects are to be lamented, Ratio docet and trahit affectio, Bern.
says Bernard, Reason does inform, and affection does enforce this former
manner of lamentation, but grace does comme^d and God does command another
mourning, mourning for abominations as it follows in my Text, for the
Abominations. When Rahel wept, 2. Part
God by his prohibition cries Noliflere, weep not. Our Savior in the Gospel
beheld none weeping but prohibiteth them. Ier 31.16. Luke 8.15.
Tairus wept for his daughter, and Christ says, Noliflere weep not. The poor
widow following them, that bate her son to the burial is forbidden in the
same words, Noliflere, Our Savior ready to go to his passion. Luke 7.13.
the daughters of Jerusalem wept for him, he for bids the^ Nolite flere,
weep ye not. Luc. 23.28.
Does God forbid weeping, and does the Prophet promise a reward for weeping?
yes says Rabanus non ideo vt nonlugeant temporalia, sed ne negligerent
suiritualia. Nature does teach us, to weep for Natural causes, but grace for
spiritual, such is this mourning to be rewarded Mourn for the abominations.
Common sins are to be lamented, they be the unfruitful thorns that choke
the good seed of virtue and grace, the corrupters of judgment, the seducers of
will, the betrayers of virtue, the flatterers of vice, underminers of Courage,
slaves to weakness, infection of youth, madness of age, the curse of life, and
the reproach of death, the least of our bosom sins is fire in the hand, and
a serpent in the heart, a Canker, a spider, an evil spirit, and the fruit
hereof is death. But the word wickedness is a degree, that far exceeds
common sins. The Hebrews observe that the word wickedness in the original
is transcendent. It is not (...) a small fault, nor (...) iniquity, nor (...)
simply evil, but it is (...), as importing the all sufficient Term for all
manner of impetuous impiety, nor restrained to any one branch of the breach of
the Commandments, but outstretching al degrees, that whatsoever exceeds
modesty and is contrary to reason, nature, grace, or scripture, settled into
dregs, frozen into ice, having forced, captiuated, the soul to impious
servility, with a whorish forehead, that cannot be ashamed, aspiring, crying,
climing, towering, filling and defiling the earth, poisoning the air, lifting
it self above the stars: yet in this exuberancy, and transce^de^cy,
Abhominatio^ like the whore of Babylon strives to sit higher, Rev. 13.1.
she is the beast that rose out of the sea, having seven heads and 10 horns,
and upon her horns ten crowns, and on her heads, the name of Blasphemy.
Abomination is the abstract, the Lucifer, Rev. 17.5.
the Dragon, the Babylon, the great mother of all whoredoms, all witchcrafts,
and to say no more it is Idolatry; survey the former Chapter and you will find
it. The great abominations mentioned there be four, first the Idol of
indignation, or as others read it the image of jealousy; Pint. in loc. quatuor
abom. genera.
secondly the Ancients or Nobles committing Idolatry, and one especially
named among the rest; Thirdly, women weeping over an Idol, women not of the
meanest; Lastly, between the porch and the altar, the place of the Priests,
Villapand.
and therefore collected hence that these were Priests, they are committing
Idolatry. And after the Prophet had seen every one of them, the Lord by a
gradatio^ leads every degree, every vision to a higher elevation of their
abomination: for when he had seen every one of them, he says, but behold
greater abominations. The first is that Idol of indignation, or image of
iealonsie, Luth. Lamb. Villalpand and Pint. in Ezekiel.
which what it was is not generally concluded, but as the most, and best, it
was the image of Baal which was the first occasion of the heathens and Jews
Idolatry. Every Idol in scripture is called, vanitas, mendatium for nicatio,
abominatio, but this especially, Villalp.
this is the abomination of desolation in high places, some refer this Idol,
to that which Manasses made, 2. Chr. 34.4.
but Josias took that away, for he brake down the alters of Baalim, that were
before him. Others expound this of those made in the time of Zedekias: an Idol
it was, and the cause of indignation. The second was greater Ancients
committing Idolatry, worshipping, and burning incense to the forms and
pictures of creeping things, Ezekiel. 9. v. 16.
and abominable beasts privately in their chambers and to all the Idols of the
house of Israel. These seaventy, the Sanidrim, the Council of Israel, the
elders of Israel, Number. 11.
as they be called by God at their first institution, they that should have
taken care for Gods service, they commit abomination. But the third
abomination was greater, at the door of the Lords house there sat women
weeping and mourning for Tammuz, Lascivi daemonis simulachrum, says an
interpreter, the Idol of a lascivious Devil, whether of Adonis, or Osiris, or
Saturn, or whatsoever it was, devilish it was. R. Moses apud pint. in Ezekiel.
Rabbi Moses the Egyptian says, this Tammuz was the Idolatrous statue of one
so called who was a great worshipper of Idols, and he dying desired to be so
adored; it was an horrid abominatio^. But the fourth is greater then al,
between the porch and the altar, some Priests, say all Interpreters, turning
their backs to the Temple, and their faces to the sun, worship toward the
East; this was the most abhorred of al others. Observe the transcendency, and
priority of these in their dagrees, first the Idol of Jealousy, this was but
at the gate, at the entry, there it might have stood as a byword to those that
pass by, a contemptible thing, a Mehushtan, a ruin ous Skeleton, time eaten
weather beaten Monument; no, it stood there to be adored, worshipped publicly.
Behold, says the Lord, the abhominatio^, that the house of Israel commits
herein; yet behold greater abominations, the Nobles and Ancients, worship not
one Idol only, but the forms of creeping things, abominable beasts, all the
Idols of the house of Israel, nay more one among the rest, a chief one,
Currus Daemonis, Pint. in Ezekiel.
quo multi vehebantur ad infernum, a chariot of the Devil wherein many were
carried to hell, this mo^ster has a Censor in his hand, in the midst of
them, and every one of them round about, burn incense to this Idolatrous
imagery pourtrayed on the wall, yet this was only in their chambers, it was
privately. But the third abomination is greater, women weeping for that monster
that Devil of lust, or that devil of Idolatry, women shameless Idolaters.
The devil had no other engine in Paradise but the woman, Genesis 3.
she was the wheel to turn about all the world. Ahabs Iezebell is his
instrument to slay the Prophets, Herodias daughter to strike of John Baptist
his head, Helena shall further Simon Magus stratagem, Philumena her Apelles,
Montanus must have his Prisca Donatus his Lucilla, Priscillinus his Galla,
Arrius must be favored and furthered in his heresy by Constantines sister,
and Nicholas the Deacon will have choras foemininas: whether it be that women
by their nature, are more flexible, or by law less liable to punishment,
(though very many of them have been holte worthy Saints and Martyrs of God,)
yet many have been most faithful servants to their infernal Master, they be
the loadstones and loadstars in all evil, the Jesuit not more serviceable to
the Pope then Idolatrous women to the devil. These women were not in the
common streets, but in the gate of the house of the Lord, in an eminent place
do they commit this Idolatry. Yet the fourth is far beyond all, in all the
circumstances. It is much that the Idol should be public, yet better
public by the common people, then in private by the Lords and Ancients of
Israel: in the second, it is not so much that the Nobles and Ancients, do
commit Idolatry in private, in their chambers, as that these women, those
idolatrous witches, should openly, even at the door of the house of the Lord,
mourn for that monster, whether it were the God of their corporal, or
spiritual filthiness, for both be sworn sisters and inseparable associats. In
the third it is not so clamorous in the ears of heaven, that women, weak for
their sex, though wicked in this service, should weep, and mourn, this being
done without t the gate, though in an Idolatrous custom; I say it is not so
clamorous as that the Priests of the Lord, the seers of Israel, the strong men
of Sion, the foundation of Jerusalem, they that should have bin the Oracles of
God, that these should build Babell in Salem, it is more then that all the
Commons, many Nobles, some women be Idolaters. Numb.
If the light be darkness how great is that darkness? Nadab and Abihu, if
they offend, fire shall strike them; Corah if he offend the earth shall swallow
him. The offering of the Priest was greater then the offering required from the
Prince, Lev. 4.15
not respectu dignitatis, but pietatis, the Prince to offer a Goat, Bux.
but the Priest, a bullock. The Priest was not only the sacrificer, Sacerdos
sal sacrificii.
but the salt, of the sacrifice, if this salt have lost his savor, wherewith
shall he be seasoned? if the Priest commit Idolatry, what hope in people or
Prince? at his hands all will be required. Here then is the full measure;
people, and Prince, women, Priests, all are found faulty, all are ahominable,
or at least some of all kinds and qualities among them, this is the cause that
this mourning is required, that the Saints may herein be discerned, that they
are so far from participating in the wickdenesse of the world, that they in
consideration hereof may be found, not only watching but weeping as the
Pelican, Storke, Dove, Turtle, bemoaning the increase of iniquity; and as my
Text speaks for the abominatio^s that are done. observation properly arises,
that it is the duty of all Gods Saints to deplore the sins of the time, by
which Gods judge ments are hastened upon the world. Moses left this as a
legacy to his people, they did not more lament his loss after his death, then
he mourned for them, and their ensuing sorrows for their present sins before
his death. Deuteronomy. 32.
David had the same spirit; Ps. 119.
mine eyes gush out with waters because men keep not thy law. To say no more,
all the Prophets do bewail the sins of Jerusalem the seat of the kings of
Judah and Samarta the city of the kings of Israel. Jeremy wished himself a
fountain, and if you read his Prophecy and Lamentations, you may think he
shed an Ocean of Tears, for the sins of the daughter of his people. As I name
him for all the Prophets, so I only direct you to S. Austin of all the fathers,
who besides his practice herein, Confessions, Meditations, Aust.
and Soliloquies, does upon this occasion of my Text exhort all to this
general Lamentation. Aug. lib 2 cont. Ep. Parmenian.
Cum idem morbus plurimos occupaverit, nihil aliud bonis restat, quam dolor and
gemitus, vt per illud signum quod Ezechieli Sancto revelabatur, illaesipossint
evadere ab impiorum vastatione: when the same discase (or general calamity)
shall visit many, there remains nothing to the Godly but sorrow and weeping,
that by that sign, which was manifested to holy Ezechiell, they may escape
unhurt, Chauc. Gerson. Alvar. Pelag.
in the devastation of the wicked: what Gerson, and Alvarez Pelagius a Papist
in his book named Gravamen Ecclesiae have written even against I dolatrous
Papists, is worthy for ever to be remembered, though it cannot in this scanrell
of time be recited.

dysastrous time of my distracted meditations I have been at a maze to consider
whether these prophecies of Jeremy and Ezekiel be Oracles for Jerusalem only,
or the Chronicles of our own lands: sure I am we have the Idol of indignation
among us, Popery the mother of two sorry twinns Idolatry and Treachery, we have
some Idola trous Ancients, noble Idolaters, Idolatrously luxurious women, I
dare not say that Noble women mourn for Tammuz. We have Idolatrous Priests of
our own Tribe, of our own Temple, who wish more Rome in the Land, who often
offer strange fire upon the altar even in Bethel, spurious, Heterogeneous
monsters, Hermaphrodites, Ambodexters, Rapsodisticall Postillers, false hearted
fellows, who edge their swords upon the Philistines forges, and for this and
these comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. It is
confessed that Jeremy and Ezekiel prophesied both at one time; Compare their
prophecies, and you will believe that they prophesied purposely for this age,
and this place wherein we breath. Ier. 13.16.
In the 130 of Jeremy there is a prophecy, that while men look for light there
should be great darkness: Is not this fulfilled? and have not our eyes seen,
and sorrowed, have we not wept day and night, to see our present and apparent
joy ecclypsed, the expectation of such solemn and solid comfort in the
conjunction of that blessed star, with the religious Prince Palsgraue? In the
same Chapter in the 18. Ier. 13.18.
verse the Prophet, as if he cried to the English Court, uses these words,
Say unto the King and Queen, humble your seiues for your Principality is come
down, even the Crown of your heads. And were the sun and moon of the firmament
of this land, I mean his Royal Majesty and the Queen ever so distressed
with sorrow, as now, that the glory of the British Principality is ecclypsed?
In the 20 of the same Chapter, the Prophet asks where is the beautiful
flock that came from the North, the flock that was given him? And may we not
ask? where now is the beauty and glory of this flock, of this family? where
be those worthy, active, rarely qualified, Religious, Noble, and divinely
tempred Gentlemen? whom, if another Queen of Sheba had beheld in the order of
their service and manner of their attendance, she had pronounced, 1. King.
10.8.
Happy are these men, happy are these servants. In the 22. Ier. 23.10.
of Jeremy there is a command to weep bitterly, the reason, because of the
death of the Prince, Shallum the son of Josiah; for says Jeremy, He shall go
away, and shall never return to see his native Country. O that the grave had
opened her mouth upon us, and that this had not been sulfilled in our eyes,
that a Million of our lives had served as an expiatory sacrifice for our
blessed Prince! In. Ezekiel there be many notable places, that he that runs
may read how truly our history is pourtrayted in that Prophecy; but this
string will grow harsh, if it be touched longer or louder.

Ye may ask me wherein be any of these Prophecies fulfilled in our times, in
connivence of Idolatry? But ye are wise, ye have hearts and judgments and
eyes to behold the increase of this desolation; ye need not ask, or if ye
will ask, ask the father in Christ's name for some redress: for did not the
wakefull eye of heaven keep Centinell over us, and the divine hand protect us
from the furious battry of tempestuous Popery, we should bleed under the
presence of their wished for desolation, as now we ought to weep for that
continued abomination. Babylon has been described by Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel,
and almost all the Prophets, especially S. John, have foretold her Papal
Tyranny, and farall and final misery. If there were any life, or spirit, or any
of our Ancestors jealous, zealous courage in us, we would be avenged of Gods
enemies. Is it not enough that they have reaped of the best fruits of our land
and blasted some of the fairest hopes and crept into houses, and led women
captives laden with diverse lusts, and have their annual sessions, and
customary officers, for their subsidiarie collections among the hell borne
brood of bastards, enemies to our King, and God, and Church. I know if there
were no Popery in our land, yet Abominations might every where be found,
Oportet esse hareses, Oportet esse abhominationes. But I say it is impossible,
that all the world should afford so many high and horrid abominations, as be
in these. What greater pride then that a Priest shall so abase the metal of
the Crown and lay the golden head of the picture under the earthy foot of the
Pope? what sensuality more then to proclaim indulgence with liberty, to all
kind of lust, what Covetousness more then to sell souls, the great mark of
Romes market in the Revelatio^. Rev. 18.13. A most notable place to prone the
abomination of Rome: No place of the world selling souls but Rome Tully in
Catil. coniur. Job.
A place so invincible to convince Rome of Antichristianisme, as no
quicksilvered Sulphurous Enginer among the Jesuits shall ever be able to
countermine it. Veniunt, and in senatum veniunt, thy live and come to Church,
and I would they came no nearer. But come they as near as they may, he that
sits in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord still has them in
derision, the sea is limited, nay hell it self is bounded, their Navies have
been shipwrackt, their fire works prevented, their weapons, poisons,
Treasons, ever hitherto descried, and God will continue to be our God, their
Dagon ever shall fall before our Arc, if we continue his servants.

Acknowledge this, Honorable, and Beloved, let Gods protection, if nothing
else seal the certainty of our Religion unto us, you that have any place of
government and derive any beams of authority from the sunshine of his Royal
Majesty, look to your oaths of allegiance to God and the King, how soon you
must give account of your stewardship you know not, be faithful in the cause
of the Lord. In some parts of this land by the countenance and furtherance of
our late Renowned Prince, authority has kenneld up some blood thirsty
she-seminaries, Banbury Castle
and Religion that was sick of a Consumption begins daily to recover. There
is no open Toleration for Popery, I confess better were it that the Eagles of
the valley should pick out their eyes, but in eo quod superstitio non tollitur,
toleratur. I never shall remember that remarkable place of S. Paul to the
Galathians, but my soul will abhor the thoughts of blending or suffering two
religions in one place. The Gospel was planted in that Church, and yet this
desired to retain some few of their ancient Jewish ceremonies: if ye read the
place, Gal. 3.4. and 5. Chap.
you will wonder that Paul should be so vehement against the participation of
some few relics of their old religion. You will find him more bitter (if I
may call his holy zeal, the seal of his Apostleship, bitterness) I say you
will find him more earnest and piercing then in all his Epistles. Besides an
ingeminated Anathema to those that preached Jewish doctrine among them, Gal. 2.1.
and foolishness heaped on their heads because they did hereby frustrate the
grace of God, he protests unto them in the 5. chapter and second verse,
Behold I Paul say unto you that if ye be circumcised, Christ profits you
nothing. Is Circumcision grown so odious? Is the seal of the covenant,
Abraham's covenant of grace antiquated? Is there no means, that this and the
gospel may stand together? Will not Paul suffer a little leaven in the lump,
not agree, that an agreement, or reconcilement be made between Moses and
Christ, I say between Moses a type of Christ and Christ, between Moses, who
was with God the father in mount Sinai, and Christ with him in mount Tabor. Not
this Moses and his law to be endured where Christ is, and his gospel? How
then, if leaven be not suffered, is poison mingled? if Law and Gospel not to
be together, how shall that be endured, graced, maintained and countenanced
among us, which is derogatory to law and gospel? Beloved be ye not deceived
God is not mocked, he sees hearts, as you see faces. Idolatry and the
connivence of Idolatry, brought all the plagues upon Israel; favors among us
done to our enemies, have almost undone us. Eheu suslulerunt Dominum, I may say
with Mary, they have taken away our Lord. Whether it was by any hellish plot of
theirs sent from their infernal caves and cavernes, or the too much sparing of
these Amalekites, whom God (if man neglect) will punish, I may say sustulerunt
Dominum. The choicest and greatest plague that these Incendiary, Sa^guinary
assacia^ts could have devised, they have performed. I know not whether, it was
their damned villainy, when they saw that Solomon would not link with Pharaoh,
that they fearing Solomon would pull of the crest of Pharaoh, have preve^ted it
by their infernal stratagems. Speak it I must not, fear it I do, yet not
because I fear to speak it: for alas, now that sustulerunt Dominum for us of
this distressed family, did they cut our throats presently, they would rather
free us then add any thing to our present miseries.

But Lord look down upon us, we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture,
thou have broken our bones in sunder yet art able to cause the bones that thou
have broken to rejoice; build up the walls of thy Jerusalem, look down upon
thine Anointed, cloth his enemies with shame, but upon him and his let his
Crown flowrish on earth, til thou crown us all in heaven. Amen.

TEARS SHED OVER ABNER.

THE SERMON PREACHED ON THE Sunday before the PRINCE his funeral in St. JAMES
Chapel before the body.

BY DANIEL PRICE then Chaplain in Attendance.

SENECA. Hectora flemus. AT OXFORD Printed by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold
by John Barnes dwelling near Holborne Conduit. 1613.

TO THE HONORABLE AND worthy Sr DAVID MVRRAY.
SIR,
MY end in publishing this Sermon, is not popular ostentation; that neither
becomes this season, nor this subject: being then framed, when having lost
the light of my Master his life, I desired to confine my self to the circle of
solitariness, yet was I put unto this, and the like burdens above my strength,
and beyond my will. This was my last homage to his memory, who has exchanged
highness for happiness in the highest heavens. It is my first service to you,
who were one of the first and faithfulst servants to him, till the holy passage
of his heavenly soul; your watery eyes having then no other object but him, and
heaven, where now he is clothed with the rich wardrop of his Redeemer. Accept
worthy Sir, these mites, grains, drops, tears; they be the best odors and
ointments that in that have I could provide to present to him dead, and you
living. Our Tribe owes much to you, but Religion much more; and therefore I
know many join with me to wish your worthiness complement of joy in this
life, and full accomplishment of glory in the next: for the which as your
favors have bound me I continually pray, while I am

DANIEL PRICE.

2. SAM. 3.31. Rent your garments, and put on sackcloath, and mourn before
ABNER.


MY Text contains the furniture for a funeral, an Honorable shadow
presented on the stage of mortality, concluding his last act upon the face of
the earth. In the 1. of Samuel and 14. ye may find his birth, 1. Sam. 14.50.
Abner the son of Ner, kinseman to Saul, a Prince of the blood. In this
Chapter is recorded his death, funeral and last obsequies, v. 27.
and these so fully described that neither the manner nor marshalling of it be
left out. v. 31.
Hearse, Sepulcher, mourning garments, mourning Elegies be not omitted, and as
if David gave the Impresse, v. 38.
his own words be, know ye not that a Prince and a great man is fallen this
day in Israel. I will stay my meditations from running as Peter and John did
to the sepulcher: Ioh. 20.4.
he that comes after, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose, he is
to anoint the body at the burial, and foelix est cui talis praeco contigerit,
and happy is our dead Achilles, as in heaven in his soul, Rev. 1
that he sings praises with those who are made Kings and Priests to God, so
in earth, that at the interring of his body his praises shall be sounded by
him, Aug.
who is as Augustine spoke of Cyprian, Tanti meriti, tanti pectoris, tanti oris,
tantae virtutis Episcopus, our most Reverend Prelat, and of such worth, such
wisdom, such speech, such spirit.

My part at this time is to shed some Tears over Abner, and as David in the
31. verse of this Chapter to lament before the hearse: V. 31.
a duty unexpectedly imposed on me, the weakest of my worthy brethren, yet now
to be performed so far as Omnipotency shall enable, as a final end, and
funeral of my service to that virtuous, gracious, Princely spirit, which once
inhabited this Tabernacle of earth that here lies before us.

Abner the Princely Hebrew, was now going to his last Passover. From the Egypt
of this world, to the Canaan of heaven is one Passover, but this was not it,
he was now to pass the other from the world into the earth, to remain in
silence, and solitariness in the womb and Tomb of the earth. David asks
the question, died Abner as unregarded, died Abner not lamented? No; for the
Text says, David lift up his voice and wept, all the people wept for Abner,
and again David lamented and follows the beer, and wept besides the
sepulcher, and all the people wept again for him, and yet further, David
commands them to mourn, and in a solemn observance, wishes them to lay aside
their purple and Princely furniture, their wanton, superfluous, and
supercilious sails of Pride, nay not only lay them aside, but to rent and
tear them in pieces, and to put on Sables, mourning Abiliments, outwardly to
testify their sorrowing inwardly, because Abner was fallen in Israel. And what
was Abner, that he is so lamented, so honored by these observances, so mourned
for in these obsequies, that King and people, and all Israel lament him? Abner
was the grace of the Court, and the hope of the Camp, he was the Candle of his
father, as the original signifies. Abner was the bearer of the sword, and the
joy of the soldiers. Abner was the glory of the king, and the supporter of the
kingdom, a noble-minded Martialist, that did not after a dishonorable Peace,
which is no better then lusts truce, and valors rust. To say no more, he was
Abner, the light of Israel, and now this light extinguished, Abner is dead and
departed, therefore Rent your clothes, put on sackcloath, and mourn before
Abner, for Abner lies dead before you.

Not only change your garments, but rent them, tear them to totters, and put
on not only sables, semblances of sorrow, but saccloath hairy, dusky, dusty
sackcloath, nor only Scindite vestimenta, rent your garments, but scindite
corda, rent your hearts by mourning, and do not this ^lam, but coram, not
privately, but openly. Put your garments on of lamentation, non tanquam illi qui
theatro vivu^t, not as though you did personate sorrow, but as though grief
were as clothes to your backs, and as marrow to your bones. And mourn you,
no^ ta^qua^ illi qui in funere plorant, not as mercenary men among the
Heathe^s, who were hired to mourn in their public funerals, but really let
all the senses, all the faculties of the soul be clothed only with sorrow.
Weep, and wait, and watch the body while it is here, water his couch with your
tears, attend the hearse and bear it to the burial, and perform these last
ceremonies of service, and sorrow to Abner David's Chiefetaine, Isreal's
Captain, whose presence was a heaven of delights, whose departure seems to
leave an Eclipse in all things. Rent your clothes and put on sackcloath and
mourn, Abner lies dead before you. The Parts of this iniunction of sorrow
are three; signs of sorrow, rent your garments, and put on sackcloath. 2. The
inward signs, mourning and lamentation. Thirdly the cause of both, Abner is the
sad spectacle dead before them.

I forbear descant, plain song best fitteth sorrows. First of the first. 1.
The manner of the Eastern people was when they lost friend or child, or in any
common calamity, to rent their garments. In the latter, when the Israelites
found want of the favor of God, they put of their wonted garments, Job. 2. Ion
3. Amos. 8.
as in the Prophets may be found, Job sat in ashes, Niniveh in saccloath, the
Jews rent their clothes. J need not record the frequency of the Phrase in
scripture. The holy Patriarch Jacob was one of the first J find so passionat,
and it was when he lost Joseph his joy, Genesis 37.
the light of his life. Rachel never mourned for her children as Jacob for the
son of Rachel, he mourned and rent his clothes, says the Text. Pardon the
good Patriarch that he was in such an ecstasy, well might he rent his clothes
from his back, when they had rent his bowels from his belly, and taken his
Joseph from him. Isaac his father was not more dear to Abraham, then Joseph
his son to Isaacks son Jacob. Wherein observe that God tried these three
Patriarchs in their three children, Abraham by Isaac trying his faith by
offering to offer Isaac; Isaac by Jacob, Jacob flies from his fathers house
for fear* Jacob by Joseph, Joseph is sold by his brethren, and they bring old
Jacob his bloody party colored coat, and Jacob seeing it accepit vnam vestem
scindit alteram, he received Joseph's garment, but rent his own, Lud.
herein manifesting how great his sorrow was for the loss of his son.

The loss of a son is the greatest loss under the sun. Job lost all, last
of all his sons: when those fatal Nuntioes bring him news of several
losses, one waving after another, any of them all ready to shipwreck al Jobs
senses, Job 1.20
he answers none of them till the death of his sons was presented to him,
then, says the Text, Job arose and rent his mantle. But J will not rent my
self from the Text.

In holy scripture there is not almost any state or condition of life but
yields an example of this Renting the garments. Jacob the Patriarch, Iosuah
the Captain, Genesis 37.10. Josh. 7.6. Iud. 11 15. 2 Samuel 15. 2. King. 2.
Joseph the judge, Chusai the Counselor, Elisha the Prophet, David and
Ezekias, Achab and Ahalia the Queen. But of all other I find not many examples
of the high Priest, for in the law it was prohibited the high Priest: Lev. 10.6.
for Moses thus speaks, Rent not your clothes, least ye die, and least wrath
come upon all the people. And therefore when the high Priest in the Gospel
rent his clothes, he rent his Priesthood, says Abulensis, Abul.
Praesagium scissae pontificae dignitatis, it was a presage and prodigy of his
renting officium and vestimentum simul.

This custom is not only mentioned in Scripture, but in all monuments of
history, Poetry, and Oratory, Iuv. Satyr. 10
that of Iuvenal of Polyxena

Scissaque Polyxena Palla: Herod lib. 9. Lucian. dial. de luctu. Dion. lib. 6.
that also of Augusta in Seneca, scindit vestes -- Augusta suas. Herodotus
records it of the Lacedaemonians, Lucian of the Grecians, Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus of the Romans, though Tully in his Tusculans jest at these
Ceremonies calling them Luctus Barbaricos, yet these shows and shadows have
much life in them, and be sensible provocations to sorrowfulness and
solitariness. For by renting of the rich roabes, and apparelling themselves in
sables and sackcloath, they manifest their mourning in body as in mind. With
renting of garments, putting on of sackcloath is ever joined. Moeroris
insignia, tristitiae Emblemata. And indeed the use of sackcloath, Rab.
has been very ancient, and frequent; the Arc until the Temple was built
was covered with sackcloath, and John Baptist was clothed in sackcloath, Mat.
3.4.
and Esaias and the other Prophets, were commonly apparelled in saccloath, and in
the end of the world Enoch, Esaias. 20.20. Apoc. 11.3.
and Elias shall preach in sackcloath, I can show you a whole Court thus
arrayed, in the time of Ahab; a whole City in the days of Jonas: Niniveh.
But not to stray further: upon this renting of garments, and clothing with
sackcloath; the sadness and sorrow of the spirit draws the body and all the
habiliments of the body into the participation and manifestation of grief.
Every work of ours, in ordine ad Deum, has many outward necessary ceremonies
in the performing of it. Prayer is a holy service and by this tenure we hold
our temporal and spiritual blessings, herein bowing of the knees, bedewing of
the eyes, smiting of the breast, be not of the substance, but of the
circumstance of prayer, Domer.
Non tam opera quam passiones, neither commanded, nor prohibited by God, nor so
properly works as Passions, yet when these attend prayer, not mimically sought
or vainly studied for, or Hypocritically affected and personated, but come of
themselves; these holy perturbations, proceeding from the spirit and power of
prayer, they never return without a blessing. In the repentance of Niniveh,
they used besides fasting, the livery of my Text, sackcloath, and that so
generally, as that man, and beast put it on, and not only so, but a forbearance
of meat, neither man, woman, or suckling, neither rational nor irrational
creatures, had their feeding, the infant crying for the dug, and the dombe
creatures crying in the Crib, in the great and solemn abstinence, did add much
life to the performance of the Ninivites repentance. To let pass the guise of
other Actions, our own custom, and the habiliments that now are on us, now we
see all things are turned to mourning round about us, it has a strange
operation to stir up the powers and passions of sorrow in us, to set open
those cesterns of our souls, that rivers of Tears may flow from in this
Hart-breaking, yet well pleasing pensiveness. For the nature of grief does
utterly exile all objects of pleasure, and when true sorrow sits her down in a
stupid and stupendous manner, and calls for heaven above to weep with her,
the earth beneath to lament, Rocks to cleave, mountains to echo groans,
Rivers to run with Tears of grief: the Israelites did not more loath, then
she does delight to sit down on the bancks of Babylon, her music is
Lachrymae, or Doloroso, she is as Rahell in hard labor, she no sooner
conceiueth but is delivered, Genesis 35.16.
and no sooner delivered but conceaues again, her throbs and throws almost
devide her soul from her self, but that her solace being in division, that
which kills others, keeps her alive, emptiness in the bowels, blacknes on
the back, round about spectacls of misery, al circumstances to make sorrow
greater then her self.

Is it so? Be outward circumstances required to express inward sorrows? Down
then with all the signs, and sails of vanity, and in true sorrow, and
humility, humble your selves before God. It was one of our Saviors questions
to his Disciples after their return from the visitation of John Baptist, Luke
7.24.
whom went ye out to see, one clothed in soft arrayment? he answers
himself, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicatly, live in
Princes Courts. Ahlas, Beloved, that tune is altered, you that have been as
Orient stars in this firmament, now the dark and black color of the night
clothes you. It was a true speech of the Emperor, sumptuousness of apparel
is vexillum superbiae, Nidus luxuriae, the banner of pride, and nest of lust:
and as true is that of another, the worst apparel is natures garment and the
best but follies garnish. The great sin of the Assyrians was excess in
clothing, Ion.
and therefore their great City Niniveh was therefore apparelled in sackcloath.
The great sin of our land is excess in the same kind, and therefore God has
clothed this our great City at this time in mourning garments. Ask of the
most ancient observer, and Register of times, whether either in man's memory, or
in records of antiquity the like example has appeared, as that which is
obvious now in all parts of this City that almost the third man we meet is a
mourner. The froth of ostentation that appeared lately, I say not only in this
house, and in this City, but in all this Land did prodigiously pretend an
alteration. It was not strange to see a man carry a whole house on his back,
nay to see some more able to bear then Elephants, carrying more then Castles,
lapping themselves in their land, being the living sepulchers of their
ancestors, executors to themselves, and thieves to their successors. I
acknowledge a free use of all Gods good blessings. Honor to whom Honor
belongs, and all the accrument of all honorable ensigns to them whom God has
lifted up above their brethren; but Nature and Nations have ever until now made
distinction as in other Circumstances, so in apparel between the Master and
servant, the Prince and Subject. It is the generality rather then the bravery
of apparel I condemn. Yet even in the bravery, what a poor ambition is this,
that a Peacocke is more beautifully suited then thou, or a Lylly of the field
more glorious the^ thy Colors* feathers, spangles, pearls, silks, and golden
suits can make thee! Be not deceaved, my Beloved, in the bravery of the world,
in the vanity, or opulency, or voluptuousness of life, he that gave a
garment may give a Rent, he that has clothed with beauty, may cloth with
leprosy. Look into the rifling of a wordrop in Esaias; Esaias. 3.18.
The inventory is taken in the 3. Chapter, the bravery of their Ornaments, and
chains, and bracelets, and muflers, and bonnets, and Tablets, and earings, and
rings, and ornaments of the legs, and changeable suits of apparel, and
mantles, and wimples, and crisping pinnes, and glasses, and hoods, etc. But the
destruction of all this feminine furniture is in the next verses: It shall come
to pass, that instead of a sweet smell, there shall be a stincke, instead of a
girdle a rent, instead of well set hair baldness, and instead of a stomacher,
a girding of sackcloath, and burning instead of beauty. The gates shall lament
and mourn. That story shows how our state is, so we sinned, so we are
plagued.

It is observed that among the Jews, whosoever were present where blasphemy
was committed, Thalm.
they presently rent their clothes in detestation of the blasphemer. Were it
an iniunctio^ among us, we should never be in a whole suit of clothes, there be
so many blasphemies daily committed. In all the old Testament I find but
four blasphemers, Shelomiths son in Leviticus, Corahs murmuring was a kind
of blaspheming.
Corah in Numbers, Golias in the 1 of Samuel, and Zenacherib in the 2 of Kings.
The first one of the commo^s, the 2 a Priest, the 3 a soldier, the 4 a King,
and none of all these escaped without vengeance, to show, that if in the
Co^munalty, or Clergy, or military men, or in the very throne of Majesty,
blasphemy be found, without great mercy there will be great judgment
executed. In our weakness oaths do fall from the best of Gods children:
Humanity and infirmity, those two twins both dwell in us, and therefore let
us pray, Enter not Lord into judgment with thy servants, for in thy sight no
flesh shall be justified, keep us from the cursed custom of oaths, and keep
us from being either principals, or accessaryes in blasphemy.

Lastly to close up this first part; In your mourning garments, see that ye
cloth mourning minds, and truly sorrowful souls. None of you can condole so
much as ye ought, and therefore far be it, that among any of you, there
should lurk under the sable habit of a mourner, any falsehearted,
Pharisaicall, Hypocritical, Popish masker, whose soul is not robed with
either the Nuptial, or funeral, wedding, or mourning garment. To such J say
not friend, but foe, how camst thou to this mourning garment. Epiphanius
mentions some Heretics that were called (...) that continually went in
sackcloath, and yet were rotten painted sepulchers. Epiph. Haer. 80.
I fear me, if due inquisition were made, we might find Heretics in
sackcloath, even in these solemnities. The pressing in of Papists into those
places, which our Gracious Master honored with the access of his Person, this
last Summer will never out of many good men's minds, who saw and pitied to see
the boldness of these blood suckers. No wonder that there is masking in
mourning, when there is such common masking in believing, that many a one that
comes to these assemblies may be asked, noster es, an adversariorum? as
Joshua once questioned. Ios. 5.13.
But the day shall come when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed,
Conscience shall be unmasked, and their own souls say to their own
consciences, as Achab to Elias, Have thou found me o my enemy? But unto those
that do truly mourn, the Lord will mark them in Sion: and howsoever the
Persians in the history of Ester would not suffer any in sackcloath to come
into Ahashuerosh his Court, yet as Jacob got the blessing in sackcloath by
making himself rough in the sense of Isaac, so he that comes to God with the
inward sackcloath of sorrow, shall surely find a blessing. O then how happy
were we if we could for ever continue our mourning till our blessed Master,
who is in glory, and we who are here in misery come to meeting.

For our part we pronounce not renting of clothes only, without the putting on
of other roabes, nor so much wish you to put on sackcloath as to put on Christ.
Induite is the voice of the Church, not scindite: Put on, not rent of. We pray
for the Kings Majesty, Indue him plentiously with heavenly gifts; for the
Royal progeny, we pray, In the Collect for the King. In the Collect for the
Royal issue. In the Letany.
Indue them with thy holy spirit; for the Honorable the Lords of the Counsel,
we pray, Indue the Lords of the Counsel, with grace wisdom and understanding,
and in many other places in our Liturgy; the Original of all being from that
of S. Paul, Put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Which will be the better performed
if ye please to be acquainted with the second part of my Text, which is
mourning, inward mourning, not only scindite vestimenta, but scindite corda,
Rent not only your clothes, but your hearts.

And mourn. It has been an ancient and a laudable custom for the Saints of
God to deplore their deceased of what estate or condition soever. Honorable be
those examples, Abraham lamenting Sara, the Hebrews Moses, Joseph Jacob, the
Israelits Joseph, the Apostles Stephen, Nazianzen Basil, Bernard Malachie, and
our blessed Savior Lazarus his friend, and far be it that Christians be
blameable for neglect hereof. If it were that but Nature only did teach this,
and affection press it, those internal acts, the Passions and operations of
our soul would diffuse themselves, not only by a sensible but reasonable
motion, to bewail the want, and lament the loss of such as were, by our duty,
or propinquitie dear to us. But when a greater enforcer hereof, then nature
appears, when Grace approves this, we may then open the floodgates of
affection, and deplore the death of those, whom the eyes that saw blessed, and
the ears that heard, gave witness unto. David in these 5. last Chapters
celebrateth many funerals with mourning for Saul and Jonathan, for Ishbosath,
for Ahasel, and here for Abner. And it is not without much reason that Solomon
does give Counsel to go to the house of mourning, est enim illic benedictio,
says one, Pin.
there is performed that blessing which Christ promises. A blessing is
promised no where to mirth, but to mourning our Savior has annexed this
reward. The keeping under of the soul is much availeable to all religious and
devout offices, the contemplation of the lamentable estate of the several
occurrences of this lower world, is one of the cheifest and first rounds of
Jacobs ladder, and has brought many holy ancients to heaven, and does teach
every man David's lesson; Ps. 119.
I see that all things come to an end, therefore they law do I love. The whole
world is the house of mourning, whither then may man go but to mourning. The
Paracelsian may hold that there is salt in every body; I am sure, there ought
to be sorrow in every soul. The second son that Adam had was Abel, Genesis
his name the name of vanity and sorrow: of vanity because Adam was exiled
Paradise, and the whole creature was subject to vanity; Adam might have taken
up Salomons Text, Omnia vanitas: and Abel had his name from sorrow, because
all things were so obnoxious to vanity, both these be joined in Salomons
universal censure, Eccl.
vanity and vexation of spirit. Abel the first name of mourning, Abel the first
cause of mourning. S. Austin only collecteth three reasons of praising Abel,
virginitas, Sacerdotium, Martyrium; and in all these he was the type of Christ,
and indeed his name of mourning did typically prefigure the nature of Christ's
life, which was spent in solitary sorrow. It is a conceit of Methodius, that
Adam continued his mourning for his son Abel a hundred years, Hist. schol.
in lib. Genesis
his reason is, because he had no other son, as he collecteth from the Text,
in the space of a hundred years after. How long soever he lamented his son,
we know not, nor need care: we are sure that all the days of our Pilgrimage,
we may lament our father Ada^; for as he brought in sin, so sin has
brought in Lamentation and mourning upon us, and not Jeremy only but all
mankind may write Lamentations. Non finiresed semper reservare lachrymas
debemus, Hier.
we must never end our sorrows, intermit them we may, but still to keep our
acquaintance with them. That of Hierome I confess it is true, Detestandae sunt
illae lachrymae quae non habent modu^, mourning without measure is a hell upon
earth, yet again Detestandi sunt qui carent lacrymis, they are to be detested
that have no measure of this heave^ly Manna.

My obsernations upon the word Mourn, is this, O^s.
The best servants of God ought to lament the loss of those that have been
Pillars either in Church or Commonweal. It is confirmed by S. Hierome, Pietas
plorare iubet, desiderandi sunt vt absentes, deplorandi vt amici, Hier.
Piety does command these lamentations, holy men are to be lamented, because
being absent to be desired, and as friends to be deplored. Tauri pro tauro
mugiunt, says Bernard, unreasonable creatures do low one for another: how much
then should reasonable men, especially Christians deplore those that are
departed from them, when reason teaches, and affection inciteth? It was the
practice of many of the Prophets, as S. Hierome notes. Hie. in 17. Isa. Esaias.
57.2. Mich 7.2.
Iustus periit, says Esaias, the just man perishes, and no man takes it to
heart, sanctus periit, says Mioheah, the holy man perished out of the way, Pius
defecit, says our Prophet, the godly man cease, and Jeremy in most ample
sort, in his, 9. Chapter, whither if ye have recourse, ye may see the
fountain from whence ran the rivers of al his lamentations. Ier. 9.1.
O that my head were water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night, for the stain of the daughter of my people! I acknowledge
that these all did deplore rather the general desolation in the want of good
men, then in their particular affection the death of such good, holy, just,
godly men. But in this kind also, these blessed servants of God are not without
example; David shall speak for all in his Elegies for Saul, Jonathan, Absolon,
Abner, etc. Nay our Savior, as before I mentioned, wept for his friend, I find
that name bestowed only upon his friend Lazarus and I find our Savior weeping
only for Lazaru, for no one particular but his friend Lazarus, and that was so
observed by the Jews, as that their speech was, behold how he loved him. Ioh.
11.
Our Sautour raised up, as S. Austin notes, Aust.
three especially, and particularly inhis life, but he wept only at one of
them. The circumstances of his raising these differ much, the first was dead
but an hour, the second dead a day, the third dead four dates; the 1. dead
but not taken out of the bed, the 2. dead and laid in the coffin, but not in
the grave, the 3. dead and laid in the grave, dead 4. days, and began to
savor: he touched the hand of the first, the coffin of the second, but the
third he touched not at all. At the first few persons were present, and Christ
charged them not to speak of it: at the second many were present, and it was
noised far abroad: at the third a number of Jews present, and they observed
it. At the first there was no public weeping; Ioh. 11.
at the raising of the second the mother wept: at the raising of Lazarus, the
friends, and sisters, and Jews wept, and fleuit Jesus, and fremuit, and
turbauit seipsum, Jesus wept, and groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, and
again he groaned and was troubled, and cried with a loud voice; the^ said the
Jews, behold how he loved him. Et quare fleuit Jesus, nisi hominem flere
docuit, and why did Christ so weep, but that he hereby taught man to weep?
he opened 2. fountains of passion and compassion, and therefore those that
carry his name, are to conform themselves in some measure, and though there
be no proportion between finite and iufinite, yet in the best manner we may,
precept, and example, and promise do enforce this blessed practice. It was a
strange law, that the Athenians made an edict to prohibit mourning at
funcials, fit for heathen, not Christians to imitate. For they that have been
honorable and commendable in their lives, are to be followed with the best
testimony of affection, that the just may be had in everlasting remembrance,
yet with this warning in mourning, that as we prove not without charity in not
lamenting their deaths, so also not without hope to forget the good estate of
their souls when we so overmuch lament the death of their bodies.

In the 9. of Numbers, when the cloud was taken up, Number. 9
the children of Israel iournied, when it abode, the children of Israel
pitched, so when sorrow comes, sit down with sorrow and mourn; when joy
comes, return and rejoice, yet never to bewray a want of faith when we would
manifest an abundance of love.

warrant for bewailing the irrecouerable loss, that the Church and
Commonwealth, and Protestant world has now sustained by the sad spectacle
before us, we may rent garments, and put on sackcloath, and mourn. Mourn
then, ye children of the bride-chamber, the bridegroom is taken from you.
Mourn ye sons of Eli, Nebility and Gentry, the Ark of God is gone from among
you. Mourn ye Priests of the Lord, between the porch and the Altar, Josias is
dead, and slain among you. Howl ye poor fir trees, your shelter is down,
the Cedar is fallen, and lies here before ye. Let the house of David mourn,
and lugeat Domus Iacobi, let S. James mourn; Zach.
let the inhabitanes of Jerusalem mourn, and to use the words of Zachary, let
them mourn as for their only son, and lament as for their first borne. In
that day shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddo, and the land shall bewail every family
apart, mourning shall be in all the ends of the land, complaining in the
streets of every City, crying in the chambers of every house, Alas for the day
of the Lord is come, it is come: all the orders and Companies, I say not of
this house only, but of all this Realm, from the honorable Counselor, to
him that draws water, from the man of gray years, to the young child, shall
plentifully water their cheeks, and give just occasion to the Chronicles and
Proverbs of our posterities, to be remembered. And we especially of this
Collegiate society, that shall this night end our watching, shall to morrow
have a new occasion, not only of increasing but renewing our weeping. Hitherto
we have mourned for the departing of his soul out of his body; now we must
lament for the departing of his body out of this place: so long as his hearse,
his vrne remained, we had a Master, though we could not enjoy him alive, yet
it was some solace in sorrow, to attend him dead, though we heard not his words
so full of grace, nor enjoyed his presence so full of glory, yet his ashes, his
effigies, gave a glimse to us sitting in darkness, and now we must loose
this, and this unhappiness will admit no help. Genesis 50.10.
When Jacob was carried from Goshen to Canaan the Egyptians mourned with a
great and very sore lamentation, and that mourning was so wondered at by the
Canaanits, that they call the place Abal-Mizraim to this day, Egyptians gave
the cause of the name: Canaanits gave the name of the place, mourning the cause
of both, both these strangers, nay in themselves infestuous enemies to the
Israelites. If Egyptians and Canaanits, strangers, have done this for Jacob,
what shall the servant do, and attendants in familia Iacobi, pro filie
Iacobi; let us cry mightily unto heaven, that after our bodies lie buried in
the dust, our lamentation may be remembered, Ah the Prince, ah our glory, ahlas
for the day of the Lord is come, for Abner lies dead before us! My last part.

Mourn before Abner: Coram not Claam, not privately but openly. Math.
Many acts of devotion are to be performed privately: when thou give alms,
says our Savior do it privately, when thou prayest enter into thy chamber
do it privately, when thou repentest, says David, commune with thine own
heart, and in thy chamber, Psalm. 4
and be private. Priuacy is a special circumstance in all these, and sure if
many would but undergo the catechizing of their souls in private, Laer. tit.
3. de Jra.
they would not be observed so much for their sins in public. Laertius
mentions Pyrrbus Eliensis, which was wont to consult himself daily in some
secret place, and being observed to talk to himself, hereupon being questioned
the cause, he answered, Meditor bonus vt sim. And Seneca mentions Sextius in
this kind, who every night would privately examine himself, Quod body maesum
tuum sanasti? eui vitio obstitisti? qua part meliores? and what custom says
Seneca, can be more commendable? These beloved, shall arise in judgment with
this generation and condemn it: their practice was a kind of veiled
Christianity, they did shame to do that privately, which this age does
perpetrate daily and publicly.

Mourning is to be performed openly, solemnity expects it, and antiquity,
that constant, wise, and unpainted Herald, prescribes it, Coram Abner, the
last act of his obsequies, the last tribute of duty. Abner yet carries his
names, the earth yet carries his body, it is not Cadaver, nor Inane corpus
anima, it is Sacrarium vitae, not a Carcass, Athan.
or empty corpse, but as Athanasius well observes, the dead body is the vestry
and Chapel of life, and have their Camiteria, sleeping places til the
Resurrection of the dead. They be as Kings houses, not to be contemned, when
their Masters depart out of them, because they are to return again: life
shall visit these desolate rooms, all the offices in this Princely body of
Abner shall be supplied, the Court is but removed, Heaven is the standing
house, this body again shall be the bed chamber of the soul, yet because
life is gone out, lament, for Abner is Abner still, let not your last act fail,
though your eyes cannot see him, yet let them send our Tears to sorrow for
him, and Mourn before Abner.

The sorrowful presence of a sad stectacle calls sorrow before it comes, and
often creates sorrow where it is not. It is no marvel that Abruham wept
when he saw Sara his wife dead, or that Bethshebe wept for her husband, or
Eleazar for Aaron his father, or David for Absalon his son, or Rebecea for
Deborah her nurse, or Christ for Lazarus his friend, or David for Abner his
Captain. But that Alexander should so lament when he came to behold the
Sepulcher of brave Achilles, or those many in histories to deplore, and fall
out into tears upon the first sight of spectacles of desolation, may seem
strange.

Yet those spectacles sometimes cause passions of diverse effects. When our
Savior beheld Jerusalem, he wept over it, but when the army of a worthy
Conqueror, above 1000. years after came to behold the ruins and rubbish of
the same City, Hist. Ture. p. 21
the devout passions of diverse are very diverse: somewith their eyes and hands
cast unto heaven, calling upon the name of their Savior, some prostrat upon
their faces, kissed the ground, as that whereupon the Redeemer of the world had
walked, others ioifully saluted those holy places they had heard so much of,
and then first beheld. Our Savior, in a holy as well pitiful, as sorrowful
contemplation, beheld the presage of their utter dissolution and desolation by
reason of that horrible contemptuous iniquity of theirs Quod nulla posteritas
taceat, sed nulla probet, Sencea.
and therefore upon a more cause of grief then these soldiers of joy,
lamented the City, and yet slept not till he came near to the City, the sight
of the City was the seal of his sorrow, Propter Jerusalem has much more in it
then this day can give me leave to deliver. S John in his Gospel does deliver
the story of Christ's raising up of Lazarus: and well may John write Lazarus
story, they were both almost in one line in Christ's love, Johannes dilectus
Domini, Lazarus amicus Domini, Ioh. 11.
John the beloved of Christ, Lazarus the friend of Christ. The story is worthy
observation? V. 11.
Jesus told his Disciples our friend Lazarus sleeps, they understood him not,
the Text says, V. 13.
Jesus understood it of his death, then said Jesus, Lazarus is dead, yet Jesus
wept not, in knowing or telling them this. Our Savior then goes on his
tourney toward Lazarus, he discourses all the way concerning Lazarus, yet
Jesus wept not, he meets by the way with Martha, and communeth with her
about her dear deceased brother, Nondum fleuit Jesus, Jesus wept not yet. At
the length Mary comes, she falls down and weepeth, and cries out, Master
if thou had been here my brother had not died, then Jesus seeing her weep,
and the Jews weep, he groaned in spirit, and was troubled, yet he wept not At
length he asked where have ye laid him, and in his passing thither, the Text
says, Jesus wept, coming near to the grave, he could not contain: Fleuit
Jesus.

The Doctrinall observation of these words (before Abner) is, that it is the
duty of Gods servants to lament over their deceased, and carefully to provide
for their Christian funerals. Honesta sepultura is much remembered among the
fathers, Aust.
and one of them has writ a book de cura pro mortuis. If there were nothing
to prove the Lawfulness hereof, that one parcel of ground that Abraham bought
to consecrate to burials, may justify the antiquity and reverend use hereof.
How honorable were the sepulchers of the Kings of Israel and Judah, it is a
grace to them that had this Epitaph, he was buried with his fathers, the Piles
of Pyramides of Egypt be yet in part to be seen, Mat.
they were made of that brick as some record, which the Israelites in the
house of their bondage were constrained to make: and so it might be, that God
suffered them to be the instruments of making Pharohes sepulcher who were the
cause of his death. In vita Ambr.
In the New Testament we want not examples of these solemn funerals, that of
Stephen may serve for all, holy men carried him to burial and made lamentation
for him. S. Ambrose, as appears in the description of his life in this kind
was very careful, those that were honorable in their places, or profitable to
the Church, or Commonwealth, or any way to be esteemed good, holy men, he
would bewaild their death, and attend their funerals. But it may be some such
Scepticall Cynicall creatures may question, whether such pomp as is used in
funerals, be lawful or no, for why should not I think that Judas tribe is not
utterly extinct, whose cry is ad quid perditio haec? To answer all such that
part of solemn service, the last night, being a portion of the 50 Chapter of
Genesis may satisfy all such curious and querulous Inquisitors. Genesis 50
Joseph commands his Physicians to embaulme old Israel, forty days the
Embalming continued, then they provided furniture for his funeral, and all the
house of Joseph, and his brethren, and his fathers house, all the servants of
Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt, and
Chariots and horsemen, and a great company and they made great lamentation. To
this may be added many examples, sacred and profane as also the Emperous
constitutions: Constantine that appointed 950. officers about funerals, which
order Arcadius and Theodosius confirmed, and afterward Anastasius increased to
1100 and a certain pension allotted unto them; this also established by Leo
and Justinian, some to visit, some to provide necessaries in sickness, others
to lay out the dead, others to embalme them, others to carry them to burial,
as Claudian witnesses

Portatur iuvenum cervicibus aurea seeds. lawfulness of our Christian
celebrities and solemnities in funerals, is approved, and hence we may learn
to perform those offices in the last obsequies of our deceased, as knowing
that before the Law, under the law, after the law, yea even to heathens that
knew not the law, this custom was with reverence and care observed.

But J draw to the end of this my service and sermon. Exodus 12. Numb. 14.
Those two speeches of Moses, Cras movete castra, Cras celebrate Pascha, be
fitted for us; To morrow we must remove our Tents, to morrow we must celebrate
a Passover. There is a fourefold Pascha, Pascha populi, Pascha Christi, Pascha
in mundum, Pascha e mundo, I am sure we have a Passover, and to be performed
with bitterness, and as at the Passover the first borne was slain, so unhappy
are we that we see the first borne to lie slain before us. Shall I say, Abner
is slain? Abner was a Prince, and a great man in Israel by David's testimony,
and David lamenteth him the more, because being a Prince of the blood, he was
such a soldier. For certainly the soldier how ever he paceth, the same
measure of misery with the scholar, yet in all ages has been ever in high
esteem, til these days. The merchant cannot trade without him, the Law cannot
remain vnviolated without him, nor the Crown stand steadfast without him. The
soldier is the heart, and arm of the state, the vpholder of the King, and the
glory of the conquest, the Captain of the Navy, and the father of the army,
and the most laudable improver of his Country. For always the olive garlands
of Peace be not so glorious as the Laurel wreathes of victory, seeing Peace
only keeps and often rusteth good spirits, but victory imployeth and edgeth
and increases them. The loss then of a soldier is much, but especially of an
Abner a Princely soldier. Lament then for Abner, the fathers Candle is
extinguished, Abner the Champion of Israel is deceased. Nay a greater then
Abner is departed. Prince Solomon for wisdom, Prince Josias so piety, Prince
Alexander for chivalrie, to say no more, noble, holy, chaste, virtuous, gracious
Prince Henry lies dead before us. He, He is dead, who while he lived, was a
perpetual Paradise, every season that he showed himself in a perpetual
spring, every exercise wherein he was seen a special felicity: He, He is
dead before us, who while he lived was so holy in his morning and evening,
public and private devotions, so gracious a Protector of truth, so true an
enemy to Popish falsehood, so faithful to God, dutiful to Parents, pious in
his life, patient in his death, respectfull of his deserving servants, and so
respected of all the world. He, He is dead; that blessed Model of heaven his
face is covered till the latter day, those shining lamps his eyes in whose
light there was life to the beholders, they be (...) give over shining, Those
(...) we have kissed, be closed and (...) shall open. He, He, is dead, and now
(...) conclude with that Apostle. Eamus. (...) let us go and die with him,
(...) he shall not return to us.

(...) ^^^ourable Religious, and every way (...) Fare ye well, The (...) as I
have of sorrow (...) Apostles salutatio^ to those (...) ye well, be perfect,
(...) one (...) of good comfort, and (...) ever with you, and so I commend
(...) of power to establish you, to him that (...) falling, and sent you
blameless (...) exceeding joy, To the (...) majesty, dominion (...) Amen.

FINIS.

