Be Patient in Trouble:
OR, The Patient man's Counsel, wherein is shown the great goodness of God
toward them that bear the Crosses and Afflictions of this World patiently: As
also a friendly instruction, whereby to advise us to forsake our wonted sins,
and turn unto the Lord by speedy repentance, very meet and necessary for
Worldlings to mark, read, hear, and make use of.
To the tune of, Bodkins Galliard.


COme, come, you greedy worldlings leave your toil,
Lend me your approbation to my song:
For I like you was troubled for a while,
Bout worldly matters which have done me wrong:
Now to re^^^e that life I am inclind,
I Will give God thanks and take what I do find.
Though on this earth I live as one so poor,
That few or none regard^ my company:
Yet has the Lord a blessing still in store
For them that wait his leisure patiently:
Then let no men despair though means be small,
But in affliction give God thanks for all.
When I remember Job that was so just,
How he despised was of all his kin,
And how from Post to Pillar he was tossed,
And no man weighed his sorrows not a pin:
Th^n unto memory I likewise call,
That he in troubles gave God thanks for all.
Although of riches once he had great store,
And was the chiefest man in all the East,
Yet was the Lords dear sarvant brought so poor,
And of his goods and Cattle dispossessed:
Then patient Job unto the Earth did fall,
And heartily did give God thanks for all.
Not only all the wealth which he enjoyd
Was quite consumed and taken from him away,
His Sons and Daughters likewise were destr^yd,
By a tempestuous weather fell that day,
The house in pieces on their heads did fall,
And still poor Job did give God thanks for all.
And further to increase his misery,
His Wife to him most wrathfully did say,
Husband quoth she curse God and yield to die,
O no said Job, I know a better way,
I Will not offend my Heavenly makers will,
I Will praise his name and be contented still.
The second part,
To the same tune.


THus being comfortless upon the Earth,
His day of birth began to call to mind,
He also thought upon his hour of death,
And with great grief those speeches he assignd,
Naked Came I out of my Mothers Womb,
Naked shall I return unto my Tomb.
Thus Job continued still so pure and holy,
As holy writers does of him approve,
Whom all the World could not entice to folly,
For God loved Job, and Job his God did love.
And afterward the Lord his fortunes blessed,
With far more wealth than he before possessed.
This sweet example may for great and small
Be a direction, how that we may guide
Our lives, when crosses does to us befall,
That from these Precepts we may never slide:
Lord clothe us with that everlasting Robe,
True Faith and Patience like thy Servant Job.
And grant that ever we may put our trust
In thee alone, which art our strength and stay,
Seeing, that earthly treasure is but dust,
Which soon will perish and consume away:
Let us desire our sins may be forgiven,
And every day prepare ourselves for Heaven.
This World is full of vain deluding snares,
The Devil also lays many cunning baits
For to entrap our souls at unawares,
He uses many policies and sleights:
Just cause have we to fly to Christ with speed,
And crave his aid in this our time of need.
Moreover let us now with speed forsake,
Our wonted sins wherein we take delight,
And of our lives and ways a conscience make,
And learn to serve the Lord our God aright.
O let us not our time too long delay,
But put from us all wickedness away.
Let the Blasphemer now foregoe his oaths,
And bid the Drunkard leave his swilling Mates,
For God himself the sin of sweating lothes,
And all good men a Drunkards presence hates;
Let foul Extortion now be put to flight,
And Malice quite be banished out of sight.
Let Envy, Pride and vile Adultery,
And Murder, that fierce Monster part from hence,
Both Covetousness, and Prodigality,
No more be seen amongst our Eminence:
So will the Lord our Goods and Cattle bless,
Our Land and all that ever we possess.
Our Noble King the Father of our peace,
The Lord preserve and keep continually,
And send the Queen and all their blessed increase,
The dew of thy sweet blessing from on high:
So shall all English men rejoice and sing,
Praises be given to Christ our Heavenly King.
L. P.
FINIS.
Printed at London for John Wright junior, dwelling at the upper end of the Old
Baily.


