THE EAGLES FLIGHT Or Six principal notes, or sure marks for every true
Christian, to so are up to the everlasting nest of Gods Eternal kingdom.

AS IT WAS DELIVERED in a most godly and fruitful Sermon at Paul's Cross.

By Master Price of S. John's in Oxford.

Imprinted at London by RICHARD BRADOCKE for John Busbie, and are to be soulde
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Crane. 1599.

THE EAGLES FLIGHT.
Luke 17 37. Wheresoever the dead body is, thither shall the Eagles be
gathered together.
WEre that fruit a grape (as some scholemen hold;) or a fig as (with Moses
Barcepha) Theodoret resolves; or an apple as some other suppose) for a taste of
which our first Parents (Esau-like) sold their birthright in Paradise; Sure I
am that (in that) there was not Juice enough to quench that thirst after higher
knowledge, which the heat of Ambition had bred in the root of mankind: But
that draught which in his infancy (but like a corn of salt) a little
distempered Adam his taste, since (rising to a greater growth) like an habitual
salt phlegm, has bred the passion of dropsy in his posterity, that now the
more they do know, the more they may know, and the admit^ing them to one secret
is but the hartning them to challendge to be made partakers of another: So
itcheth both the eye after the variety of sightes, and the care of soundes,
that (as the wise man says) neither is the one satisfied with seeing, Eccl.
1.8.
nor the other with hearing. Christ no sooner took occasion by a bold question
(which a Pharise asked him of the time of the day of judgment) to disclose
unto his disciples the signs which might give them warning of the approach of
it, and the sudden separation of the elect from the reprobate; but one
pressed him, and (as it were setting shoulder to the Portall of Gods very
privy Chamber,) in they must, and be told they must where also this great
Sessions should be held.

Our Savior (to leave a testimony in the world how well curiosity pleases
him) shaps them a kind of answer, which might so far resolve them as their
salvation needed, though not so fully as their humors desired: and (in a
prouerbiall kind of speech taken from the flight of Fowls unto their prey)
gives them to understand, that the distinct place of this appearance was not
to be enquired after: But a place there should be, in which it should be
made, and toward it should all flesh as assuredly flock (to receive their
doom) as ever Flow did to gorge themselves with their prey.

Here therefore is a flight of Foul to a mark: the Foul that must fly are
Eagles: the mark (at which the flight must be) is a body: the manner (in
which this Foul shall fly) is, they shall be gathered together. And the
place (where the mark or body shall be set) is yet unknown to these Fowls;
but wheresoever it is, thither shall they make repair.

By the body is meant Christ Jesus; who at the fullness of time shall appear
glorious in that body, in which he once conuersed with us contemned.

By the Eagles, are understood the elect and faithful servants of God, who at
this appearance shall (as David says, Ps. 36.8.) be not only banketed, but
even to the fulness satisfied, or (as the original word signifies) in a sort
surcharged with the fatnes of his house.

By the gathering together of these Eagles, is shadowed the resurrection of the
just, in which the Trumpe shall blow, and the dead shall rise (incorruptible,)
and they who have fallen asleep in Christ, shall from all the quarters of the
world be summoued to meet him in the Clouds.

By this little therefore that has been ^^oken, some small glimse being given
of me natural meaning or drift of this scripture: let us I pray you for the
better conceiving of it, enter into a more particular view of the several
parts of it, taking them in order as they lie.

Wheresoever.

This wheresoever of our Savior, is a reply upon a Where (of his disciples,)
whereby in the words (next before my Text) they had made bold to demand of
him of the place in which that separation should be of two in one bed, and two
in one field, and two at one mill, whereof he had told them, that the one
should be received, the other refused. The original greek (...) (where Lord)
though it more ordinarily import but the places and be englished where: yet
also sometime signifying the motion to a place, and being fitly translated
whither (as it appears by that one verse of Sophocles, into which in both
these senses he has contrived it

(...) makes it probable that they made two demaundes in one word, one after
the place in which this sentence of separation should pass, another after the
place into which they (that were thus separated) shoule pass.

In effect, first to what bar should all flesh repair for their doom, then
whither they should be directed by that doom.

Duo quaerentibus vnum respondet says one; Christ shapes them but one answer
to two questions. True, but such an one for an answer, as the Perspectiues say
it is, (one for a Sunbeame, which is made of two beams gathered into one) or
such a one as you use to say, two friends make, which are one in deed in
heart, but two in strength.

For it cannot be but the Epitomizer of Ten in Two, (the digester of so large
a volume, as the whole law into so brief a sum, as Love God above all
things, and thy neighbor as thy self) should be as plentiful in his
answer, as flesh and blood should be in a question, Is their question where
they should make their appearance? see his answer, wheresoever he shall keep
his Court. Is there question whither they shall be translated? See his
answer, whither he has gone before to prepare them a place. In fine see in
one wheresoever, both a snib for the curious, and a comfort for the fainting.
First a word of the Snib the^ a word of the comfort.

Wheresoever.

The divine nature, as it is very mercy it self, so it is also very wisdom it
self: and as in mercy it has vouchsafed to impart vntoman, that he shall one
day be brought unto judgment, so it has in wisdom thought good to conceal
from him when shall be this day, and where this judgment into which he shall
be brought.

For as the assurance of a judgment (to be endured) cannot choose but work a
fear of often or grievous offending in a reasonable man. So it is not vnliklie
but that so great favor as to be made privy to the time and place of this
judgment would breed a security in the heavy heart and a pride in the
swelling heart of wicked men. Hereupon the eternal wisdom (by whom the world
was made) fore seeing how much more convenient, the ignorance than the knowledge
of these two circumstances would prove unto us, has in the one prevented, and
in the other (as it were) put by our curiosity.

For concerning the time, Mark. 13.32.
he clean discorageth us to enquire, elswher telling us, that with it not the
Angels, nor the Son himself, much less may we be acquainted. And for the
place, here gives he us almost as little heart, making his Apostles (whose
privilege he said it was to know the mysteries of heaven) no directer than an
indefinit answer, and vouchsafing their where, not so much as a Here or a
There, but putting it by as a demand which misliked him with an vnresoluing
whersoeuer.

Of which wheresoever of his, you are not yet to conceive, as of an answer,
whereby he purposed to shake them off utterly as unresolved, Luke 2.27.
(for more liberal of these secrets then thus was he, when in a generality he
gave them to understand, that he would come in the Clouds:) but the mystery
which he refuses to break unto them, is the particular place or part of this
Air, where this great Assise shall be held: which notwithstanding, yet are
there (of the peaching lignage of ambitious Adam) Wisards, who (as if they had
crept into the heart of the Almighty, and ouerheard his secrets) would bear
the world in hand, that they have learned and distinctly know, that over the
valley Iosaphat nere Jerusalem at the foot of the hill (from whence the Lord
was taken up into heaven) shall this Judges throne be settled. This Counceller,
this mighty God (so Esaias terms our Redemer) is silent: and yet dares dust
and ashes presume to speak? Wheresoever, quoth he (and designs no place:)
even here say they, and appoint at the valley Iosaphat. True indeed is it,
that the Lord will summon all nations into the valley Iosaphat, for so has he
promised, Joel. 3.2. but whether into material Iosaphat, or Iosaphat so termed
because the Judgment which here shall be pronounced, shall resemble that
which there was executed upon the Moabites and Amonites, ^^ustly (with Rapertus
Fuitiensis) doubt. For what is Iosaphat (if you interpret it) but the judgment
of the Lord: and what is the valley, but the depth of that Judgment, into
which Salomon^ assures sures the young man that God will bring him after all
the iollitie of his youth, after he has cheered himself in the days of his
youth and walked in the way of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes? Eccl.
11.9. Now long these men for a reason of me why the Prophet should specify
this place? Quest.
Meant he not to teach the Church that here literally was this Judge to be
expected?

My answer is ready: two reasons had he to make choice of it, Answ.
by allusion to which he might shadow to the Jews the day of judgment: One,
the freshnes of that famous deliverances memory, which the Lord had wrought in
it for the^: Another, the great resemblance that will be between that general
and that particular judgment of his.

For, from the time of this Prophet yet had there not a man's age passed, since
(without stroke of theirs) the Lord had in this valley, within the sight of
this City, dispatched three whole Armies, which had joined forces to beleaguer
them; and further in such sort as in that general judgment he will dispach
the wicked.

For as here though the Moabite, the Amonite, and the inhabitant of Seyre
bound themselves against Judah, Yet cannot they prevail: So there though the
Moabitish flesh, the Amonitish world, the savage inhabita^t of Seir the Devil,
enter a league against the elect, yet shall they have no hand at them. As theirs
had, so shall these and their accomplices have, swords of their own consciences
accusing them to turn into their own bowels.

And as the same place was to them a valley of judgment, which to the Jews
was a valley of blessing. 2. Chron. 20.26. so shall the great day be to the
wicked a day of judgment, for they shall receive that heavy doom, go you
cursed; which to the godly shall be a day of blessing, for they shall hear
that joyful voice come you blessed. etc.

Here therefore let proud flesh take warning to give over inquiry after this
secret of God: and let careless flesh take advice to look into the secret of
his own heart. Let it not busy thee to know where thou shall be judged, but how
thou may answer at iudgedment. Know thou the place? yet can thou not
withdraw thy self from it, appear thou must. And know thou not thy self,
ill can thou answer for thy self, defenceles will thou be condemned.

Bethink thy self whether, if here in earth thou were to come to thine
answer for a crime pretended to be committed by thee, it were wisdom to spend
thy time in harkning after the place of execution, and not rather to employ it
in providing thy self of friends and answers against the day of thy trial:
And then say how much better thou shall be then mad, if (knowing that thou
must once render an answer of thy life past) thou yet weary thy wit only
in search after the place where, never bethinking thy self so much as how thou
may render thy account. Luke 10.42.
Think thou not thou shall at last have Marthaes check for troubling thy
self about many things, where as thou might with more case, have purchased
many commendations, and by offending but that one thing which is necessary,
have one of the three (which witness in heaven) give thee testimony of so
much discretion as to chose the better part which shall not be taken from
thee. John. 21.22.


This question thou see likes thy Savior as ill, as that of Peter's did, what
should become of John: and therefore propose it when thou list unto him, his
reply to thee is like to be as then was to him, busy body what is that to
thee? follow thou me.

This of the Snib (the first of those two notes in this Wheresoever): now a
word of the other, that is the comfort.

Flesh and blood is (naturally) wont in a calm to heed to hope: So in a
storm to abject to despair, and like a Bladder that swells indeed with a
puff, but irrecouerably shrinks with a prick.

Be we confronted with no temptation, and assail there neither persecution,
our constancy, nor cross our patience, nor guiltiness our peace of
conscience: On scowre we, and so high a top bear we, as to devour no less
than heaven in expectation. But hap there either the smallest trouble to fall
foul of us, or our selves a far off to descry the Justice of God with the
hiddeousnes of our own sin: Straight veil we Bonnet and (scarce haling on)
look for naught, but when we should wrack. Then can we not hear of a
Savior, the voice of an accuser rings so loud in our cares: then can we not
see to heaven, the steeme of hell has so blinded our eyes, then seem we
still to strike either upon the sands of some secret, or the rock of our
known sins. Rise we to the top of a billow? why there is the throne of a
judge to condemn us. Fall we again to the bottom? why there is a place of
torment to follow us. Then have we not memory, for all (even so short a speech
as that of the Apostles, Luke 8.24.
Lord help us or we perish:) But so possessed are we with the thought of our
own end, that no more but the end of it runs upon our tongues, and we cry
only, we perish.

Here, even so constant a mind as Bernards (incredibili met^^ ac
miserabiliconfusione deiecta, as he himself speaks) stricken as it were to
the ground with so great fear as no heart would think but any would pity:
Nay tenebroso circumfusa horrore, as it were close prisoner in darkness and
horror, Hoc solum, and that de profundis too, clamabat as it were from the
bottomless pit; will not have a word to speak, but quis nouit pot estatem
iraeti lae, Lord who is able to conceive aright what the power of thy anger is?
And whom does any fear so little appall, that his wits serve him to reckon the
torments that attend on thy displeasure? Here needs not (trow we) to so
perplexed a Pilot, as that poor soul of ours which God has set at the stern
of this vnwealdie body, some land-marke to give it comfort against the fear
in which it is, and direction for the course it is to take? Is it not high time
that a Savior by a general wheresoever should show that Haven, when the
destroyer by a general Nowhere, has almost persuaded there is no Heaven?
yes, and that fails he not to do: Hear him (distressed soul) whosoever
thou art. Hang sin so heavy upon thee, that it seems thou can not make
any wing, And be the place (to which thou must take thy flight) whersoeuer it
will, yet shall thou be able to recover it. Fair it with thee as that did
with the Dove, and find thou no other place, yet shall thou not miss of thee
hand of this Noah for thy foot to rest upon: Spectat militem suum vbique
pugnantem (as Ciprian says) Be it wheresoever it will that the adversary set
upon thee, it cannot be so dark a place but thy Saviors eye is upon thee too,
either (if thou faint) to cheer thee, or (if thou fight it out) to Crown thee.

Is it the guarde with which this way is kept, that scares thee? why is it
stranger than was that of Paradise? It cannot cut thee off.

Take not an Angel, but Angels, even Principalities unto thee, and join they
unto themselves noe less than Powers. Attend there upon these: death, to
dispatch thee: life, to corrupt thee: things present, to delight thee: things
to come, to suspende thee: height, to discorage thee: depth, to afright thee:
Nay an army royal of all creatures to ouerrunne thee: what great thing
shall they all be able to do? Not so much as to separate or with-holde thee,
not from the person, but neither the very love, and that is in the heart thou
know; and of whom? of God himself. Romans 8.38. Know thou no more particulers
of this kingdom than Abraham did of that which was the type of it: And have
he which calls thee hither from out thy kindred and from thy fathers house,
told thee no more but that he will show thee this Land: yet pass thou on
securely: there will come a time, in which, brought to thy iorneyes end ere
thou be a war, thou shall hear, This is the land which I will give to thy
seed: And know thou no more of the coaste of this way, than Abraham's servant
did of that which led to Bethuell, yet rely with him but upon the conduct of
the GOD of his master: and he shall bring thee as straight hither, as he did
him whithersoeuer.

It follows.

The body is, or as Theophilact reads, and that both in the judgment of
Hierome, and upon the warrant of good reason, and even by the confession of the
Sire-newe Scholiast himself more significantly, The dead body.

For this kind of reading makes both the Syriacke edition of this place, in
which for this body we reader Dephegad, of Phagad, to destroy, as one would
say the destroyed or slain, And the original to the fellow text to this in
the 24. of Mat. where we find not (...) but (...) of (...) to sal likewise,
for acakrasse, Mat, 24.27.
because as Ierom says, It falls by death. And the ground whence this
proverb in the 39. Job. 33. verse, where even the vulgar Latin enforced by
the nature of the hebrew Calalim, coming of Calal to wound or kill, reads
this, vbicunque fuerit caedauer flatim adest, Whersoeuer the carkas or dead
body is, thither will it (speaking of the Eagle) shortly resort.

Here therefore, not to say how inconvenient it may in reason be, to take
this body (which so many ways is a dead one) for the Church, whose very
stones Saint Peter tells are living. 1. Peter, 1.51 In this mark, at which this
flight is to be made, there are two things to be considered.



First of the body it self, then of the quality of it, it is a dead one.

Very much is there worth both our attention and memory, in this little which
here the Evangelist gives our Savior, when he terms him a body. For
without labor (such is the dexterity of the Spirit of God) both arms he us
against an error, which the Devil has sown in the Church, and warnes of a
benefit, which our God has bestowed upon his Church. For what Christian
(having his Savior termed a body) is either so dull as not to conceive, that
then Marcion mistook his mark, who taught that he was but a shadow; or so
unthankful as not to recount that for his sake was this body in unspeakable
humility, assumed of God in the birth of Christ, and in inconceivable love
offered upon the Altar of the Cross in the death of Christ.

At this wisdom stand amazed with me; At this love, melt with iee, flesh, if
thou be not harder than stone. Thy Savior is a body; remember this, and with
this also in the 24. Luke 39. wherewith himself satisfied his Disciples, that
he was not a Spirit, For he had flesh and bones: and with these two texts
stop the Heretics mouth, if ever he assault thee.

Thy Savior is a body, remember this: and with this also, that which his
Apostle S. Peter tells thee, 1. Pet. 2.24.
that with this body he has borne thy sins upon the Cross, and then lift up
thy head and rejoice: let thy thoughts be comforts to thy self, thy words
praises to thy God, thy deeds good deeds to thy brethren.

Thy Savior is a body, remember this, and withal that which the Doctor of
the Gentiles, 1. Cor. 6.15. tells thee, that thou art a member of this body: And
then bethink thy self what honor is due to thy body: How ill it will beseem
thee to pollute it with any sin, which he who was without sin, has
vouchsafed to accept as his own flesh. Thy Savior is a body, remember this,
and with all, That in this body he shall return to judge the earth. For it was
the son of man, whom the high Priest was promised one day to see in the Clouds.
Mat. 26.64. And no other but very him whom they preached, undertakes John unto
the soldiers they should behold John. 19.37. And to the son has the father
given the power to judge, and by this title as to the son of man Ioh. 5 27.
And then say, whether that speech of Paul unto Agrippa, Act. 26.2. will not be
fitter for thy mouth than it was even for his; I think my self happy sweet
Savior if I shall answer this day before thee, Chiefly because thou have
knowledge of all customs, whether they be the adversaries (who is busy in
assalting) or this fleshes, who is false in betraying, or this poor soul
which is weak in resisting. That flesh of mine, which Iudaslike with a kiss
to thy Deity delivered thee into the hands of so many Temptations, has given
thee experience of them all. I see the wounds yet bleed, which were taken for
my sins, and lo my nature is assistant in judgment to assure me it shall be
pattaker in glory. Genesis 43, 34,
Is my Joseph thus great? then shall not his brother Beniamins entertainment
be small. And if Hester be so dear to Assuerus, sure her kinsman Mardochy
shall have his day. Hest, 6, 1.
There is in store for him a robe and a ring and a horse, and a crown, and a
train to proclaim his savor, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king
will honor. Thy Savior is a body, remember this, and withal that which
himself has auerred in the sixth of John, That this body and flesh of his is
meat indeed, and then never doubt but thou shall have wherewithal to
strengthen thine heart.

Let the windows of heaven be shut, that the rain cannot fall to moisten; let
the face of the sky be darkened that the Sun cannot break out to ripen; let
the poores of the earth be locked that the fruit cannot spring forth to feed
thee: yet art thou provided for thy diet.

Thy Savior his body shall be to thee the widows Barrel and Cruse: never
shall this meal (if I may so term it) of his flesh, 1, King, 17 16,
nor this Oil of his blood fail thee. The meat that he will give thee
endures unto everlasting life.

So says himself, John, 6.27. The water that he will give shall be to him
that drinks of it, a Well of water springing to everlasting life: so
undertakes himself, John. 4.14. Finds the Foul her prey delightful when she
tyres upon it? Be ruled by David, Come and taste of thy Lord and thou shall
find him more than so, no less than even sweet. Finds the Foul her prey
hearty, Heb, 10, 22,
and grows she high by tyring upon it? Be advised by Saint Paul, Draw
near thy Savior, with a pure heart in assurance of faith, and thou shall
find him more than so. Such fulness shall thou meet with (in him,) whereof not
thou, but we all, both may and do receive: and what receive we? no meaner
things than very grace, and it not mincingly, But so think, John. 1.16.
as grace for grace, or, as some interpret, grace upon grace, or grace in the
neck of grace, Pro Legis gratia, Gratiam Euangelij (as Augustine speaks.) In
time past the grace of the law, but it not serving to bring us to God: In the
fullness of time the grace of the Gospel, and with this one grace (as with one
hand many fingers) how many graces? The grace of Redemption, for to purchase
it unto us, he gives himself who is this body, 1. Tim. 2.6. The grace of
spiritual growth; for both is his age The measure, and his Spirit, The means
of this growth of ours. The grace of Sanctification: for this that he might
confer on us, Ephesians. 4.13.
fanctified he himself. The grace of Glorification: for (to harbing as it
were, John. 17.19.
and to prepare for our instalment therein) is he before ascended into heaven,
so that sparing is his commendations of our savior, as the Psalmist, John, 14,
2 Psalm, 45, 2
full of grace are not his lips only, but his whole body also.

In whatrespect Christ is termed a body, you see: why a dead one, let us now
inquire.

May it be in regard of the estate wherein he either now is, or hereafter may
be? No, he has had his ^^persedeas for death, ever since his resurrection.
Christ once rising from death, Rom, 9, 6
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him. And though himself
confess that he was dead, yet adds he, that now the case is altered: For
why? he is alive, and that not for a time but for evermore Amen. Reave, 1, 18


The term therefore of being dead, which here the Evangelist gives him, has
relation to a state of his which is past. For he was indeed (as you have
heard) de ade: Exo, 12 46
witness the soldiers who because they found him so, unwittingly full filled
the scripture, whilst they saved the needless pains, John, 19, 33,
as they took it, of breaking his legs: And had he not so been, hard of
digestion would our weake-stomackt faith have found him.

For as in the law, Leuit, 17, 13,
were it beast or foul that was taken by travel, such as for his kind might
lawfully be eate^^ yet must the blood of it be shed a^^ covered with dust
ere it were eaten (...) in the gospel were this Lamb which we had not caught
indeed, Gen, 27, 20,
but which (as Jacob said of his venison) the Lord our GOD has brought it
into our hands, never so clean (and indeed without spot of sin was it) yet
must his side be opened with the spear, and his body hid in the dust of the
grave, before he could be diet for our souls.

Physicians both in their directions in diet, prescribe the flesh of the dove
as wholesome, and in their practice apply the blood of it a sovereign against
certain diseases of no baser parts than the eye, and the brain. For Galen in
his tenth book of the virtue of Symples gives it against the bruses called
(...) which make every thing we look on seem read. And Iul. Alex. liber
12. Capite 4. salubrium commends it as a most special baulme to be dropped
upon the corners off the Brain called Pia and dura matter, in the wounds of
the head: which though they do, yet in the fear of infla^mation council
they a kind of divorce of these two so wholesome parts, and wish this bird to
be let blood ear it be eaten.

Not unlike is the case of this harmless and guiltless dove our Savior,
upon whom so many of us (as be right Eagles) must prey: John. 6.50.
wholesome is his flesh, for of it who so eats shall not die. So precious is
his blood, had it not been dropped upon these eyes of ours, yet had we
remained in our blood, and (looked we whither we could,) still should we
have been troubled with these (...): No where could we have found a pleasanter
spectacle than the goare of our sins: And had it not been applied to that
wound which we took in our head (Adam,) died had both he and we of it.

Yet see, stricken must he be, ear we can be healed: Esaias. 53.5
For by his stripes are we made whole. Dye must he that we may live, for his
life it is that this good shepherd must lay down for his sheep. And spilt
must his blood be, John. 10.14. 1 Co. 5.50 1. John. 1.7, Mat. 26.28,
that we might be purged from that blood, to which possession of the kingdom
of heaven is denied. For his blood is it which cleanses us from all our
sins, and the way by applying this blood is by shedding it.

We read in the greek story of one Codrus king of the Athenians, Justin.
who in the time of war between his people and their neighbors of
Peloponnesus, being by the Oracle, a putatiue Dietie, to which in time of
Paganism they had recourse for council, admonished that theirs should the
day be whose king was by the enemy slain, to purchase his Army victory
entered this course; having clad himself in base attire, he privily conuaide
himself to the enemies Camp, where offering such speeches of defiance as
could not be borne at ones hand so mean in show, in reward of his boldness
he was slain: upon which success ensued unto the Athenians, as the Oracle
had foretold, and conquerers they became. Thus kind, and kinder was our
Codrus our prince of peace, knowing not by any deceitful information of a
doubting Oracle, but by that infallible wisdom, whereby he understands all
things, that either he must accept of death, or we might not hope to aspire
to life, such were the bowels of his love, that first he denied as it were to
draw upon the glory of his Dietie this vile clothing of our flesh, and then
so disguised went at hell mouth to challenge our enemy, who toald on with the
baseness of his outward appearance, quickneth many, while he thought to kill
one: Fallente illum malignitate sua (as a Father says) dum intulit supplicium
filio Dei, Leo.
quod cunctis hominum filijs on remedium verteretur: ouerdrawne even in his own
bow, and busy to hasten on the Son of Gods execution, with all the sons
of men's redemption. Ruens dumirruens, captus dum capit, dum mortalem
persequitur in saluatorem incidens: falling whilst following, caught whilst
catching, and in the heat of his pursuit after, as he thought, a mortal
man, confronted by the puissance of the eternal Cod.

Pyrrhus king of the Epirotes having in two set battles with great loss of
men put the Romans, the Lords of the world, to the worst, and hearing by a
favorite of his, this his so great good fortune: smothingly gratulated him,
that two victories indeed he had gotten of them, but them so dear, that
should he at the same rate buy a third, the purchase would no less than
undo him.

A greater complaint than this may the prince of darkness take up, so dear
has this one coming forth at Christ cost him, that the mortgaging of his
kingdom will not bear the charge of a second conflict: For what did Christ
in this conflict? even Parthian-like Viuit cadendo through death he no less
than destroyed him, who had power of death, neither had he other means left
to attain this so glorious a conquest. Heb, 4, 27 2, 14, Exodus, 30, 16,
In thee must into the second Tabernacle; thither was no access without
blood: Remission must he procure; that could he not without shedding of
blood: Heb, 9, 22.
A kingdom he had by will to bequeath, that could not be entered upon, till
by his death it were enforced: Heb. 9, 17 Rom, 6, 3
For what is our tenure by which we hold of him? Is it not this death of his?
Not into his birth, but into his death are we baptized.

True it is which Fulgentius has: Macula vitiatae propaginis inde incepit
aboleri, vude in vnoquoque nascentium videbatur existere: As we were sinnets
in the Cradle, so was Christ our Savior in the Manger. And on foot indeed was
our salvation, the first instant he was in the flesh; but noe more but in hand
was it, till the last moment he was fit to be in the grave. He began our
exaltation when he resolved upon his own humiliation: And after past there him
not so much as an idle action, but still busy was he to satisfy for our
rebelling by his obeying, for our surfeting by his fasting, for our blasphemy
by his praying, for our wronging by his suffering: Yet never sway he an issue
of all this, till we saw that issue of two streams out of his side, The
soldiers spear was the pen, and his blood the ink, wherewith he signed:
And that triumphant consummatum est, it is finished, the Seal he set to his
quietus est, or discharge of ours.

Threatened he had death by his Prophet. Hose. 6.13. that he would be his
death: yet hear we not him undertake as if he had been as good as his word,
till after his passion: he must be lifted up and then will he draw all men
unto him? Then dare his Apostle make bold with death, Ioh. 12, 32 1, Cor. 1^.55
and ask it where is his sting? and with the grave, and demand of it where
is his victory? Upon point of his departure, according to his prophecy that
the children of the Brydall should mourn when the Bridegroom was taken from
them, his disciples grew out of heart: to comfort them he tells them of a
conquest of his, I have overcome, says he: but what? No more but the first of
the three combats of the world; I have overcome the world. Ioh. 16.3^ 1. Cor.
15.26.
That last enemy (death) was yet to be grapled with; who (tanquam Briareus)
for his valor being set as it were to guarde the standard of hell, could not
be eaten with looking upon. But so hard a skirmish was to be endured in the
quelling of him, as after a retreat again and again to his father, with if
it be possible let this cup pass from me, should cost the victor a sweat,
and it not natural, but even a sleete of water mixed with blood.

Here therefore is the use of this title here given this body: dead it is
termed to assure you ye shall live; And stricken is the blood of you pascall
Lamb Christ Jesus, upon the dore-post (as I may terne it of your houses, that
is in each of your viewes, that it may serve to secure you from the destroyer.

For as in the full of the Moon, where the landlord of light the Sun, and
his freeholder the Moon be farthe stasu^der, the Sun is no sooner set, but you
look, and are not decieued, the that Moon should straight arise: Even so in
the fulness of time, in which your sins had separated (as the Prophet
speaks) beetweene you and your God, the Lord of your life, Esa. 59.2.
no sooner set in the West of his death, but he drew up al you, that are
lightened by him, into the Ascende^t of your new life.

Now therefore as it is written of the Elephants, 1. Mac. 6.34.
that they grow fearce by the sight of the blood of the grape spilt before them
so will it be expected at all your hands, that this blood of your Savior
(which is the true vine) thus powered out before you, put stomach in all you
against the power of darkness: and that you follow where you General has led,
marching to life, if it were to death, and dying to sin since be has died
for sin, Letting vanity understand you have not an ear to hear it, and
leasing you have not a tongue to speak it, and malice you have not a heart to
conceine it, and pride you have not an eye to admit it, and gluttony you have
not a stomach to banquet it, and a bride you have not a hand to receive it, and
sin you have not a mind to commit it. You read in the Psalm, of the death of
a Saint whith is precious in the sight of the Lord; Haec est illa mors (says
Leo) why this is the death GOD has in so high regard, Vbi h^mo occiditur in
mundo, non terminatione sensuum sed fine vitiorum when a man dies, before he
dies, and shakes hands, not with his senses but with his sins.

This of the dead body, or mark at which this flight is: now of the flight
it self.

Thither shall the Eagles be gathered together.

And therein: First of the end of their flight. Then of the choice of the
fliers. And last of the manner of their flying






Thither shall these Eagles be gathered together.

Thither: both aloft into the air to meet their Judge, and above into the
heavens to reign with their God.

Thither: for their doom for there they shall receive that Patent for a
kingdom, Come ye blessed, etc.

Thither, for the crown: for where himself is, even there is that our
Saviors will, there whom his Father has given him be they: John. 17.
where an Angel shall be the Clarke, Messiah the Judge, Saints the Jury,
Innocent the verdict, Receive a kingdom the sentence.

Thither shall the Eagles be gathered together:

Where the glory of their God, whose brightness they shall se: their safety
from their foes, whose ruin they shall behold: the comfort of the Saints,
whose company they shall enjoy: the receipt of a kingdom, upon receipt of
which they shall enter the Fee simple of life, which they shall never loose:
the temper of their joy, which shall satisfy, and yet not glut, shall join
and strive to fill them with happiness.

Thither shall. etc.

Where is a city, and the gates of it Pearl, and the streets of it Gold,
and the Walls of it Precious stones, and the Temple in it, the almighty God,
and the light of it, the Lamb; and the Vessels to it, Kings of the earth.

Thither shall. etc.

Where is a river, and the spring of it, the Throne of God, and the water of it
Crystal, and the Banks of it are set with the trees of life.

Thither shall etc.

Where the cheer is joy: the exercise, singing: the city praise: the Subject,
God. the Quire, Angels.

Thither shall, etc.

Where there shall be no more need to fear least either the eyes be dimmed
with tears, or the soul surprised by death, or the heart damped with sorrow,
or the ears a frighted cries, or the senses dosturbed with pain. For from
thence (whither these shall be gathered) shall all they depart far away:
Where they shall be good and not persecuted, happy and not envied, rich and
not robbed, kings and not flattered.

Thither shall, etc.

Where they shall have possessions without inpeachments, Seignories without
cares, length of years without decay of strength, love of all without jealousy
of any, greatness of state without conscience of corruption.

Thither shall, etc.

Where they shall be together in the same instant ravished with seeing,
satisfied with enjoying, and secured for retaining.

Thither shall, etc.

O then how happy they who shall be gathered thither! could this heart
conceive it, or this tongue tell it, or these cares hear it, then were they
translated thither. O then how had pie they who shall be gathered? But who
they? Non qualiscunque (says Origin) not ot every fether I wisse.

We have Peacoks, all whose glory is their Plumes, they are all ready; but
too too square: they shall not do well to spread: They are not they.

We have Vultures, all whose Tenure is in their pomp, they are all ready, but
too too high, they shall not do well to tower They are not they.

We have sparrowes, all whose sport is in their lust, they are all ready,
but too too pleasant, they shall not do well to Chirpe: They are not they.

We have Ostriches, all whose feeding is on mettels, they are too too
ouercloide, they shall not do well to stretch: In Mat. tract. 30,
They are not they.

We have Cormora^ts: whose God is their belly, they are all ready, but too too
fed, they shall not do well to gape, They are not they.

All they to this Thither are Scarabees or Beetles, and it to them a Rose, It
is so sweet it kills them.

The breath of man if you mark it, has this property at the same instant to
warn that which is near it, and to cool that which is far off So fares it
with the Lord of Hosts.

Is one near him? Psalm. 85.9.
(and so is every one that fears him) then warm lights the breath of this
Thither upon him, and so cordial is it, Wisd. 1.3.
as is no confection of the Apothe caries. But let one be far off him, and
less tha^ so cannot any be who lodges wicked thoughts, for they separate from
God, then bleake comes it to his heart, and a very shaking sends it through his
bones.

Then sownds Thither to the grave, as to the goal, to judgment as the Assise,
to Hell as the place of execution.

Then, where is a judge and his presence worse to be endured than the weight
of Mountains, it is so fearful, where are thousands of home-borne witnesses,
and their evidences against thee, al are so cruel; where a sentence shall
pass, and it, Go you cursed, It is so severe:

There is their Thither.

Where an execution is done, and the officer the Devil: And the Instrument of
Fire, and the kind, Burning; and the measure eternity,

There is their Thither.

O then how cursed they who shall be gathered thither?

But who they? All save so many as shall be gathered to that other Thither. But
who they? Harken and he will tell you who must bring you thither: Eagles, not
a wing of other male shall be gathered thither. For it is like lightning that
this Judge toulde you he will come: And lightning, you know, Mat. 24.27.
no bird but the Eagle will broake. Now should you doubt who these Eagles be,
and ask first of Origin, he will answer in general, Qui in passionem domins
credunt, They which Iay hold upon Christ's passion: Then of Hiero, and he will
return, Sancti, The same, but in fewer words: Then of Cyrill, and he will
iumpe with Jerome both in sense and words, Sancti the Saints: Then of Ambrose,
and he will tell you in effect as much, 2 Chro. 5.13.
Instorum Animae, the souls of the just.

Thus like Salomons noise of Priests, which sounded trompets at his bringing in
the Arc into his temple, they were of the city of David as these are (that
is) of Jerusalem which is from above, were there no fewer than 120. of them,
yet such an Vni-sound would they all keep, that you would say they were as one
blowing Trompets, and that they sang and made but one sound in singing.

But would you in particular know, whether you be any of those Eagles yea
orno, And by consequent whither you shall be gathered together? Take of me 6.
notes of an Eagle that will not fail you.

1 Your Nest, 2 Your eye, 3 Your Flight 4 Your Foe, 5 Your Age, 6 Your wit,
1 If it be on the Rock. 2 If it can broke the Sun. 3 If it be high and swift.
4 If it be the Dragon. 5 If it be well renewed. 6 It it be first to pease,
then to carry what you seize on.
By each of which, that you may be better able to examine your selves, I will
by God his assistance speak a word of each.

Be you right bred therefore, John 309, 1.30.31.
First you will not build but upon the rock: for so says John. The Eagle makes
her nest on high, she abides on the rock, even upon the top of the rock; So
far will you be either from the negligence of some, who perch they care not
where: or the pride of other some who build high enough, but not sure enough:
or the stifnes of other some, who nest in the ruins of the rock.

There is a first kind of men, who having caught Iustus ex fide sua vinet, the
just shall live by faith by the end, run away counter with Pythagoras his
(...) they have found, and flatter themselves with a conceit that the way
forsooth to heaven they cannot loose, follow they the trace of Arrius, yea
almost of Mahomet himself.

For the just (that is, say they, the morrallie-honest man) shall live, that
is, shall be admitted into the joys of heaven by his faith, that is in the
lieu of that kind of devotion or religion whereto he addicted himself, be it
whatsoever it will.

Be any of you of this fether and so headdie as to take that way which comes
next to hand, for the next way to heaven: 1. Cor. 10.4.
he is no Eagle, he builds not on the Rock. For the Rock is Christ Jesus,
and besides him there is not given a name by which they may be saved.

As it fared with Paul's fellow-passengers in their wrack, the ship
(continued they in it) would save them all: but the shipboate were it kept in
to it, would loose all. So fares it in this wrack of salvation, Be this rock
Christ built upon, he will secure all: But be any other Savior relied upon,
he will no less than fail all.

As of the privilege his death had in saving alone, it is excellently said,
multorum etc. Many a Saints death has been precious in the sight of the Lord,
but never a one to be so innocent as the ransom of the whole world: Solus
dominus noster Jesus Christus extitit, in quo omnes crucifixi, omnes mortui,
omnes sepulti, omnes etiam suscitati. One Christ Jesus is found, through whose
side all men are crucified, with whose last gasp all men gave up the ghost, in
whose grave all men are buried, by whose resurrection all men are quickened:
Even so of the privilege his faith has, may it be as truly added Multorum
inconspectu hominum speciosa fides: many another religion has been a fair
show in the sight of men, but none of them could justify before God. Only a
true faith in Christ Jesus has been able to crucify the heat of lust, to
kill the heat of concupiscence, to bury the memory of sin, and to quicken
to the life of righteousness. The life which is gained by knowing him has a
singling Haec in the foreheade of it; Haec est vita aeterna, John. 17.3.
this is the eternal life indeed, to know thee, and the Jesus thou have sent.
And this is that one faith which is compassed in with so glorious a couple, as
one God before and one Baptism behind.

There is a Second kind who build, Ephesians. 4.5
and super altitudmem too (indeed aloft) but it is cordis sui (as Just says)
the loft of their own proud he art: And this heart of theirs (as in an Anatomy
you know it is) like the Poets Pernassus being Biceps double-ridged, having a
left knoll puffed up with the conceit of innocence in abstayning from evil,
and a right (and yet wrong) swollen with opinion of desert by doing good, has
given site to two other mis-builders, neither of which can make good that they
are Eagles: for they build not on the rock.

The one sort, our young Angelical masters, whom Donatus has had the
scowring of, and left them nothing but purity.

The other our old Meritours, who are so far beforehand, as to have made
even with God for the purchase of heaven.

The former would be reputed ready in the Text: were they so, they could not
(me thinks) but meet with that Rebater, (at least would they mark it) in
the fourth of James, we offend: and who? not only a few worldlings, which will
hear a sermon at the Cross, but all new recusants too, and that not in one or
two, but in many things: In many things we offend all: Or that through-cooler
in the 65. of Esaias. 5. where they hear better news of these perfect ons, who
were so much holyer than the rest: Esaias. 65.5
that none must press into their company: then that they were as smoke in the
wrath of the Lord and a fire that burns all the day long.

The latter would be esteemed as pregnant in the Fathers: were they so, They
could not (me thinks) miss: of either that of Leo (It is so obuious)
Necessarium est trepidare de monito, Religiosum gaudere de dono: Be thou never
so good, yet must thou learn to build so little on it, as to tremble at the
thought of it: And be heaven given never so free cost, yet so, down must thy
stout heart, on this condition to be glad to accept it: Or that of Bernardus,
Merita habere cures, merita data noueris fructum, speres dei miseric ordiam.
Do not like the men of this barren generation of ours, who (as securely as
they sit) are the next door to cursing, and in the way to burning too: Heb. 6.
for that's the issue they should find of so little fruit after so long
tilling. Be doing a Gods name, and God (though he will not sell the) yet will
give thee heaven but yet see thou be sure to remember of whom it is given thee
to be able to do this good, and then in any case let thy Plea be, Not mine own
merit but his mercy.

A third sort of men there is who build, and about the rock too, but not on
the top of the rock, as Job tells us the Eagles do, but where the storm has
worn a hole in the rock, These are rather Plinies (...), so termed, because
they naturally want feet and cannot stand, in english Martinets, who as the
same Author lib. 10 chap. 39. of his natural history writes, have certain
good qualities.

First they be very rife court and contry swarm with them. Then they are as
busy as rife, His quies nisi in nido nulla, aut pendent aut iacent, They are
still stirring, but in their nests, and there you shall not take the^ but
either hanging or lying. Last they are as diverse as either rife or busy, and
ingenia aeque varia, scarce two of them in one mind.

First they build in the Ruins of the Rock: for what between the
sacrilegious preferrer, which will not beg all but have some: And the
Simonicall gratifier, who like our new kind of purchasers, makes away land to
get Lordshippes by sea: and the fantastique Reformer, Qu^ nomine imperij
impugnat imperium, Act, 5.38.
who has been so long building the Church, till he has almost pulled down
the Church (for there are more kind of Martinets than the Libellers) never
wrought Hannibals scalding vinegar upon the Alps, as these fellows, as hot
as tart Spirits, do upon this poor Rock (the Church) to make it moulder
down. But the comfort is, they are (...), they have noe feet. For if Paul
his tutors rule hold, and by Saint Luke (registring it) it should seem it
does, This council of theirs, which is not of God, cannot stand: the root of
that cannot be but rottenness, whose fruit is but corruption, and no longer
can this fog of their greatness last, than till the Sun be risen to dispell
it; and toward day it cannot but already be, so many Cocks have crowed
against them.

This of the first note of an Eagle, the nest, and such as by it may be known
to be no Eagles.

Now a word of the second to wit the eye, which (be you of the right male)
is al ways so quick as to ken a far off, and so strong as to look straight
against the Sun. For her eyes behold a far off says Job: and Plin. lib.
10. cap. 3. Illi acies contra radios solis stat firma, her eye will never water
though she gase into the Sun. And these two virtues shall you still mark in
their eyes who shall be gathered hither. Job. 39.32
See the first in Abraham, in whose bosom Dives would feign have been: he can
see and rejoice at Christ's day almost 2000. years off. See the second in Eagle
John himself, and his fellows he runs not with bare (...) (we have seen)
but (...), Ioh. 8.56.
our eyes have served us to stand and gase upon no less than even his glory:
yet what manner glory was his? very such as is the only begotten sons of the
Father.

Gracious God, how far are the Atheists of our age from both this strength
and sharpnes of sight! Light it self is so dym they cannot see it: themselves
are so far off they cannot discern themselves, for God is light (so says
the truth,) and their souls are themselves, so faies their Philosophy.

They cannot see a God (that is the fountain of al natures) in so clear a
glass as the Mirror of all creatures. A work so fair would in reason prove
a workman as skillful. For to an effect above the bent of his own nature, can
no cause any better reach, than a childs wit can to the building of this
Church. And yet can they (Bussards as they are) see a world, that is a
building, infinity admirable for the firmnes, capacity, majesty, use, order,
motion of it: And not find as much as the tracte of any creatures either
omnipote^ce in that fitmenes, or infiniteness in that capacity, or glory in
that majesty, or goodness in that use, or wisdom in that order, or life in
that motion of it.

Suppose one of these pollitike depose-Gods were but a master Chimick (as such
working wits are very ingenious) and having don me the favor to show me some
one of his especial Magistrals (as greatness of skill, and pride in kindenes are
often co^penions) should hear me judge it to be the destillation of some Peddler
Aqua-vitae-man, would he not take me to be of small judgment in that Art?
And then demand I of him (whosoever he be) whether as mean an opinion (for
his judgment in very nature) may not be well had of him, who seeing an heaven,
which he confesses abundant in variety of influence, and they all as
marvelous as manic, managed by a consort of motions which thwart and yet
disturb not one another: Who treading upon an earth which yealdes bread to
strengthen him, wine to comfort him, gold to enrich him, drugs to heal him,
wonders to astonish him: who sailing upon a sea, which he knows is water,
(that is a humor naturally spreeding) and yet sees it higher than the earth,
that is against nature without limit, solid: can yet surmise so hab-nab a cause
as chance, nay any but so above nature a cause as GOD could be the compactor
of this heaven the endower of this earth, the controller, of this sea? He sees
huge Elements, earth, water and air, yet so ouerawde as to give their
substance, moisture, and breath to the nourishing little plants and herbs.
He sees fierce and sturdie beasts, yet so ouerruled, as to yield their backs
to serving, their lives to feeding weak and little man: O can he doubt there
is an vmpire of impeachable right, unmatchable power, vnsoundable wisdom which
could, without repining, subject those so great to these so little?

Let me beg of him (be there any present of this mind) first to be think
himself what interest his prince (who may command his life and land) has
in him: Then should she (from which wrong, thanked be God, her highness has
ever been far) having forced him to yield both into her hands, dispose of
the one to her Exchequer, of the other to his underlings service, whether he
could brook such measure even at her hand or no: whether he would fast to
feed that underling of his, watch to guard him, die to save him: And then say
how dear needs must this title be to all, how sovereign his power to all,
that at his beck, pride has not thought much to bow to baseness, learning to
be taught by rudeness, power to be manacled by weakness, millions to be
won by twelve, and the earth to be caught by fishers. O had I now but Ananias
his gift, that after the shining of this great light from heaven and earth, and
all upon these princes of the darkness of this world, I could much them and
make the scales fall from their eyes: how clearly should they see, not only
that God who of nothing made them, and of most wretched molde blessed them; but
also that soul of their own, which now though their quickest sense be too
slow to descrie, yet one day will their slowest be quick enough to feel. For
yet, as they cannot see a God in his creatures, so neither can they a soul of
their own in his effects.

Live they? yet is it not by a soul: their temperature forsooth cannot give
them to do so much: yet is this temperature of theirs of four deads they say
(for such are the elements) and of dead added to dead can life (I am sure) no
better arise, than some what of naught multiplied by naught: for millions of
Ciphers you know will not raise so much as one unit.

Find they somewhat in them little selves of capacity enough to hold this
great world and it not thronged, but so distinctly as in a moment to present
them with it all the heaven moving, the stars shining, the fire mounting, the
Air pearcing, the sea swelling, the earth resting, gemmes glistring, variety
entertayning: why even yet is not this somewhat (which within so little as they
are holds so great as these are) in any case a soul; for they have nothing
in them which is not a body: and yet every body is bound, they say, to this
law that it cannot hold any thing bigger than it self.

Feel they somewhat in themselves which waxes as the body waineth, and which
is wisest to prescribe, when the bones and sinews are weakest to execute:
which enables that body now to grow move and speak: which it may be ere night,
having every part that they so it now has and a greater quantity than now it
has, will be as unable to grow, move or speak as the dullest stone wese: And
yet cannot this same what (whatsoever it is so twhart the body in nature, so
seperat from it, continuing it so perfect) obtain of them to be other than
either somewhat of the body or nothing in the world. Stony senseless men,
what can there be possibly, thus to infatuate them?

They could yet never see for sooth this God, this soul we so much talk of,
Plautus (as I remember) in Asinaria brings in an old strumpet playing upon a
worne-out customer of hers, (with whom the world ran so low that he was
feign to ask days of payment for his pleasure) with these words, Oculatae
nostra sunt manus, credunt quod vide^t: my friend, people of our trade have
eyes in their hands, if your present be so fine they cannot see it, they
believe it is so far off they do not receive it. It is as old as true, that
like will to like: for see, our gallants of Diagora his religion have kissed
their mistrisses hand so often, that they are woxeuen like the^, why they are
come to credu^t quod vide^t too. It will not sink into their heads, that any
this which is not so gross, it may beseene. I marvel whether these men
think themselves breath in So^mer as well as in winter: It should seem they
do not. For the sharpest he among them sees no breath he then sends forth:
But as cold grows on, and the air rarifies begins it to appear. Fools as
they are. God and his providence, and their souls, and the like, are things of
so subtle nature, that all this Summer of their pleasures, or harvest of their
profit, they cannot see them. But there is a winter of judgment drawing on,
and it so cold an one, that it will force a trembling of their flesh, and
gnashing of their teeth.

Then will the air grow so sharp, that it will show them a God in their
judgments, his providence in their damnation, and to a (now vnbeleeued) soul
themselves have, an unspeakable torment which in it they shall feel.

Then shall they be so mad with pain, that they shall stare and roar, and cry
O what is this I feale? It cannot be a head, a hand, a leg, a breast, a back
that bears all I feel: these teeth have made me rage with pain, yet was
that case to this: this flesh, these neaues, these joints, the wind has even
rackt, yet was it ease to this: It is now but a moment, yet feel I what
eternity can inflict upon me: And though I feel what it can inflict, yet
will it have somewhat to inflicte I never felt. It is that soul, which (then
reputed fools now found too wife) Christians taught was immortal, that
tastes all this.

O that I were so happy as to make but one of you have sense of this, and that
if you would be entreated to spend but some few hours in marking some
disparing man's fit, who (though sound in body) yet in somewhat else you
should see inconceiueably panged, you could not choose but have. How joyful
should I poast with such a soul unto God? with how sweet hymns of consorted
Angels would heaven entertain us? It were pride to say we should come to joy
but hundred thick, (that were to intimate that we supposed one of us were
just,) Noe we should both be then so good (of yet so bad) that there should
be for each of us his 99. degrees of joy a piece. But would there more come
in and our company increase, O then how would that vaulting ring? How full
would each one make the number of all, and how exceeding all the joy for each
ones part?

Now to the third, to wit the slight: wherein are to be densidered two things,
the pitch or hight of it, and peise or strength of it. To botls which God
himself alludes Exodus 19.40 where he putting his people in mind both how far
above the earth (as we ^erme it) of danger, and how quickly before the
expectation of longing, he had conducted them out of Egypt, he tells them he
had borne them upon Eagles wings. Of the latter some Grain-marians say, that
it has the greek name (...) because it rushes forward with a force: And of
it again the North (that is the most boisterous wind) has the latin name of
Aquily, because it scoures and makes head forward like an Eagle: And if these
two qualities of your flight want, woe be to you, you are no Eagles.

You must fly high: so did Saint Paul: his and his likes conversation was not
lower than heaven. Act. 3.20.


You must fly strongly: so did David, He had gotten to the Lord before the
morning watch. Psa. 130.6.


You must fly high for heaven (whither you are bound) is the measure of hight
it self; Esaias. 55.9.
when God will she we how much higher his ways are than ours, so much is it as
are the heavens higher than the earth.

You must fly strongly: for heaven (which you would recover) is that Islud
quod violenti rapiant, The hold which none but such as will have nonay,
surprise: Iud. 6.
the violent forsooth, (no colder) they: may take it, and they not by doring
neither, but by force.

Now because it would little boot you to hear that you must fly thus hie and
thus strong, unless you withal knew both how you might do and when you had
don so; I will fust tell you the means to rise, (with the note whether you be
risen) And then whence is this strength, and whereby known that you have it.

The means first of rising is to take the Apostles (...), to shake off sin:
for that which could not Iet an Angel stay in heaven, will not suffer a man to
rise from the earth* And that which sat so heave upon our Saviors head, as to
make him bow his neck, sits upon our backs that it will not suffer us to
sproede our wings: Qui peccatorum granant^^ sepulchris, Ioh. 19.30
discussa obstaculorum mole prosiltant, if we will rise as Christ did, we
must roll away the stone that lies upon us, as he did.

The note that you are risen, is the kind of obiecte you have chosen there
abouts even are you, where that is upon which you have set your delight. For
from your hearts you cannot be, and where your treasure is, there will they be.
Now would you know where this object is? First show me where your joy is: and
would you hear where your joy is? tell me where your mind is. Are you young
and are you witty? what is your mind on it? Are you old and are you wealthy?
what is your mind on it? are you minions and in favor? what is your mind on it?
Are you parents and have your sweet children? what is your mind on them? Then
here is your joy, for here is your mind, and Lapwing-like you cry there till you
be hoarse, but you are but here: Mat. 6.21.
for here is you joy: were you once risen, you would seek the things that are
above. 1. Cor. 2.15.
No farther than to the top of this steeple, he seems (you know) scarce a boy
in stature, which (when you are by him) proves a tall man: Marvel not though
you think nothing in heaven worth the having: the reason is, you which grow
here on earth, are so far off, that all there is out of kenning.

The learned in Astronomy, have by demonstration found that the Moon (which
the ignorant think the biggest star but the Sun) is indeed the least
Plannet. But Mercury (which is your evening star) though it seem the
greatest (but these two) is in truthbut the smallest of all the rest. But ask
you of the^ why they seem so big, they will return because they are low.
Things of this world, as for their short lasting and often changing they have
bin likned to the Moon, whose motion is most swift and face most diverse: So
also for their pliablenesse to any use: wherinlike their master man, Cu^ iusto
sunt iusti, cum peruerso peruertuntur, Such are they as he imployes them: like
unto Mercury, who has this property that he is good or bad as the star is
with whom he is joined. But see, they agree with these two in more than so;
they borrowe also their fair show they make us of their neerenesse to us, and
therefore seem they bigger because they are lower than better things. Had we
taken the two wings of the morning (prayer and meditation) for his, as Bernard
says, apprebenditur summitas scalae, by these we may soar to the top of
Jacobs ladder: Quickly should we have descryed both this so sophisticated
greatness of things transitory, and so conveyed infiniteness of eternal
glory.

Now concerning the strength of your flight, and both the means for it, and
the trial of it, Paul has together delivered them in the 2. Cor. 10.4.

The means, if you be mighty through GOD: the trial, if your proceedings be
stern, that noe impediment can withholde you from him. For if you be once
thus winged, down must even (...) impregnable houldes before you. And
therefore fore will I say the less of both. For as for these means, I am
persuaded, there is none present so self conceipted, as (in cold blood) to
impute it to any other, but him, who put those sinews into David's arms as
could break a bow of brass. Psa. 18.34
Only to advertise fleh and blood to stand ever on his guard (that so
presumptuous a thought never steal upon it by consequent, as to clame the
least part in this honor) I cannot conceal what old Lactan. has to this
point excellently noted, Tull. de Nature. deor. lib. 2.
who by the very (...) of Jupiters name, which came as the heathen said, a
iuuando of helping, concluded to them he could be no God: Iuuare, opus aliquid
confere^tis, he only is said to help which does less than all that is done.

Of the tokens of this strength, (to wit the ouerbearing hindrances that
oppose themselves, which will appear by our speedy recovery of the place,
toward which we make, I will say as little. Only let resolution learn, this
of me: it is not yet resolute enough, if this world have ought at which thou
rub: If a kingdom cast in your way, mark your start, you have sick feathers
in your wing, and for your speed, build not upon Mercedem adepti vnd-cimae
horae operarij, they had their pence which came in the last hour: But remember
it was not operis (as Hillary says) sed miscricordiae, his mercy that gave
them, not their work that earned them. And then think we may well miss of
this mercy, which we know has been so strange, as to give no ear to so
great Suite as knocking, and of so young and innocent as Virgins.

And this of the third Note of an Eagle, (her flight high and strong:) now of
the Foe, which is the Dragon: for so writes the Poet.

Nunc in reluctantes Dracones,
Egit amor dapis, Horat. car. lib. 4. ode. 4.
at que pugnae.
The Eagle is no sooner sligded, but straight she is grapling with the Dragon.
And heeres a right note of an Eagle indeed to single such an enemy, who has
been thousands of years in arms against his God. Ierones his head would now
give proof of a good subject to his prince; but this Dragons head of a better
to his God. Should we turn tail to this foe, we should do what in us lies
to make both God a lier, and our selves perjured, He has promised to put an
edge in Genesis 3.15
us against him, (I will put enmity between this feed and her head) And that
this enemy should grow to encounter him, and wound him in the very head, He
shall bruise thy very head: And we our selves have undertaken in our baptism,
to do as much.

You have often herad how careful Hawiball was of maintaining the quarrel
against the Romans, which his father Hamalcar had sworn him to. And you have
often heard, how hard God pressed the disobedient Jews with the Rhecabits
observance of their fathers charge. Put these together: Shall not heathen
Hanniball rise in judgment against us, if we rise not in courage against this
Dragon, against who^ we have passed an oath still to be in arms? Were the
loss small by his friendship, it were another matter. But it cost us (if we
remember) Paradise. Or were the gain but small by this conquest, it were
another matter: But it is even that or greater, for which once we ventured.

All we shall be like (not Dij, Gods that are so base to have fellows, but)
Deus that one God that is above al and in all. And how so? He made all good*
and so (says Origin) in a sort shall we do, Nobis saltem, qui malis aduer
samur, we shall make the Devil him self good unto us, the conquest of whom
shall be the matter of our glory.

Nowlong you to be bickering with him, and would any of you know where to
find him? Ask Macarius, he will tell you: (...) here man here is his form:
when God bids you be angry with the Dragon, he bids you be angry with your
selves; and when he wills you to fight against him, he wills you to fight
against your own lust; for they (as the Apostle has given you intelligence)
fight against you.

Leo in his sermon of the 7. of Macab. has descried within you, a whole
Ambuscado of his: covetousness, which tell me citizens if you never found
there: pride, which tell me Ladies if you never found there: Anger, which tell
me Captains if you never found there: Pleasures, which tell me Courtiers if
you never found there: Lies, which tell me Lawyers if you never found there.
And if you ever did, do (as there be wishes you) Cum viderit is multiplicem
pugnam, numer^ sam quaerite victoriam, Set upon all there, and get many crowns
for many conquests.

One says, a Captain and his company is like a bird, whereof the Captain
is the body which moves the winge, and the company the wings which bear
up the body. As therefore if you can break the wings you may easily seize
upon the bird; So if you can cut off these forces of the Dragon (which are his
wings) you shall! at pleasure catch him which is the body. And thus briefly of
the Foe, the fourth note of an Eagle.

The fist (if you remember) was the Age, and that of the nature that it might
be renewed. And this is that peculiar of the Soints, Job. 11.17
which was Zephers warrant to promise just Iobe that his age should shine and
appear more clear than the moon day: Ephesians. 4.23.
And Paul's commission to enjoin the converted Ephesians to so great a task
as to be renewed in the spirit of their mind: And Augustines ground, for
that note of his upon Abraham's sacrifice in the 15. of Genesis where, though the
age of every beast he offered be set down, (his Ram, his Goat, each
three year old) yet of his birds (by which, Spiritual men are meant) he are
we no such thing: De auium aetaete tacetur, they have specified no stint of
years, Esaias. 40.31.
because they have indee de no end of years. Now this reparing of the Eagle
is in two points, The melting her soarefethers, and the casting her ouergrown
bill, Plin. lib. 10. Cap. 3. (For the former of which her means is, as some
Hebrews. write, to bath in a spring: for the latter with Augustine, the
stream of waters accord, to beat it against a rock:) Even so have the chosen
ones of God, both two means, and two degrees of their reuocation.

The first of their means, baptism; answerable to her bathing. Gal. 3.27.
For as many of us as are baptized have put on Christ.

The second, 2. Co. 1.10.
Repentance, like her beating against the Rock: for both as painful is it,
having sorrow for his mother, of whom it is bred; Act. 11.18
and it is fruitful having life for his daughter which it brings forth.

The first of their degres, Vivification, or a spiritual joy, upon a feeling
they have of pardon for having done amiss, and strength hereafter to do
better.

The other their Glorification (or the change of their corruption into the
state of Angels by their resurrection.)

Of the former, we have one example in Paul, now so woe begone, as to break
out into Owretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Romans 7.25.
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, never more desperate disease,
never more quick cure.

For the latter, they have his word, whose credit is so good that he needs
not the testimony of men. In the resurrection they shall be like the Angels
of God in heaven: Ma. 22.30
though not with out bodies as they, yet as free from corruption as they. But
of this I have elsewhere spoken at large.

Here my note is, that every one who will go for an Eagle, must both molt and
replume. Shall I speak plain? Vide pro. cap. 24. v. 16.
must so search every corner in his heart for sin, till he find himself
almost as far gone as even now you heard Paul was. They be the broken
hearts Christ came to heal. The whole in opinion (for in truth there are
none) they either have noe need, or shall have noe use of his physic. But
you must not stay here. Bernard says, God has two knees, a left one of
judgment, and a right one of mercy. If thou be a sinner (and therefore on his
left hand) thou must indeed take his left knee in thy way till thou tremble
for fear: But the^ by it creep to the right, which will make the spring for joy.

Hear secure wantons, from whom sin yet never wrong tear, whom the Viol de
la Iambo, has a charge to keep from melancholy, look up and see another
Viol that will one day as much noble all your senses, as that delights one: It
is a Violl of wrath which shall be powered upon you. Revel. 16.1.
Weep a while to save a howling for ever: Come molt, you are yet no Eagles.

And here drooping spirits (be there any present) who languish in despair,
if this earth have Eagles, you (of all men) sure are they, you have molted, you
have knocked your bills against the Rock: let it suffice. O cheer at last and
pray for us who never had the grace to do so much: if ever any came to suffer
with Christ, it cannot be but you are they from whom torment has wrong, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. And then bid that disputer say, how
you can miss of reigning with him, who when he had promised you should do
so, (to exclude pretense of doubt) sent that his promise with a letter (as it
were of commendations) to you, that if he were true, who never can be false
in that he was truth it self, It is a faithful saying, Est and Amen has
protested it, you which have suffered with him shall reign with him, Est and
Amen has promised it. 2. Tim. 2.
And this briefly of the Age, the fist of my notes of an Eagle.

The sixth was her wit, (seen in her custom to peife or weigh her prey, before
she attempt to fly with it.) Rapta non protiaus ferans, sed prime deponuns,
(says Plin^^) expertaque pondus tum demum abeunt: the manner of these birds is
not to snach and away, but first to try how heavy that is they seize on, and
if they find it portable, then to be gone with it.

Man indeed is the Lord of al creatures, yet often fares it with him, as once
it did with Lord Naaman, vouchsafing not to be advised by some servants of
his, It is a venture but he will Hoose so great a blessing, as a cleansing
from his leprosy, for so small pains as a washing in Jordan, Pismires, they
must teach him diligence in making his provision, or he will be to seek of
necessaries, Lillyes they must learn him confidence, to build upon Gods care
of him, or he will have lost the memory of his providence. And Eagles they
must teach him discretion, to consider what he gains, or he will be so
headie, to engage himself for that, the gain of which will venture him his
very soul.

Ananias found it to be true, Act. 5. ser. 59.
dum pretty quarit compendium, anunaefecit detrimentum, says Ambrose: while he
was so sly as to save his money, he proved so rash as to loose his soul. And
so did Gehezy, while he weighed not the money and raiment, would ouer-loade
his own soul with that which loaded two Syrians backs: he cast himself
into such a heat of sin, that it broake out upon him into an hereditarie
leprosy.

Here be great preyes to be found by trading in this City, but they have
often an oath, or lie hanging at them: these will be so heavy on your souls
they will press you down to hell: these would be left alone.

There be great preyes to be found by presentiments in the Church, but they
have often a weighty lease or somewhat else hanging at them: weigh these leafes
(both demisors and receivers) you shall find that they will cost you the Fee
simple of a better thing: These would be left alone.

There be also perhaps great preyes to be found in some Courts, by abridging
poor Universities ancient privileges: but weigh the privileges I beseech
you, least they prove (more than by their name they seem) not Legis, but
Euangelij priuationes, and bereave you of the comfore of the very Gospel. I
cannot doubt either of the wisdom or the conscience, to who^ the hearing of
this matter is referred: but yet give me leave (out of the abundance) of my
duty too, and my fear for my mother) in the name of learning and virtue to
entreat you, that as you will not have your memories stincke in the noses of
all learned posterity, as you will not unawares take from that pretogatiue to
which you would seem to add, by disabling it to give that, which you say it
must needs recall: As you will not be able for that slander to the preaching
of the gospel; that it has taught, to take from learning that which ignorance
persuaded to give it, you would in your determination hereof use both your
wisdom and your conscience.

There be great preyer to be found by counterfaite reprisall at Sea, but they
have often a conscience of piracy hanging at them. These are so heavy they will
sink you in a burning lake: These would be left alone,

There is indede a kind of bastard Eagle, termed Halietus, (as who would say
the Sea Eagle:) See wants this forecast I talk of; She will sowse at any
fish she sees, but she paies for this her hearts, (that often befalls her, as the
writers of the natural history record) Vt cum far quod caperet ne que at;
in gurgitem demergatur: That being not able to lift up that she fastened on,
she is drawn under water and drowned. But these (remember) are not (...)
right bredde, and likely to be drenched before they be gathered hither.

Physicians for the body, divide their whole practice into two general
parts: (...) (or preventing physic,) and (...) (or recovering physic.) The
former not so troublesome, but consisting most in keeping of a wholesome diet:
The latter very painful, as in taking of it there must be purgings,
sweatings, lancings, and the like.

We for the soul have two parts of our practice too: (...), one so pleasant
that it will never trouble you, and that is this weighing discretion in the
gettings (to which now I would persuade,) And (...) (another bitter one) of
having ease by lancing your own hearts, and by confessing that which you would
now think a death the world should know, which you shall be forced to use,
accept you not of this.

If you make this rule unto your selves, to gain nothing but with a good
conscience, all the comfort you shall have of it my heart is not able to
conceive. But this I know you shall find, to live in credit with men, to die
at peace with God, and to escape those pangs, which when you feel them, you
would be willing to buy out with the loss of all you have.

But if all be fish with you that comes to net, and any thing to be done
whereby something may be gotten, then say upon your deathbeds that I lie, if
there either you be not given over to have no remorse at all, and so to go to
torments like fools to the stocks:) or, if you find the mercy to have
remorse, between a settled resolution, you shall hear that there is no
salvation without restitution, and impossible you should seek to make this
restitution, when you find not scarce any other means than to despair and
die.

And this I thought good to observe by occasion of these six notes of an
Eagle, the kind of bird by which our Savior chose to shadow them who shall
be gathered hither. Now it remains that from this choice of the Fliers, I
proceed to those near circumstances in the flight it self, contained in
these words, shall be gathered together: which as I conceive them are three.

The first, the efficient cause of it, or he in whose strength it is made.

The second, the manner or after what sort it shall be made.

The third, the certainty or the assurance we have that it must be made.
All three distinctly delivered us in that one Original (...), which we in
english express by these many words shall be gathered together.

The first of which notes (or the efficient cause) I gather by Abnegation out
of the voice of this Verb, which being Passive, gives to understand that
they who shall be gathered are no Actors in their own gathering.

The second (or the manner of this Flight) I find in the Praeposition (...),
which imposing upon the Verb, (that is compounded with it) a community, as
the Grammarians speak (indeed stretching the action or passion of it to
many) argues in this gathering a shoaling or an assembling of some company.

The third (or the certainetie of this flight) I deduce out of the nature of
this Verb (...) it self, which at least imports a pre-eminence, and not
seldom an irresistable violence in conducting, or as one would say a
sovereignty in drawing, whither it inioynes a necessity of following. For so
uses Aesebines it, with whom (...) soundes as much as (...) to drag or hail
one to the b^^^^, no less than to leave him no shift whereby to escape making
his answer: or, to speak more to the capacity of the meaner; first in that
it is said, these Eagles shall be gathered, I conclude that it is not they
that shall gather themselves: Then in that it is added, in that they shall be
gathered together, I collecte there must be some number of them who shall be
gathered: Last in that it is told us that they shall be gathered or enforced
to make this appearance, I resolve they shall not have power to deny it, out
come they must.

By the gathering I told you in the beginning was the resurrection meant, and
therefore cannot now doubt but you conceive that by the cause in this gathering
is the Author of our resurrection, By the certainetie of this gathering is the
assurance of our resurrection understood.

Now concerning that which I had intended in each of these three, I have place
only for our Saviors complainte, John. 16.12. I have many things to say, but
you cannot bear them away; not that your capacities would not serve to receive
them for their greatness, but that my strength cannot last to deliver them, for
their number. For besides what I had intended of the two first points (the
cause, and the manner) with the sum of which, Mor. 24.
I should have been better able in few words to acquaint you, my especial
purpose was (in the third) to have attempted the making good unto the Atheists
of our time that, which long time Gregory undertook to their fathers in
infidelity, that Resurrections fidem qui in obedientia non tenent, eaudem in
ratione debuerant teners: They whose faith was so weak, that they could not
therefore believe a Resurrection, because God had promised it; should yet in
reason have made no doubt of it, because very reason in a sort persuaded it.

But here as the straitnes of time has prevented me (for uttering that which
it may be might have done some good) so has it made me amends with bidding me
to the keeping of that best rule, given but in one, (but true in every such
mystery of religion) which otherwise I should have ventured to have broken,
Fides credat, intelligentia non requirat, Let faith believe it, let wit seek
no reason of it: Ne aut non inuentum putet incredibile, aut reperium non credat
singular, least curiosity for his pains gain one of these two things,
either (if it be in judgment dazeled and cannot find it) like an Apostata to
think it incredible: or, (if it be in mercy illightned and able to reach it)
then (like almost as ill) to esteem it no more than ordinary.

Howsoever therefore, either in an other place or at another time in this
argument I may venture to do as swimmers use, and put my self to diuing to
save others from drowning (for so much danger is there in seeking to establish
that by reason which is above reason:) here and now, that one promise of him
(who is the truth it self, that all that are in their grave, shall hear the
voice of the son of God) shall suffice me both for direction to the Author
and intelligence of the company, Ioh. 5.28.
and assurance of the Appearance upon this Sommons.

The Son of God (whose voice shall be heard) he says, my soul shall be
the Author, that All which shall hear it, they shall be the company, and that
hearing which shall be restored unto them, shall be the warrant they shall
rise.

Now the God of wisdom and consolation give us both (in our searching)
modesty, and (in our suffering) faith, that to us may the comfort redound, and
the check not stretch of our Saviors wheresoever.

The body which was slain for us, quicken us: which is united to us, sanctify
us: which feeds us, strengthen us: which shall judge us, acquit us.

The majesty (at whose commandment the Eagle mounteth) aslure us of our
kind, by our nest so sure as on the rock, our eye so strong as vnd aseled by
the Sun, our flight so true, as high and swift, our Foe so choice as the
Dragon; our age so fresh as renewed: our wit so discreere as peizing before
bearing away: And last the Son, who we know shall at last raise us all out of
the sleep of death, in the mean time raise us his people out of our slumber
in sin, that our first life may secure us from the second death. To this
Son, with the Father, and the holy Ghost (three persons but one God, power,
wisdom, and love it self) be ascribed al praise dominion and glory, now and
for evermore

Amen.
FINIS.

