THE GODLY MAN'S INQVISITION, LATELY DELIVERED IN TWO Sermons before the Right
honorable HENRY, Lord MONTAGVE, late Lord High Treasurer, privy Counselor,
etc. and other Gentlemen of Worship, at KIMOLTON on their Annual feast day.

BY R. PRESTON, Preacher of Gods Word.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his
shop at the two Greyhounds in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sr FRANCIS STANTON Knight, R. P. wishes to his
present prosperity the addition of many days in the fruitful fear of the
Lord Jesus, etc.
RIght worshipful,
These two following Sermons, being preached before an honored assembly
whereto I was a stranger, I could not conveniently dedicate them to any person,
or particular party thereof, least ignorance of their conditions, and want of
knowledge and acquaintance should accuse me of presumption, and too much
boldness: The remembrance therefore of your self, of your countenance, and
favor toward me became a sudden object, emboldening me to send them abroad
under your name: because (as I am conscious of your pious practices, so) I have
and do know you a Patron of Religion, and godliness, esteeming it your
greatest gain to know Christ Jesus, and to be found in him.

In these Sermons you shall find nothing sauouring of Affectation, or inclining
unto ostentation, but rather affection to the souls of the Flock, for from
the heart-roote in Jesus Christ do I desire their salvation. The subject of
them is, The godly Man's Inquisition, wherein you shall see the estate of man by
reason of sin and corruption laid open, viz. that he is a stranger to the Lord,
a vagrant from the Commonwealth of Israel, a lost sheep, in bondage unto
sin and Satan, without Christ, a child of wrath, a prodigal, etc. And
because to loose the favor and countenance of God, is of all conditions the
most miserable, a vassallage without exception, I have in the second place set
down the means how to get out, which is diligent seeking of the Lord in
prayer, faith, fear, repentance, holiness of life. Wherein also, that the
duty may be the more set forward, the place, the matter, the way, the manner,
the measure, the end and time of seeking are in their due places propounded.
And whereas there be certain times when the Lord will specially be found, and
certain times when he will not be found, I have in the last place laid down
both, exhorting all men in the conclusion, to take the present day, least the
ouer-passing of it through negligence, keep them eternally from it, and so
bring them into everlasting separation from the presence of God. This is an
Abbreuiation of the sequents, which I have presumed as shaddowed with your
allowance to publish. Be you pleased to accept it, be no severe examiner, but a
mild pervser, and also a practiser of the continents, and let affection to the
matter, somewhat mediate with your judgment to censure not as you see, but as
I mean. I confess of my self, that I am unable to carry the least stick to
the Altar, and unworthy of all others to prescribe either diet or direction to
any, that has but touched the hem of Christ's garment, yet am I not ashamed to
humble my self to others view, that by the mercy seen on me, who have been
thus sarre led into the secrets of God, they may be likewise encouraged to
press within the border of the Mount, when the horn of salvation shall be
blown. As I am I crave your pardon for my boldness, and the continuance of
your favor, leaving these Sermons to your use and practice, and your self to
the Lord, in whom I rest ever

bound unto you in all humble observance, Ri: PRESTON.

THE GODLY MAN'S INQVISITION.
ESAIAH 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found.


THe foundation of my speech for this time is grounded on this short line, and
few words of the Prophet Isaiah: and they well resemble that excellent
constructure of our SAVIOVR, laid down in his Gospel by Matthew: Seek first
the kingdom of God, etc. Mat. 6.33.
Where by first we understand, primarily, chiefly before all, and above all
things: so that God, and his kingdom of grace must be sought principally, and
require the first-lings of all our labors: For, as all Obligations which run
indefinitely without limitation of time (says the Maxim in Law) are presently
due: Simil: ^^^
so we in the like kind so we in the like kind stand bound to God: And
although in this Text is prefixed no certain day, yet it tells us that we are
engaged to every day, and therefore all holy men urge the present day. Ier.
35.15. Gal. 6.10.
Turn every man now from his evil way: Do good while ye have time. While it
is called to day, Heb. 3.7.13.15 Ioh. 12.35.
exhort one another. To day if you will, hear his voice: Walk in the light
while you have the light, etc. The Mariner sails while the gale is favorable.
The Smith strikes while the Iron is hot. The Traveler walks while it is day;
and the Lawyer takes his time: viz. every term time: Now it is always
Tearme-time with Christians: this present day is our Term, and so is every
day: If then we would have our cause to be heard, Christ to be our Advocate,
and God to give sentence on our side, let us seek him diligently, and betimes;
Isa. 8.13.
let us early in the morning sanctify the Lord in our hearts, and make him
our dread.

The Prophet having set down in the former part of this Chapter, Coherence.
the sufficiency and efficiencie of Christ, without whom nothing is available
to salvation (for in him is the fullness of the Godhead bodily) and likewise
having described the calling of the Gentiles, Col. 2.9.
and how they should acknowledge Christ, and seek the Lord; Here in this verse
from the occasion taken from the Gentiles he exhorts the Jews to emulation:
Seek the Lord while he may be found; as if he had said, seeing the Gentiles
are so zealous, and so much enkindled to search the Lord, why should you Jews
that are the Lords peculiar people be frozen, Tit. 2.14.
and cold in this duty? Seek the Lord, etc.

In these words I will observe these three particulars: first, Quid, secondly,
quem, thirdly, quando: The interpretation.
for the first, quid is the action, seek. And this is taken from the course
and practice of men, who having lost any thing of moment and value, betake
themselves to diligent inquiry, and seeking of the same, never desisting till
they find: So they that purpose to give up their names to Christ seek God
diligently, never giving over their Inquisitions, til they be well assured of
his presence. To seek God in this place, signifies many things, as to labor
to be reconciled to God in Christ, to turn to him by repentance, and
humiliation of soul, to worship and serve him according to his word, to
invoke his holy name, to pray unto him, to make profession of his Religion,
to embrace him the true Jehovah, and as the only God by a lively faith, etc.
This large signification of seeking the Lord is not only thus meant, and
expounded here, but elsewhere in Scripture. Hos. 3.5. Psalm. 24.6. and 27.8.
While he may be found: These words include the present occasion, and time of
seeking, for according to the time that God will be found, we are to seek. Now
if we seek according to certain rules after prescribed, he will be found
presently, and therefore we are to seek presently. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Now is the acceptable time, now is the day of Grace. Otherwise there is a time
when the Lord will withdraw himself, and will not be found, though we seek
earnestly, as the Prophet did for a Man to execute judgment, Ier. 5.1.
and perform righteousness in Jerusalem, and found him not. In few words, the
meaning is this: O ye Jews by your disobedience and daily transgressions, you
have lost the Lords favor and countenance, abused his gracious offers,
delaying time, and procrastinating Repentance, and you have made unto your
selves Idols that are no Gods: Now the Lord once again offers himself in
his mercies to your view, neglect not the occasion, but serve, seek, call
upon, and worship him: if it come to pass that means and time slip away
through carelessness, then all your hopes are in the wind, and you may seek
God, but he will never be found as a merciful and tender Father, but rather as
a terrible and a fearful Judge.

Seek.] This word presupposes a former loss, Doct. 1.
we need not seek God, Sin is the cause of the loss of Gods favor.
unless formerly we had lost God: Hence I gather this Theoreme, that by
corrupt nature, and multitude of transgressions, we are loosers, not seekers of
God, we are rather strangers and wanderers from him, then Inquisitors of, and
true conuerts unto him. In the corruption of nature we lost the comfortable
presence of God, which in our innocence we enjoyed: by loosing our selves we
lost him: and secondly, in the daily admitting, and committing of sin after
grace received, we loose his sight and presence.

Sin is a makebate, Reason.
and a schismatique, that rendeth asunder the sacred bond of peace between the
Creator, and his creature: it shorteneth his arm, and withers the fresh
boughs of his love: It makes a separation between him and us, as the Cloud
between the brightness of the Sun and us: It casts us into darkness,
and thrusts us behind the door, as Iael did Sisera, that we might loath to
see the face of God, as Sisera did the face of Barak and Deborah: Judge. 4.18.19
So long as the Ephesians continued in their sinful Idolatry, they lost God,
for it is said, Ephesians. 2.12.
that they were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God. And so
soon as our progenitour Adam had transgressed the Commandment, in eating of
the forbidden fruit, he went and hid himself in a bush, as if Gods presence
had been too hot for him: Genesis 3.8.
Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord amongst the
trees of the Garden: fearful they were to hear him speak, and ashamed to
see his face, and therefore they seek starting-holes, to hide themselves the
further from him. In the same taking are all his offspring to this day, if the
old serpent get any of us to pluck an apple from the prohibited tree, that is,
if he win our consents to sin, he has his desire, and we become vagabonds
on the earth, and fugitives from the face of God: And ever the more we offend,
the further we are from God, being either like Pilgrims now wandering up the
steep Mountains of pride, now down the low valleys of despair, now through
the shadie groves of wantonness, now through the broad fields of
licentiousness, now through the thornie thickets of worldly cares, now through
the filthy channels of carnal lusts, roouing sometimes here, sometimes there,
without mate and guide, the Devil leading us whither he list, or like Merchant
adventurers, imbarkt in the ship of security, sometimes hoysing up the sails
of noisome desires, sometime filled with the merry gale of vain and worldly
pleasures, sometimes delighted with a whistling air of filthy lucre, ever and
anon running upon the Syrtes and quicksands of sin, to the great danger, not
so much of the loss of life, and wrack of goods, as the wrack of Conscience,
which is the greatest shipwreck, and the loss of Gods lone and affection,
which is the greatest loss. Thus sinful men that we are, whilst with the
Prodigal we become travelers, and Merchant adventurers, to see the fashions
of the world abroad, we become like to Jonas, Ion. 1.3.
who fled to Tarshish from the prefence of God.

There be three things that make men forsake one another society; Philo. de
profugis.
Hatred, Fear, Shame: for hatred, the envious man hates the company of him
that prospers, and so does one enemy hate another: Jacob fled from Laban
because of his injustice and Idolatry, he hated them: For fear Children will
run from their Parents, and servants from their Masters, for fear Jacob fled
from Esau, and David from Saul. For shame the Adulterer keeps his Cabin, and
is couched in a chamber; Genesis 3.
and for shame Adam skulted in the grove of Paradise: Tell me, thou fugitive
sinner, for which of these things do thou seek to estrange thy self from
God? there is no cause of hatred in him, for he is wholly delectable, Cant.
5.10.16
the fairest of ten thousand: there is no cause of fear in him, for he is the
Father of mercies, and the God of consolation; Ephesians. 2.4.
he is rich in mercy, especially to them, Gal. 4.6.
who have received the spirit of adoption to cry Abba Father: there is no cause
of shame in him, Psalm. 24.8.9. and 25.3.
for he is the Lord of Glory. Nay, rather (vile sinner) be ashamed of thy
sins, and blush at thy transgressions, whereby thou have lost thy self, and
a merciful God: thou by thy wicked life, have turned thy back upon thy
Master, and set thy self so far at odds with him, that thou shall draw
down no love from him unto thee, unless thy Repentance and humiliation for
thy sin, be as the Loadstone to pull him to, and win him again.

Object: But how can a man wander from God, Ob:
or lose him? Wheresoever I am, God is there present; he fills both heaven
and earth; Ier. 23.24. Psalm. 27. Psalm. 139.2.3.4
he is with me at my sitting, rising, lying down, in the thoughts of my heart,
words of my tongue, ways of my feet, nay, in my reins, and bones. His
presence cannot be avoided, who sits on the Circle of heaven, 1 Reg. 8.27.
Isa. 66.1.
and beholds the inhabitants of the earth as Grasshoppers, whose throne is the
heaven of heavens, and the earth is his footestoole, and his ways are in the
great deep, etc.

Answ: It is true; Sol:
There is neither heaven nor hell, nor the uttermost part of the Sea, neither
day nor night, light, nor darkness, that can separate us from God; the
presence of his God head is no less in one place then in another: He is well
known in Jury, and his name is great in Israel. But yet touching the presence
of his mercy, and loving kindness, that is not vouchsafed to the wicked, they
shall not enjoy one jot of it: In which respect they may be said to be far
absent from God. Secondly, God may be said to be found, when the kingdom of
Grace is much advanced amongst a people: but the ungodly they seek to subdue
it, Heb. 10.29.
and to trample the precious blood of Christ under their feet, which makes
them strangers unto God.

Use. Is it so that a man by sin flies the face of God: For information.
this may then let us see the malice of sin against our souls: It will never
cease stretching forth an Ishmaeliticall hand, til it have quite parted God and
us, yea, till it has divided us from our selves, for while we are beguiled
with the deceilfulnesse thereof, irrational conditions, and beastly qualities
oppress us, and with dingthrifts, and Prodigalls, it will make us forsake our
Fathers house, and change his sweet and fat land for a strange Country, his
dainty cates, and dishes of sweet meats, for refuse husks, his friends and
acquaintance to become fellow-feasters with swine. In a word, it will so mad
us, that we should never think either of God, or the Devil, of Paradise, or
eternal plagues, if the Lord had not left time and means, that we might
return to our selves, and so seek the Lord.

Use 2. Secondly, this Doctrine may teach us to beware, For instruction.
and to take heed of sin, and as much as in us lies, to bind it to good
behavior (we have no greater enemy in the world) seeing without our
circumspection, it will go about to set God and us at ears Oh then take the
peace of it, and seek to shut it out of the doors of thy heart, that it may
never shut thee out of Gods presence. And as Samael dealt with the Amalekites,
1 Samuel 15.
so deal thou with the members of sin, kill them, and then bury them with
Iezabells bones in a deep grave, that they may no more rise up to hang upon
thee: this is the next and readiest way to get into Gods favor, and the
presence of his grace.

Use. 3. Thirdly, we are here likewise taught to bewail the great loss of our
God, To bewail our loss of God by sin.
and to lament the want of his gracious presence: this is the practice of every
godly man, for if he think it the greatest gain to obtain the favor of God,
then he must needs think it his greatest loss to want it. If there be any
sprinkle of Regeneration upon thee, or spark of grace within thee, it will
move thee to grief and sorrow in the absence of God, and compel thee to seek
him as the Heart does the waters, saying, Psalm. 143.6.
My sonle desires after thee as the Heart after the water brooks, and as the
thirsty lands after rain.



Psalm. 67.1.
Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us; neither do we complain,
Isa. 59.2.
that our iniquities have reared up a partition wall between God and us, and
so hid his face from us that he will not hear: neither do we accuse our
selves as lost sheep, Psalm 119. last verse.
that have long gone astray. Oh therefore let us flatter our selves no more
with those that pluck out the eyes of knowledge it self; Psalm. 10.4.11.
Tush, God is gone, he hides his face, and will never see; But rather let us
resolve to seek GOD when he is wanting, and to mourn for the want. Let us not
follow our sensuality too far, nor buy voluptuousness with a price, but say
with the Athenian Orator, when we hear how far God is from us by our
pleasure: Non em^m tanti peanitere.
I will not buy the seeking of God by Repentance at so high a rate.

Use 4. Lastly, seeing by sin we loose God, here again we are exhorted,
when we possess him, when we have found him, Let us hold God fast when we have
him.
when we possess to keep our selves there, and to hold him fast. Let thine
eye be continually upon him, and never suffer him to be out of thy sight. Psalm.
123.2.
Behold as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their Masters, and as
the eyes of a maiden unto the hands of her mistress; So let our eyes wait
upon the Lord our God. As the child deals with his Father, he follows him up
and down, and dare not let him go out of his sight, but holds hard on his
skirts, and keeps him with him; So deal thou with the Lord: turn thy self
in every good action unto him, and if thou have any fear of loosing, then sit
the closer and hold the faster, ever remembering that the second loss is the
greater, and brings more danger to the looser: David set himself ever in
Gods presence, 2 King. 5.16.
so do thou stand before the Lord continually, for this is a sign of thy
obedience to the Lord thy Master, to stand before his face, and not to shrink
from his presence.

Thus much of the Supposition; Now of the Position, Seek the Lord: Having laid
down, how that by sin we are out of Gods favor, and lose his presence of
grace; it remains to speak of the means to find the Lord, and to get into
his favor, and that is here said to be Seeking, whether it be by prayer,
Repentance, obedience, or hearing of the word daily and diligently, etc. Doct.
1.


God being lost by sin must be sought by all holy means.
And the Point is this, that having lost the Lord by iniquity, we are to seek
him again by all godly helps and means: we must not stand upon arguments,
but resolve present diligence to seek when God seems to leave the Cabin of
our hearts, and begins to write bitter things against us. The servant put out
of his Masters service, knowing the profit by it, will not stand upon his
terms; My master did me wrong, why did he thus? but he seeks all means to
procure his masters wonted love and affection; neither does it become us (Gods
servants) to argue upon points without ground, but rather we should seek Gods
face when he calls upon us to that purpose, saying, Psalm. 27.8. Hos. 5.3.
Seek ye my face. Thus did the men of Israel, they sought the Lord, and he was
favorable and gracious unto them, God sends not his workmen away without
wages, nor those that seek him by Repentance, in faith, etc. without a reward.
David says, Psalm. 34.4.
I sought the Lord, and he heard me. He did not so much use his bodily feet to
run after the Lord, as the good temper of his affections to take delight in
the Lord. Neither did he say, I prayed and was heard, but I sought and was
heard: 2 Chronicles. 20.3
and thus Iehosaphat fearing God, set himself to seek the Lord: And why are
all the Elect of God, called a Generation of seekers, but in respect of their
enquiries after Gods favor, Psalm. 24.6.
according as it is the brand of the ungodly, that they seek not God?

And surely, Reason.
if either the comforts and joy we may reap by Gods presence, or the
necessity thereof may be of force to persuade inquiry, and to stir up our
care, neither of them is wanting in this so weighty a matter: for comforts and
joy, what thoughts are able to reach to the excellency of them? Eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor heart conceived the multitude and worth thereof: the presence of great men
will astonish and amaze their inferiors, it will make them fearful to behold
their faces: Math. 5.8.
but such is not Gods presence, his face and countenance is delectable, and at
his right hand is pleasure for evermore: Psalm. 16.11.
and the more we can behold it, the less is our fear; and the greater our
rejoicing: 1 Samuel 6.13.
when the Arc was restored, the men of Bethshemesh exceedingly rejoiced: when
the public teaching of the Law (which had a long time been discontinued) was
again established, Nehem. 8.12.
the people of Jerusalem were much comforted. But how much more will the
Children of the marriage Chamber rejoice, Math. 9.15.
when the Bridegroom is among them? This joy arising from Gods presence,
concerns either the qualification of the Conscience, or the fruition of Gods
favor in the estate of glory: for the conscience, when after many skirmishes,
and secret terrors, it begins to gather heart (as we say) and to feel
evidences of grace, then there is much joy, yea, such joy, 1 Pet. 1.8.
as Peter calls it glorious and unspeakable: Touching this Joy look upon
David, boasting in the joy of heart, which was given him by the Lords lifting
up of his countenance upon him; Psalm. 4.7.
Look upon the Eunuch, going on in his way rejoicing, Act. 8.39.
because he felt how faith in Christ was wrought in his soul; and that was
Mary's Joy, rejoicing in spirit, Luke 1.46.
that she knew God in Christ was become her Savior. For the fruition of the
state of glory hereafter, it may well lift up the believers heart with comfort,
Reu.
who shall stand before the lamb accompanied with 24. Elders, singing and
rejoicing: he shall be where God is for ever, Ioh. 14.16.17. 1 Cor. 13.12.
and shall see him face to face. If this glimmering light of heavenly knowledge
(when we see but as in a glass darkely) be so delightful: what shall it be to
see and know the Lord as he is? If the communion we have here with Christ in
his word, and Sacraments be so joyous, what shall it be to enjoy the immediate
presence of God our Father, Christ our Redeemer, the holy Ghost our Comforter?
Now shall not such excellent comforts, springing from the enioyment of Gods
presence be reputed worthy our inquiries? What do many vulgar people
oftentimes to see the Kings face, or at least his person? Strange things are
done out of the desire thereof: As earnest should we be to get a sight of God.
Thus I have briefly pointed you to the joy of the Saints in their
apprehensions of God, and the beholding of his bright countenance: Now let me
show you the necessity too: the necessity in a word is such, that without
God, and the presence of his grace, there is no possibility of admittance into
heaven: for upon all those that are without the pale of his favor, shall be
executed that sentence passed upon the man without the wedding garment; Mat.
22.13.
Bind them hand and foot, and cast them into utter darkness, where shall be
neither comfort, nor light, nor yet hope of either. To be in a dark Dungeon,
where is no penetration of light, nor any consolation, is great pain and
misery: 2 These. 1.9.
but to be excluded from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power, is even to be punished with everlasting destruction. As is the world
without a Sun, a pining child without a Mother, a distressed land without a
governor; even so is the soul and body without the blessed and glorious
presence of God, nay, they are in a thousand times worse taking: for their
exemption shall be perpetual and easelesse, their eyesight shall only be of
Gods wrath; and his eternal fury. They shall feed his Justice while they are
burning in fire and brimstone, Reu. 21.8.
which is the second death. Look then of what necessity, salvation, and
happiness, and life eternal is, of the same is the favor and loving
countenance of the Lord. If it be necessary for a man to seek to be saved, it
is necessary to seek the present, and future good of his soul, by seeking a
conioyning to the Lord by means of his grace. What can deserve the very best,
and (as it were) the very quintessence of our care, if not this?

Ob: But it will be said, Ob:
Why need we seek God, He is every where at one and the same time, he fills
both heaven and earth?

Answ. In God we must consider two things; Sol:
first, Deity, secondly, Presence of Grace: touching the former, God need not
be sought, so he is always at hand, as it appears Act. 17.27. We may feel
after him, and find him, because he is not far from every one of us. And
thus seeing his creatures, we see him. Touching his presence of grace (which is
often wanting to comfortless Consciences) we are to seek God, and are
commanded so to do: for he absents himself many times from his dear
children, touching his Grace, so much, that they desire but the least
impression, and token thereof, and cannot get it, whereupon they are much
exercised in stirring the scinders to find some liue-ashes, and will not give
over searching, till they have gotten some treasure, some specialtie of Gods
favor. And this is called the seeking of Gods face. Psalm. 27.8.

Quest. But why should we seek Gods face? Quest.
Is it not said: Thou shall not see my face, for there shall no man see me and
live? Exodus 33.20.


Ans. The face of God is either prima or secunda. Sol:
The first is the face of his spirituality, of his divine Majesty, which
cannot be seen with the dark eyes of mortality: Our weakness is so great,
and his Majesty on the otherside is glorious and transplendent, that we cannot
behold it without the consuming of our selves: no more then the eye can behold
and look upon the exceeding brightness of the Sun without the hurting and
dazeling of it self. The second is the face of his love, and favor; this with
the understanding, and the heart may be seen: Eccles. 1.16.
Moses and Jacob saw this face of God, and rejoiced.

Use 1. Is it so that every one should set himself apart to seek God by one
godly help or other? For reproof.
Some say, oh, it is an easy matter to be acquainted with God, he may be soon
found, a little seeking will serve the turn: but let the industrious
carfulness, continual supplications, and the daily complainings of Gods
servants in the want of God, (yea, then when he is present in their hearts)
testify the facility, and easiness of this business.

Ob: I but Sir tell me, did not Christ say, Ob:
Seek and find? Therefore when, or where, Math. 7.7.
or howsoever seeking I shall find.

Ans. I grant it to be true, Sol:
that Christ did say so to his Disciples: and made this promise to them (in
them to us) that every believer, being in Christ, might seek, and find: but
not that every kind of seeking should obtain. The meaning of the words is
this, That whosoever have been first sought, and found of God, shall seek and
find God: but they who have not first drawn near to him, shall never find
God drawing near to them.

Secondly, another sort of people there is, 2.
deserving much blame; namely, all such as plead a perpetuity of Gods presence
with them in the midst of their wants of him: Oh, I never wanted the Lord, and
why should I go troubling my self to seek him? Alas, for the blindness and
folly of such men: they speak without sense, to say they have that which they
never so much as once enjoyed. Where God affords his presence of grace, there
always are other companions of it, and such as attend the Spirit: As we use to
say, Where the King is, there is his Court, his waiters, his attendants; So,
even so where God is with his Spirit, there is his Court, and attendants, as
says, love, obedience, fear, peace, joy in the holy Ghost, worship,
reverence, prayer, Repentance, humility, etc His Angels will be about thee,
his Spirit within thee to help thee, his Grace to uphold thee, his mercy to
embrace thee: Look then, are these present, then their Master cannot be far
off? But surely, Grace would tell thee (if thou had any) that there is a
great want of God, that thou may seek daily for a supply: and that he is the
farthest off from such as feel the least want.

Ob: The Lord has blessed me with his good Creatures, Ob:
he has given me prosperity, and riches, I find no want of them, and
therefore if the, Lord were absent from me, those things should be taken away,
and I should be deprived of their use.

Ans. A man may enjoy many outward blessings, Sol:
and in the possession, neither know whether God loves, or hates him. He may
have his portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14.
and his belly filled with hid treasure, he may be full of children, and leave
his substance to his babes; and yet he may be out of Gods favor, and called,
Romans 9.13.
a man of the world. Esau was fatted with the blessings of the earth, and yet
he was so far of from the Lords love toward him, that the Lord hated him.

Secondly, the more covetous a miser is, the less acquaintance he has with
God, because he is filled with noisome lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9.
and enters into many temptations, which drives him from God: and therefore it
was rightly spoken, that a Cable might as soon go through a needles eye, as a
rich Miser enter into the kingdom of heaven, consequently into Gods favor.

Lastly, 3.
another kind of people deserve equal reproof with the former, namely, such
as leave the pure Well and dig Cisternes that will hold no water: such as
forsake God, and employ all their cares in and about the world. That seek
worldly pelf, and external goods, and in the mean time have no regard at all
to seek the Lords good will lost by their transgressions. It is now adays an
ordinary matter to see spiritual affairs iustled aside, or rather thrust out
by the shoulders, that the outward man may receive some contentment; and golden
opportunity neglected, that the occasion of improuement of worldly commodities,
of tickling carnal delights, and of maintaining outward reputation among men
may be embraced. In a word, Matters touching God are so slightly, so seldom,
so remisly sought after, as if they were not worthy talking of: And matters
touching the world are so eagarly, so industriously, and with that intention of
mind and body followed after, as if God had made man for nothing else but to
swallow down goods and greatness, as fast as possibly he can. Oh, my
Brethren, be ye in time recalled from this miserable state of misery, and
remember how faulty you are in seeking the things of God: your care for the
earth has so devoured the care of heavenly things, Genesis 41.20.
as if the lean Kine in Pharaohs dream had eaten up the fat. Consider these
things, and seek the Lord in a good time, while the way is fair, the passage
speedy, the door open, the day lasts, and while he calls.

Use 2. As this Doctrine may reprove the offender: so it may serve to instruct
us to the observation of the point in hand, For instruction.
to seek the Lord: If a child in a crowd has lost the sight of his tender
hearted Father, or a waiting man the sight of his kind Master, or if any man
has lost any matter of valuation, how diligently will they set themselves to
Inquisitions, they will go every way to the wood (as the Proverb is) they
will not cumber themselves with other triuiall matters found in their way, but
pass over them as if they took no notice of them; So it should be with us,
tho many good commodities may lie in our way, yet let us never trouble our
selves to take them up, for it is a more valuable commodity then they are,
that we seek after. Oh, let us be stirred up on all hands concerning this
duty, whet on one another to the performance of it: And you that have been
careless herein, begin now at last to be better advised, and think it not an
easy thing to seek God: Seeking requires a care, and an endeavor more then
ordinary. And you that have bestowed some care this way, be persuaded that it
has not been so earnest, so constant, so intentive as it ought to be, reamend
and double the same. Yea, let us all redeem as much time as possibly we may
for this one thing, let us abridge our selves rather in our outward profits,
and pursuites of them, let us rather want opportunity in our sports, let all
other things go to wrack, rather then this one business should not be
forwarded.

For direction.
Use 3. This point will teach us in the third place a lesson of direction,
where, and how to seek Gods loving face and favor: And therefore if you be
affected with the commodity here mentioned, you will be glad to take the time,
means, and helps offered.

God has three houses.
First, we will begin with the place where God must be sought, for when we are
once fully assured of his habitation (as I may so speak) and of the place
where he dwells: then we may both boldly and freely seek him. The place we must
go unto is his house, there we must seek him; for, as one neighbor having
some business with another, goes not to a strangers house, but to his house
to seek him: and indeed where should neighbors seek one for another, but at
their houses? So if the Lord be wanting to any soul (in as much as it cries
out, Psalm. 76.7.8.
why Lord absentest thou thy self so long?) then let that soul be prostrate
before the gates of the Lords house, that he may answer the complaints
thereof. And that it may not long be far from him: Consider that God has
three houses, if we miss in one, or other, yet we shall be sure to find in the
third.

First, Church Assemblies.
The first house where we must seek God is the Church; whereto the godly often
are congregated, and where also God is present after a special manner: He is
in the midst of such assemblings: Math. 18.23.
John found the Lord in the midst of the seven golden Reu. 18.1.
Candlestickes, that is, the true Church. The spouse sought and found her best
beloved in the tents of the Shepherds, Cant. 6.1.2.
and in the garden among the beds of Spices: that is, in the Assembles of godly
people, where graces grow as Spices upon a bed in a garden. And so if we will
find the Lord, our resort must be to the Sanctuary: from under the threshold
of the door thereof, Psalm. 63.2. And 73.17.
flow forth waters to refresh our souls. Thither went the Prophet David in the
time of distress, and was comforted; and thither went the people of Israel to
see the Lords face: So that in the Congregation (where the little flock of
Christ is folded) we may seek and find.

The reason of it is, Reason.
because those means which God has sanctified, and set apart for our
salvation, and for inquisition, are there used: there is the word truly and
soundly preached; there are the principles of religion for those of a lower
form; there are deeper points for exercised wits; Heb. 5.14.
there are helps for Magistrates, for Ministers, for private men, for young and
old; yea, whatsoever grace is lacking, there thou shall be sure to have it
supplied abundantly; there thou shall see the great Mystery of godliness
discovered which is, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God manifested in the flesh, etc. And as in the material Sanctuary, the Lord
revealed himself to his people; so here to those that with Conscience seek
him will he likewise discover himself in the salvation of their souls.

Use. If God be pleased graciously to afford us his sight, Use.
and remembrance in exterior temples, For reproof.
where godly men are often assembled, then this may show us plainly the
graceless courses of ungodly sinners, that live as men without house,
harbourlesse, the blustering world is their lodging room, unclean birds their
fellows; and the houses of strangers their dwellings. Not to speak of
Separatists, who (as if our Church had utterly loft her face, because perhaps
she wants some beauty) do fly from our Congregations, as if they were cages
of uncleanness: Nor of Popish Recusants, who (because they see not their
Images, their breaden and wooden Gods in our Temples) refuse to come near the
portalls of our Church, Luke 11.42. Act. 20.27.
when the Key of knowledge (by which might be opened unto them the whole
counsel of God) is offered.

First, many others there be, who, that they may not be thought plain
Atheists, do after a sort join with the Assemblies, not for love to Gods
house, nor for duties therein exercised (for so they cast themselves from the
presence of God in carnal laziness, and profane contempts,) but to show
their service of the time, and the saving of their purses. The Proverb is, As
good never a whit as never the better: It is as good to be absent as to be
dull, heavy, lumpish, and without spirit in seeking for God, whom they care
not whether they find or no.

Secondly, Others in stead of going up to the house of the Lord, seek the
utter desolation of it, (so ill affected are they with Gods presence) they raze
the Sanctuary to the ground, Psalm. 74.7.
defile the dwelling places of Gods name, burn up the Synagogues of God, Lam.
1.4.
that no man may come to the solemn feasts of Sion, and all her gates they
delight to see desolate.

Thirdly, Many delight to pass over Sabboths in the Alehouse and Tauernes,
being gathered to heathenish consorts: Their usual speech is this; the Church
has enough in it that may go to God, and pray for us, we may stay here well
enough. These pass upon themselves sentence of excommunication, and like
outlawed persons, are deprived of the benefit that belongs to the subjects of
heaven (namely, Gods protection, and enioyment of his Realm) and thus they are
given up to Satan. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20.


Fourthly, Others take their horse, and travel uell about worldly business
upon the Lords day, pretending that they can pray and serve God on Horseback
in their journey as well as the best: But all these are deluded by the Devil,
whom they serve; they are cut off from the privileges of Gods house, 2 Cor.
5.18. Ephesians. 4.12. Romans 4.11. Act. 14.27.
The ministry of reconciliation, the body of Christ edified, the seals of
Righteousness, which are by faith: And the preaching of the word, which is
called, The door of faith, is shut against them.

And is it not a strange thing, that whilst they run from God, from his
presence, his protection, his Church, and Congregations, they should think to
meet with God, and find him where he is never had? I may say assuredly they
shall find him in his just Judgment, and he will meet with them in their
hypocrisy to give them a full reward: they may go on a while, but in the
mean time, God is fetching a stroke against them, which like a flaile, the
higher it is lifted, when it falls will give the greater blow, and make the
deeper wound.

Use 2. The Assemblies of the Saints is Gods first house where he will be
found, For instruction.
then should we with gladness go into Bethel, for Gods name is there heard,
Psalm. 122.1.
Christ is there present, Mat. 18.20.
and the presence chamber is filled with the glory of the Lord. 1 Reg. 8.12.
The Prophet David saw and conceived such special and extraordinary benefits
coming to his soul by seeking the face of the Lord in his house, that he
always wished himself there: Psalm. 27.4.
One thing I have desired of the Lord, that I will require, that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord. This was a matter which he desired above all things, and for the
obtaining whereof he was very importunate with God. My soul longs, Psalm.
84.1.2.4.10.
and faints for the Courts of the Lord, blessed are they which dwell in thine
house, etc. Oh that the same mind were in us to come before the Lord in
public meetings, and in them to be partakers of the exercises of piety, then
we would say with Jacob, surely, this place is reverent, whatsoever we have
thought of it, Genesis 28.16.17. etc.
It is no other but the house of God, even the gate of heaven. This is the
first house where God must be sought.

Secondly, A Christian man's family.
The second house, where God must be sought is the private family of every
Christian. It suffices not to be diligent in the Church, unless a man be the
same at home: this was holy Jobs care, that his family might be Gods house, Job
1.5.
as appears by his daily sanctification of his children: And of Ioshuah, Josh.
24.15.
the Scripture truly relates, That he and his house feared God; Intimating
that while their houses were receptacles of Gods worship, they themselves (as
they were Gods dutiful servants, so they) were serious seekers of the Lords
eternal love and mercy. Our Savior says, that wheresoever two or three are
gathered together, or consent in any thing in his name, he will be there
present, though it be in a man's secret family. Adams house where God was
worshipped, and sacrifices offered, Genesis 4.
was Gods house, whence Cain complains he was cast out, for every denomination
is from the worthier part: therefore make thy house Gods house, and so thou
shall have God near thee, with his sweet fellowship, and fullness of
blessedness.

Quest. But what might I do that my house may be the Lords house, Quest.
to the end I may seek and find him there?

Answ. To this purpose are required of thee these things; Ans.


1. If thou will make thy house Gods Church, and so find the Lord at home;
then see that all the members in thy family be the true members of the Church:
look to this with a diligent and heedfull eye: if there be but two righteous
persons in thy house, God will there show thee his face after a sort, but when
thy whole family may be baptized with the name of a Church, because there is
not so much as a Canaanite, or an uncircumcised person in it, then it shall be
as a sweet savor in his sight, and his glorious countenance will there be
most radiant and bright.

2. Entertain none into thy family but such as the Lord has first
entertained into his: take none into thine house which are not of the household
of Faith. This is the sweeping of the house, and making fair of the doors and
gates for Gods entrance. Psalm. 101.
The Prophets eyes were to the faithful of the Land, that he might pick out
the choicest of them for the Lords service, and his prayer was for the
Israelites, that they might be corner stones, polished, and graven to make a
Princely Palace.

3. After this groundwork is laid, then the householder must build thereon,
dealing in his family, as the Pastor in the Church; either by way of teaching
by words, and example, or by praying, or by correcting. First, teaching, and
instructing of the family is required, and that partly in reading, partly in
delivering precepts out of the Word. It is Gods Commandment, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
To whet the Law continually on our children, and to train them up, even from
their childhood in the Scriptures. Secondly, Calling them to account for things
delivered by Catechizing is needful. This is the driving of the nail to the
head: this hinders vain thoughts, words, and exercises: this banisheth much
folly, and ignorance that is bound up in the hearts of children and servants.
Thirdly, Application of Gods works past or present, on our selves, or others,
to move unto confidence in God, by the works of his mercy, and to fear to
offend by the works of his justice, is also requisite: this was holy Abraham's
practice, Genesis 18.19.
for which God would not hide his secret works from him. Fourthly, Edification
of the family with Psalms, and melody to the Lord is fit and convenient, Col.
3.16.
as the Apostle teaches us. Again, as the Master of the house must teach by
words, so by example, like David walking in the vprightnes of his heart in the
midst of his house: for the eye of the family is upon the governors thereof,
as the eye of the Church upon her Pastor.

Secondly, there must be daily praying in the family, at least every morning
and evening solemnly on our knees, making confessions of sins, and requests
unto God, together with thanksgiving: Evening and morning, Psalm. 55.17.
and at noone will I pray, and make a noise, says David. And Daniel three
times a day prayed and praised God in his house. Dan. 6.10.


Lastly, there ought to be in the family Christian Discipline, that if any
member thereof should happen to be out of order, by correction, admonition,
reprehension, or at worst excommunication, it may be brought to reformation. By
these means, the private house shall be made Gods house, wherein he may be
soon sought, and our selves sweetly solaced.

But alas, Use.
how careless are the most in this case? Men's Cottages are Satan's Courts, and
great men's places his Palaces: How is God sought at home, when (almost) every
member in the house is a rough, and vnhewed stone, not graven after the
similitude of a Princely building? Is not sin so rife, that it runs through
the silent, and secret Chambers, and like leprosy defiles the foundation, yea,
the whole building? How is thy house Gods temple, when the Idol of
profaneness, disorder, ungodliness, etc. worse then Aarons molten Calfe, is
erected? How do thou flatter thy self with a conceit of Gods presence in
thy whole family, when thou mockest him? Thou seem humble at the Church,
but art disdainful, scornful, hateful, arrogant, and proud at home: thou
seem to be loving, kind, and friendly at the Church, but art full of malice,
bitter words, frowning looks, and unkind carriages at home. Thou seem in
the public house of God to yield obedience to wholesome Doctrine, Heb. 10.
but at home (as the Jews did deal with the blood of Christ) thou tramplest
it under thy feet. How do thou enquire for God in thy family, when thou
give a welcome entertainment to Atheist, Papist, Jew, Pagan, miser, swearer,
oppressor, and others of the same rank and station alike? How can thou
expect Gods presence on thy right hand any where, if thou suffer thy house
to be as a cage of unclean birds, and neither pullest their feathers, nor
sweepst out their filth? Oh, I beseech you mark my words: The outward
magnificence and sumptuousness of building, the pleasantness of situation,
the costly hangings on the walls, the rich furniture of household stuff, the
goodly show of tall, and proper personable men are nothing nay, outward civil
order is nothing, unless all godly means with a godly mind be practiced as
well in the private family, as in Gods public house. Labor therefore to
make your house (by the industrious and honest exercises of reading, praying,
catechizing, examining, singing of Psalms, of entertaining, maintaining,
retaining godly servants: of punishing, admonishing, reproving, or
excommunicating ungodly and sinful people) like Gods house, then shall you
have cause of joy, and matter offered sufficient of Gods presence.

Thirdly, A sanctified soul.
The third house where God is to be sought, is the soul of a man. That is the
temple of the living God, 2 Cor. 6.16.
and he has said, that he will dwell there, and walk there. And often have
his sons and faithful servants rejoiced, that they might be in the least
sort found worthy, that God would come thither. They sought him in their
hearts, and found him no where else, or sooner then there.

But how shall I make my heart Gods Temple? Quest.


First, Ans.
As in the Temple God was daily worshipped; there were daily sacrifices
offered, the Scriptures read and expounded, and prayers preferred unto God from
his people: So must thou get a proportion in all these, if thy heart be Gods
temple. First, thou must privately, yea, secretly apart daily worship and adore
him in thy soul with personal worship, concerning such thoughts and
impressions of his unutterable Deity, as the tongue in no wise can express.
Secondly, Thou must offer the sacrifices of praise and thanks, for his
personal blessings, and benefits, call to mind how rich in his bounty he has
been to thy soul, and so express thy humble thankfulness unto him.
Thirdly, daily supplicate unto him, and power out thy soul in prayer unto his
majesty, desiring the remission of sins past, prevention of sins to come,
sorrow and humiliation for sins present, beg graces fit for thy salvation,
and such strength therein as may uphold thee etc. Fourthly, Solely and apart
every day read the Scriptures, and other godly Treatises, as occasion may give
leave from honest labors, and being read wisely, discreetly, understandingly,
apply to thy use and benefit.

Secondly, thy Heart must be as the Arc within the Sanctuary, wherein were
kept the Tables of the Law, written with Gods own finger: thou must endeavor
in obedience to all Gods Commandments: entreat God to write his law in thy
heart, that thou may never depart from it. Ier. 31.33.


Thirdly, thy heart as the Arc must keep the Pot of Manna, a type of Christ
the food of life: close Christ within thy heart, and hold him as thy life,
never to part with him; for that Pot figured the Sacraments, in which Christ is
propounded the food of the soul.

Fourthly, thy heart as the Arc must contain Aarons rod that had budded,
signifying the discipline and government of Christ, unto which thou must
subject thy self: let this rod flourish in thee, and stoop with reverence and
fear to this scepter. By this means thy soul is Gods Temple, where he will
be found as a man in his house.

But alas, Use.
though this be so necessary a duty to seek the purity of heart, wherein is
Gods delight, yet who is it that addresseth himself to it? Every one is
deficient in this point, the cleansing of the soul is least thought of for
Gods habitation: And yet who is it, that boastes not of such a good and honest
heart, that makes not his brags of such inward goodness, as if God had dwelt
there long? Who is he that complains of his want of spiritual furniture for
his soul? But look to thy self narrowly, peep in through the windows, and
thou shall easily find such inward crazinesse, and lamenesse by corruption:
such halting between God and man, such deadness in sin and wickedness,
such rouing thoughts, fleshly desires, carnal and worldly purposes, naughty
intentions, and such defects of graces, as if thy heart had sworn against Gods
presence, and made an utter denial of his entrance. Let these things be well
examined, and tell me if it be not more then needful to call for help, the
spirit of sanctification, to cleanse and wash all white within, to purge the
soul from dead works, and to make it a clean house for God to abide in. The
way to find the lost groat is to sweep the house, and to sift the dust: and
so labor for inward holiness and sanctity, get thy heart ridd of
deceitfulness and hypocrisy, of sin and iniquity, sift the corners, set up
a light in it, the Candle of Faith, and use a prospectiue continually into
every far nooke of it, and then get a weeding hook to pull out Darnell and
Cockle, so shall thou not be long absent from the Lord, at length to thy
consolation thou shall find him. Thus we must seek the Lord in his house, the
public assemblies, our own Families, and Souls.

The second Sermon.
Secondly, seek with the eye of faith and obedience.
SEcondly, as we must seek GOD in his own house, so with a spiritual eye, as
he himself is a spiritual substance; flesh and blood cannot see him, though
they seek him: we can never find him by the eyes of natural senses, but of
faith and obedience: Gods spirituality cannot be pierced with the eye of flesh,
which sees nothing but that which is finite, material, visible, and
circumscriptible, as God is not; nay, if the soul of a man, a finite spirit,
cannot be seen with the bodily eye, much less the God of spirits, who is
infinite, and of such purity as the Angels are not able to behold. S. John
says, No man has seen God at any time; and S. Paul says, God dwells in
light not to be attained to, whom no man has seen, neither can see: and
therefore concerning the outward sight (whereby curious and ignorant men would
be glad to see God, hardly thinking there is any God, when none in this sort
can be seen) the truth is, God cannot be seen. Neither are we able to see and
find God by the eye of our mind, (whilst we are here) as it is corrupted; the
reason is this, because all our knowledge is by forms and fashions conceived
in our mind, and for the most part flows from the outward senses, but God
(as has been said) cannot be perceived by our senses. No man ever saw the
glory of the Lord, viz. his Essence and divine Majesty, no, not Moses
himself, neither could he see him expressly with the eye of his mind. But
thus far we see the Lord, after an obscure fashion we see his love and mercy,
and kindness to us in the revelation of his son Christ, in his beneuolent
gifts of grace, in the remission of sins, justification, sanctification, etc.
But at the last day we shall see him fully in his brightness and beauty, even
as he is: 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we know him in part, says Paul, but then we shall know as we are known.

Gross are those old Heretics, Use.
the Anthropemorphites, that gave to God an humane form, etc. The Scriptures
(speaking after our capacity) give unto him the parts of man, as feet, hands,
face, etc. And whereas they allege some apparitions, and visions which the
Fathers had; as Abraham of three going to destroy Sodom, as Lot of two, etc. I
answer, that God appeared unto them not in his nature, but in such a form as
pleased him. Many saw, Sed quod voluntas elegit, non quod natura formauit, What
his will chose, not what his nature formed. Men saw him when he would, in such
forms as he would, not in his divine nature, wherein he lay hid even then when
he was seen.

Gross likewise and ridiculous are our common conceits of God; Ignorant people
suppose him to be a man in shape and passion like themselves: The Epicure, who
thought there was no happiness under the Sun, but in carnal pleasure,
imagined God to be of the same sensual humor, and deemed that freedom from
business was his chiefest felicity. And David says in the Psalm, that the
ungodly person, who runs to all manner of excess, joining with the thief,
and partaking with the adulterer, Psalm. 50.18.21
and opening his mouth with the slanderer, thinks God like himself: and
generally, our private thoughts touching God are not so holy, so reverent, so
divine, so full of respect as they ought to be.

Therefore if we would see the back parts of the Lord, then we must pray to
him to open the eyes of our mides, to clear them with the grace of
understanding, that we may see him now, not as he is in his eternal being, for
that cannot be, but as he has revealed himself mercifully and graciously unto
us in all his spiritual endowments of grace. This is the second thing required
in our seeking the Lord, namely, to seek him not with the eye of sense or
nature, but with the eye of grace, enlightened and cleared.

Thirdly, seek God by his means.
Thirdly, we must seek God by his own light and means: first, by the word in
Precepts and Promises. This is a Lantern to our feet, and a light to our
paths, by which God may be discerned, whom the darkness of the world cannot
comprehend. We read, that when God appeared to Eliah, before him went a
mighty strong wind, 1 King. 19.11 etc.
which rent the mountains, but the Lord was not in the wind. After the wind
came, came an earthquake, and after it a fire, but the Lord was in neither:
but then at last of all came a still and soft voice, and in that the Lord was.
And that was it which most affected Eliahs heart; for, as the Story says, When
Eliah heard it, he covered his face with a mantell, and went out. Whereby the
Lord would teach us, that as in the first delivery of the Law, the instrument
which God taught them by was a voice (he purposely forbearing to present
himself to their eyes in a visible shape, least they should stick too much
upon outward shows) so they likewise in following times should trust
especially to the same means, which God (as it were) by his own mouth has
sanctified unto them at the beginning, namely, a voice. The nature of man
rather affects that which offers it self to the eye, then the naked and bare
instruction of the ear: and therefore all counterfeit Religions are full of
beauty, Images, signs, and bodily representations, wherewith the world is
bewitched. But the instrument that brings us to the Lord is his own word: the
Lord thought it fitter to inform Moses by the care, then to give him his
desire in presenting himself to his eye: so he does still hold the same
course, and has ordained the sense of hearing, to be (as it were) the pipe, by
which the saving knowledge of his will may be conveyed down into the heart.

And as for those who will not be instructed by hearing, Use.
they are sons of wrath, past all hope of] Gods loving presence; there is no
course, though in man's reason never so little; that is able to recover them.
Let it admonish us, if we desire to know God, to prepare our ears to the
means of knowledge. Remember what Solomon has said, that it is but the
sacrifice of fools, Eccl. 4.17.
which all those perform, who come into the house of God, and are not near,
and ready to hear. thus much of the word, teaching us, that a man desirous to
know in some sort; or to conceive the majesty of God, is instructed more
largely by the ear, then by outward and visible representments.

A second means to seek God are such signs of his presence as he has made
choice of to reveal his grace in. In the old testament believers must seek
him in sacrifices and ceremonies, and therein he gave them gracious answers.
The Arc of the Covenant was called the face of God, and the seeking of
special testimony of his presence there, is called the seeking of his face.
And because he was so specially present there, the Jews in their Prayers must
turn their faces toward the Arc, and toward Jerusalem. And that the Jews
might know where to find God at all times, Exodus 25.8.
he told them that he would dwell in the Sanctuary, and sit between the
Cherubins: So in the new Testament, God has appointed certain signs, as so
many way-markes to find him out; as the public serving of him in spirit and
truth; resorting of Gods Temple, and there joining in holy worship with the
rest of his people, is the way to seek him. The offering up of the sacrifices
of prayer and praise, Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50.15.
and I will hear thee, and thou shall praise me. The frequenting of the
Sacraments, which represent that to the eye, which the word does to the ear:
In all which he will be sought, and out of these will not be found. God cannot
be seen, or found, but by his own light, and therefore he that must seek
him, must have the light of understanding. Psalm. 14.2.
The Lord looked down to see if any would understand, and seek after God.

Fourthly, seek God in the right way. Ier. 6.16.
Fourthly, as we must seek God by his own means; so, in the right way, which
is called, the old way, and therefore the good way: We must not seek God that
way we lost him, for so it is likely we shall never hear of him: but there is
another way, though a strait and back way, which soon brings us to him. The
family of Jacob (those seventy souls) came down to Egypt through the land
of the Philistims, but after forty years circled about to Canaan, through the
Arabian Desert. The three Wisemen that worshipped Christ were warned by the
Oracle, to go into their Country another way. Imitate these Sages, thou lost
God by transgression, seek him not in that common beaten way, but by
obedience, and humiliation: thou lost God by adultery, seek him by chastity:
thou lost him by the way of pride; hatred, wantonness, wrath, riot, seek him
by the way of humility, love, temperance, patience, sobriety: thou lost God
by the way of covetousness, contention, swearing, profaneness, seek him by
the way of contentation, peace, honoring his name, holiness of life: thou
lost him by the way of vain superstition, seek him by the way of Christian
Religion: to conclude, as thou lost him by the way of sin, so now set on to
seek him by the way of repentance, and reformation: A reformed life is the new
way, and best way; till thou set foot in it, thou art out of the right way,
and soon shall loose thy way to God: enter into it, and bid farewell to thy
sins, that thou may with a quick dispatch, wheel about into thy own
Country.

Fifthly, as we must seek God in the right way, Fifthly, seek God in his own
manner. 1. Early. Psalm. 63.2.
so in Gods manner, and that is diverse sorts of ways. First, Early: This was
the Prophets practice; Early in the morning will I seek thee. That is, every
morning, the beginning of my work shall be to look toward thee; I will
begin my duties in faithful inuocating thy help, and aid: And as in the
morning of the day, so also in the morning of thy life, forget not to seek God
by Repentance, faith, obedience, etc. This is the chief season: Eccl. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. A wound looked to at first when
its freshest is soonest healed; A groat newly dropped down through the fingers,
if it be presently sought after will soon be found: So will God in youth, from
whence (as a friend) he has lately departed, by reason of sin. Behold then,
as every day of thy life, so principally thou owe the prime part of thy life
to this duty, when thou art strongest and aptest.

But many defer to seek the Lord, until the last week of their life, the
last day of the week, the last hour of the day, the last minute of the hour.
It is an exorbitant course, while the ship is sound, the tackling sure, the
Pilot well, the sails strong, the gale favorable, the Sea calm, to lie idle
at Rode, carding, dicing, drinking, burning the seasonable weather, and when
the ship leakes, the Pilot sick, the Mariners faint, the storms boisterous,
and the Sea a turmoile of outrageous surges, to launch forth, and hoyse up
sail for a voyage into far Countries: and yet such is the skill of evening
seekers, who in the morning of youth, and soundnes of health, and perfect use of
reason, though they cannot resolve to weigh the Auchor, and cut the Cable that
withholds them from seeking of Christ, nevertheless, they feed themselves with
a strong persuasion, that when their wits are distracted, their senses
astonished, all the powers of the mind, and parts of the body distempered; then
forsooth, they think suddenly to become Saints at their death, howsoever they
demeaned themselves as Devils all their life.

Let us awake from sin with David early, Psalm. 57.9. 1 Samuel 15.12. Genesis
21.14. Ioh. 8.2. Ioh. 20.1.
rise with Samuel early, with Abraham send away Hagar early, with Christ and
his Audience come to the Church early, seeking the Lord with Mary Magdalen
early: Of this point more largly touching the opportunity of seeking, hereafter
following. Secondly, 2. Earnestly.
Earnestly; As the husbandman for gold, silver, and his earthly Commodities, so
we must seek for this spiritual and eternal treasure: the former seeks
eagarly, and instantly, and so must we. Our desire as it is to enjoy, so it
must be earnest and fervent in the pursuit; we ought to neglect no time, nor
pretermit any the least occasion of finding. A loitering man that cares not
whether he work or no, Prou.
may get for his idleness a suit of rags: and he that thinks to gain Gods
graces with nothing ado, may well go without them. There goes the striving
for masteries before the Crown; a painful sweating race before the getting of
the goal, and an industrious diligence (notwithstanding all serious thoughts
to this purpose) before the obtaining of the Lords grace and favor.

Seek painefully, not carelessly, not ouerly, Luke 15. Pro. 2.4.
as the woman for her groat; seek as for silver, search as forgold. The mint of
gold lies not in the first spade it lies deeper: search with a desire of
finding; for its well if after all pains, we find at the last.

Thirdly, Sincerely, Thirdly, Sincerely.
with a good and honest heart. Quod cor non facit, non sit; What the heart does
not is not done at all. Adams body being newly framed of the slime of the
earth, lay liueles and breathless, until the breath of life was breathed into
it; So the action of seeking God, with all the circumstances and terms
thereof, is nothing worth in the sight of God, until from the Altar of the
heart, the fire of zeal, sincerity, and integrity incense them. 1 Pet. 3.10.
Romans 6.17. Romans 10. etc. Deuteronomy. 10.16.
S. Peter's hidden man of the heart, S. Paul's obedience from the heart,
Circumcision of the heart, etc. are acceptable to GOD. Therefore in our seeking
the Lord, let our heart march along, that so we may serve him with the best
member we have. As Joseph charged the Patriarchs, not to see his face, unless
their brother Benjamin came with them: so stands the Lord affected to the
heart: if thou will go to the Lord go with thy heart. Ier. 29.13.
Ye shall seek and find me, says God, because ye shall seek me with all
your hearts. Thus did the Prophet David secke the Lord, as he testifies in his
own words, Psalm. 119.10.
with my whole heart do I seek thee.

This condemns hypocritical seeking, which is deceitful; It shall never
find acceptance with God, nor see his lovely countenance. It draws near to
God with the lips, and touches the creft of heaven (as it were) with the
mouth, but the heart is far from God. If thy heart be not single, then Peter in
the person of Simon Magus has read thy doom. Act. 8.
Thou have no part in true Repentance, because thy heart is not right in the
sight of God. If the old Pagan soothsayers at any time missed the heart in the
entrails of the Sacrifice, or if they found it without panting and moving,
they were wonderfully appauled, and strongly feared that some danger would
ensue. For they observed, that in the sacrifice of Julius, the heart was
wanting: and immediately after, his most familiar friends conspired against
him, and stabbed him in the Capitol. They likewise observed in the sacrifice
of Pertinax, how the heart lay still without motion, whose death presently
following, the people lamented with this wailing acclamation, While Pertinax
reigned we lived securely, and feared none. In our Christian sacrifice of
prayers and repentance, alas, the heart is wanting, or at least not stirring,
there is so little faith, fear, obedience, zeal, sincerity among us. What
this heartlesse serving, seeking of God means, I cannot in particular divine.
I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet; yet sure I am, it portends no
good. For prevention therefore of imminent Judgments, let us seek the Lord
heartily, Heb. 10.22.
giving him the whole and entire possession thereof, as himself justly calls
for it saying, Deuteronomy. 16.16.
Turn ye unto me with all your heart.

Fourthly, in his Son Christ.
Fourthly, seek God in his son Christ, He is the only Mediator that passes
betwixt God and us, without whom none can come unto, and find his Father. He is
our Jacobs ladder, whose humanity touches the earth, and his divinity
reached to heaven. He is that new and living way, Heb. 10.20.
through whom we have access to the Father. He is the way, Ioh 14.6.
the truth, and the life.

Oh: The way to him is faith; for, 2 Cor. 5.7.
We walk by faith, not by sight. Heb. 11.6.
He that seeks God to find him must believe in him. We are a generation of
seekers, Psalm. 24.
of them that seek the face of the God of Jacob. If we follow faith as our
guide we shall never err: yet mistake me not, I mean not a naked, solitary,
imaginary fancy of faith; this is presumption, not persuasion, but a saving, a
sanctifying, a justifying faith: a faith working by love. This way to Christ
has the approbation of the Spirit, rounding the faithful in the ear, Isa.
30.21.
This is the way, walk in it, and long ago prophesying of it: Isa. 35.8.
there shall be a way, and the way shall be called holy, the polluted shall not
pass by it; Neither Lion, nor Bear, nor any hurtful creature shall walk in
it. Therefore whosoever walk according to this rule, Gal. 6.16.
peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

This condemns the Papists that seek Gods favor by other ways then the true
statue Christ, the Virgin Mary, and a number of their own Canonized Saints
make a way for them, thus say they; but Gods precious Oracle finds no tongue
speaking to this purpose: It only shows us guidance to God, in, and through
Christ.

This also condemns the Solifidians (yea Nullifidians) that run well but
quite beside the mark. 2 Samuel 18.23.
Ahimaas by running the nearest way outstripped the Egyptian; and many make a
short but the way to him (leading through the intricate Mazes of this our
Pilgrimage) is a sound guiding faith: Make this thy rode, and then (though not
so soon as thou would) thou shall see God in his brightness of love and
mercy.

Fifthly, Resolutely.
Fifthly, Resolutely; Resolution is necessary to this point. The Soldiers
resolution is the battle: the Sowers resolution is his plowing, and sowing:
the Scholars resolution is his studies: And all our resolution ought to be
this godly resolution to seek the Lord. Let the dead bury the dead, Phil
3.11.12.
I will follow hard toward the mark of the high calling. I will seek God.
Agrippa almost persuaded to be a Christian, was altogether no Christian:
unsettledness is the breake-necke of many Christian courses, when there is a
purpose, and then no purpose, a will and no will to seek God. It is not leaden
heels, but faint and dead hearts that makes us stagger, and until the fire of
determination, together with the hot coals of steadfast resolution inflame us
onwards in our Inquisition, we shall not enjoy the promised Canaan, that land
of fruitfulnes, where God is perpetually resident. Therefore as David swore and
steadfastly purposed to keep Gods righteous judgments; Psalm. 119.
so let his case be ours, that we may with full purpose bend our selves in
Repentance to seek the Lord, whatsoever other occasions and matters may
casually fall in our way.

Sixthly, Directly; Beware of blind lanes, Sixthly, Directly.
and circuiting perambulations: crooked ways and crooked feet will cast
backward. Gal. 2.
Peter was shent for walking with a wry foot to the Gospel. Therefore take
heed to thy feet, Eccl. 5.1. Heb. 12.13.
and make straight paths unto them. The way to heaven is both strait and
straight, like the street in Damascus, Act. 9.11.
which was called the straight street. He that goes about to seek God, must
go as Paul to Coos, Act. 21.1.
with a straight course, therefore as thou art careful to set on, so be as
diligent to set out in the right and direct passages; leave by-ways and
wrie-wayes to nocturnall walkers, perambulations and circuitions to Satan,
that infernal Peripatetike. Such as will obtain Gods mercy, and find his
tokens of grace, must neither turn to the right hand of selfe-pleasing
singularity, Deuteronomy. 5.32.33.
nor to the left hand of vulgar impiety: but walk in the true profession of
the Catholic faith, and in an honest vocation, warranted by Gods word.

Seventhly, Seventhly, Constantly. Math. 24 13.
Constantly; Continue seeking. He that continues to the end shall be saved.
Gods grace is worth all our seeking, though we should seek it a thousand
year, give not over till it be found. Be watchful to the end and thou shall
have the crown of life, Reu. 2.10. And 2.26.
and he that keeps my works to the end, to him will I give power over
nations. What a shame is it then to recoile and fall off from seeking, bending
back like a broken Bow; Psalm. 78.57.
to begin in the spirit and end in the flesh? What a shame is it after thou
have fed on Angels food, to lust after the Onions and Garlic of Egypt? After
thou have escaped the filthiness of the world, tasted of the good Word of God,
Heb. 6.5. 2 Pet. 2.21.22.
and of the joys to come, to turn from the holy Commandment, and with the
dog to return to his vomit? What did it profit Demas to forsake the Gospel,
which once he professed, and to turn worldling, which dearly he loved? Or the
young man to have been trained up in the keeping of the law, Mar. 10.21.
and afterward to depart from Christ for the love he had to his possessions?
and what good shall we reap in seeking, Gal. 6.9.
repenting, praying, humbling, hearing, etc. if we faint and give out before we
obtain the thing sought? Like as he that runs in a race, 1 Cor. 9.
unless he hold out to the goal, obtains not the price, and therefore says
Paul, I have finished my course, as it auailed not Lots wife to have gone out
of Sodom, 2 Timothy 4.7.
and after to look back: So they shall never come to the Lord, that lagger by
the way, that are weary of the duty undertaken, and run themselves out of
breath, before they come to the end of their race. And if such as seek, but
before the end give out, shall not find, what then shall become of our wicked
profane wretches that never seek at all? What shall become of them that seek
only vanities? Which fly not, but seek the corruption which is in the world,
that care for nothing but back and belly? If God reject the righteousness and
will of the Jews, what hope can thou have which never think of God, but
to blaspheme him? Which delightest only to wallow in abominable sins? I
must tell thee that ten thousand times thy betters are in hell, even such which
have rapt hard at heaven gates, which have bestowed many hours in prayers,
much money on the poor, etc. If such as seek, miss, for seeking amiss, much
more those that seek not at all, or the contrary.

This may advise us to renew our strength as the Eagle, to wait on the Lord,
to run and not be weary, Psalm. 112.6.
to walk and not faint. Trees of the Lords planting continue their fruits
indeficiently, neither do their leaves drop off. Let us be provoked to
constancy in searching the Lord, and hereunto let us consider motives, and
means.

1. Motives.

1. The end of Redemption is to follow the Lord, Luke 1.75.
to serve him in righteousness and holiness all our days. Ezekiel. 18.24.
2. Righteousness departed from is vain and forgotten. All labor, prayers,
repentance, obedience, yea, all sufferings are lost, as the Galathians suffered
many things in vain. Gal. 3.4.
3. Thou shall be judged as thou art found when the Lord comes. The question
shall not be, what thou wast once, but what thou art, not how thou began to
seek, but how thou continuedst in Seeking. 4. Perseverance at length brings
home the profit, it knits us indissolublie to the Lord, and puts upon our heads
the Crown of glory. Glory and immortality is the part only of such as by
continuance in well doing seek God. Romans 2.7.
And our Savior is express, Luke 22.28.
to you which have continued with me have I appointed a kingdom.

2. Means.

1. Get an infallible testimony of Gods favor, arising from the wise
application of Gods promises, Ioh. 6.40.
and the sure witness of his Spirit. 2. That thy self purified, make
conscience to repent of sin, and respect all Gods Commandments. 3. Continue
the use of the means of preservation, as hearing, reading, praying, receiving
of the Sacraments, etc. 4. Join thy self with such as daily seek the Lord.
5. Labor to know the necessary use and worth of the Lords presence, that so
thou may confess and profess his goodness amid humorous opinions and
strange oppositions. 6. Be not too hot and ouer-hastie at first, Nullum
violentum perpetuum.
but meek, tractable, sociable, for boisterous, and hot-spurred natures will
not hold long. 7. Be ever wary, and circumspect to walk on by fear, always
doubting thine own weakness, and suspecting thy strength. 1 Cor. 10.12.
Let him that stands take heed least he fall. Thus of our direction in
seeking the Lord.

While he may be found] There is a time (it seems) when God will be found of
his servants that seek him: It is his own promise, and he will not gainsay
it. The poor shall not always be forgotten, Psalm. 9.18.
the hope of the afflicted shall not perish for ever. It makes God yearne
within himself to see the godly seek him in distress, Times to find God.
and himself to withold his presence from them. Therefore the first time
wherein God will be found, is the godly man's exigents, Deuteronomy. 4.29.30
When thou art in tribulation says Moses, and all these things are come upon
thee, at the length, if thou seek the Lord, he will not forsake thee. David
called out of the deep, and God heard him. Moses cried at the red Sea, and
then God was found. Abraham three days after the Commandment, found God on
the Mount. And after three days when the case was hopeless, and the Disciples
faith a little prejudiced, Christ rose again.

Reu. 3.20.
and desires entrance; By it he so reueales himself to the congregation, that
they may spiritually by the illuminated eye of the mind, behold him present
after an admirable sort among them. The time of preaching the Gospel in
Scripture is called the Day of visitation.

in seeking: for to sit still and do nothing is to want the price. The Spouse
in the Canticles wanted her beloved, when she would not sollow after him, but
lay slugging on her bed. And when we are like standing Ponds, covered with
green and filthy stuff of idleness, we are aliens from God. But when we
fall to enquiring after him among the watchmen in the dark of the night,
through dangerous streets, with a good heart, eagarly, directly, resolutely,
continually, then he comes to us, thrusts in his hand by the hole of the door,
calls upon us, and brings with him such gracious gifts, as are worthy our
pains and industry.

Psalm. 51.17.
or months: but sure it shall come, and God will be present. 2. God loves an
humbled spirit, Esaias* 65.
yea, it is such a thing that like an Adamant it draws him thither where it
is. 3. God is the God of the afflicted, to give them ease in his good time, he
has made his promise to them to be their cover from the rain, and a wall of
defense from the storm and tempest.

Besides, consider what may befall thy self, their case may be thine, God is
able to burden thee with the like griefs, and agonies, and therefore deal
lovingly, wisely, and charitablie with them.

Why hidest thou thy self, O Lord? Psalm. 10.1.
For he is not always there at first call, neither will he grant (oftentimes)
the requests of his people upon two or three petitions, or many prayers, and it
may be for their further good and profit.

Job was tried to the uttermost, before he found God taking his part, and so
became an example of patience.







Zebedees sons, they asked they knew not what: or after such a sort, or in
such a thing as he will not be found in, as Paul sought God to remove away the
prick of the flesh, yet God would not be found in that; but in the supply of
sufficient grace was he found.

But for all this that I have said, God will be found of such as seek him in
fear and awe, and after a good and godly manner.

Ob: But I am unworthy to find God, Ob:
who have provoked his wrath like an unkind wretch, and that every day.

Ans: Esteem not less of thy self then God esteems of thee, Ans. Act. 10.
in every nation he that fears him is found of him. He keeps open house:
his heavenly Palace has three gates in the East, Reu. 21.
three in the West, three in the North, three in the South, that the glory of
Jews and Gentiles may come in: He thinks not his own presence too good for
us: Ioh. 12.26.
but where he is there shall his servants be. This was his promise, because it
was his pleasure. Therefore Christ says to his Father. Ioh. 17.24.
Father I will that those whom thou have given me be with me, that they may see
that glory which thou have given me. With this hope he comforted his Disciples;
In my Fathers house are many mansions, I go to prepare a place for you; Ioh.
14.2.3.
and if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you
unto me, that where I am there may ye also be.

Seek God while he may be found] Another thing worthy observation, is the
opportunity of seeking, so as God may be found, and that is the present time;
Hence learn again, Doct: The present time is Gods time. Eccles. 3. (...).
that the most seasonable season to seek God is the present season. There is a
time for each thing under the Sun, says Solomon, but for this duty, no time
so convenient as the very instant. In worldly business deliberation is very
necessary, and it is held a great point of policy to deliberate long before a
man determine any thing: but in this case it is dangerous to stand to
deliberate.

Delay is vain and presumptuous.
etc. It is not good to be religious too soon, for fear young Saints prove old
Devils: when I am grown old then I will bethink my self of this matter. Upon
this inbred presumption he is all for to morrow, crying out with Domitians
Crow, Cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow, when as he knows not what the morrow
may bring forth, Conversion, or Confusion. Prou. 27.1. Quamdiu cras, cras,
quare non modo, quare non hac hora finis turpitudinis meae.
Augustine in that excellent Book of his Confessions, speaks to all young men
in his own person, persuading them not to defer this good work. How long,
says he, shall I say to morrow to morrow? Why do I not now? Why do I not now
make an end of this filthiness? Yea, Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus erit.
Sera nimis vita est crastina, viue hodie, etc.
the very Heathen Poets have condemned this procrastination, and would have men
to lay hold on the present time. It was good counsel which good Eleazar gave
his Disciples; Ovid. Mar. Pers.
Be sure ye repent one day before death. When reply was made, the day of
death is uncertain, therefore he said repent this day least to morrow ye die.
Thus stands our case. D: Hulls Sermon at the Cross. October. 18. 1612.
A poor traveler by chance slips into a pit, and in his fall catches hold of
one twigge. The pit is deep, and in the bottom full of cruel Serpents. While
there he hangs by that poor twig, anon comes an hunger-bitten beast, which
biting, and browzing on other boughs, is each moment ready to crop off that
twig: Now in what a woeful plight is this distressed creature. This traveler
is man, the slender twig is frail life, this pit is hell, those Serpents,
fiends, and worms of Conscience, the hunger-bitten beast is death: Say now
were it not foolish presumption to defer Repentance upon hope of long life,
depending on so doubtful condition? Many young men are taken away on the
sudden, before ever they look, or prepare for death. Job. 21.13. And 24.24.
They spend their days in wealth and suddenly they go down to the grave, and
are cropped off as an ear of Corn. Have we not examples every day almost of
some that go well to bed at night, and are found dead in the morning? And of
others that drop down by the high way side, and die in the field? We may not
take upon us to determine peremptorily of such, Romans 11.33.
because the judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out. Therefore add not one evil day unto another. Sufficient for the day is
the evil thereof: Math. 6.
yesterday, to day, to morrow, time past, present, and to come, that is, all
the days of our life are (...) days of sorrow.

2. Delay is danderous: breeds second nature, 2. Delay is dangerous.
and custom of evil, whereon God usually lays a fearful commination; Reu.
22.11.
Let him that is filthy be filthy still. And when the soul is invred to an
evil habit, it is hardly capable of better impressions and virtuous
dispositions. Ier. 13.23.
Can the Black-moore change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? So hard it is
for them to do well who have learned to do evil. The Israelites long
acquainted with Egyptian bondage, were loath to leave it; but the hurt was
their own, and their loss had been greater if the Lord had not redeemed them
with a strong arm. When sin pleads prescription, and Satan possession, the
Soul of the Combatant shall find enough to do to be rid of it; for, his
bones were filled with the sins of his youth, Job. 20.11.
and now they will sleep with him in the dust.

Reason 3. It is disasterous.
3. Deferred seeking is dismal and disasterous. He that neglects to day shall
have no time to morrow, Ren. 10.6.
but shall for his negligence purchase an eternity of displeasure. The rich
man, Luke 12. promised himself many days of pleasure; Luke 12.19.
But thou fool (says the Text) this night shall they fetch away thy soul.
And many a man feeds his conceit with an Evening Conversion, and with the
Back, to spread his wings of Repentance in the twilight; but that is not Gods
hour, and therefore his head and heart may ache with crying, but shall not be
the better, for he shall end his days in woe: this is an approved truth, Heb.
12.17.
Esan sought the blessing in vain, though he sought it with tears, when there
was no place for Repentance. Math. 25.
The five foolish Virgins coming too late, when the Bridegroom was entered,
and the door shut, had a fearful and final repulse, I know ye not; When I
called, ye answered not; Prou. 1.28.
when I said, Return to me ye sons of Adam, ye would not return:
therefore when you shall call upon me I will not answer; when you seek me
early I will not be found, etc. Oh, therefore let us not wast away that little
light of time left us, in gaming, ryoting, reuelling, drinking, dancing,
dallying, swaggering, swearing, etc. but take present hold on it so friendly
smyling; for, as Christ said of John Baptist, This is Eliah, if ye will
receive him; So, I say, This is the time of our repentance, even this hour,
this minute, this moment.

The precepts and examples of others may move to this duty.
we neither want sufficient Precepts, nor examples of others. First, we have
many incitements and precepts. 1. Of Christ. Walk in the light while ye have
the light, Ioh. 12.35. And 9.4.
for the night comes when no man can work. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, would to
God that in this thy day, etc. 2. Of Gods Children, who all are so nearely
conjoined in urging the present opportunity, that they need not be rehearsed,
Ephesians. 5.16. Prou. 23.23. 1 Pet. 5.
counselling us in general to buy the truth, but not to sell it, to redeem
the time, to gird up our loins, etc. Secondly, we have store of examples unto
this duty, as 1. of Christ, who like a Gyantran his race, and as the Sun in
the firmament he went about preaching the word, Math. 4.23.
doing good, and healing all diseases among the people. He gave his eyes no
sleep, his eyelids no slumber, nor the temples of his head any rest, until
his Father gave him his Quietus est: Sit thou on my right hand. 2. Of the
Angels, who attend the Lord, and do his heasts and his will at the first
command with speed, they make no delays, but when the Lords pleasure is to do
his message they run. 3. Of holy and godly men, to whom as soon as the Lord
says, Seek my face, they forthwith address themselves to it, and shape this
answer, Luke 19.6.
Thy face Lord will we seek. Zacheus being bidden to come down from the tree,
came down hastily, and received Christ joyfully. Genesis 31.
When God charged Jacob to return into the land of his Fathers, and to his
kindred, he protracted no time, but informing Rahell and Lea of the necessity
of his voyage, he suddenly departed, without taking his leave of Laban; and the
prophet David says of himself, Psalm. 119.60.
I considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies, I made haste,
and delayed not the time, etc.

Again, we are taught from the unreasonable creatures, to observe our time,
Ier. 8.8.
The Storke knows her appointed time, the swallow her season. Why should we
that are endowed with reason neglect the gracious time, why stand we idle,
Math. 20.
or sit we gaping one on another? Genesis 42.1.
Let us put on the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel on our feet, and
let us take the staves of travelers in our hands, that so we may make have to
him, who will crown our righteousness imputed by Christ, with glory and
immortality.

God, through sickness, infirmities, losses, etc. One would think this time
would wholly press their Consciences with this so good a duty, and urge a
perseverance of humiliation, but yet behold, no sooner is Gods hand removed
from them, but like Horses well fatted, and pampered, they kick against their
master, and fall to tumbling in their out-casted dung. Others under the
painful Ministry, and while the zeal thereof seems to touch them, are all
on the spur, they will cry, and take on as if they were utterly destroyed,
they will seem to reform all whatsoever has been done amiss; but like
stubborn and deceitful servants, (that stand silent and mute before their
masters) they will laugh, and spend time idly, and lasciuiously, when they are
departed from it: they forget the word, yea, themselves, and so with the dog
they return to their wonted vomit. 2 Pet. 2.22.
Others are in strength of body and soundness of the members, and they need
not return to God till they wax wan, and weak, and feeble: and then (they
say) is their time. But let me frame such an opponent and times-enemie this
answer; if thou do not forsake thy sins, and turn to God till thou be
weak and feeble, then thy sins will forsake thee, and not thou them: What
thanks is it for a drunkard to give over his drunkenness, when he is not able
any longer to go to the Alehouse? Or for the Whoremaster to leave his
whoredom, when he has no strength for the performance, and execution of his
filthy desire? A man should willingly part with his sins even while he is
able to commit them, and not by constraint when there is no remedy. Secondly,
the time of weakness, dotage, etc. is not Gods appointed opportunity: If a
man would then he cannot soundly turn to God, for all the parts of body, and
powers of soul will loose their virtue, and neither part nor power can
perform their office. Eceles. 12.
The brawne of the arms they fall away; the keepers of the house, Solomon
brings in that decrepit age, deaf, blind, lame, halt, short winded, full of
aches in his bones, cramps in his joints, and sundry diseases in his body,
trembling on a staff, with shaking lips, and almost robbed of all senses; as
if he might say, Now look, and tell me whether this weak time, this feeble
age, be the acceptable time and day of conversion? When this age oppressed
Barzillai, then could he say, Can I discern between good and evil? 2 Samuel
19.35.
Have I any taste in that I eat or drink, etc. He confessed that his
weakness was so great, that both body and mind were disabled from attending
on the King, much more from attending this work of grace. Others also are
ready to plead the mercifulness of God, to give toleration to presumptuous
procrastination: Oh, God is merciful, hereupon the young man is loose, the
drunkard ryotous, the rich man cruel, the swearer blasphemous, the adulterer
vicious, and each man adulterate and beastiall in his kind; But let such bold
flinder-mice know withal, that God is as speedy in justice to punish the
evil and ungodly men, as he is full of mercy for the use and reward of his
own dearelings. The hope of the wicked is hopeless, the Lord has said it,
Psalm. 18.26. Prou. 1.28 34.
he will visit their iniquities, and laugh at their destruction; and they shall
find that true (for all their presumptions) which the Apostle relates, Heb.
10.32. And 12.29. Romans 2.4.
viz. that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God, who is a
consuming fire. The mercy of God should lead men to repentance, and make
preparation for the day of grace. Others are forward to excuse their delay. I
pray you, did not the thief on the Cross seek the Lord by Repentance at the
last hour of his life, and found him to his comfort? I grant its true, but it
follows not thereon that every one so seeking shall partake of GODS favor.
This example was extraordinary, and given of God, that sinners should not
presume, and that true paenitentiaries should not despair. It is folly and
great madness to defer until the last, in regard of this one pattern and
example, it being left without precept. Fie on this slaggering and staggering
of Christians, who gape after Meteors in the air, cast beyond the Moon, and
are doubtful, when they hazard nothing but vanity, which would hazard their
souls. They murmr at present conversion, and say with the Disciples, This is
an hard saying, who can bear it? Ioh. 6.
Or else they seek to shift it off as they did, who were called on to
re-edifie the Temple, and answered, It is not yet time to build, Hag. 1.2.
etc.

For instruction.
God bids, and it is our duty to hold opportunity by the fore-locke, by a
little staying behind, it will slip away, and we shall not be able to catch
hold of it. Now the Lord will be found, but anon he is gone, and will absent
himself, as the Prophet tells us, Hos. 5.6.7.
They shall go with their sheep and their Bullockes to seek the Lord, but
they shall not find him, for he has with-drawne himself from them. Oh,
therefore when God puts any good motion into our hearts of seeking, let us
forthwith address our selves unto it, as Abraham's servant that was sent to
provide a wife for his son Isaac, when he had had good success, and well
effected the business which he came for, hasted home to his Master: And when
Rebeccaes friends requested him to stay ten days, because they were loath to
part with her on the sudden, he would not yield at any hand: No, hinder me
not, says he, Genesis 34.54.55.56.
seeing the Lord has prospered my journey, but send me away that I may go to
my Master: So should we suffer nothing at all to hinder us, but even make have
to turn to the Lord upon the first motion. There is a good saying to this
purpose in the book of Ecclesiasticus, Chap. 5.7.
Make no tarrying to seek the Lord, and put not off from day to day, for
suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break forth, and in thy security thou
shall be destroyed.

Ob: But it will be said, Ob:
Have makes wast, fair and softly go far, soft fire makes sweet Malt, the
hasty man never wanted woe.

Ans: All these be true, Ans.
and good often in temporal affairs, yea, and sometimes also in businesses
touching the soul; Esaias. 8.
Let not him that believes make haste; be not too credulous of every thing
without trial. But in this case of seeking the Lord, these Proverbs hold not
true, we have no larger bounds then the present, the instant, the moment. If we
slack our zeal never so little, every bait of drunkenness, object of
covetousness, presented glance of wantonness, will offer it self as a
temptation, to alter, or at least, to hinder our intended Conversion. And
albeit, they say as the Devils said to Christ, Math. 8.
Why tormentest thou us before the time? Yet brethren, the time is already
come, and now is, wherein God conuerseth with us most graciously by his Spirit,
and most familiarly by his word, let us therefore gather Manna early in the
morning before the Sun melt it away, and let us walk in the light while we
have it, then shall our darkness be turned into light, our sorrow into joy,
our baldness into beauty, and for sackcloth we shall be decked with
garments of gladness; then shall heaven and earth, Angels and men, and all
creatures else clap their hands for joy of our Conversion, all meeting in this
cloze. Praised be the Lord, (who has such pleasure in his servants) that he
will be found of them to their Salvation.

Amen.
FINIS.

