A SOVLDIERS VVISH UNTO HIS SOVEREIGN LORD KING JAMES.

LONDON, Printed by John Harison, and are to be sold in Pater noster row, at
the sign of the Grewhound. 1603.

To the right honorable the Lords and others of her late Majesty's privy
Counsel: Robert Pricket wishes all increase of honor and Celestial
happiness.
RIght honorable, I humblye entreat your honors vouchsafe to patronise this
little book, for in the absence of my sovereign, I know not unto who^e better
to direct the same, (...) unto you my honored Lords whose prudent, wise, and
foreseeing consideration, has for these many years principally assisted the
protection of Englands safety; if your Lord* shall be pleased to peruse the
lines herein contained, I hope not any word in them shall prove offensive, for
my heart has desired nothing more then to manifest my loves best wishes unto
my Lord and King. I humbly refer the discourse to be censured by your
wisdoms: and yet desires (if your honors shall think it worthy) that it
might pass unto the star brighte eye of Englandes Majesty, to whom a
Soldier wishes a happy Coronation, and a long, continued, blessed,
peaceful, triumphant, and victorious Reign, to Gods glory and Englands
benifite, and that your honors may be unto his Majesty, as late you were to
Queen Elisabeth.

Your Lordships in all humbleness of duty. Robert Pricket.

A Soldiers wish unto his Sovereign Lord King James.
Thrice noble King the wonder of our days,
Give leave my Muse may speak thy virtues praise;
A Soldiers hand made rough with Iron war:
Not smoothly can with Poets lines confer.
Aonian banks he does not use to tread,
But march where Mars a warlike step does lead:
If roughly then into his verse he breaks:
A Cannons mouth, a boystrons languish speaks.
Thence does he learn: for muskets, pikes, and swords,
Do teach a Soldier: no great choice of words.
Yet in the hope of his Dread Sovereigns love:
A Poets skill he thus desires to prove.
Geeat pearlesse Prince I need not to derive,
The line all race which does our hopes revive.
Thy kingdom England: knows thy true dissent,
And yealds it self unto thy government.
And first, my wish does pearcs the Crystal sky,
And humbly prays heavens greatest Majesty;
That in our far renounde Elizaes stead,
Her Crown may stand upon thy princely head.
Fair England has this forty four years been,
The Kingdom of the worlds renowned Queen.
High Jove did by the wonder of his hand,
Raise her upon a regal throane to stand;
That by her means he might his children bring,
With peace to rest under her princely winge.
When Romes black veil of everlasting smoke,
Did strongly strive the purest light to choke.
Even when the Pope that Antichristian devil,
Had turned all good into the worst of evil.
Changing the truth of everlasting verity:
Into the dreams of faithles Friars imagery.
Leaving the Oracles of Gods eternal will,
Ruling by strength of vain traditions skill.
Seeking to race Christ Jesus kingdom down,
For to uphold an Antichristian crown.
Burning alive all those that would deny,
To yield unto their gross Idolatrye.
When England thus was massicred by Rome,
The just condemned by injustice dome.
Then God in mercy to his children sent,
A gracious Queen: to salve their woes lament.
Dread sovereign, your royal self no doubt,
Have hard how God did bring this work about.
And how he fau'd our Queen from danger great,
To set her safe upon a Princely feate.
That she thereby that Gospel might advance,
Which drowned was in darkesome ignorance.
And when he had instald her regal throane.
She peerless lived vpheld by God alone.
No forrayne foes could once her land invade,
Proud Spain to fly by Englands force was made.
No treasons plot laid by the best advice,
Of Rome and Spain could work her prejudice.
No Popish pardned perjured traitors vow,
To be of force would heavens great God allow.
But to the horror of Romes vsupped name.
His champions all were brought to public shame.
No hell borne hand distaynde with villainy,
Could get advantage against her dignity,
For all the treasons bent against her life,
Brought traitors to the slead, the rope, the knife.
In spite of devil and hell and men made devils,
God kept her safe from all sinister evils.
So that her throane was to the world a wonder;
No king nor Queen like her the heavens clouds under.
All her attempts did prosper royally,
And crowned were with glorious victory:
Her people so were hallowed for her sake.
As that in war there Pikes did passage make.
Through tropes of men the Holland states do know,
By Englands hands there honor first did grow.
And Spain has seen through clouds of smoke and fire
How Englands fame did to the heavens aspire.
More could I speak, but this I breefly tell,
Heavens maiden Queen in all things prosperd well.
And whilste she liud in peace her scepter swaide,
With such renown as mighty kings dismaide,
Did in amasement say unto there Lords,
Go see if truth with fames report accordes,
Beyond the bowndes of Europekings most great,
Did send to see the Queen of Englands seat.
And thus her state in fame all kings above,
Was safely kept by Jove's celestial love.
And all her time: the beauty of our story,
Shinde in her land with vnecclipsed glory.
The king of peace her his leiutenant made,
When as his kingdom did in her kingdom fade.
She once a Queen the kingdom of heavens King:
On earth she made to be a glorious thing.
Salvation sound by worlds redeemer sent,
Was fetch from forth a saviors testament.
Whose written word for ever firmly stands,
Caractered first by Euangelian hands
Whose goulden pens commanded were to wright,
No more but what heavens king should first indite
That king of kings that mercy most esteem d:
That Jesus Christ who us from hell redeemd,
His Gospel was the glory of our land,
Whereby we learnd the truth to understand.
And so our Queen on Christ her faith did ground
As that her fame did through earths kingdo^es found
And Christ did unto her his love reveal,
When as by him her hand had power to heal:
Her snow white palm by faith had virtue such,
As that the sick she healde with gracious touch.
Thousands diseasd that did her mercy pray,
Touched by her hand were safely sent away.
And for by faith, the sick were thus redreste:
Her sound belief, was by that truth expreste.
That faith in Christ whose written verity,
Was daily preached by Englands ministry,
Unto our Queen a croune of glory sent,
Whose precious beauty was her souls content.
For to obey that law which Christ had taught,
Our Queen her self and all her subjects brought,
Thence did proceed the glory of her state;
No strength had power her hopes to ruinate,
And therein stood a Soldiers name renound,
When he should fight for her whom Christ had crowned.
And when by her that Christ our heavenly Lord,
Ruled like a King by scepter of his word;
Then God, then Christ, then Queen, then countries laws:
Held in themselves a most supreme applause.
No cause can well a soldiers name commend,
But when his sword shall all those rights defend.
And for them all a soldiers arms I bear,
My quarel's just nor men nor devils I Will fear.
But now my Queen whom I have thus commended,
Her heavenly soul is unto heaven ascended.
Her peaceful reign in peace did end her days,
Heaven has her soul, the earth retains her praise.
And now I will a soueraygne look to find,
Indu'd with all the virtues of her mind.
And thus my king my vearse shall now return,
To thee whose heart with godly zeal does burn.
God left our Queen this kingdom to maintain,
Whilste by his word he taught thee how to raygne,
For in the kingdom where thy rule was seen,
The law of Christ has in that kingdom binne.
Thy royal through ane and scepter bearing hand,
Did strive with truth in equal life to stand.
Most prudent, wise, and just in every thing,
Approved was Prince James then Scotlands king.
And for thy heart with God did stand upright,
He now has raisd thee to a greater might.
Great King how may thy heart with joy be glad,
When God to one three kingdoms more does add.
How good a thing is it that God to serve,
Who thus rewards them that well deserve?
Great king I know thy ever righteous heart,
Will dignifie the worth of thy desert.
And make us blessed by thy virtues grace,
Because thy soul the way of truth does trace.
Well may I say thy prudence thought upon,
That God has sent a second Solomon.
Whose wisdom shall adorn his kingly name,
And to all kingdoms memorise his fame.
Thy royal hand O king has wisely tried,
To prove thy heart deuinely sanctified.
Thy Angel spirit with David's pen does wright
And wisdom gives thy mind a glorious light.
Cloauen tongs of fire have made thy muse divine,
In all thy words a heavenly grace does shine.
Thy work approues thy exercise has binne,
In holy writ true judgment thence to win.
With how great joy may all good people say,
A godly king shall Englands scepter swaye.
Whose royal self with kingly domination.
Shall build his house upon a firm foundation.
For such has been his virtues preparation,
That God for him will bless his kingdoms nation.
England regard how God has thee respected,
And how thy weal is still by him protected.
And now whilst that it may be calde thy day,
Turn to thy God and all his laws obey.
Peruse thy state and then thou may behold,
The love of God with merces many fould.
Even when the time was come that wild ones wished,
Even then their hopes were presently dismiste.
And quiet peace with gracious calm content,
Proclaimed King whose princely regiment,
Shall wrap thy glory in a golden vale,
And make thy fame, the star-bright skies to scale,
Thy house of honor, shall be built a new:
And in their state, thou shall thy nobles view.
But this I charge, where justice made surprise,
Let not a thought so much as mutinise:
I speak with love unto my countries weal,
There is no salve, has power dead things to heal:
But every branch of honor that does live,
God unto them their ancient honors give:
That England may for many hundred years,
Attend her King with all her princely Peers.
And this I hope in glorious sort to see,
When great King James our crowned King shall be.
Pray England then God may thy Soueraign bless:
In whom consists all thy happiness,
Thus mighty King thy own is given to the,
Thy self alone is Englands Majesty,
Come to thy kingdoms, in peace thy Crown enjoy,
Who wish not so, Gods judgments them distroy,
Coraga then for that's a Soldiers term,
Thy God oh King shall shield thy throne from harm:
Thy heart obeyes the scepter of his word.
Strong therefore will he make thy kingdoms sword,
Come then brave prince, make Englands earth to ring:
With hundred thousands tongues, that cries God save the King
The hearts of England are in preparation,
To dignifie thy glorious Coronation.
Come with the spring, in the our sping does flourish
Thy royal hand shall Englands kingdom norish:
The heavens and earth agrees with choice of time,
To raise thy fame above the clouds to clime:
God makes a promise that thy Reign shall be,
As was our Queens in princely dignity:
For well we know the written truth shall stand,
Like gold to gild the Churches in thy land:
Imperious prince be then thy right possessed,
And make thy Queen, a glorious Emperest.
Thy Royal race incorporated right:
In blood of Kings that were of greatest might,
Tells that thy name with glorious power shall grow,
And that the world thy valiant strength shall know.
And as I think diuinest destenie,
Did promise at thy blessed nativity,
That in thy race there should be something done,
Whose glorious fame through all the world shall run.
And in this hope, thy kingdom England lives,
Thy happy issue such great comfort gives;
A King, a Queen, a Prince, a Duke, all these
Great titles, do thy Englands people please:
For they rejoice to see each princely bud,
That springs from forth King Henry's Royal blood.
And now whilst that the world, a world is called,
No doubt thy throne is in thy line instald:
This makes the land thy presents to expect,
Whose prudent wisdom must her weal protect:
Thy nobles here united all in one,
Humbly attends their King to wait upon:
Thy City London, does it self address,
The love unto her sovereign to express.
There shall the King a hundred thousand see,
Lift up their hands, and bow an humble knee:
And cry King James, God by thy power defend,
Their echoing shouts shall to the heavens ascend:
The commons all, thinks long to see that day,
God save the King, their hearts desires to say;
Thy England in all pomp of Royalty,
Prepares great King thy throne to dignifie:
The wealth of England all her gold and treasure,
Offers it self unto king James his pleasure.
A fleet of ships, inricht with wars great thunder,
Whose force has causde earthes nations all to wonder,
That Navy Royal, the terror of Spaynes fear,
The name and fame of great King James does bear:
The strength of England, and each defensive town,
Offers themselves unto king James his Crown:
For Englands Crown is made his proper own,
The great king James for Englands king is known:
Great Caesar's tower, with her unvalued store,
Does with her strength and wealth king James adore:
And Englands Court does for his presence crave,
That gallant state does wish king James to have:
The pleasure of fair Englands pleasant land,
Does give it self into king James his hand.
All those rich honors that befits a king,
They will themselves unto their Sovereign bring:
The laws of England will themselves derive,
From great king James his high prerogative.
The Church in England our sweet Saviors spouse
Next unto Christ king James her head allows.
And Ireland which did in rebellion stand,
Is conquered now, unto king James his hand.
And thus great King thy greatness does excel,
All princes that in Europes compass, dwell:
And now my wish desires that day to see,
When James the king of England crowned shall be.
That then my eyes may my dread Soueraingne view
When all his own becomes his proper due,
Then do I look that Gods Lieutenant here,
Shall like earths God most gloriously appear:
Armd in the strength of true saluations law
Thereby to keep his kingdoms land in awe,
And then oh King, heavens Lord shall be thy God,
Who in his wrath will with an Iron rod:
Bruise and break down the strength of every arm,
That but attempts to do thy highness harm,
And then thy Crown shall sure established be,
To the Oh King and thy posterity.
Because thy heart upon thy God does wait,
He will thy throne exalt to highest height:
A race of princes from thy loins shall spring,
And each of them shall be a mighty King.
Thy seed for euershall thy throane adorn,
And Kings and Queens shall to thy sons be borne:
From the and thine shall dangers force be bard,
Gods Angels shall be your celestial guard,
When foreign kings against thy state shall rise,
Thy England shall their forces soon surprise:
God shall in arms thy warlike vangard lead,
And make thy foes thy battails fight to dread:
That when their eyes upon thy glory look,
Their backs shall turn before a blow be struck:
And when they fly to escape their dangers thrall,
On their own swords themselves by heaps shall fall.
The files and ranks upon thy battles wing,
Amidst their troops shall heavenly Angels sing:
Whose music shall thy men encourage so,
As boldly they upon their foes shall go.
Thy rearward strength shall Angel hands defend,
A heavenly host shall on thy powers attend;
Thy battle shall with such great force be knit,
As all thy foes shall never enter it:
Thy troops of horse, thy picht batalia garding,
Thy proudest foes shall fear their valiant charging
Thy Royal self in kingly dignity,
With joy shall see thy glorious victory.
This to effect when wars allarams come,
Great multiudes shall wait upon thy drom:
Thy kingdom can no doubt afford the then,
A hundred hundred thousand fighting men.
But our long peace free from contentious jar,
Has made them such great strangers unto war:
That want of skill will work thy kingdoms wrong,
Unless they learn what things to war belong.
I wish that peace wars children nourish might,
So as they may defend their mothers right:
That when as danger brings it self in sight,
They well may know to order every fight.
For God commands each welcommended means
Be used to shield a kingdom from extremes:
Thus by our God thy kingdoms state erected,
Shall by his love securely be protected:
And thus King James shall to his Crown retain,
The glory of our late Elizaes Reign.
And add unto his glories now begun,
More then could by a maiden Queen be done.
In which attempt, when Justice gives the word,
I then desire to use a Soldiers sword:
And in my heart thus much I contemplate,
I shall not need the lines effeminate:
A Ladies letter shall not a Soldier shake,
Nor be of force, a Captains name to make.
But due desert, a Soldiers cause shall plead,
And tri'de experience shall the vangard lead:
Those bodies that shall for their country bleed,
No reason but their country should them feed.
And Englands law for them provides so;
But now our name unto our King shall go.
My Sovereign King, my life is only thine,
And nothing else within this world is mine:
And whilst my God shall suffer me to live,
My lives employment to my King I give.
And when you please that Soldiers used shall be,
My Sovereign Lord, even then remember me:
In dust and blood my life I Will sacrifice,
To serve my king against Englands enemies.
My little skill it were in vain to boast,
But were I tried amidst a warlike host,
I would not think but be sufficient then,
In wars array, to range ten thousand men:
Yet in my heart I Englands peace prefer,
And not desire to see a causeless war.
But for my God, my Christ, my King, my land,
I ready am to take my sword in hand.
These humble lines an infant muse has fed,
And left them rough, not wisely pollished.
Unfit to swim unto that blessed shore,
Where springs the tree of sacred wisdoms lore:
Where Majesty locked up in princely eyes,
With mercy mixed in Courts of safety lies.
Yet that word mercy, bids my muse to fly,
Unto the throane of Englands Majesty.
And having wished to him all happiest health,
At's princely foot she humbly throws her self:
I cannot smooth with flatteries filed phrase,
Wherein does stand a Poets gilded praise.
A warlike pike is made a Soldiers pen,
Where with is writ the deeds of worthy men.
And like a Soldier with a subjects zeal,
I thus my love unto my King reveal;
And wish all good, with an unfeigned heart,
That heaven and earth can to his grace impart.
Humbly my wish unto his period comes,
Praying for King, for Queen, for princely Sons,
Unto them all my God thy love express,
Protect them safely, increase their happiness.
And in thy mercy let not Englands sin,
Blast the fresh flowers of our glorious spring:
Unite two lands that but by name stands parted,
Their people bless, and make them single hearted.
England and Scotland, let all their Lords agree,
And serve their King in loves best purity:
Then Irelands rebels full soon there is no doubt,
From doing harm will all be raced out.
These Kingdoms God in peace together knit,
That on his throne King James may safely sit.
So in their hopes those minds shall quickly quail,
That thought ere this the Pope should most prevail:
The self same law which Christ himself did teach
The self same law, shall Englands pastors preach:
And all Gods children shall rejoice with joy,
To see their King, the beast of Rome destroy:
Thus England now provide thy triumphs games,
In honor of thy mighty prince King James.
Here follows an excellent Poem wherein the author has comprehended, the
principal effect of all before written, and this he desires to dedicate to the
Lord Mayor of London and his brethren, as a testimony of his love unto there
wisdoms, and well ordered Cities government, and humbly prays that the
beauty of there state may long be continued to the honor of the King of
England and his kingdom generally.
Celestial graces help my muse,
By your divine direction.
That it may well that state peruse,
Vpheld by Jove's protection.
Whose honors praise does far surmount,
All nations of the best accounte.
And tells the world that her bright glory,
For ever lives in fames true story.
England that I Will with seaes inclosde,
Whose state twyse twenty two years stood.
Ruled by a Queen by heaven composde.
To be the best of every good,
That humane race did ever yield.
Her praises heaven and earth has filde.
Her royal hand did kings controwle,
Earth has her fame, and heaven her soul*
That happy land when change had wrought,
Occasion that did menace war.
By council wise full soon was brought,
In peace to order every Jar.
The day that causd sad greefes annoy,
The self same day procurd much joy.
Farewell sweet Queen did sorrow bring,
But joy imbraste the name of king.
A true descent from race of kings,
Raysd up a king to Englands crown,
Whose virtues praise the muses singes,
He is Prince of great renown.
Englands nobles true honor gaynde,
When they king James, there king proclaimd.
His prudent, wise, and valiant spirit:
Does like a King a kingdom merit.
Wondrous, and yet a pleasant sight.
Did cross reports contention,
When Earls and Lords, and many a knight,
With wisdoms best prevention,
Did stop the mouth of private hate,
With love unto the public state.
And still I wish that things fore done,
Spoil not the glories now begun.
London I will thy fame imparte,
To stranger countries, for my eyes
Did see the worth of thy desarte,
I will thy wisdom memorise.
Thy people gouernd with like awe,
As when thy Queen ruled by her law.
The name of King no more could crave,
All tongues did cry the king God save.
Thy commons did in order stand,
With careful watch to guard thy peace.
Hearing what king should rule there land,
Then with a smile there sighs did cease.
With tears they did their Queen deplore;
With love they did there king adore.
And then the joy of there desires,
Filled London streets with triumphs fires.
Disordred minds looked for that coil,
Which there degenerate thoughts had wishte,
When they might fill their hands with spoil,
But now there hopes are all dismiste.
The sea of Rome with all her friends,
The hope of there proceedings ends.
And England does with peace embrace,
The glory of Eternal grace.
Worlds great fame and wonders mirror,
Let honor now thy hopes renew.
Thy peaceful state has binne wars terror
Great kings has sent thy court to view.
Thy sovereigns scepter bearing hand,
Upon a four fowld throane does stand.
Let constant love thy state enclose,
And fear not then a world of fooes.
England, thy God has showed his love,
Stand on thy guard, the truth defend.
And such as would contentions move,
Teach them to know how they offend.
Fetch home thy king and him annoin.
Whom God and nature does appoint.
Thy Autums paste, now comes thy spring,
Thy Queen God has, God save the king.

