The true Picture of John Preston Dr. in Divinity, and sometimes Preacher of
Lincolnes-Inn.



THE SAINTS SVBMISSION, and Satan's overthrow. Or, SERMONS ON JAMES 4. 7.
Submit your selves therefore unto God, resist the devil, and he will flee from
you.

By that faithful and reverend Divine, JOHN PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity,
Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College, sometime
Preacher of Lincolns-Inne.

LONDON, Printed by I D. and are to be sold by Peter Cole at the sign of the
Glove in Cornhill, near the Royall-Exchange. 1638.

The Contents.
SVbmission to God what Page 9 1. It must be with the whole heart. 11 Reason,
God will have the whole heart or nothing. 18 The inward man must be subject.
22 Reason. 23 Rebellions of the inward man what 27 1. Thoughts vain, 29
wicked, 30
2. Affections 1. Manifest. 43 2. Secret 44
Rebellions of the outward man what. 48 1. Speeches. 49 2. Actions 53 Why we
must be subject to God, 3. Reasons 59 1. Use to justify God 61 2. Use to
humble us 64 Signs of submission to God. 87. 108 Motives to submit to God,
109. 114 Why we must resist the devil, Satan is our adversary. 119 How Satan
tempts. 131 1. By substracting the means God uses to bring men to himself.
131 2. By laying snares and baits. 148 Satan's subtlety appears 1. in
fitting his baits according to men's callings, 153 2. Fitting them according to
occasions and opportunities offered. 154 3. In the glosses he covers sin
withal 159
How to resist Satan 166 1. We must have our hearts filled with grace 168 2. We
must remove all false friends, viz. our lusts. 186 How to root lusts out of the
heart, and how to know it, 194 3. We must seek to Christ for help. 198 Three
things hinder Christ from helping us. First, unfruitfulnesse. 206 Secondly sins
unrepented of. 209 Thirdly, thrusting our selves into temptation. 210 We must
resist the devil, 215 1. We must watch and pray 216 2. We must resist the
devil at first motion. 221 Doctrine. Whosoever does truly resist the devil,
shall get the victory of him. 234 1. Reason. 136 2. Reason. 137 3. Reason. 141
Objections answered page the 244. to 269. 1 Use. Reproof of those that do not
resist the devil. 2 Use. The fearful estate of those that have not put Satan
to flight by resisting which are of two sorts. First those that never resisted
Satan at all. 274 2. Those that after resisting a while fall back. 278 Three
causes of falling back. 280 3. Use of exhortation not to faint, be Satan's
temptations what they will. 287 Satan tempts concerning, 1. Our effectual
calling 288 2. Our Justification. 291 3. Our sanctification. 293
Signs of yielding to Satan's temptations. 206 1. When we lay aside our
weapons. 298 2. When we are less troubled at the temptation. 299 3. When sin
prevails more. 300 Helps against Satan's temptations. 1. We must use strong
means. 301 Viz* Fasting and prayer, with diligent use of the Word. 304 2. We
must get strong reasons against strong lusts 306 3. We must labor willingly to
undergo tentations and wait till God send deliverance. 310
THE SAINTS SVBMISSION and Satan's overthrow.
JAMES 4. 7. Submit your selves therefore unto God: resist the Devil and he
will flee from you.
IN this whole context from the beginning of the Chapter to the end of this
verse, the Apostle does five things, first he reproves his dispersed brethren
of the Jewish nation for diverse of their sins. Secondly, He shows the cause
of all these sins: Thirdly, The means to avoid them. Fourthly, The
hindrances and impediments hereof that it takes not effect. Lastly, The way
and course to be taken for the removal of these impediments. The sins or
vices here principally taxed are four. First, their contentions, illustrated
from the cause of them, verse, 1. viz. Their lusts which fought in their
members, from whence come wars says he, and fightings among you? come they
not hence even of your lusts that war in your members. Secondly, Their
remissenes in prayer, set forth by the effect of it, not obtaining their
desires, verse 2. ye lust and have not etc. ye fight and war yet ye have
not because ye ask not. Thirdly, their asking amiss or not praying according
to the will of God, declared by the cause of it verse 3. Ye ask amiss, that
ye may consume it upon your lusts. Fourthly, Their covevetousnesse or
immoderate affecting the things of this earth, aggravated from the nature of
the vice and Gods affection to it, its, enmity with him, verse. 4. Ye
adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God. For the second particular the the cause of all these sins
and lusts is set down verse. 5. Do ye think says he, that the Scripture
says in vain, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy. The corrupt
frame of our nature always inclines and stirs us up to that which is evil.
The third particular, the means to avoid these lusts, we have expressed in
the beginning of verse. 6. But he gives more grace. Fourthly, the hindrances
and impediments of this grace that it takes not effect are two, first, Pride of
heart, a vain conceit of a man's own sufficiency and uprightness before God.
Secondly, yielding to temptations and snares, to each of which in the last
place, the Apostle applies an exhortation, wherein he shows how these
hindrances may be removed, if the Jews of the dispersion desire to remoove
the first, they must submit themselves to God; if the latter they must resist
the Devil, submit your selves thereefore unto God, resist the Devil, and he
will flee from you. So then you see what the words of this text contain, a
double exhortation, and upon what occasion propounded.

For the better understanding of the first exhortation, we may consider these
particulars. First, what the submission here required is. Secondly, what are
the reasons to enforce it. Thirdly, the uses of the point. For the first, this
submission may be thus described, it is a gracious frame of the heart whereby
the whole man does submit it self unto the Law of God, in all things and in
all estates. For the particulars in this description, they may thus be
explained, first the heart must be brought into a right frame and order,
concerning this frame and order of the heart see, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. and Isa. 43.
21. This frame must be of the whole heart, it is called a gracious frame to
distinguish it from that evil frame of heart which is in wicked men mentioned,
Genesis 6. 5. the reason why this gracious disposition of the heart is required,
is, because God at the first did plant his Image in man, whereby he was set in
an excellent frame, and this image God requires to be repaired again in man,
even the same image for substance though not for degree: the same for all the
parts, though not for the perfections of the parts, and therefore we find that
the regenerating of a man to be the renewing of Gods image in him. This
gracious frame of heart God has promised to his people, as we may see, Ezekiel.
36. 26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and will give you an heart of
flesh: the fulfilling of this promise we may see, Romans 8. 29. This image of God
therefore must be restored in the soul as appears, 1 Cor. 15. 49. As we have
borne the image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly,
Ephesians. 4. 23, 24* it is required that Christians should be renewed in the
spirits of their mind, and that they should put on the new man which after God
is created in righteousness and true holiness. Now in Adam this image was
perfect, in us it is imperfect, in him it was as the light in the air at noone
day, when the Sun shines in his strength, in us it is as the light in the air
at the dawning of the day, then the light is in every part of the air, though
not in the same degree, but it increases more and more, until the perfect
day. Hence those words of Solomon, Prove. 4. 18. The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. This renewing
of Gods image is also called the new man, the new birth, Ephesians. 4. 24. Now we
know that a child in the womb has all the parts that a man has, but only
there wants the strength of these parts: so it is likewise in the new regenerate
man.

Here it will be objected, that no man is able to come to this perfect renewing
of Gods image.

To which I answer, that a man may, and every man must attain to it, otherwise
all his labor is in vain, the heart had as good never a whit be changed, as
not wholly; an instrument unless all the strings be in tune, will make no good
harmony, one string out of tune will mar the harmony as well as more.

The reason why there must be this whole change is, because God will either
have the whole heart or nothing. The holy Ghost will not dwel^ in the heart
unless it be a polished Temple, and the whole frame set up: No man will dwell
where there are but a few posts and studdes set up toward the rearing of the
building.

Object. If the heart must be renewed, how comes it to pass that there are
many rebellions both of heart and life in the best men?

Ans. There are so indeed, but their rebellions, differ from the rebellions of
the wicked, for first their rebellions are between the flesh and the spirit,
between their spiritual reason and their Carnal reason: between Carnal
affections and spiritual, which shall get the pre-eminence. But the rebellions
of the wicked are between one lust and another, one carnal affection and
another, their rebellion is against the providence of God and the light of
nature which is in them. Secondly, there is difference in regard of the end of
their rebellions; the Godly ^are to rebel against God least they should
displease him, and ^oose their sweet Communion with ^im: but the wicked (...)
rebelling fear on^y the punishment which will follow, ^^ey fear God as the
malefactor fears the judge.

Secondly, it follow in the description, tha^ by the gracious fram^ of the
heart, the whole man be mad^ subject etc. by the whole man, we ar^ to
understand the inward man and the outward. First, the inward man must be made
subject, that (...) the heart. For Go^ especially require^ the obedience of the
heart, see therefore the Wise-mans counsel to this purpose, Prove. 4. 23. and
the Apostles, Heb. 3. 12. The reason hereof (...), because God sees ^ot as man
sees, he ^udgeth not as man ^udgeth, according to the sight of the eyes. God
especially looks to the heart, because that is the springhead ^^om whence all
the streams of our speeches, and actions flow Now we know i^ the springhead
b^ slimie and muddie the streams flowing from it must neede^ be slimie and
muddie but if that be fair and clear the streams will be so also, thus it is
with the heart, the heart is as the chief wheel in a clock which sets all
the res^ on going, an unskilful man cannot judge of the clock but by ^he
sound; the artificer looks to the ^^ward workman^hip of it; so likewise, God
especially ^ookes to the heart. The like we see ^en in some sort use ^o do,
for when a ^an has injury offered him, he presently looks with what heart
the o^^er did it, if he did it ignorantly or against his will, he who has
received the wrong, will better bear with him (...) but if the other did it of
malice, then he takes it more heinously. We shall find therefore in Scripture,
that God less esteems fair performances with a^ corrupt and crooked heart,
then an upright heart with weak performances. The first of these was in
Amasia, 2 Chr. 25. 2. the latter in David, who though ^e had many great
^lippes, yet was a man after Gods own heart: now the rebellions of the inward
man, or of the heart, are either in thoughts or affections; rebellious thoughts
are either ^aine or such as are wicked. First vain thoughts are rebellious,
for it is rebellion as well, not to do that which is commanded, as to do that
which is forbidden. If a Prince should come to a subjectes house, and he
instead of entertaining him, should continue vainly talking and prating with
some base fellow, it would be counted wonderful neglect and contempt: the like
offense do they commit who when they should entertain God in their hearts
have them filled with vain thoughts, and so banish God from them. None indeed
are free from these rebellions, yet we must continually strive against them,
for here is the difference; the wicked have them with delight, or at least
without reluctance: the godly although they have them, yet it is with much
striving against them, and continual sorrowing for them, so that they get
daily more and more strength against them

The second sort of rebellious thoughts are such as are wicked, and that either
for substance or manner, evil thoughts for substance are all those, whose
objects are evil, as when a man thinks how he may fulfill any particular
lust. These evil imaginations are one of those seven things that are
abomination to the Lord. Pro. 6. 16. These six things does the Lord hate, yea
seven are an abomination unto him, a proud look, a lying tongue, and hands
that shed innocent blood, an heart that devises wicked imaginations etc. Such
evil thoughts have the covetous man, the malicious man, the envious man, for
the fulfilling of their particular lusts. If we would have God delight in the
beauty of our souls, we must wash our hearts from wickedness according to
Gods Counsel, Ier. 4. 14. O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness that
thou may be saved, how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? as
dirt cast upon the face takes away the beauty of it: So the beauty of our
souls is stained and defiled by wicked thoughts: that common proverb was
certainly invented by the devil, that thoughts are free for God more respects
the heart then outward performances. Rebellious evil thoughts for the manner,
are such as having a good object yet are conversant about that object after an
evil manner: and these again when a man is either conversant after an evil
manner about things that are holy, or that ^re civil. About holy things, as
first about God, either when a man thinks there is ^o God, and these are most
blasphemous thoughts, or when a man conceives not ^right of God. Thus ^oore
silly people ^hinke God to be an ^ld man sitting in ^eaven. Secondly, about the
word of God, and his attri^utes, when a man is not persuaded aright concerning
them. These evil thoughts again are twofold, either they are manifest, such
as men perceive to be in themselves: such rebellious thoughts the Pharisees had
concerning Christ, and Simon Magus, concering the buying of the holy Ghost with
money: or else they are simple and not reflexed, such as men perceive not to be
in themselves, and yet in truth are in them, as may be discovered by their
lives and courses. He that lives a presumptuous life, shows that he has a
secret rebellious opinion of the mercy of God: he that lives a desperate life,
shows that he conceives amiss, (though it may be he sees it not) of the
justice of God. Those that are of civil things are of three kinds, the first
is when a man thinking of some civil thing, thinks that he can of himself
with his own power compass the same, such the Apostle blames who say not with
their mouths but rather in their heart we will go into such a City, and there
we will buy and sell and get gain, Iam. 4. 13. After he adds verse. 16. that
they did rejoice in their boastings, that is, in that which they thought they
were able to do, but indeed were not. Now oftentimes the man that has such
rebellious thoughts, if he miss of his expectation hecomes impatient. The
second kind is when we make our selves the ends of our own actions these kind
of rebellious thoughts the Prophet Zacha^ blames, Chap. 7 ver 6 When ye did
eat and when ye did drink, did you not eat^ for your selves, and drink^ for
your selves? Thus men sin when they eat only to satisfy their hunger, and
to strengthen them for the fulfilling of some ^ust. Both these kinds of evil
thoughts are ^oyned together in that proud speech of Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4. ^0.
Is not this great Babel, which I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
^he might of my power and for the honor of my Majesty? The third kind is,
when we ^hinke of civil things with putting some ^rustin them, chearing up
our selves in regard of them, this the rich man does when he makes his wealth
his strong City, as Solomon speaks, Pro. 10. 16. that is, when he thinks
himself as safe by reason of his riches, as a man does when he is in a strong
and well fenced City. Thus the rich man in the Gospel did Luke. 12. When his
barnes were ful^ then he bids his soul take her rest, not before, although God
was as near him before as then, so then his trust was in his riches, but if we
consider his sudden destruction, we shall see the folly of that his trust. The
second kind of the rebel^ions of the heart are ^n the affections; and ^hese
are twofold, either manifest, earnest and boiling affections, such are
commonly the marks of the wicked, such a boiling lust after honor was in
Haman: the like was in Ahab after Naboths Vineyard: the like affection is
worldly grief which makes many pine away, or else they be more secret, such as
are not yet stirred up into act. This secret thirsting after riches was in
Balaam, see Numb. 22. 18 The like secret affection was in Hazael which the
Prophet told him of, though he little thought it to be so, yet it afterward
proved true, as appears 2 King. 8. 12. that these secret lustings are
rebellious and therefore odious in Gods sight, is evident, because his spirit
never dwells in any heart where they are, because they defile the heart
according to that of our Savior, out of the heart proceed evil thoughts,
murders etc. these are the things which defile a man, Math 15. 19. 20. Now the
spirit delights not to dwell in a polluted heart, and though we see not these
secret lusts in our hearts, yet Gods Spirit sees them, for he sees not as we
see. God knows the secret good motions of his spirit in our hearts Romans 8. 27.
and therefore also the secret corruptions of our hearts, although we see them
not our selves. It concerns us therefore especially to look to our hearts,
the thoughts and affections thereof. The hypocrisy of Amasia and Ioas was
manifest at last, because their hearts were not upright.

The rebellions of the outward man follow; which are either in speeches or
actions. Both these are expressed, Isa. 3. 8. Jerusalem is ruined and Judah is
fallen, because their tongue and their doings are against the Lord, to provoke
the eyes of his glory. Rebellious speeches consist either in the vanity or
rottenness of them. First, there must be no vanity in our speeches, we must
as the wise man speaks, ponder our words, not speak any thing, till having
pondered it, we find it to be of sufficient weight, worth the uttering. Did we
seriously consider, that we must give account of every idle word, that every
idle word is a rebellion, we would surely make more conscience of idle words
then we do. Secondly, rotten speeches are such wherewith there is joined some
corruption Ephesians. 4. 29. the contrary to these are called gracious speeches,
Col. 4. 6. Now there are two sorts of either kind; a speech is called gracious,
either because it proceeds from some inward grace, that is called a zealous
speech which proceeds from the affection of zeal; or else because it ministers
some grace to the hearers, or stirs up some grace in them which lay dead
before: So those are corrupt speeches, which either proceed from some
corruption in the speaker, or stir up some corruption in the hearer. Our
speeches should be poudered with Salt. Col. 4. 6. unless they be seasoned with
grace, they are like unsavory meat which for want of Salt becomes putrified
Pro. 10. 20. The tongue of the just man is as fined silver, that is, his words
are precious as silver, and like fined silver, they have no corruption joined
with them: but the heart of the wicked is little worth, and therefore his words
cannot be gracious.

Rebellions in actions are, either the omitting of some good commanded, or the
committing of some evil forbidden, the omission of some good is rebellion,
although there concur not an act of the will at the same time for the
omission, first because the will at the same time does concur with the doing
of some thing which should not then be done: that the doing of evil is
rebellion against God, as the committing of Murder or Adultery none will deny.

Next it follows in the description, that the whole man must be subject to the
law of God, viz. the Law of righteousness, not the Law of sin, which reigns
in our mortal members, and that in all things, and in all estates as well
prosperity as adversity. There are two sorts of professors, sometimes the
true professor, the upright man when he grows fat, strikes with the heel,
whereas before in adversity he subjected himself to the Lord; like an horse
which being kept low, will easily be ruled by his rider, but being pampered and
kept very lusty and fat, lifts up the heel against him, and will not suffer
the bit. Contrarily others, so long as they continue in an even and pleasant
course will subject themselves to God, and his service, but when afflictions
come, when God leads them through craggie and thornie ways, then they will
go no further, the reason is, because their feet are not shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, they have not that peace of conscience
which will make them willing to pass through all estates, which is like shoes
to the travelers feet. We know he that is well shod will easily pass through
Craggy and thorny ways, whereas he that is not so shod, dares not. Thus much
for explication of the point: in the second place follow the reasons to enforce
the exhortation, and from every word a reason may be gathered.

First, seeing every sin is a rebellion against God, let this the rather move
us to submit our selves unto him, that we may not be so great offenders as
traitors.

The Second may be taken from the person of God, to whom we are exhorted to
submit our selves, first in respect of his greatness over us, this reason the
Prophet Malachy uses Chap. 1. 6 14. Secondly, in respect of his goodness
toward us, who is so merciful a father to us, this we may see urged, Isa. 2.
2, 3. Isa. 5. 23, 4.

The third may be taken from our selves who are exhorted to this duty. First
consider that we are all his Creatures, we hold our being, and all that we have
continually from him, therefore it concerns us to yield all homage to him, the
more a man holds of his Lord, the more homage he owes him Secondly, we are
all his servants, therefore we are not to fulfill our own lusts, or to obey
Satan, but only to do our Lords work; yea we are not his servants only, but
besides bought with a dear price, even the precious blood of his only Son,
1 Cor. 6. 20. when a man has bought a servant and that at an high rate, he
expectes the more and better service to be done by him. Thirdly, we are all his
children, therefore we must yield all duty and obedience to him, this reason the
Apostle uses, 1 Pet. 1. 14, 15. As obedient children fashion not your selves
according to the former lusts in your ignorance, but as he which has called
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation. Lastly, we are all
the Temple of the holy Ghost: a Temple that is consecrated to holy uses must
not be profaned by putting it to common uses, this is sacrilege; so when we
are temples consecrated to the holy Ghost it is sacrilege to profane these
temples, to put them to base uses, this reason the Apostle uses, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
What? know ye not that your ^ody is the temple of the holy Ghost which is in
you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? etc. We now come to the
uses of that which has been delivered.

This serves to clear the justice of God who punishes sin with eternal
death both of body and soul. Use 1.


Obj. Sin being a rebellion, deserves indeed punishment, but death seems to
be too severe a punishment. Ans. When we hear that a rebellious child is put
to death, we judge him worthy of it and to have deserved it of his father,
because the child received life from the father his father is so far above
him, and deserved well at his hands. By the same reason may God in an higher
degree punish every sin with death.

Obj. But it seems much that God should punish one sin with eternal death.
Ans. The reason hereof is because the rebellions of the wicked are continual.
If they would cease to rebel and submit themselves to God, he would cease to
punish. Again it is just because God set before Adam life and death eternal,
for him and his posterity, as by justice for his obedience he should have had
eternal life, so for transgression he and all his deserved eternal death.

This may also serve to humble us for our sins, Use. 2.
seeing the least of them is a rebellion against God. The reason why many go
on quietly in their course of sinning is, because they consider not that God is
highly provoked to anger by the same. For the better working of this
humiliation in us, let us consider a few means. The first is to make
catalogues of our sins, to set them in order before the light of our
countenance, for otherwise God will surely set them in order before the light
of his countenance. By setting them in order before us is meant that we should
set the greatest in the first rank, and so accordingly in order, until we
come to the least, so that it is needful to know the greatness and
heinousness of every one of them. For the better understanding of the
greatness of every one of them, let us consider but this; a traitor, if after
his treason committed, the King sends out his Proclamation to take him, and he
after a third or fourth Proclamation, will not yet come in, it does much more
aggravate the offense, so often as we have despised the word and not hearkened
to the reprehension for our rebellions committed, so often have we refused to
be called in, when the King of Heaven has sent out his Proclamations for us;
therefore we cannot but conceive our former rebellion to be much more
aggravated thereby, therefore our souls should be humbled for it, for the
multitude of our rebellions: it will be objected that we cannot possibly number
them, yet a special means to discover them unto us will be to examine our
selves by the word. For although a man have never so many spots about him, yet
if he have not a glass to look in, how will he epsy them? If a man come into
an house in the dark, though it be all besmeared with slime and dirt he cannot
discern it without bringing a light with him; the word is this light which will
discover to us the foulenes and corruption of out souls and hearts, the reason
is, because God only is able to search the heart, and find out the corruptions
thereof, it is he that made the heart, and not man, therefore it is too deep
for him to search, the wisdom of God is contained in his word, hence the word
will help us in the searching of our hearts, here by the way we may note why
so many suddenly fall into despair. God does suddenly kindle a clear light
within them, whereby they come to see the foulness of their sins and the
multitude of them, which having never looked into before, they deeply apprehend
that it is impossible for them to obtain mercy, and so despair. The second
means, after we have set our sins before us with their aggravation, is, then
to stay long in the consideration of them, many at the ripping up of their
sins will be ready to say Lord have mercy upon me, but this is not
sufficient. Hence is that usual doctrine, that repentance is a continued act.
A spark of fire under wet wood will not at the first flame out, yet with
continual blowing at length it may burn: that spark of grace which is
smothered in a man's heart at the first sight of his sins, will not kindle his
affections, but at length with continual meditation, it will break forth, and
may work much remorse. The Prophet blames the people, that in their humiliation
they did but hang down their head like a Bulrush, Isa. 58. Is it such a fast
that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? is it to bow down
his head as a bulrush etc. they did well in humbling themselves, but their fault
was in that they did not continue the same but were like the bulrush, which
whilst the storm or blast of wind lasts, hangs down it is head, but after
lifts it up again. David in his repentance, had always his sins before him,
Psalm. 51. 3. the more he considered it the more humiliation it wrought in him.
The third means is, we must have the spirit of God to soften our hearts, or
else all our labor will do no good, an hard stone while it so continues, will
not be bruised with a blow, but being changed into flesh, a little blow will
bruise it. Our stony hearts must be turned into flesh, before they can be
broken with consideration of our sins, which is only the work of Gods
spirit, this point is gathered out of Zach. 12. 10. Those who have had the
greatest measure of sorrow for their sins it has bin wrought in them by the
spirit of God. But how shall we attain to this spirit will some say? our
Savior tells us, the way is to ask and pray for it, and confirms the same by
an argument, Luke 11. 13. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto
your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy spirit to
them that ask him? Obj. If we were children indeed as our Savior there
argues, it is likely God would hear us, but we are not For answer hereun to
mark the parable beginning at the 5. verse. and continued to the 9. verse, the
conclusion is verse 8. I say unto you though he will not rise and give him,
because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give
him as many as he needs. God is our friend, if we could so persuade our
selves; if we cannot, If we continue constant and fervent in asking, God will
at length hear us for our importunity, and give us as joyful an answer as the
woman of Canaan had after her repulse, this may the more comfort us, the longer
we expect an answer with patience, the better and more comfortable answer shall
at length be given us. Many think that they want not this humiliation for
sin, but let such examine whether they have left off their course of sinning
which they lived in before, this will be a special sign of their repentance.
If a man have done thee an injury, and pretend that he is very sorry for it,
yet if he offer thee the same wrong again and again, thou will judge that he
did but dissemble: So he does but dis- dissemble in his repentance, that does
continue in sin sorrowed for, that keeps the same course of sinning still.

Another use may be of exhortation, Use 3.
to our selves, to our whole man, inward and outward, that we rebel not any
longer, but submit our selves unto the Lord. For the farther enforcing hereof
let us consider. First, some signs of this our submission. Secondly, the
motives to it. Thirdly the means to attain it. For the first, Signs
the signs of this submission The first may be respect to Gods word, and
delight in it, if we neglect his word and are not moved with the judgments and
promises therein contained, then are we rebels. That Subject that hears the
Proclamation of his Prince read, with the punishment annexed to be inflicted
upon such as break it, neglectes the same, regards not the punishment, but
manifestes his contempt of them, shows that he will not obey that law of his
Prince, but rather rebels against it. That neglect of Gods word is a sign of
rebellion is most evident, Isa. 30. 8, 9. 10. Now (says the Lord by his
Prophet) Go, write it before them in a Table, and note it in a book, that it
may be for the time to come, for ever and ever, that this is a rebellious
people, lying children, children that will not hear the Law of the Lord, which
say to the seers see not, and to the Prophets prophecy not unto us right
things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceites. A common excuse of
simple people is, that they are not book learned, though they delude their
own consciences, yet God is not mocked, he that made the eye shall not he see?
he that made the understanding shall not he know? God knows that this is but
an excuse, and that sloth and negligence is the true cause that they have no
more knowledge in Gods word, these think they have knowledge enough, and
therefore need no more; but this will be tried, if they examine their desire to
know more, and their delight in Gods word, which always accompanies knowledge.
Thus the Apostles reason stands 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. If they had tasted how gracious
the the Lord is, then as new horn babes they would desire the sincere milk of
the word, that they might grow thereby. Act. 20. Paul tells them that he had
revealed to them the whole Counsel of God, intimating that he had bin in
fault, if he had kept the least part thereof secret: although the Pastor, if
he be not diligent to teach be in fault, yet that excuses not the people:
though God requires the blood of the people at those Pastors hands, that do
not feed them, yet the people perish notwithstanding. God oftentimes complains
that his people perish for want of knowledge: but poor silly people persuade
themselves that to have much knowledge is not required of them, but of
Scholars and Pastors; This obstacle will be taken away if we compare 1 Cor. 1.
5, 27, 28. with Heb. 6. 1. and 5. 12. We know although a man take no poison nor
lay violent hands upon himself, yet if he refrain the taking of his meat, he
will soon famish, though a man abstain from murder, adultery, and such
heinous sins as will bring destruction to his soul yet if he take not the
food of the soul, the word of God, his soul must needs famish.

Obj. But if we should spend much time in getting knowledge our estates would
decay. Ans. Christ says the contrary, Math. 6. 33. First seek the Kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be added unto
you. Surely the cause why many decay in their estates notwithstanding their
continual toil, and labor, is, because they seek not the kingdom of God
first: because Solomon asked wisdom, we see he wanted not riches and wealth,
but had them in abundance. Let us take the Prophets Counsel in this case Mal.
3. 11. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat
in my house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hoastes, if I will
not open you the windows of heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there
shall not be room enough to receive it. A special motive hereunto should be,
the consideration of their miserable condition, who wander not being guided by
the light of the word. They are like a traveller who is to take a great journey
in the night, and knows not the way, yea, that wants a lantern to give him
light. See further two fearful judgments denounced against the people which
profited not by Gods word, but were incapable of being taught the same Isa. 28.
10. 11, 12. Neglect also of the fearful judgment denounced in Gods word
without trembling at them is fearful rebellion, the punishment whereof we may
see, Ier. 5. 14. So likewise not to be moved with the promises contained in
Gods word, is an evil sign, that we have not submitted our selves, to the
Lord, it is wonderful that so few come under Christ's banner, and fight his
battles, seeing there are such excellent and incomparable privileges
promised to such as do, Heb. 12. 22, 23. Whereas King Cyrus wanted not
Soldiers, after he had Proclaimed that they who were Gentlemen should be made
Knights, they that were Knights Lords; Surely if Christ's promises had bin of
this kind, he should have had more followers then now he has. Another sign
of rebels is to obey Satan and not God, his His servants we are whom we
obey, Romans 6. 16. Here many will say, they defy Satan, but let them learn of
the Centurion, that they are surely Satan's servants, if when he bids them do
this, they do it when he bids them come they come, the godly indeed may
sometimes be violently lead captive of Satan, but they are never his subjects
for they never obey him willingly, nor Confess themselves to be his servants.
The wicked man walks with his face toward hell, his back toward heaven, yet
sometimes he may look back but not long together: whereas the righteous man
walks with his face toward heaven, and his back toward hell: and although
sometimes he fall backward, yet he recovers himself quickly and goes forward,
like a ship which sails from East to West, which though it be turned back
with some storm or tempest, yet when that is over, it sails forwards, as
before. Another sign of a rebel is to purchase goods and lands in the enemies
Country, that shows he does not purpose to return. The world may be called
the Devils Country and therefore he who sets his affections upon any thing
here, and labors to purchase the same, has this sign of a rebel: For no man
can serve two Masters, Luke 16. Some will object that they seek for wealth out
of a provident care to provide for themselves and those who belong to them, not
because they make riches their treasure or set their hearts upon them.
Therefore these must thus examine themselves, if they esteem their riches
above any thing else, care for the increasing of them more then for any thing
else, if they do, they make riches their treasure A man ascending upon an hill,
the higher he ascends, the less all things beneath seem unto him. So when a
man is ascending up to heaven in his conversation, the higher he goes, the
less esteem will he have of all earthly things here below. That which a man
makes his treasure he spends most of his time, if if not all in increasing of
it, and he who does thus with his riches, makes them his treasure. The rich man
may further know, whether he trusts in his riches by the effects of his
trusting in them, as by his fear of loosing them, by his grief for their
loss, and his joy in getting of them. He trusts in his riches when his heart
fails, if they fail, as a Cripple trusting to his Crutches, when they are
taken away, his legs fail him, he can go no further. Thus we have the
notes or signs of trial: now follow two or three motives to persuade us to
this duty of submission.

First, Consider that we shall never have success in any thing, so long as we
continue rebels against God. For the fear of the wicked shall be hrought
upon him, Prove. 10. 24. an excellent example hereof see, Ier. 42. The wicked
man always either misseth of his desire, or if it be fulfilled, it turns to
his great hurt. When God suffers the wicked worldling to grow rich according to
his desire, he either takes from him the use of his riches, or else suffers him
so wholly to set his affections upon them, that he forgets God, which is worse.
Another motive should be the fearful judgments that are every where
denounced against the wicked and rebellious, Psalm. 11. 6. Isa. 30. 13, 14. They
are very emphatically compared to a swelling wall and a broken Vessel. Thirdly,
another motive should be the mercies that God bestows upon his faithful
subjectes. He is as full of Compassion and bounty unto them, as the Sun is
full of light, or the Sea full of water. Lastly, another motive should be the
easiness of Christ's yoke, and compare herewith how base a master the Devil
is, how hard his yoke is, and withal how small his wages, a little pleasure
here and eternal pain hereafter. Now Christ's yoke becomes light and easy by
these means.

First, they that take this yoke are strengthened to bear it: if a child had
an heavy burden laid upon him, and his strength accordingly increased, he would
bear it with ease. Secondly, they who bear this yoke delight in it, it
becomes easy, what will not become easy to a man if he delight in it? The
Hunter delights in his sport, and therefore endures wind and weather to
follow it

THE SECOND SERMON.
JAMES. 4. verse. 7. Submit your selves therefore unto God: resist the Devil and
he will flee from you.
THe second exhortation follows, Resist the Devil and he will flee from you.
Which words contain two particulars. First, the exhortation it self, resist
the Devil. Secondly, the encouragement hereunto which may stir us up to the
performance of the duty, and he will flee from you. For the first exhortation,
resist the Devil; Surely beloved there is no need of motives to stir up
Christians to take up this exhortation, as a man being set upon by a Lion needs
no persuasion to flee from him, for that he will do as fast as he can, only
desires to have some way showed him whereby he may escape: so the Christian
which truly sees in what great danger he is continually, by the continual
lying in wait for him of Satan, needs no exhortation to flee from him, and
shun him, only wantes a way to be showed him, whereby he may escape this great
danger. Therefore passing by all such motives as might be here propounded, let
me set down only three particulars employed in the text. First, the Devil is
our adversary. Secondly, we must be furnished with strength and weapons, to
resist him. Thirdly, we must put in practice this strength, and use these
weapons, otherwise they will not profit us.

For the first, that Satan is our adversary and that we must resist him, and
fight with him; though wicked men that are dead in their sins take no notice of
it, yet it is evident by Scriptures Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against Principalities and powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickednesses in high places. If
the Devil were not our enemy why should the Apostle here exhort us to resist
him? so that text, 1 Pet. 5. 8. is most evident for this purpose. Be sober and
vigilant, because your adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour. Here we see what kind of adversary he is.
First, his strength appears in that he is called a Lion. Secondly, his
fierceness and cruelty, in that he is called a roaring Lion. Thirdly, his
diligence in that he is said to walk about seeking whom he may devour. That
Satan is our professed adversary, and takes all occasions he can of tempting
us, appears, partly by experience, partly by reason. By experience as Eve in
Paradise was tempted by Satan, so at this time we have many experiences of the
like kind, in Witches, to whom the Devil has appeared in sundry shapes, as
many of them have confessed and others also have seen, so that it cannot be
doubted of. And surely if Satan take upon him a voice to be heard of the
outward ear, as he did to Eve and does now to many Witches, then without
doubt he being a spirit can much more by a man's fantasy present things to the
mind, and so speak to the mind. Further also it cannot be doubted, but that
he can make and frame propositions and reasons, and present them to the mind,
and persuade by these his reasons as we see in Eve, Genesis 3. And this truth is
also evident by reason, those which are usually called Faedae tentationes
cannot but be suggested by Satan, as will appear, whether we consider the
manner of the suggestions, or the matter of them.

First for the manner by which they are cast into a man's mind, that they come
not accidentally appears, in that they come so often, and continue so long.
Many have bin troubled with them for many years together. Again, they come
not by discourse, as appears from the suddenness of them, in that they are
cast into a man's mind without any former thoughts which might bring them in.
Again, that they come not by the strength of a man's affections, appears in
that he does presently abhor them, in many there is no consent at all given to
them, it remains therefore that they must needs proceed from Satan's
suggestion.

Secondly, it appears in the matter of temptations, as to instance in that one
for a man to kill himself, seeing it is a principle deeply grafted into every
creature (as it cannot be otherwise) to preserve it self its own life, this
thought in a man to seek all means to kill himself, cannot come by any other
means then by the suggestion of Satan, for we never knew any other creature
willingly work it is own destruction, only the Swine in the Gospel into whom
the Devil had entered. Therefore surely man but by the Devils persuasion (man
being a reasonable creature may be moved with reason) would never do it.

Here it may be said that reason will move a man to under-goe a less danger to
escape a greater, Obj.
and for this cause men make away themselves.

With the heathen indeed, Ans.
who knew neither heaven nor hell this might prevail, but how can this be true
in a Christian (I mean one borne in the Church) who is persuaded there is a
Hell for the wicked? can any such man be so fearelesse and so void of reason,
as to cast himself into hell which he seeks to shun? would any man standing
by the fire, voluntarily throw himself into the fire that he might not be
burnt? or cast himself into the water, that he might not be drowned? the reason
is the same here.

There are two special ways by which Satan uses to tempt men, the first by
subtracting the means God uses to call men by to himself. The second is, by
laying snares and baits of his own. For the first, there are three means, by
which God uses to unite man unto himself. The first and principal is his
word, the second his mercies, the third is afflictions. Which two latter serve
to quicken the first and make it of- effectual. Concerning the first his word,
Satan labors to frustrate it many ways either by keeping it from men so he
kept S Paul from coming to the Thessalonians to preach the word, 1 Thessalonians. 2.
18. We would have come unto you, even I Paul once and again, but Satan
hindered us. Or else keeping men from the word as in the parable Luke 14. 17,
18. Or if men come to hear it by making it unprofitable unto them, either by
making them delight only in the pleasantness and sweetness of the style
wherein it is delivered, and so neglect the word: as if a man should only
delight to behold the curious workmanship of a piece of cloth he has, and
never use the same to cloth himself with, or by making them delight in
observing the defectes and infirmities of him which preaches, so that the
Sermon being ended their whole talk is of the slips and infirmities of the
preacher These men are like a strainer through which the pure and good milk
runs without stay, only the hairs and motes remain behind. Or else Satan does
it by making men at the hearing of the word to be senseless and stupid either
by blinding their eyes that they cannot discern the truth, thus says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The God of this world has blinded the minds of them
that believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the
image of God should shine unto them. Or by hindering their assent that they
cannot receive the word nor believe it: So that though the word be a hammer,
yet it cannot break them; though it be a sword yet it cannot enter into them.
And further if the hearer arise with some good purposes in him; to reform his
courses and lead a new life, whereas the right way is now presently to work
them on his heart; Satan labors forthwith to quench them or to steal them
away: if there be likelihood of reformation and turning, then presently he
presents to a man his beloved sins which he is loath to part with, to see if
they will stay him; and calls to mind the reproaches and ignomines which will
surely attend upon that profession: he suggestes that he will never be able to
undergo it, in regard of the strictness and rigor of it, with many other
difficulties By this means oftentimes, the good motions which were in a man's
mind become but a cloud which Satan blows over.

A second means to quicke^ the former are Gods mercies, the goodness of God
is said to lead us to repentance Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance and long suffering not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance, the word there signifies a leading proper to man.
These mercies of God often become snares to that wicked, according to the
imprecation of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. 22. Cited by the Apostle Romans 11. 9. Let
their table be made a snare, and a trap, a stumbling block and a reco^pense
unto them. Thus, riches are a great blessing of God and so Jacob accounted of
them, yet when they increase, Satan tempts men to set their hearts upon them,
and so to make an Idol of them. Thus wit and learning are gifts of God, but
when a man has them in any good measure, Satan temptes him to seek his own
praise by them, and so to neglect Gods honor. So likewise preferment which
should make a man more useful and profitable both to God and his Church to how
many is it made a snare, who make it the end of their desires? Thus when a man
is in favor with the Prince or some great man whereas he should make the use
of it which Nehemiah did, yet he uses it for his own turn, for sinister ends.

The third means follows, namely afflictions, when a man will not profit by
the bare word, these open a man's ears, and seal to him the instruction,
according to that in Job 33. 16, 17, 18, 19. Whereas before the word did fume
in his brain, afflictions make it sink down into his heart. This effect
especially appears in such a sickness, wherein a man takes deep apprehension
of death. For if any thing will change his heart, then in all likelihood is the
time; but in many although their purposes and resolutions at that time be
changed; yet afterward being restored to health, these good motions are stolen
out of their hearts by Satan, and they become the same men they were; so that
their sickness has been but like a sudden shower, which falling into a great
water makes a sound, and for the present does much trouble the same, but
presently the force of the motion being past, the water returns to his former
calmnesse. Their sorrow is but like the hanging down of the head of the
bull-rush for two or three days, in the time of a storm or tempest, which
being over, immediately it lifts up the head again. Such sorrow was that of
the hypocritical Jews, taxed, Isa. 58. 5. Is it such a fast that I have
chosen? a day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head like
a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou call this a
fast, and an acceptable day to the LORD.

Thus much concerning Satan's first way of tempting; now we come to speak of
the second, which is his great diligence, and wonderful subtlety in laying
his snares and baits. Our adversaries diligence appears in the innumerable
snares he lays for us; his snares and baits are in so many things as any
corrupt affection of man is set upon. In peace most commonly his baits are
pleasure, gain, preferment; in anger revenge; in extremity seeking to
unlawful means; so that his baits are every where. Any thing which is an
object to these filthy Iusts which are in a man's heart, he uses as gins and
traps to captivate us in; in all things he lays some bait or other to catch
us by: in our affections he strives to have us immoderate and carnal: in our
thoughts first vain, and then blasphemous: in company profane, in receiving
of benefits unthankfnll: in crosses, impatient and distrustful; as his
diligence, so likewise must we know his subtlety to be wonderful, which
appears many ways.

First, by the fitting of his baits and tentations unto a man's diverse Calling,
condition, and disposition: as the water of a fountain is conveyed thither
whither it naturally tends by the Channel, so Satan uses our seveverall
dispositions, as channels to conveigh the corruption of our heart that way it
tends. Thus he fitted the covetous disposition of Judas with a bait of
thirty pieces. He inflamed aspiring Human with the bait of preferment; so
likewise he fitted Achitophel. Thus he fits all men tempting them to such
lusts as he knows they are most addicted unto.

We must therefore Use.
consider our personal sins, wherein the devil does most usually foil us,
and take heed lest he again foil us in them. He which is subject to anger,
let him take heed of that passion especially. He which is given to
covetousness, let him especially take heed to the baits of profit. Let not
the angry man look upon the covetous to see his fault, lest he forget his
own; nor let the covetous look upon the angry man to see his fault, lest he
forget his covetousness But let every one consider his own personal faults,
and take especial heed lest he be overtaken in them.

Secondly, the Devils subtlety appears by fitting his baits, and tentations
to all occasions and opportunities offered. He did not always tempt David to
murder, but when opportunity was offered to adultery: he tempted Peter upon
an occasion to deny his Master; that this is most true, every Christians
private experience will tell him. When Herod had made the people wonder at his
eloquence, the devil tempted him to assume the glory to himself, which
brought that fearful judgment upon him Thus when they are called to any
public duty, then Satan tempts them, and tells them, this is a fit occasion to
show your selves, to win estimation among men, so the true end of that duty
is neglected. As adversity is the time of trial, so is opportunity. Upon all
opportunities the devil tempts men to some sin or other. Hence the Apostle,
2 Cor. 2. 7. exhorts the Corinthians to forgive the incestuous person amongst
them, and to comfort him, lest otherwise the devil might have more power over
him, and tempt him to despair, or some such sin; Ye ought rather to forgive
him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow, wherefore I beseech you, that you would confirm your love
toward him.

Hence it stands every man in hand, Use.
when Satan draws him into some sin by occasion, as by evil company, or the
like, then to consider and look what sin he is most exposed unto by that
occasion, and so to defend himself that Satan foil him not.

Thirdly, his subtlety appears in the convenient glosses, which he covers
sin withal, whereby he blinds a man's judgment, so that either he sees it not
to be a sin, or else he sees not the punishment of it. So that as a blind man
knows not whether he go aright or no, or when he is right: no more does he;
He uses two means to blind men's judgments in this manner, first by stirring
up in them some immoderate affection, which whiles it reigns, hinders the
judgment from discerning aright of things. As the eye of a man when it is
troubled sees all things amiss, and not as they are indeed, yet afterward the
impediment being removed, it sees things as perfectly as before: so when the
mind of a man is distempered with anger, or some immoderate affection, he
judges not aright of Kings, but being carried with violence of passion does
many things amiss, afterward when his distemper is ceased he comes to his
right judgment, and plainly sees how he was deceived before. Secondly, he
does it by hindering us from applying the rule aright to our actions. Thus in
Usury, when a man is possessed with the love of money, and takes great delight
in it, that man is not able to apply the rule in Scripture to himself, whereby
this his sin is forbidden. Satan is so crafty, that he invents sundry
distinctions, whereby he persuades him of the lawful toleration hereof. So
when the rule in Scriptures for Ministers is, that they ought to care and be
solicitous only for their flock to feed it, yet few can apply this rule to
their actions, but seek chiefly their own gain and preferment. When a man
beholds a thing through his affection, like as his affection is, so seems the
thing to be, like as a man when he sees any thing through a glass, the object
seems to be of the same color that the glass is: thus affection deceives a
man. But these things though they are hidden from men here, yet for the most
part at their death they are laid open before them, the immoderate affection
that hindered judgment is then taken away, and Satan also who blinded men
before, makes things appear unto them as they are. Who sees himself thus
beset with his adversary, and desires not to have strength and weapons whereby
he may resist him? which is the second point.

The strength and means whereby we may resist him, are especially these three;

First, to have our hearts filled with grace, that so the di^ell may find no
room to enter.

Secondly, to cast ^ut our false friends, which when our adversary assailes,
will turn from us and take his part; these are our wicked lusts.

Thirdly, to seek this help from Christ, we have no strength of our selves, it
is he only which can help and uphold us.

For the first, We must have our hearts filled with grace, which is an
especial means, the reason may be gathered out of the Parable, Luke 11. 24,
25. When he comes he finds it swept, and garnished; that is, void of
goodness, empty of grace: were it not for this he could not have entered, our
hearts therefore must be filled with grace. The Conscience of man is like a
strong fortress, out of which he casts this his enemy who had possession of
it, or like an house wherein the devil dwelt and took delight, which when he
is cast out of, he goes up and down through dry places, that is seeking to
get in, and enter into some others; seeking rest and finding none, that is not
able to enter into any others, he returns again, and as an enemy cast out of
a strong hold, if he be not withstood by a garrison, gets possession again;
So if Satan returning finds not a garrison of graces and virtues fortifying
the man, if there be but the least room void enters again into him, which if
the conscience had been full of grace he could not have done. As in nature, non
datur vacuum, there is no place empty; So in the heart of man there will be
something or other, if it be not filled with good thoughts, it will be filled
with bad: if it be not filled with the graces of Gods Spirit, it will be
filled with Satan's temptations. This may rather be called emptiness then
fullness; a thing is said to be empty, when it is void of that it should be
filled withal. A Well when there is no water in it, is said to be empty,
though it be full of air. So long as the true fullness of Gods grace tastes in
our hearts, so long the devil cannot enter, but when there is not this
fullness, then according to the measure of vacuity more or less, Satan entering
into a man does possess him. Moreover, as there is a double emptiness, so
there is a double fullness. First, there is an emptiness of knowledge, such
was in those Gentiles of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 22. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools: and verse. 21 they became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Answerable to this
there is a fullness of knowledge, and of all the graces of Gods Spirit. Such is
that which the Apostle prays for, Coloss. 1. 9. We cease not to pray for you,
and to desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, in all
wisdom, and spiritual understanding. Ephesians 3. 14. For this cause I bow my
knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye may be able to
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height, and to know the love of CHRIST which passes knowledge. Secondly, there
is an emptiness of conversation, void and empty of the duties which are
performed in a good Conversation. This is called vain Conversation, 1 Pet 1.
18. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from
your vain conversation, received by tradition from your fathers. So likewise
there is a fullness of conversation opposed to this emptiness, when a man's
whole life is filled with the fruits of Gods grace, such the Apostle prays for
Phil. 1. 10, 11. This I pray, that ye may approve things that are excellent:
that ye may be sincere, and without offense till the day of Christ, being
filled with the fruits of righteousness.

We must labor to have this fullness of grace in our hearts. Use 1.
For as ink sinkes into wet paper, and runs abroad upon it, but when the
paper is covered with oil, it slideth and sinkes not: so when the devil
offers his snares to any empty heart, they enter in and foil him, but when the
heart is fortified with the fullness of grace, Satan's baits cannot take hold,
nor enter in We may discern when this fullness is, there is no room for
vain thoughts, for unchaste desires, for any immoderate affections. One would
think an empty heart could not be discerned so well: as we know an empty
barrel by the sound, so we may discern whether there be this emptiness in
men, or no, by their speeches and actions.

We must have this fullness of Conversation, Use 2.
we must always be exercised in the fruits of godliness, never without some
good speeches, actions, thoughts, or affections. When we are not busy in Gods
service, the devil takes an occasion to tempt us to serve him when we are not
doing some good, the devil tempts us to some evil.

But whether is any Quest.
man able to have this fullness of Conversation here required?

It is sure, Ans. 1.
every Christian ought to have this fullness. Secondly, it is sure every true
Christian has the same in some measure which may thus be expressed; all the
actions of a Christian life may be reduced to these three heads. Either they
are actions of his general Calling, as he is a Christian, so they are all
good; or secondly they are actions of his particular Calling, which if not done
for any by-respect, but all for a good end in obedience to God, they are good
also. Or thirdly, they are such actions as further a man in doing his duty in
either of these Callings, which do either strengthen him, as eating and
drinking, which being used without excess, make us fitter for our Callings,
being good actions, or else they are recreations to refresh us, which also used
as the former are good actions. If all these actions may be good, as we see
they may, seeing a Christian may be always performing some of them, he may
always be doing good, (according to the substance of his actions) though
there be many imperfections in them, and so may have the fullness of
conversation. When we are idle Satan takes hold of us, and look how much we
are empty, so much room the devil takes up in our hearts.

We must therefore take heed that we be neither idle nor ill occupied; Use 3.
we must put on the whole armor of God; we must not only put on the
breast plate of righteousness, and leave off the sword of the spirit, but we
must put on the whole armor of God, if there be but one part left naked and
uncovered, there the devil will be sure to wound us.

The second means whereby we are to resist Satan, is to remove all false
friends, our lusts, and corruptions, which lie in our minds, and like tinder
are ready to take fire by the least spark of tentation. Therefore S. James
tells them, it was their lusts which caused contention amongst them. It may be
spoken to our comfort, that Satan has not power to compel any to evil.
Demon non dicitur iussor, sed incensor vitiorum, he cannot move the will and
affections, only by Gods permission he may somewhat move ^he fantasy by
cer^aine objects: but it ^s man's corruption which yields to his tentations,
tha^ makes him so much prevail with me^ This is plainly shew^ed, Iam. 1. 14.
Every man is tempted, when he i^ drawn away of his own^ lust, and enticed.
Act. 5. 3^ Why has Satan filled the heart, (says Peter to A^nanias) to lie to
the hol^ Ghost, and to keep back^ part of the price of the land? So that Satan
does no more, the^ if a man should per^wade to evil, only is ^perswasions are
^^ronger, and far ^ore subtle, therefore Peter asked Ananias ^hy he suffered
the ^ivell to fill his heart, which implies it was ^is yielding to him, which
caused the di^ell to prevail. So ^hen David returned ^^om the slaughter of the
Philistims, and the wo^en came out of all the Ci^^es of Israel to meet Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 6, 7, 8. It is said that Saul being^ exceeding wroth tha^ the singers
ascribe^ to David ten thou^ sand, and to him bu^ one, he had an ey^ that is,
an evil eye^ on David, from tha^ day forwards, and (i^ is added) on the more
row (this his corrup^tion of envy having made place for it) the evil spirit
came upon him. Thus in Iuda^ the strength of his covetousness made way for the
devils ^entation: if the same ^entations had been offered, or cast upon any
other of the Disciples, they would never have taken ^lace, because they wanted
this corrup^ion of covetousness which was in Judas. This advantage Satan ^ath
of us, he knows what sins all men are most given to, by reason of their
corruption. Therefore when he tempts them with objects answerable to their
corruptions, he knows they cannot, (or if they can, very hardly) resist them;
He tempts the drunkard with company which will draw him to fall into that
sin* because he knows the drunkard cannot refuse such company being
offered. The lascivious he tempts with an unchaste object, which he knows he
cannot resist. Thus he makes men's corruptions betray them, although some
corruption and lust may be still, and dead in a man for a while, yet when a fit
object is offered, if it be not fully mortified, it will take hold, and show it
self.

But by what means may these corruptions and lusts lying in a man's heart be
removed? Quest.


Only by repentance: Answ.
when our hearts are hardened and made senseless with these corruptions, and
with the custom of sin, the sorrow of repentance can only humble the heart,
and mollify it again, and make it fit to take another impression; as wax
when it is melted loses the stamp it had before, and is pliable to take any
other* so the heart being softened thoroughly by the sorrow of repentance,
loses the former stamp which sin had left upon it, and is ^^dy to take
another. But a little sorrow is not sufficient to mollify the heart enough, it
must be a deep sorrow and continual; We may perhaps by a little sorrow cut
off the tops of sin, but unless the ground of our hearts be sufficiently
broken, wherein sin had taken root, the roots of our sins will still
remain*

How shall a man know, Quest.
whether his lusts be sufficiently rooted out of him?

This may be a special sign that they are; Answ.
when any such objects are offered, which prevailed with him before, if now
there be in his heart a true hating and loathing of them, so that they cannot
prevail with him again: but if the like objects work on him again, it is
sure his lusts remain still in him.

The third means whereby we may be enabled to resist the devil, is by seeking
to Christ for help, of him only we have spiritual strength; hence the
Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, besides, Putting on the armor of God, to be
strong in the LORD, Ephesians. 6. ^0. The Conies which the Wise man speaks of,
Prove. 30. 26. if they come out of their rocks, lie open to be devoured by the
lions and other wild beasts: so also if we be out of our rock, we are exposed
to the greedy desire of the roaring lion, the devil and his tentations; it is
not said that we are stronger then he is, but he which is in us, Christ, is
stronger then he which rules in the world Let us learn wisdom of the conies,
which though they be very weak, yet because they make their houses in the
rocks, and continually keep in them, no wild beast can devour them, though we
be never so weak, yet if we will flee to our rock Christ, and always rely on
him, we need not fear the devil, and all his tentations, if there were any
strength in our selves, this might not seem needful, but seeing Adam before
he fell, having such strength could not resist the devil in Paradise, much
less can we now; our only strength is by faith in Christ. As Gideon was to
send away a great part of his host by Gods command before he could overcome
the Midianites, so must we cast away all confidence in our selves, before we
shall be able to overcome the devil by relying on Christ. We must therefore
cast our selves wholly upon God, and rely on him, and say with Iehosaphat, We
know not what to do, O Lord, but our eyes are upon thee, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. We
must take heed of assuming any strength to our selves, when God raises a man
up, he thinks that he rose, partly by his own strength, this is to take away
the glory which belongs to God alone, and greatly to dishonor him: we see that
those who trust in their own strength, are often suffered very grievously and
desperately to fall. So Peter when in confidence of his own strength, as may
appear Math. 26. 33. He followed Christ into the high Priests hall, then the
devil tempted him and gave him so fearful a foil. This and the like
examples should teach us to be very thankful to God, that he has preserved
from such like falls hitherto, and to cleave the nearer to him, that we may not
in the like manner be foiled hereafter.

But some may object, Object.
that grace is a very good thing, and therefore a man may trust in his own
grace?

This is all one to number the people with David, Ans.
and to make flesh our arm. To make flesh our arm, is no more then to trust
in some creature, grace is a creature created in man by the gracious work of
Gods spirit, therefore to trust in a man's own grace is to make flesh his arm.

We must withal know this Caution, that there are three things which will
constrain Christ to forsake us, and not help us at need.

The first is unfruitfulnesse, 1. Hindr.
when God finds not the increase of his grace, which he looks for in us, the
figtree was cursed, because it bare no fruit when Christ expected to have found
fruit upon it. God laid waste and destroyed his vineyard, because it was
unfruitful, after much cost and labor had been bestowed upon it, God looked
it should have brought forth grates, and it brought forth wild grapes, Is 5.
4. The same is expressed in the Parable, Math. 25. 26. The reason hereof is,
because God will not suffer his name to be taken in vain, by whatsoever God is
known, that is his name, so that the graces of God, which after a special
manner are the names of God, he will not suffer to be taken in vain, he will
not suffer that they should be idle in a man, decaying daily, and never
increased.

The second Hindrance is any sin that lies in a man unrepented of, 2. Hindr.
as we may evidently see Rom 1. 26 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. the reason why this makes
Christ withold his help from us, is, because one ^^nne makes way for
another, and causes another, not only effective, making a man the more ready
by custom to commit sin again, but also meritorie, for the committing of
one sin, is often a punishment for the committing of some other sin before.

The third Hindrance is, 3. Hindr.
the thrusting of our selves into battle; therefore we always read that the
Israelites (whenever they went out to battle without asking counsel of the
Lord,) fell before their enemies. As it is with the head, so it must be with
the members. Our head Christ Jesus was tempted of Satan being led aside by the
spirit into the desert. Moreover, we are Gods champions, and if we go out to
battle without his leave, we are not in his ways, and therefore have no
promise of protection or defense. When he which is our full strength does
leave us, what strength have we to resist our adversary. Let us consider the
example of Solomon and Paul; Solomon because he took a wife of the Aegiptians
contrary to Gods command, and so thrust himself into tentation, was left to
himself; and so fell shamefully. S. Paul was led into tentation, there was
given him a prick in the flesh the messenger of Satan to buffer him, therefore
Gods grace was sufficient for him, and he overcame the tentation.

This reproves many Use.
who travel for pleasure, or to see fashions, and that go to battle without
Gods sending: therefore they speed thereafter, for they never return without
some wound taken, and that many times mortal. This they are to consider, who
thrust themselves upon occasions of sinning, us into evil company, where they
have no promise of Gods protection.

The third general thing drawn out of the text was, The third general.
that we should put in practice the strength we had, and stir up those graces
which are in us; This the Apostle especially aims at in this place, exhorting
them to resist the devil; for all these graces will do us no good, except we
put them in practice, and stir them up in us. We are therefore continually to
watch and pray; this ward we are to keep over our selves, is not easy, no,
not then when any tentation is newly overcome, for then another is ready to
enter: So that we must be like the builders of the Temple, which held a sword
in the one hand, and built with the other, being in continual fear of their
enemies: We must watch continually armed, when we have least care, then is
Satan most powerful over us; we must have our hearts both hard and soft,
hard to resist all the tentations of Satan, and impressions which he would set
upon them: but soft to receive any grace, or impression from the Spirit of God.
We must not quench the spirit, but the fiery darts of Satan, that we may
perform this, three duties are required of us.

First, we must by all means labor to be acquainted with the policies of
Satan, as S. Paul testifies of himself that he was, and to the end we may see
his policies, we must pray unto God to open our eyes, and enlighten our
minds, that we may have a sight of them, and that is here worth the
observing, which some Divines hold concerning the fall of the Angels, that it
was only through the want of stirring up those excellent things, and lights of
knowledge which were in them, that brought them to their fall; the want of this
was also the cause of Adams fall.

Secondly, we are to run over all the tentations wherewith Satan has tempted
us, and see his manner of proceedings, and what policies he has used, that so
when the like policies come again, we may be able to resist him, knowing how
he did formerly deceive us. Why should Satan every day grow more and more
subti^e to tempt us, and we not grow more and more acquainted with his
policies to resist him?

The second duty is to resist him at the first, for when we give place unto
him at the first, then God does in judgment give us over to him, and suffers
him to overcome us: See this in the example of Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 8, 9, 10. Now
for the devil to take place in us, and overcome us, differ not as may appear,
Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, that is, let not
the devil overcome you in this, neither give place to the devil. Although by
every sin the devil does not take place, yet every sin makes more room for
the devil, until at the length he enter. Mark what the Prophet Hosea says,
Chap. 7. 6. They have made their hearts ready like an oven, whiles they lie in
wait: their baker sleeps all the night, in the morning it burns like a
flame of fire. Here then we see, that as an oven if there be but little fire
left in it over night, yet if the baker sleep and quench it not, yet in the
morning the whole oven is as hot as fire, and flames as fire: So if there be
the least spark of sin left in a man's conscience, if he neglect, and do
not quench it at the first, it will quickly get strength and flame forth, so
that it will be very hard to quench it. Many who have given way to vain and
idle thoughts, and have carelessly given themselves to idleness and ease, at
length have become altogether in Satan's power: like as a soft thing yielding at
the first, presently receives impression, their hearts being once polluted,
presently all their affections receive the same impression. It is the heart
which sets the seal upon all the actions, like. as a seal which always
sets the same impression on the wax which it has it self.

The third duty is, we must resist him in every sin whatsoever, and not in
some sins only. Although we overcome many sins whereunto Satan does tempt us,
yet we do not overcome Satan, unless we overcome all sins whatsoever. Every
sin is as it were a door into a man's heart whereby the devil does enter;
Now suppose all these doors were shut but one only, the devil could enter
into the house of our hearts by that one door, and possess them as well as if
there were more doors. Suppose a man's house has many doors, although all be
shut but one, a man may as well take possession by entering at one, as if all
were open: Also every sin is a snare: what matter is it, whether Satan hold
us fast by many or one? the devil has many weapons whereby he plays with
us, and though we can beat him at many, yet if he be but too hard for us at
one, that is sufficient for him, for he can slay us with that one weapon: and
what matter if he slay us with a penknife, or a spear, a great sin, or a
little one, for sure it is, that the least sin seen and continued in, or
delighted in, is sufficient to keep us in the devils power, and for the devil
to hold us fast with.

THE THIRD SERMON.
JAMES. 4. verse. 7. Submit your selves therefore unto God: resist the Devil and
he will flee from you.
THus much has hitherto been spoken of those words of the text, Resist the
devil, now we come to the second part, the promise, in these words, and he
will flee from you. This is a promise of encouragement to resist the devil,
because they that do so shall surely overcome. The like argument the Apostle
uses, Romans 6. 14 Thus Captains use to encourage their soldiers in hope of
victory; when we have fought with Satan a long time, and yet find not that we
prevailed, presently we are ready to saint, and to give over battle: now to
prevent this, we have here a promise of victory. Yea, the words intimate
something more the devil shall flee from you; we shall not only prevail
against him, but also we shall be less tempted by him he shall depart from
us, we may see this in our own head Christ, Math. 4. 11^ hence then the
doctrine arises;

That whosoever does truly resist the devil, Doct.
shall get the victory of him.

Which victory is double, both general, according to the general resolution a
man has to resist Satan in all his tentations, and also particular in every
tentation. For proof of this doctrine we have those words, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the Godly out of tentation, and those 1 Cor. 10.
13. God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able: but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it. This promise Go^ performs, either by increasing the strength
and patience of him that suffers, or else by lessening the affliction and
tentation according to his strength.

The reasons of this doctrine may be these, Reas.
the first is taken out of Romans 6. 14. where the promise is this, Sin (that
is original corruption) shall ^ot have dominion over us, ^en neither shall the
^ivell himself have ^ominion over us, ^ut sin, says the A^ostle, shall have
no do^inion, therefore not ^e devil.

The second reason Pet. 1. 5. we are ^ept, says the Apo^^le, by the power of
God, ^rough faith unto salva^^n. Christ is our shepherd, and we his sheep,
so that he will take care for every one of us, hence those most sweet and
comfortable words* Ioh. 10. 27, 28. My sheep^ hear my voice, and ^ know them,
and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Yea, Christ testifies
of himself, John. 17. 12. that he had not lost one of those whom his Father
had given him. Besides, if the death of Christ was able to reconcile us unto
God, then much more his life being a more powerful means, shall preserve us
to eternal life, this is the Apostl^^ own argument, Romans 5. 9. O Much more,
being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For
if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son:
much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. And although we
have not this preservation for our own sakes, yet God will preserve us for his
own names sake, we being his portion, The Lords portion is his people, Jacob
is the lot of his inheritance, says Moses in his most divine songs Deuteronomy. 32.
9. Surely God will not loss his portion, therefore he will preserve his
children which are his portion.

The third reason is drawn from the weakness of our enemy, 3
with whom we fight, namely Satan, who has received his deaths-wound, and over
whom Christ has triumphed, as appears Col. 2 15. He has spoiled, says the
Apostle, principalities and powers, and has made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them on his cross. Now the devils strength is not taken from
him, but he is spoiled of that liberty which he had before, of exercising his
power upon us; for he had power as a tormentor once over us, and liberty to
use that power, but now all his liberty is taken away, and therefore he only
tempts and afflicts the children of God by permission, and he can go no
further then God permits. He could not tempt Job at all, until he had
permission from God, and then also he could afflict him only after that
measure, and by that means which God suffered him. For the further clearing of
this truth some objections that may be made, and which use to arise would be
answered.

If indeed in the time of tentation I were persuaded that I were truly in
Christ, Object.
then I should not doubt to get the victory, but in tentation I cannot find
this persuasion.

Some men are in the state of grace, Answ.
others are not. Now this promise indeed, as all of the like kind, pertain to
them that are in the state of grace; and for such, in tentation they are
neither to believe Satan, nor their own reason; for a man in tentation, is
like one in a swound, who has no use of his senses, let a man therefore
consider his former life, whether there has been any reformation in that;
whether he has felt a change in his heart, which if he can find, whatsoever he
feels for the present, he needs not doubt but he is in Christ. Now amongst
other signs this is a special one, if he can find that he does truly resist
the tentation, not for the avoiding of vexation or perplexity that does
accompany it, but for the avoiding of sin which he is tempted unto.
Otherwise, if the party be not in the state of grace, then first he must apply
to himself the promise of sanctification, and must believe his engrafting into
Christ, before he can have the promise, or apply to himself the victory.

But it may be objected, Obj.
that a man may believe a falsehood, which he is not bound to do.

For answer hereunto we must know that there is, Ans.
a twofold act of faith, the first is to cast a man's self upon Christ for the
remission of his sins, and this is sufficient for justification as appears,
Romans 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. After this application truly
made, will follow love, repentance, and obedience. The second act is a reflex
act, whereby a man is persuaded that he does believe, from whence arises
spiritual joy. Hence the Apostle in his prayer for the Saints at Rome, Romans
15. 13. phraseth it thus, Now the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace
in believing. He that will exercise this second act of faith before the former,
believes a falsehood, otherwise if a man have the former, he ought to exercise
the second, and then he needs not doubt of the victory in tentation.

Many have had experience of the contrary, Object.
so that although they have often and long resisted Satan, yet they are still
foiled by him.

Though indeed they be foiled for the present, Answ.
yet they get more strength afterward, according to that, Romans 8. 28. All
things work for the best unto those which love God, to them who are called
according to his purpose. Yea further, the devil fails in both his ends in
tempting them, his first end is to have his house swept, the other to have it
garnished, that is, to empty the heart of grace, and to strengthen sin in
him, now this endeavor to strengthen sin, is frustrated, both in regard of
the guilt and power of it; First, for the guilt he is not able to make that
plain against us, because God accepts of our persons, and nothing in the old
man can hinder God from accepting the new man in us. And although upon the
committing of every sin there does necessarily follow a guilt, yet repentance
and the righteousness of Christ comes between, and hinders the same from
redounding upon the person of the believer.

Secondly, in regard of the power of sin, his tentation makes not sin have
more dominion over us, or more sway in us, but the contrary, like as the water
of a well that has mud at the bottom, although some may think it the fouler
for the mudde, yet it is the clearer. So the corruptions of a man's heart being
stirred by tentation, after become less, this being an occasion of their
purging, for hereby a man sees his corruptions which lay dead before, and so
labors to purge his heart from them, see this evidently in Hezekiah for his
failing, which is set down 2. Chron* 32. 3. he had a profitable end of it, as
is expressed verse. 26. David had a secret trusting to the multitude of the
people before he numbered them, although he saw it not in himself, but as soon
as he had numbered them, his heart smote him, and then he was humbled for his
sin. Secondly, tentations are so far from emtpying us of grace, that they
increase it in us diverse ways. First, because they drive us nearer to Christ,
to seek him, they make us fitter to receive him, for we must be emptyed of
our selves, before we are fit to receive Christ. Secondly, because they
increase humility in us, which is the ground of all Gods graces, so that there
is no grace but has his rooting herein, that tentations do humble us, and
empty us of all conceit of our selves, appears plainly in the example of Paul,
2 Cor. 12. 8. Thirdly, because grace is purified by afflictions, as spotted
clothes, are cleansed by washing, and like as gold is purified by the fire; so
then the means which Satan uses to winnow out the good corn, and to leave
the chafe, to purge out the pure gold, and leave the dross, the same means
God turns to the contrary, to winnow out the chafe from the good corn, and
to purge out the dross from the pure gold.

Another answer to the former objectio^ may be this, thoug^ God suffer Satan t^
foil his children, ye^ in the end they over^come and becom^ conquerors, as in
bat^tell a man may re^ceive many foyles^ and many wound^ of his enemies, and
yet in the end overcome him.

But we have had experience, Object.
that many have lain under a ^entation to their ^eath, and have not ^eemed to
have over^ommed it, how ^ould these prevail ^ver Satan?

For answer, Answ.
we ^ust know the spirit ^eing in the child of God tempted, there ^ust needs
be some ^ct and fruit of the spirit, although the ^arty himself dis^erne it
not, and this ^orke of the spirit is such as God accepts* Romans 8. 26, 27. So
the^ the victory is in truth though not in show, and therefore as profitable to
them But here this caution must be added, that we look not to overcome
whilst we stand still and remain idle, we must perform our duty, before we
can expect that God will perform his promise, we must therefore resist the
devil. God keeps and preserves us, but it is by means, as appears 1 Pet. 1.
5. God keeps us through faith unto salvation, and the Apostle S. John says,
that he who has a true hope, will purify himself as God is pure, 1 Ioh. 3.
3. Although God be said to keep us, yet we are said to keep our selves,
which is to be done by a careful use of the means which God has appointed.
If a Patient should profess that he had committed his life unto the skill of
the Physician, and wholly depended upon him, whereas notwithstanding he would
neither abstain from the things which his physician told him to be hurtful,
nor take any thing which he prescribed, were this man to be believed? The like
may be said of him who professes, he desires to get the victory in ten^ations,
and that he depends upon God wholly for it, and yet never uses the means God
has appointed for it. Now these are especially three, two whereof are things
to be abstained from, namely reasoning and conferring with Satan and gazing
upon the object, one thing is to be done to get the armor of salvation, to be
girt with it, to have the shield of faith especially; there is none which has
been overcome in tentation, but he has failed in one or all of these. Eve
failed in all, she conferred with the Serpent. Secondly, she gazed upon the
object, the fruit of the forbidden tree. Thirdly, she used not the shield of
faith, to reject the lies of the Serpent, who said you shall not dye at all,
when God had said to the contrary. The like we see in David's tentation, he
gazed upon the object till he was taken, neither did he use the armor of
salvation as he ought to have done. Job failed in neither of them, when as he
said, Job 31. 1. I made a covenant with mine eyes, there is his resolution, for
not reasoning or disputing with his corruptions; why then should I think upon
a maid? there is his resolution for not staring upon the object, For what
portion of God is there from above? and verse. 3. it is evident that it was
faith in believing the threatenings of God toward the wicked, whereby he was
terrified from walking in their ways; Is not destruction to the wicked? says
he, and a strange punishment to workers of iniquity? Does not he see my
ways, and count all my steps?

Now follows some Use 1*
Consectaries or Uses from the former doctrine, the first may be for reproof
of those who stir not up themselves to resist the devil, notwithstanding
they have the promise here made them: Such are those who by custom, and the
bad inclination of their natures, give themselves to some lusts which they
never set themselves against, and herewithall they excuse themselves, it is
their weakness and inclination of their nature, they must be borne with, their
heart is good, and their mind is good, but to these be it spoken, their
excuses will not defend them, for if they would resist as they ought, the
promise is made to them, they should not fail to overcome. This is the excuse
usually made of most men for some principal lust that reigns in them. But
whereas they have the promise of God for victory, there should be no doubt of
overcomming: and whosoever does not last out these Anakims, these lusts, which
are his deadly and sworn enemies betimes, he shall find they will be pricks to
his sides, and thorns to his conscience, even all his lifetime, and at the
hour of his death especially.

The second Use is for trial. Use 2.
Here^ we may have a rule to try whether we have resisted Satan or no, and
surely most fearful is their estate, who have not put Satan to flight by
resisting, but are put to flight by him in yielding, and of these there be two
sorts; First, those who never resist at all. Secondly, those who after
resisting a while fall away, and give over. First for those who never felt any
combat of Satan, and know not what his assaults mean, it is impossible that
they should be escaped out of Satan's power, he will never leave his possession
so easily. We see when he was cast out of one, whose body he did but possess,
before his departure, he rent and tare him, and will he so easily leave the
possession of a soul, which is his more proper seat? How then can any man
think he has gotten the victory in this spiritual combat when he has not
stricken a stroke, nor felt any blow, none are Christ's soldiers, or those
whom he came to redeem, but such as are described, Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. The
Apostle says, Romans 8. 15. Ye have not received again the spirit of bondage
to fear, etc. intimating that they received that, before they received the
spirit of adoption; whosoever therefore has not felt any assault from Satan,
sure it is that as yet Satan reigns in him as his king, and those men who
themselves have had no skirmish with Satan, for the most part censure rashly of
such whom they observe to be more fearful of offending in lesser matters.
Yea, indeed they judge foolishly of the ways of God, having had no experience
of them. But the estate of the second sort who fall away is most fearful, and
those men become most dangerous of all, and greatest enemies to the most
sincere professors, because they have had some knowledge in the ways of God;
that the estate of these men is fearful appears Heb. 10. 26. If we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment,
and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries; and verse last, we
are not of them who draw back unto perdition. Here is implied, that such as
draw back do it unto perdition. Now that these men resisted not truly
appears, because they fell away, for if they had they could not but have
gotten the victory. Men use to be deceived in this kind three ways, and when
any of these happen they fall away. First, when men think they sorrow and
repent for their sins, whereas indeed it is for the punishment and smart
which they feel for them, thus did the people Hos. 7. 14. it was for the loss
of their corn and wine for which they howled, they had only an outward
humiliation, there was no crying to God in the heart; so much the Lord
testifies by the Prophet, They have not cried to me with their heart, when
they howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn^ and wine, and
they rebe^ against me. The same people are compare^ to a brittle bow, verse. 16.
they stood bent with many fair promises, but when they came once to be proved,
they failed of their pretenses, as a brittle bow that knaps asunder being
tried, thus many are humbled for some present affliction that lies upon them,
or for the avoiding of some sensible trouble, when they have no resolution to
repent, and turn to God, it is seldom done, but in passion, and so continues
not. Evil men never do good but in passion, as good men never do evil but
in passion; but when the blast of passion is over, then every man goes his own
way, the good man forward to heaven, the wicked man forward to hell. This was
the fault of the second ground, which though it received the Word, yet brought
forth no fruit, because the seed had no rooting. Secondly, it may be that the
reasons which persuade a man at the first to break off his sins, are not
strong enough, and therefore when stronger reasons are brought on the other
side, he is not able to resist, but is constrained to yield, and so fall away;
He does like a King, which with ten thousand soldiers would go meet his
adversary with twenty thousand, and so is overcome. Thirdly, a man will break
off some sins though not all, and so think he repents, whereas there remains
some special corruption which he will not part withal, and therefore when
religion and this lust shall stand in opposition, religion must give way, and
thus he falls from the truth, of this sort were Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy
1. 20.

The third Use is for exhortation, Use 3.
nor man ought to faint, be Satan's temptations what they will, for there is a
promise of victory which ought to sustain every one. Now Satan's temptations
are of three sorts, either against a man's effectual calling, and the certainty
thereof, or else against a man's justification, or thirdly against a man's
sanctification. First for our effectual calling, we have the spirit of God
which does witness the same to our spirits, and all the difficulties here
arise from the want of our full resolution to resist Satan Consider what Christ
says, Math. 11. 30. My yoke is easy, and my burden light; The difficulty
hereof, that Satan would make us believe to be, in leading a Christian life is
not so. Christ's law is there called a burden, because it is so to our corrupt
nature, and it is also called a yoke, because it contains a man within the
bounds of his obedience, as the yoke contains the Ox in his rank, and order,
but as soon as the burden of sin, which is truly a burden, becomes heavy and
irksome to us, then the burden, of Gods law will be light, and when the yoke
of sin is heavy to us, then the yoke of the law will be easy and light. Satan
therefore is a liar, as he always has been, when he tells us, of the
heaviness of Christ's yoke, for if we bring with us a resolution to bear it, a
will and an endeavor, Christ will make it easy to us.

Secondly for our justification, a Christian in this tentation, must imitate
Job, who being tempted very strongly in this kind, yet held his hold, and it
will always be to his praise that he did so; as a Christian ought not to
conceive his corruptions to be less then they are, so also he ought not to
conceive the graces of God in him, to be less then they are: his faith ought
never to fail to lay hold on its object, so that although God for a time seem
to hide his face; yet as we doubt not, but the Sun shines when it is under a
cloud, so even then the Christian ought not to doubt of Gods favor, but to
believe that the light of his countenance will again shine out.

Thirdly, to overcome tentations against our sanctification, let us take up the
duty commended by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the
faith, quit you like men. The Apostle himself as a good captain, leads this
way which he points out to others, as we may see 1 Cor. 9. 27. I keep under
my body, and bring it into subjection, left that by any means when I have
preached to others, I my self should be a castaway. It was the sin and
ruin of the Israelites, in that they would not believe the victory, which GOD
promised to them in subduing the Canaanites, and so it will be our ruin also,
if we believe not the promise of God for victory over Satan. We must know that
we are as well to believe the promises of our sanctification, as of our
justification, as may be gathered from that of the Apostle James 1. 5. If any
man want wisdom, let him ask of God, and it shall be given him. The same may
be said of any other grace, and it follows ver. 6. Let him ask in says and
wa^er not, for ^ee that wave^eth, is like a wave of the Sea; he is like a wave,
in that he is carried backward and forward without any constancy. Let us
therefore stir up our selves to resist Satan, and not to faint in the
combat, for Satan's chief end is to weary us out, that so we may give over,
for so long as we continue striving, he gets no victory; the victory is
then gotten, when we give over; if we give not back, but believe, and
continue striving. we shall be sure to be saved, H^b. 10. 39. Here because
some think they have overcome, when they have not, it is necessary to know the
signs of yielding unto Satan, which are these;

Satan is resisted, then surely we yield unto him.

Secondly, when a other arises from victory by a constant resisting: the
former is proper to the wicked, the other to the godly.

it more steightly, and with less grief being committed. These are the signs
of yielding unto Satan. Now follows some helps against him to procure the
victory.

and more then ordinary medicines. Many not considering this, have not gotten
the victory over their lusts, which otherwise they might have done. Lusts are
of two sorts, some are naked and simple, coming only with their own force,
stir up thy self, that thou may resist these, for so shall thou be sure
to overcome. Others are whetted on by Satan, and his force does accompany them,
such a tentation was that of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 7. he had a thorn in the
flesh, and the messenger of Satan to buffet him; It is most likely that the
corruption was in his nature before, but now it assailed him more powerfully in
regard of the force of Satan, which did accompany it. These tentations coming
with more force then their own, must be resisted by us, with more power then
our own; the chief means are two, first prayer, and fasting joined with it
to sharpen the duty, Ephesians. 6. 18. Secondly, the Word diligently read, and
meditated upon, for as the enemies are not carnal, neither are the weapons
carnal. This Word is the wisdom of God, and the power thereof may be seen,
Prove. 6. 23. The Commandment, Says Solomon, is a lamp, and the Law is a
light: and reproves of instruction are the way of life. Psalm. 19* 7. The law
of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple.

Ephesians. 4. 22. That ye put off according to your former conversation, the old
man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; they deceive a man,
and this is the reason they hold a man fast so long: therefore sins are
called errors, and ignorances; Contrarily, the new man is renewed in knowledge,
Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after
the Image of God which created him. For the removing therefore of our lusts,
the understanding which was before deceived, must be rightly informed of the
truth, and then be confirmed in it by sound reasons: which being done, the
understanding will change the will, and affection. So for the lust of anger, it
is said to rest in the bosom of a fool, Eccles. 7. 9. Be not hasty in thy
spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of fools. Folly then
being the cause of it, the readiest way to be cured of it, is, by having the
judgment rightly informed, which being strengthened with reason, will move the
affections So S. Peter calls the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of ignorance,
1 Pet. 1. 14. because these lusts proceed from their ignorance, they then who
have their judgments truly informed, will with greater case, overcome a
corruption by opposing strong reasons against it: but when a man's judgment is
inclined to the contrary, then he has lost the victory for lusts get place.

his resisting, that his corruptions grow stronger and stronger: but we must
know that our corruptions are not always the greatest, when they seem so to
us: if when we truly resist them they seem stronger, it is a sign we have
more spiritual feeling in us then before; we must not think to overcome them
without any trouble, for we are commanded to crucify our lusts, which
crucifying necessarily imitates pain. Secondly, this makes many weary under
tentation, when after diligent use of the means, they find no fruit nor ease.
But this should not discourage them, for the means will have their effect in
the end. Like as sin though it lie quiet at the door a great while, yet at
length will call down some heavy judgment; if we sow to the Spirit, we
shall be sure to reap of the Spirit. None of our groans, none of our tears,
which we shed in this case will be lost or spent in vain, for God will put
them in his bottle, as holy David says, and will surely reward them see this
in the example of Cornelius, Act. 10. 4. Thy prayers and thy alms are come up
for a memorial before God.

Fourthly, we must avoid irksomeness, we must consider, that it is part of
the obedience, God requires at our hands, patiently to undergo a tentation,
and therefore it behooves us, of duty to do it.

FINIS.

