Ane oration made by master Theodore de Beze Minister of the word of God,
accompanied with xi. other Ministers and xx. deputies of the reformed Churches
of the Realm of France, in the presence of the King, the Queen mother, the
king of Navarre, the princes of Conde, and of La Roche Surion, monsieur de
Guise, the Constable, and other great Princes and Lords of the Kings counsel,
being there also present vj. Cardinals xxxvj. Archbishoppes and Bishops,
besides a great number of Abbots, Priours, Doctors of the Sorbone and other
Scooles: Tuesday the ix. day of September, 1561. in the Noonnery of Poyssy.
Truly gathered and set forth in such sort as it was spoken by the said de Beze.

Whereunto is added a brief declaration exhibited by the said Beze, to the
Queen the mother, the next morrow after the making of the said Oration,
touching certain points contained in the same.

Ane Oration made by Master Theodore de Beze, Minister of the word of God,
accompanied with xi. other Ministers and with xx. deputies of the reformed
Church of France, in the presence of the King, the Queen the mother, the king
of Navarre, the Princes of Conde, and of La Rochesuryon, and sundry other
Princes and Lords of the Counsel.
SIRE, forasmuch as the success of all enterprises be they great or small, does
depend upon Gods assistence especially when the matter in question
appertains to his service, and does surmount the capacities of our
understanding: we trust your Majesty will neither think it strange nor
amiss, if we begin with the calling of his Name, making to him our prayer
in such sort as follows.

LOrd God Father eternal and almighty, we confess and acknowledge before thy
holy majesty, that we be poor, wretched and miserable sinners, conceived and
borne in sin, inclined and given to ill, and unprofitable to all that good
is: we transgress continually thy holy commandments, whereby we do
purchase to our self by thy just judgment, ruin and destruction.
Nevertheless Lord, we are right sorry that we have offended thee, and do
condemn our selves and our sins, with true repentance, desiring that thy
grace may aid our rewfull misery. And forasmuch as it has pleased the to show
this day so much favor to thy poor and unprofitable servants, as to give
them mean to declare freely in the presence of the king, whom thou have
established to reign over them, and of the most noble and worthy company of
the world, such matter as it has liked thee to give them knowledge of,
touchi^g thy holy truth: it may also please thee, O Lord and Father of heaven
and earth, according to thy accustomed goodness and mercies, so to kindle our
vndersta^dinges, so to govern and guide our affections, framinge them to yield
to true teaching, and so to conduct our speech, that after we shall have
conceived according to the measure that it shall like thee to impart to us the
secrets which thou have showed to men for their salvation: we may with all
truth and sincerity, set forth both with heart and tongue, such matter as
may serve to the glory and honor of thy holy name, to the prosperity and
aduau^cement in honor of our king, and of all them that belong unto him, with
the rest, quietness, and comfort of the whole state of Christendom, and
specially of this Realm of France. And this, O Lord and father almighty, we
do require in the Name and for the sake of Jesus Christ thy son our Savior,
praying to thee in such sort as him self has taught us to pray, Our Father
which art in heaven, etc.

(.) All the above written, was spoken by Theodore de Beze kneeling, al his
company being in like sort upon their knees, who after the prayers made,
rising continued his speech, as follows. (.)

Sire, it is no sinal felicity to a faithful servant, bearing his hearty
affection to his master, to se the face and person of his liege Lord,
forsomuche as the same representyng said Subject be not only admitted to his
Princes sight, but receives so much favor, as the Prince will be content to
have

The fruit and comfort of the which four points, Sire, it has pleased God,
using therein his secret judgments, that some of your right humble and most
obedient subjects have of long time laked, to their great grief and sorrow:
until that at the length by his infinite mercy, harkening unto our tears and
continual mourninges, he has showed us such grace, as this day has brought
to us the good fortune that hitherto we have wished, rather then looked for,
which is to se your majesty: Sire, and that more is, to be seen and hard of
the same, and of such a noble and worthy company, as hard were it in the
world to find the like.

So as if we had never before received any benefit at your hand neither
hereafter should ever be partakers of any from you, all the time that we have
to live, could not suffice to praise God for this his benefit, and to give
worthy thanks therefore to your majesty. But with this, when we consider that
this said day does not only open a mean to us, but calls us, and as a man
may say, by the gentle, cortoyse, and gracious countenance and demeanor
which we see in you so well becoomyng your Majesty, drives us to witness
altogether our duties, to confess the Name of our God, and to declare the
obedience that we bear to you: we must needs confess that our understanding
is not hable once to conceive the greatness of such a benefit, and our
tongues much less hable to utter that, that our affections and good wills
gives them in charge to set forth. In such sort, Sire, that this favor
passing all the eloquence of man, we think it is a great deal better to
confess our weakness with a shamefaste scilence, then to diminishe the grace
of the benefit by the lack of convenient speech, for the due setting forth
of the same

Our chief desire is Sire, to obtain most specially the fourth and principal
point, that is to say, that our service which we offer this day, may be
agreeable and liked to your Majesty, which grace we trust to win at your
Majesty's hands, the rather if thereby it come to pass (which God grant it
may) that this our coming hither, may bring with it an end, not so much of
our own thraldomes and miseries, the memory whereof is half extincte by the
good hap of this day: as of a number of troubles and disorders, (which has been always to us more grievous then death could have been) fallen upon the
Realm, with the ruin and destruction of so great a number of your subjects.

Many and diverse occasions be there, that has hitherto kept us from the
enioyinge of so great a grace, whereof we should yet be in despair, were it
not that one the other side, many other things do maintain our good hope, and
put us in some assurance. First there is by the malice and iniquity of the
time, an assured persuasion rooted in many men's hearts, that we be unquiet,
troublesome, and ambitious men, given to our fantasies, and enemies of al
concord and tranquillity.

Others there be perhaps, who suppose that albeit it may be that we be not
altogether enemies of concord, yet that we do demand it, and be content to
come to it, with so sharp and heard conditions, as were not convenient we
should with them be received, as though we pretended to ouerturne the present
state of the world, and to make a new of our own fashionyng, and to spoil a
number of their goods and riches, to enriche our selves withal.

There are besides these, Sire, sundry other like, or rather greater lettes,
but we desire rather, that the memory of them may be buried, then to renew by
the rehearsal of them, old sores, being now come not to complain, or to open
griefs, but to seek out the most convenient and spedie remedy for them. And
who then gives us such an assurance in the mids of so many lettes and
hinderaunces? It is not, Sire, the leaning to any thing that is in our
selves, who be in all respects the basest, and most vile in estimacion, of any
sort of men. Neither is it (GOD therefore be thanked) vain presumption, or
arrogauncie, for our poor and low estate bears it not. It is, Sire, rather
our vpryght conscience, which assures us that our cause is good and just, of
the which we trust God will be protector and defendour. It is also the natural
goodness which we do note in your face, speech, and countenance. It is the
equity which To the Queen mother.
we see and learn by experience to be graven in your heart Madame. It is the
righteousness, and To the King of Navarre.
vpryghtnesse in judgment, which we find in you, Sire, and in the rest of
thee blood royal. And a great and manifest occasion have we to hope well in
that our trust is, that you my right honorable lords of the Counsel,
reducing The co^^ sa^^e.
yourselfe all to one conformity of good meaning, will have no less good
will and affection, to grant unto us so holy and necessary an agreement, as
we have to receive it. And what more? There is yet one thing that enterteineth
us in right good confidence. And that is, that we do presume according to the
rule of charity, that you my lords the Prelates, with Prelates.
whom we have to confer, will rather do your best with us, according to our
little measure, to set forth and bring to light the truth, then to darken it,
to teach rather then to contend, to way our reasons rather the^ to trauaill
to argue against them. And finallye rather to stay that the disease go no
further, then to make it incurable and deadly. This is the Prelates.
opinion we have conceived of you my Lords, beseching you in the Name of that
great God, ye has brought us here together, and that shall be judge both of our
thoughts and sayings, that notwithstanding whatsoever has been spoken,
written, or done, in the space of these xl. years paste, or there about, you
will spoil your selves, (like as for our part we mind to do the same) of
all such passions and preiudices, as may hinder the good fruit, that is to
be trusted shall succeed of so holy and commandable an enterprise: and that it
may please you to persuade your selfs (in the which opinion God willing you
shall not be deceived) that you shall find in us a sprite tractable and ready
to receive whatsoever shall be proved by the pure word of God.

Think not that we be come hither to maintain any error but to disclose and
to amend whatsoever may be found out of the way, either on your side, or on
ours. Esteem us not so outragiouslye presumptuous, that we would once pretend
to overthrow that we know to be eternal, to wit, the Church of God: Neither
do you believe that we go about and seek means to make you like unto us, in our
poor and vile effate, wherewith nevertheless, thanks be given to God, we
find our selves very well contented. Our desire is to have the ruynes of
Jerusalem repaired, the spiritual temple to be set up again, the house of God
which is builte with living stones to be set again in his entier estate,
and that the flocks so scattered and strayed by the just vengeance of God and
negligence of man, may be knitte together again, and brought in one company
to the shepefolde of him that is the sovereign and only shepherd.

This is the mark we shoot at: This is our whole meaning, desire and intent
(my Lords) which in case heretofore you have hardly believed, our trust is
that you will be easily brought to the belief of it, when we shall have
declared to you by conference, such matter as has pleased God to endue us
with, in all modesty and patience. And would God that without any further
trauaylling we might in the stead of arguing one against the other, all with
one voice sing a song unto the Lord, and offer our hands the one side to
the other, as it has chaunsed at some times past between two armies of Pagans
and Infidelles set in battle array. A foul shame must it needs be to us,
that professinge the state of preachers of the doctrine of peace and concord,
we be so easily set a sunder, and so hard* and uneasy* to be tied again
together in ^ne unity. But what shall we say* Men may, and ought to wyshe
that all things were well, but it is God alone that must grant ^t, which he
will do when it shall please him, to cover our sins with his goodness; and
chase away our darkness with his light.

And having thus much said, Sire, to the intent it may be known that our
meaning is to proceade with good and upright consciences, simply, plainly, and
roundly, we mean if your Majesty give us leave so to do, to declare in a
short form the principal points of this conference, in such sort as God
willing no man shall have just cause to be therewith offended.

There are some men that do think, and would gladly persuade all others to
think the like, that our disagreing does stand in no great matters of
importance, but consists rather in things indifferent, then in the
substancial points of our faith.

Others there be all of the contrary, that for lack of good information of our
belief, take it as though we agreed in nothing, no more then Jews or
Mahometistes.

The opinion of the first sort is not so much to be discommended, as the
judgment of the last sort is utterly to be rejected: Like as we trust shall
appear by the discourse of our matter.

But surely, neither of them both do make any way or ouerture of any true or
assured concord. For if the last be believed, none of the parties can purchasse
to the^ a sure standing, but with the ouerthrowinge of the other, which were
to cruel to think, and most horrible to be executed. If the opinion of the
first should be received, it must needs be that many things should remain
undecided whereof should rise a very dangerous and hurtful disagreing.

To enter then into the matter, we do confess (in the which saying we have
much a do to contain our tears: we confess I say, that as we do agree in some
principal points of the Christian faith, so do we disagree in some vthers.

We confess one only God, in one and self same essence, infinity, and
incomprehensible, distinct in three persons consubstancials, and in all
points coequall. That is to say: the Father unbegotten, the son from ever
begotten of the Father, and the holy Ghost proceadinge from the Father and the
Son.

We confess one only Jesus Christ, very God and very man, without confusion
or separation of the two natures, or of the properties of the same.

We confess that touching his manhood, he is not the son of Joseph, but was
conceived by the secret power of the holy Ghost in the womb of the blessed
virgin Marie, virgin we say both before her deliverance and after also.

We confess his Nativity, his life, his death, his burying, his going down
into hell, his resurrection, and his ascension, as they be contained in the
holy Gospel.

We believe that he is on high in heaven, set at the right hand of the Father,
from whens he will not depart till he come to judge the quick and the dead.

We believe in the holy Ghost, who lightneth us, comfort us and supporteth us.

We do believe that there is one holy Catholic, that is to say, universal
Church, which is the company and congregation of Saints, out of the which
there is no salvation.

We do assure our selves of the free remission of our sins, through the blood
of Jesus Christ, by the virtue whereof, after the same body of ours being
raised from death to life shall be joined again with our souls, we shall
enjoy with God the blessed and everlasting life. How then will some say* are
not these the articles of our faith* wherein then stands the difference
between us?

First, we differ in the exposition of some part of them. Secondly, in that it
seems to us (wherein if we be deceived we would be glad to know it) that men
have not satisfied them selves with these articles: but of long time have not
ceased to add article upon article, as though Christian religion were a
building that never would have end.

We say moreover that such building as has been made of new, has not as
far as we can understand ben always builded upon the old foundation: and
therefore has it rather taken away the grace of the old buildinge, then
served to the garnishing and setting forth of the same. And yet have men
cleaued more to those accessaries, then they have done to the principal.

This is the sum shortly of that we believe and teach: but to the end that
our meaninges may be the better conceived, we will discourse the points more
perticulerly.

We say then, and trust to maintain the same with all the temperaunce we can,
by the testimonye of holy Scriptures, that the very God in whom we ought to
believe, is spoiled of his perfect Justice, if men think to set against
his displeasure and just judgment* any (...) kind of purgation or
satisfaction in this world, or in the other, then that whole entier and
perfect obedience, which can not be found in any other, but only in Jesus
Christ. And in like sort if we say, that he acquiteth us of one part of our
debtes, so as we pay the other, we spoil him of his perfect mercy.

Hereof rises it as far as we can judge, that being the question, by what
title we look to be placed in heaven, we must holly and only stick to the
death and passion of Jesus Christ our Savior and redemer, or else shall we be
driven to worship a strange God, which should not be perfectly either just, or
merciful.

And hereof also depends another point, of no small importance, touching the
office of Jesus Christ. For if he be not only and entierly our salvation,
this precious Name of Jesus, that is to say Savior, denounced by the Angel
Gabriell, should not properly appertain to him: likewise if he be not our
only Prophet, having fully declared the will of God his Father for our
salvation: first by the mouth of his Prophets, and after that, when the
fullness of the time was come in his own person, and finally by his faithful
Apostles. If he be not also the head and spiritual king of our consciences,
if he be not our only Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, having
by one oblation once made of himself which never can be made again,
reconciled man with God, and is now in heaven, our only intercessour, till
the end of the world. To make an end if we be not holy complete in him
alone, the Name and title of Messiah, or Christ, that is to say anointed, and
dedicated of God the Father to that effect, can not appertain unto him.

If then we can not content our selves with his only word faithfully preached,
and afterward registered and truly recorded by writing by his Prophets and
Apostles, it is as much as to dispossess him of the degree of a prophet. And
in case also we will make new laws, to bind the consciences of men, we take
from him the dignity of the head and spiritual kingdom of the Church. And
whosoever shall take upon him, to offer him for the remission of sins or shall
not be content to take him for our only intercessour and advocate in heaven,
between God and man, he takes from him the dignity of his everlasting
priesthod. Thirdly we disagree in the definition, the spring and the effects of
faith, which we term with S. Paul, justifying faith, by the which only we do
affirm that Jesus Christ and all his merits be applied to us.

Touching good works, if any man think that we set not by them, he is much
misenfourmed, for we do no more separate faith from charity, the^ heat and
light can be saperated from the fire. And we say with S. John in his first
Canonical Epistell, that he that says he knows God, and keeps not his
co^maundamentes, lies, and no truth is in him.

But concerning this purpose, we confess plainly that we disagree in three
principal points.

The first, touching the beginning, and the spring from the which good works
do proceed.

The second, what works be good works.

The third, to what respect they be good.

Touching the first, we find none other free will in man, but that which
receives freedom by the only grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. And we say,
that our nature being in the state which it is fallen into, needs before all
other things not to be aided and vpholden, but to be mortified and killed by
the virtue of the Spirit of God, for so much as his grace finds it not
only wounded and much weakened, but altogether destitute of force and repugning
to al good, yea dead and rotten in sin and corruption. And therefore do we
not to him so much dishonor as to make our selves parteners with him, to
whose grace and mercy working in us, is to be given the beginning, the
myddle, and the end of our good works.

Touching the second point, we do not receive any other rule of justice and
obedience before God, but his commandments as they be written and registered
in his holy word, to the which we do not take it lawefull for any man to add
or diminish, to bind therewith man's conscience.

Touching the third point to wit in what respect they be good: our belief
is, that so far forth as they proceed from the Spirit of God working in us,
they ought to be called good, for that they issue from so good a spring, and
yet if God should examine them rigorously, there would be ^ounde matter enough
and enough ^o the disaduauntage of them.

We say further, that they be good in another respect, that is ^o say:
forsomuche as God is by them glorified, men be drawn to the knowledge of him,
and we all be assured the Spirit of God being in us, which is known by his
effects, that we be of the number of the elected, and of them that be
predestined to salvation.

But if a question be moved, by what title everlasting life does appertain
unto us, we say with S. Paul, that it is a free gift of God, and no recompense
any way due unto our merits. For Jesus Christ in this behalf instifieth us
by his only justice, being imparted to us, sanctifies us by his only
holiness, being by him freely given to us, and has redeemed us by his only
Sacrifice, which is auailable to us, having in us a true and a lively faith by
the grace only and liberality of God.

All those treasures be communicated to us by the power of the holy Ghost,
vsinge for that effect the preachinge of the Gospel of God, and the
administration of his holy Sacraments. Not for that he needs any such matter
for the putting in ure of his said power, he being almighty: but for that it
pleases him to be served with these ordinary means, to breed and nourishe in
us the precious gift of faith, which is as it were the only hand, and the
only vessel to take hold of Jesus Christ, and to receive him with all his
treasures to our salvation.

And to the intent we may declare what we do admit for the word of GOD: we
admit nothing but the doctrine written in the holy Prophets, and the
Apostles, termed the new and old Testament. For by whom shall we assure us
of our salvation; but by such a^ (...) thereof, without reprothe, and against
whom none exceptions can be taken.

And touching the writings of ancient doctors and Councelles, we think it
convenient before we do receive them, as matter whereunto nothing can be again
said, to confer them thoroughly, and to see them to agree with the holy
Scriptures and among them selves also, considering that the Spirit of God is
never disagreing from it self.

Which we believe (my Lords) you will never go about to enterprise: if you do,
yt shall like you to pardon us if we do not believe till we do see it done,
that you shall ever be hable to bring it to pass.

How then? are we of the cursed race of Came, the son of Noe who disconered
the pri^^^^ of his Father? Do we think our selves more conning and better
learned then so many ancient doctors both Greeks and Latiues? Be we so
presumptuous, as to think that we are the first that brought truth to light,
and to condemn the whole world of ignorance? God forbid (my Lords) that we
should be such: but it may like you to remember that there has been Councels
and Councels, doctors and doctors, for these he not the first days that
false prophets have been in the Church of God, of whom the Apostles have given
us warning in diverse places, namely in the fourth Chapter of the first to
Timothye, and Act. the xx. Secondly, touching the said ancient writtinges,
forasmuch as all truth that may be found in them must of necessity by
drawn out of holy Scripture: what more sure way can we find to study, and
use them to our profit, then to try them by that touch stone, and to way
and consider the testimonies and reasons of the Scriptures, upon the which
they have grounded their expositions.

Surely no man can or ought to attribute any more to them, then their selves
do require: whereupon harken what S. Iherome says upon the Epistle to the
Galathians. The doctrine (says he) of the holy Ghost, is that which is set
forth in the Scripture and Canonical writtinges, against the which if
Councelles shall ordeine any thing, it is unlawful, and not to be admitted.
And S. Augustine writtinge to Fortunatian: We ought not (says he) to account
the reasons and dispntacions of men, of what estimacion and how Catholic
soever they be, or have been, in equal degree with the Canonical Scriptures,
or of such an authority, as it may not be lawful for us, (the reverence
due to such personages reserved) to reprove and reiecte any thing in their
wrytinges, wharein it may be found that they have judged other wise then
truth will bear them being so found and understood, with the help of Gods
grace, by me or by any others. This think I of other men's wrytinges, and the
same liberty do I give to such as shall take the pains to be readers of any
thing that my self shall write. As much to the same sense writes he in his
11^. Epistle, and in like sort in his second book 37. Chapter against
Chresconius.

Saint Ciprian also writteth in the same wise, saying that it behooves us not
to regard what this man or that man has done before our times: but what Jesus
Christ has done before all men's times. And the same rule gives S. Augustine,
writting to Saint Iherome. And in another place disputing against them, that
for the maintenance of their opinions alleged the authority of the Council
of Arimine: Let us ground our self (says he) neither I upon the Council of
Nice, which nevertheless is the most ancient approved Council: neither you
upon the Council of Arimine, but let us cleave and stand fast to the holy
Scriptures. Saint Chrysostom was of the same opinion, who in his second
exposition upon Saint Matthew in his xlix. Homely, says: The Church stays
it self upon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apostles.

And to conclude in this matter, we do receive and take the holy Scriptures
for an entier and a perfect declaration of all things necessary for our
salvation. And touching such matter as may be found in Councels, or the books
of any ancient doctors, we can not nor ought not to let you, but that you
may allege them to your aid, and we also, so as it be grounded upon the
express tistimonie of the holy Scripture. But for the love of God, bring not
to us their bare authoritis, unless the same be thoroughly examined upon the
touch stone before mentioned. For we say with Saint Augustine, in his second
book of Christian doctrine, in the vi. Chapter: If there fall any difficulty
in the interpretation of any one passage, the holy Ghost has so tempered the
holy Scripture, as that which is in one place obscuredly spoken, is in an
other place spoken more clearly.

And thus much for this point, which I have drawn some what the more at
length, to the intent that all men may understand that we be not enemies to
councelles, neither to the holy fathers, by the which it has pleased God to
teach and instruct his Church.

There are yet two matters behind, to wit, the matter of the Sacraments,
and the discipline and policy of the Church.

Touching the first: truth it is that it were requisite, it were treated of
at good length, because of the difficulties that be this day thereof in the
state of Christendom. But because I have not at this time taken upon me to
dispute, but rather to set forth shortly the principal points of our
conference: I will content my self to declare summarelie what we do think,
and hold therein.

We be as I take it concerning this word Sacrament, of one accord, to wit:
that Sacraments be signs visible, by means whereof the conjunction and unity
which we have with our Lord Jesus Christ, is not to us simply signified or
figured, but is to us verelye and truly offered on the behalf of the Lord,
and consequently ratified, sealed, and as it were graven by the virtue of the
holy Ghost, in such as by true faith do apprehend, and take hold of that
which is to them so signified and presented.

I use this word signified (my Lords) not meaning thereby to weak or to
diminishe the dignity of the Sacraments, but to note a difference between the
sign, and the thing that signifies it in all virtue and efficacy.

We do also agree that to the Sacraments, there is necessarily required a
celestial and supernatural mutation. For we do not say that the water of the
holy Baptism, is simply water, but that it is a true Sacrament of our
regeneration, and of the washing of our souls, by the blood of Jesus Christ.

In like sort we do not say, that in the holy Supper of the Lord, the brrad is
simply bread: but that it is the Sacrament of the precious body of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which was delivered for us. Neither that wine, is only and
simply wine: but that it is the Sacrament of the precious blood which was shed
for us.

But here with we do not say, that this mutation is made in the substance of
the signs, but in the use and end for the which they be ordained. Neither do
we say that they be made by virtue of certain words pronounced, neither by
the intent of him that pronounces the same: but by the only power and will of
him that ordained this heavenly and godly action, whose ordinance in this
behalf, ought to be rehearsed with a loud voice, and in such language, as
the assistauntes do understand, to whom it ought also to be plainly
expounded, to the intent they may understand it, and receive it accordingly:
And thus much concerning the outward signs. Let us now come to that, that
is testified and exhibited of the Lord by these signs.

We do not say, as some for lack of good understanding of us, do judge, that
we do teach, that is to say, that in the holy Supper of the Lord, there is
nothing but a simple and naked remembrance of the death of Jesus Christ.

Neither do we say, that by the said holy Supper, we be made partakers only
of the fruit of his death and passion, but we do join the ground with the
fruits that come of it, saying with Saint Paul in his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the tenth Chapter: That the bread which we break in such sort
as he has ordained, is the communication of the very body of Jesus Christ,
that was delivered for us. And the Cup whereof we drink, is the
Communication of the very blood that was shed for us, yea in the same
substance that he took in the womb of the virgin Marie, and that he carried
from us into heaven.

And I pray you (my Lords) in the Name of God, what can you seek or find
in this holy Sacrament, but we do seek and sinde the same also.

I do understand what you will say straight. Some of you will require us, to
confess that the bread and wine be transfourmed: I say not into the
Sacraments of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that have we
confessed all ready, but into the very natural body, and the proper and
natural blood of Christ.

Others peradventure will not press us so narowly, but will require us to
agree, that the body and blood be reallye and corporally other within, or
with, or under the bread.

In which point (my Lords) I beseech you for the honor of God, to give ear
to us patiently, without taking any offense of our sayings, and for a time
to put away all the ill opinion that you have conceived of us.

When either the one or the other of these two opinions shall be by the holy
Scripture proved to us, we yield our selves ready to embrace it, and to
stand to it to the death. But for the small measure of knowledge, that it has
pleased God to impart unto us, it seems that this transubstantiation, agrees
not in any similitud and conuenien^ie of our faith, farasmuche as it is
directly contrary to the true nature of the Sacraments. In the which it is
necessary that the substanciall Signs contymie, being true Signs of the
substance of the body and blood of Jesus Christ. And besides this, it
overthrows the verity of man's nature in Christ* and of his ascension. The
same do I say of the second opinion, that is of the consubstanciation, which
has no foundation upon the word of Jesus Christ, and is never a whit
necessary to make us partakers of the fruit of the Sacraments.

If heerupon any man will This place he hand leth again in his declaration.
ask us, whether our minds be to seelude Jesus Christ from his Supper, we
say we mean no such matter. But if we have regard to the distaunce of places,
as must needs have, when the question rises of the corporal presence, and of
his humanity, distinctly considered, we say his body is so far from the
bread and wine, as the greatest height of heaven, is distaunte from the earth,
forsomuche as touching us, we be upon the earth and so be the Sacraments
also, and touching him his flesh is in heaven, in such sort glorified, that as
Saint Augustine says, has not taken away the nature of a very body, but
has rydde from it all infirmities and imperfections belonging naturally
thereunto.

And if any body will hereof conclude, that hereby we make Jesus Christ to be
away from his holy Supper, we answer that he concludes a wrye, for we do to
God this honor, that we believe according to his word, that albeit his body
presently is in heaven, and in none other place, and we upon the earth, and not
else where, we be nevertheless made partakers of his body and blood, in a
spiritual sort, by mean of faith, as verily as we se the Sacraments with
our eyes, touch them with our hands, put them in our mouths, and live with
the substance of them, in this corporal life.

You see in a sum (my Lords) what our belief is in this point, which as
seems to us (and in case we be deceived we would be glad to understand it)
offered no violence to the words of Jesus Christ, neither yet to the article
of Asce^tion, neither to the ordinance and foundation of the Sacraments,
neither yet opens away to any questions or distinctio^s, curious and
combersome to be dissolved*

And further it hinders not our conjunction and unity with Jesus Christ, for
the which end principally the said Sacraments were ordained, and not to be
worshipped, showed, kept, or carried about, neither yet offered to God. And to
make an end: This belief, if we be not deceived, imports more honor to the
power and word of the Son of God, then does the other that supposes the
body of Christ to be really coupled with the signs, or else we might not be
partakers thereof.

I shall not need to touch any point of that may concern the administration
of Baptism, for that I am sure none of you (my Lords) will think so ill of
us, as to accoumpte us to be of the rank of the Anabaptists, which sect has
this day no greater enemies then we be to it. And as for other particular
questions in this matter, we trust with the aid of God, that being the
principal controversy agreed upon, by this friendly and quiet conference, the
rest will take end of it self.

Touching other commonly called holy Sacraments: truth it is that we can not
gene the^ that name, till we be better taught so to do by holy Scriptures.

And yet in the mean time we Confirmation.
think we have sufficiently astablisihed the true confirmation, the office
whereof is to catechize, and to instruct such as have been baptized in their
infancy, and generally all persons before they ought to be admitted to the
holy Supper.

We teach also true penitence, Penance.
which lies in the true knowledge of our fautes, and the satisfaction of the
parties by us offended either publikelie or perticulerlye, and in the
absolution which we have by the blood of Christ, and in the amendinge of our
lives.

We do allow Matrimony, according Matrimony.
to the ordinance of S. Paul, in all them that have not the gift of
continency, to the which, we think not to be lawful to bind any person, by
vow, or perpetual profession, and with that we condemn all whordome,
wantounesse, and loosenes, both in words, gesture, and deeds.

We do very well admit degrees in Ecclesiastical charges, in such Orders
sort as God has ordained them in his house by his holy word.

We do also allow visitations of the sick, as a principal part of the holy
ministry of the Gospel.

We do teach with S. Paul no man to be judged in the difference of days and
meats, knowing that the kingdom of God lies not in such corruptible
things. But in this part we condemn all dissolution, exhorting incessauntly
all men to sober living, to the mortification of the flesh, according to each
man's necessity, and to continual prayer.

The last point now rests, which is touching outward order, and policy
of the ecclesiastical estate, wherein we think (my Lords) we may say without
offense, that all is at this day so perverted, so confounded, and in such
ruin, as it will be hard for the best Masters and deuisers of works that be
at this time alive (well considering the common order and state at this
present of the Church with the life's, manners and conversation of the
ecclesiastical persons) to espy out the old signs, and marks of the buildinge
so well devised, compassed, and framed by the Apostles, whereof your selves can
somewhat bear witness, having these days passed, travailed about the
reformation thereof. And because these matters be so well known, we mind not
to hold any further purpose of them, being specially things better to be kept
in silence, then to be spoken of abroad.

And to conclude, we proteste before God and his holy Angels, before your
Majesty and this right honorable company that sits round about you, that
our desire and intent is nothing but to have the form of the Church brought
again to the natural pureness and beauty, in the which it so greatly flourished
in the time of the Apostles, and of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And touching those things that sithen that time have been added, and have
crepte into the Church, such of them as shall appear clearly to be
supersticious, or manifestlye contrary to the word of God, to be utterly
abolished: such as be superfluous, to be cut of: and such as by experience we
have seen to lead men to supersticion, to be taken quite away. And if any
shall be found expedient, and seruinge to edifyinge, being judged to be of
that sort, after ripe wayinge of them by the ancient Canons and authority of
the fathers: let them continue, and be retained, kept, and observed in the
Name of God, according as may be thought to be convenient for the time, place,
and persons, to the intent that drawing all by one string, we may serve God in
spirit and truth, under your protection and obedience, Sire, and under the
government of such, as God has appointed, under your Majesty to have the
order of the administration of this Realm. And if there be any, Sire, that yet
do think that the doctrine whereof we make profession, does by any mean,
divert, and draw subjects from their obedience, which they ought to bear to
their Princes and superiors: we have, Sire, to answer the^ withal, in good
and upright consciences.

Truth it is, that we do teach the chiese and principal obedienonce to be
due to God, king of kings, and Lord over all lords, For the rest, if our
writings be not sufficient, to purge us of that foul fault laid unto our
charge: we will for our defense, Sire, allege the example of so many
provinces, Seignories, Principalities, yea and Realms, reformed, according
unto this self same doctrine which, God be thanked, may serve us for good and
sufficient witnesses to discharge us. To be short, we do in this point clean
to S. Paul's saying, in the 13. Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, where
speaking of the temporal policy, he enioyneth enery man expressly to be
subject to the higher powers. Yea, says Saint Chrysostom upon the same place:
though thou were an Apostle, or Euangeliste, for such subjection takes nothing
away from the service of God.

And in case it has heretofore happened, or may hereafter happen, that any
cloking them selves with our doctrine, shall be found culpable of R^bellion, to
the worste of your officers, Sire, we proteste before God and your Majesty,
that they be none of ours, and that they can have no greater enemies to them,
so doing then we be, so far as our poor estate and condition can reach.

To make an end, Sire, our bounden duty to do the best we can for, the
aduauncing of Gods glory, the obedience and humble service which we owe to
your Majesty, the zeal and affection that we bear to our country, and
specialie to the Church of God: has this day brought us hither, trusting to
Almyghtye God, that following the course of his goodness and mercies, he will
with his grace work in you, as he did in little king Josias ij. thousand, two
hundred and two years (...) the (...) of (...) auar^^^
sithen. And that under your gracious government Madame, being assisted with
you Sire, and other right honorable Princes, and Lords of the Council, the
ancient memory of the most famous Queen Clotilde, shall be renewed: by whose
good mean, as Gods instrument, the knowledge of his religion, was brought into
this Realine. This is our full trust Sire, for the bringing of which thing to
pass, we are ready to employ our lives, to the end that serving your
Majesty in a thing so holy, and so commendable, we may se and enjoy the true
golden world, in the which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ may be served: to
whom be honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Here Master de Beze and his company bowed their knees to the ground: and
afterward rising again, he presented a confession to the king, containing the
faith of certain reformed Churches in France, in such sort as follows.

Sire, we beseech your Majesty that it may please the same, to have no
regard to our rude and ill polyshed language, but to way our good wylles
and affections, altogether dedicated to you. And forasmuch as the points and
articles of our faith and doctrine, be plainly and at better lenght contained
in this present confession af our faith, which we have once already presented
to your Majesty, whereupon the present conference is to proceed: we humbly
beseech your Majesty, to show us again so much favor, as to receive it at
our ^andes in this place, trusting by the help of the grace of almighty God,
that after we shall have conferred together, in all sobriety, and reverence of
his Name, you s^all find us all of one accord. And in case our sins shall be
a let, that it shall not so come to pass, yet doubt we not but that your
Majesty, with his good Council, shall be hable to bring the thing to a quiet
end without prejudice of either party: as to reason and Gods honor shall seem
best to appertain.

FINIS.
A brief writing, exhibited by Master Theodore de Beze, to the Queen Mother at
Poissy, the x. day of September: containing a declaration of certain points
proponed by him the day before in the presence of the King, the Queen Mother,
the king of Navarre, etc. Being present also there a number of Cardinals and
Bisshoppes, and other Ministers of the Church. 1561.

To the Queen.
MADAME, whereas your right humble servant Theodore de Beze, has some
occasion to fear that your Majesty should not remain satisfied with a
speech that passed from him yesterday, in the declaration of a matter which
to his great grief, was by my Lords the Prelates found very strange. He
most humble desires your Maistie, that it may please you to understand at
better lenght, such purpose as he could not then sufficiently express, by
reason of a noise reased in such sort, as the knitting up of his matter was
not hard, nor conceived of the hearers, according as his desire was it
should have been, and as he meant to have had it.

Madame, the cause that led me to enter to that matter, was, for that there
are many that for lack of good understanding of the confession of our faith,
do think our teaching to be to shut out Jesus Christ from his holy Supper,
which were a manifest impiety. For we do know (thanks be given to God) that
that blessed Sacrament was ordained by the Son of God, to the end that being
made more and more partakers of the substance of his very body and of his
very blood, we might be so much the nere united and incorporated with him, to
draw to us thereby the eternal life. And doutlesse, if it were otherwise it
should not be the Supper of the Lord.

And, Madame, so far be we from willing or meaning to say that Christ is
absente from his Supper, as contrarily there are no kind of men that can
less bear such a sacrilege then we.

Truth it is, that there is a great difference, to say that Jesus Christ is
present at his holy Supper, giving unto us there at his very body and very
blood: and to say that his body and blood are joined with the bread and the
wine. I have confessed the first, which is the principal. The last I have
denied, for that I take it to be directely against the verity of the human
nature of the body of Christ, and to the article of the Ascension, as it is
contained in the holy Scripture and declared by all the ancient Doctors of
the Church.

I will not here allege many places and reasons. Only Madame I beseech your
Majesty most humbly to way and consider with your self, whether of the two
opinions carries with it the more honor to the word and ordinance of God,
either that, which would make us to believe that we can not be made partakers
of the body of Christ, unless it be put and joined really with the Sacrament:
or else the other that teaches us that albeit his body does presently remain
in heaven and not elsewhere* yet by the spiritual virtue of it, and by the
mean of a right and true faith, we that be on the earth and do believe in him,
be made partakers of his very body and his very blood, as truly and as
certainlye as we see with our eyes, and touch with our hands the holy
visible Sacraments of the bread and wine, which he has ordained to that
effect.

If this declaration. Madame, which long time sithen has been set forth
among my wrytynges (albeit I could not yesterdaye do you to understand the
same) may satisfy your Majesty: I shall have great cause to praise and
thank God hyghly therefore. If not, I will be so bold as to desire yet so
much favor at your hand, as that I may satisfy your Majesty more fully by
mouth, in the presence (if it shall so be thought needful) of such as by whom
you shall think I may receive knowledge and learning, as one that has great
need thereof, and that does desire nothing so much as to learn more and
more, whereby I may be the more hable to do your Majesty service in the
establishing of so wholesome and so holy a concord and agreement.

These be the very words by me spoken, where with my Lords the Prelates seem
to be much offended.

If thereupon they will ask if Rehearsal of the words, spoken the day before.
my meaning be to make Christ absent from his Supper, I say nay: Believing
nevertheless, that waying the distaunce of the plates (for so must we do when
the question touches corporal presence) and considering distinctly his
humanity, his body is as far from the bread and wine, as the highest part
of heaven is from the earth. If any man will conclude hereof, that we make
Christ absent from his Supper, we think him to conclude ill.

For this honor do we give to God, that according to his holy Word, albeit
the body of Christ be in heaven, and we on the earth: yet be we made partakers
of his body and blood, as verily in a spiritual manner, and by faith, as we do
see the Sacraments with our eyes, and put them into our mouths, and do live
with the substance of them, in this corporal life* These were my words.

For the confirmation whereof* here what S. Augustine says in his fifte
treaty upon S. John. When Jesus Christ said, you shall not always have me
with you, he speak of the presence of his body. For concerning his Majesty,
his providence, and his invisible grace, he has fully accomplished his promise
made in an other place: I will be with you til the end of the world. But
concerning the nature of man taken of him, concerning that he was borne of the
virgin Mary, concerning that he was crucified, buried, and raised from death
to life this sentence is accomplished: you shall not always have me with you.
And why? for that touching his body, he was conuersaunt 40. days with his
disciples, and from the same disciples, following him with their eyes, and not
going after him, he ascended into heaven at the end of 40. days, and is no
more here.

The same S Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus.

In as much as he is God, he is every where, in that he is man, he is in heaven.

Vigilins Bishop of Trent, which wrote against the heresy of the Eutychians
about the year of Christ 500. says.

The Son of God is deparred from us touching his humanity, but touching his
divinity he says unto us: I am with you till the end of the world. He is
with us, and he is not with us, for he has not left nor forsaken, touching
his divinity, them that he has left, and is departed from us touching his
humanity. Touching the form of a servant which he has lift up into
heaven out of our company, he is absent: but touching the form of God which
departs not from us, he is present with us.

Again, when his flesh was on the earth, certainly it was not in heaven, now
that it is in heaven, as certainly it is not on the earth, and so is he absent
as we do still look for him, which we do believe to be with us on the earth, in
that he is the word, to come again from h^auen corporally. and fleshly.

And in an other place, The only Son of God, with was also made man, is
conceived in one place by the nature of the flesh, and is contained in no place
touching the nature of his divinity.

The confession asweall of the Protestants as of there adversary party of lait
days assembled at Poissy in France concerning the presence of Jesus Christ in
the holy Supper whereof let our Papists chose which best likes them and so
remove the error of transubstantiation.

La Confession du dernier iour de Septembre, 1561.
ENtant que la Foy rend les chooses promises presents, and que ceste Foy prent
tresueritablement le corpse and le sang de nostre seigneur Jesus Christ par la
virtue du saint Esprit, en cestegard nous confessons la presence du corpse and
du sang diceluy en la saint Cene: en la quelle il nous present, done, and
exhibe veritablement la substance de son corpse and de son sang par loperatio^
de son saint Esprit: and nous receuons, and mangeons spirituelement and par
foy cest corpse, qui est mort pour nous: pour estre os de ses os, and chair de
sa chair, a fin den estre vinifiez, and parceuoir tout ce, qui sy recoit, a
nostre salut.

Autre Confession du premier Dottobre, 1561.
The Confession of the one party presented the last day of September, 1561.
FOr as much as faith makes present the things that be promised, and that the
sam faith receaueth most assuredly the body and the blood of our lord Jesus by
the virtue of the holy Spirit. In this respect we confess the presence of the
body and of the blood of ye sam our lord Jesus in ye holy Supper. In the which
he presents, gives and exhibiteth verily the substance of his body and of
his blood by operation of his holy Spirit: and we receive and eat spiritually
and by faith the body which dead for us, to be bon of his bones, and flesh of
his flesh: to the end that we may be quickened and to receive all that which is
requisite for our salvation.

The Confession of the other part presented the first of October, 1561.
NOus confessons, que Jesus Christ en sa saint Cene nous present, done, and
exhibe veritableme^t la substance de son corpse and de son sang par loperation
de son saint Esprit, and que nous receuons and mangeons sacramentellement,
spirituellement, and parfoy ce propre corpse, qui est mort pour nous: pour estre
os de sesos, and chair de sa chair: a fin den estre viuifiez, and parcenoir
tout ce, qui est requis a nostre salut. Et pource que la foy appuyee sur la
parolle de Dieu, rend and fait les chooses promises presents: and que par ceste
foy nous y prenons vraiement and de faict le vray and naturel corpse and sang de
nostre Seigneur par la virtue de son saint Esprit: en cest egard nous
confessons la presence du corpse and sang diceluy en la saint Cene.

WE confess that Jesus Christ in his holy Supper presents, gives and verily
offers unto us the substance of his body and his blood, by ye operation of
his holy Spirit. And that we receive and eat sacramentally, spiritually and by
faith that sam body which died for us to be bon of his bones and flesh of his
flesh to the end that we may be quickened and perceive all that which is
requiset for our salvation. And because that faith grounded upon the word of
God makes and gives present the things promised: and that by this faith we
verily and in effect receive the natural body and blood of our Lord by the
virtue of his holy Spirit, in this respect we confess the presence of his
body and blood in the holy Supper.

De la part des ministres,
Maistres
Pierre Martyr Theodore de Beze Nic. des Gallars Augustine Marlorat Iean de
Lespine.
Pourla part des do creurs and euesques,

Messieurs
Leuesque de Vala^ce Leuesque de Sees Salinac Bouteiller Despence.
For the part of the ministers,

Masters
Peter Martyr Theodore de Beze Nicolas de Gallas Augustine Marlorat John de
Lespine.
For the part of the doct. and bischoppes,

My lords
Bischop of Valence Bischoppe of Sees Sallignac Bouceiller Despence.
WE know not which of the Confessions was presented by the party of the
Protestants neither which by the Bischoppes but let our Papists chese either
and let us give glory unto God whose verity compels his enemies to confess
that which they have long denied.

Arise, o Lord, let thy enemies be confounded. Amen.
The end.
Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Robet Lekprewik,

Cum priuilegio.

1561.


