RECVSANTS CONVERSION: A SERMON PREACHED AT St. JAMES, before the PRINCE on the
25. of February. 1608.

BY DANIELL PRICE Master of Arts, of Exeter College in Oxford.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1608.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE HENRY, PRINCE OF Great Britain and DVKE of
CORNWAYL, the glory of grace in this life and the grace of glory in the future.
REligious and most Gracious Prince, let me crave pardon for my presumption, in
offering that unto the eye of the world, which I lately preached in the ear of
your Highness. The vnde served and unexpected attention, and former acception
of these labors, have drawn this little gift, in representation of my
remembrance therein: With this, I present my self and service, being ever
ready with all my power to do your Highness the humblest duty, thinking my
self happy, when I may perform any thing which may testify my true,
zealous, and dutiful affection. Your highness has already cunning Aholiab,
and Bezaleel, sweet singing David, Parable speaking Ecclesiastes, Sin smiting
Micaiah, Jonas powerful for Contrition, Peter potent for compunction, Barnabas
singular for Consolation. These all have dedicated and consecrated their
labors to the building of Gods temple in you: For my own part I confess I am
not able with these, to bring taches, or rings, or earings, or bracelets, or
jewels of gold, or Onix sto^es, or Sittim wood, or ointme^ts, or spices, or
perfumes, but the little oil which I have, I desire to present for the light
of the Temple. Your Grace is the comfort of the old, the hope of the young,
and the joy of all, tanqua^ ad clarum and beneficum sidus certatim ad volant,
they strive to flock to your Highness as to the comfortable star of their
happiness, wishes, prayers, presents, be their offerings. With me it is worse
then with many, I have nothing to present, unless as Eschines did to Socrates,
I should present my self, and ah las in my self I find that there is such a
disproportion between a presents worthiness* and my weakness, that even in
this, I had been disanimated, had I not been by your gracious favor
encouraged. It now remains, that in the hu^blest manner I can devise, I wholly
resign my self, studies, labors, endeavors, and course of life to your
Highness protection and disposition, craving pardon for my boldness, and ever
praying for your Highness blessedness, that you may be truly gracious in this
life, and truly glorious in the life to come.

Your Highness most humbly devoted in all service DANIELL PRICE.

Esaias. 2.3. Come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house
of the God of Jacob.


WHen the Lord, for many years together had manifested himself, to be the God
of Israel and expected that his people would become the Israel of God, it
proved at the length, that Isreal's sins, made them to become Ismaels sons,
and of a chosen generation a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people, a holy
nation, they became an unwise and foolish generation, a disobedient and
rebellious generation, a generation that set not their hearts aright, and whose
spirit was not confident in their God, dishonouring Gods Majesty, despising
Gods mercy, abusing his goodness, abasing his glory, profaning the Kings
holyday the Saboath of the Lord, poluting the Sanctuary the Chamber of Presence
of the Lord, neglecting his precepts the Acts of Parliament of the Lord,
conte^ning his holy-ones the Privy Counsel of the Lord, not regarding him as a
father who had adopted them his sons, or as a Master who had hired them his
servants, or as a husband who had espoused them as his wife, or as a Lord who
had delivered them as his people, out of the fie^y furnace of the land of
Egypt of the house of bondage. Herevpo^ the Lord sent forth his heavenly
heralds the Prophets, with their celestial proclamations, to signify his
anger conceived against their sins, and yet his mercy if it were received by
sinners, that so he might invi^e those that did rebel, incite those that did
neglect, hasten those that did linger, and recall those that did wander, to sue
out their pardons and to recover those places that they had lost in the house
of his Courts. Etym. nom. Prophetarum.
Thus sent he forth Esaias his health to heal their sickness, Jeremy his
exaltation to bring them to humiliation, Esekiell his strength to help their
weakness, Daniel his judgment to manifest his mercy and by these 4. as by 4.
tru^pets or by the 4. winds or by the 4. rivers of Paradise or by the 4.
Evangelists he does send out his spiritual Pursevants with their celestial
proclamatio^s. Our Prophet Esaias is one of these four who having sounded a
Parle in the former Chapter and having contested with this people, Summa totius
primi capitis.
proves that they are a sinful nation, a people full of iniquity, seed of the
wicked, corrupt children, their whole head sick and their whole heart beauy so
that from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head nothing but wounds
and sores and swelling and corruption, the land wast, the cities burnt Zion
like a beseedged City, the faithful City become a harlot, the silver dross,
the wine water, the Princes rebellious: and that therefore the Lord would
consume the^ and utterly overthrow them. Yet not withstanding all this their
misery, in this Chapter, he prophecieth of Gods great mercy, that there
shall be a time of the restoration of the Church, of the erection of the Temple,
of the election of the Gentiles, the house of the Lord shall be prepared upon the
mountain and the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the
top of the mountains and shall be exalted above all the hills and the people shall
resort thereunto, and shall mutually and reciprocally, excite, and solicit, each
others with these words of my Text. Come and let us go up to the house of the
Lord to the mountain of the God of Jacob. Which words emblematicallie do
describe Ecclesia militantis symbolum, triumphantis exercitium the true sign
of the Church militant on earth, and the holy exercise of the Church triumphing
in heaven. Wherein if devotion, compunction, conversion, assention, or religion
may move, let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says unto the
Church, or rather what the Church speaks with the spirit, come and let us go
up to the mountain of the Lord to the house of the God of Jacob. If unity;
amity, or vnamitie may move, if the prophet who was a noble courtier or the
people who were worthy Converts, or the place they go to, to the house of God,
or the God of that house Deus Iacobi may draw attention from you. O then come,
and see, and hear, and taste, the gracious goodness of the Lord in the society
of his Saints, with one mind and one mouth inuiting one another with these
words come and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord to the house of the
God of Jacob: Come here is the mutual inuitatio^, let us, here is the loving
conjunction, Go up here is the spiritual assentio^ to the mountain of the
Lord. here is the place for heavenly devotion* to the house of the God of Jacob
here is the Lord of hosts habitation. Come and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord to the house of the God of Jacob. Without any further descant,
observe with me these particulars. 1. a motive Come 2. the persons mutually
moving and moved let us. 3. Division.
the subject of the moutie go up. 4. the place whether they go to the
mountain of the Lord. etc.

These be the gests of these Gentiles progress, and the points in the
progress, 1. Obs. Illir. clascript.
that J am to point at And first let the motive move you to attention Come.
Illiricus notes that the word in the original signifies, as much as hasten or
dispatch and Montanus on the same word observes Hoc verbum studiorum
excitationem, magis quam corporis metum explicat. In hos c. 6.1
That this word signifies not so much a motion of the body as a devotion of
the mind, and yet sometimes may signify both, as Aquinas on the like place
notes by these words. Venite add^mum Dei, venite ad doctrinam huius domus, 1
Doctrine.
venite ad obedientia^ huius doctrinae. The word Come in this place
administreth this doctrine that it is the duty of Gods children, not only to
be forward themselves in godliness but also as much as they may to draw on
others as St Hierome observes. Non sunt propria salute contenti sed se mutuo
prouocant. Reason. Hier. in Hoseam 6.1. Reason of doct.
The reason of this doctrine is this every Christian must work by faith to
apprehend his own salvation, and also by love to comprehend as many as he
may, within the compass of the promise: Now faith works by love, and mutual
love is so especially required as without this faith is dead, hope a vain
presuming, holiness hypocrifie, zeal, surie, love being the mother of grace,
the daughter of sanctity the glass of religion, the marriadge garment and the
key of Paradise, and seeing that faith works by love, what greater love can
there be, of one to a another then for Christians to bring their brethren from
the snares of Satan into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Grego.
Hom. 10. in Ezech.
Gregory in his Homiles upon Ezethiel observes this, Quid est quod haec
pennata animalia vicissim alas alteram ad alieram feriunt etc. What does the
joint moving of these Cherubins signify but that all the Saints of God do by
their virtues incite one another to the performance of holy duties? Aquinas.
Aquinas upon the 12. of Esaias, urges that as sinners do incite others, to
wickedness by drawing cords of vanity with the cartropes of iniquity, how
much more should the Godly seek to draw others to the affection of religious
piety. For seeing that the wicked cry Come and let us lay wait for blood
Prove. 1: 11. How much more should the godly excite each others, with o come
and let us sing unto the Lord. Psalm. 95.1. seeing that the wicked cry Come to
Bethel and transgress, to Gilgal and multiply transgressions. Prove. 1.11,
^sal, 95.1. Amos, 4.4. Hosea, 6.1. ^us. in Chro. Epiph. ^^rs. 78. Orig, lib. ^
in Gen, ^sid, de rit ^anct, Eus. l. 3.1. Chro. 12 Hom. 2.
to say Come and let us return unto the Lord? Hosea. 6.

This has been the practice of the godly in all ages being themselves called
and reclaimed and converted to convert, and to reclaim others. So did the
Apostles the blessed servants of our Lord and Savior being called from
fishermen to be fishers of men, they converted many nations, as Ecclesiastical
histories testify a Peter converting Antiochia, b John Asia, c Andrew Scithia,
d Philip Gallia, e Thomas Parthia, f Bartholomew Armenia, Hier. in epis. ad Gal
Fact Chro Baronius and all.
Simon Zelotes Mesapotamia, and Joseph of Arimathea our Britannia. Yea not only
the instructions but also the actions of very heathens have bin potent motives
to the wisest and worthiest of the world drawing many to the imitation of their
virtues. The speech of Alexander his Tropheys and Victories was the cause of
Cesars affecting and obtaining that renowned glory as Suetonius records: Sue
in Iulio Plut in The mistocle.
And the cause of Themistocles glory was the following of Miltiades steps of
dignity, as Plutarch testifies. And so those many examples, of Hercules
fortitude, Marcus Aurelius wisdom, Anthonius Pius, care of the Common wealth,
Aristoteles learning, Catoes severity, Scipio his continency, Loelius amity,
Fabritius integrity, Phillip of macedon his policy, made them to be as
presidents of these virtues to al succeeding ages, Aug. lib. 5 de ciuitate Dei
c. 15.16
in so much that St Austin proves that they have bin honored in all nations,
not only bringing other nations in subjection to their Country, but also in
drawing them to the imitation of their excellency by their precepts and
counsels, and instructions, and actions. Much more is the power and force,
and much more shall be the honor of those that lead others, to Godliness, surely
they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that
turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars for ever more Dan. 12.3.
Dan. 12.3
And therefore the Lord in Ezech. Commands every one to cause on another to
return Ezec. 18.32. Exodus 18 3
Exhorting one another, and provoking one another, and edifieing one another as
the Apostle counsels. 1. The. s 5.^
1 Thessalonians. 5.11. every man concluding as the Psalmist lo here am J and the
serva^t and the subject and the people, and the children that thou have given
me. A doctrine serving first for this use, to encouradge al true and faithful
Christians to take every opportunity to bring others unto the Lord, Vsus
and to use all means for their brethrens salvation, but especially concerning
those that are in place of eminency and authority, because the actions of the
leaders are as spurs to the followers and their exemplary prouocatio^s more
forcible then their mandatory proclamations. For how did al in the time of
Alexander affect chivalry because he was a soldier, and Poetry in Augustus
time because he was a Poet and fencing in Commodus time because he loved
sencing. How forwards were al in Christianity in the time of Constantine
because he was a Christian, Lact. divine. instit. lib 5.
How backward in the time of Julian when he fell to Apostacy, Lactantius could
say that to imitate the manners yea the vices of Princes was held an obedience.

The example of the Prince is the greatest provocation to do good or evil. A
Prince is as the highest Sphere, the lower Spheres have their action, motion,
imitation from him. There is such a Concatenatio^ in government that where
there is a good king there is also a good kingdom, a good Counsel, a good
Clergy, and a good Commonwealth, the axiom ever true, Rex velit honesta nemo
non eadem velit. If the heart of a Prince be set upon honest things the hearts
of al others will be set upon the same things with him. The virtues of private
men, be only their own, of Princes and great men all the worlds, dicta
edicta, facta exempla. Their actions breed axioms, their words examples. If
they once do that which is preposterous, their scholars will be many. The
disease of the head, is the head of al diseases. O how ought great me^ to be
advised then, in their actions, not only for their own sake, but for the
avail of others, that by virtue they may breed virtue, that their goodness
may not only be immanent but also transient, especially seeing their names,
places, offices, powers, and honor be worth no estimation unless virtuous
and not virtuous, unless exemplarie to move and draw and excite others unto
piety and Christianity, they being the watch men, and rulers, and heads, and
shepherds of the people as Homer calls Agamemnon, Hom. Ill 10


-- (...): Which Caesar truly showed himself to be, Polycrat.
never using the word Ite, 2. Use.
but the word of my Text, Venite, Come.

Secondly this may serve to the reproach of those that come not at all unto the
Lord, who being withheld by their riches, or withdrawn by their pleasures, or
detained by their profits, or bewitched by their senseless and liuelesse
cogitations they defer and procrastinate their coming unto the Lord, not
vouchsafing to come to join with the congregation of his Saints. Laert. in
vita Diog
Against whom Diogenes shall be witness, who was so diligent in coming to
Antisthenes that he told him, he should not find a staff strong enough to
beat him from him, whilst he had any thing to teach him: And Scipio shall
rise in judgment against them, ^ iuie.
who was so devout in daily frequenting the Capitol to perform divine
offices, that he was had in great honor among the Romans for his devotion.
But alas Epicurisme, Atheism. Paganism, Anabaptisme, Barowisme and Papisme,
have so enchanted many amongst us, that they will not come unto our Church,
Charm the Charmer never so wisely. Especially our malicious enemies the
Edomites, and Ammonites, the Papists who by their doctrinal contradictions and
personal maledictions, do disgordge the impostumes of their poisonfull
stomachs against our faith, truth, religion, King, and God, and framing to
the^ selves a religion out of the fragments, and remnants, of the ancient
heresies, they are become heirs apparent to all those monsters of Satan's
kingdom, the Montanists, and Maniches, and Eustathians, Hull, in Polytick
Athiest, Orm erod in picture, of Pap. and multi a^ij.
and Pellagians, and Collyridians, and Carpocratians: and Marc^onits. and
Valentinians, despising the truth, which was delivered by Angels, preached by
Prophets, testified by Apostles, witnessed by Martyrs, sealed by the blood of
many thousand Saints, and the worlds Savior, and do so far condemn and
contemn us and our religion, as that they think it most meritorious, if they
could abolish us and our service of God out of the land of the living. Such are
these, seed of the Serpent, Sons of Beliall, workmen of Babell, Pyoners of
Hell: so much are they incensed against us, as that they are become
blood-thirsty Crocodiles, hart-gnawing Vultures, dilaniating Lions, poysonful
Aspes, in laying snares more subtle then Doeg, for wicked Counsel worse then
Achitophell, for blasphemous impiety far above Rabshakah, for devilish
hunting more truculent then Nimrod for murder and massacre more sauadge then
Herod, for betraying of their God, and King, and religion, and land, and
Nation, more deuilish then ever any of the tribe of Judas.

O that they had removed their blindfolded ignorance, and ignorant Idolatry, or
that they were removed out of the land: that so we might all go together, as
sheep of one sheephard, sons of one father, inheritours of one kingdom,
Inhabiters of one Country, and so might travel together to that eternal
Jerusalem where the spirit and the bride say Come, and let him that is a thirst
Come, Revel.
and let whosoever will, Come and drink freely of the water of life, that so
with mutual minds all of us might move each others as they hear do, Come,
and let us. And so let us Come from the word Come to the words let us the
persons moving and moved.

And here first behold the greatest Change, 2. Obser.
mutation, alteration, metamorphosis that ever was: foes received as friends,
aliants as citizens, enemies as servants, the rejected as elected, the Sons
of the bond woman made free, strangers to the promise made heirs. The Gentiles
who had no covenant in hope, no hope in God no God in the world, are now
converted, accepted, approved. On the other side behold with terror and
trembling, the right Olive tree made a wild branch, the Citizens made aliants,
the heirs made strangers, Jacob a supplanter, supplanted, Esau rejected,
received, Israel, made Ismaell, Ismael made Israel and the Israelites to whom
appertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenant, and the giving of
law, and the service of God, and the promise, are now become a froward
generation. Doctrine.
The Jews perverted, and the Gentiles converted. The doctrine that hence I
gather, is this, they that turn from God, he will turn from them, and they
that turn to the Lord, he will turn to them. Reason. 1. Sam. 2.13
The reason and proof of this doctrine, is that of God himself. Jn Sam. They
that honor me I will honor them, and they that despise me I will despise
the^. Though the Jews were the people, whose fathers he had loved, whose seed
he had chosen, whom he brought out of the land of Egypt, for whom he showed
so many miracles, and to whom he manifested so many mercies, a people as dear
to him as the apple of his eye, as nere as the signet on his right hand, yet,
if they forsake him they shall be fettered, famished, scattered, consumed, and
utterly rejected, and on the other side, though the Gentiles were a people
odious in the sight of God and men, an adulterous and Idolatrous generation,
yea though their sins were as red as scarlet, he can make them as white as
snow, though as red as crimson, if they will turn, he can make them as white
as wool: A strange mutatio^, an unheard of Metamorphosis.

Shall I tell you of Sampson so strong, that proved so weak, of Solomon so
wise, that proved so foolish, of Peter a Pastor, that prove an impostor, of
Judas a preacher, that proved a traitor, of Paul a persecutor, that proved a
preacher: what is all this to this? The Jews that were received are rejected,
and the Gentiles that were rejected, are received.

Shall I tell you? that all the world was destroyed, and a little arc
delivered, that al Sodom was burned, and little Soar defended, that all Egypt
was plagued, and little Goshen preserved: behold these with trembling, and add
unto these; this, that the Jews that were received, are rejected, and the
Gentiles that were rejected, are received.

Shall I in one word, tell you of the co^sumption, destruction, subversion,
desolation of the worthiest structures, and Piles, that ever the sun looked
upon: how Noe that was full of people, and Babylon that sat as a Queen, and
Jericho that was the city of Palm trees, and Tirus rich with the seed of
Nilus, and Jerusalem the joy of the whole earth, were overthrown, and all
utterly consumed. Yet none of these are Parallel to this Cataclisme, and
Inundation of desolation, that the Jews, the first, and best, and one, and
only beloved people, who had Abraham for their father, Israel for their name,
Moses their Prophet, Aaron their Priest, Manna their meat, Canaan their
Country, Kings their Captives, David their king, yea Christ himself their
kinsman, and yet these Jews rejected, and Gentiles received. Vsus.


O consider this all ye that forget God, howl ye Fur trees that these
Caedars have fallen, the Olive tree has lost her fatness, the Vine tree her
sweetness, the Cedar her fairness, the Fig tree her fruitfulness. O what
then remains for the brambles and briers, thorns, and thistles, but the fire
of wrath, and the wrath of fury! O did the world, and the pomp, and the glory
thereof consider this, did those places that now in joy enjoy the pleasures of
the world duly regard this. Did Venice so blessed with riches, Bononia with
fruits, Naples with Nobility, Millaine with beauty Ravenna so honored for
antiquity, Foreign Countries.
or Florence for policy, did these I say in the height of their pride, cast
down their eyes upon the dust and ashes and rubble of the worlds more ancient
monuments, they would now, Our own Land.
even now, in the days of their peace, think upon the time of their
visitation. Did our own land endowed as gloriously, as graciously with the
blessings of peace and plenty, and prosperity as ever Caanan was. Did our Land
meditate upon this, it would not so far put from her the day of desolation. The
City London.
Did the City proud of her walls and bulwarks, puffed up in the wealthinesse of
her inhabitants, glorying in the goodlinesse of her building, vanting her self
to be the mother city of the land, the Metropolis of the Country, the seat of
the kingdom, and the Chamber of the King, did this City remember this, then
her graves would not be so full, her houses often so empty, her howlings so
many, her plagues so mighty. Yea to come nearer: St James
Did this Court wherein I speak, and you the stars of this Zodiake consider
this, it would serve to let you blood in the swelling veins of pride, to
lance the impostumes of greedy desires, to purge your ambitious, malicious,
voluptuous thoughts, to cure wantonness, and to curb the lest thought of
wickedness. Wherefore, let every man make particular use of this doctrine, that
seeing the Jews have fallen, they take heed to that counsel of S. Paul,
(...). 1. Cor. 10.12.
Let him that stands take heed lest he fall. Be not deceived, flatter not thy
self, equivocate not with thy soul, though thou seem to be the dear child
of God, presume not there upon, thou may fall, thou art not more sober then
Noah, more strong then Sampson, more wise the^ Solomon, more chaste then David,
more secure then Peter. Cecidere duces, the Columns, Arches, Pillars,
Piramides have fallen Isreal's strong me^ have fallen, yea Israel the very
first, and best, and chiefest of Gods people have fallen, their strength has
bin weakened, their beauty blemished, their blossoms blasted, their honor
obscured, their glory ecclipsed, me^ have fallen, the best of men, more
glorious then the best of me^, Patriarchs have fallen, Prophets have fallen,
Apostles have fallen, Stars have fallen, Angels have fallen.

A second lesson that we learn in these Gentiles, 2 da. 2 dae.
is their unity, and mutual society in their conversion, exhorting one another:
They were not divided in their wills, not separated in their actions, not
disioind in their affections, but in a heavenly harmony they all join
together, mutually inciting, Come and let us. The one and only God and father
of us al, who is God for everlasting, blessed world without end, he, in the
riches of his wisdom, and knowledge, has appointed, that not only the world
in things natural, but that his Church also in things spiritual, should begin,
increase, continue, Aristotle.
and be perpetuated by unity. The Naturalist looking through the windows of
Nature beheld the one and found Unity to be the apeasement of al Co^traries, of
contrary Elements in the world, of contrary humors in the body, of contrary
affections in the mind, of contrary factions in the Common wealth: and in
things spiritual, it is so heavenly, as that it is truly esteemed to be the
bond of the Patriarchs, the Chariot of the Prophets, the refuge of the
Apostles, the Comfort of Confessors, and the salve of the Saints. And
therefore God himself has made his faithful people to be al as one, his Cant.
6.8.
Church he has made one. He has given them Mat 25.34
one kingdom, and Ioh. 17 21
one will, Ier 32.29
one heart, and one way, Eze. 1.16.
one mind and one spirit. So like in love as that with the Esec. 1 16.
Cherubins in Ezechiels vision, they seem to have but one face. So loving in
quality and condition, as that with all Judge. 20.1
Israel they are gathered together as one man, so constant in faith and
affection as that they Acts 2 46.
continue with one accord in the Temple. So did these Conuerts, they conioine
themselves together as the true members of Christ's body, one thought, one
wish, one desire, one heart, one tongue, with all which they join, Come and let
us.

So that the doctrine which hence arises is this, Doctrine.
that it is a sure sign of Christianity in the Children of God to be at one
in the unity of the spirit. The reason of the doctrine is, that seeing there is
but one God, one Father, one Redeemer, one Comforter, one milk of the word, one
food of the Sacraments, Reason.
seeing there is but one faith, one Lord, one baptism, seeing we all inhabit
one vale of misery, and valley of tears, seeing we all fight against one
enemy, the old serpent, seeing we al run for one goal, all wrestle for one
garland, al strive for one crown, al partake in one body, and one spirit, we
might al be one in the Lord Jesus. And so might enioie the blessing of unity,
and amity and unanimity, more pleasant then the pools of Heshbon, more
glorious then the Towers of Lebano^, more redolent then the oil of Aaron, more
fructifiing, then the deawe of Hermon, That so we may be al knit together
without any disiu^ction, that whether we be supplicants to the throne of
grace, we may al of us come together, as joint petitioners, or whether we be
the singers of thanksgiving in the house of the Lord, we may al sing in the
harmony of the spirit, or whether we be as the company of an army to stand in
the gap to entreat for Conditions of peace, we may all cry together, Spare us
good Lord, spare thy people, and be not angry with thine inheritance: so al
of us, being as so many beams, issuing from the Sun of righteousness, all as
brooks coming, from the fountain of goodness, al of us as nerves proceeding
from the head of wisdom, al of us as arteries springing from the heart of love,
all of us as veins derived from the liver of life, al of us as lines drawn
from the center of grace: Al of us going one way through truth unto life,
through light unto truth, through love unto light, having one hope, one faith,
and grace of God, in Christ Jesus, the one and only means of our salvation.

The use hereof is to exhort all the Saints, Use.
and servants of God, to an uniformity in Christianity, and the profession
thereof, that so there may be no division in the body, for seeing a body, a
house, a kingdom cannot stand if once divided, Alas how shall the Church of
Christ, the body of Christ, the household of the faithful, the kingdom of
heaven upon earth stand if there be so many Sizers and Concisers, and Cutters
and Carvers of her members? Liuie
Rome in that civil or rather uncivil discord between Crassus, and Caesar, and
Pompey had almost lost (by this threefold discord) the threefold cord of their
concord, and many other Common wealths have been much wasted and impaired by
the monster dissension. Tacitus in vita Agrico lae.
Tacitus in the life of Agricola describing the figure, fashion, complexion,
chivalry and resolution of the Britains in that time, observes this also,
that they were then drawn into pety partialities and factions, Britan, gens
vali dissima. Tacit.
and the greatest help that the Romans had adversus validissimas gentes as he
calls our nation, was that they had no common counsel together, but each
city fought against their neighbors, Et ita dum singuli pugnant vniversi
vincu^tur, whilst one by one fights, al are subdued. The Romans are again
entering our land, they expect an aduantageous success, by our homebred
factions, and schisms, and dissentions. But Lord let it never come to pass,
let our Commonwealth and Church be as Jerusalem a City at unity, safe as
Mount Syon that shall never be removed. Let thy Church here be for ever the
house of peace! O let not her Peacemakers be her Peacebreakers, let not her
fathers be foster-fathers of dissension, but let Patrones be patterns of
unity, let her Presidents be the preside^ts of unity, her Ancients bear the
standards of unity, let her be begirt with the walls of unity, let her and her
servants, and her sons be guided by thee O God, the God of unity, till the
coming of thy Son Christ Jesus to judgment!

J know J speak to an intelligent and ingenious auditorie, J need not expatiat
in this of the profit, pleasure, blessing, faelicitie of unity. You al know
that she is the greatest gift of God, chiefest joy of Angels, highest happiness
of me^, fearfullest terror of diuils, holiest harmony of Saints, heauenlyest
Antheme of Celestial Cherubins, The Empress of the world, whose privy Counsel
be the virtues, whose Ladies of honor be the Muses, whose nearest attendants
be the Graces, whose Guard be the Angels, whose Court is prosperity, whose
state is felicity, whose statuts verity, whose continuance eternity, David
his Ecce, as the roial usher of this Empress bids you behold how good and
gracious, and happy, and holy, and heavenly a thing it is to dwell together in
unity. Hold it, and behold it, entertain her, and retain her, that you may
al say as these converts Come and let us go up. And so J end this point and
follow them in their going up. Come and let us go up

The life of a Christian is not the life of speculation, 2 Obs.
not a professing life, but a practicing, not a talking life, but a walking,
they must not only Come together but go together, they must walk, and go,
and clime, and go up. Go repent go up, perseverance. 1. Repent.
This ditty their duty, Come and let us go up. Jn the word go we may note
their repentance; in their going up their perseverance. For the first they had
long layen upon the lees of ungodliness vnstird, unmoved, they sat in the seat
of the scornful, or if they stood up, they stood but in the way of sinners, or
if they walked they walked but in the counsel of the wicked, gressus digressus;
but now they take a new journey in hand, they choose new living ways; they
go, egressus regressus, they go, and go out, and go on, and go up and
turn from the way of their wickedness and from the wickedness of their ways.
Doctrine.
The doctrine gathered from the word go is this, that it is a certain sign
of salvation in a penitent sinner, upon the first knowledge and acknowledgment
of his sins, to go to the throne of grace. Austin. Reason.
St Austin gives the reason of this doctrine, Man by his going from God is
deformed and poluted and altogether void of al spiritual blessings, and by his
return and going back to God he obtains al those blessings he formerlie
lost. Excedendo frigescit, ascendendo fervescit, Recedendo tenebrescit,
revertendo clarescit, and therefore these conuerts resolve here as those did of
whom St Austin speaks. In 70. Psalm.
Conferamus nos ad te and been erit nobis de nobis, malum est nobis de nobis,
and quia commisimus malum, dimisisti nos nobis. The state of Christians in
their conversion is undoubtedly most heavenly, that though Satan has
assaulted them and sin has wounded them, and the world tempted them, and the
flesh betrayed them, and temptation entrapped the^, yet al these enemies remove
their beeseedg when the soul is desirous to turn to his God. O how happy is
the Christian then when he has the father calling, the son moving, the holy
spirit persuading, the word directing, the reward inuiting, Saints conuersing,
Angels reioicing, and he himself singing that sweet and holy Hymn Nu^c
dimittis, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace from the wicked
ways of the world, the flesh, the devil, and from the company of al infernal
accomplices, lo J come, J walk, J go, J run, J clime, J go up to the house
of the Lord, J repent my sins past. video meliora proboque J follow hard to
the mark for the high price of my salvation! Thus when they return and for
sins sake leave sin, and leaving sins, repent of sins, though the lees
thereof remain in them, and if for righteousness sake, they labor for
righteousness, though an esse^tial righteousness be not inherent in the^, though
they do not all the good they love, but in love, desire to do it, though they
leave not all the sins they hate, but in hatred labor to resist them, by this
returning the good we do is accepted, the good we desire to do is imputed,
the evil we leave is discharged, the evil we desire to leave, shall not be
imputed. But alas, how many put from them the thought of repentance? When
notwithstanding that they have their conscience accusing them, their sins
oppressing them, Gods judgment threatening the^. Gods spirit warning them, Gods
mercy exciting them, And yet alas yet, they are so lulled in security, as
that they think not of their return before the Lord quite turn them of.
Strabo in Geog. l. 13,
These be like those of whom Strabo writes in his Geographie, (...), they
defer til it be to late, like to Hanniball in surprising Rome, Quando potui
non habui voluntatem, and quando volui non habui potestate^. They have vocem
corvinam, to cry Cras, to procrastinate their return, but have not vocem
columbina^ mox mox. They remember not that God has left but 2 Tenses to man
praesens and prateritum, and has taken the future into his own hands, to
dispose thereof himself: and if they have been deceived of the time past, and
are deceived of the time present, how much more may they be of the time future.

The Saints and servants of God, are careful upon the first knowledge of their
sins, and errors to return unto the Lord. So did Act. 9.6.
Paul from Gentilisme, in persecuting the Jews, Mat. 26.75.
Peter from Iudaisme, in denying his Master, 2. Sam. 12.
David from his adultery, Eccl, 1.1.
Solomon from his Jdolatry, 2. Chro, 32.26.
Hesekias the father, 2, Chro. 33, 12.
Manasses his son. Act. 8.37.
The Ennuch, Act. 10, 1.
Cornelius, the Iud. 2.5.
Israelites, Joan. 3 6.
Ninivits, Iud. 7.19.
Bethulians, Act, 8, 12,
Samaritanes, n Thessalonians, and infinite more.

The use of this doctrine is that we confess that we have al gone astraie and
done wickedly, every one of us has wandered out of the way, and therefore
that we seek to the throne of grace there to seek this conversion, this
especial gift of God, this joy of Angels, this salve of sins, this haven of
sinners, denied to Angels, and therefore they became devils, denied to devils,
and therefore they remain damned, and only a gift bestowed on the sons of
God. O how often has repentance and conversion been preached, and yet how
little has it been affected! It has been preached by Naoh to the old world,
by Lot to Sodom, by Moses to Egypt, by the Prophets to Israel, by John
Baptist to Christ, by Christ before the Apostles, and by many thousands of the
Saints and servants of God since in many places, and how often it has bin
preached in this place and to this presence, the very wood and stones, and
seats, and senclesse creatures ca^bear witness. O it will be to late to return
Corpus cu^ causa, when the sentence of condemnation is come from the Kings
bench. Come therefore let us worship and fall down and kneel before the Lord
our maker, for he is the Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture,
to day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, and now even now while
it is time and day, remember to return unto the Lord: whatsoever thou art
that have straied from the Lord by pride, return by the holy way of
humility, or by hard hearted cruelty, return by the blessed way of mercy, or
if by envy, return by charity, or if by covetousness, return by liberality,
or if by drunckennes, return by sobriety, or if by filthiness, return by
chastity. In a word J end this point with the words of our prophet in the 5.
verse of this chapter. O house of Jacob come ye and let us walk in the light
of the Lord! Esaias. 2.5.
And so J come to step a step higher from the goeing to their going up, Come
and let us go up.

They go, and walk, and clime, and go up. They continue, 2. Perseverance Go
up.
they persevere, with Hanniballs soldiers they proceed forwards in their
journey, notwithstanding the rough rocks, and craggy clefts of the Alps. God
cannot abide haulting in his service, delaying in religion, loitering in
profession, limmits in Christian procession, he cannot but distaste any
snaile-like withdrawing, any peece-like recoilling, any Hypocritical faining,
any wearisome fainting, any Dial-like staying, any poole-like standing, any
Ephraimite starting, any foolish virgin neglecting, any drowsey Apostle
sleeping. The profession of a Christian must not be like to Fabia in
Quintilian, Quint.
which for, 30. years to gether would not confess she was a year elder, or
like to the sun in Ioshuaes time that stood still, or rather the sun in
Hesekiah his time, which went backward, or like to that Mounke who in his
quotidian devotions, St Thom^ Moore.
was wont to say the 1 day Gloria Patri, the 2 and filio, the third and
spiritui sancto and in the end it was sicut erat in principio, Iuc. in dialog.
Eras in chuy^ds. Ho^. de a^ Pot.
dubling over his orisons, or like to Mandrabulus in Lucian, who the first
year offered a sheep of gold, the second a sheep of silver, and the third a
sheep of brass; or in a word like to the picture in the Poet, Definit in
piscem, mulier formosa superne. Many there be who make good entrance but weak
continuance, they runn well at the first but they either tier or retire, they
begin in the spirit and end in the flesh, the blossoms be fair, but when
their fruit should be ripe it is rotten, their beginning is good and laudable,
but the end is lewd and damnable. The Lord hates these, and therefore as the
especial thing he requires in a Christian is to be faithful, so the most
especial thing in the faithful is to be perfect, even to be faithful to the
death.

The Doctrine that I hence gather from the words go up, Doctrine.
is this, that the Christian that has entered into paths of righteousness,
Reason.
must resolve to walk therein all the days of his life. The reason of this
doctrine is the position of Christ himself, he that puts his hand to the
plow and draws it back, is unfit for the kingdom of heaven. A Christian
therefore must remember that as God is a, and o, so he will have his servants to
run from a, to o, from the beginning to the ending in the constant profession
of the faith: they must remember they that were marked to be preserved in
Jerusalem, they were marked with the Character (...) which is the last of all the Hebrew letters, teaching the^ that they must run their race even to the
last. Their profession must be Sacramentum militare, to hold until death, like
to the covenant in our Liturgy of matrimony, to be kept til death us depart,
like to that in the Poet of Megara to her Hercules:

Seneca.
Non vincet fidem vis vlla nostram,
Moriar Alcide tua --
They must with the Cant. 3.4.
Spouse in the Canticles, take hold and not leave the hold. With Io. 20 21.
Mary Magdalen stand, and wait, and stay at the sepulcher, they must with the
Mat. 15.22
woman of Canaan, cry and continue in crying and calling, Heb 12.4
Phil. 4.1.
They must continue in the Lord, they must be steadfast, and immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord. Ps. 126.6.
They must go, and go on, yea they must go, and go up with these Israelites:

Non est ad astra mollis e terris via, They must go on, go up, clime and
ascend, if they will be truly upright, they must go right up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob. The use hereof is to exhort those
that are matriculated in the book of Christ, Use.
that they prove proficie^ts in his School, that they may walk from strength
to strength, from faith to faith, from virtue to virtue, from grace to grace,
Ps. 84. Rom 1.17 2. Cor. 3: 18
and so may at length pass from glory to glory. That so there be no evil,
or unfaithful heart in us at any time to fall from the living God, not starting
aside as Ephraim, not backsliding with Demis, not gainesaying with Ecebolius,
not repugning with Julian, not turning from the truth with Phygellus, and
Hermogenes, not making shipwreck of a good conscience with Hymeneus and
Alexander, but that for ever, and ever we consecrate our bodies to his name,
our ears to hear his word, our tongue to sound his praises, our hands to be
lifted up, 4 obseru.
our cheeks to be bedewed, our knees to be bowed, and our feet to aproach his
Courts: and so I come to the place whether they go, to the mountain of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob. The Church of God in Scripture is
compared to many and several things, Cant. 2.10 Elek. 17.6
for her louelines to a a Dove, for her fruitfulnes to a b Vine, for her
holynesseto a Pet. 2.9.
Priecthood for her royalnesse to a Psa. 45.10
Queen, for her brightness to the Cant. 6.9
Morning, for her fairness fair as the fairest of Cant. 5.9
woeme^, and here for her safenesse to mount Syon: not for her visiblenes, as
the Papists out of this, and other places affirm, but for her stedfastnes and
safenesse she is as Mount Syon, that stands fast fore ermore. For visibility
we hold as it has been often answered them, that it is an external ornament,
no necessary argument of Christ's Church, we know that of St. Austen to be
true, that the Church is well compared to the Moon, In Psalm, 10.
for as the Moon receives the light from the Sun, so does the true Church
receive her light from Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness. And as the Moon
so the Church is so^etimes in the full, and shines in full brightness, as in
the Apostles times, and diverse hundred years after. Some times she is in the
waine and ecclipsed, as for many hundred years last past, it has been, in
which that Apostasy from the faith is come, which S. Paul by the spirit of
God foreshewed. That there should come a departing and the man of sin should be
disclosed, eue^ the son of perdition. 2. These. 2.3. and more plainly, the
spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the
faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error, and doctrine of devils,
which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their Consciences burnt with a
hot iron. 1. Tim. 4.1. For the visibilitie of the Church the argument would as
well befit Bethel where Jeroboam his calves had more co^course then the Temple
at Jerusalem, and might justify the Ephesians clamor, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians, whom all the world worshippeth, and is as availeable to prove the
Arrians to be of the Church, Naziane.
who measured their Church by multitude, not quality; and the Turk may in
this contest with the Pope, his Church being as apparent in show, as
ceremonious for rites, as superstitious in devotion, as glorious in Temples, as
ancient almost for succession. Our adversaries in this remember not how in the
sacred stories, the Church is hieroglyphically depainted, by Noah's arc, by
Abraham's progeny, Jobs family, Eliahs complaint, Nebuchadne sors furnace, the
Apostles latent, the Christians Couchant. That the Church is like a Cant. 2.2.
Lylie among the Thorns, like a Lylie of the valleys. Like a Esaias. 1.8.
Lodge in a garden of Cucumers. Like a Cant. 2.14
Dove in the holes of the rocks, and in the secret places of the stairs, Rev.
12.6.
like a woman flying into the desert, Eze. 16.5.
yea cast out into the open field, to the contempt of her person. Thus has
she bin seen and skorned, acknowledged, but detested, visible, but miserable.
Where now is the magnificent pomp, and glory, and speciositie, and eminency,
and perspicuitie of this Church? I follow these visible heretics no farther
about their visibility. The Church is here named by the name of a mountain,
That God, who among all the fowls chose the Dove, among all the flowers the
Lylie, among al trees the Cedar, among al nations Iudaea, among al days the
Saboath, among al turrets, the tower of David among al Cities Jerusalem, among
al other mountains has chosen Syon for himself. It is not Babylon that burnt
mountain. Ier. 51.25. nor Horeb that smoking mountain Exodus 19.18. nor Eball
that cursing mountain Deuteronomy 27.^3. nor Synai that trembling mountain Deuteronomy 4.1.
where there was fire to the midest of heaven, and darkness, and mists, and
clouds, and thundering, and lightning, the Trumpet sounding, and the earth
quaking. But it is that prepared mountain. Mich. 4.1. it is that high
mountain Esec. 20.40. It is that holy mountain. Ps. 2.6. It is the mountain
of his name. Esaias 18.7 it is the mountain of his Temple* Mich. 3.12. the
mountain of his testament. Esaias 14.13. the mountain of the house of the Lord.
Mons supra montes, mons in vertice montium. Some take these words to be spoken
of the general Church, some of the particular Temple. Some that the Prophet
here alludeth by the particular to the general, Sion was the place where he
appointed his Temple to be built, this therefore is called the mountain of his
house. So that the meaning of the words is this, that they that had been
recusants from the Church, aliants from the Congregation of Israel, should at
the lenght be written in Gods book, incorporated into Christ's body, clothed
with Christ's righteousness, admitted to be scholars in Christ's Church,
Esaias. 18.7.
and received to be inheritours of Christ's Kingdom: and as this our Prophet
speaks in his 18. Chap. verse. 7. At that time a present shall be brought unto
the Lord of hosts, (a people that is scattered abroad and spoiled, and of a
terrible people from their beginning hitherto, a nation even by little and
little troaden under foot, whose Land the rivers have spoiled) to the place of
the Lord of hosts to the mount Syon. These be the people, these the present,
these be they that come, that go, that go on, that go up to the mountain
of the Lord to the house of the god of Jacob.

The doctrine that J gather from this place is this, that every one have an
especial regard and care to know whether he be a true member of the Church,
Doct
whether he be truly one of the society of al Christian souls. The reason of
this doctrine is this they that be not of this Church they cannot assure
themselves of any true joy, Reason
any true peace, any true comfort in this life or in that to come. J might
prove this by many places, but J know not how J may be dispensed with in this
congregation for prolixitie of speech and therefore will draw unto an end. Psalm.
15.1.
David in the 15. Psalm asks this question who be the true members of the
Church, Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, or who shall rest upon thy holy
mountain? J refer you to the answer, view it, observe it, read it, then
remember. The truest argument that we have to prove these Conuerts to be of the
Church, is this, their earnest desire to come to present themselves before the
Lord in his house. So that leaving al other marks, I dare be bold to aver out
of this place; That they that come to present themselves unto God in his house,
with true, faithful, lowly, penitent, and obedient souls, they are the true
Saints and servants of God. O how should this move us to earnest and unfeigned
devotion, how should this move us to sing with David, O how pleasant are thy
tabernacles O Lord of hosts! Indeed they were pleasant and amiable to him, he
could have wished himself a very Potter, a dorekeeper in the house of his God,
yea when he was absent from the Tabernacle, he lamented that his happiness was
not so much as the very Sparrow, and Swallow, that sound a nest and building
place in the Temple, s 84.4.
concluding in that Psalm, O blessed are they that dwell in thy house! I need
not to tell you of the magnifice^t structure of the Temple, how gloriously
erected, how beautifully fra^ed how past al imaginations furnished, how
finished, dedicated, blessed, admired, honored, freque^ted, how esteemed by God
himself as a holy mansion, the very joy of the earth, the beauty of the
world, the glory of al nations, the palace of the great king, the delight and
paradise of the highest, where was the Arc and covenant, the tables of the
Testimony, the Seraphins, Cherubins, and mercy seat, al being strange things
of much excellency, but the summitie of al happiness, was the residence of
Gods eternal favor there. J need not to tell you of the honor that the very
heathe^s had in their reputing of this to be most holy, of Antiq. ib. 11.8. and
2.2. and 14.8.
Josephus in his Antiquities testifies what obseruant regard was borne to this
sanctuary by Alexander the great, by Ptolomaens Philadelphus, by Pompey the
great, and many others, J omit the styles, titles, names attributs, and other
encomiasticks of this Temple.

The use J make of the doctrine proposed is this, to exhort every man to
comfortable remembrance of this benefit, that he is one of Gods Church, and
may be bold to present himself before the Lord in his Church, that whereas
many dare not be bold to speak unto some others of the same mould and matter,
dare not I say, come into the presence or enter the privy Chamber, yet they
may be bold to enter Gods great Chamber of presence, the residence of his
favor, the habitation of his honor, his Sanctuary, Temple, Tabernacle,
mountain, house, Church. Ho wought this to move us? Seeing we may be bold
to come to this mountain, yea more to the house of this mountain, nay more to
the God of this house, of this house J may well say; for if ever he were God,
he was Deus Iacobi. And J from the inwards of my soul pray that this Court of
St James may be as truly Domus Iacobi, as he has bin Deus Iacobi: who
knows not that he is Deus Iacobi, a God, a great and powerful God, whose
Court is Celum, wose hal is expansum, whose star chamber is firmamentum,
whose exchequer is profu^dum, whose Kings bench is Empyraeum, whose throne is
heaven, whose footstole is earth, whose washpott is the sea, whose attendants
be Angels, whose horses be the winds, whose Chariots be the fire, whose word is
his will, whose will is his command, whose command is his power, whose power is
eternal, making him fearful to his enemies, merciful to his servants, just in
his judgments, true in his promises, wonderful in his mercies, meruellous in
his wounders: all this is comprehended in this he is Deus Jacobi J hope none of
you are so stony hearted but will be moved by the mountain, or if not, by the
house of this mountain, or if not, by the God of this house, or if not, yet
sure by this title that he is Deus Jacobi, J shall exhort and by violence draw
some conversion, or compunction, or devotion from you. Gracious Prince give me
leave to speak to your Highness. J confess J am not Agapetus to give precepts
to Justinian, or a Pliny to give instructions to Traian, or an Aristotle to
give Council to the young Prince Alexander: yet give me leave to remember your
highness of one higher, the Lord of Lords, and the Prince of Princes, Remember
his name, his fear, his service, his honor, his Church, let it for ever be
your joy, and the Crown of your dignity, with the good Emperor Theodosius
rather to be membrum Ecclesiae, then caput Imperij, let the example of David be
ever before your Princely eyes, his profession; I and my house will serve the
Lord, his protestation, It did me good, when they said we will go unto the
house of the Lord, my feet shall stand in thy gates o Jerusalem. So shall the
eyes that see you bless you, and the ears that hear you give witness to you,
and the mouths that speak of you shall cry from the earth to the heavens,
blessed be the womb that bare the, and the papps that gave thee suck, and God
himself shall utter his voice from the heaven to the earth, Peace be within thy
wales and plentiousnesse with in thy Palaces. Honorable springes of Nobility
ye generous and in genious spirits, I have not the spirit of Paul to speak
to the Noble men of Beraea, yet give me leave to remember you of your duty,
which the Lord requires, Kings cast their Crowns at his feet, and Nobles
seek their honor in his service. Perform duty to him, and ye shall be
more Noble then ye were borne, ye shall be partakers of a new birth in Christ
Jesus: add unto the Nobility of your birth the Nobility of life, the
Nobility of virtue is your own, of birth your predecessors:

-- Et quae non fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco. --
Remember your God, his service, and Religion, Remember his Temple, Remember
that this place is the Spring-Garden of the Nobility, here ye grow up as
plants, and here shall ye be preferred to be as the polished Corners of the
Temple. O then remember the honor due unto the Temple! I hope you hope for the
blessings of the eternal life, one of them is to be made Pillars in the Temple
of my God. Are you to be pillars in the Temple of God? Revel. 2,
O then remember the Love you ought to show unto this temple. What should I
speak of the corners or pillars of the Temple? Templum est is viventis Dei,
ye are the Temple of the living God, the Scripture speaks it, I need not
demonstrate it, your lips be the Organs of this Temple, your thanksgiving the
hymns of this Temple, your unity the harmony of this Temple, your tongues the
censors of this Temple, your prayers the incense of this Temple, your heart the
Altar of this Temple, your repentance the sacrifice of this Temple, your zeal
the fire of this Temple, which as the fire in the Temple, let it never go out.
The time will come, when you will acknowledge this, and condemn your selves for
contemning this, when you will hate the pomp, and glory, and all the state of
this world, when in true judgment you shall find your gold and silver to be
but the earths dregs, your silks but the excrements of worms, your Pearls
but the rubble of the sea, the sweetest musk to be natures avoidance, the most
gorgeous apparel to be follies garnish and prides ensign, the most fair
houses, riotts witnesses, oppressions monumentes, the greatest cheer the
bodies stench and the bellies burden, the greatest offices favors
butterflies, and moneys bondslaues. Authority envies object, and cares
subject, and the chiefest Glory, statteries shadow, and popularities
apprentice. Ah las what fruit, or joy, or comfort will ye then have of those
things whereof ye will be ashamed? O then remember now even now in your tender
years, to tender your selves to your God, for they that honor him, he will
honor them, and they that despise him, he will despise them. Al of you,
worshipful and beloved, Remember what you have hard this day, if the Text I
have chosen (the Conversion of the Gentiles) cannot move you to Conversion, yet
let the time wherein I speak. It is Lent, a time of al others in the whole
year appropriated for this holy work of Co^version. Devotion, coming to the
Church, and performing of divine offices. It is the time wherein Christ in
forty days did suffer more misery, then in all his life. It is the time in
which he did hunger, fast, thirst, watch, pray, sweat, bleed, faint and die
for thee. That so he might be the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of
the sinners of the world: Remember this weak, weary, bleeding, fainting, dying
Lamb: worthy is this Lamb that was killed, to receive power, and riche^, and
wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise. And let all the
Creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and in
the sea, and all that are in them, sing praise, and honor, and glory, and
power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for
evermore. Amen.


