A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOSIAH REYNEL Esquire, the 13. of
August 1614. in East-Ogwell in DEVON.

By John Preston Minister of Gods word in East-Ogwell.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Richard Boulton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Chancery Lane. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSIPFVL SIR THOMAS REYNEL, SIR GEORGE REYNEL, SIR CAREW REYNEL,
KNIGHTS: Mr. RICHARD REYNEL Esquire, Grace, Mercy and Peace in the blessed LORD
JESUS.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
IT may seem strange that I have joined you all together in one Inscription,
when every one of you severally are worthy of a better gift then here is
exhibited, or by me can be given; yet herein I have done no more then nature,
brotherly affection, and Christianity has done. That I have clothed this in
the livery of your Patronages, I might have given many reasons: First, for that
you are lovers of true religion, and favorers of all true professors.
Secondly, because it was preached at the interring of your dear brother.
Thirdly, because I had rtaher the whole world should condemn me as unjust, and
the curious and captious carpe at me, then you should so much as think me
unthankful. I owe unto you all a double debt, of Love, and of Service. Of
love, the more I pay, the more I owe; though a debt once paid, be no more due,
yet love being paid, is still due. Service I will be ready to pay to the
uttermost, though it come short of your great deserts, and of my manifold
desires: I that yield to all in learning, will yield to none in love and
service to you. But to you right worshipful and worthy Patron, I owe a treble
debt, of Love, of Service, and Thankfulness: Of love, for your extraordinary
kindness in preferring me, and for that countenance you have continually given
to my weak Ministry: Of service, such as I can perform, I will not fail;
daily beseeching God for the increase of his spiritual graces here, and
eternal glory hereafter, both to your self, and al such as are d^ere unto you.
Of thankfulness, in patronizing me being absent, kindly entreating me present,
and for affecting me long before I was by you preferred. Of some I shall be
hardly censured, of others thought ambitious in seeking men's favors. For this
I care not, so the well-affected Christian may think of the shortness of his
life, and thereby prepare to dye; and being ready, to be willing to dye, and
you be pleased to procure a quiet passage under your patronages for those few
indigested meditations, which were by Gods permission, and his assisting
Spirit, first preached, and now published: I ascribe the patronage to you, the
use to the godly, and the success to God. The God of peace give you the peace
of God which passes all humane understanding, and afford you many comforts
and joys in this life to the end, and in the next his joy without end.

Your worships in all faithful service, JOHN PRESTON.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Mr. JOSIAH REYNEL Esquire, the 13. of
April 1614. in East-Ogwell in Deuon.
PSALM. 39. 5. Behold, thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age
is nothing in respect of thee: surely every man in his best state is altogether
vanity.
THE Princely Prophet David, who was a man after Gods own heart, 1. Sam. 13.
14. 1. Sam. 13. 14.
The chosen of God, Psa. 78. 70. Psalm. 78. 70.
A man gracious with God, Act. 7. 46 Acts 7. 46.
The servant of God, Ps 89. 20. Psalm. 89. 20.
The type of Christ. Acts 2. 25. Acts 2. 25.
Nay Christ is called the son of David, Math. 1. 1. Math 1. 1.
The sweet singer of Israel, 2. Sam. 23. 1.
a man that had tasted the full cup of Gods mercies, and had been plunged in
many troubles, insomuch as he said: Psalm. 34. 19.
Great are the troubles of the righteous, Psa. 34. 19. He does often complain
of his troubles, and that with great grief and bitterness of mind, and
chiefly in this place. This Psalm is partly narratiue, partly precatiue: In
the first part David declares how he had purposed with himself to take need
of murmuring against God, which might arise through the injuries of men. In the
second part he desires that God would certify him of the vanity of this
life, and therefore he says: Psalm 39. 4.
Lord let me know my ^^d, and the measure of my days what it is: let me know
how long I have to live. Psalm. 39. 4. In another place he says: Psalm 90. 12.
Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
Psa. 90. 12. David in these words does not desire death, but he requesteth that
he may be brought to a serious consideration of his mortality, as is evident by
the words, Let me know my end: that is, the end of my natural life, of my
days, which by thy decree I must live in this world, and then he says;
Behold, thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is nothing in
respect of thee: surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity.

Here note 4 things. 1 A note of attention, Behold. 2 A confession, thou have
made my days as an hand breadth. 3 An asseueration: surely, 4 An amplification,
every man in his best estate is altogether vanity.


It is as much as if the Prophet had said; Behold, I will show and declare unto
you by a twofold comparison, that the Lord has made my days short; for they
are but as an hand breadth, which is one of the shortest measures, and the time
of my life is as nothing, or like to nothing; and surely every man, not only
such as are of base condition, but the mighty and the noble are vanity.

[Behold,] This word behold, consists of few letters, less sillables, yet
very significant: Sometimes it is a badge of admiration, as Behold a Virgin
shall conceive and bear a son, and thou shall call his name Immanuel, Esaias
7. 14. Esaias 7. 14.
Sometimes a sign of alteration, Reuelat. 21. 5.
as Behold I will make all things new. Reu. 21. 5. Sometimes a token of
gladness; Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy that shall be to all
people, Luke 2. 10.
Luke 2. 10. Sometimes a point of demonstration, Behold the place where they
have laid him. Mark. 16. 6. Mark 16. 6.
Sometimes it shows a thing unknown, Behold I will send you Eliah the
Prophet, Mal. 4. 5. Mal. 4 5.
Sometimes it is taken scornefully, Behold the man that took not God for his
strength, but trusted in the multitude of his riches, and put his strength in
his malice. Psalm 52. 7.
Psalm. 52. 7. Sometimes it is a note of attention, Behold I stand at the door
and knock, etc. Reu. 3. 20. Reuelat. 3. 20.
Declaring his love to the Laodiceans. In this one word behold, here is comfort
for such as faint, and Gods love is showed toward such as repent. In this
place it is a note of attention, to put us in mind of the breuity and
shortness of our lives.

Here observe, Doctr.
that every word in the Scripture is remarkable, and this word behold is not a
word of course, but a note to stir up our attention. It is like the sounding
of a Trumpet before some weighty Proclamation, or like the ringing of a great
Bell, before the Sermon of a famous Preacher: it is set down to move us to
attention to hear for afterward. Esaias 42. 23. Esaias 42. 23.
One figure may stand for many hundreds, one counter for many pounds, one
little box may contain many jewels: So one word of the Scripture may point
out unto us many things worthy our observation, and what can be greater then
to hear, to learn, and to learn to know how short our life is. Let him that
has an ear hear. Revel. 3. 6. Revel. 3. 6.


The use may reprove such as will not be warned, Use 1.
by any mark or note, nor stirred up to hear, but become voluntary deaf
Adders, refusing the voice of the charmer, though he be most expert in
charming, Psalm. 58. 4. 5. Psalm 58, 4. 5.
They will not hear Christ crucified, Gal. 3. 1. Gal. 3. 1.
They are enemies of the cross of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. Phillip. 3. 18.
who is able to kill our sins, and quicken our souls. When the balm tree is
cut in summer, that the sweet liquour drop forth, the inhabitants preserve it
in viols: when the Word, which is the spiritual baulme, is divided by
preaching, 2. Tim. 2. 15.
2. Tim. 2. 15. the people should bring empty pitchers with them, as the widow
did at the command of Elisha, 2. King. 4. 5. 2. King. 4. 5.
the empty pitchers should be attentive ears; but either they are without
mouths, or without bottomes; without mouths to let in one drop of grace, or
without bottomes that when we have put it in and look to see it again in your
lives, behold it is run throughout, as water through a sieve, and scarce
leaves any wet behind it. It is not enough to eat meat, unless the stomach
retain it; so it is not enough to hear, unless men lay it up in their
hearts, as Mary kept the sayings of Christ in her heart, Luke 2. 51. Luke 2. 51.
We must have ears of atention, and hearts of retention. In vain does the
Preacher open his mouth, unless God open the heart, when God opened Lidiaes
heart, then she attended to the things which Paul spoke, Acts 16. 14.
Act. 16. 14. As men come so they speed, and as the affection is, so is the
profit: If they bring empty pitchers they may be filled, but if their vessels
be full of wickedness, they can never be filled with goodness: As we do Gods
works to holiness, so we shall find comfort to holiness: It is to be
feared, least many go home with vnfallowed Hos. 10. 12. Hos. 10. 12.
nay with unhallowed hearts.

Secondly, for instruction to us, where God is an Heb. 9. 27.
Heb. 9. 27. for we must die, and we are as water spilt on the ground. 2. Sam.
14. 14.
2. Sam. 14. 14. which cannot be taken up again. Wise Solomon, godly David,
religious Josiah, faithful Abraham, just Lot, righteous Noah, zealous Moses,
trusty Jonathan, dilligent Peter, and careful Paul, have dyed; it is certain
we shall die, but the time uncertain, and the place. The time is uncertain,
God came to David's child in his infancy. 2. Sam. 12. 18. 2. Sam. 12. 18.
to the widows son in his yourh, Luke 7. 12.
Luke 7. 12. to Jacob in his old age. Genesis 49. 33. Genesis 49. 33.
God has ordained and limited to every living creature his appointed time
wherein to live and grow, and next to decrease and die; and as it pleases God
to prolong or abridge their lives, so he disposes of the second causes, and
means whereby he will have it brought to pass, and so every one has his
certain limits and term of life set him. Job says, Is there not an appointed
time to man upon earth, and are not his days as the days of an hireling. Job.
7. 1. Job. 7. 1.
Again, Are not man's days determined, the number of his months are with thee,
thou have appointed his bounds which he cannot pass? Job. 14. 5. Job. 14. 5.
In the same chapter, All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
changing shall 14. God has appointed how long every man shall live, and though
four score years be no long course, yet there are but few which hold out to
the uttermost end thereof, in regard of the^ that stay by the way. Some are cut
off even before they have begun their course, and some in the midway, and
that through so many sorts of sickenesses, with other inconveniences and
accidents, that a man cannot possibly comprehend, or conceive them all. As
death spares not any person, so it respects not any place. A man may be
murdered in the field as Abel was, Genesis 4. 8. Genesis 4. 8.
A man may fall backward sitting quietly in his chair, and break his neck
as Eli did. 1. Sam. 4. 18. 1. Sam. 4. 18.
Or dye in the Temple as Senaherib did Esaias 37. 37. Esaias 37. 37.
Or at the Altar as Ioab 1. King. 2. 34. While Jobs sons were feasting, 1.
King. 2. 34.
the house falls upon them Job. 1. 19. Job. 1. 19.
While the scoffing boys were mocking, Bears came from the wilderness and
devoured them 2. King. 2. 24. 2. King. 2. 24.
While Corah and his company were contending, the earth opened and swallowed
them up Numb. 16. 31. 32. Number. 16. 31. 32
While the Captains and their fifties were fetching the Prophet perforce to
the King, fire falls from heaven and consumes them. 2. King. 1. 10. 2. King* 1.
10.
Thus death does follow us wheresoever we go, and is ready to ceize upon us
wheresoever we are.

Thou have made my days as an hands breadth. Some say thou have set my days
short, some thou have made my days mourning; some, thou have made my days of
four fingers wide, Taphat signifies the measure of the palm of the hand,
which is of four fingers. The meaning of the Prophet is this: Thou Lord have
made my life short, like the palm of an hand, which is of four fingars, which
is one of the shortest measures.

Seeing the life of man is but as an hand breadth, Doctr.
it affoordeth this doctrine, that man's life is short, and of no long
continuance. Our life is compared to grass Esaias 40. 6. Esa. 40. 6.
which withers. To a shadow which passes Psalm 102. 11. Psalm. 102. 11.
To smoke that vanishes, Hos. 13. 3. Hos. 13. 3.
To a bubble that is dissolved: To a weauers shuttle for swiftness, Job. 7. 6.
Job. 7. 6.
To a spiders web which is soon swept away. To a cloud that goes away. Job.
7. 9. Job. 7. 9.
To a flower that fades, Job 14. 2. Job. 14. 2.
To a vapor which is soon dispearsed, Iam. 4. 14. James 4. 14.
Remember that my life is but a wind Job. 7. 7. Job. 7. 7.
No marvel if when the wind blows the leaf fall, if when the death
appears, the night end. There is one says, our life is an heavy sleep, fed
with false and imaginary dreams, and he calls it a Comedy, or rather in our
days a Tragedy of transitory shows and disguised persons. Sometimes to a
birds nest made of straw and dung, that the winter soon dissolueth. There is
another calls it a child's game, that builds houses of sand on the shore,
where every wave washes them away. Is our life so short? then it is better to
die then to live, and the day of death is better then the day of birth. Eccles.
7. 3. Eccles. 7. 3.
The day of death is not a perishing but a parting. The soul is not lost to
the body, but only sent before it to joy. If the soul be painefully laid
off, it is joyfully laid up. Per natiuitatem ad stadium per mort^m ad breuium
peruenimus.
Through our nativity we come to the race, through death to the reward:
through birth to the flood, through death to the haven; through birth to the
fight, through death to the victory; through birth to labor, through death to
rest; by birth to sorrow, by death to joy; by birth to life, which is full of
all sorrows and troubles, by death to life eternal which is free from all
sorrows. Death is rather the flight of sin, then the detriment of man dying,
because to the just death is not the end of nature, but of sin, as a Father
says. To leave this world and inherit a better should seem nothing. Death is
a passage from sin and corruption to glory and immortality, from this earth
to heaven, from the company of sinners, to the company of Saints; from sorrow,
to solace; from pain, to peace; from sickness, to safety; from persecution,
to triumph; from the bondage of Pharaoh, to the liberty of the sons of God. The
consideration hereof made Solomon, who for wisdom might seem a God, for
government deservedly might be King, and for learning might be a Prophet, to
say; All things under the Sun are vanity and vexation of spirit. Eccl. 2. 11.
Eccles. 2. 11.
Seeing all things in the world are vanity, better is a good death then a bad
life, and the day of death better then the day of birth. When we are borne we
are mortal, but when we shall rise again, we shall be immortal: we are
alive in the womb, to die in the world, but dead in the grave to live in
heaven. Our life is not compared to an ell or yard, to a pace or to a cubite,
to a mile or to a furlong, to a fathom or to a foot, but to an hand breadth, a
very short measure. Man that is borne of woman is of short continuance. Job.
14. 1. Job. 14. 1.
Few and evil have the days of my life been. Genesis 47. 9. Genesis 47. 9.
The time of our life is three score years and ten, Psalm. 90. 10.
if a man come to four score, then there is nothing but weakness. As Jonah
his gourd was soon come and soon vanished, Jonah 4. 6. Jonah 4. 6. 7.
so man is soon borne and soon dead. This world is as a Stage, and man as an
Actor, when he has played his part he is gone. Our lives shorten as if the
book of our days were by the penknife of Gods judgment cut less. Before
the Flood they were in Folio, they lived almost a thousand years, Methushelah
lived nine hundred sixty and nine years, Genesis 5. 27. Genesis 5. 27.
the whole chapter will show us how long the men lived before the Flood. After
the Flood in Quarto, then they lived an hundred and twenty, and an hundred and
seventy. Genesis 25. 7. Genesis 25. 7.
In David's time in Octauo, three score and four score years, but with us in
the days of the Gospel, in Decimo sexto in the least volume, now at forty,
fifty, or sixty years, old men, and so we are dying almost so soon as we
begin to live. The Elements are more mixed, drossie, and confused, our new
sins call for new plagues; the air is more infected and contagious, and our
sins of drunkenness and surfeiting do not want to second all the rest: we
may observe that neither planers above, nor plants below, yield us expected
comfort. So God for our sins does cause the heaven to be as Brass, and the
earth as Iron, and the air with the winds to be tempestuous, and so almost
every thing which was created for man's use is become his enemy, and all because
we turn all things to vices corruption, which were given for natures
protection: and therefore what we have diuerted to wickedness, God has
reuerted to our revenge. We are sick of sin, and therefore the world is
sick of us. How soon does the sand run down in the houre-glasse, how
quickly does the Sun begin to set? so speedily does our time pass away.
Future things are always beginning, present things always ending, and things
past are dead and gone; while we live we die, and then we leave dying, when we
leave living: Better it is therefore to die to life, then to live to death,
because our mortal life is nothing but a living death, and life continually
flies from us and cannot be withheld, and death hourly comes upon us and
cannot be with-stood: No armor resists, no threatening prevails, nor no
entreaty profits, against deaths assault. If all perils spare our life, yet
time and age in the end will consume it. As a river that rises in the Forest
passes by many rocks, runs and tumbleth, and makes a noise, yet in the
end enters into the sea: so fares it with man's life, he comes into the
world with pain, and begins his course with pitiful cries, and is daily
molested with sicknesses, and never cease running, till in the end he fall
into the sea of death: As every man has his Genesis, so he must have his
Exodus, and as we are borne to live, so we are borne to die. Our dying on earth
is but the taking of our journey to heaven: Why are we unwilling to loose that,
which cannot be kept? The good Pilot sits at the stern to guide his ship;
and so a good Christian to direct his life must think on death: death is the
door whereby we must go out of bondage, and therefore as he that is in prison
takes great comfort to sit upon the threshold, that when the door is opened,
he may the sooner get out: so we must always have our minds fixed upon death,
for pass we must, but how or when we know not. Emosinarius having his Tomb
in building, commanded that it should be left imperfect, and that his
servants every day should put him in mind to finish the same, that so he
might prepare to dye.

The use of this doctrine is, Use 1.
forasmuch as our life is short, and nothing almost shorter, let us prepare for
death, Luke. 12. 40.
for we must dye. Be ye prepared, for the son of man will come at an hour
when ye think not, Luke 12. 40. All estates of men are exhorted to prepare,
old and young, rich and poor, Prince and Peasant: the danger is great, if men
be found unprepared: as death leaves men, so the day of judgment shall find
them. If the tree fall toward the South, Eccles. 11. 3.
or toward the North, in the place that the tree falls, there it shall be.
Ec^le. 11. 3. As Ishbosheth being found asleep, 2 Samuel 4. 6. 7.
was killed by Rechab and Baanah, 2. Sam. 4. 6. 7. even so if we be asleep in
sin, and unprepared, we shall be killed by Satan. Because the five foolish
virgins had not oil to maintain their lamps, Matthew. 25. 12.
the Bridegroom said, I know you not. Mat. 25. 12. Because the man which came
to the wedding was not prepared, Matthew. 22. 13.
he was cast into utter darkness, Mat. 22. 13. As he is left behind that is
unprepared when the wind serves, and the ship under sail, even so he is left
in damnation that is not prepared for the Lord when death comes. Many men
prepare for life which is uncertain, and forget death which is certain. Mark
13. 37.
I say unto all men, Watch, Mark. 13 37. The day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night. 2. Pet. 3. 10. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
a thief as well for stealing on us, as stealing from us: he comes in the
dark when no body sees, treades on wool, that no body hears, watches an
hour that no body knows. It may be he will come when men are banqueting, as
on the old world, Luke. 17. 27.
Luke 17. 27. Or when they are drunken, as on Belshazzer, Dan. 5. 25. Daniel.
5. 25.
Or when they are committing filthiness, Numb. 25. 8.
as on the Israelitish man, and the Moabitish woman. Number, 25. 8. Or when they
are coveting, Luke 12. 20.
as on the rich man, Luke 12. 20. Or when they are gormandising, Luke 16. 22.
as on the glutton, Luke. 16. 22. Or when they are lying, Acts 5. 5.
as on Ananias, Acts 5. 5. No thunder now can beat into them a fear of that
which then no power shall ease them of. We know Christ will come, let us
prepare for his welcome. We are all householders, our bodies are our houses, our
souls our goods, our senses are the doors and windows, the locks are faith
and prayer. The day of our death will come as a thief; a thief comes when
men do not look for him: so the day of death comes suddenly. A thief
comes not when the master of the house is watching, but when he is asleep:
so many times the day of the Lord comes on men, not when they seem to watch,
but when they are secure and careless: let our repentance watch, let it never
sleep, least we perish. But men now put far away the evil day, Amos 6. 3.
and they flatter themselves with the remoteness, the vision that he sees, is
for many days to come, and he prophesies of the times that are far off,
Ezekiel. 12. 27.
Ezekiel. 12. 27. Surely there is no peace to the wicked, Esa. 57. 21. Esaias. 57.
21.
Their rose buds are not withered, their dances are not done, sleep
conscience, lie still repentance, they will not prepare for death. God made
garments for Adam of dead beasts skins, Genes. 3. 21.
Genesis 3. 21. to put him in mind that he was condemned to dye, and to make the
remembrance of death familiar unto him, that the loss of life might not
affright him, who always ware the livery of death upon him: so we feed daily
upon dead creatures, this should teach us to prepare to feed dumb creatures.

Secondly, Revel. 14. 13.
because our lives are short and sinful, Blessed are they which die in the
Lord. Reu. 14. 13. First, they are blessed in respect of the place: for if we
consider the world wherein we live, it is a vale of misery, a prison, and a
place of vexation and trouble, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 22.
We know that every creature groaneth with us also, and trauelleth in pain
together unto this present, Romans 18. 22. But heaven is a place of joy, rest,
and of comfort. This place is of no certain continuance, here we have no
abiding City, but we look for one to come, Heb. 13. 14. Hebr. 13. 14.
But heaven is of continuance: for the foundation thereof is God. Secondly,
they are blessed in regard of their company: for here we live among the wicked
and sinful men* but there we shall enjoy the company of innumerable Angles,
Heb. 12. 22. Hebr. 12. 22.
It was an excellent change when David was called from a Shepherd to be a
King: so was it an excellent change in Saul when he was called from seeking
his fathers Asses, to be a King; yet this is nothing in respect of their estate
which are called from this world to heaven, where there is light without
darkness, wisdom without ignorance, understanding without error, reason
without obscurity, memory without oblivion, and joy without sorrow, where,
whatsoever shall be desired, shall be present; neither shall any thing be
desired which is not comely: where God shall be seen without end, loved
without lothing, and praised without wearying. Thirdly, in regard of their
condition they are blessed, for they rest from all their labors: for they
which dye in the Lord, or for the Lord, are with the Lord. Paul desires to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. Philip. 1. 23.
Death considerd in Christ, and joined with a good life, is to Gods elect an
advantage, Phil. 1. 21. Philip. 1. 21.
nothing else but a bridge over this tempestuous sea to Paradise, Gods mercy
made it so; not by making death in it self good, but an instrument of good to
his. Why is any man unwilling to dye? Death does not separate us from God, but
it makes us draw near to God: then do we draw near to God, when we are
separated from the body. Genes. 40. 21.
As Pharaohs Butler could not see the face of the king when he was in prison,
but being loosed from his bonds, he both saw him, and gave the cup into
Pharaohs hand, Genesis 40. 21. So as long as we are in the prison of our bodies,
we cannot see the face of God; but being loosed, we shall see God face to face,
1. Cor. 13. 12. 1. Cor. 13. 12.
and enjoy that unspeakable good which God has prepared for them that love
him. 1. Cor. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 2. 9.
Have thou feared God in life? then do not fear death: for the sting of death
is taken away by Christ, so that as honey is not truly honey when it has lost
its sweetness; nor vinegar truly vinigar, when it has lost its tartness;
nor Aloes truly Aloes, when it has lost its bitterness: so the death of the
righteous is not truly death, having lost his sting, fearfulness and terrors
in the godly. The dying out of this world is not a death, but a life rather,
and therefore as Julian said to Christ; Vicisti Galilae.
O Galilean, thou have overcome me: so may death say to them, O Christian thou
have overcome me. Vicisti Christian.
What is death that thou fear it? it is a departure from this wicked world,
a dissolution of the bodies of the godly from bonds, that they may be with
Christ; it is a returning to our heavenly Country from this pilgrimage, it is
a deliverance from the misery of the world, it is a return from banishment to
our fathers house, it is a preparation for the glory of the resurrection. Why
do thou fear death? Death has only the name of death, not the sting of
death. Numb. 21. 9.
As the brazen serpent in the wilderness had the form and shape of a serpent,
but not the life a serpent, nor the sting of a serpent, Number. 21. 9. So death
has the likeness and semblance of death, but it has no sting, it has no
venom, it has no poison. If a Be sting a dead carcass, she loses not her
sting; but if she sting a living man, she loses her sting: so death stinging
us which were as dead flesh, did not loose his sting; but stinging Christ, he
has lost his sting: therefore we may now say; 1. Cor. 15. 55.
O death where is thy sting. 1. Cor. 15. 55. Thy sting is no sting unto us, but
a crown of rejoicing. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19.
It is a Midwife to bring us out of the womb of this world, into the land of
the living, Psalm. 27. 13.
Psa. 27. 13. Death is as a ship whereby we fail from earth to heaven. Do not
fear the grave: for thou sowest but a carnal and corruptible body, to reap
an incorruptible and spiritual in the resurrection. Be willing to change
dross for gold, and corruption for incorruption. If one enemy find favor at
another enemies hand, why should a dutiful child fear to go home to his
heavenly father, a penitent soul to his sweet Savior, and an obedient member
to be joined with his head? If he came into this world to redeem us, why
should we doubt but at our death he will receive us. He that accepts his
enemies, will he reject his friends? He that bought us so dear, will he
refuse his penyworth? If he affected our company so much on earth, (as that he
said) My delight is to be with the children of men, Pro. 8. 31. Has he now so
forgotten his old love, Prou. 8. 31.
as not to admit us into his company in heaven. He came hither to buy us an
inheritance, and he went from hence to prepare it for us. Ioh. 14. 2. John.
14. 2.
And when we are to enter into possession, will he exclude us? No, no: Psalm.
32. 18. 19.
The eyes of the Lord are upon them that fear him, to deliver their souls
from death. Psalm. 116. 15.
Psa. 32. 18. 19. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints,
Psalm. 116. 15. Precious, as the end of labors, as the consummation of victory,
as the gate of life, and the ingresse of perfect security. Let us remember his
love in adopting, his truth in promising, and his power in performing, and our
fear of death will soon be altered into a desire of the same. He come to open
heaven gates, and what meant he, but that we should enter in? He came to us on
earth to innite us to him, and why departed he from the earth, but to have us
follow him? He abandoneth none, but abandoned by them. He is easily found
where he has been carefully sought. Well, death to the good is counted a
quiet haven, and to the bad it is counted shipwreck, The wayfaring man does
willingly demand where his mansion and stay shall be. The servant does often
account when his year is ended, the husbandman does always expect harvest, and
a woman with child does wait for her time of delivery: so the servants of God
do think of their death, and so look where their treasure is, Matthew. 6. 21.
there will their heart be also. Math. 6. 21. If a Prince should command a
Beggar to cast off all his rags, and bid him prepare himself to come into
his presence, and live daily in his company, would the beggar delay, or be
sorry because he shall enjoy the company of a Prince? Much less should we
delay, or be sorry, when God, the Prince of Princes, calls us by death into
his privy chamber of heaven. Therefore let beasts, and heathen, adulterers, and
murderers fear death, because they think, and it is certain, that all their
joy ends with their death; and let not Gods children fear death, because it is
an entrance into joy, and eternal felicity in heaven.

And my age is nothing in respect of thee. Some read it age, some substance,
some life; in the original, My time is nothing in respect of thee; nor this
life nothing in respect of the life to come. It is some thing in the eyes of
men, which see only things present; but before God, which sees things to
come, which is eternity, which wants all measure, it is altogether nothing.

This teaches us, Doctr.
that our life, how long soever it be, being compared with the eternity of God,
is as nothing; and worldly prosperity being compared with eternal felicity,
is as nothing. God is infinite, and our life is finite: it were a most unequal
valuation to compare, and much more to prefer things which are in no
proportion of goodness to the things which are vnder-valued; for between
temporal and eternal, heavenly and earthly things, can be no proportion. One
day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. 2.
Pet. 3. 8. 2. Pet. 3. 8.
I am Alpha and Omega (says God) Reu. 1. 11. the first, Reuelat. 1. 11.
and the last, without beginning and without end. But man had beginning, for
he was made of the dust of the earth, Gen 2. 7.
Genesis 2. 7. and man shall have an end of his time, for he shall return to
dust, Genesis 3. 19. Genesis 3. 19.
What proportion is there between God and man? God is the Creator, man the
creature: God is Immortal, man mortal; God the Maker, man made by God; God
the Potter, man the vessel of earth; God is mighty, man is weak. If
persecution happen, saint not, God is mighty; if poverty, shrink not, God is
wealthy; if thy conscience grieve thee, run to God he is merciful; if thy
ignorance dismay thee, run to God he is wisdom: Worldly prosperity is of
short continuance, but heavenly happiness shall continue for ever.

This serves to instruct us to prefer the life to come before this life, Use
1.
for in the world to come there is life without death, rest without labor,
health without grief, light without darkness, day without night, and
happiness without end. The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard,
neither came into man's heart, what God has prepared for them that love him. 1.
Cor. 2. 9. 1. Cor. 2. 9.
In heaven there is no sickness nor sorrow, Revel. 31. 23.
no crying out nor complainig. There is no need of the Sun, neither of the
Moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the
light of it. 24
And the people which are saved shall walk in the light of it, and the Kings
of the earth shall bring their honor and glory unto it: 25
And the gates of it shall not be shut by day, for there shall be no night
there. Reu. 21. 23. 24. 25. As God is our light here, so he will be in
heaven, He is the Sun which borrows not light from another. He is the Way.
Ioh. 14. 6. Ioh. 14. 6.
The Door, Ioh. 10. 9. Ioh. 10. 9.
The Vine, Ioh. 15. 1. Ioh. 15. 1.
The living Bread. Ioh. 6. 51. Ioh. 6. 51.
He is the light by participatton here, and by fruition in heaven. Our Savior
said, I will be with you to the end of the world, Math. 28. 20. Math. 28. 20.
that is, he will be with the godly, as long as any be on earth, and he will
be with them for ever in heaven. Christ will not be light to the wicked in this
life, and therefore he will be no light to them in the life to come. He will
be life to none that are appointed to death, nor the bread of life, to such as
had rather the Onions and Garlic of Egypt, then Milk and Honey in the
heavenly Canaan. To whom God does give the light of Grace here, to them he
will give the light of glory in heaven; to whom he denies the one, he will
never give the other: If God make us partakers of Christ's Ignominy, he will
make us pertakers of his Glory.

Secondly, 2
seeing all things are mutable in this world, let us lay up our rest in the
world to come. There is nothing under the Sun which is perpetual, but all
subject to diverse mutations: kingdoms are subject to mutability, as we may see
by Israel and Judah, how did they flourish for a time, now they are gone, and
their Kingdoms possessed by others? How often has the government of Rome
been changed? Famous Cities have come to naught. One Generation passes,
Eccles. 1. 4.
and another succedeth. Eccl. 1. 4. Eccles. 11. 7.
In another place he says: Surely the light is a pleasant thing, and it is a
good thing to the eyes to see the 11. 7. 8. Man is not perpetual, for man is
borne to die, as we see daily by experience: Houses built with great cost and
charge become ruinous: Trees have but a time and then wither. What is there
under the Sun that is perpetual? The light of our eyes is but for a time,
but the happiness of the godly lasts for ever. The rich man can have his
riches but for a time, nor the great man his honors, nor the King his Crown,
nor the wanton his pleasures, but the godly man's happiness lasts for ever.
The true difference between earthly things and heavenly consists in this,
earthly things are much desired, but being obtained they content little,
heavenly things are desired little, but once gained, satisfy much; and
therefore lay not up treasure upon earth, where the moth and canker corrupt,
and where thieves dig through and steal. Math. 6. 20.
Math. 6. 20.

[ Surely, every man in his best state is altogether vanity.] Every man of what
sort or fashion so ever he be is vanity. Eccles. 1. 2.
Solomon says, All is vanity: Eccl. 1. 2. and David says, The children of men
are vanity, the chief men are lies; to lay them upon a balance they are
altogether lighter then vanity. Psalm. 62. 9.
Psalm. 62. 9. And man is like to vanity* Psalm. 144 4.
Psalm. 144. 4. That is vain which is subject to diverse changes, which is
mutable, frail, and passing away; so every man, rich, and poor, noble, and
ignoble, Prince, and people, are changeable, like a bubble made of vanity.

This does teach us that all sorts of men, Doctr.
and all sexes are frail and changeable: To day living, to morrow dead, as
some of our neighbors round about us, to day rich to morrow poor, as Job. 1.
21. Job. 1. 21.
To day in honor, to morrow in the dust. One cries mine head, 2. King. 4. 19.
as the Shunamites child did. 2. Kin. 4. 19. another is sick with a fall, 2.
King. 1. 2.
as Ahaziah was, 2. Kin. 1. 2. Another cries in his feet as Asa. 2. Chro. 16.
12. 2 Chr. 16. 12.
Another sick to death, Esaias 38. 1.
as Hezekiah, Esa. 38. 1. Another soul pants, Psalm 42. 1.
as David's did, Ps. 42. 1. As that part of the wheel which is highest, is
presently lowest again: so that man which the world lifts up one while,
anon after casts down again, so mutable is the estate of every man. All
things in the world will either leave us or else we must leave them. They will
leave us; Riches takes her to her wings, as an eagle. Pro. 23. 5. Honors
leave many, Proverb. 23. 5.
as Haman; dignities, as Bellisarius. We leave them, As the Partridge gathers
the young which she has not brought forth: so he that gets riches, and not
by right, shall leave them in the mids of his days, and at his end shall be
a fool. Ier. 17. 11.
Ier. 17. 11.

The use of this doctrine serves to humble all sorts and sexes, Use.
that they wax not proud. Art thou a king, thou art subject to mutability? thou
art vanity. Art thou noble, art thou rich, thou art but vanity? like a Venice
glass soon broken, thy days are but as an hand breadth; thy time is nothing,
if it be compared with the eternity of God, and thou in thy best estate,
whether youthful, or in prosperity, thou art frail and subject to diverse
mutabilities and changes, thou art mortal and thou must die.

And now (beloved) least I should tire my self, and your Christian patience, I
will but lap with Gideons soldiers, Judge. 7. 6.
Judges. 7. 6. and touch the honey as Jonathan, 1. Sam. 14. 43.
with the tip of my rod. 1. Sam. 14. 43. and so brifly will speak as the
present occasion, and your expectation requires: that as I have hitherto
spoken of death, so now I may say something also of this dead subject presented
here before your eyes. This worshipful Gentleman, Descent.
descended from worshipful parents, who were well known to many living among
us. Education.
His education was in learning, first in schools in the country; then to
Oxford, where he became so studious, that he excelled many of his rank. From
thence he was sent to the Innes of Court; there he made such proceedings, that
he might have been inferior in nothing to such as are right honorable, if he
had continued; but he chose rather to live privately with contentation, then in
great places where contentment is hardly to be found. I will speak with your
fouourable patience, something of his learning, of his life, and so of his death.

First touching his learning, Learning.
he was a good Grammarian, he did both write and speak good latin: touching
his writing, his book written in latin, dedicated to the Kings Majesty, will
testify the truth thereof. Touching his speaking of latin readily, such as
have conferred with him, can relate. He was a good Philosopher, a good
Historian, some Grecian, a man well read in Physic: and for distillations,
and secrets; few can second him. Touching divinity, he had read the Bible, and
expositors thereon, both old and new, ancient and modern. Divinity was his
study now for the most part, wherein he did so busy himself, that he intended
(if it had pleased God) to have printed a book of the grounds of Christian
religion, collected in latin, wherein he showed great reading, good
judgment, and multiplicity of knowledge. It were to be lamented, were it not
that the good pleasure of Almighty God was such, that so much learning should
go to the grave, and such good parts as were in him, should be buried in the
earth.

Secondly, his life was answerable to his learning, Life.
he was sober in his carriage, affable in company, gentle, and of an humble
spirit toward all; not covetous, for he was dead to the world; not proud, no
quarreller, no drunkard; and for any thing I can speak (or any other
charitable Christian) blameless from all great, enormous, and scandalous
offenses; being full of the works of the spirit: he was a peacemaker, he would
persuade such as did contend, and take pains to compose strife: he would give
of his own to end that which malice had begun: he was charitable to the
poor, and pitiful to the distressed. His brethren and sisters have lost for
a time, the company of a dear and comfortable brother: his kindred a good
Counselor, the poor an almesgiuer; and other Ministers and my self, a kind
friend, and I doubt not but God has received his soul. Lastly, Death.
touching his sickness and death, his sickness was Morbus haereditarius (as
himself would call it) accompanied with a fever. The stone.
In his sickness he was patient, and willing to leave this miserable world. And
as his life was quiet, so he died quietly. Now the Lord grant us grace so to
spend all our days in his fear, that at length we may dye in his favor, and
receive the reward of everlasting life.

FINIS.

