THE DVTIES OF COMMVNICANTS, OR A TREATISE, Teaching such as purpose to receive
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, how they may rightly carry themselves,
before, in, and after the action of Receiving.

By R: PRESTON, Preacher of Gods Word at Rushden in Northamptonshire.

1 COR. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread,
and drink of that Cup. LONDON Printed by I.D. for John Bellamie, and are to be
sold at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1621.

TO MY WELL AFFECTED FRIEND Mr R: NEWMAN of Rotherhith, near to London,
grace, and peace be multiplied.
CHristian friend, I am bold to send this small treatise into the World, under
your protection, moved thereunto, 1. in respect of your zeal to good things,
rightly ordered, 1. by the light of knowledge: 2. by a wise discretion; and 3.
by sincere affection, which has provoked you to hate not only the works of
wicked men, but also the vain doctrines of such Teachers as are not acquainted
with the truth. 2. In respect of your practice of good things, wherein you go
before many, as an example of good works. 3. In respect of your affection, and
kindness to me, who am but a stranger unto you, and far separated from you.
That acquaintance I have with you is of no long standing: yet for the time
thereof I have found so much favor, and so unexpected respects at your hands
that the Law of equity calls on me for some answerable requital of them.
This paper gift therefore I commend unto your religious care, and Christian
practice, and entreat your friendly acceptance of it, as an insinuation of my
desire to be thankful. The matter which it brings, is, A lesson for
Communicants, teaching them several duties, of good behavior, before, in, and
after the action of receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, very necessary
to be taught, and learned in these sinful, and formal days, seeing there be
many Communicants, and but few Catechumeni Communicants, that are worthy
partakers of the Sacrament. The style and manner wherein it comes abroad is
plain, familiar, and fitted for the capacity, and understanding of the
simple, so as they that are in the lowest form may gather something from it. In
a word, whatsoever it is, I have adventured the publishing of it, for the use,
and benefit of the Church of God. If either to your self, or to any member
thereof it bring any little increase of sound knowledge, and sweet feeling in
the mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3.4.
I have my reward, and that which I can desire. And so beseeching God to endue
you, and yours, with all saving grace, to keep you from falling, and to
present you faultlesse, before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy,
through Jesus Christ; I heartily, and humbly take my leave.

Rushden. November 27. 1620. Yours in all Christian affection, R: PRESTON.

DVTIES OF Communicants.
THis age, and time (wherein we live) as it is the more sinful, because men
incessantly devise new proiects, and forecast to grow stronger in all
ungodliness: so much the more needful is it, that the duties of holiness,
and of the true fear of God should be pressed upon the consciences of people,
that the streams of sin, and the running issue thereof may be staunched, and
stopped. It becomes us not to fashion our selves (as the Apostle demonstrateth,
Romans 12.2.
) to the stamp and Image of the World, nor to grow the more sinful, as this
changeable age gives occasion, but we should labor to think on, Phil 4.8.
and do whatsoever things are honest, just, true, and of a good report, Deuteronomy
5.32.33.
etc. And to walk in all the ways which the Lord our God has commanded us.
It is truly observed touching our Savior, that he fulfilled all
Righteousness: John 3.15
so let all our endeavors drive at this, that God (not the world, nor the
children thereof) may observe, and say of us, Well done good, Mat. 24.45.46. and
25.21.
and profitable servants, enter into joy eternal; for you have had respect to
al my commandments to keep them* and indeed though there be small power, or no
ability at all in us to fulfill as was in Christ, yet there is no man, but is
bound. 1. To all duties of religion, and godly life. 2. To all duties
concerning outward righteousness, which men claim. 3. To all particular
duties charged upon him by virtue of that society, whereof he is a member,
whether Church, Commonwealth, or family. For this is the will of God, that we
should pro^pt, and set forward our selves to every good work, that we should
strive unto perfection, and sanctification, and bear the image of Christ in us
again. Phil. 3.1.
Oh that there were such an heart in every one of us, These. 4.3.
that we might fear God, Deuteronomy. 5.29.
and keep his Commandments, then would it go well with us, and our children
after us.

And as generally we stand in need of all incitements, and prouocations to do
all the things that God has enioined us by virtue of our Callings, General,
or Particular: so more particularly ought the duties of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper to be urged, and pressed upon us. 1. Because we are dull and unapt
to conceive, or understand the mysteries thereof, much like to blunt iron that
needs much sharpening. 2. We are ready to forget, our memories like Siues, or
Riuen dishes drop out good lessons, as fast as they are powered in. 3. We
deceive our selves in the receipt of dainty Cookt meats at the Lords Table,
taking that for ordinary, which is sacred bread. 4. We suppose no necessity
of such meat (signifying holy things) when our own Tables, often in a day are
furnished with choice dishes. 5 We are ignorant of the end, and use of such a
blessed banquet: and lastly, having tasted thereof we remain unthankful, or
else strangely conceited of a Non proficiencie by feeding on them.

we may receive the Sacrament. 1. Doctrine appertaining to the right use of the
Sacrament must not be kept secret. 2. The danger of unworthy receiving must be
foreshewed. 3. The precious must be separated from the vile: Ier. 15.19.
holy things may not be given to dogs: Mat. 7.6.
And 4. together with personal sanctification, 2. Chron. 35.6.
must be a preparing of the brethren.

Remembrancers, not only for putting him in mind of his covenant toward his
people, but also in that they must be restless in whetting Christian duties
upon the people, among which, the duties concerning the Sacrament may be
reckoned; For, first, there is none so far instructed in the mysteries
thereof, but is wanting in much knowledge, and to seek in his practice, and
therefore had need of stirring up. 2. Pet. 1.12.
I will not be negligent (says S. Peter, writing to those that had knowledge,
and were established in the present truth,) to put you in remembrance of these
things. And secondly, no man is so strong, and so sound of memory, but he
stands in need of a daily confirmation, and often renouation.

Now as God is thus careful for us, that we might not be left destitute of
nourishment for our souls, nor forgetful of his mercies in the Lords Supper,
but sends us his Ministers to be Stewards, and Remembrancers, to put us in
mind of our Covenant made with him, to teach us what things are necessary to
the right using of the Sacrament, and to charge us as from his immediate
person, not to dare to provoke him to anger, 1. Cor. 10.22.
by an irreuerent, and profane dealing with those things, that are of so holy
a nature as the Sacraments. Then must we labor to possess our memories, and
to have our hearts prepared for a remembrance, and entertainment of such
lessons as are taught, and delivered concerning the Sacrament.

First, least we sin against Christ, by a second daily crucifying of him by
our sins.

Secondly, least we heap damnation upon our bodies, and souls.

Thirdly, least we be sharply reprehended of the Lord for our forgetfulness,
and neglect of such an heavenly banquet, as is his last Supper.

Considering therefore the necessity of worthy receiving, and the danger of
those that rush upon the Lords Supper, without serious preparation, my purpose
is to show how we may become worthy receivers, and so may prevent all
Judgments threatened. If we would be approved as worthy, receivers in the
Lords sight, then a threefold religious behavior is required at all our hands.

1. Before we receive. 2. In the action of receiving. 3. After our receiving.
First, our behavior before we receive consists in four duties principally.

1. In a purpose, and resolution to receive so often, as occasion of receiving
is offered. 2. In a preparation to receive. 3. In knowledge of that we do
receive. 4. In a longing desire, and hungring appetite after that we receive.
David said of the whole Law of God, Psalm. 119.
I have purpose, and determined to keep thy Law; so must we all of us in this
particular, purpose to receive when God offers the opportunity.

The reason is because in this Sacrament God of his infinite goodness, Reason.
and mercy offers unto us his only son Christ Jesus, the true bread of
life, Ioh: 6.48.
to seed our souls to eternal life; and Christ also offers himself, I am
the living bread which come down from heaven, 33.35.51.
if any man ^ate of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread that I
will give him is my flesh, etc. Now if God offer his son, and his son be
willing to come unto us to be our bread of life, both vn^hankefull unto God,
and Christ, and unmindful of our own good shall we be, if we purpose not to
receive, but refuse such a great mercy of the Lord, when ^t is fitly offered.

Object. We purpose to receive Ob.
this Sacrament, though not so often as perhaps you would have us, we will
receive it once a year, at Easter time, and that is sufficient, etc.

Sol. To this I answer, Sol.
that it is not sufficient to receive it once a year, at Easter, and no more:
but it ought to be received at all other times, even so often as God in his
providence shall call us unto it. These are my Reasons for it.

holy feast unto him, Exodus 12.14
not by fits* and starts, when they would, but as he had commanded them
throughout their generations, as an ordinance for ever; And Christ himself in
the New Testament, instituting this Sacrament, says unto his Disciples, and in
them to every one of us, that look for the same salvation, Take, eat, Mat.
26.26
without any limitation of time, giving us to understand, that so often as he
commands to take, so often we in obedience should be ready to receive: and
besides, this is a part of Gods worship, set down in the second Commandment,
and ought to be obeyed.

New Testament: Hence it is, that we read in the Old Testament, that the man
that would not celebrate the Passover, with the rest of Gods people, should
be excommunicated, and cut off from the great Congregation: Number. 9.13
And so common was this practice of the faithful in the Primitive Church, as
that it was made a Sabbath days exercise, so that we see in the Acts of the
Apostles, Act. 2.46.
Hearing of the Word, and breaking of bread go together: 1. Cor. 11.26.
and Paul says, so often as see eat this bread, Alij quotidie co^municant
corpori, and sanguini Dominico.
etc. Noting thereby the commonnesse of the Sacrament: And indeed we find,
that in former times, some did partake and communicate every day; others
certain solemn, and festival days, others upon Saturdaies, and the Lords
day, others upon the Lords day only: Alij certis diebus accipiunt, alibi
nullus dies intermittitur quo non offeratur: Alibi sabbato tantum, and
Dominico: Alibi tantu^ Dominico. Aug. Epis. 118. ad Ianuarcum. Legimus omni
Ecclesiae Congregatione celebrata fuisse hac mysteria. Chry. super Mat. Homil.
16. Dies Dominicus, dies panis, dies lucis, etc.
others, so often as the Papists do offer their Mass. And we read that in
every Congregation, and meeting of people together in the house of God, the
mysteries of the Lords Supper were celebrated. And hence it is, that the
Sabbath has three names given unto it. First, the Lords day. Secondly, the
day of eating bread: and thirdly, the day of light.

bidden) were not worthy, Mat. 22.8.9.
neither could they be admitted to taste of his supper: Luke 14.24
but other guests that were in the hie ways and under hedges were compelled to
come in, that the house might be filled, and the wedding furnished. Oh that in
this our day, men would think upon the Lords kind Inuitation of us to his
well stored Table. Isa. 55.1.2.
Pro. 9.5.


heretics, and profane persons of the world. Christ says to Peter, John
13.8.
unless thou suffer me to wash thy feet, thou have no part in me: So unless
in this Sacrament we suffer Christ to wash us with his blood, we have no part
in him: And again says our Savior, Ioh: 15.6.
If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch that is withered, and
men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.

us to a new token, seal, and pledge of his ancient love: Now none will be
content, I think, with feeding the body once a year, nay, scarce once a day.
What leanness, and lack of grace is this, to be content to have our souls
fedd with the bread of life but once a year: The oftener our friends send us
loue-tokens, and pledges of their affections, the more do we rejoice, and with
thankful hearts receive them; but this token that GOD sends us is Christ, with
all his benefits, let us therefore receive him with praise, and with much joy,
and whenever, he is offered to the hand of our faith.

Church, who turned the Sacrament of the Lords Supper into the Propitiatory
sacrifice of the Mass, Council. trid: sess. 13. Can. 9. Mornae: c^^tra Missam.
pa. 229 Willet. Synop. Page 629.
where they will offer Christ, but not receive him: whereas still to this day
all other Churchet among the Grecians Armenians, Syrians, Muscouites, Germans,
etc. retain an often Communion in one year.



1. The Papists that go about to disanuall the necessary use, and often
receiving of the Lords Supper, binding lay men to a set time, and season of
receiving, to Easter time only, whereas Christ requires an often repetition
of his death, and a diligent coming unto his Supper.

2. The Atheists that make no reckoning of this Sacrament, perhaps they will
come once in a month to the Church to save a forfeit, but scarce once in a
year to receive the Lords Supper, and when they receive it, they make no more
account of it then some three halpenie Ordinary: there is such scantnesse of
Grace among them, that they feel no sweetness in it.

3. Temporizing Communicants that communicate at some season of the year, or
at some supposed good times, only as though seasons, and Moons, and the
influences of the sky, gave virtue to Gods ordinances.

4. All wicked people, that abstain from this Supper, for very negligence, in
want of preparation, or because they are fallen out with their neighbor, and
cannot be in perfect charity. To these and all such it may be said, that they
are grievous sinners, and great transgressors of Gods Commandments; they are
open contemners of the practice of the faithful, they incur the wrath and
displeasure of the Master of this feast, so as in Justice, and true Judgment,
he may tell them, they shall never taste of his meat any more, they cut
themselves off from Christ, and from unity, and concord with his Church; they
despise the food of their souls, and the pledges, and tokens of Gods love,
and they utterly cast off the seals of their own salvation.

Ob: Ob.
Yea, but S. Paul says, that it is better for a man to abstain then come for
the worse. 1. Cor. 11.34.


Sol: Sol.
It is true indeed, therefore all such as come upon a good intent, and yet
without knowledge of that they come for, or such as come for custom, or
company, without examination of themselves, or such as (because they would be
counted Christians) come without their wedding garment, Mat. 22.12.
having neither faith, nor a good conscience, do sin greatly in coming, as
well as the former in not coming at all: but yet these can be no prejudice, o^
discouragement to them tha^ are rightly prepared. Other men's sins must not be
block^ in their way to this banquet, to hinder them from it.

Ambros. de Sacra: lib. 5. cap: 6.
Make have to come oftentimes unto this Sacrament, for when this thing is
di^igently, and continually done, Ignatius in Epist: ad Ephesians:
the powers of Satan are expelled, which turns his acts into fiery darts,
to move men to sin. And albeit thou make a stand at thy sins, yet if they
be not so great, as for them thou ought to be excommunicate, thou may not
separate thy self from the medicine of the body and blood of Christ: for,
Hilarious de Consecra: did: 2.
it is to be feared, least that he, which withdraws himself ^ong from the
body of Christ, be utterly estranged from salvation. He therefore that ceased
to sin, let him not cease to communicate.

Oh therefore examine, Theophilact in 1. Cor. cap. 11.
and bolt out thy conscience, and so come unto these heavenly mysteries, not on
the festival, not on the vnfestiuall days only, but at all times when thou
find thy self ready, and worthy.

Psalm. 57.7. 2. Chro 30.12.13.
to all the parts of Gods worship, and service, and therefore much more to this
holy Sacrament. This Preparation is called Examination: Let a man (says the
Apostle) examine himself, 1. Cor. 11.28.
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup.

This examination is threefolde;

1. Of our sins past and present. 2. Of our reconciliation with God. 3. Of
our reconciliation with our brethren.
First, for the Examination of our selves, touching our sins, past or
present, that is set down in the Lamentations of Jeremiah, Lam. 3.40.41.
where the Prophet says, Come, let us search, try, and examine our own
ways, and so turn again to the Lord: but how must we examine our selves,
surely by the Law of God, we must know that, and take that into our hands,
Ephesians. 5.13
as a glass to behold our selves in, for it will show us all our sins, Gal.
3.10.
original, actual, etc. Yea, not only our sins, but the punishment of
sins: the Law as a line will show us all our crookedness, and fetch us in by
such circumstances, as whereby, we shall not content our selves with a
Confession in gross, that we are sinners, but we shall confess our sins to
be out of measure sinful: and like the Kings Attorney, sift, and exaggerate
every circumstance of our sin, to make it as foul as can be, that our hearts
may be beaten down in the sense of our misery: and that we may cry out of our
selves: Alas, What have I done? And in this Examination, we must judge, 1.
Cor. 11.31.32.
and condemn our selves, that so we* be not judged, and condemned of the Lord.
We must do, as the Judge does in his examining of a thief, or an evil doer:
first, set our selves at the bar of the Lords seat, to whom we must be
countable: secondly, make diligent search into our offenses: thirdly, produce
witnesses: fourthly, accuse our selves, and plead guilty: fifthly, confess the
particulars; and sixthly, pass sentence of death upon our selves, judging our
selves a people worthy to be cut off. Ezekiel.


Christ has acquitted, and discharged us for our offenses, 1. Tim. 1.13 14.
whether we be reconciled unto God, or in the state of grace, or no: this
Sacrament profits none but such as are in Christ: Examine your selves (says S.
Paul) whether you be in the faith or no, 2. Cor. 13.5.
prove your selves, know you not that Christ is in you, except you be
Reprobates?

We may know whether we be reconciled unto God, and have gotten pardon of our
sins, two ways.

1. If we feel that we have truly believed. 2. If we perceive that we have
truly repented.
For the first we shall know, that we have truly believed,

Hereby (says Saint JOHN) We know that we dwell in him, 1. Ioh: 4.13.
and he in is because he has given us of his Spirit

And among all the gifts of ^he Spirit, earnest, and hear^^e Prayer, is a note
of true ^aith, for therein the Spirit ^f GOD gives us confidence and
boldness, to cry, Romans 8.15.26.
Ab^a Father, with sighs, and ^^bbes, that cannot be expresed.

ward battle against fear, against infidelity, against sin, and against
the temptation of Satan, so as through Gods blessing we do overcome. Gal.
5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: Every
cross, puff of wind of affliction, or temptation, vnsetleth the unbeliever;
but the believer will not fear though the earth be moved: Psalm. 46.2.
his faith is like Iron, the more it is beaten, the harder it is; or the
waters, the more they are pressed, the stronger they are, and the more
impetuous, as we see in the Sea between two rocks, and in Rivers under the
Arches of a bridge.

Being justified by faith, Romans 5.1.
we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ: thirdly, of Joy,
which is called unspeakable, and glorious: joy in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have received the atonement: fourthly, of mortification,
Act. 15.9.
faith purifieth the heart, it suffers no unclean thoughts, unlawful lusts,
or wandering motions to harbor there, it purges out the old leaven, and by
little and little, transchangeth it into a new lump: fifthly, of obedience; We
have received grace, Romans 1.5.
and Apostleship, that obedience might be given unto the faith: Heb. 11.8.
And Abraham by faith (when he was called) obeyed God: Gal. 5.6.
sixthly, of love, faith works by love, both toward God and man, toward him
that begat, and him that is begotten, yea, and him that is not yet begotten:
seauenthly, Of remission of sins, Act. 13.48.
so many as were ordained to eternal life, believed. And again, All that
believe in Christ, Act. 10.43.
shall receive remission of sins, etc. The inward sense of such fruits as
these, argues faith to be in the heart of him, that bears them.



2. Cor. 7.10.
continually mourning and grieuing for our sins, and offenses: the sacrifices
of God are a contrite, Psalm. 51.17. Psalm. 34.18. And 77 3. And 143.4. Isa.
42.3. Joel 2.3. Act 2.37.
broken, afflicted, anguished, perplexed bruised, rent, and pricked heart. He
that unfeignedly repents, does lament, and bewail his former sins, and
conceiueth such inward grief, that his heart does melt, 2. King. 22.19.
and his spirit is sore troubled within him. 1 Samuel 8.15.
Our sins should be our greatest sorrow, nothing should go so near our
hearts as they: and therefore the Lord says, that when men are brought to a
true sight of their sins, they shall mourn for them, as one that mourns
for his own son, Zach. 12.10.
and be sorry as one is sorry for his first borne.

Father. 2. Cor. 7.11.
This is called Indignation, or displeasure, signifying how much every penitent
man is angry, and displeased with himself; and thus did Job repent of his
sins, saying, Job 42.6.
I abhor my self in dust, and ashes; and Paul, Romans 7 24.
when he called himself, a Persecutor, and a miserable wretch.

Si vis esse verus paenitens, cessa a peccato et noli amplius peccare quoniam
inais est paenite^tia, quamseque^s coinquamt culpa. Bern. Medita: c. 4.
yea, all manner of iniquity. It is not sufficient for us to be inwardly
sorrowful, but we must put away all our sins: and if thou will be a true
penitent, cease from sin, and sin no more, for that repentance is vain,
which after-sinnes do defile. It was the great commendation of the Ninevites,
that they turned from their evil ways, Ion: 3.8.
and from ^he wickedness that was in their hands. Neither must we think it
sufficient for us to forsake some sins, and retain other some, or to
exchange one sin for another, but we must endeavor to forsake, and sell all,
Mat. 13.44.
not one cursed Amalekite, 1 Samuel 15.3.
that sighteth against our soul, must be spared, how dear so ever it be: 1
Pet. 2.11.
Cleanse your selves (says the Apostle) from all filthiness, 2. Cor. 7.1.
both of the flesh, and spirit. Mortify all your earthly members; Col. 3.5.8.
Psalm. 119.3. Psalm. 101.4.
cast away all things that are displeasing to God: work none iniquity; none
at all, etc.

of life, if we study, and endeour nor to break the least of Gods
Commandments, Psalm. 119.5.6.
but have respect unto one, and all: If we p^t on the new man which after God
is created in righteousness, Ephesians. 4.24.
and true holiness: if we seek to please God in all things, Psalm. 139.20.21.
hating that which he hates, and loving that which he loves; and if we
exercise our selves to have a conscience void of offense toward God, Act.
24.16.
and man.

Saint John: that he is a liar, 1 Ioh: 4.20
who says, he loves God, and hates his brother. The true ground of this
Reconciliation is the love of God the Creator: All the love of man must issue
from the love of God; and all duties of the second Table must be performed in
the first; neither ought any creature to be loved so far, as it is an enemy,
and hateful to God the Creator. I hate the wicked, that is, so far as
wicked, namely, their practices, not their persons.

There are certain signs and tokens whereby our love, to our brethren; and
Reconciliation with our neighbors may be rightly discerned.

or offense he has committed against him, franckly, or freely; yea, though he
have offended him often, even unto seauentie times seven times: He that has
ten thousand Talents forgiven him, will not easily take his brother by the
throat for twopence. The Commandment is to forgive one another, Ephesians. 4.32
even as God for Christ's sake forgave us. The example is, Be ye merciful as
your heavenly father is merciful; Luke 6.36.
he forgiueth all, freely, perfectly; he is first in forgiveness, he
forgiueth, and forgets too. The form of our petition of mercy is, Mat.
6.12.
forgive us, as we forgive others: and the conditional promise is, if ye
forgive men their trespasses your heavenly father will forgive you, Mat. 14.15.
etc.

Ob: But I am daily provoked, Ob.
and how shall I forgive?

Sol: Many in this case suffer their patience to be broken, Sol.
not bridling their anger, and judge meekness, putting up, and not revenging
injuries to be baseness, cowardice, and weakness. But the word of God tells
us, Luke 17.4.
that we must forgive our brethren, though they sin seven times a day against
us, that we must not be overcome of evil, To. 12.21.
but overcome evil with goodness: this is bow, arrow, sword, pistol, and a
surer conquest then many blows.

Romans 12.9.
Let love be without dissimulation: It must not be hypocritical, from the
teeth outward, and fawning; but love must come from a pure heart; Let us not
love in word, 1 Ioh: 3.18.
and tongue, but in deed, and truth: Dissembling is evil in all things, but it
is worst of all in neighborhood, as the most contrarie^ corrupting cause of
friendship. Things most excellent, Corruption optimi est pessima.
corrupted become the worse: As there is nothing more excellent, and
comfortable to the life of man, then true, and unfeigned love; so there is
nothing more vile, then when it is counterfeit, and dissembled.

example of it in good Zacheus, who being converted, stood forth in the
presence of Christ, and made this protestation, If I have taken any thing, Luke
19.8.
from any man by forged cauillation I restore to him fourfold. This also was
the Law for theft, Exodus 22.1.
that if a man steal an Ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall
restore five oxen for the Ox, and four sheep, for the sheep. And hereupon
David adjudged the man that had taken from his poor neighbor his only sheep,
2 Samuel 12.16.
that he should restore him fourefold.

Ob: But what if a neighbor be so poor, Ob:
that he is no way able to make Restitution, or amends?

Sol: Then surely his poverty may be dispensed withal, Sol:
for as the Proverb is, Where nothing is to be had, the King must loose his
right; And necessity has no law. But yet if a man be never so poor, he must
testify his desire to restore if he were able, and no doubt but it will be
well accepted.

friends must show himself friendly, Pro. 18.24.
no contentious, nor railing word must go out of his mouth.

Ob: But my neighbor deserves rather sharp, Ob.
then friendly words, may I not reprove him?

Sol: Yes, Sol.
but it must be in a friendly manner, having war with his vices, but peace,
with his person. He breaks not Gods peace, nor the Kings peace, nor the
Churches peace, nor the league of true neighborhood, who having a good calling
reproues, but he that obeys not the truth to speak ill of an undeserving
neighbor, argues a deuillish mind; to speak well of a good neighbor, a
civil mind: to speak well of an evil deserving neighbor, a Christian mind.

In this case of friendly reproof, follow the direction of our Savior CHRIST;
Mat. 18.15 16.17.
If thy brother offend against thee, (that is, in thy sight, for an offense
committed before thee is a scandal unto thee) go and reprove him between
thee, and him alone: If he shall hearken unto thee, thou have won thy
brother: but if he shall not harken unto thee; take unto thee two, or three,
that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established,
etc. This is the friendl^ course which we must take wit^ an offensive
neighbor. And he chance to be absent, that w^ cannot reprove him to his fac^
yet we must not publish h^ shame behind his back: He that utters infamy
is a fool^ The secret faults of our neighbors we are to conceal, Pro. 10.18.
and cover, if they be committed o^ infirmity: 1 Pet. 4.8.
for, Love covers (...) multitude of faults.

Samaritan, Luke 10.33
grieuing at the trouble of his brother; he will set to his shoulders, and lift
him up, yea, every way he offers himself willing, and ready to help and
^elieue him to the uttermost of his power and ability. In this respect Paul
gave great commendations of the Macedoni^ns, That to their power, yea, 2. Cor.
8.1.2.3.
and ^eyond their power, they were wil^ing of themselves to relieve one another
in their poverty and ^aiserie.

And according to this rule, and example the same A^ostle exhorted the Romans
to ^eioyce with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15
and (...) weep with them that weep: And the Phillippians, Phil. 2.4.
Not to ^oke every man on his own things, ^ut every one also on the things of
others.

Objection. But must we in all ^ccasions be so affected as our ^eighbours? Ob.


Sol: No: Sol.
the drunkard does rejoice in his drinking: It is sport to a fool to do
wickedly, Pro. 10.23.
and folly is joy to him that is destitute of understanding; Pro. 15.21.
let them rejoice alone, let us rather weep.

Again, Many will weep when they are crossed in their tastes, 2 Samuel 13.2
as Amnon is sick for his sister Thamar; and Ahab for Naboth his Vincyard: 1.
Kin. 21.4
Here we are not to weep with them, but for them.

Use. Is it so that we must prepare our selves before we come to the Lords
Supper, by examining our selves: first, touching our sins* secondly, Our
Reconciliation with God thirdly, Our Reconciliation with our brethren: Then in
this point as in a glass, we may see how many sorts of people fail in their
preparation, and commit a fearful sin; and profit little or nothing at all
by this ho^y ordinance of God.

condemning themselves for their sins, but rather like the proud Pharisie
they justify, and excuse themselves; they are no such great offenders as men
take them for, they hope they are prepared, etc. Well the Lord says to all
these: Psalm. 50.
What do you with mine ordinances, and hate to be reformed, casting my Laws
behind your backs. I will wound your hairie pate, and the scalpe of all those
that sleep in sin, and so God in the severity of Justice sharpens his wrath
against them, that the edge of it might be keen in the day of wrath.
Therefore let all such never dare to come to this Table in their pollutions:
Will a man entertain a filthy Leprous guest, or shall he have a kind welcome
to his Table, that comes in a besmeared, and dirtie apparel? No surely. No
more will God suffer polluted, and filthy persons to eat of his Table, and
though they come and sit down (as many sinful men do,) yet they are not
welcome guests, and as the saying is, He had rather have their room, then
their company.

with the bare names of Faith, and Repentance, though they have no true signs
of faith, and repentance, though they be neither seasoned with the spirit of
Grace, nor weaponed with spiritual strength to fight against the adversaries
of the soul, nor fruitful in faith, bringing forth abundantly the fruits
thereof: though they be never touched with inward grief, nor reformed in their
ways: these are like the church of Sardi, Reu. 3.1.
they would have a name that they live, whereas they are dead. But let them be
warned never to adventure to eat of this Sacrament, till they be better
prepared, and be that in deed which they appear to be. God delights not in
such servants that presume to walk in their Masters apparel: he will not be
mocked with such deceitful forms.

The third sort that fail in their Preparation, are those that say they love
God, and yet hate their neighbors, or if they love them, it is not apparent,
but their love is under a shadow. If at any time wrong be offered them, it
cannot be borne, nor brooked, they cannot forgive, and forget, corrupt nature
has so lessoned them, Veterem ferendo Iniuriam inuitas nouam.
that by putting up one wrong, they think they open a sluice for the entrance
of many more, nay, they hold it a sign of a poor, and a cowardly spirit. It
is courage, and manliness say they, to revenge injuries and wrongs. Is it
manliness? Nay, it is foolishness: Eccles 7.9.
Anger (says Solomon) that is, desire of Revenge, rests in the bosom of
fools. Nay, it is brutishness; anger a dog and he will fly in your face;
touch an Ass, and he will wince, and kick, Pharoahs seven lean kine would
devour as much as they could lay their hands on.

what mischief they can against their neighbors, they render evil for good,
and seek to harm them of whom they have received good. 4. Priest, and the
Leuite, and do him no good. 6. Others, thou prayest not so much that he may
live in heaven, as that he may leave the earth: not so much that he might enjoy
that life, as be deprived of this, which is murder in some sort. 7. distress,
as the Edomites in the day of the destruction, and captivity of Judah. 9.
Cain, What am I my brothers keeper? They feast it themselves, Amos 6.4.
but are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

All these which respect not their neighbors good, nor practice love, and
charity, must not presume to eat of the Lords Supper, which is a feast of
charity. That meat is not profitable, which is eaten with a malicious
stomach, and grudgingly digested, much less good, will the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ bring to him that is cloyed with malice, envy,
hatred, despite, grudges, and murmurings. The time that Christ was conversant
with his Disciples, he taught them humility, patience, contempt of the world,
and other Christian virtues: but the persuasion of love, charity, and good
will he reserved to his last Supper, to the intent they might understand that
feast to be a feast of love, and charity.

Knowledge, whereby he shall be able in some measure, to know, and discern
that thing aright, which he intends to receive. This is very necessary if it
be sound: first, because then it is a sanctified understanding of the divine
mysteries, and also of all Principles of Religion, as first, Of the Trinity of
persons, in the Unity of the Godhead secondly, Of the creation of man and his
fall: thirdly, Of the curse, and misery due to sin: fourthly, of the natures
and offices of Christ, and redemption by faith in his death, especially of the
doctrine of the Sacraments, sealing the same unto us.

2. If we know not GODS will in these mysteries, we can neither believe, nor
receive aright: Businesses cannot be done by them, that have no skill in them.
So without skill in these spiritual matters, we are far off from good
conclusions.

3. To receive without knowledge, is to crucify Christ, to wound, and pierce
him again, which brings damnation to the ignorant person, as Paul well
observes in his first Epistle to the Corinth: 1 Cor. 11.27.29.
Who soever shall eat these holy things unworthily, not discerning the Lords
body, is both guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and also draws down
damnation upon himself.

The use of this point may teach us, Use 1.
that there is no room in this festival meeting, for children in
understanding, who in their pure naturalls are far off from comprehending the
use, and end of this Sacrament. Secondly, Here is no place for natural fools,
or madmen, they are simple, but yet wanting that Doue-like simplicity, which
is requisite to this Communion, they must be debarred. Thirdly, nor for sick
men that are past their senses: Fourthly, nor for ignorant men, though they be
come to some ripeness in age, and years.

2. All Ministers, Parents, Use 2.
and Tutors may justly be blamed, that admit, suffer, and send such senseless
people to this feast, when best wits, and the greatest understanding is all
little enough.

3. Lastly, Use 3.
let all Gods Ministers learn hence a lesson. None can come unto God but they
must first know God, therefore it becomes them to Catechize such as purpose
to receive, that trial may be made of their knowledge. I know many lofty
Masters will think scorn, that their servants, or their children should be
instructed, yet let not great words dash the Minister out of countenance, it is
better, he fulfill his duty in Catechizing, then find the anger of the Lord
kindled against him for his negligence.

The things wherein our knowledge must be exercised in this Sacrament, are 1.
the parts of it: 2. the use and end of it. 3. what it is to eat it.

or breaking in pieces the body of Christ upon the Cross, to be a
Propitiatory sacrifice for all our sins: Heb. 10.10
therefore Christ when he had given thanks, he brake the bread, and said to
his Disciples, Take, eat, 1. Cor. 11.24.
this is my body which was broken for you. The pouring of the Wine serves to
put us in mind, that Christ was thrust to a tree with a spear, Ioh: 19.1.2
etc.
and so out of his sides shed his most precious blood for our sins, therefore we
are said to have Redemption by his blood, Ephesians. 1.7.
for without shedding of blood, no remission of sins.

Quest: Quest.
But I would know why Christ chose Bread, and Wine, rather then any other
Element to be outward signs in this blessed Sacrament?

Sol: First, Sol.
because they are soon procured: secondly, to teach us that as man's temporal
life is chiefly nourished by Bread, and cherished by Wine, so are our souls
by his body, and blood sustained, and quickened unto eternal life.

Ob: Ob.
But why is Wine added to the Bread.

Sol: Sol.
To teach us, first, that as perfect nourishment of man's body consists both of
meat and drink: So Christ is unto our souls, not in part, but in perfection,
both salvation, and nourishment: secondly, that by seeing the Wine apart from
the Bread, we should remember how all his precious blood was spilt out of his
blessed body for the remission of our sins.

Use.
This makes against that horrible sacrilege of the Church of Rome, who takes
away, and denies unto the people, one part of this Sacrament, that is to say,
the Wine, and minister it but under one kind, under the Bread without the
wine, contrary unto Christ's institution, who first took Bread, and then Wine.

Ob: Ob.
But are not the outward signs, ordinary bread, and wine?

Sol: Sol.
No. They are consecrated by a divine Word, which does not change their
substance into other substances, but changes them in their use and name: for
that which was before but common Bread, and Wine to nourish men's bodies, is
after the blessing set apart to an holy use, for the feeding of the souls of
Christians. And where before they were called but bread and wine, they are now
called by the names of those holy things they signify, the body and blood of
Christ: the better to draw our minds from those outward Elements to heavenly
Graces, which by the sight of our bodies they represent to the spiritual eyes
of our faith.



do all in remembrance of him: Luk 12.19. Mat. ^6.26 1. Cor. 11.26.
And Paul says, as often as we eat this bread, and drink of this cup, we
show forth the Lords death till he come. As the staying, and killing of the
Paschall Lamb was a notable means to show the Lords death ^ill he came in the
flesh; so this Sacrament is a special means to show us his death already
come, and vnder-gone for us, ^ill such time as he shall come again to Judge
the world in righteousness: Hence the Lords Supper is called a Propitiatory
sacrifice, (...).
not properly or really, but figuratively, because it is a memorial of that
Propitiatory sacrifice, which Christ offered upon the cross.

Use. Use 1.
This doctrine serves to confute, and overthrow the Popish Mass, wherein the
Priest would represent Christ unto the People: for this Sacrament is only
ordained of God, as a lively means to represent Christ, and to show forth his
death till he come, but yet they are not contented with this lively
representation of Christ exhibited, but they have brought in three more
representations, and so make four in all;

Simplex representatio, a simple representation of the death of Christ, which
is done so often, as this Sacrament is received.

Representatio ad viuem, a lively, and full representation of Christ's death,
which they do use yearly to set forth by solemn gestures, apparel, and
other ceremonies upon good Friday, as it is commonly called before Easter; and
so they make this Sacrament nothing else, but a Pageant play.

Bellar: de Missa lib. cap. 1.


And 4. the fourth is added by the Rhemists, Rhemist. 1. Cor. 6.8.
and the relics of it (if there were any) hanged up in a Pixe, not only to
represent Christ, but to housle the sick. But we are taught by the word of
God, that by eating the bread, and drinking the wine, and not by gazing, or
looking on, or lifting up, or turning about, or carrying in processions, or
hanging up bread in Pixes, or by any such means is the Lords death showed
forth. We are to acknowledge only one Sacramental representatio^ of Christ,
in the Supper, Morna: contra Missam cap: 60.
and the sacrifice of the Mass an abominable Idol, never heard of till after
the time of Gregory the Great, in the fixed age of the Church.

Secondly, by this point falls to the ground another pillar of Popery,
namely, their Transubstantiation, whereby they hold the very Elements of bread
and wine, to be changed into the very body, and blood of Christ, and so
maintain the Physical, substantial, and real presence: but if the end of
this Sacrament be to show forth Christ's death, and all that we must do, must
be done in remembrance of him, then Christ is not really, or physically
present: Helps of remembrance are of things absent, not present, and therefore
Gelasius says, Lib: de duabus Christi naturis.
Bread and Wine in this Sacrament pass into the body and blood of Christ, yet
so, as the substance, and nature of Bread and Wine cease not. Bernard could
say, Christ is present, Non materialiter sed spiritualiter, not substantially,
but by a Sacramental relation between the signs, and the things signified.

This Popish tradition was not known in the primitive church nor long after.
Which makes Ignatius say thus; Ignatius in Epist: ad Philadelph:
There is one flesh of our Lord, and one blood shed for us, one bread broken
for all, and one cup for the whole Church; how was it possible better to
distinguish between the signs, and the thing signified, then by these four
words; first, flesh, and secondly, blood on the one part; thirdly, bread, and
fourthly, cup, on the other part. This point is handled elsewhere in one
Treatise of the doctrine of this Sacrament.

2. A second end of this Sacrament is to confirm our faith, in which respect
it is called a seal of the new covenant, Mat. 26.28 Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 11.25.
and remission of sins, and also to assure us of life eternal, in which
respect it is called, Reu. 2.7.
the tree of life, which God has planted in the midst of the Paradise of his
Church, and whereof he has promised to give every one that overcomes to
eat. Our Savior assures us, Ioh: 6.5.
that if any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and the bread that
I will give him is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World.

Ob: Ob.
Yea, but we have the word to confirm our faith, and to assure us of our
salvation, what need we this Sacrament?

Sol: Sol.
Though we have the word, yet this Sacrament is needful, and in two things it
goes beyond the word.

Take thou this, eat thou this, etc. But in the word he speaks, and offers
Christ only generally to all that believe, and repent, ctc.

of his promise, therefore it is said, This is my body; etc. This then must
needs much confirm our faith, Use.
as we see the Kings great broad seal set to a pardon, confirms a pardon:
the matter of the seal of Gods Covenant, consists not, (as do the seals of
Kings and Princes of the earth) either of yellow, or red, or green wax, but
of the red blood, of the immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ, which is visible,
exhibited to the eye of faith; for which cause the Lord himself, and the
Apostle calls the Cup in this Supper, the blood of the new Testament, or of
the new Covenant, for that covenant of grace is ratified, established, and
confirmed, yea, and sealed therewith, as it were with the Lords broad seal.

And as in the Kings broad seal, there is imprinted, engraven, and lively
represented the person of his Majesty: So in this Sacrament, which is the
Lords seal, is imprinted, engraven, and represented the very body and blood
of Christ, and the lively person of the son of God: and all for the
strengthening of our faith, and the nourishing up of our souls in the
assurance of our salvation, through his merits and mediation.



1. Of our Union with Christ, The Cup of blessing which we bless, 1 Cor.
10.16.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break
is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? That is, a most effectual
sign and pledge of our union with Christ. This union is called, abiding in us:
Ioh. 14.16.23. (...).
a joining to the Lord: a dwelling in our hearts, and is wrought betwixt Christ
and us, 1 Cor. 6.17 (...). Ephesians. 3.7. (...).
by the spirit of Christ, apprehending us, and by our faith (stirred up by the
same spirit) apprehending Christ again. Both which S. Paul does most lively
express: I follow after, Phil. 3.12.
if that I may apprehend that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
This union is best felt and most confirmed when we do duly receive the Lords
supper: for then we shall feel sensibly our hearts knit unto Christ, and the
desires of our souls drawn by faith, and the holy Ghost, as by the cords of
love nearer, and nearer to his holiness.

1. Cor. 10.17.
We being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that
one bread; that as the bread which we eat in the Sacrament is but one, though
it be made of many grains: So all the faithful though they be many, yet are
they but one mystical body under one head, which is Christ. This Communion
pleases Christ very well, Ioh: 17.11 21.22.23.26.
else he would not have prayed for it so often as he did: and it is highly
commended in the Primitive Church, because believers were of one heart, and of
one soul in truth, affection, and compassion.

4. A fourth end of this Sacrament is a token and pledge of our 1. spiritual
resurrection. He that eats me shall live, blessed be that man that has part
in this resurrection. Ioh: 6.57.
2. Of our corporal Resurrection, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Christ our
head is risen, therefore all the members of the body shall likewise rise: for
how can those bodies which are weapons of righteousness, Romans 6.13.
temples of the holy Ghost, and members of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.19. Iuo modo negant
carnem capacem esse resurrectionis, quae sanguine and corpore Ch^isti nutritur?
Irenae: lib: 4. cap. 34.
and have been fed and nourished with the body and blood of the Lord of life,
but be raised up again at the last day?

3. The third, and last thing which must be known touching this supper, to it,
is this: We must know what it is to eat this Supper: many are ignorant in
this matter: Now to eat this Supper is to eat the flesh of Christ, and to
drink his blood spiritually by faith, under the signs of bread and wine: for
this cause Christ says, I am the bread of life, Ioh: 6.35.
he that comes to me shall not hunger, etc. And again, except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, for my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. And all this must be
done by faith, which is both the hand, mouth, and stomach of the soul, to
receive, chaw, and digest this heavenly food. In the Gospel of S. John, it is
said, that God gives this privilege to so many, as receive Christ, that they
are the sons of God; Ioh: 1.12.
and a little after it is showed, who receive Christ, namely, all those that
do truly believe.

Ob: Ob.
But our bodily food is present with us, Christ is in heaven, how then can we
feed on him?

Sol: Sol.
I answer, that it is true he is in heaven, for the Scripture says, Act. 3.21.
the heavens must contain him till the restoring of all things: Yet
notwithstanding, he may be said to be really present two ways. 1. To the
signs by a Sacramental relation. 2. to the Communicants by faith alone. Fidem
mitte in coelum and eum interris tanquam presentem tenuisti. Aug. Epist. 3. ad
Volus:
In the holy Contemplation of faith, thou art at one instant with Christ, and
Christ with thee.

Use. Seeing Christ is offered in this Sacrament to be our food: and we are
to feed effectually on his body, and blood in assurance of life eternal,
this then must teach us to be careful to keep our stomachs for this meat,
and not cloy them before hand with sin. Men commonly keep their stomachs
for the best meat, and will not cloy them with the meanest: so let us keep our
stomachs for this blessed Manna, Psalm. 78.24 25.
which will make us look fresh in this worldly wilderness. Number. 16.35.
Labor not (says our Savior) so much for the meat that perishes, Ioh: 6.27.
as for that which will last for ever. And that our stomachs may be fit for
this heavenly bread, and Lordly cup, we must take heed of sin: we are called,
the Temples of the holy Ghost, let us look that these temples be clean swept,
and cleansed, otherwise neither Christ, nor the holy Ghost will come into them.

of this Sacrament. All this meat in this Supper must be eaten by faith. As
meat will do one no good that wants hand, mouth, and stomach; so this meat
cannot profit any, that wants faith.

1. If we have not the righteousness of faith, this Supper seals nothing unto
us, Every man receives as much, as he be^eeueth.

2. Without faith we cannot apprehend Christ in heaven: (we being on earth,)
for as he dwells in us by faith, so by faith we must likewise eat him.

Heb. 11.6.
3. Without faith we cannot be persuaded in our consciences, that our receiving
is acceptable to God. Romans 14.23


Ob: Ob:
Are none but the faithful nourished in this Supper, are not the wicked
nourished a^ well as they?

Sol: Sol:
No. 1. They have no^ part in Christ: He would not pray for them. Ioh: 17.9.
2. Wanting faith, they are no welcome guests to this banquet. Panem Domini,
non panem Dominum Aug. de Judah.
3. They may eat the Lords bread, but not that bread which is the Lord.

Ob: Ob.
What do the wicked receive in this Sacrament? I am sure they receive the
Elements.

Sol: Sol.
Surely they receive the Elements only, and increase of more ungodliness, and
more fullness of all iniquity, evil men, 2. Tim. 3.13.
and deceivers are said to wax worse and worse, as Judas so soon as he had
received this sacrament, grew forthwith mischievous: Ioh: 13.27.
Satan entered into him, and filled him full of all iniquity.

Ob: Ob.
Then it seems the Sacrament is not in vain to any?

Sol: Sol.
No indeed; for, as it is a seal of salvation to the godly, so it is a seal
of condemnation to all the wicked: and a token of Gods vengeance.

Knowledge and desire must be joined together.
knowledge, and desiring are joined together. A man can neither know Christ
truly, but he must needs desire, and long after him: neither can he desire,
and long after him, till he first know him: Here is the trial of our
knowledge. It is but vain, and trifling knowledge, which provoke not to
desire. If our eyes were opened to see, then our mouths would cry after Christ.

Ignorant persons must here take notice of their misery; Use.
for not knowing Christ, they cannot desire him, nor desiring him, they cannot
enjoy him. If ever thou would have thy soul thrive, labor to have thine
eyes opened to see the worth of Christ's merit, Ephesians. 1.18
and spirit. This is the reason why so few pray, and heartily desire to be
partaker of this Supper, because they know not the sweetness thereof. The
difference of the word, and the Sacrament is this, the word is called verbum
audibile, the Sacrament, verbum visibile. Aug.


This fourth duty (next unto knowledge) is an earnest desire to Communicate,
as if a drought had overtaken us, and our souls began to be parched, for want
of moisture. As Peter speaks of the word Audible, so it may be said of the
word Visible. Before we come to the Word, we must prepare our selves by laying
aside all maliciousness, etc. 1. Pet 2.2.
And as newborn babes we must desire the sincere milk of the word, that we
may grow thereby. So we must prepare before we come to this Sacrament, and lay
away all our sins: then as newborn babes, we must cry, hunger, and ^hirst,
after the body and blood of Christ, the food of our ^oules.

Now this longing desire, and ^ungring appetite must arise from a 1. sense, and
feeling of ^ur want of Christ; 2. and from the weakness of our faith. Paul
seeing a great want of Christ in himself, and the absolute necessity of every
drop of his blood to wash away his sins, desired above all things to win
Christ, Phil. 3.8.9.
and to be found in him, yea, he accounted all things as dross and dung, to
the end he might obtain him.

There be sundry reasons why this Sacrament should be desired: Reasons.
some concern men of knowledge: others belong in general to all.

First, there be good reasons of desiring this Sacrament in them that know the
parts, end, and use thereof.

of righteousness by faith, Romans 4.11.
an assurance of our Union with Christ, for which cause it must needs be
sweet unto their souls.

2. They apprehend it to be a badge of their profession of their Religion, and
of their service to Christ, and therefore they cannot but desire it.

3. They believe it to be the band of the communion of the Saints, and in that
respect they must needs affect it.

4. They know Christ is therein specially present with his spirit of grace, and
all spiritual benefits, and therefore they long after it.

The reasons that concern all men generally are these;

receive it: as for those that want stomachs it does them more harm then
good. Luke 1.53.
The hungry are filled, but the rich, and those that want stomachs, are sent
empty away.

Psalm. 81.10.
and his filling; our thirsting, and his watering; our open heart, and his open
hand go together: If Gods hand be shut, it is because thine heart is shut; God
will not give without asking; If thou have no mouth to ask, God has no hand
to give, On the contrary, if thou have an heart full of desires, thou have an
assurance of receiving thy desires: thy request can be no sooner in Gods ear,
but Gods hand is in thine heart. Even in thy sighs, and desires for grace, thou
shall find comfort, and joy, for in desiring thou shall receive. Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst, for they shall be satisfied: If any
thirst, Ioh: 7.37.38.
let him come to the waters, he shall drink, and out of his belly shall slow
rivers of waters: Isa. 55.1.2. etc.
Ho every one that thirsts come to the waters, etc.

3. They which have no desire to this Sacrament are in the state of a sick man,
who though his body be lean, and ready to perish, yet his stomach loatheth
the meat, that is offered to him, to restore his health and to strengthen him,
therefore Christ said of such, John 5.
that they would not come unto him (being the spiritual poole of Bethesda,
able to cure and heal all soule-diseases) that they might have life.

Use. This shows that the state and condition of all those that come not to
this holy Table, and yet preach unto the world, that they want this hunger, is
very dangerous, and fearful, for it argues plainly, that they have sick and
lean souls, though healthful, and fat bodies: their faith and feeling is
almost, if not altogether dead; and except they get some good help in some
seasonable time, they will utterly perish.

2. Here is a cooler to the itch of ambition, to the thirst of covetousness:
Isa. 55.2.
Why lay you out your money, and not for bread, and your labor without being
satisfied? Our soul can find no more rest in any earthly thing, then Noah's
Dove out of the Arc, therefore as she returned to the Arc; so must thou
return to God that made thee for himself. The circular world cannot fill the
triangular heart, no more then a Circle can fill a triangle, still there will
be some empty corners. Nothing can fill the heart but that fullness which is
in Jesus. And therefore pursue thy desires, these earthly things as earnestly
as thou will, and get of them what thou can, and delight thy self in thy
fools Paradise, promising this, and that contentment, in the end thy thirst
will be greater then it was in the beginning, thy bread will prove gravel, thy
honey gall, thy wine vinegar, thy fish Serpents. Ipsa etiam vota post vsum
fastidio sunt, and quae mereri optauimus, vbi meruerimus abdicamus.
All earthly things are sweeter in the ambition, then in the fruition. After
the use, we even loath the things, that we have often desired, and those
things that we have desired to obtain, when we have obtained, we reject.



If thou had known the gift of God, Ioh: 4.10.
thou would have asked, and he would have given thee waters of life. Because
men cannot discern with the eye of sense this spiritual water, they never
affect, nor thirst after it, whence it comes to pass, that they stand (as it
were with Tantalus, of whom the Poet speaks) up to the chin in water, and yet
die for water, they sit (as it were) in the midst of a richly furnished Table,
and yet pine away for want of cheer. If we want them it is because we do not
hunger and thirst after them, for only he that hungreth and thirsts is
called to them, and Christ will only give to him that hungreth and thirsts to
eat, and drink of them. hardness of heart, this is worse then the former,
for that cannot affect because it knows not, this will not tho it know. It is
an hard matter to get a drop of water out of a flint and as hard a matter to
soften it, though rivers of waters be powered on it: So it is with many a man,
the hardness of his heart is so invincible, that it cannot relent, neither
will one drop of the dewes of Heaven pierce it further then the outside, like
the heat of the Sun that gets not further into the tree then the outside.

3. The third is security joined with extreme neglect, men are careless of
the benefits that may be reaped in this Sacrament, and so cast it off: like a
beggar that might grow to some better estate, yet castes up all care, foldeth
his hands together, puts them into his bosom, and lets the squares go as
they will.

Use. Let us thirst after Christ in this Sacrament exhibited to believers:
Psalm. 42.1.
as the heart pants after the water brooks, so let our souls pant after
him. Aristot: de Historia animalium lib. 6. cap. 9. Lucretius lib. 6. Oppianus
lib: 2. de Venatione.
The Philosophers observe of the Heart, that being pursued by dogs in hunting,
by reason of heat, and loss of breath, he hasteneth to the Rivers, or wearied
in fight with a Serpent, or stung, or wounded by him, while the Serpent rests
on the ground, he seeks to some cold fountain, whereby the infection of the
venom received, may be abated. Even so such as are wounded, and stricken of
the old serpent, must have recourse unto Christ, not only to behold him with
the eye of faith, but also to take him, and taste him, by the hand, and
stomach of faith, that they may be headed: For, he is the fountain, and
head-spring of all grace, it is he that sends life, sense, motion, and
direction into all his members, resembled in that holy ointment which ran down
from Aarons head and beard, Psalm. 133.2.
even to the skirts of his garment. He is that blessed bread in this sacrament,
which being worthily eaten, opens the eyes of the receiver. He is that Rock
flowing with Honey, 1 Samuel 14.27.
that reuiueth the fainting spirits of every true Jonathan that tastes it with
the mouth of faith. He is the true Bread of life, and heavenly Manna, which if
we shall duly eat will nourish our souls for ever, unto life eternal. How
should then our souls make unto Christ, that request from a spiritual desire,
which the Capernaites did from a carnal motion? Ioh: 6.34.
Lord evermore give us this bread.

The special means to come by this hunger, and thirst, is, a consideration of
man's misery, and Gods mercy; the way to discern this hunger and thirst is by
the signs thereof; 1. By a sense of pain in the stomach: 2. By a want, and
emptiness: 3. By an eager desire of a supply. Thus much of the duties touching
our good behavior before we receive.

The second sort of duties in our good behavior at the time of receiving,
follow in order: They are four,

1. We are to receive this Sacrament as an instrument appointed of God, to
convey Christ, and his benefits unto us, if we believe.

2. We must receive it with fear, and reverence, seeing it is Gods ordinance,
yet not to adore, and worship it, seeing it is not God, but his ordinance.

3. We must make a particular application thereof to our selves.

4. We must receive it with joy and delight.

1 These. 2.13.
appointed of God, for the conuaying of saving grace into our hearts. I call it
a voluntary Instrument, because it is the will, and appointment of God to use
it, as a certain outward means of grace. It is an Instrument, because when
we use it aright, according to Gods institution, then God answerable by it
conferreth grace unto us. It may be said to be an Instrument to confer Grace
two ways. 1. By the signification thereof. 2. By the confirmation.

but particular to the several Communicants.



This confirmation is on this wise, the signs, and outward Elements: 1. affect
the senses outward, and inward: 2. the senses convey the object to the mind:
3. the mind directly by the holy Ghost reasons on this manner, out of the
promise annexed to the Sacrament: He that receives the Elements aright, shall
receive confirmation of Grace thereby: but I use them aright in faith and
repentance, says the mind of the believer, therefore I shall receive
confirmation, etc.

Use. This serves to confute the Papists, who hold both this Sacrament, and
the other of Baptism, not to be voluntary Instruments of God to confer Grace,
but natural, and Physical Instruments, having power and efficacy to work,
Bellarm: de sacram: lib. 2. cap: 4.11.
produce, and give grace, yea, that the very action of the Minister, dispensing
the Sacrament, Ex opere operato, gives grace immediately, as the moving of
the Pen causes writing. This Popish doctrine is fearfully derogatorie from
the blood of Christ, Si quis dixerit per ipsa nouae legis sacramenta ex opere
operato non conferri gratia^, etc. Council: Triden: sess: 7. Can: 8.
and contrary to the Scriptures: For, 1. this effect cannot be ascribed to the
work done as they teach: 2. neither can any extraordinary elevation of their
Beeaden-God confer grace, for this were to make the Sacrament a miracle, and
to encroach upon the right of the holy Ghost: 3. neither have the outward
elements any inherent: force, and power to feed the soul, as they have to
feed the body: 4. neither because grace is not tied by any promise, or means
to the action, so as God who is most free in his gifts, cannot either otherwise
distribute, or cannot otherwise but dispense it with the action.

But understand, that 1. Grace is not tied to the word, therefore not to this
Sacrament.

2. If this were true, then every Communicant should be gracious, the contrary
whereof appears in many of Paul's communicants. 1. Cor. 11.
3. Paul stands much upon this, to prove, that Justification by faith is not
conferred by the Sacrament, and from circumstance of time gathers that
Abraham was first justified, before he received the Sacrament: Act. 10.47.
So Cornelius did truly fear God, and was endued with the spirit of prayer:
So the Eunuch was first a believer, Act. 8.37.38.
before he Communicated:

4. This opinion of tying grace to the Sacrament, overthrows, 1. the highest
and most proper cause of our salvation, which is Gods free election, to which
only Grace is tied: 2. the only meritorious cause which is the blood of
Christ: 3. the most powerful, and applying efficient, which is the holy Ghost,
to whom Grace is ascribed, and not to the Sacrament.

Use 2. As it is with the Lords Supper, so it is with all other ordinances of
God, no outward means can be effectual, unless the inward work of the spirit
be added. We have power to come, and hear the word, but unless the anointing
teach us, 1 Ioh: 2.27.
we shall remain untaught: yea let the Apostles themselves preach, Mar. 16.20.
the Lord must work with them also, or nothing can be done. We have power to
come to Baptism, yet unless we be renewed by the holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5.
and the spirit be upon us, Isa. 59.21.
the outward water will do no good. If there be any grace in the water (says
Basil) it is not in the nature of the water, Basil: lib. de Spiritu Sancto cap.
15.
but from the presence of the spirit; and Hierome says, Hieron. in Isa. 14.
man gives water, but God gives the holy Ghost. Let us beware and take heed,
that we give not too much to outward means, as if they should yield forth all
comfortable fruit, and all efficacy, of themselves without the work of the
spirit. Many boast of the Sacrament very much (as the Jews of their Temple,
the Law, Circnmcision, Covenants, etc.) yet if they go no further then the
outward sign, it cannot be an Instrument from God to convey grace into their
hearts. As of Baptism, so it may be said of the Lords Supper: Vis regenerandi
non aquae simplici, sed Sacramentali, idest gratiae Dei, quae mediantae verbo,
per aquam operatur adscribenda est. Polan: in Analys. Cateck: Basil.
the efficacy, and strength of our regeneration, and reformation cannot be
ascribed to the bare sign, but to the Sacramental sign; that is, to the
grace of God, working with the outward sign, yet so that the word of God must
work with them.

reverence, as Gods own ordinance, to convey, increase, and to confirm Grace
in us, so, as that we must not worship it as God himself, the author, and
bestower of all grace, and goodness. Eccles. 5.1.
Take heed (says Solomon) to thy foot, when thou entrest into the house of
God, and be more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools, for
they consider not that they do evil: as this must be done at the receiving of
the Word, so at the rest of all Gods ordinances: for this is a most certain
rule, that what fear, and reverence, God requires in one of his ordinances,
he requires in all his ordinances. He would have us to fear and tremble at
the receiving of them. Isa. 66.2.


The ground, Reason.
and Reason is, because that abuse which is offered unto any of Gods
ordinances, the Lord takes as done unto himself; even as the Prince takes
that disgrace, which is done to his Crown, and robes, as done to himself.
Christ says, those that despise his Ministers, despise him, and those that
despise him, despise his Father that sent him: therefore all our gestures, and
behauiours, must be such, as show forth a fear, and reverence due unto God in
respect of his ordinance, whither we receive it kneeling, sitting, or standing,
or the like, yet (these things being in different in themselves) we must have a
respect unto the order, and rule of comelines, which is set down in the Church
wherein we live, because so much as possibly we can, we are to keep the unity,
and peace of the Church: always provided, that nothing be done in way of
religious honoring, and worshipping the sacrament, which were to make the
creature a Creator. God only is to be worshipped and served; Mat. 4.10.
as our Savior answered Satan, when he would have had him to have fallen
down, and worshipped him. A Cerere, and Baccho Paganorum dijs long absumus,
qua^uis panis et calicis Sacrame^tum nostro ritu amplectimur. Aug. ad Faust.
We must not worship (says one) the heathen Gods of bread and wine, though
after our manner we embrace the sacrament of bread and wine: his meaning is that
Christians do not worship bread and wine, as the heathe^s did. A holy Martyr
well answered his Opponents, Thomas Spurdance, Acts and Monuments. Page 2025.
I receive Christ by faith, by believing in him; but the bread being received
is not GOD, for, God dwells not in Temples made with hands: you do evil to
cause the people to kneel down and worship the bread.

Use. This may serve to confute the Papists, who fall into the contrary
extreme, and give so much reverence to it, as that they worship, and kneel to
it, as to God. Council triden: sess: 13. Can. 6.
They hold, and it was so decreed in the Council of Trent, that the Sacrament
should be adored, even with the highest degree of worship, (cultu latriae)
which is proper to God, that it should be carried about in solemn Processions,
to be adored of the people; and whosoever held the contrary, was pronounced
accursed. But this Sacrament is only to be reverenced as an holy mystery, not
to be adored with any religious worship. The Apostles received it at the hands
of Christ sitting, not kneeling, taking it, not lifting up their hands to it,
and Christ bids them take, eat, drink, and do all in remembrance of me, to
teach us, how vain, and idle the religion of the Papists is, in worshipping
the Sacrament, which neither Christ appointed, nor the Apostles acknowledged.

Use. This may serve to reprove those, that never look to their feet, but
come rashly to this Sacrament, without fear, or reverence: they never
consider, that God is there present. It befalls to many of them, as it befell
to Jacob while he slept; The Lord was there, Genesis 28.
but he was not aware: So the Lord is here, but they consider it not; they
stand gazing on the rest of the Communicants, as if they should be asked that
question, when they come home, What went you out to see? and not what to
receive. But do these men think God is present? that they stand before
Angels? surely, they know it not, if they did they would not be so rash, and
careless.

Use 3. Here we are taught to demean our selves reverently, and with fear,
while we are about to receive, Considering 1. the worth, and price of this
Supper, it cost the son of God his precious life, he came down from his
throne of excellency; humbled himself: was reputed a base servant, and
offered himself a sacrifice to die for us, that we might live: 2. The dainty
cheer in this Supper, the body and blood of him, who is the ruler of heaven
and earth: the Lord, at whose beck the Angels tremble, and by whom both quick
and dead shall be judged at the last day. 3. The majesty of him that sits at
the Table with us: which is God Almighty, that foldeth the heavens in his
span, and before whom heaven and earth shall pass away like a scrole: 4. the
person that inuiteth us to this feast: no mean servant, but a Lord, even
Christ Jesus, Col. 1.15.
the express Image of his Father. 5. Our own unworthiness; we deserve not to
eat at this table, having been conceived in filthiness, and wallowing ever
since, in the mire of iniquity: these should make us fear, and quake, as
Jacob cried out at Bethell, that is, at the house of God. How fearful is the
the place? Surely it is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate
of heaven: So in respect, that Christ inuiteth us, gives himself to be our
food; that God also is present at this Table, and we for our parts are most
unworthy to fit thereat, or to feed of the meat thereon: we ought to cry
out, surely, this is the Lords table, and all the meat set upon it is of
Christ's provision, and therefore we will eat it with fear and reverence. If a
poor man sitting at a knights board tremble, and fear at every bit of meat
that he puts in his mouth, how much more should we fear that sit at this
board, where the Lord of Heaven is present. If John Baptist an Apostle,
Evangelist, and a Prophet, Mat. 3.11.
thought himself unworthy to bear Christ's shoes: O Lord how unworthy are
we profane wretches to eat Christ's flesh, and to drink his blood. If the
Woman that had the bloody issue, feared to touch the hemme of Christ's garment,
how should we tremble to eat his flesh, and to drink his all-healing blood?
Oh therefore let us come with pure eyes, and heart, to see, and receive the
Arc of the new Covenant, Col. 1.19.
in whom dwells all the fulnesso of the Godhead bodily.

The third duty touching our good behavior, in the time of receiving, is, the
particular application of the Sacrament unto a man's self, while he is in
receiving of it, and this is done by meditating upon the holy actions, and
rites, which according to Christ's institution are used in, and about it: for it
has pleased God (considering our weakness) to appoint those rites as means,
the better to lift up our minds to the serious contemplation of his heavenly
graces.

We must apply this Sacrament 3 ways, as it is 1. a Supper. 2. a Seal. 3. a
communion.


his mere love has set apart, and consecrated his son, yea, Ioh. 6.27.
(as the Apostle speaks) sealed him to be my mediator and redeemer: when he
breaks the Bread, and powers the Wine, I must meditate, how that Christ's
body was broken, and his blood shed for my sins: when he gives the bread
and the wine, I am to think, that then God is offering, and giving me his own
son, to feed me unto eternal life: When I receive the bread, and wine, and
feed on them, I must meditate of the receiving of Christ, and of my feeding on
him by faith, to the cherishing, and nourishing of my soul: Except I eat his
flesh and drink his blood, Ioh: 6.51.57.
there is no life in me, I am but dead, and for this cause did he come down
from heaven, Col. 2.13.
that he might give life to me, and to the world of the faithful.

Ephesians. 1.13 14.
and to have given us the earnest of his spirit.

Now the promises which are sealed unto us, and which faith lays hold on this
Sacrament, respect, 1. our Redemption, 2. Reconciliation. 3. Sanctification. 4.
Preservation.

1. Those that concern my Redemption, are these, and such like, Tit 2.14. Heb.
4.14.15. 1 Ioh: 3.8.
that Christ died for me: that he has redeemed me from sin, and Satan, from
hell, from the wrath, and curse of God: Gal: 3.13. Mat. 1.21.
that he has saved me from all my sins: that they are all forgiven for his
sake: Gal. 4.5.
and I am released of the punishment due unto them: Romans 8.3 4
that he has kept the Law for me, Mat. 3.15.
and fulfilled all righteousness in my behalf: Romans 3.24.25. Mat. 17.5. Romans
4.21.
that his righteousness is imputed unto me, and that God accepts it as mine
own, etc.

2. Those that concern my Reconciliation, are these, and such like, that
Christ has reconciled me to God his Father, Romans 5.10.11.
by whom I have received the atonement: that he has purchased the favor,
Ephe. 1.14.
and good will of God toward me: that God is my Father, and I am his child:
Gal. 4.6.7.
that he loves me in Christ, Ier. 31.3.
and will love me unto the end: that he is well pleased with me in his son
Christ: Ioh. 15.8.9 10. etc.
that he is well pleased with my prayers, 1 Ioh: 5.14
to accept them; and with all my works, Mat. 18.20.
and exercises to give me a blessing in them, etc.

3. Those which concern our Sanctification, are these, and such like: Ephesians.
1.17 18.19.
that I shall receive the spirit of Christ, whereby I shall be endued, not
only with knowledge, faith, repentance, the gift of prayer, 2 Cor. 12.9
and all other graces necessary for me, but also that I shall be sanctified
throughout, 1 The. 5.23
both in spirit, soul, and body; and this will appear, when my mind shall
abound with all good motions, Romans 8.29.
and heavenly meditations, Ephesians 4.23 24.
when my heart shall be filled with all righteousness in Christ, Phil. 1.11.
with all good desires, and holy affections: when my will shall be subject,
Luke 22.42.
and obedient to the will of God: 2 Cor. 10.5
when my words shall be the words of God able to edify, Ephe. 4.29.
and minister grace to the hearers: when my works shall be such, 1 Timothy 2.10
as becomes them that profess the fear of God: when I shall be a vessel
unto honor sanctified, 2 Timothy 2.21
and meet for my masters use: and when I shall serve God in love, and good
works, that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in me, 2 These. 1.11.12.
and I in him.

4. Those which concern my Preservation, are these, and such like: that I am
an heir of salvation, Heb. 1.14.
sealed up unto the day of Redemption, Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 4.30
so that the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, 2 Timothy 4.18
and preserve me unto his kingdom, which is kept for me and I for it: 1 Pet.
1.3.4.5.
He has promised to send his Angels to attend, Heb. 1.14.
and wait upon me day and night, Psalm. 34.7.
to defend, and keep me from all dangers, Psalm. 91.11.12. etc.
and to minister, and bring to my hand all things necessary for me, etc.

1 Cor. 10.16.
The Cup of blessing which we bless is it not a Communion?

The application is true, and sound: first, when I feel that I am in the
presence of God, Isa: 44.10.
and that my soul has communion and fellowship with God the Father, Zoph: 3 17
and with his son Jesus Christ, Ioh: 14.16 23. Ioh: 17.20.
as verily as my body has communion with bread, and wine: 2. When that I
feel I have fellowship and communion with all the Saints of God: Ephesians 3.7.
that I am vnseparablie knit and joined to all my neighbors, 1 Cor. 10.17 1
Ioh: 1.7. 1 Cor. 12.13.25. Romans 12.10 Ephesians. 4 16. Act. 4.32.
and brethren by love, and do live in the practice of love, like a lively, and
feeling member of the body.

Use 1. This confutes the Papists, that hold it sufficient to look, and gaze
on this Sacrament in the Pixe, to worship it, but not to apply it: the Laity
are debarred from it, that it might not profit them.

Use 2. Must this Sacrament be particularly applied, this shows that many
receiving it, receive little profit by it for want of application; some receive
in 1. ignorance: 2. others unprepared: 3. other some for fashion: 4. others
because the season serves: 5. others for satisfaction of their taste: 6.
others to feed their bodies; few for the right end and use.

Use 3. Disburden thy self of all worldly thoughts, and vain cogitations, and
let thy soul be as empty of them, as the poor man's cofer is of gold and
Jewels: hereby a way is paved to walk in heavenly meditations, and freedom
purchased to think seriously upon this Sacrament.

The fourth and last duty touching our good behavior in the action of
receiving the Sacrament is, feast, Reu. 19.7.
a banquet; it is compared to the Marriage feast of the Kings son. Mat. 22.2.
As the guests that are called to such feasts do much rejoice, so must we when
we come to this heavenly feast; like the Children of Israel, that observed the
feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness, 2 Chro. 30.21.22.
etc. Our joy in this banquet should exceed; all other reioycings in natural,
or temporal feasts should stoop unto it. In this is a kingdom;
righteousness, peace, Romans 14.17
and joy in the holy Ghost, in those nothing but bodily sustenance. This joy
will increase, as our assurance of Gods mercy toward us increases. The holy
Ghost, who is our earnest penie, Ephe. 1.13.14.
is given unto us to assure us of the fulfilling of Gods promises: so that
having received him, and feeling him stirred up in us more and more by this
Sacrament, 2 Cor. 1.12
we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God, 2 Co. 5.5.6
yea, as the Apostle says, we have cause to rejoice, with joy unspeakable,
and glorious. 1 Pet. 1.8.


A good show of joy and gladness did many of the Jews then give, when Christ
riding into Jerusalem on an Ass, they spread their garments in the way, cut
down branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way, and cried through
the streets of Jerusalem, saying; Hosanna the son of David, Mat. 21.8.9
blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna thou which art in
the highest heavens. Here was great tokens of joy, and gladness: but how much
more gladness should be in us, seeing Christ has not only vouchsafed to come
into our streets, but into our houses, and our hearts. Great joy was in all
Samaria when Philip came thither to preach among them: Act. 8.6.8.
but greater should our joy be, among whom Christ inhabiteth, and to whom he
has given his own flesh to eat, and his own blood to drink for our
spiritual, and eternal nourishment.

Use 1. This point may serve for direction, to order our desires aright in the
matter of joy. Every man loves a glad heart; and wishes joy: but therein many
mistake. 1. One rejoices in his substance, Job 31.25.
he has gotten much. 2. Another rejoices in his promotion. 3. Hest. 5.11.
Another doateth upon that mad mirth which Solomon speaks of. 4. Eccles. 2.2.
Another rejoices in a Table richly Dan. 5.1.2.3. etc.
decked, an ouerflowing Cup, a faring deliciously every day. 5. Another
rejoices at the destruction of him whom he hates, 6. Job 31.29.
Another rejoices in sin, and wickedness. Pro. 10.23.
It is a pastime to a fool to do wickedly. It is the drunkards joy to be at
the Cup early, Isa. 5.11.
and to sit till the wine have enflamed them. The twilight glads the heart of
the adulterer. Job 24.15.
The oppressor danceth upon the threshold of him that is oppressed. Zeph. 1.9.
Ismael geireth at Isaac. Genesis 21.9.
Holy Job was as a Tabret to the godless ones; Job 17.6.
and the drunkards made songs on David. Psalm. 69.12.
Men imagine summum bonum, their chief felicity to consist in their joys. But
alas, how much are they deceived; for, what are all these joys in comparison
of that we treat of. Indeed if it be rightly considered, what true comfort can
a man take in any thing, so long as the diet of his soul is not the joy of his
heart. Howsoever the Devil teaches men to forget the consideration hereof,
that so he may lead them like an Ox to the slaughter, not knowing that they
are in danger, yet if ever at any time the conscience be awakened to think on
this, the very remembrance of it is like the beholding of the hand upon the wall
to Belshazzar, which when he saw it, put him quite out of his humor of
iollitie; it was not then the delicate taste of his wine, nor the fatness of
his kids, nor the royalty of his Guests, not the finenesse of his fare, could
keep his countenance from changing, his thoughts from troubling, and his
joints from beating one upon another.

Use 2. This may persuade us to affect this joy, and to prefer it before all
contentments: Here we are assured that our labor is not in vain. Thou shall
have joy in seeking for this joy, it shall be gladness to thy soul, to hear
of this gladness: no greater contentment in the world to an hungry beggar,
then to hear of a good dinner, and to feed therein, Oh then that thou could
be persuaded to seek this joy, and in a kind of distaste of all other Joys,
which are not worth the naming, to cry out, Lord evermore give me this Joy:
Then the meat in this Supper would be most sweet to thy soul, and thy
chiefest pleasure.

Use 3. This may serve as a touchstone to try our selves by, whether our
stomachs be in good case, and whether we receive this Sacrament aright, to
Gods glory, and our own comfort, or no; If we do, then we rejoice, take
pleasure, and delight in it more then ever we did in any worldly feast, or
banquet; here is the daintiest meat, and most precious banquet, that ever we
came to; Here every dish in this feast is made of the most precious body and
blood of Christ, which is able to feed our souls, whereas all other banquets
can but only feed our bodies. Luke 19.6.
As Zacheus received Christ joyfully when he came to his soul, much more into
his heart, so those that have sound stomachs receive this sacrament with great
joy and gladness, because herein Christ is come home unto them, and has
brought salvation with him.

Thus much of the duties touching our good behavior in the Action of Receiving.

The third sort of duties in our good behavior after the Receiving of the
Sacrament follow: The duties are four;

1. Thankfulness to God. 2. Carfulness to grow in grace and strength,
according to the nourishment received. 3. A worthy walking in the strength of
this food received to Gods glory, and the good of his Church, etc. 4. A
spiritual watchfulness, by prayers, and supplications, with all perseverance
thereunto, that we may continue in well doing unto the end, and in the end.
The first duty, which (after our receiving) we ought to perform, is
thankfulness to God. We must show our selves thankful to God, for bestowing
so heavenly, and blessed a feast upon us. 1 The. 5.18
In all things (says the Apostle) give thanks. Now if in all things, in our
public feasts, yea, in all our afflictions, and troubles, then much more are
we bound to be thankful for the great benefit of our Redemption bestowed upon
us in this heavenly banquet; whereby being slaves unto sin, drudges unto Satan,
and subject unto hell and condemnation, we are delivered both from sin, and
Satan, from hell, and everlasting destruction. A notable example hereof we see
in Christ, and in his Disciples, when they had ended this supper, Mat. 26.30.
they departed not before they had sung a Psalm of thanksgiving unto the
Lord. Mar. 14.26


Reasons to provoke, and induce us hereunto, (if we have had any true taste of
Gods mercy in this Supper) are these;

ones being deadly stung with some venomous serpent, she is content to have
her own breast pierced, that the blood might gush out, to nourish, feed,
preserve, and recover them: So our Pelican Jesus Christ for the love he bare
to us (being stung to death by the venomous Serpent Satan,) was content to
have his body pierced and his blood shed to feed, and preserve us. Therefore
the Apostle considering this love of God toward him in Christ, prayed for the
Ephesians, that they may know this love of Christ, Ephesians. 3.19 20.21.
which passes knowledge that they might be filled with all the fulness of God,
etc.

of all Gods promises, and of all the assurances of our own salvation. If a
pardon should come to a malefactor, he would be a glad, and a thankful man,
but when he sees the Kings broad seal put to it, much more joyful and
thankful, for then he knows all is cocksure, it is no forged Counterfeit:
So, the King of heaven and earth, has not only given us a pardon, but also
has set to it his seal in this Sacrament, therefore we should always be
singing Psalms of praise, and lift up our hearts with joyful thankfulness
unto the Lord.

love of Christ, and his Saints, and we have such continual comfort in the
sense and feeling of both, that we have not only just cause of joy, but also
of thankfulness.

Use. Use.
This may serve to give a check to our unthankfulness, as for all Gods
benefits, so especially for the Crown of all the rest, even his Son Christ,
given unto us in this Sacrament: this is a bolt, and a bar to keep Gods
benefits from us, we will not be thankful for them, when we have received
them. Unthankfulness, says one, Ventus exiccans, et vrens fluenta gratiae.
Bernar.
is a block that stops up the passages of Grace: and it turns the blessings
of God into curses: because the Gentiles were unthankful, Romans 1.21.22. 2 Timothy 3.2.
the Lord infatuated their understanding: It is a sin most hateful to man, say
he is ungrateful, Ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris. Minus Publianus.
and thou may well say, he is every way faulty. If we respect Gods
Commandment, that commands us to be thankful in all things, or the practice
of Christ, and his Disciples, that after the receipt of this Sacrament gave
thanks, or the love of God that ought to move us to thankfulness, or the
seal of our pardon, which ministers matter of thankfulness, or the
fellowship we have with Christ, and believers, which urges us to be
thankful, let us then testify our thankfulness to God with the Prophet
David, Psalm. 116.12.13
saying; What shall I render unto the Lord for all his mercies? I will take the
cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: the sacrifice of
thanksgiving is as pleasant, and acceptable unto God, as is any sacrifice, and
therefore by David the Lord says, Psalm. 50.23.
Who so offers me thanks and praise, he honors me, even with most
excellent honor.

Peter speaks of the Word, it must be desired, to the end, we may grow by it:
1. Pet. 2.2.
so we desire, and receive this sacrament that we may gather strength, and grow
thereby in grace, till at last we come to a perfect and a full age in Christ.
Our Savior testifies of himself, Ioh: 15.1.2.3.
that he is the vine, and his father is the husbandman, every brauch that
brings not forth fruit in him, he takes away, Mat. 3.
but every one that brings forth fruit he purges it that it may bring forth
more fruit. This duty of growing is much urged in Scripture, we beseech you
brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, 1 These. 4.4.10.
that ye increase more, and more. 2 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 6.1.
Grow in grace. Let us be led forward unto perfection, Solomon compares the
righteous unto the Sun, Pro. 4.18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. This is a manifest truth,
neither is there any point plainer then this, that the children of God after
grace received, must always be growing. And the Reasons of it are these;

which is to feed us, that we may gather strength, and increase of grace.
Psalm. 92.12.13.14.
As a poor man coming to a good banquet is much refreshed, strengthened, and
cheared thereby: So the Lord has appointed this banquet, Eze. 47.12.
that all the good graces of our souls begun in us, which are but poor, and
weak, may receive much strength and refreshing.

2 Cor. 6.1.
least we receive the grace of God in vain.

Mat 25.26 30.31
weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

Use 1. This may serve to reprove those, that keep one standing, and one stay
in their Profession, and Religion, and though they have had the means of grace
long, and used them often, yet there is no increase of grace, no increase of
knowledge, faith, repentance, new obedience, etc. They can go from day to day
to the hearing of the Word, and other godly exercises, but still they are at
one stay, as ignorant, as senseless, as void of true judgment, and of as bad a
Conscience. But alas what a fearful state, and condition is this. If a child
grow neither in length, nor strength, nor fatness, after many years feeding,
sucking, attending on him, etc. surely the mother will be out of conceit with
him. So when the Lord shall feed us in seasonable time, and we shall be all at
one, stand at a stay, neither thriuing in knowledge, nor increasing in good
affection toward religion, he will be out of all good conceits with us, and at
last give us over to our own sencelesnesse. The sick person that is so sick
that he feels not his disease, and wants a stomach, that he cannot eat is
much pitied, and lamented, and every one says of him, surely he cannot live:
So, these that receive Gods graces in vain, in respect of the sense of comfort
in themselves, though not in vain in respect of God; these men, I say, that
reap no profit by receiving the Sacrament, are much to be pitied, for they are
near unto death, and their end will be damnation.

Use 2. This serves also for our Instruction; Let us strive after perfection,
that we may daily grow from perfection to perfection, till we become perfect
men in Christ Jesus. Let us continually pray with the Apostle, Lord increase
our faith: and let us labor by all holy means of hearing the Word preached,
and reverent use of the blessed Sacrament to grow more and more in faith. Let
us pray with the Prophet, Psalm. 68.28.
Stablish the thing, O God that thou have wrought in us. And let us labor to
be daily more and more grounded, and stablished in every grace that the Lord
has wrought in us. And if already we do thus, let us comfort our selves in
this, that we do as we ought, and let us hold on our good course unto the end.

of our high and honorable profession, whereunto we are called by glorifying
God, and edifying his Church. This duty is set down in the Epistle of Paul to
the Ephesians, where the Apostle exhorts us to walk worthy of that high,
Ephesians. 4.1.
and honorable vocation, whereunto we are called. This made Paul go unto God
in the behalf of the Thessalonians, as he says, We pray always for you, 2
These. 1.11.12.
that our God would count you worthy of this calling, and fulfill all the good
pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power, that the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in him, according to the
grace of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. As we receive our natural food, that
we may grow in strength, or at least have our strength preserved, that so we
may be able to undergo our callings; so in this Sacrament we receive our
spiritual food, that thereby gathering strength in the inner man, we may be
the better able to glorify God by walking in our callings; Mat. 5.16.
Let your light so shine, says our Savior, that men seeing your good works,
may glorify your Father which is in Heaven: And the ground of all this ought
to be the love of God in Christ: therefore says Paul, 1 The. 2.12
I beseech you that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his
kingdom: And this we shall do, Romans 12.^1.
1. when we present our bodies a living sacrifice holy, and acceptable to God:
and 2. when for Conscience sake we endeavor to keep Gods comman If ye love me,
says Christ, Ioh. 14.15.21.
keep my Commandments. For, he that loves my Commandments, and keeps them
is he that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I
will love him, and will manifest my self to him.



Paul style this Calling, Phil. 3.14.
an high or supernall Calling: Not so much because the Caller is heavenly, but
because the honor, to which thereby we are advanced, is indeed heavenly. Hence
also it is termed, Heb. 3.1.
the heavenly vocation; not so much because the author, means, and manner, is
heavenly, but because the state, whereto we are brought is heavenly, and
glorious.

Ob: Ob:
But how may I discern this worthy walking?

Sol: Sol.
By these three signs: the first is for a man to resist Satan, and all his
temptations, and never to make himself a drudge, and a slave unto sin any
more. The Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, to put on the whole armor of God,
that we may be able to stand against the assaults of the Devil, Ephesians. 6.11.12.
for we wrestle not against flesh, and blood, but against principalities, and
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, etc. What this
spiritual Armor, both offensive and defensive means, is further expressed
in that Chapter. Ver. 14.15.
And for sin, let not that have dominion over us, Romans 6.12.14.
for, we are not under the law, but under grace: and we may very well know,
that to whom we yield our selves servants to obey, 16.
his servants we are to whom we obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness.

1 The. 5.22
but to abstain from all appearance of evil. S. Peter exhorts us, not only
to abstain from fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11.
which fight against our souls, but also to live so, 12.
that our conversation may be honest among the Gentiles, and wicked men, that
they perceiving our good works, may be provoked to glorify God in the day of
their visitation. S. Paul in three several places of his Epistle to the
Philippians, persuades us to live unrebukable. Only let your conversation be
as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27.
that is, so walk, that it may appear, our life is framed after the doctrine
of the Gospel, and is answerable to our Profession. Again, let us do all
things without murmuring, Phil. 2.14.15.
and reasonings, that we may be blameless, and pure, and the sons of God
without rebuke, etc. And in another place. Whatsoever things are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely, Phil. 4.8.9.
of a good report, and that are well fraughted with virtue, and deserve praise,
let us think on them, and do them. In all these places we are exhorted unto
holiness of life, and integrity of conversation.

translation from death to life, 1 Ioh: 3.14
the Cognizance of a Disciple; It is called that favorable, Ioh: 13.35.
and well-wishing affection, of Gods children one toward another: the
special object of this love, are the brethren, under that name come all that
are partakers of like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1.
and spirit of Adoption with our selves. The lodestone of this love is
brotherhood, Mat. 10 42.
Disciples are loved e^ nomine, because they are Disciples; Gods children,
because they are Gods children, stamped with his Image. The manner of this
love, is 1. natural, and kindly, proceeding from self inclination, no outward
prouocations: 2. Impartial, whether poor, or rich. 3. Fervent, much water
will not quench it. And the fruits of this love, are 1. sociall, conuersing one
with another, for mutual comfort, and edification. 2. A fellow-feeling of
miseries. 3. a succouring of distresses, and a cheerful distribution to their
present necessities. Romans 12.13


This last fruit of love is peculiarly required after the receipt of the
Sacrament: for, as GOD has showed his great mercy unto us, in bestowing upon
us a singular, and a rare banquet: He has not dealt so with every Nation; Psa.
147.20
So should we show mercy unto our poor brethren, in bestowing some relief
upon them according to our ability. 1 Cor. 16. 1 Romans 15.25 Qui copiosiores
sunt, and volu^t, pro arbitrio quisque suo quod visum est contribuunt: and quod
ita colligitur, apud praepositum deponitur, etc. Justin Martyr Apolog. 2.
This was practiced in the Primitive Churches; Collections, and Loue-feastes
were made for the relief of the poor Saints, those of the richer sort,
finding themselves willing to give something, did contribute as they thought
fit, and that which was given and collected publicly, the Overseers did so
dispose of, that poor widows, fatherless children, and all sick, lame, and
impotent persons found help. And as in public, so also in private, it
behooves us to yield them some relief, and to send unto them of our
superfluity, as in Nehemiahs time upon the Sabbath, Nehe. 8.10.
after the hearing of the Word, etc. the people did eat, and sent part unto
them, for whom none was provided.

Use 1. This doctrine may show us, that most men, though by name they be called
Christians, yet walk unworthy of this high, and honorable calling whereunto
they are called, they go on in sin without Repentance, and do what they can
to disgrace the Lord, and Author of their profession, giving just cause of
offenses, both to God, and the world: unless they reform their lives, and
labor to be purged from all filthiness of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and spirit, their end will be fearful. It will be the eternal destruction
of their bodies and souls. Of these profane Esaues, and fleshly Libertines,
S. Paul makes mention, saying; Phil. 3.18.19.
There be many that walk (he spoke passionately, with tears) who are the
enemies of Jesus Christ, whose end is destruction. Our Savior Christ says,
Mat. 18.7.
Woe unto the world because of offenses, yea, woe be to that man by whom the
offense comes. Do thou hear this thou that lie in ignorance, that
give thy self to drunkenness, to contempt of the Word, and Sacraments, etc.
then lay it to thy heart, thy end if thou continue in this course is damnation,
and that which thou most delightest in, shall be thy sorrow, and thy glory shall
be turned into shame. It had bin as good for thee to have had a Millstone long
ago tied about thy neck, and thy self thrown into the bottom of the Sea,
then to have lived to the offense of GOD, and scandalized his Church. It is too
much that thou thy self should be evil spoken of: but the holy Gospel with
the profession of it, and the whole company of religious, and godly people, by
thy means to be blasphemed, is most horrible, and cannot be without the curse
of God. Oh therefore I beseech, and entreat you in the fear of God, Sic
viuite, vt nemo de vobis male loqui absque mendacio possit? Hierot Epist. ad
Caelum de Institut. Matrisfam.
(when wicked men are given to speak evil of you) make them eat their words,
and so live, that none may speak evil of you, but that all the world may see
they lie. Remember God has called you not to uncleanness, 1 These. 4.7.
but unto holiness; every thing in his Calling sauoureth of holiness, 2 Timothy
1.9.
the Calling is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15.
the Caller is holy, the means and instrument is holy, Ioh: 17.17
and the immediate worker, which is the Spirit, is the fountain of all
holiness. Oh then walk worthy of this calling.

Use 2. This may show us, if we try our selves by the former signs, whether
we walk worthy of our Calling, and live according to our profession, the
badge and cognizance whereof we have already received. If we resist sin, and
Satan, and suffer neither of them to reign in, nor over us: if we take heed
that we be not spotted of this present evil world: if we love our brethren,
and the members of Christ, and with chearfulnes help them in their present
exigents: then we have received grace, by virtue of this heavenly Manna, and
walk in our Callings, to Gods glory, and the edifying of his Church. But on
the other side, if we neither resist Satan, nor sin, but give them
house-roome, and inhabitation, if we cannot in any sense commiserate, and help
the necessities of our brethren, then we have but the name of the Calling of
Christianity, Christians indeed we are not, and deservedly, may grieous
imputations be cast upon us.

Use 3. Seeing after the receipt of the Sacrament, the works of mercy are to
be remembered, and the wants of the poor relieved: justly may they be blamed,
that depart the Congregation, and give nothing to the poor, whose bowels sound
like Shaulmes for want of food, and whose faces gather blackness through
famine, We have those that receive the Sacrament, and yet so miserable, and so
void of the bowels of compassion, that they can suffer the pitiful child half
starued, and hanging upon their mothers breast, to cry out, ready to give up
the ghost, Where is bread, and where is drink? And the hearts of the parents
to fall asunder like drops of water, because they have not to give unto them, I
would wish these to remember the Parable of the rich Glutton, and poor
Lazarus, Lak. 16.
and the manner of the last Judgment, Mat. 25.
where the wicked are reproved, not for murder, or whoredom, though they shall
be damned for these, but for unmercifulness, being fed themselves, they would
not give any food to the needy. There is no love of God in such. 1 Ioh: 3.17


Some are so eager in scraping for their heirs, that the poor can get
nothing; but that surely is best laid up, which is laid up in Christ's alms
box, which is the poor man's hand, for he and his, shall find the benefit of
it afterward. Some in matter of Alms, 1 Samuel 25.10.11.
have Nabals answer, they have families of their own, should they take and
give to others? Some stand upon their terms, they will give, but with? to
wicked men? Yes, to them in great, and extreme necessity; some indeed to
spare their purses, will pretend, either that the persons be wicked, or that
they know them not to be good. But man's nature is to be pitied, even in an
evil man, and he which gives to a sinner, not because he is a sinner, Non
peccatorem, sed iustumpauperens nutrit, quia millo non culpam, sed naturam
diligit, etc. Grego: mag.
but because he is a man, relieueth not a sinful, but a righteous poor man,
because he respects not his fault, but his nature. Mercy uses not to judge of
deserts, but to help necessity.

Some would give, but they plead their own poverty. What thou want in
purse, bestow in prayers to God for them, in admonition, instruction,
consolation, and such like.

Some will give so far as may stand with reputation. What if Christ had been
so straightened in his bowels to usward, where had our poor souls been? He
had honor and glory, yet for our sakes he emptied himself, and became of no
reputation: and shall we stand with his poor members on terms of reputation.

Some give grudgingly, who when the penny is out of the purse, wish it in
again, and repent of their liberality; these are men with evil eyes. Pro.
23.6.


And many others will not give any thing, without much urging; these are like
Spunges, they suck up water apace, but they will not let fall a drop, though
they be full, till they be squeezed.

I could wish that these excuses might be spared, and poor hungry souls
better remembered. Give unto them to supply their wants, and give cheerfully,
and often, when by any means you hear of their distress. A merciful man
will not stay till poor men seek up him, but he will seek up the poor, that
he may find them whom modesty, and shame fastness causes to lie hid, and to
conceal their needful cases. Oh spare some dish from your tables, some
morsels from your mouths, some money from your treasury to relieve them.

1. God commands it, and gives to you, that you may give to them. 2. Reckons
it as done to himself: 3. It commends your profession, nay, our profession of
Christianity binds us to give. 4. Thy gift is depositum pietatis, Tertul. in
Apolog.
the stock of godliness: 5. It is pleasing to God: Heb. 13.16.
it is called a sacrifice. 6. It is beneficial to thy self, God suffers
many to labor under great miseries, that he might crown the miserable for
their patience, and the merciful for their benevolence. 7. Many promises are
made to giuers: Pro. 11.25. Luke 6.38.
Giving is called (...), Communion, or Communication: If thou give a penie,
the poor man gives thee a good prayer, and blesses thee in the name of God,
Job 29.13. And 31.20.
of which Job made great reckoning. Giving is like to Tennis-play, for, as the
Ball that is served, is returned forcibly upon him that served it; So does God
double upon us the good that we have done to others as Dauias Prayers returned
into his own bosom; Psalm. 35.13.
so do our Alms.

The fourth and last duty required at our hands, after the receiving of the
Sacrament, is, a spiritual watchfulnes by prayers, and supplications in the
spirit, both for our selves, and the whole Church, with all perseverance
thereunto, that both it, and we may continue in well-doing unto the end, and in
the end.

This Duty is set forth unto us, in the Philippians, where the Apostle bids us
be in nothing careful, Phil. 4.6.
but in every thing by prayer, and supplication, together with giving of
thanks, let our request be made known unto God. And our Savior, Mat. 26.41.
bids us watch and pray, least we enter into temptation, giving us to
understand, that it is an easy matter to fall from God, and fly to the enemies
of our salvation, unless we make hearty prayers to God for our establishment.

Paul prayed unto God in the behalf of the Philippians, Phil. 1.5.
that they might stand strong in their fellowship in the Gospel, from the
first, to the last day; and surely much more needful is it for us to pray for
constancy in good things: soon may we fall or slip, let us then pray the more
seruently, let us not give our selves any rest, but still pray unto the Lord
for our continuance.

us both the will, and the deed; Phil. 2.13.
as Christ says, Ioh: 15.5.
without him we can do nothing: therefore it is necessary, that our souls
should be powered out, and our supplications tendered, that God may be pleased,
to begin good things in us, and then according to his good pleasure to
continue them in us, and us in them.

Reu. 2.5.
and to take his ordinances away from amongst us, and to translate them to
another people, Mat. 21.43.
which shall bring forth the fruits thereof, to leave us to our selves, to come
against us with wrath, and to bring on us that shameful Proverb, Lo, 2 Pet.
2.22.
with the dog they have turned to their vomit, and with the sow to the mire.
What greater shame then after our escape from the filthiness of the world, our
taste of the good food of our souls, and of the ioies to come, to turn from
the holy Commandment: what a shame is it for us to begin in the spirit, and to
end in the flesh, to feed of Angels bread, and then to lust after the
Garlic, and Onions of Egypt. Great need it is for us to cast down our selves
in all lowliness, before the throne of Gods majesty, and earnestly beg at
his hands, strength, and courage in all good things, and perseverance therein,
considering, that if the unclean spirit come for re-entrie, and get
possession, Luke 11.24. etc.
he will come with seven other unclean spirits, and our last end will be the
worst.

If ye abide in me, Ioh: 15.7.
and my Word abide in you, ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you.
To pray always, Romans 12.12 1 The. 5.17 Luke 18.1.
and not to faint, or give over, is a thing much commanded by the holy Ghost.
And as thus we are to watch by prayer, so always in our prayers, this is to be
remembered, that we pray, that the Lord his way may be known upon earth, and
his saving health among all Nations; that the word of the Lord may have free
passage; and that we may continue grounded, and stablished in the faith, as we
have been taught in Jesus Christ.

Use 1. This may confute the Papists, touching their free will, seeing a man
cannot persevere, nor do any good thing without Gods special assistance.
Whosoever therefore shall tell you, that we have power in our selves, to will,
and to do that which is good, and that we need only to be helped, but not
wholly assisted by grace, believe him not. Adam before his fall had free will to
choose the good, and to refuse the evil: but by his fall he lost that which in
his Creation he had, even all free will unto all things of the spirit: so that
till such time as he be regenerate by the spirit of God, he cannot at all by
his own power understand, think, will, or do any thing that is good, but is
wholly carried to that which is evil, and can do nothing else but sin. 1
Cor. 2.14
The natural man (says the Apostle) perceives not the things of the spirit
of God; for, they are foolishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned: Where the Apostle plainly shows, that the
unregenerate man has none understanding at all in the ways of God, and the
things that belong unto his peace, neither can have till the Lord sanctify him
by his holy spirit, changing his corrupt will, and working in him both the
will, and the deed, of his own good will.

Use. This may teach us, that it is not sufficient to begin well, unless
withal we continue in well doing unto the end, and in the end. The second sort
of evil hearers began well, Mat. 13.
but they mard all in that they did not continue; for, (notwithstanding all
their good beginnings) in the time of temptation they went away. The five
foolish Virgins had flourishing Lamps for a while, yet they went out before
the coming of the Bridegroom, and therefore they were excluded out of his
chamber. Lots wise made great have out of Sodom for a season, but on a sudden
she looked back, and stood still. The Scribe that answered Christ so
promptly, and aptly, Mar. 12.34
out of the Law, was not far from the kingdom of God; yet because he held
not on he could not enter. So it is to be feared, that in many of us there is
pronenesse to retire, and give out, we start aside like a broken bow. Psalm.
78.57.
It is a kind of weariness unto us, Mal. 1.13.
after a week, or a month, or a year to hold on. I have known some exceeding
hot, running swift at first like Hazael, but on a sudden they became cold, 2 Samuel 2.23
and lazy, and grew to a loathing of that which they at first extremely loved.
Look to it thou which art guilty to thy self of thine own back sliding.
Remember Lots wife, having begun to forsake the corruptions that are in the
world through lust, continue in the grace of God, and grow forward from grace
to grace, til thou be a perfect man in Christ.

It must not be in Religion as in banquets; In the beginning good Wine, and
then after that which is worse, but rather with the Church of Thyatira, Reu.
2.19.
Our works must be more at last then at first. Oh let us all be carried
forward to perfection, Phil. 3.12.14.
leaving that which is behind, endeavoring to that which is before, if by any
means we may attain the mark, With the Spouse, Psalm. 45.11.
Let us forget our own people, and our Fathers house, that is, the foolish
conversation received from the Tradition of our Fathers. 1 Cor. 9.
Let us so run that we may obtain; For, Mar. 10.22.
He that goes forward to the end shall be saved.

FINIS.

