LONDONS WARNING BY Laodicea's Luke-warmnesse.

OR A SERMON Preached at Paules-Crosse, the 10. of October, 1613. BEING The
first Sunday in Term.

BY SAMPSON PRICE, Mr. of Arts, of Exeter-Colledge; and Preacher to the City
of OXFORD.

LONDON: Printed for John Barnes, dwelling on Snoe-hill, at the sign of the
Harrow, 1613.

TO THE RIGHTLY HONORABLE, AND right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, by divine
Providence, Lord Bishop of London.
WHat your Honor commanded, I have performed, as God enabled. This Sermon
which by your powerful Authority I preached, is now at the request of many
religious friends printed, and beggeth shelter and protection under your
Lordships judicious and reverend approbation. It was harkened to attentively by
the Honorable Lord MAYOR, and the publishing of it afterward earnestly
requested by him, whose true love to learning, may challenge a greater duty
from more worthy hands, then these rude first fruits of my pains at the
Cross. Besides, my excuses may be, the raritie of Sermons in this Argument
which is so necessary, the manifesting of my desire of doing good to my
uttermost poor power in Gods Church, the testifying to the world that I desire
to give some testimony of my unfeigned thankfulness to your Honor, who
countenanced me in the University, where you were a zealous, religious, and
worthy Governor. Sin is more powerful, now, in the dottage of the world,
then it was in the nonage, so that there is need of Pulpit and Press, to
repress it. I know your love to the truth, which has encouraged many, and now
is so necessary to be manifested, the love of many growing cold. My weekly
labor, in that Pastoral charge, which requires much pains, constrained me
to take up those plain notes, which I delivered, and now have returned them,
with an acknowledgement of the Authors names, which is the best reward that can
be given to them in the judgment of Patritius, Patrit. ep. l. de instit. resp.
Bas. p. 1. ad Gr. Ier. apol. adu. Ruff. Gr. de Basil.
and the advice of Basil to Gregory: Whose names concealed may brand a man with
the note of theeuery, as Jerome speaks. God has made your Honor a Kingly
Palace of Eloquence, and placed you, in the eye of this Land, over this
Honorable City: go on in defending Religion; so the Lord shall continue his
graces to your Honor in this life, and multiply them with greater glory in a
better life; for which I shall pray while I live, and rest

Your Honors in all duty to be commanded, SAMPSON PRICE.

LONDONS WARNING BY Laodicea's Luke-warmnesse.
Lord Jesus begin and end.
REVEL. 3.15.16. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot, I
would thou were cold or hot. So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither
cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth.


WHen S. John, John 21.7.
the best beloved of the Disciples, had pleaded his cause before Domitian, that
cruel Emperor, at Rome, and miraculously escaped out of the Caldron of
boiling Oil, Doroth. vit. Pat.
he was banished into the I Will of Pathmos; whence, he wrote this Apocalypse,
where using many zealous Prayers, and pouring forth bitter tears, Amb. concio.
de Basil.
which are the best weapons of Christians, he received much gracious content
from above, and the Earth refusing him, Rupertus.
Heaven embraced him. That as David flying from Saul found a Kingdom, 1 Samuel
24.20. Elias from Iezabel an Angel to feed him, 1 King. 19.5. Paul from the
Damascens, spiritual Brethren to comfort him, Act. 9.27. So this blessed Exile
had much glory in his greatest misery. For that God who showed his visions to
Abraham in the Mount, Genesis 22.12. to Iaacob in the field, Genesis 28. to Joseph in
the stocks, Genesis 40. to Moses in Midian, Ex. 3. to Jeremy in the Prison, Ier.
38. to Daniel in Babylon, Dan. 2. and to the Apostle Peter in the house of a
Tanner, Act. 10. reuealeth to this our Evangelist, Apostle, Prophet, rapt up in
the Spirit, strange things, which were to be done. The will of God being
revealed, it must be opened to the seven Churches of Asia, Richard. de sancto
Victore 2. prol.
which were, like David's Worthyes, more excellent then all others, 1 Ch: 12.14
and of which John had the government after Paul: but now, some had lost their
first love; some were not faithful to the death; some maintained the doctrine
of Balaam and the Nicholaitans, Victorinus Epis. Clem. Al. Strom. Eus. l. 3. c.
19. Irem. l. 1. c. 27.
that it was lawful to eat of meat sacrificed to Idols, that fornication was
no sin: they suffered Iezabel to preach openly, and seduce many; they had but
a name to live, when they were dead: many of them were neither cold nor hot,
but proved falling Stars. This is the accusation of Laodicea, and therefore it
is reprehended by John, and threatened by Christ, serving, as a warning to all
other Churches, least they be deprived of the Candlestick of the Gospel,
Haymo. Paunonius.
Which judgment the Lord keep from us.

I know thy works.] This whole Book has been much regarded of the Ancients:
Ier. ad Paulin. Eus. l. 7. c. 23.
S. Jerome concluded that it had as many mysteries as words. Dionisius
Alexandrinus, confessed he understood it not, and therefore did so much the
more reverence it by faith. Gilbertus, H. card. Primas. praef. comm. Rupert.
comm.
calls it the excellentest of all Prophecies. Primasius, thought it could
never be praised enough. Rupertus, compared it to the Land of Promise, which
the proud slandred, but the humble praised. Arias Montanus, Ar. Mo. praef.
after 30. years study of it, said it was obscure unto him, had he not been
extraordinarily illuminated: but now the Book is unsealed, as you may read, c.
22. v. 10. It is not here as in the quadrature of a circle which may be known,
Quadratura circuli scibilis est at non datur scientia.
but the way is not yet found out: for the time is at hand when all things
foretold here, shall be fulfilled; this being a perfect Ecclesiastical story,
Strigelius.
from S. John to the end of the world, of all material things in the Church.
His Phrase is Prophetical, his Method Logical. He was Legatus a latere to
Christ, one of his general Ambassadors, John 13.23. Dio. Carth.
and leaned on Jesus bosom. He had kept a long vacation in his solitary
Pilgrimage, and seeing many dangers near, he forewarneth the Churches. The
mystery of iniquity began then to work.

The Church in the Apostles times, had her Conflicts, the ten great
Persecutions began then to be raised up; Heresies after sprouted forth; at
last, by degrees the great Antichrist approached toward his cursed seat,
being to rule as a Monarch, and make war against the Saints; which, when S.
John perceineth, he directed these familiar Epistles to encourage all ages to
be zealous in the work of the Lord, for he knows all their works.

[I know.] Here are Esaus hands, but Iaacobs voice; hard speeches, rough
countenance, a strong tempest of words, but an hidden spirit of tenderness and
loving kindness, proceeding from a merciful Savior, who knew that unless
they were touched to the quick, till blood were drawn, they would not be
moved. The Pastor was first to be blamed, whose name, whether it were Sagares,
as some collect from Eusebius, Lib. 5. cap. 24.
or otherwise, I search not. He gave a bad president: for, Hos. 4.9.
like Priest, like people. The hearers grew cold, which Christ seeing,
grieueth, and sends a message; August. in apo. hom. 2.
nay, comes himself, and stands, and knocks, and speaks to all,
speaking to their Angel. O magna multitude dulcedinis Dei, as Cassianus cries
out: Cass.
O the great multitude of the sweet mercies of God, who keeps the just in him
mouth, and never casts out sinners before he admonish them, as here Laodicea.

[I know.] Wherein, let no man wonder that I the meanest and unworthiest of
Gods messengers, have chosen so thundering a Text: for beloved, silence can not
break the dead sleep of sin; softness of voice can not pierce the heavy
ears of this dull age; ordinary speaking has no proportion with extraordinary
transgression. I^rich^ must be overthrown with Trumpets and a shout: the
Prophets have need of the zeal of Phinees, the gentle spirit of Eli is not
sufficient.

When I look into the fashions of the world, I see one makes his Heaven of
the dross and rubbish of the Earth: another makes his belly his God: another
Toad-like swells with ambition: another Narcissus-like is enamored on natures
dowry, his beauty; or natures shame, his apparel. The most, either like
Pharaoh, glory in their obstinacy; Exodus 1.20. 2 Samuel 16.23. Act. 24.3. Dan.
4.7. 3 King. 18. 1 Samuel 17.5. 1 King. 12.8. Ioh 7.48. Josh. 9.3.
or like Achitophel, in their policy, or like Tertullus, in their cloquence;
or like Nabuchad-nezzar in their building; or like Zenacherib in their
greatness; or like Goliath in their strength; or like Rehoboam in their birth;
or like the Pharisees in their knowledge; or like the Gibeonites in their
craft. All these, and many other, are but bitter sweets, gliding shadows, Ier
9.3.
gaudy toys: yea, dung, in respect of good things: for which many hazard
bodies and souls, but they have no courage for the truth. All these may be
rouzed up by this threatening to Laodicea, which neglected Religion, and
followed other things; and this is the aim of my Text, being a tax of the
whole world, which is set on mischief, toward the end, especially of those
whose life is a Corban of unjust guiles and wicked gains, an Acheldama of blood
and oppression, caring not who want, so they may abound: as also, of all those
who are like Salamanders, never living well but when they are in the fire of
contention: who like Shemei while they seek their servant, riches, and serve
Mammon, loose their best master, God: who have good tongues, but the use them
to deceit; good wits, they use them to defend errors; strong arms to murder;
authority to oppress, and a good profession to dissemble. These are the works
of darkness, which the Father of light knows. Thus the forehead of sin
has lost the blush of shame; the score reaches from the East to the West, the
cry of our wickedness has pierced the Clouds, the height of iniquity is come
to the top, and the fruits thereof are ripe: a dead coldness has stricken the
hearts of many, having left them nothing but the bodies of men and visors of
Christians: Never was the Judge of all the Earth nearer to come, yet never was
there so little preparation for his coming. Never was there more plenty of the
Gospel amongst us, yet never were men more unthankful and fruitless then
many of us. In regard whereof, I have thought this the fittest portion of
Scripture that I could propose to you all. I know, etc. As if briefly thus
Christ had said [I know thy works:] Non approbando, sed reprobando: not to
allow them, but to reprove thee for them, Gloss. Hugo Card.
as Hugo Card. commenteth. Either they were not in the way of the Lord (says
Meyerus) or they thought too well of themselves already, or they feared to
defend the truth publicly.

[ Thou art neither cold nor hot.] Neither an open enemy, nor truly zealous of
the Gospel, but a Gibeonite, an Ephraimit, a Canaanit.

[I would thou were cold or hot.] Which he wishes not simply that they were
enemies unto him, but in respect of that state of luke-warmnesse, in which they
were, because sooner they would come to Christ if they trusted not in
themselves. I would thou had either the heat of Christians, or the cold of
Pagans, as Saluianus interprets it.

[So then because thou art lukewarm, etc.] That is, seeing thou have neither
the zeal of charity to God, neither the acknowledgement of thine offenses,
that by the fear of hell and repentance thou mighst be drawn to good works,
as Ambrose upon the words.

[I will spew thee out.] It is an allusion to the nature of lukewarm water,
which being drunk, easily procures vomit; so our sins (says Aretius) cause
Christ to cast us away.

[I know.] The sum of which Text of Scripture is, that the wicked Hypocrites
shall be excommunicate from the true Christians, as August de Ancona notes, or
as Clem. Alex. Here we see, that the Lord tempereth all his rebukes with
compassion, or as Conradus Graserus: this is one of the beginnings of the
infections of Antichristianisme. You may call it the Worlds warning, or
Englands drowsinesse awaked, or rather LONDONS WARNING BY LAODICEAS
LVKE-VVARMNES. Consisting of two general parts.

1. A solemn reprehension. I know thy works, etc. 2. A zealous commination. So
then, because thou art lukewarm.
protestation, I know thy works, that thou, etc.

2. An optatiue comparison. I would thou were cold or hot.

In the second, you have 1. a reason full of indig. nation, So then because,
etc.

2. A punishment of eternal reiection. I will spew thee out of my mouth.

In the 1. you have the Atheist manifested.

In the 2. you have the Neuter condemned.

In the 3. you have Hypocrito threatened.

In the 4. you have the sinner banished.

Of all which, while I shall speak hastily, as a passenger, and plainly
according to my small ability, and accustomed method; let not any thing be
taken sinisterly, which God knows, comes from a poor sinner, that wishes
the flourishing of this Honorable City, and the continuance of the Gospel in
this whole Kingdom, till Christ Jesus come to Judgment. Let me desire your
Christ Jesus come to Judgment. Let me desire your Christian, charitable, and
reverend attention. John. 11.9. Act. 2.15. Luke 22.53.
There are but 12. hours in the day, I shall keep you only 2. of them: this
is but little after the third hour of the day: let no man seem so drousie as
if his heart were oppressed with surfeiting, drunkenness, or the cares of the
world. It is your hour, and the Lord keep us all from the hour and power of
darkness, that we may hear, and learn, and practice, the good lessons
arising from my Text. And so I come to the parts of my Text as they lie in
order: and first, of my first circumstance proposed to be handled, wherein
there is an open protestation, I know thy works, etc.

1^. 1^.
If we look into the state of Leoditea, we shall find, Plini. ^. 5 c. 29.
V^d. in Epit. ^^ll. in Apoc.
that it was the chiefest City of Asia, built by Antiochus Theos, who put upon
it the name of his wife. It was one of the most flourishing places of all Asia
minor. Camerarus in locum. Strab. l. 12.
Here S. Paul preached, think hence he wrote his first Epistle to Timothy. It
was the name also of a place in Phrygia; it had many worthy Ministers after the
Apostles times, Eus. l. 4. c. ^6. and l. 7. c. 28.29.
as Socrates, Eusebius, Alexandrinus, Anatolius, Stephanus, Theodorus and
others. Here the great question was decided about keeping the Passover. Melito
l. de pasc.
It was washed through with the River Licus. It had many honorable Citizens,
as the rich Hiero, Zeno the Orator, and Polemo his son, Gasparus a Mel.
Suarez. in text.
afterward made a king by Augustus. Their name is interpreted, A just people,
of (...) and (...), but this auailed them nothing; for evil persons may have
good names, Lambert. Auen.
as Adoni-zedek the King of Ieruslem, Ios. 10.1.
who was an Idolater and a Tyrant, had a name signifying the Lord of Justice,
or the Justice of the Lord. And one who was a grievous persecuter of the
Christians, Eus. Ecc. Hist. 9.9. 1 Kin. 12.32.
was termed Theot^onus, the child of God. Bethel in Ieroboams time, was
unwilling to part with the name of the house of God, but it rather deserved to
be called Bethauen, the house of vanity: so Laodicae abused her name, and the
blessings of the Lord which were many, this aggrauateth the offense: for as the
sin of Adam was so much the more abominable being committed in Paradise, and
the Idolatry of the four and twenty men worshipping the Sun at the door of
the Temple of the Lord: so sin was more remarkable in these, of whom the Lord
had dessrued so well, and therefore he now opens them. I know, etc.

Doctrine may be collected.

The Lord knows the works of all men, and will reveal them, be they never
so closely hidden for a while. A proof of this ye have in the Prophet David,
who when he had committed Adultery and Murder, swallowed them for the greater
part of a year, without any great remorse. But Nathan coming to him, tells
him, thus says the Lord; Thou did it secretly, as if none had seen it: I
saw it, and will bring an open punishment upon thee out of thine own house
before all Israel, and before the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.11. This made Solomon his
son give this advise, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct
thy paths, Pro. 3.6. This was a charge given to Abraham when he was 99. years
old, Walk before me, and be perfect, Genesis 17.1. And it was the Oath of Elijah
the Tishbite: As the Lord God of Israel lives before whom I stand; 1 King.
17.1.

This Jeremy remembered the Jews of, If thou return, then will I bring thee
again, and thou shall stand before me, Ier. 15.19. All which, and many more,
teach us, that GOD sees and knows our ways be they never so secret. And no
marvel; for if we climb up to Heaven he is there, if we go down to the
center of the earth, he is there also: he is every where and no where; every
where, by replenishing the place with his being and power; no where; by
circumscription and local definition. He is within all things, not included;
without all things, not excluded; below all things, not degraded; above all
things, not preferred: therefore he proclaims to LAODICEA, that he knows
her works.

In the Epistle to the Church of Ephesus, C. 2. v. 1.
he holds the 7. Stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the
7. golden Candlestickes.

In that to Smyrna, he is first and last, was dead, v. 8.
and is alive.

In that to Pergamus, v. 12.
he has the sharp Sword with two edges.

In that to Thiatyra, v. 18.
he has eyes like a flame of fire, and feet like fine brass.

In that to Sardis, C. 3. v. 1.
he has the 7. Spirits of God.

In that to Philadelphia, v. 7.
he is called holy and true, having the key of David, which opens, and no
man shuts, and shuts and no man opens.

And in this to Laodicea, he is called Amen, the faithful and true witness,
the beginning of the creatures; and the knower of all works in my Text. He
commends some, and discommendeth others, knows all. The Minister of Smyrna
was a good man, though poor to the world, I know thy poverty, but thou art
rich. c. 2.9. Thou have done good service to the Church, and have little reward
of man: Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
The Minister of Philadelphia was a worthy man, not of the greatest gifts, yet
faithful in a little. Thou have a little strength, and kept my word. c. 3.8.
Christ promises to bless his labors, and make his enemies know that he is in
the love of God: but Ephesus is reproved for going back-ward. Pergamus and
Thiatyra, for maintayning corrupt doctrine. Sardis, for dullness, deafness,
and unsoundness in the worshipping of God: and Laodicea here for
luke-warmenesse. The ground of his praises and dispraises is, that he knows
their works, seven times repeated, that is, all their particular actions;
yea, their very thoughts, and therefore cannot be deceived. Men may err in
their censures of others, because they know not the hearts, and with what
affections, cannot fail one jot, therefore he stops their mouths at the
first, least they should reply any thing, I know thy works. I know what thou
art, and what thou have been; I know thy sitting down, and thy rising up.

The illimited knowledge of God is amplyfied by wonderful testimonies
throughout the Bible, I stay not your ears with commemoration of the places.
There is neither heuaen nor hell, nor the uttermost part of the Sea, neither
day nor night, light nor darkness, that can hide us from his face: the
thoughts of our hearts, words of our tongues, ways of our feet; nay, our bones,
our mothers wombes wherein we lay in our first informitie and imperfection, are
well known unto him. He sits upon the Circle of heaven, and beholds the
inhabitants of the earth as Grasshoppers: his Throne is the Heaven of heavens,
the Earth is his foote-stoole; his ways are in the great deep. The ignorance
of this, is the cause of all sin, of cursing, deceit, fraud, mischief, and
vanity, because men have not God in their thoughts. Psalm. 10.4.

This made Nazian confess that a man ought Naz. Orat. de Theolog.
no oftener to breath then to remember CHRIST, and Ephreem to say, Ephesians. to. 2.
c. 10.
that men considering the knowledge of GOD, will avoid offenses as malefactors
abroad will thefts, at the drawing near of Assizes. By this means he
recalled a foul soul that long had lived in abomination: Metaphrastes in
eius vita.
she desired Ephreem to lie with her, which he refused, unless it were in
the mids of the City, she said it would be a public shame to both: How
much more said he, is it in the sight of God and his Angels? which words so
amassed her, that she repented and became a faithful convert.

It was the advice of Seneca the Philosopher, Sen. Epist. 11.
though an Heathen, to his friend Lucilius, that in all his actions and
thoughts, he should so carry himself, as if some good man saw him and would
blame him if he erred; but we must have God always before our eyes, and being
at our right hand, we shall not be moved, our heart shall be glad, our glory
shall rejoice, Psalm. 16.9.
our flesh also shall rest in hope.

And surely, there is no way to hide our selves from him: disguised ADAM in his
Figge-leaued coat, close amongst the bushes, could not shelter himself from
his knowledge, no more can we. Videt omnia generaliter sine exceptione,
euidenter sine dubitatione, immutabiliter sine obliuione. He sees all things
generally, without exception, evidently without doubting, Nich. Denijfi.
unchangeably without forgetting.

He enters the privy chamber of the heart, therefore it is impossible to blind
his eyes, or to avoid him by flying, Viex inftit. ad poenit.
and therefore poor runne-away, Non te Domino abscondis, sed Dominum abscondis
tibi. Thou hidest not thy self from God, but God from thy self.

condemn the ignorant sinners of this age, Eccles. 27.19.
who sinning secretly say, Who sees us? we are compassed about with darkness,
the walls cover us, what need we fear? the most High will not remember our
sins; such only fear the eyes of men, and know not that the eyes of the
Lord are ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, beholding all the ways of
men.

Yet thou blasphemous Atheist, hearken to this, whenever (as I hope there is
none in this Christian Congregation) who runnest on in thy sins, Heb. 4.13.
and think that God knows them not; yes, he knows all things, all things
are naked and open to the eyes of him: Zeph. 1.12.
he searches Jerusalem with Candles, and punishes the men that are settled on
their lees. They know this, and remember sometimes that for all things they
must come to judgment. This is the reason that the faces of such are usually
pale and ghastly: their smiles and laughters faint and hartles: their speeches
doubtful, and full of abrupt stops, and unseasonable turnings: their purposes
and motions vnsteedy and savoring of much distraction. Hence are those vain
changes of places, and companies like the sick patients, though removed, yet
complain still of vnabated torments: like the stricken Dear having received a
deadly arrow, whose shaft shaken out has left the head behind it, running from
one thicket to another, not able to change his pain with his place, but
finding his wounds worse with continuance: With Nero they may change their
bedchamber, but fiends will attend them. They may send their soul from their
body, but never their conscience from their soul, nor their sin from their
conscience. Neither profane Lucretius with his Epicurean rules of confidence:
nor drunken Anacreon with his wanton odes, can shift of the violent horror of
this adversary. A meditation fit for the corruptions of these times, wherein we
may complain as Tertullian did. O nos miseros qui Christiani dicimur hoc
tempore, Jewel in Apol.
gentes agimus sub nomine Christi. O miserable men that we are, many of us are
called Christians, and yet under this name cover many sins of the Gentiles.
Ibid. page 3. c. 7.
And as S. Gregory said of the pitiful estate of his time, We that are
Christians are hated of the Heathens for our vices sake, we are now become a
wonder, not only to Men and Angels, but even to all the wicked and ungodly: or
as more lately Gueuara: The Philosophers believed as Pagans, but lived as
Christians; we believe like Christians, but live like Pagans. How many amongst
us wallow in immoderate pleasures, having wanton eyes, smoothing mouths,
painted faces, lickerous tongues, gaming hands, following no vocation, more
ambitious of the title of good-fellowship then of Religion? Their senses are
their procurors, appetite their steward, and lust their Masters: they are the
living tombs of their Forefathers, and Posterities. How many, Aug. 3. de ciu.
c. 1.
Qui magis erubescunt si villam malam habeant, quam si vitam: who blush more
having an ill ordered Farm, or house, then a wicked Life? How many who
profess that they know GOD, but in works deny him, being abominable, and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate? Tit. 1.16. How many who love
in word and in tongue, but not in deed and in truth? 1 Ioh. 3.18. How many
that cry Lord, Lord, yet never do the will of the Lord which is in heaven?
Mat. 7.21. The Lord knows the ways and works of these to be ungodly, and
they shall perish, for their benummednesse to do any good. I know, etc.

Doctrine may be to teach us, that seeing all our works are manifest to him,
we work out our Salvation with fear and trembling. We have been long
taught that we are saved by Faith, without the works of the law, which though
it be a most true position, and soundly proved, and flatly concluded Romans 3. v.
28. Yet being understood amiss it has been the cause of Epicurisme, and the
neglect of good deeds. It has made many amongst us wish Christ to do all,
they will do nothing for themselves. It is a true challenge I confess of the
Prophet, for the all-sufficiencie of Christ his merit. It is I, it is even I
which for mine own sake put away thine iniquities, Is. 43. Not Abraham, nor
Moses, nor Peter, nor Paul. It is not the preparation of a man's own nature,
nor the liberty of his own will, nor the cooperation of his own Justice; for,
eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ, Romans 6.23. But yet this
gift is bestowed only upon those for whom it is prepared, Mat. 20.23. which
have exercised themselves in the works of mercy, Mat. 25.35. not that these are
the causes of salvation, and by them we should merit, as the Rhemists affirm
in their Annotations, To. 2 sect. 2. And Bellarmine the Papists Pithagoras
maintayneth, l. 4. c. 3. De bonis operibus. The ancient Fathers are against it.
Basil. orat. de Humil. Quid te effers tanquam in bonis proprijs? Quid enim
habes quod non accepisti? Why do thou boast of any good works as though they
were thine own? what have thou, that thou have not received? So, Chris. in 2.
co. ho^. 11. A gratia iustificatio fit, Deo totum praestante: Our Iufication is
from God, he works the whole. So, Ber. in can. se. 61. Meritum meum
miseratio Domini: My merit is the Lords mercy. So, Orig. on 3. Romans It lies
upon us to search who was justified by faith without works, and for example,
(says he) I think upon the Thief, who being crucified with Christ, cried
unto him; Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom: and there is no
other good work of his mentioned in the Gospel, but for this alone faith,
Jesus says unto him, This night thou shall be with me in Paradise.

I speak not this to withdraw men from doing good, or to discourage them in
their charitable devotions. We allow good works, and preach them to our
hearers; yea, some of our Church publish whole Treatises, that good works are
necessary to salvation. Let this therefore be a witness against our
Adversaries the Papists, who slander us, saying, that we teach only negative
doctrines, and not affirmative Positions. For we proclaim to the world that
Faith is dead if it have no works: we urge Gods Commandments, which we are
to obey; his Honor which we are to seek; Christ's example, which we are to
follow; the Vocation of Christians, which requires a life answerable to our
profession; the Reward promised to those that keep Gods Laws; the scandal
that ensues of lewd actions; the Curse that is denounced against the
transgressors.

We have a great advantage of them for good works.

We propose to our selves the example of Christ and his Apostles; they follow
Antichrist, and the founders of diverse Orders of Monks, and Friars, and Nuns,
who were rather superstitious then zealous, ceremonious then holy and religious.

We force none to forswear Marriage; they suffer none of their Clergy to
marry, whereof many obhominations follow.

We count it a thing horrid for men professing Christianity, to empoyson and
murder those that are opposite to them in Religion; they count such
meritorious, and honor the Assassiners as Saints.

We allow no Indulgences of the Pope, but they are confident upon them.

I confess we live in the dottage of the world, wherein the hearts of many are
hardened from doing good: yet howsoever in the time of King EDWARD the first
the Statute of Mortmaine was enacted, whereby it was provided, that none should
give any thing to the Church without the especial license of the King, which
is yet unrepealed, yet in this last age, and in the remembrance of some yet
living: since the clear Sunshine of the Gospel has enlightened the
Hemisphere of our Church, there have been more Colleges founded, more
Hospitals erected, more Libraries and Schools builded, more poor Scholars
maintained, more Orphans and Impotent relieved, more charitable deeds
exercised generally in our Land, particularly in this famous City, ever
renowned for her good works, then in many ages under Popery and superstition.

I know there are some in, but not of, our Church, whose chief study, is to
rob GOD and the Leuite of the little portion of Tithes and Offerings, which
cannot be denied to be due iure diuino. Mr. Carleton.
We cannot say of such as the Jew did of the Centurion; Luke 7.5.
He loves our Nation, and has built us a Sinagogue, or as the Prophet DAVID
did of himself; they desire to behold the beauty of the Temple of the Lord,
but their cry is, let us take the houses, and barnes, and lands of the Church
in possession, and for the honor of the Priesthood: Down with it, down with
it, even to the ground, but that rule of Sacrilege shall hold, Quae malign
contraxit Pater, Pet. Ble. ep. 10.
luxu peiori refundet Haeres; That which the Father has wickedly scraped
together, the son shall more wickedly scatter abroad. It is the cause of the
ruin of so many great Families in this kingdom. Let him that has an ear
hearken to this; when you crave, beg not that which is Gods; when you give,
give not that which is Gods; when you buy, buy not that which is Gods; when ye
sell, sell not that which is Gods.

And here let me give our religious King JAMES that testimony which Petrus
Blesensis left to Henry the second; Ibid.
Benedictus Dominus, qui Regem Henricum atalibus hactenus conseruauit innoxium;
Blessed be that GOD which hitherto has defended his Majesty from all kind of
Sacrilege, that has not furnished his house with the spoil of the Church,
nor increased his Revenue by the loss of Gods house, nor defiled his hands
with Symonie, nor bestowed his Preferments for personal favor or respect of
reward.

And besides his Majesty's care, many Ebed-melech's there are in this Kingdom,
Ier. 38.9.
speaking for the Prophets of the Lord, that they may have maintenance.

Many Obadiahs ready to hide the Servants of GOD from dangers.

Many liberal Benefactors giving voluntary Donations, deposita pietatis;
Pledges and testimonies of their Piety and Religion, Tert. Apologet.
as Tertullian calls them, Sacrifices as acceptable to GOD as that of ABEL,
Gr. Naz c. 1. contra Iulia.
says Naz.

Many good Shunamites persuading their Husbands to make a Chamber, s Kings 4.10.
to set forth a Bed, and a Table, and a Stool, and a Candle for the Messengers
of God, when they come to them.

Many with Zachaus, Luke 19.6.
who joyfully receive into their houses them that bring the glad tidings of
salvation. Luke 19.6.


And in this lukewarm age some there are who are holy, and humble men of
heart, resolute Christians, who like him in the Poet.

Lucem and aethera petit and test sole viuit. Sen. Tr. Hip.


Walking in sincerity as it were in view of the Sun; walking in the light as
children of the light; Ge. 25.27. Ioh. 1.47.
tracing the steps of virtuous Jacob, who was a plain man; and of Nathaniel a
true Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile. Though it cannot be denied but
that there are more, neither hot nor cold, whom because I shall deal with in
my second general part, I proceed to my next circumstance of the first
general, where you have the optatiue comparison.

[I would, etc.] The Church of God rejoicing in her husband, Iae. 22.
Christ; says that he was like a Roe or a young Heart, leaping upon the
Mountains, and skipping upon the Hills. Can. 2.8.9. Propter acerrimum visum and
velocem cursum ad omnes fines terrae, as Philo interprets it. Philo. carpat.
Episc.
It is in regard of his quick sight and swift course into all the parts of the
world. His measures were from heaven to the womb, Lyra.
from the womb to the cratch, from the cratch to the cross, from the cross
to the grave, from the grave to heaven; behold he comes, his progress
quickly, and still is in travel to his Church with prayers and wishes.

[I would, etc.] The driving of his Chariot is like the driving of Iehu, he
speaks in have, the time with him, is as the time of love. His love is as
strong as death, the flames of it are Divine flames, never dying, the coals
thereof as the coals of Juniper.

Ask the days that are past since God created man upon the earth, from the
one end of heaven to the other, if ever there were such a thing as this. Did
ever any hear the voice of God speaking in form of a petitioner? O thou
divine and eternal peacemaker, the savior of men, the anointed of God,
mediator betwixt God and man, in whom there is nothing, which does not exceed,
not only the conceit, but the very wonder of Angels, who saw thee in thy
humiliation, with silence, and adore thee in thy glory, with perpetual
praises, we stand amazed at thy love, emptying thy self of glory, that thou
might put on shame, and misery, to be the sinners orator and sacrifice. He
said not as David, would God I had dyed for thee, O Absolon, my son: God
knows, he dyed for our sins, the cause most odious: the just for the
unjust, the persons unequal: to bring us to God, the end most absolute: and
still he applies this to his Church, speaking by his Ministers, pleading for
us in heaven, persuading us on earth.

[I would.] Laodicea was in a consumption, her hands were sick, her members
weak, her Physician and Pastor fearful, her zeal was at the last gasp,
her enemies were round about her, ready to laugh at her destruction, for being
neither cold nor hot: This makes Christ so earnest. He is not like the Pope,
which dispenses with his followers to worship God, with their lips, and
dissemble their religion, and forswear their opinion, and come to Sermons, and
subscribe to our laws, and seem Protestants; as the devil licenceth witches
to seem Christians, so they give him their heart, as appeared by many in the
beginning of Queen ELIZABETH'S reign, having an agnus Dei, with Da mihi cor:
he cannot endure a Neuter.

[I would.] For there are but two ways, vna fidei in caliditate charitatis,
one of faith in the heat of charity, leading to life everlasting, another of
cold distrust in Christ, drawing to destruction. Nardus in text.
But I come to the Doctrine, which is this properly.

It is better to be an open sinner then a doubtful Neuter. Bar. apol. ad Guli.
Abb.
Saint Barnard I confess made a question of it. Quis horum magis impius? Who
is the more wicked, whether he, that openly professes impiety, or he that
falsely counterfeiteth sanctity? But here the question is answered, and the
controversy decided by Christ himself.

Look upon the Jew, Gr. 3. p. pastoral admon. 35.
says Saint Gregory, he seems to believe, but is incredulous: the Gentile is
more tolerable; which can say, I never knew the Law, I never heard the
Prophets: neither can be excused; yet he sins less, which does not the
works which he never knew were to be done, then he that knew his Masters
will, read it, and denied it. It had been better for such, not to have known
the way of righteousness, then after they have known it, to turn from the
holy Commandment, delivered unto them. 2 Pet. 2.21. This made CHRIST tell the
Priests and Elders of the Jews, that Publicanes and Harlots should go before
them, into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 21.31. for they seeing their sins,
repented at the Preaching of John. So he told the Pharisees; If ye were
blind ye should have no sin, but now you say, We see: therefore your sin
remains, John 9.41. The open sinner reuealeth himself that we may avoid
him, but the Neuter walks so secretly, that we know not how to judge him;
therefore they are more odious then the other.

In regard whereof, Licurgus banished Neuters his Commonwealth. Aul. Gel. l.
2. c. 12.
Solon prohibited them by his Law. Elias forbad that there should be any
amongst the Israelites to worship GOD and Baal. Moses would not have men to
wear mixed garmets of Linen and Woollen, and CHRIST professes that no man can
serve two Masters, GOD and Mammon, the true Church and the false, England and
Rome. The abuses he strikes at, are doubling in the Worship of GOD, blending
of Truth and Falsehood: yet some, either in hope of gain, or out of their
rotten affections, or out of their Machiauillian Policy, would have many
Religions tolerated in one Kingdom: nay, as Mahomet composed a Religion of
Indaisme and Christianity, so, many would reconcile the Protestant and Papist,
and have both live together. But far be this Realm of ours from such
corruption. Let all good people say, Amen.


For, as Anthony sometimes King of Navarre, said to the Ambassador of the King
of Denmark, Comment. Relig. and reipub. in Gallia.
exhorting the reformed French to be of Luthers Doctrine; There be forty
points, wherein Luther and Calvin do differ from the Pope, and in nine and
thirty of them they agree between themselves, and in that single one they
dissent: so we pray unto the Lord for the reconciling of those unto us: but
the differences of the Papists are so many, Episc. Land. in Ionam.
and so Diametrally opposed, as the Northern and Southern Poles shall sooner
meet together, then our opinions, standing as they do, be reconciled.
Therefore never look for a Reconciliation or Tolleration. One Heaven held not
Michael and the Dragon in peace; nor one House, the Arc and Dagon; nor one
Womb, Iaacob and Esau; nor one Temple, Prayer and Marchandising; nor one Camp,
the clean and Leprous; nor one Bath, John and Cerinthus; nor one Tongue, GOD
and Milchom; nor one Conscience, our Religion and Popery. I would to GOD there
were not many Laodiceans amongst us, that urged this Caveat, who either afraid
of danger, or pining with sloth, sit down and are zealous neither way.

quiet and not factious, Virtue follows the mean, we will be stiff for
neither Religion.

matters of indifferency, if we might go on either side without danger, then
Platoes advise is good; so to deal in a Commonwealth, as to hurt neither
Parents nor country: And that of Saint Augustine, Aug. ep. 86. ad Casul.
In ijs rebus de quibus nihil statuit diuinae Scripturae certa praescriptio,
etc. In those things which the Scripture prescribes not certainly, either the
Custom of Gods people, or the Institutions of our Ancestors are to be held
for Laws. We must take heed, least by the tempest of Contention the
calmnesse of Charity be inueloped. And that of Saint Ambrose, Si non vultis
errare, etc. If ye will not err, do as I; to what Church soever I come, I
apply my self to the Ceremonies of it: Aug. ad Ian.
which if it had been followed by some in this Church, the Adversary would
never have insulted over us, for iarring in Discipline: but as good
Constantine, Eus. l. 2. de vita Constable. c. 67.
that great Emperor exhorted Arius and Alexander to put away a foolish
Question that fired the Church, so our gracious Sovereign, like a blessed
Peacemaker, has decided the difference of indifferent ceremonies, and given
the counsel of the other worthy Monarch. There is no cause offered to strive
about the greatest commandment in Scripture, nor any new error of Religion
brought in, but we all hold one and the same creed of Faith, so that we may
easily agree in one judgment, and deal all zealously against the common
adversary. From whom how carefully we ought to separate our selves I refer
you to Philip Mornay, Morn. de Eccle. c. 10.
that most noble champion of the truth, in his Tract of the Church.

21. Circumst.
For the proof of many, who think they may be Protestants in show, and
Papists in deed, frequent our Churches, Sacraments, and Assemblies, and yet
keep their consciences to themselves; like them in the time of Optatus; Aliud
habet animus, Optatus lib. 1.
aliud resonat sermo: They harbor one thing in their heart, and utter another
thing in their speeches. But they shall find that of August. to be true.
August. de vita Chris. ad sororem viduam.
Nomen Christiani ille frustra sortitur qui Christum minime imitatur. It is in
vain for a man to take upon him the name of a Christian that does not imitate
Christ. It is an abominable and palpable devise: had Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego done so, Dan. 3.18.
Nabuchadnezzar had never confessed the true power of God. We must not halt
betwixt God and Baal. 1 King. 18.21.
He will be glorified in our bodies and souls. Our bodies are for the Lord, 1
Cor. 6.13.
and we must love him with all our hearts, with all our souls, and with all
our minds. He created not only the soul, but also the body, and requires the
service of both. He has made all, he has bought all, he has dearly paid for
all, and therefore must have all. O think upon this you that bring your bodies
to this, and the like places, (if any such be here) and send your hearts to
Rome, you must answer it, may be this night before your God: dally not,
delay not to cast away the double mind.

Hannibal, when he had obtained the victory at Cannas, if he had gone
straight to Rome, by all men's judgments had taken the City, but deferring it
till the next day, the Romans recovering their forces again, he was shut
out, and heard this approbry:

Vincere scis Hanniball, vti victoria nescis.

Thou know how to get the victory, but not how to use it.

Delays inspirituall matters are much more dangerous: contemn not then the
calling of the highest: My son give me thy heart. It is not enough to be
outwardly formal, so much may be wrought by the Word in the hearts of the
wicked: as it did in Herod, working an external reverence to John: in Pilate a
distraction of mind: in Agrippa half a resolution to become a Christian: in
Festus a trembling at doomes day: in Pharaoh a confession of his sins: but
all these vanishas the morning dew. Reave. 18.4.
O then utterly forsake Babylon, Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. For her
sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.

leave that Religion wherein our ancestors have lived and died, and some of
them suffered for?

blamed in the Scripture for walking in the ways of Jeroboam, and of others of
their ancestors?

Often the godly deplore their fathers sins before God. 1 King. 15.34. Psalm.
106.6. Psalm. 45.11.
Salomons wife representing the spouse of Christ, was commanded to forget her
own people, and her fathers house. What a praise is it to Ezekiah and Josiah,
2 King. 18. and cap. 21.24.
and others, that having idolatrous Parents, they rather looked to their Father
in heaven.

If any of them dyed in wilful ignorance, should we for their company thrust
our selves into Hell? If any of them were almost right, they will not grudge
that we should have more light opened to us then they saw. Leaving the
determining sentence to Gods secret judgment; there is no doubt but many of
them, who lived in the time of darkness, holding Christ the foundation
aright, and groaning under the heavy burden of humane traditions,
satisfactions, and such Popish trash, by a general repentance from their
errors and assured faith in their Savior, they found favor with the Lord,
and for their sounder part they were of that Church whereof we are: Which is
the opinion of Saint Cyprian in the like case; Dear brother, Cypr. de sacr.
Domin. calicis. Epist. 68.
if any of our Predecessors, either ignorantly or simply, did not observe and
hold this which the Lord taught us to do by his own example and ministry,
by the favor of the Lord, there may be pardon given to his simplicity

If any object after this, that some of the worthiest of our own men were
sometimes affected to the Church of Rome; as, Luther was a Friar, In vita.
and married a Nun: Calvin lived a while under Popish governors: Beza was at
first addicted to Romish positions: Zanchius, and Peter Martyr both Italianat.

Let this be granted, there is no more prejudice unto our Religion, or unto
them for this, then that Moses for a time was brought up as the son of
Pharaohs daughter: Exodus 2.10.
Acts. 23.6.
or that Saint Paul was borne a Pharisee: or that Mary Magdalene was a grievous
sinner: Luke 8.2.19 2.
or Zaccheus the Master of the custom. It was no fault for Lot to come out of
Sodom, Genesis 19.12.
neither can they be blamed that hasten out of Babylon. They are bound to
bless God, who delivers them as Jonah was freed out of the Whales belly:
Iona. 2.10.
and as Josephus reports that Cyrus, who caused the Jews to build the Temple
and gave them back the vessels thereof, Joseph. lib. 11. cap. 1. Antiq. Iud.
was moved to do it by reading the Prophecy of Isaiah, who 200. years before
had named him: Isa. 45.1.
so these looking into the written word of God, have been drawn to the truth;
so was it with that noble spirit Galeacius Caracciolus, son and heir
apparent to Calantonius, Marquis of Vicum in Naples, bred, borne, and brought
up in Popery; a Courtier to the Emperor CHARLES the fifth, Nephew to the Pope
Paul the fourth, being married to the Duke of Nurimes daughter, and having by
her six goodly children, at a Sermon of Peter Martyrs, Beza in vita cius.
was first touched, after, by reading Scriptures and other good means was
fully converted: he labored with his Lady, but could not persuade her, he
forsook all these allurements, and for the love of Christ came to Geneua, and
there lived a holy life for forty years, and so died. He did as Leui was
commanded to do by the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 33.9. He said of father and mother, I
have not seen them, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his
own children. All Christians must be such Levites, regarding neither father
nor mother, son nor daughter, in respect of God. Genesis 24.56.
They must say as Abraham's Servant to Laban and Bethuel, Hinder me not.

Admonition to all to be zealous and open in the cause of Religion, neither
fearing the faces of men, nor betraying the cause of GOD upon any base
condition.

I know, many have taxed the zeal of Luther, Lut. to. 1.
who resolved to rely only on the Scriptures: Si mill Augustini, If a
thousand Austines, L. de capt. Bab.
or Cyprians should persuade me to any thing, I would rather hearken to one
Sentence of the BIBLE: and the Suffrages of two honest men having Scripture,
then a whole Council. And his worthy Resolution, who hearing that the Divines
of Louaine and Colen had burned many of his Books by the command of the Pope,
Massoeus Chro. 10. p. 273.
he openly burned the Popes Laws, Decretals, and Bulls, saying, I have done to
them, as they to me. Re. 18.6. Fox. Martyrol. Anno 1521. p. 977.
And his Heroical spirit, daring to profess that he would enter into that
forewarned City of Worms, though there had been as many Devils in their
streets as Tyles on their houses, to answer for himself before CHARLES the
fifth of that name, against Eckius and others.

But the cause was Gods, he knew that the kingdom of GOD was to be got by
violence. He remembered that of CHRIST, He that is not with me, is against
me: He that gathers not with me, scatters. Therefore was he so earnest
against the Popes head, and the Monckes bellies, Carrion Chro. aucta a Melanc.
l. 5.
which makes our Adversaries lay so many slanders upon him: L. 4 Chron.
Genebrard making him the grand Antichrist, because Luther, as he says, in
Hebrew, makes 666. but the Rhemists quit him of this honor. In Apoc. 13.18
I omit the rest.

Yea, such was the zeal of Saint Jerome: If my Mother were hanging about my
neck; if my Brethren were on every side, howling and crying; and if my Father
were on his bare knees, to detain me in a wicked life; I would shake them off,
despise them, trample them under my feet.

Such, of Antonius Marinarius, hearing that the Council of Trent would not
have a Christian to be certainly persuaded of his salvation: which point, yet
Catharinus Archbishop of Minoria, Che^^n. exam. 1. p. de side iustificante.
in person then present confuted, against Dominicus of Soto, Confessor to
CHARLES the fifth, and one of the Presidents; afterward Julius the third,
protesting that it was not sufficiently discussed to decide any thing, he
cried out; If Heaven fall, if the Earth vanish away, if the whole world run
headlong, I will look to the goodness of GOD, and stand upright, and if an
Angel from heaven shall labor to persuade me otherwise, I will say, Anathema
to him.

Such, Ioh. Checu^ l. de pronunt. linguae Grecae.
the zeal of Thomas Linacer, who comparing the lives of Popish Priests with
the 5.6. and 7. Chapters of Saint Matthewes Gospel, cried out, Either there is
no Gospel, or they are no Christians.

Such, of blessed Calvin and Beza, so I shall ever style them, they would never
yield to any King, that should draw them from GOD. Their speeches may be
wrested, but never any true inference collected that they pretended Treason.
They have poisoned Souls therefore who by a Popish conceit of Herod and Pilate
reconciled, would bring these worthy Instruments of Gods Church within the
compass of any bloody design. Let such learn to follow the rule of
Tertullian, if they have any knowledge to employ it in testimonium very, non in
adiutorium falsi; to witness truth, Aug. l. 8. conf. c. 8.
not to help falsehood. Let them remember that of Aug. Surgunt indocti, etc.
The unlearned who upon a good conscience were zealous for the truth, shall rise
up in Judgment against such, and get Heaven from them. Let not them that live
of the Altar, live ftom the Altar, but preach truth in season and out of
season: and if ever we had strength to rattle out the terrible Judgments of
GOD against sin, let us now do it. Let the light of our lives shine in the
faces of the world. Let us divide the word aright, for cursed is he that does
the work of the Lord negligently. I say to Archippus, Ier. 48.
Let him take heed to the Ministry that he has received in the Lord, Col. 4.
that he fulfill it. Take heed, look unto it. Give good and careful regard:
have your eyes in your heads, and your hearts in your Eyelids. It is a work,
a burden, a service, rather then a Play, or honor, or vacancy. We have
received it of him, that will require it, talent and use, principal and
interest, and give us the fullness of his wrath, if we do it to halfes and
not wholly.

Let us not be as children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. But speaking the truth, in love, let us grow up into him, in all
things, which is the head, even Christ. For it is almost all one, says
Fulgentius in his first book to Thrasimund King of the Vandals, to deny the
faith, and not maintane it. His reason is, because by one and the same silence
he strengthens error, who through fear or negligence holding his peace,
affirms not the truth, like a sleepy centenar, betraying the tents of his
Captain, not that he has a will perhaps to betray them, but because he
keeps not the watch as he ought, nor descrieth the enemy which comes to
assault them.

Look upon the ancient Fathers of the Church, how voluminous they were,
dealing against heretics, and defending true religion.

Origin, living Anno domini 240. leaving behind him 1000. treatises, Ier.
catal. de viris Illustr.
almost all perished.

Ambrose, Anno 380. 3. volumes, extant.

Chrisostum, Anno 411. 5. tomes.

Ierom, Anno 420. 9. tomes. Augustine, at the same time, 9. volumes.

Gregory the great, Anno 600. 6. tomes.

Yea our own worthyes may stir us up, Cochleus hist. de Hussitis l. 1.
Wicklif, who wrote works as great in quantity as S. Austins.

Luther, who wrote 12. tomes. Erasmus, 9. tomes, besides his notes upon many of
the Fathers.

Gualther 15. tomes. Brentius 8. tomes.

Calvin, 13. tomes, Zanchius, 8.

I reckon not the labors of latter, as memorable for some things, Fox, Jewel,
Whitakers, Humphreys, Perkins, Docter Raynolds, Docter Abbots, Docter Moorten,
Docter Field.

Let us all look upon the zeal of the Christians in the Primitive Church, who
being daily persecuted, yet prayed unto God, and praised the Lord, in the dens
of the Earth, Plin. secund. l. 10. ^p. 61.
as Plinius secundus their adversary in the time of Traians the Emperor
testifies of them. But we, beloved, have our Oratories open, our Pulpits
frequented, our Churches beautified. They had the greatest tormentors that ever
were, and yet insulted over them, In an Epistle to the Asians.
as Antonius Pius, the best of the Heathen Emperors, confessed. We have had
Kings to be our nursing Fathers, and Queens to be our nursing Mothers.

Consider the three Children singing in the furnace; Paul and Silas, in the
stocks, Martyrs at the stake; other holy Saints devoured by wild Beasts,
beheaded, pressed, roasted upon spits, broyled on gridirons, boiled in hot Oil,
and scalding Lead; thrown down from Mountains upon sharp stakes, torn
with wild horses, rent asunder with the violence of bowed trees, brayned,
racked, pricked with pen-kniues, their eyes boared out, their tongues cut, their
Arms, Hands, Legs, Feet, and all their members disfigured, their bowels
dismembered, and they famished to death, yet never denying their religion.

Behold the Martyrs in Queen MARY'S time, thrust out of their Houses, spoiled
of their Patrimonies, loaded with irons, locked in Prisons, burned with fire.
They were flesh and blood, as well as we; life was as sweet to them as to us,
their bodies were as sensible of pain as ours; we go to the same Heaven with
them, yet to see how they dyed, would make a man out of love with life, and out
of all fear of death: it would extract tears from any that was ever able to
weep. Beloved, there is now no dragging out of houses, no hiding of bibles, no
creeping into woods, no rotting in dungeons, no casting of infants out of the
mothers belly into the flames: the Gospel is preached, professed, Professors
encouraged, Preachers rewarded. Never was the Land so happy for zealous and
preaching Bishops: never better means of salvation offered. O then, let us be
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord* It was this that honored Apollos, Romans
12.11.
Act. 18.25. Let us not sell the truth for the favor of men. Let us remember
that Eli was plagued for honoring his Children above GOD: 1 Samuel 18.
so, all must look for some judgment that are neither cold nor hot, but
neglect the work of the LORD. Be either a whole Protestant or Papist.

It is not for any to defend that Atheistical Position, that all Controversies
may be taken up, and all Religions accord together; that our Differences are of
small importance; that they pertain only to learned men to think upon; it is
not for the common people to talk of Religion; yes, every one must be ready to
give an account of his Faith, and yield a reason of his Profession, and dye in
defense of his Religion: especially, seeing lukewarmnesse is here threatened.
And therefore were I as happy as Solomon, 1 Kings. 3.5.
to have whatsoever I would ask, this is the greatest blessing that I would
crave for you, to be zealous and amend, and do your first works, and this
shall be my Prayer: but I come to Christ's threat of the Hypocrite.

So then, because thou art luke warm, etc. IT was a wise Answer, 1a.2ae.
that is reported of our best, and I hope the last Cardinal, that this Island
shall ever see, who when a skillful Astrologer upon the Calculation of his
Nativity had foretold him some specialties concerning his future estate,
answered: such perhaps I was borne, but since that time, I have been borne
again, and my second natiuitte has crossed my first. It was otherwise with
Laodicea, for at first it was a holy City, a chosen place, a just people, but
now they revolted, apostated, and the best of them were hypocrites, lukewarm,
neither hot nor cold, therefore GOD threaneth, So then, etc.

Victorinus interprets luke-warmnesse of dissemblers of Religion, Politicians.

Primasius, of rich men unmerciful to the poor.

Ambrose, of them that have Faith, and no works.

Ansbertus, of many who took the habit of Monks, but followed the world.

Rupertus, of unthankful men attributing all to themselves.

Ioachimus Abbas, of one that is neither tristis ad poenitentiam, nor alacer ad
Dei obsequium, neythe sorrowful in repentance, nor quick in the commandments.

Coelius Pannonius, of Hypocrites counterfeiting virtues which they have not.

Generally, it is understood of those, who persuade themselves to be good when
they are bad, as the Pharisees. John 9.40. who though they saw CHRIST in
person, and beheld him in his Miracles, yet they would not acknowledge him;
they were blind, yet seemed to be unwilling of this veyle, Are we blind
also? it was hypocrisy in them.

When this once possesses a man, Ber. se. 65. Cant.
the Spirit is quenched, Sloth then increases, Charity cools, Pleasure
flattereth, Security decemeth, Custom renoketh, the Law is dissembled, right
is concealed, and the fear of GOD relinquished: this is the end of
luke-warmnesse, and the fruit is the wrath of the Almighty.

So then because, etc.] Whence this Doctrine follows; Luke-warmnesse in
Religion moves the Highest to great wrath. A sin so horrible, that the Lord
threatens, if any man in faint-heartednesse for want of Patience withdraw
himself, his soul shall have no pleasure in him. He. 10.38.
And the fearful and unbelieving, (which dare not stand to the profession of
the truth) shall have their portion among murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, Apoc. 21.8.
and such like persons, in the Lake which burns with fire and Brimstone,
which is the second death.

We must have our Fathers name written in our foreheads, Apoc. 14 1.
that all the world may see we are not ashamed of our profession. If we be not
Martyrs, yet we must be confessors, else we are no Christians. So Barnard, Cum
causa Dei ventilater in medium and falsitas praeponitur veritati, qui pro
persona quam gerit non resistit, de suo damnabitur silentio. When the cause of
God is discussed, and falsehood preferred before the truth, he that according
to the person he bears, does not resist it, shall be condemned for his
silence.

We all stand upon Iaacobs Ladder, and must either ascend or descend; Bar.
epist. 91.
Si attentes stare ruas necesse est, If thou try to stand still, thou must
fall; he is no whit good that desires not to be better: for when a man leaves
his desire of being better then he gives over his former goodness. So Ier.
Vbicoeperimus stare, Ier. epist. ad Demetriadem de Virginitate.
descendimus, nostrumque non progredi iam regredi est. When we begin to stand,
still, we go down, and our not going forward, is to go backward.

It is recorded of Valentinian, Theod. l. c. 4.
that when his Soldiers had chosen him to be Emperor, they were consulting to
have another joined with him: No (said he) it was in your power to give me the
Empire while I had it not, but now when I have it, it is not in your power to
give me a partner. We gave God our hearts in Baptism, and they belong to him
by right of creation. He will have the whole and cannot endure any riuals or
luke-warmnesse.

use of this touches to the quick all those who imagine that they may do as
others in outward worship, so that they keep their hearts to God, as though
GOD were not the creator of their bodies, as well as of their souls.

Some are like the world, Optat. l. 1.
running in a Circle of temporizing; always about the way, never in the way: 2 Timothy 3.7.
like those seely women, ever learning, never coming to the knowledge of the
Truth. Others, like the Hedge-hogge, which has two holes, one toward the
South, another toward the North; the wind blowing in the one, she shuts
that, and opens the other; they turn on any side. Others, like Nicodemus,
that came to Jesus to be instructed, but it was by night: Ioh. 3 1. Ioh. 9.28.
like Joseph of Arimathea, a Disciple of Jesus, but secretly, fearing the
Jews. Like the Marygold, shutting and opening with the Sun. Like Mermayds,
half Flesh half Fish. I would to God we were either cold or hot, but rather
hot and zealous in Religion, that as the hottest regions bring forth sweetest
spices, so the most zealous people might be most fruitful in good works. But
alas, many amongst us the more they are taught, the more ignorant they are, and
the more aged the more cold. Many come to hear the word, but they profit not
in the increase of knowledge they will come and stand before the Preacher, but
they will not try by the Scripture whether the things be so, or not, which are
taught them. They will not be at cost to buy a Bible, or if they do, they will
not read it, or if sometimes, yet not in a constant course.

Many are content to frequent the public Congregations upon the Sabbath, but
they will not privately sanctify it in their families. Many will show religion
in the general calling of a Christian, while they are in the Church, but in
their particular duties they fail. These are the sins that go up unto
Heaven, and cry for vengeance, and threaten punishments. What could have taken
away that sweet Prince, of fresh and bleeding memory, Prince HENRY, the
expectation of all the Christian world, but our luke-warmnesse? But blessed
Prince, our sins have aduantaged thy holy soul, though robbed us of our
happiness in thee. O mourn then for the sins of this age, but especially
for luke warmness. Return ye seduced souls from the fleshpots of Egypt,
from the vanities of Rome, offer to God the sacrifice of zeal in defense of
our true Church.

If any shall say, we love to be zealous for antiquity, and not for novelty;
your Church has been but since Luther, Anno Dom. 1517. for this is a common
objection.

We answer, D. Abbot. Now the most reverend Archbishop of Cant. answer to D.
Hill.
he was not the founder of our Religion, but God himself, the ancient of
days. As he did originally deduce those things which he taught against
Papistry from the Scriptures and out of the works of the ancient Fathers, so
did he derive them hereditarilie from others, as John Hus, Guic. hist. l. 13.
Hierome of Prage, and the rest as Francis Guicciardin an Italian and
Florentine Historiographer plainly confesses. Fox. Martirall.
Hus being 100. years before Luther, and yet prophesying of him not long
before his death.

And so generally, was his Doctrine spread, that a general counsel of
Constance, In tab council. ante Platinae. hist.
was called principally against the Hussites. The nobles of Bohemia wrote
supplications for them, Anno 1415.
but (contrary to the Emperors safe conduct given to the former of them) they
were burnt. Sigismund could not be satisfied for the breaking of his promise,
till by their decree which is in the 10. Session, the Counsel signified that
their authority was such, that they might disannull what he had appointed.
Campian shifteth it of so. Camp. cat. 4.
Imperator promisit, orbis Christianus mayor Imperatore dissoluit. He calls
some Bishops the Christian world, were they never so many in number, Cochl.
hist. Huss. lib. 2. p. 74.
had they authority to make him break his Oath? At last they must fly to
their old axiom. Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, The Heathens would
be ashamed of it, and Cacanza passes it over being in the 10. Session: saying,
Nothing was done then worthy of note. I omit their taking the Cup from the
people, a non obstante of Chapter Com. Sess. 13. Before these Wiclif was zealous
for our Religion, and so earnest against Popery, Cochl. l. 2.
that Cochleus affirms, He thinks the torments of Wiclif are greater in
Hell then those of Judas or Nero. Hear the charity of the Romanists toward
the best Christians. His Doctrine was so generally received in Oxford by the
best, that Pope Gregory the eleventh, in the year 1378. directed his Bull to
that University against his articles. Yea, for the space of 30. years after,
Hussus. to. 1. in replica. contra. Ioh. Stoakes foll. 110.
scarce was there a man there but held his opinions, and taught the same to
their scholars. He having protested, that as near as he could, he did all
things ad honorem Dei and vtilitatem Ecclesiae. De verit. scrip. p. 145. and p.
15.
For the glory of God and benefit of his Church.

They were still defended, in the days of King Edward the fourth, Anno 1476.
which caused the King to write letters for the burning of them. I might allege
the testimonies of many, Reignald Pain, Bishop of Chichester and others, Anno
1457. out of this place, Balaeus cent. c. 19.
Preaching that the Bishops sinned in buying their admissions of the Pope,
against begging Friars, Transubstantiation, and other errors.

I could ^^ge other stories at large, of the Lord Cobham, burned in S. Gyles
field, Anno 1417. in defense of our Religion. Fox. to. 1.
Of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Son of HENRY the fourth, Brother of HENRY the
fifth, and Uncle to HENRY the sixth, Balaeus cent. 8. c. 2.
stifled with a pillow for profession of the Gospel, Anno 1447. so that before
and after Luther, we have had champions to fight against the Pope. If ^^is
has not always been visible, we answer, no more is always the Moon in
the heavens, because sometimes there is none seen, as in the change, yet it
were absurd to conclude that therefore there is no Moon at all there.

The ancient Fathers before these, were ours in the maine points of religion.

Lactantius, against images. l. 2. instit. c. 9.

Ambrose, against praying to Saints. com. in Romans c. 1.

Chrisostom, for the marriage of the Clergy. hom. 7. ep. Heb. and l. 1. adu.
Iouin.

Saint Augustine, Six. Sen. Bib. 8. l. 5.
against free will, made Sixtus Senensis reject his opinion.

Theodoret, against transubstantiation, so that he who in the end of his
dialogues, writes the admonition to the Reader, is enforced though he be a
Papist to confess that he has many things against it. Post Epiph. The: dial.

Gregory, against the Supremacy of the Pope. Ep. ad Plauritium.

Barnard, touching the matter of merit by works. se. 61. in cant.

For justification by faith in Christ alone. ep. 190. for certain assurance of
Salvation, in the death, and by the strength of our Savior. se. 3. de 7.
misericordijs. And for disliking then the vile life of the Clergy, se. in
concilio Rhemensi: how copious is he?

But we stand not upon the authorities of men, neither upon the name of
Lutherans, Caluinists, Zuinglians: for these were not founders of our Church,
but reformers of it, and sweepers of many abuses and Popish errors: Neither so
much upon the name of Protestants, though this name arose honorably at Spires
in Germany, when the Duke Electour of Saxony, the Marquis of Brandeburge, the
Lantsgraue and other Princes, Sleid. Hist. l. 6.
made a solemn protestation against an edict made in prejudice of the reformed
Religion, Anno 1529. But with maturest judgment, and sober understanding, our
men confer the Scripture in many languages, they pray unto God to inlighten
them, they look into Fathers, Histories, Councels, they compare old things
with new, they leave no good means unattempted to sift and sound the truth,
and still the farther they look, the less ground they find for Popery: they
more hate it in their old age, then in their young, unless they put a veil
before their eyes; then let them be carried, and run from us, they were never
of us.

Nay, the books of controversy in Religion, so they be not mingled with
State- causes, are to be sold commonly, which yet our adversaries interdict to
their followers: and which is more the scripture is open, every man may read
it, and is exhorted to the study of it, to lay foundation here as upon a Rock:
not to build upon the waters, the Scholemen, as the Papists do. Ferdinand.
Vellosill. Ep. in praef. in aduers. Schol. Theol.
Witness one of their own writers, who testifies of himself, that he had
studied Schole-Diuinitie and the Canon law for the space of 16. years, and yet
never so much as saluted either the Scriptures or Fathers.

So that our Adversaries are Laodiceans, neither cold nor hot, and come first
here to be taxed. For do they not persuade themselves that they are rich, when
they are poor, and blind, and naked in spiritual graces, counting Christ's
robes of righteousness not large enough to cover their nakedness of sin,
Is. 64.6.
patching to a piece of new cloth, as if the old were out-worne, botching to it
the menstruous and filthy clouts of their own righteousness; which like the
curtald garments of David's servants cannot hide their shame, 2 Samuel 10.4.
but defile them, as Job confessed, Job 9.31.
Mine own garments defile me, and had more need to be washed themselves in
the blood of the Lamb, then to go about to wipe away their scarlet sins by
Popish Indulgences?

Were Saint Paul now in Rome he would utter the same words that he did in the
midst of Mars hill at Athens; I see that in all things you are too
superstitious and furious: for, as CHRIST was crucified at Rome, Re. 11.8.
which is not meant in respect of the place, for that was Jerusalem, but if we
respect the power and authority that put him to death, a Roman Judge, Roman
Laws, Roman authority, a kind of death proper to the Romans, and in a
place which then was within the Roman Empire: so, now in his members he is
especially persecuted by Rome; sending out Priests and Jesuits, as so many
Firebrarnds, seeking to set on fire the several corners of the Church: but
these and the rest of those Orders, are at last betrayed by their own
Confederates.

By Albertus, Sleid. l. 21.
Pightus, and Ferus, and Vergerius, who intended to write against Luther, in
the point of Justification by Faith only*

By Didacus de la Vega, a Spanish Friar of Toledo, Do. 12. post Pentecost.
in the sufficiency of the Scriptures.

By Andreas Masius, in Relics.

By Contarenus the Cardinal, De lib. arbit.
touching the doctrine of Free Will.

De reformat. Ecclesiae.
By Petrus de Aliaco, in the Canonizing of so many Saints.

By the Seculars, withstanding the Jesuits, Quod l. fol. 21 In margin.
who give a toleration to their Proselytes to come to the Protestant Churches.

Alas, what zeal is in this, or in their other actions? yet to give them their
due, I must confess they have zeal, but not according to knowledge.

How zealous are they to the Pope, in their reverence and worship of him? The
word Papa at the first used honestly for a Father, as Austine styles Jerome,
but now challenged by an usurper, murderer, and Herodian Fox; and more trust
given to him, then to Christ, as Gerson in his time complained. Gerson. part.
1. de exa^. doct. confid. 7.


What Treasons dare they not attempt to maintain his Kingdom? witness the
Gun-pouder Treason, for which prayers were made by R. B. P. in his Seven
sparks of the enkindled Soul, before the Stratagem was discovered; and his
Motto, In my Meditation breaks out fire; His brag, The memory of Novelties
shall perish with a crack, p. 32. The tempestuous night being passed, a
perpetual day shall be our comfort, p. 35. The crack was heard into all
Lands, and made Nations quake for fear, p. 54. Confirm the hearts of those
thy Laborers: endue them with strength from above, and give success unto
their endeavors, p. 69. Parsenimus defends it, saying, Take away root and
branch. So, Eudaemon-Iohannes, apologizing Garnet, but as sufficiently answered
as ever our Church could desire, D. Abbot.
by a reverend Prelate.

What damnable slanders have they not put upon our late Sovereign, blessed
Queen ELIZABETH: they have it from their Father, Parsons, I had almost said,
the Devil; for who else could breathe out such impostumate detractions against
her, who was the glory her Sex, the Myrrour of Majesty, whom all Protestant
Generations shall ever call blessed, though a generation of Vipers, not
forewarned of vengeance to come upon them, seek to sting her reputation,
calling her miseram foemina^, placing her in Hell; making her life wicked, her
death cursed.

He dipped his pen in the poison of Aspes, which was under his lips, and sought
to enuenome the name of this holy Saint, whom neighboring Nations either
triumphed in, or trembled at; whose countenance was able to terrify Treason,
who might truly have used the words of Deborah; Judge. 5.8.
In Israel, until I Deborah came up, they chose new Gods, under whose
government all this Kingdom, especially you of this place, lived in such peace
and plenty, in such obedience to GOD and her, and in such love one to another.
She was a woman after Gods own heart, she led his people like a Flock 45.
years through a Wilderness of many distressfull dangers; she was the Diamond
in the Ring of the Monarchs of the earth, and notwithstanding all the roarings
of the Bulls of Basan, Centaurs and Minotaurs of Rome, their thundrings,
lightnings, excommunications, execrations, Incantations, conspiracies,
rebellions, drugs, daggers, and dags, yet she lived to out-liue the malice of
her enemies, and dyed in peace, and was buried with Regal burial.

Let the zeal of these provoke us, least they get ground of us in their bad
cause: it is good to be zealous in a good cause; Canes latrant pro dominis,
Dogs bark in defense of their Masters, and shall we be silent in defending
the Lord JESUS. Fear not the scoffs of Atheists, thou art a stranger at home,
no marvel if the Dogs of the world bark at thee. There is none that
reproacheth thee for zeal in Religion, but brandeth himself with the sin of
luke-warmnesse, and here he may see his punishment. Woe be to fearful
hearts, Eccl. 2.12.
and faint hands, and the sinner that goes two ways.

Let us that think we stand take heed least we fall: let us consider the
season, redeem the time, not harden our hearts, hearken to the voice of GOD
while it is called to day. GOD spared not the old world, who despised Noah;
the Sodomites, which vexed Lot; Jerusalem, which abused the Prophets; and you
hear how he threatens LAODICEA. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation? He will show us our of his mouth if we dissemble before him. Let
us then now at the last separate light from darkness, God from an Idol, the the
Israelites from the Canaanites, the precious from the vile, the believers from
Infidels, Protestants from Papists. Let them return unto us, but let not us
return unto them, who in Superstition are Heathenish, in Tradition Jewish, in
Treason devilish. Then shall he make us to this people, a fenced brazen wall,
and they shall fight against us, but shall not prevail against us; for I am
with thee to save thee and deliver thee, says the Lord.

But my last circumstance calls me.

The Jews had three kinds of Excommunication, 21.22. Drus^us Heb. quaest. l.
1. and 2.
Niddui, Herem, Sham-meth.

By the first they were removed from Ecclesiastical assemblies. (...)
By the second there was an Anathema published against them. By the third they
were Samatized: the word Sham-matha in the Chalde or according to the Hebrew
Sham and Meth. Hi signifying there is death. So is there in this separation,
The Lord willingly freeth himself of them, as a man would his stomach of
undigested meat: He does it with a kind of exultation. This Moses told the
rebellious Israelites: and it shall come to pass that as the Lord rejoiced
over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so the Lord will rejoice over
you to destroy you, and to bring you to naught, and ye shall be plucked from
the land whither thou go to possess it. Deuteronomy. 28.63. And if once the Lord
cast us up, he will never return to his vomit, but I press not the word: I
come to my last Doctrine.

God never leaves us, till there be no hope of amendment. When the Lord had
purposed to destroy the old world, because the wickedness thereof was very
great, he did first use all means to reclaim them. He gave them an hundredth
and twenty years to repent in, and in the mean while, sent Noah a Preacher of
righteousness, to forewarne them of the danger, both by verbal and also visible
preaching, in making an Arc, for the saving of himself and his household. 2
Pet 2.5. Heb. 11.7. 2 Samuel 15.16. 1 King. 21.18.
He sent Samuel to Saul; Elias to Ahab; Jonas to Nineveh, an Epistle to
Laodicea: but if these will not move, he casts utterly off.

Laodicea must be spewed out of his mouth. Her wealthy, insolent, imperious
inhabitants, father, son, nephew; old, young, all must be rejected. It is
not the loss of their wealth alone, nor decay of Merchants and men of war,
the rooting out of the noblest families in Laidicea, nor the funerals of
private houses, but the fall of the whole City. It Is a fond conceit of the
profane vulgar to make God all of mercies, a gross ignorance to disioyne
mercy and justice in him to whom they are both essential. Dare we hope that
GOD can be so kind to us as to be unjust to himself? No, he will repay
vengeance to those that will not receive the call of mercy. He will spew them
out of his mouth.

use of this may serve as a glass to all impenitent sinners, to look upon
Gods judgments, poured down upon them who made no conscience of their ways,
and neglected his Commandments.

Let worshippers of strange Gods look upon the Israelites spoiled for this.
Judge. 2.14.


Let creepers unto Images look upon Jeroboam, 1 King. 14.10.
cut off with all his house.

Let rash swearers look upon the blaspheming Sennacherib, 2 Ki. 19.35.37.
King of Assyria, killed by his sons Adramelech and Sharezer, and an Angel of
the Lord smiting in his Camp in one night an hundred fourscore and five
thousand.

Let prophaners of the Sabbath look upon the gatherer of sticks, Number. 15.36.
stoned by all the people.

Let rebellious children look upon Absolon, 2 Samuel 18.9.
hanged and cast into a pit.

Let Murderers look upon Cain, Genesis 4.24.
his blood was shed by Lamech, his Nephew.

Let adulters look upon four and twenty thousand, Number. 25.9.11.
perishing for committing it with the daughters of Moab.

Let thieves look upon Achan, Josh. 7.24.25.
his sons, daughters, and all his substance burnt for stealing.

Let false witnesses look upon the rulers that accused Daniel, Dan. 6.24.
they were brought and cast into the Den of the Lions; they, their children and
their wives, and the Lions had the masterie of them, breaking all their bones
in pieces, ere ever they came at the ground of the Den.

Let covetous men look upon Ahab, 1 King. 22.34.
tyrannically possessing Naboth his Vineyard, falling in Battle.

Let lukewarm professors look upon Laodicea, Orosius.
it is fallen by an Earthquake for neglecting the Gospel. So that as Christ
bad his hearers remember Lots wife, Luke 17.32.
(so I may say unto you all) remember Laodicea.

Woe upon woe is threatened against Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, for their
coldness. Those Cities glittered with Christ's miracles; their streets sounded
and rang with his doctrine; the inhabitants were privileged with his
familiarity. But for as much as there was no more in them then in Gath, or
Ashkelon, Cities of the Philistines, and the Vineyard was as barren as the
wilderness, and Christ was in their streets, not in their hearts, therefore
curses were thundered to them; so to Laodicea.

Notwithstanding, write it in tables, and let it be a monument for the last
day, that the Lord is gracious toward ungracious sinners, if they quench not
his spirit, if they despise not his Prophets, if we abuse not his mercies, if
we neglect not his judgments.

But alas, our sins have made this a preaching not fit for these times,
blessings must sleep a while, mercy go aside, peace return to the God of
peace, Epis. Land. in Ionam.
and not be spoken of. This rather should be our preaching, There is judgment
with thee O Lord, with thee there is ruin, and subversion, with thee is
battle, and famine, and snares, plague, and storm and tempest, fire and
brimstone, therefore thou shall be feared.

Mercy and Justice are two sisters, and as the one has had her day, so the
other shall not miss hers, unless we be zealous and amended. The Lord has two
arms, two cups, two recompenses, and doubtless there is a reward for the
righteous, and torment for the obstinate, and false-hearted, and lukewarm
professor. Which should be a motive to all true-harted Protestants, to join
together as one man, against them that have evil will at Syon, the common
adversary the Papists, and all that are Popishly affected, the Gangrens of this
Land, if ever we would have good.

All Israel was against Athan, in the Valley of Achor, because he was the
cause that they could not stand against their enemies. In the Conspiracy at
Rome against Julius Caesar, there were no fewer, by report, then four and
twenty daggers stabd into his body, because he was taken by the Nobility of
Rome, to be an enemy to the Commonwealth; shall Priests and Jesuits, be
suffered to run from house to house, and seduce whole families? shall we nurse
up Lyons-whelpes for our own overthrow? What saftie can we be in, when such
Miscreants lurk in your dewllings? iet in your streets? when neither Country,
nor City, nor Court is free of these conspiratours, keeping a daily record of
all our actions, and have taken to use whatsoever has been spoken, or done,
against them, these many Halcyon years of ours, meaning to exchange it, ten
for one, if ever they see the day of their long expected toleration, and so
expulsion of the Gospel: which Lord let them never see.

The gates of Rome cannot hurt us, no nor the gates of Hell unless we hurt our
selves.

I appeal to you Worthy, and Honorable Magistrates, to whom the sword of
justice is committed. You may thus reason, as the Orator against Catiline. Did
Publius Scipio a private man kill Tiberius Gracchus, but lightly weakening the
state of the Commonwealth, and shall we that are consuls let Catiline alone
desirous to lay wast all the world with slaughterings and fierings? Not only
for Gods sake, but for our Kings sake, whose deputies ye are, as he is Gods;
not only for Religion, but for very policy, as you regard the peace of this
state, and well-farre of the Church, as you love your own lives, rouse up your
spirits; the cause is the Lords, vindicate his dishonor. He has made our Land
a sanctuary for true Religion, a refuge and shade in the heat of the day, for
persecuted Professors, who have been chased like Bees from their own Hiues.
He has made this place a Temple for himself to dwell in; the zeal of it
has been famous over the world: O let it not be a common receipt for all
comers, Atheists, Neuters, Hypocrites, lukewarm Professors, Popish wanderers.

It was the defense of Religion, that made David, Solomon, Josias, Constantine,
Edward the 6 Queen Elizabeth, and our late blessed Prince Henry so honored,
that their names amongst all true hearted Protestants, are like a precious
ointment, their remembrance is sweet as honey, Eccl. 49.1.
and as Music at a banquet of wine. It is this that must honor you all.

Remember, that to whom much is given, of them much shall be required. We of
this Land have been a long time the trees of the Lords Vineyard, full of
sap, of as many favors as any people of the world. If we be his Oliue-trees,
we must have fatness. If his Figge-trees, we must have sweetness. If his
Vine-trees, we must have Wine, chearing the heart; I mean, we must bring forth
good fruit to benefit others.

The Heathens feign of the Powers, Luc. Dial.
that every one chose a tree. Jupiter, he chose the Oak for continuance;
Neptune, the Cedar for tallnesse; Apollo, the Laurel for greenness; Venus,
the Poplar for whiteness; Pallas, the Vine for fruitfulness: our true GOD
has chosen us as a peculiar people to himself. O then, bring forth fruits,
worthy of the Gospel: be earnest and diligent to make your Election sure,
especially you, whom the Lord has placed as the Eye of this Land.

Mercurius Trismegistus told Asclepius that Aegipt was the Image of Heaven,
Aug. 8. ciu. 23.
I am sure your City is an Image of the whole earth, and I hope it shall be
called Vrbs aterna, an everlasting City, more truly then ever Rome was by
Ammianus Marcellinus, Pind. Od.
though I know it must have a period.

That which Pindarus fained of the City Rhodes is true amongst you; Gold has
been as plentiful as if it had almost rained down from Heaven: glarious
things are spoken of this City of God: it has the Temple of the Lord, and
Court of the Kings seats of Indgement. It has a Royal Navy of Vessels, and
is fenced not only with these walls of wood as Gracia was against Xerxes,
Herod. Poly.
but it has a Tower furnished with Instruments of brass and Iron, against
your enemies, it has many sumptuous buildings, and faithful Watchmen, Psalm.
127.2.
yet unless the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain.
Defend Religion, and the Lord will fight for you, and defend you all.

I speak to you aged Fathers; Be like the Sun in the Firmament; not like
Ezechias Sun that went backward, not like Ioshuahs Sun that stood still; but
David's Sun, that like a Bridegroom comes out of his Chamber, and as a
Champion rejoices to run his race. Be like the Sun in the Firmament, more
glorious at the setting then rising: the nearer you are to your graves, be the
more zealous in good works.

I speak to you young men; Beloved brethren, offer to God the first fruits of
your youth, call upon the name of the Lord for help: be strong in defense of
that profession, wherein you were baptized, and he that has begun in you a
good work will perfect it.

I speak to you Matrons and devout Virgins; Learn of Esther and her
hand-maides, to be true to the Lord and his word, so shall all generations call
you blessed.

In a word, I speak to you All; Remember what you have heard: many Preachers
have been sent unto us. The Heavens over our heads, have been resolved into
tears, weeping for our sins. The Earth under our feet, has trembled for
fear of those plagues which we deserve. The roaring Sea has ouer-swelled the
usual bounds. Death, has been sometimes vsherd amongst you, with the pale
horse of a ranging Pestilence, destroying day and night. O let not these things
be forgotten, as though they had never been!

At the last, let the reward move us, Behold this day CHRIST stands and
knocks at the door of your hearts, saying; If any man hear my voice, and
open the door, I will come in unto him, and banquet with him, and he with me.
This knocking is his calling unto us by his words, works, benefits. This door
is the closet of our hearts; the hearing, is our obeying; the opening, is the
readiness of our souls; this coming in unto us, is his being in us by his
holy Spirit; this banqueting is the continual feast of a good Conscience,
which that we may all have, and so sit with CHRIST in his Throne, when we have
over come; the good Lord for his mercies sake grant it to whom, with the Son,
and the holy Ghost, that Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, be
ascribed all praise and power, glory and goodness, dignity and dominion, this
day, and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

