A HEAVENLY PROCLAMATION TO FLY ROMISH BABYLON.

A SERMON PREACHED AT OXford in St MARY'S Nov. 21.1613.

BY SAMPSON PRICE Master of Arts of Exeter College and Preacher to the City of
Oxford.

2. COR. 6. 1^. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. AC: OX

printer's device of Joseph Barnes

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND TRVELY WORTHY KNIGHT. SIR ROGER OWEN, all
happiness.
SIR the mystery of iniquity does now work. Gr. l. 4. ep. 38.
Never was Antichrist and his army of Priests (as Gregory calls them) more
enraged to oppugn the true Church the^ in these days, conceauing in likely
hoode that he has but a short time, Rev. 12.12.
and that the time is at hand, which the Lord has promised, shall bring upon
Babel the vengeance of the Lord and the vengeance of his temple. Ier 51.6.11.
Rev. 18.20.
The Lord make good his word and hasten his work that the heavens may rejoice,
and the Apostles and Prophets. Rome was sometimes famous for her faith, but now
it is become Babylon as Jerome in his time confessed, Hier. ad Marcell viduam
and praef. l. Didimi de Spir. Sancto. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 26. and l. 4. c. 21.
praising God, that he was freed from it. It co^ceived about the times of
Traian says Egesippus, and now has brought forth the man of sin whose pride,
doing reverence to no mortal man. Cerem. Romans l. 3. Sect. 1. fol. 120. and his
challendge of the title of supreme and immediate Pastor, are badges of
Antichrist Gr, l. 6. ep. 30. This purple Idol, Reg. Indict. 15.
causes traditions to be matched with the written word of God, and is therein
injurious to the wisdom of God; he causes man's merits to be mingled with the
merits of Christ therein injurious to the grace of God; he causes divine
worship to be communicated to stocks and stones, therein injurious to the
glory of God. Thus the daughter of Syon is become the Whore of Babylon. In the
council of Lateran strict charge was given to all Preachers that none should
speak of the coming of Antichrist, Caranza sess. 11.19. Dec. 1516. Praeside
Leone. 10.
which prohibition argued the guilt of their consciences. But now the Pope has
his followers in triumph to give him the number of the beast as those books of
Benedictus de Benedictis Bononiae excus. Anno. 1608. and Theses Caraffae
Neapoli excusae 1609. Take the numeral letters V. 5. L. 50. V. 5. V. 5. l. 1.
C. 100. D 500 and it is the number of the beast 665. Rev. 13.18.
dedicated unto him with this inscription PAVLO V. VICEDEO, do sufficiently
prove, as is urged by that Noble Phillip Mornai; Some would have Antichrist to
be but one man standing upon the greek article (...). 1. Ioh. 2.18. It is in
Bell. l. 3. c. 2. de Romans Pont. By as good reason there should be but one
Davell because Christ says (...), The Adversary came and sowed tares, Mat.
13.25. and but one righteous man, because S. Paul says, that (...), The man of
God may be absolute. 2. Tim. 3.17.
How truly many Popes of Rome have deserved this name I have labored to
prove in this Sermon which I present unto your Worship. I confess the
argument is great and know that the blame of imperfection is so much the more
when it lights upon a high choice. D. Sutcliffe D Abbot. D. Downam. Mr G.
Powel.
But this subject being handled so plentifully by many worthies in our Church,
I undertook the burden the more willingly, and now offer this mite (Talents I
have none) into the public treasury. I was importuned to publish this Sermon
by some learned and religious friends, leisure fitted not since the preaching
of it so opportunely as now. I dedicate it to you as the chief Patron of my
studies by whose means I obtained my settled abode in this place. That Hon.
Judge your Reverend Father did countenance and encourage, my aged and painful
Father in his Ministry in that flowrishing town of Shrewsbury. Since, your
favors have been extraordinary and bountiful. Accept from me, I beseech you
these small fruits of my studies, as a pledge of my true observaunce, unto you,
being a sincere lover of the truth, and generally honored for your excellent
learning. So wishing to your good worship the increase of all good graces and
blessings, as also to your elect Lady and sweet oliue-branch, I take my leave.

From my study at Exeter College, Oct. 28.1614. Your Worships in all humble
duty at command SAMPSON PRICE.

REVEL. 18.4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, come out of her,
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues.
THe Almighty God whose throne is heaven, the firmament his pavilion, and the
earth his theater, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first
the last and the revealer of secrets, Da. 2.22. Victorin. in Apocal.
Cuius antiquit as immortalitas, whose antiquity is immortality, gave an
especial privilege to his messenger John an Apostolical Prophet to write this
Prophecy to all succeeding ages, a book never rejected by any but the grossest
Heretics. Epiph.


That as he preferred Abel before Cain, Jacob before Esau, David before Eliab,
Mathias before Judas, so he prefers S. John before all the other Disciples,
in this general charge to his Church. And he that made Moses who was a
courtier, Job the Potentate, Samuel the Judge, Elisha the Plowman Amos the
Neat-heard, Gr. super Ezeck.
Jeremy a Priest, Isaiah of the blood royal a Prophet, Matthew a Publican, Peter
a Fisher and Paul a Tentmaker, all to be penners or preachers of his word, now
inspireth a poor exile to write the history of the Church in these intricate
visions and revelations which he saw upon the Lords day. Pro merito voluminis
laus omnis inferior est Rupert. in lib.
Where having sent to the seven Churches, and showed the authors of his
message. God the Father and the Son, in the 5 first chapters, he comes to
predictions of things to come, c. 6. obsignations of those to be saved, c. 7.
Indignations upon things to be destroyed, c. 8.9. His warrant to write to many
peoples and nations and tongues and kings, c. 10. The Churches Prophets
fighting and falling by the beast, yet rising again c. 11. Her body compared
to a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet and a crown
of 12 stars upon her head, c. 12. Her combats, and they blessed that die in the
Lord, c. 13.14 Her threatenings with 7 golden vials full of the wrath of God, c.
15. Her judgments upon her enemies in general, c. 16. and in these 17 and 18
chapt. her victories gotten against the Romish church; wherein Princes
converted to the gospel (figured by a mighty Angel lightning the earth, c.
1.) do iudicially decree that Babylon must fall, for troubling of states, for
corruption in doctrine, with which she poisoned other nations, and for the
immoderate riches of her Merchants who sold both justice and the souls of men,
Rome sells souls of men. Rev. 18.13.
ver. 13. The Ministers of God must accomplish it by preaching the gospel, at
the sound whereof Babylon falls as once the walls of Jericho at the noise of
trumpets sounded by the Priests, and by the Ministry whereof as it were by the
spirit of the Lords mouth Antichrist falls into a consumptio^, as Dagon once
fell before the arc. calling by this long oratorious exhortation to relinquish
Babylon (as Lot was warned to leave Sodom) in a continuat set speech to 21 ver.
a part of which I have chosen for the subject of my discourse. Clem. Alex. in
locum.
And I heard, etc.

It has been the admirable wisdom of the Almighty, never from the beginning
to leave his Church without some comfortable promise. So immediately after the
fall of our first Parents, he foretold of that restauratio^ which should be
made by Messiah his son, Genesis 3.
as it came to pass in the fullness of time. Dan. 7.9.11. Ez 31.
So he foretold by Daniel and Ezechiel, of the great trouble which his Church
should endure by the persecutions of the divided Greek Empire, Alexanders
posterity, Diod. l. 18. and Appian.
especially the Kings of Egypt, and Syria, which descended of Ptolomeus and
Seleucus, whom the Scripture calls the Kings of the North, and the South, by
the space of 294. years, and of the precise determination thereof at the
coming of Christ.

So he told Israel of their great servitude, and intolerable bondage in Egypt,
Genesis 15.
and of the full end thereof after 400 years.

So here he sent John the Evangelist into a little Island of Pathmos, lying in
the Aegean Sea, in the 96, Straho. l. 3. Eus l. 3. c. 18.
year of our Lord, to prophecy of the ruin of a mystical Babylon (I mean
Rome) as Jeremy had foretold of the ruin of literal Babylon. Rome in this
book compared to Sodom for filthiness, to Egypt for Idolatry, C. 11. v. 8.
and in my Text to Babylon for both. And I heard, etc.

It is like to that Ier. 50.8. Fly from the midst of Babel, depart out of the
land of the Chaldeans: or that Ier. 51.6. Fly out of the midst of Babel, and
deliver every man his soul: Be not destroyed in her iniquity.

And I hear danother voice out of heaven. It is a divine inspiration to the
Church, Parap H. Card.
admonishing the elect as the other condemned the reprobate. The ordinary
Gloss interprets it of the preaching of the word. Brocard of those
Scriptures in Esaias, Jeremy, and Sophonie tending to this purpose.

Saying come out of her my people. Meyerus, paralleleth it with that Za. 2.6.
Ho, Marl. Lyra.
Ho, come forth, and fly from the land of the North, says the Lord. Marlorat,
with 1. Co. 7.31. They that use the world, as they that used it not. Generally
it is to be understood of the company of the wicked; we must leave them, they
are lulled in the cradle of security, the Devil closes their eyes with
ignorance, fills their cares with Sophistry, covers their heads with
presumption of mercy, and lardeth their hearts with the neglect of judgments;
especially it is applied to Rome, which will easily appear to be Babylon.

That ye be not partakers of her sins: either in consenting unto, H. Card.
or acting of her abominations, whereby Gods image is defaced, man made a
monster, and Gods child the Devils Creature.

And that ye receive not of her plagues. Si non fueritis participes in culpa,
Hugo Card.
non eritis similes in poena. If ye partake not in the offense, ye shall not
partake in the punishment.

Thus God, ever will be revenged upon Sinners. Sin cast the Angels out of
heaven, Adam out of Paradise. By it Ruben lost his birthright, Judas his
Apostleship. It makes to men death terrible, their persons to God execrable,
the law to condemn us, conscience to accuse us, and the hand of the highest to
plague us.

The sum of which Scripture, In Ref. Cathol.
according to judicious M. Perkins is, That they who hope for salvation must
avoid the faith and Religion of the Romish Church.

Jn the words I observe two general parts.

1 An admonition to forsake Babylon. Divisie.
And I heard etc 2 The reasons for this desertion. That ye be not partakers,
etc.
In the 1 General, there is. 1. The instrument of admonition. A voice from
heaven.

2 The matter of the admonition. Come out of her my people.

In the second general. 1. The danger of contagion conversing with the wicked.
Lest ye be partakers.

2 The danger of punishment to be inflicted upon the consorts and accomplices of
the ungodly. And that ye receive not of her plagues.

In the 1. There is a heavenly voice sounded. In the 2. The elect are called.
In the 3. An infection is threatened. In the 4. The plagues of the wicked are
manifested
Of these in their order, not what may be spoken, but what the short time, my
weak readings, and simple, but well meaning ability, with your patient
attention and especially Gods gracious assistance shall permit. Wherein I shall
desire to speak resolutely, yet with submission to so learned an assembly. The
cause is Gods, and my warrant from heaven to proclaim this voice as
powerfully, as my weakness shall suffer me.

It was a vain challenge of Galilaeus de Galilaeis, 1^ Iae^
to summon the stars to come near him, and to give him an account of
themselves; Nuntius syder.
he would hear their discourses. And a fond brag of Keppler that ever since
Tycho Braches death, he has received into his ear that no new thing should
be done in heaven without his knowledge. De stella in cygno.
And of him who professed, that he heard that which never man heard besides, a
Sermon which Christ made in praise of his father Joseph, dedicating it to
Adrian the 6. Iosephlna di. Gieron. Gratian.
But we are sure S. John heard many strange voices from heaven by the trumpets
of Angels, amongst which this is very remarkable. It is a voice more shrill
then that of the Egyptian who from the promontory of Hister was heard of
Histaeus Admiral of Darius being then at Miletum as Herodotus fableth, Melpom
p. 163
for they that were dead a while may hear this voice and live. In the
scripture there is vox Implorativa, with my voice I called upon the Lord. Psalm.
Vox collaudativa. A loud voice saying salvation to our God which sits upon
the throne. Rev 7.10.
Vox exhortativa, cry a loud, spare not, lift up thy voice as a trumpet? Is.
58.8.
and if any man ask what the shall cry, he must cry as the voice from heaven,
shall admonish him. There is vox Dei. To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts. This was a terrible voice to Adam I heard thy voice in
the garden and was afraid. Genesis 3.
Nec vox hominem sonat, It is the voice of God, not Man. Vox Christi, hear
him. An oracle from heaven has proclaimed it twice, in the river Jordan, Mat.
3. and on the mount Tabor, Mat. 17. when we have heard him, and found him we
must take hold of him chap. 3. In his word, we must believe him, in baptism
indue him, in the Eucharist spiritually eat him, in the poor relieve him, in
his life follow him, in his death trust in him, in his temple glorify him, on
earth affect him, and the^ in heaven when we have heard his voice we shall
enjoy him. Vox Dei and hominis as here, God speaks to John, and the Church to
us from heaven. Whence I collect this doctrine.

The word preached ought reverently to be received in respect of the place
whence it comes, which is heaven. Doct. 1.
Not that this is to be understood only of the place whither Christ ascended,
but also of the congregation of the faithful where he is in the midst. Io. c.
4. v. 2.4. There is a throne in heaven about which are 24 seats, and 24 Elders.
In the 5. chapter v. 10. these do praise Christ that had made them Kings and
Priests unto God, and they should reign on the earth, 50. Ep. 2.6. The church
is called heavenly Jerusalem and in other places the kingdom of heaven; so
that whether God from heaven does command Noah to make and enter the Arc or
that an Angel bid Lot get him out of Sodom? Whether Moses importune the
people to get them from the tents of Dathan and Abiram, or the Prophets Isaie
and Jeremy teach this Scripture for the leaving of Babylon, we must hear it as
the voice of God coming from heaven.

As there is a woe against them that will not preach, and a curse against them
that preach negligently, so against them that will not hear carefully, whereby
they might avoid judgments and punishments. There is a threefold voice of
woes, c. 8.13. Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth. Woe unto the
world because of Popery, whereby men are punished in their souls, they will
not go to the law, and to the testimony, therefore they can have no light. Woe
unto the world for Turcisme, because thereby thousands are murdered in their
bodies not yielding to the word, whereby they might avoid the Lords wrath. Woe
unto the world because of the last judgment, for thereby the natural
worldlings shall be plagued both in body and soul in Hell fire for evermore,
because they harkned not to the sound of the Gospel. The dangers of all these
may be prevented by hearing this sacred voice, Avoice from heaven.

Acomfort to all Churches which have the voice of the word amongst them,
whereby they are forewarned: wherein if any people were truly happy, it is
this our Island, which has the voice of many criers, preparing the way of the
Lord, of many Turtles mourning betwixt the porch and the altar for the sins,
saying Spare us good Lord, spare thy people. Joel. 2.17.
We of this Kingdom, 1 Samuel 21.6.
have many a faithful, Ahimelech amongst us, who rather then David should
perish with hunger, will give unto him the shewbread of the Sanctuary, though
they live hungerly themselves. Many a worthy Minister, who rather then David
should die with thirst, will with the hazard of their lives give unto him of
the water of Bethlehem. 2. Sam. 23.16.
I deny not, but by reading a man may receive much comfort, and be excellently
prepared, to get saving knowledge: yet the voice of preaching is the
excellentest ordinary means which God has sanctified to the salvation of his
children, and to make them wise unto salvation. By this the mind of the
ignorant is enlightened, the memory of the forgetful is strengthened, the heart
of the obstinate is mollified, the affections of the untoward are reduced, the
will of the perverse is restrained, and the life of the ungodly so changed,
that at the voice of a simple and sinful man, he cries out with the Jews,
Men and Brethren, what shall we do. With David; I am the man, with Saul, I
have sinned, and with every private convert to say, God is in these men indeed,
when they preach the heavenly voice. Were it not for preaching the word, where
were the understanding of it, consolation by it, direction from it? Without it
how should hard places be made plain, plain be applied, repugnances in it be
reconciled, or oppugners of it be confuted. Take away preaching, and then
down with our schools of learning, our houses of prayer, our obedience to
Superiors, our love to equals, and our right to heaven. It is the power of God
to salvation, the pillar of God in our journey to Canaan, the Angel of God to
bring us out of Sodom, the messenger of God to prepare his way, the trumpet of
God to cry down Jericho, and the caller to bring us unto the Church of Christ,
being illuminated by the spirit.

For it is not the outward ministry of the word only that is able to convert.
Let the Preacher be one of a thousand. Job. 33.23. for the excellency of his
gifts as prompt in the law of God as Ezra was, as mighty in the Scriptures as
Apollo's, as eloquent to quicken and enliue his speech, as if he spoke with the
tongue of an Angel, as painful as Paul, who labored more then all the rest,
as blameles in conversation as Zachary. Let the people hear never so gladly as
Herod heard John. Never so earnestly as the Jews heard the Prophet as one that
had a pleasant voice and could sing well. Esek. 33.32.
Let the^ hear never so long, as those that heard Paul until midnight. Let
the matter be handled never so excellently, as all the Synagogue wondered at
the gracious words which proceeded out of Christ's mouth. Yet if the Lord give
not a blessing, it is but the savor of death unto death. Paul may plant and
Apollo water, but God gave the increase. Therefore every one must pray unto the
Lord for an understanding heart, that as he would open the mouth of the
Preacher, so also by his power, he would from heaven open the ears and hearts
of the whole congregation, that they may hear this heavenly voice.

A Reproof of those who hearing the heavenly voice of the Church by the
mouths of the Ministers, whereby their sins are plainly reproved, and their
consciences powerfully convicted, for a while are as Agrippa almost persuaded
to leave their swearing, lying, drunkenness, etc: will with tears confess
their sins and promise great reformation, but presently al their good motions
vanish like a morning dew, they return to their former courses, as the dog to
his vomit, They live but their sick repentance is dead, Ipsius poenitentiae
agunt poenitentiam, they repent of their repentance, Amb. de poenit. l. 2. c. 9.
The preacher is unto them a voice, and nothing else, No voice from heaven.

But it is far otherwise with the godly. If the Lord speak they tremble, if
his word condemn a sin in them they fall down and mourn before him till he
forgive it. So were the Publicans moved at the preaching of John Baptist, so
the Jews were pricked in their hearts at the preaching of Peter, so the
Iaylour cried to Paul and Sylas what must I do to be saved. And good Josias,
his heart melted at the hearing of the law, so effectual is the word in the
hearts of the elect let the preacher be never so weak and sinful, as
Chrysostom well observes. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom 6.


When S. Austens hearers with great applaus commended his preaching but mourned
not for their sins, he told them. Folia haec sunt Nos fructus quaerimus.
These are Leaves, we would have fruit. So S. Chrysostom, If ye hear me with
sorrow I shall be tha^kfull and glad, for who can make me joyful but you who
made me sorrowful. He thought as Jerome, that the best commendations of the
speakers were the tears of the hearers at the heavenly voices.

voice of the Church is a heavenly voice, then let not any man be puffed up
with the excellency of his gifts. What has he that is not from above? Let not
any contemn his brother though far meaner. God often uses weak means to
confound the mighty. Let not any have the persons of men in a factious
admiration saying I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas. But let us give
one another the right hands of fellowship. Let us have the Ministers in love
for their work sake. Let us be swift to hear and pray the Lord of the harvest
to thrust forth laborers into his harvest. Let us take heed how we hear and
pray unto the Lord to open our hearts. For alas, the hearts of many are so
locked and barred against the the word, as the gates of Jericho were against
the Israelits, when none could go out or enter in. Josh. 6.1.
Therefore is the Lord so earnest in knocking, calling, crying by his voice from
heaven. He knows of what metal and matter we are made. This makes him
continue crying till we answer, speak still Lord, thy servants hear. Hearing
is necessary, for it is the sense of discipline through which as through the
beautiful gate, that heavenly Nymph, knowledge enters into the temple of the
soul. Faith comes by hearing. They that will not hear are a generation of
deaf adders that stop their ears against the voice of the charmer, worse the^
guilty Adam, raging Saul, the stiffenecked Iewesi, mpious Herod, unhappy
Felix, and irresolute Agrippa.

Many blessings are appropriated to the hearer, and as many curses adjudged to
him that will not hear, all included in that of Solomon. He that turns away
his ear from hearing the law, Prove. 28.9.
his very prayer shall be turned into sin. Therefore he that has ears to hear,
let him hear. See that ye despise not him that speaks, For if they escaped
not which refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we
turn away from this voice crying from heaven. But this voice cries louder in
the second circumstance, the matter of the admonition, Come out of her my
people.

It is a thing commonly observed, 13.2ae.
that amongst many wicked, there are some children of God. Lot was in Sodom,
Genesis 14. Rahab in Jericho, Josh. 2. Iael amongst the Gentiles, Iud. 4. Obadiah
that feared God greatly and saved an hundredth of the Lords Prophets was the
governor of Ahabs house, 1. King. 18.4. There were Saints of Caesar's household,
even of Nero that cruel monster; so here are many people of God in Babylon
called from it before the Lord power out the vials of his wrath. The Doctrine
here is plain, Doct. 2.
that The Lord usually admonishes the elect before he take reve^ge on the
reprobate. The Judge of the earth will not stay the righteous with the wicked,
Genesis 18.25. How inextricable soever the peril seem to be, the Lord knows
how to deliver the godly out of temptation, 2. Pet. 2.9. Noah from the flowd,
Lot from Sodom, the godly in the Acts of the Apostles, many in Jerusalem
forewarned by a voice from heaven to get them to Pella, Eus. l. 3. c. 5.
a city beyond Jordan, and here Gods people admonished to leave sinful
Babylon before it be destroyed are sufficient proofs. Which the ancients
describe thus. Confusion caused divisions of Nations, Regions and Religions: of
this confusion Babylon of Assyria took the name.

Pliny would have it a part of Syria which he extends hence to Cilicia. Pl.
l. 5. c. 12. l. 16.
Strabo adds as far as the Pontike sea. Ptolomy thus boundeth it, on the
North it has Mesopotamia, Geogr. l. 5. c. 20
on the West Arabia deserta, Susiana on the East, on the South, part of Arabia,
and the Persian gulf. Here was built the first city we read of after the
flowde. Many glorious things are spoken of it, yet no City of God, L. 2. L. 3.
c. 4.
Herodotus would have the walls to contain in compass 480 furlongs. Diodorus
but so many furlongs as there are days in the year, so that every day there
was a furlong built, 1300000. workmen employed therein. The height of the walls
was 200 cubits, the thicknes 50, so spacious that Aristotle said it was rather
a country then a city. L. 4. Pol. c. 2.


It was one of the wonders of the world in regard of the many miracles of
art, the works of Semiramis and Nabuchodonoser, who cried out, Is not this
great Babel that I have built, for which proud words he was presently
adjudged the loss of reason. There he established that golden head of the
image, the seat of the Babylonian Monarchy, yea Dan. 3. He set up an image 60
cubits high, and 6 broad inioyning a Catholic idolatry thereunto, which the
three Saints, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednago refused, and in a fiery trial
were found to be both Martyrs, and Confessors. As Babylon was, The affinity
and likeness of Babylon and Rome, proved thus.
so now Rome is. I must confess not properly Babylon, in as much as they were
two diverse Cities: but Rome may be called, and is Babylon figuratively,
spiritually, and by allusion. For as the old Eastern Babylon did a long time
oppress the Church of the Jews, so Rome this western Babylon has long
oppressed the Church of the Christians.

As Babylon had 7. heads, Dion. Halicar. Sigon. F^nest^l^a Sueton. Octau.
chapter 17.9. so Rome bad 7. se verall governments 1, by Kings 2. by Consuls 3. by
Dece^viri, 4. by Dictators 5. by Triumviri 6, by Emperors. Lastly by Popes.
Babylon had 7 mountains, so Rome, therefore called by some (...), Plut. probl.
Rom
the city with 7. heads, that is, 7. hills. Capitolinus, Palatinus, Aventinus,
Exquilinus, Caelius, Viminalis and Quirinalis. Neither is it sufficient to say,
that it is shrunk into the plain of Campus Martius, for though it may be true
of the body of the town yet the Lateran Church and palace which by a charter
of Gregory 2. was made the head of all churches almost 250. years since, after
him by Pius 4, and lately by Pius 5, in which there have been held by several
Popes some 33. Provincial or National, and 4 General Councels for the raising
up of Antichrists throne, where those two monsters first were bred, of
Transubstantiation and the deposing of Kings, this Church stands to this day
upon the hill Coelius.

The Babylonians, when there came any war, had their Priests to consult with
their Gods where they might hide themselves. Baruch. 6.48. so do they in Rome,
otherwise the Virgin had never taught Hiacynthus what to do, as they feign of
her image. Severin. de vita mirac. and act. canon. 12. H^^cynth. l. 1 c. 13.


Babylon was termed the pride of the Chaldeans, tender and delicate. Rome was
held the glory of the western world, and pride of the Romans. Babylon had all
kingdoms in subjection to her. Rev. 17.18. Rome had the like, for Jerusalem in
S. John's time was made an heap of stones. The Babylonians grew in their
prosperity, as fat calves in the grass, and bellowed as Bulls: who has not
heard the like of Monks and Friars, eating, says Luther, till they came to be
all belly, living to do nothing, but eating of the labors of other men:
groaning under the burden of Epicurisme, surfeiting and crying, Heu quanta
patimur pro amore Christi! Babylon was a land of Images, where they doted on
their Idols. Bell. de imag.
Ier. 50.38. Rome deifieth images as much. Babylon was noted for her
oppression, and exacting of gold. Rev. 18.13.
Is. 14.4. Rome is infamous, for her covetousness and marchandising of souls.
Babylon va^ted, I shall be a Lady for ever, I shall not be a widow, nor know
the loss of children, Is. 47.7. Rome has the same words, v. 7. of this
Chapter. All that is spoken of Babylon, In 17. Apoc. com 1. sect. 3. In Apoc.
14. Number. 42.
fitteth Rome, says Viegas. Ribera denies not, that Rome is mystical
Babylon, he says truth persuaded him to believe it, not only of heathenish
Rome, but also of Christian Rome. Antonius Puccius Clericus Apostoli. 3. Non.
May. 1515. Sess. 10. told Leo in the Council of Lateran, that S. Peter called
Rome, Babylon. B^ll. l. 2 de Romans Po^t. c. 2.
Bellarmine has no Scripture argument to prove S. Peter's being at Rome, but
taking this for a ground that Rome is Babylon. I omit many testimonies of
Tertullian, adversus Iudaeos, and of S. Jerome in prologo Dydimi, and Ep. 17.
and in Is. 47. of Austin de Civ. Dei, l. 18. c. 22.

It is the unanimous opinion of almost all the Fathers. Episc. Eliensis in
sortura Tor^^ p ^87. O^os. l. 2. c. 3.
Babylon and Rome had the like beginning, the like power, the like greatness,
the like times. Look to words before my Text. All nations drank of the wine
of the wrath of Babylons fornications. What nations have not been afflicted
with wars, treasons, cruelties, and many calamities from Rome? The Kings of
the earth committed fornication with Babylon. Have not many Monarchs suffered
themselves, and their Kingdoms, to be corrupted with Romish superstitions? The
Merchants of the earth waxed rich with the abundance of the delicates of
Babylon. What wealth has been carried about by means of Popish pardons,
selling Salvation, yet are they but gulleries. Once heathenish Rome, now
Babylon, says Petrarch. For as heathenish Rome was founded in blood by Romulus
the first builder killing his brother Remus: Aug Civ. l. 15. c, 5.
so was Popish Rome settled in full possession by blood, some 607 years after
Christ, Palmerius, Iuxta Bedam 612. Magdebur. Centur, 7.
when Pope Boniface obtained of the Emperor Phocas (that murderer which slew
his Master Mauritius) that the Bishop of Rome should be called the universal
Bishop, and the Church of Rome, the head of all Churches; so that now the Pope
like heathenish Anius, will be King and Priest, a King of Kings, as Paul 4, ad
Ducem Florent. Rex Anius Rex idem hominum, Phaebique, sacerdos Virg. Ae. n. 3.
and Prince of Priests. Cupers de Eccl. page 25. Number, 62.

Is Rome now become Babylon, Use. 1.
and is there so little hope of salvation there? O then bless we the name of
the Lord, praise we him and magnify him for ever, that this our Church is
freed from that land of darkness and house of bondage, where their holiness
is hypocrisy, their zeal fury, their faith uncertain, their chiefest ground
unwritten tradition. But our faith is the same with the faith of the
Patriarchs and Prophets and righteous Fathers from the beginning of the world.
Let us look upon them, and consider with our selves? Were they Idolaters,
Abel, Enoch, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David? Had they any to go unto for
Indulgences and Pardons? Did they one call upon the other? Happy are we that
are in such a case to follow these worthies. Blessed are we that have God only
to be our Father and this Church to be our Mother. Rome was sometimes a
glorious city, Ignatius called it Castissimam, Tertullia^ said it was a happy
Church because the Apostles of Christ suffered martyrdom in it, B Jew. in def.
of apol.
and left their whole doctrine unto it, but now says he,

O Roma a Roma quantum mutata vetusta es
Nunc caput es scelerum quae caput or bis er as?
Seeing there are some Godly amongst the wicked, 2. Use.
let them strive against the common sins, the best else may be overtake^. Hence
is it, that for the warning of all, for a caveat to the people of God, that
they who think they stand may take heed least they fall, Criminatio^s as well as
the co^mendations of the best are registered in scripture, Noah's drunkenness as
well as his vprightnes. Lots incest as well as the grieving of his righteous
soul. The weakness of Moses at the waters of Meribah when he spoke unadvisedly
with his lips as well as his zeal when he brake the tables, coming down
from the mount Sinai. Jonah his flying from Tharsis as well as his preaching in
Niniveh, and here the elects being in Babylon is noted to the world and they
publicly admonished to leave this cage of unclean birds, this den of Devils
O the patience of a merciful God never striking but first warning, not
suddenly taking revenge! How patient is he toward many beastly Belly Gods, and
swinish drunkards, that seek to bespatter the blood of Christ with their
surfets and filthy vomits. Toward horrible blasphemers, renting him asunder
with their fearful oaths. Toward abominable Atheists, who with their damned
crew, shake their heads at him, and like the young ones of Bethlehem make a
mock of him. He is provoked every day, and yet he renews his mercy every
day, to al, even to the obstinat'st Recusants, saying, why will ye die, which
voice many have apprehended and fled out of Babylon. Amb. Hexem. l. 6 3. Ep. l.
7.48.
For as S. Ambrose reports of the Partridges, that one steals away the
eggs of another and hatcheth them, but, says he, diverse of the young being
hatched, when they afterward hear the voice of their own and natural dams in
the field, leave their stepmother, and come again to her, to whom by original
right they belonged. So many, who have been infected by the Church of Rome,
after true grace imparted from above, return from their Seminaries, and
adioyne themselves to our happy and true Church, where we have the word
truly preached, the sacraments rightly administered, the poor charitably
relieved, and Gods graces so abundantly bestowed, that God has not dealt so
with any other nation, because we are his people, and the sheep of his
pasture, whom he has called out of Babylon, that we might not be partakers of
her sins. As it follows in the first of my second general.

Amongst all the occasions of sin, there is none more dangerous then evil
company. For can a man take coals of fire in his bosom, and not be burnt, or
handle pitch, and not be defiled, or fly with Ostritches and Pellicans, and nor
grow wild, or dwell in the tents of wickedness, Chrysostom.
and not learn to be wicked? Rerum natura sic est vt quoties bonus malo
coniungitur, non ex bono malus oritur, sed ex malo bonus contaminatur, Sooner
the good may be infected by the bad, then the bad reformed by the good: so was
it like to be in Babylon, and therefore the people of God are called out,
whence this Doctrine arises. Doct. 3.
It is the part of Gods children, to avoid the company of the wicked, least
they be infected by them.

This made Moses and Joshua, so earnestly to exhort the Jews, Exodus 34. Deuteronomy.
7. Ioh 23. Psalm. 106.35.
to make no compact with the other nations, least they should be unto them a
snare, to cause them to serve other Gods, and so the wrath of the Lord should
be kindled against them, and destroy them. Which they not obeying, were mingled
amongst the Heathen, and learned their works. How much more necessary is this
doctrine now in the time of Antichrist, the Lord sending strong delusions, that
if it were possible, the elect might be deceived. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.


This has made S. Paul and others so to press this point. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness. Ep. 5.11. Come out from among them and
touch no unclean thing. 2. Co. 6.19. Hate the garment that is spotted with the
flesh. Jude 23. Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadduces. Mat.
16.12 For a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. 1. Co. 5.6. S. Basil
therefore compared the wicked to them infected with the plague: and Bar. calls
it a sacrilege like that of the Jews laying violent hands upon Christ. Hom 9.
Se. 1. conv. Pauli.
It hurt the sons of Seth, good men before, but marrying with the daughters
of Cain, Genesis 4.6.7.
they filled the earth with so much sin, that a flood was sent to cleanse it.

A good Prophet sent to Bethel, there breaking the altar and restoring to
Jeroboam his withered hand, yet in his return accompanying with the false
Prophet was killed by a Lion. 1 King. 13. Eus. l. 3 c. 33.
The young man commended to a Bishop by St John, leaving the Bishop, became
a thief.

It is the hardest and most intangling knot that can be knit, Aug l. 3. conf.
c. 8 Gr. in pastoral.
such are the Devils Merchants who in the markets and affairs of the world
gain many souls to hell. We may see the fruit in Peter who denied his Master
amongst the wicked, Remig. in Mat. 26.
whom he ever confessed amongst the Apostles. Therefore Solomon spoke well, the
friend of fools will be made like unto them; Pr. 13. Eccl. 7.
and the wise man, Depart from the wicked, and evils will depart from thee. So
did S. John, he would not wash in the bath with Cerinthus; and Policarpus he
would not salute Marcion the heretic. S. Paul gave the reason, Eus. l. 3.52.
What fellowship has light with darkness or Christ with Belial, 2. Co. 6.15.
and the Prophet confessed, I hate them that hate thee, with a perfect hate
odiendo vitia, dilige^do naturam, hating them as they are sinful, loving
them as they are men; Gr. 2. bast. c. 46 In Ez. ho 9.
for it is folly says Gregory to please them who we know displease God.

Seeing the company of the wicked is so infectious, Use, 1.
and yet there are so many, 1. Co. 5.10.
that we cannot avoid them unless we go out of the world, let us make a virtue
of necessity; let us walk without reproof in the midst of a perverse
generation. Of Noah's 3 sons one will be a mocker of his father. Of Abraham's
2 one a scorner of his brother. Of Isaacs 2 one will be carnal. The 11 brethren
of Jacob will sell the twelfth Joseph, but happy is the little flock of Christ
which separate themselves as the beloved people of God, and leave the wicked
having been hurt by them. The burnt child fears the fire. The fish once
wounded with the hook is always suspicious of the baits, The beast that has
once bin caught and has broken the snare will hardly be intrapped again.
Has nature made all creatures thus careful to prevent bodyly dangers and shall
not we be more careful in the case of our souls that when once by the mercy of
God we have escaped from the filthynes of the world we be not catched again
therein least the latter end be worse then the beginning?

O that all our English fugitives would look into this one lesson, that so
they might leave Rome which opposes it self against Christ in doctrine, in
discipline, in life, so that now the Prophecies are fulfilled and so many
reasons found true to prove that the Pope is Antichrist. Rog. Houeder. in Rich.
1.
So Ioachimus Abbas told Rich. 1. king of England going to the holy land, that
Antichrist was borne in Rome and should be advanced higher in that See. So
Robert Grosthead sometimes Bishop of Lincoln cried out on his death bed,
Christ came into the world to gain souls, if any fear not to destroy
Christ, Mat. Paris. in Hen. 3.
he is An richrist. He spoke it, Anno 1253. of Innoc. 4. who was found dead in
bed his body full of blaines the day after he heard that voice Veni miser in
iudicium Dei, come wretch before Gods judgment seat.

Urban the 6, and Clemens the 7, Baldus in vit. Pont. l. 3 de pont. c. 15
two Popes at once called one the other Antichrist. That the Pope is
Antichrist, Bellarmine describes Antichrist to be the last king that shall
hold the Roman Empire yet without the name of the Roman Emper our. Did not
Pope Gregory 7, so, by the confession of Azorius the Jesuit, Instit. moral.
part. 2. l. 4. c. 20. l. ex quo.
to the Emperor Leo then resident in Greece, excommunicating him for breaking
down of Images, absolving all his subjects from their oath of allegiance,
whereupon the Romans casting of the Emperors yoke did solemnly swear
obedience in all things to the Pope? Does he not command the Emperor to
hold his stirrup, serve his table with the first dish, L. Cerem. Eccl. To. l.
3. p. 1.
and carry him upon his shoulders? Did not Pope Alexander the 3. set his foot
upon the neck of the Emeprour Frederike the I, misapplying that in Psalm 91.13.
Sigibert. in chr. Anno 1159.
Thou shall tread upon the Lion. That the Pope is Antichrist, as Christ chose
simple men, so shall Antichrist select subtle and crafty men, and experienced in
the knowledge of the world, says Gregory. Does not the Pope so? Moral. in Job.
c. 16.
Examine his consistory of Cardinals, Cloisters of Monks, orders of his
schools, and societies, all these hold it a reproach unto them if they be not
accounted most subtle. Tolet. Instr. sacerd. Parsons in treatise of mitigatio^.
The professors of mental Aequivocation, I confess excel all Matchiavellian
Politicians that ever have bin hard of.

That the Pope is Antichrist, Syb. orac. 8.
so Sybil. oracul. 8. He shall be (...), he shall have a white head, and be
called by a name much like Pontus. So is the Pope having a white miter of
Silver, and his name is Pontifex.

That the Pope is Antichrist, I describe him not as a Jew of the tribe of Dan,
or one bred up in Bethsaida and Chorazin, or as Mahomet, or Nero, or one
building up the city Jerusalem, or one borne of a Friar and a Nun, or
turning trees vpside down with the tops in the ground and forcing the roots to
grow upward, Blew. in These.
flying up to heaven and then falling down breaking his neck as some have
opened him; but working the mystery of iniquity, defacing the sacraments,
selling pardons, in all things contrary to Christ, an Idol shepherd, a pandar
of all evils, to whom even all the notes of Antichrist do agree as is
sufficiently proved by a most worthy Mr in this our Israel in his learned book
Demonstratio Antichristi. D. Abbot. M. of Baliol. Col.


That the Pope is Antichrist, exalting himself above all things. Can. si Papa
did. 40.
2. Th. 2.4. Above Bishops, for none of them may say unto him, why do thou
this, though he lead infinite souls to hell; Let experience speak. Above
Councels, I. de benef. p. 4.
for one may appeal from the council to the Pope, but not from the Pope to the
Council, says Ioh: Bid of prae: og. of. K.
Selva a Spanyard. Let experience speak. Above Angels, so Baronius in his
paraeneticall against the Venetians, abuses that place to the clergy? Know
ye not that we shall judge the Angels. Can. Lector. 34. did.
Above the Apostles for he may dispense against the Apostles Gl. verbo Fiat.
Above the law, for the Pope caused the 2. command to be razed out in the synod
of Ausburg. Anno 1548.


Above the Sacraments, for he may change in them what he thinks meet. Above
the Church, Conc. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 1. L. 1. de R. Pont. c. 9. Can. Nemo
iudicab. can. 9. q. 3. Sect. 4. de Cerem. c. 6. and l. 1. tit. 7.
though to the shutting out of Christ says Bellarm. Above Princes, for no
secular can judge him. Therefore blesses He a sword upon the night of Christ's
nativity, giving it to some Prince his favorite, but never sending them the law
or gospel.

I might stand to calculate the number of the beast expressed in three greek
characters, (...)666. c. 13.18. mentioned by Irenaeus, L. 5. c. 25. L. 2. de
temp. nov. c. 4 p. 157.
who had the names of Antichrist from them that saw John, says Acosta, he must
be (...). The Italians were called Latini, which notes of what country the
beast should come. The Popes have all their religion, service, prayers, laws,
decrees, writings, and translations in Latin, they prefer the Latin
translations of the Bible before the Hebrew, and Greek; originals.

That the Pope is Antichrist, Rev. 13.11. Faber Stapl. in Instit.
Antichrist must have two horns like a Lamb, and speak like a Dragon; so is
the Pope, in words calling himself servant of servants, but indeed suffering
to be worshipped. Antichrist must have upon his head, written a name, Mystery.
Rev. 17.5. Brocard in Ap.
The Pope has this word upon his Crown. Antichrist must sit in the Temple of
God, Not that therefore the Church where the Pope is chief, is Christ's true
Church, and therefore all Protestants should be joined to it, as Bellarmine
reasons. But it is called so because they whom he has seduced were sometimes
the Temple of God. L 3 de Pont. c. 13. Ansel. 2. Th.
As the Temple of Jerusalem was so called the holy place, when the abomination
of desolation was in it, not as being so properly, but because it had been
once dedicated to Gods worship, De temp noviss. l. 2. c. 12.
says Acosta. In the temple of God, that is instead of the whole Church, says
S. Austin. Does not the Pope so professing, L. 20. Civ. c. 19, Grets. 2. coll.
Ratisb. Sess. 1.
to define any thing without a Council. Antichrist denies that Jesus is come
in the flesh, and is Christ. 1. Ioh. 2.22. So does the Pope, though not in
grant, yet in ininference, overthrowing the truth of Christ's humanity holding
his whole humane body locally circumscribed in heaven, and at once (the same
instant) wholly present in ten thousand places on earth, without
circu^scriptio^, and that whole Christ is in the forms of bread with all his
dimensions, every part having his own place and figure, and yet, so that he is
wholly in every part of the bread. Denies our justification by faith in Christ,
ascribing it to our own works. Denies Christ's satisfaction, as his Proselites
do, while they hold a payment of our utmost farthings in a devised Purgatory.
Christ's mediation while they implore others to aid them. Adoring Angels,
Saints, Bread, Relics, Crosses, Images What offals have they to allure
Proselites out of this Kingdom, who with Noah's crow fly out of the Arc,
without any mind of return, at least without any good mind if they return,
Immunities to warrant sin, Indulgences to remit sin, Jubilees for liberty,
Libels of contumely, Exemptions from loyalty, pretense of conscience, promise
of preferment, faculties for treason and murders of the Lords anointed,
facilities to climb heaven, not by Jacobs ladder (the grace of Christ) but by
merits of Saints, supererogation of works, and pardons of Popes, sinful,
miserable, all of them, abominable many of them.

Gr. 9. refused the Gospel of Christ, and instead there of substituted a
legend, Balaeus l. 5. vit. Pont.
compiled by a Monk named Cyril. Pope Paulus Venetus painted himself, Plat
vil. Adr. 1.
desiring to seem a woman. Pope Hildebrand, Gr. 7. whom all good men saw,
Annal. l. 5. page 455.
to be of the kingdom of Antichrist (says Aventinus) though Bellarmine called
him a Saint, caused Pope victor the 2 to be empoysoned in the wine of the
Eucharist, and cast his God into the fire, Benn Card. vit. Hild Abb. vesp. vit.
H 3. Guicc. Chron. Ital l. 11. Anno. 1513. C. 11. Ann. 954.
because it answered him not of his event in war with Hen. 4. Leo 10. upon the
day of his coronation spent one hundred thousand Ducats, and called the
Gospel of Christ a fable, as Guicciardine tells, John the 12 drank to the
Devil. Luit prand. rer. Europ. l. 6. c. 6. The whole Council of Constance
Sess. 11. concludes of John 23. Atempore iuventutis suae, From the time of his
youth, he was ever of an evil disposition, shameless, unchaste, a liar,
disobedient to his Parents, and given to many other vices. Innocentius 8, had
16 bastards by several strumpets,

Octo nocens pueros genuit totidemque puellas
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma patrem. Marul de Innoe. 8. Gnic. l. 16.

Many Popes are usually praised for goodness, not exceeding others in
wickedness, so they witness of one, Bonus Pontifex, nihil memoria dignum
reliquit, Bened. 1. Sisinius. Geneb. l. 4. Chr.
of Another Nisi podagram habuisset nesciremus.

Many have been trised away suddenly, it being suspected they would be over
good. They may have the testimony of one of their own who afterward was Pope
himself ( Aene as Sylvius) If time would permit I could bring forth many
examples of Roman Bishops that were sound either to be Heretics or else
defiled with other vices, De geslis council Basil. l 1 de To. Pont.
yet all must be styled Popes of godly memory because say their Scribes, Gloss.
Extrav. l. 5. ca. Du. lum authorized by Gr. 13.
we herein respect not what they did but what it became the^ to have done, by
which reason, the honor of bonae memoriae belongs to Jeroboam amongst the
Kings, Balaam amongst the Prophets, Judas amongst the Apostles. He must know
all things, err in nothing, direct, inform, animate, expound scriptures,
canonize saints, forgive sins, create new Articles of faith, and in all these
be as absolute as his maker. He must encroach upon the offices of Christ. His
Kingdom, Priesthood, Prophecy. O ye heavens be astonished at this, and let
all Christian hearts tremble to hear such blasphemies. Look upon all the
succession from Pope Boniface 3 downward, D. Downam de Antich.
and you will confess it is Antichrist.

I say nothing of the now Pope Paul 5, Answer to a nameles Cathol
Burghesius, but what the Seminary Priests sometimes spoke of him: He is a
rash speaker, a headie undertaker, of a violent spirit, impatient of
contradiction. He challenges the succession of Peter, and name of Paul, but
follows neither. I search not over far, their orders of Benedict, which
has been so fruitful, that they say all the new orders which in latter times
have broken out are but little springs Volladerius de Canoniza Francis To. in
epist.
and drops, and this the Ocean which has sent out 52 Popes, 200 Cardinals;
1600 Archbishops, 4000 Bishops, and 50000 Saints approved by the Church. Look
on their pardons. Leo 10, for only rehearsing the Lords Prayer, and thrice
repeating the name of Jesus, gieuing 3000 years indulgence. Boniface
acknowledging so many Indulgences to be in that one Church of Lateran, that
none but God can number them.

Indulgences are given not only to the Franciscans themselves, but to their
Parents, to any which die in their habits, to any which desire they may do
so, to those who are wrapped in it after death, though they did not desire it,
and five years indulgence to those who do but kiss it. Rodol Cupers de Eccl.
vnivars. fol 4. Scappus de Iure non Scrip. l. 1. c. 25.
Their Cardinals are so bound to the Pope, that it is not lawful for them
without license, first obtained from him to be let blood in a fever, yet he
calls them his brothers, Princes of the world and Co-iudges of the whole
earth.

I leave their Priests and Jesuits, spirits of the Devil in many places of
this land, breathing out infections, But blessed be the name of the Lord, who
has sent us a North wind, as is prophesied c. 16.13. to drive away these
Popish frogs to the place whence they came where they are dealt with as the
old Romans did with their dogs in the capitol; Cic. prosex Roscio.
unless they did bark, their legs were broken, so these unless they libell
against he worthiest of our Saints, or often contradict things against
conscience, they have neither countenance nor maintenance. I enter not into
their Monasteries 225044, as Durus de Paschalo reckons the^, I^ ep. Hulderic.
Ep. August Anno 866.
were the cause that there were 6000 Infants heads found in a fish pond:
neither lead you into their bloody inquisitions, or horrid dungeons, but end
this circumstance with that advise of S. Steven, O save your selus from this
wicked Antichristian generation; and so I hasten to my last part. The
punishment of Babylon: plagues.

The plagues of Babylon for her persecuting the Church are many, Mortality,
Beasts, Famine, c. 6.8. sores, blood shed by sea and land, c. 9.10.11. wounding
with the sword, c. 13.14. unseasonable and diste^pred aires darkning her
kingdom, Doct.
c. 16. and here plagues, Whence this doctrine appears. God in justice will
be revenged upon the enemies of his Church. The proofs of this are many. What
Tyra^t has escaped without some judgment? Sueton.
Domitian is slain with the daggers of his own servants, his wife consenting.
Adrian, after he had crucified at once ten thousand Christians, has an issue
of blood, spitteth out his lungs, Spartian. l. 2. c. 12.
and is so afflicted with a Dropsy, that he would have laid violent hands upon
himself. Eus. hist. l. 7. c. 30.
Valerian by the means of the K of Persia is flaied alive, powdered with salt.
Dioclesia^ thrusting the Christians out of their offices, and burning their
Bibles, Ruff.
had his house fired with lightning, and himself so terrified with thunder,
Niceph. chris.
that in a madness he killed himself. Maximinus, rotteth with worms; and the
apple of his eye falls out. Aurelian has his throat cut. Morindus is
devoured of a monster that came out of the Irish seas. Cerinthus has a hot
house to fall upon him. Arrius voided his guts. Nappier in Apoc. 14. p. 183.
So Rome must fall, but when, whether in the year of our Lord 1639, as some
determine it, I dare not conclude, or whether by the ten horns, c. 17.16.
that is, M. Dent.
as some insinuate by the ten Kingdoms of Europe, England, Scotland, Germany,
France, Spain, Denmark, Sueueland, Poland, Russia, and Hungary I will not
search. We know that of these, the beast has lost the most, the others in
France, Spain and Venice, do groan under the heavy yoke of the Pope, and
must shake him of, so that the prophecies must be fulfilled, It is fallen, It
is fallen, c. 14.8. A noisome and grievous sore shall fall upon it. c. 16.2.
Her plagues shall come in one day, death and mourning, and famine, and she
shall be utterly burnt with fire, c. 18.8. It shall be cast down like a great
millstone into the bottom of the sea. c. 18.21. The voice of Harpers and
Musicians, Rev. 18.22,
and Pipers, and Trumpetters, shall be heard no more in it. No crafts-man shall
be found in it, nor the sound of a millstone heard in it. The light of a candle
shall shine no more in it. The voice of the bridegroom and the bride shall be
heard no more in it. The Lord does the greatest exploits either by himself
without means as he overthrew the Moabits and others. As he destroyed Pharaoh,
2. Chr. 20,
as he overthrew Jericho, and the Assyrians. Or by weak means as the
innumerable army of the Madianits by Gedeons 300. as the Philistines by Jonathan
and his armor bearer. As the Kings of Sodom by Abraham, Iu 7.
and his family, Goliath by David, Sisera by Iael. It is in vain then to ask
how Rome shall fall. God can do it. Two foundations cannot stand at once. The
Lord shall consume that wicked man, with the breath of his mouth, and abolish
him with the brightness of his coming. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.
So he will, though iniquity for a while get the upper hand, by corrupt
subtlety, by the proud and false vaunts of antiquity, universality, and
succession, By the glorious shows of their processions, the gaudy ornaments of
their altars, the pomp of their services, the triumphs of their festivals. By
their taking the best opportunity, to work upon those which are either most
unable to resist, or most like to bestead them. By their rewards of the
Calender or red-hat. D. Hal in Ep.
By the conioynd labors of whole societies, directed to one end, and shrouded
under the title of one Author. By large maintenances raised from the deathbeds
of some guilty benefactors. By their pretended miracles, wilful untruths,
bloody inquisitions, depravation of ancient witnesses, expurgation of their
own, condemnation of our writers, glorious titles, crafty changes of names,
shapes, habits, conditions, and multitudes of Actors. But we have not so
learned Christ, We have received the plain truth, Let us stand fast to it
only. O let it never be said that our carelessness, indifferency, and
idleness shall aid them, and wrong our selves. We have a good King (and long
may we have him) who in the lists of controversy, may grapple with Antichrist
for his triple crown. We have those Bishops, who may justly challenge the whole
Consistory of Rome. We have as many learned Doctors, and true hearted Divines,
as no nation under heaven more. Christendom has not the like two flourishing
Universities. We want nothing, and shall we be wanting to our selves. The cause
is Gods, and in spite of the gates of hell, shall succed, though we were not,
our neglect may slacken the pace of truth, It cannot stay the passage. Our
Honorable mother, Anno 880. Capgravius in Catalog. Sanct. Angl. 884. Philippus
chron. l. 4.960. Balaeus Cent. 2.1330. Wolphius lect. Memorab. tom. 1. Herod.
has had a religious founder King Alfred that stood for the use of the
Scripture to the Laity against the Pope. Ioh. Patritius his Reader, that spoke
against transubstantiation, Many honest simple people that defended Rome to be
Babylon. Occam that wrote a book against Pope Clement calling him Antichrist.
Let not us go backward.

It is recorded of Craesus, that being in danger to be slain in the war, his
son who had till that time been dumb, seeing his father in that estate,
cried out O man kill not Craesus. Religion in many Places weepeth and is ready
to bleed, If ever any amongst us were hitherto silent, let their zeal now
revive it.

Pyrrhus said he woone more cities by the industry of his Orator Cineas, then
he took by force of arms; Plut. in Pyrrh.
Let our faithful preaching the word without minsing or singularity, or
Popish and false allegations against those blessed men of God, Calvin, Beza,
and the rest, win more souls, then the circumventing stratagems of the
Jesuits. Let me speak to you Nobly and Honorably descended flowers of this
garden of the muses, To the hopeful sons of the Honorab. The L. Montegle,
The L. Peter, The L. Spenser. Sr Robert Carey
the Paradise of God, sons of so worthy Fathers. Season your studies with the
reading of the word, Let not the book of the Law depart out of your hands,
meditate in it day and night. Let the Poet encourage you.

Prima tuo gerito pro Jove bello puer. Mart.


To you, Reverend and learned worthies of our Israel, Let your resolution be
that of Luther, Non potest is salutem consequi qui non ex toto cord
Antichristum and Papatum oderit.

Let your farewell to your friends, be as was that of the late memorable and
learned D. Holland, Commendo vos dilectioni Dei and odio Papatus, Exhort them
all to love God, and hate Popery. To all let my advise be, that of Ier, 50, 14.
Put your selves in array against Babylon round about (against Rome) All ye that
hend the bow shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has sinned against the
Lord. Do to her as she has done to others, so for our zeal, God shall bless
us, and crown us in his glorious Kingdom, whether he bring us, who died for
us, even Christ Jesus, to whom with the Father, and the Spirit, be ascribed all
glory, and honor this day, and forever. Amen.

FINIS.

