THE SPRING. A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE PRINCE AT S. JAMES, On Mid-lent
Sunday LAST.

By DANIEL PRICE, Chapleine in ordinary to the PRINCE, and Master of Arts of
EXETER College in OXFORD.

MATTHEW. 3.8. Bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life.

LONDON Printed for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Fleetestreete, fast by the Conduit. 1609.

To the Right Honorable Lord, worthy the confluence of all Honors, ROBERT
Earl of Salisburie, Lord High Treasurer of ENGLAND, one of the Oracles of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, Knight of the most illustrious order
of the GARTER, etc.
MOst Noble Lord, this Sermon the Spring, preached in the Spring garden of this
land, the Princes Court, is offered to your Honorable Acceptance and
Patronage. It is a free will offering, Observance did appoint it, Zeal did
kindle it, Study did inflame it, Piety did sacrifice it, and now duty does
offer it. The abundant fruitfulness of your Lordshippe does challenge this
from all other, both for your ableness and willingness to good works,
wherein you beatifie your self, and beautify this Land: the Lord reward you
according to your hearts desire: He that has them has blessed your Honor with
the Treasures of wisdom and understanding, and has given you the heart of
prudence, the eye of providence, the ear of justice, the heart of Religion,
and the spirit of devotion, and has made your Honor a most special nursing
father of his two dear Daughters, this Church and common wealth. Ride on with
your Honor, because of the word of truth, of meekness and righteousness,
and the Lord shall be with you, and shall bless you with the Grace of Glory
here and the glory of Grace hence. And so in all observance I rest,

To be commanded by your Lordshippe. DANIEL PRICE.

THE SPRING
MATH. 3.8. Bring forth fruit worthy amendment of life.


THe Year the Circle of time is so intorteled, as that Annus is become
Annulus, for one day tells another, and one night certifieth another, that
all things are in a Consumption, and time that consumes all things, is it
self consumed. In the General distinction of Seasons, (Solomon the Prince of
Preachers) accommodated a time, not (...) but (...), an oportune time to every
thing, and among the rest, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which
is planted. Nyssenus follows the Allegory, God our father is the husbandman,
We are his husbandry, the Soul is the ground, the Seed is the word. The
Preachers do plant, Baptism does water, the Spirit is the Wind, Repentance is
the Dew, and Christ the Sun of righteousness is the Sun, and as in
Nature, so in Grace, there is a Winter and Summer, a fall and Spring, a time of
planting and a time of supplanting: At that season of the year, I have already
handled the Fall of the Leaf, At Richmond October. 1 1608.
as I doubt not but this high and Honorable presence do remember, and
therefore now I have chosen out a Text fit for this season the opening of the
year, the flouring of the fig tree, the blooming of the Lilly, the budding
of fruit, the flourishing of Flowers, and the resurrection of all those buried
herbs, whose honor lay in the dust, until the Spring had again apparrelled
the earth with various and glorious ornaments. It was the springing voice of
the spring, (who was Oriens eximo, Cant. 3.
Oriens ex alto) in the Canticles: Arise my love, my fair one, and come away,
for behold Winter is past, the rain is gone away, the flowers appear in the
earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, the voice of the Turtle is
heard in our land, the Fig tree has brought forth her young sigges, and the
vines with their small grapes have cast a savor: Arise my Dove, my Love, my
fair one, and come away. Pliny S^linus.
The voice of the Turtle as the Naturalist observes, is a mourning voice,
Turtur non canit sed gemit; The Turtle sings not, but mourns, Quid per
turturem nisi Ecclesia, quid per terram sponsi, nisi vitailla beata designatur?
Greg. mag. in Cantica.
What is meant by the Dove but the voice of the Church, what by the land of the
Spouse, but the life of the blessed? (says Gregory): we have already heard the
loud voice of John, the voice of the beloved Jesus, the moning voice of the
Church, the mourning voice of the Turtle, and I hope the crying voice of John
has begot the weeping voice of the Church in you, that so having been planted
and watered, now Gods graces in you may be increased, and you may bring forth
fruit worthy amendment of life.

Man was once placed in Paradise, now Paradise is placed in man,
Praedestination, Vocation, Justification, Glorification, be the four Rivers
of Paradise: the understanding is the tree of knowledge, Belief the tree of
life: In the fall after the Creation, there was an Angel with a flaming sword
set to keep out man; now there is an Angel, set in man to keep out Satan,
the Angel is Christ, and the sword the word, and the administration of the
word: he uses this sword, sometimes as a pruning knife, as in the Canticles;
sometimes an axe, as in Matthew, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit
shall be hewn down and cast into the fire. Math. 3.10.


It was the Proclamation of Jeremy, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the voice of
the Lord: I may join my Text with that Proclamation: and as Ezechiel was sent
to Preach to dry bones, Ier. 31.
and John Baptist to the dry desert, and Jeremy to the dry earth, so may I
say to the dry, empty, bare, barren desert, desolate hearts of unfruitful
hearers, O earth, earth, earth, bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life.
John Baptist here sees the Pharisees heap together to hear him, and knowing
that they came hypocritically only to hear, he requires that they also
believe, and believing profess, and professing practice, and so bring forth
fruit worthy amendment of life.

Be not dead or withered, or barren or hardened, for that is fearful and
acursed, but bring forth, not buddes nor blossoms, nor flowers nor flourishes,
for these may be fained, but bring forth fruits, not the fruits of the world,
they be but fancyes, or the fruits of the flesh, they be but folly, not the
fruit of honor, it is but pompous folly, not the fruit of strength, it is
glorious vanity, not the fruits of pleasures, they be voluptuous sensuality,
not the fruit of riches, they are immanent inconstancy, not the fruits of long
life, it is but transient mutability.

Worthy fruits, worthy not of earthly praise or of worldly prize, but that
high hopeful, holy, lively, happy, heavenly calling of amendment of life;
Bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life.

First a Production, bring forth, second, a Fructification, fruit, Division.
third, the fruits perfection, fruit worthy amendment. The first against
barrenness, the second against weakness, the third against Pharisaicall
Fainednesse. The first common to all Creatures, to bring forth, the second
proper to the best Creatures, to bring forth fruit, the third most proper, and
only proper to the best Christians, fruit worthy amendment of life.

It is truly observed that the Spiritual Regeneration of the Soul is
shadowed in the first creation of the world: The Chaos in Praedestination, 1.
Part.
the separating of light from darkness in Vocation, the creating of the Soul
in Justification, the framing of Adam in Glorification: In the first, there is
the depth of Gods foreknowledge, a dark form that cannot be discerned. In
the second, Knowledge is separated from ignorance, the light from darkness.
In the third, the bright beams of Grace shine in the heart the Sun is created:
In the fourth the image of God is placed in the Paradise of immortal joy,
only, Austen.
this is the difference at the first, God placed Adam in Paradise before he
did appoint him to work, but now he appoints him to work before he placed
him in Paradise. For when God had made a Paradise upon earth, he took the man
and put him into it, to dig it and keep it, not enioyning him to bestow any
bodily labor in dressing it at that time, for that was his future punishment,
but as Ambrose observes, Quia primus homo lex posteritatis futurus erat,
Ambrose.
legitimi etiam in Paradiso speciem labor is suscepit: Because the first man
was to be a living law to posterity, therefore even in Paradise he took a
show of labor. A labor and no labor, he had the pleasure of labor, but not
the labor of pleasure, Paradise was his Palace, all the world his Demaines,
the creatures his Subjects,, the Angels his servants.

And he dressed and kept Paradise, as Ambrose observes only by keeping those
good graces which God had given him, and increasing them continually: for O
Ecumenius adds this reason, that the graces of God, O ecumenius.
as the flowers of a garden must not only be kept, but also be dressed, that
they may have not only a being, but an abounding, because a man may have
great good things being in him, and yet be himself a Garden, that is kept
indeed, but not dressed, and so be altogether unfruitful: for though S.
Bernards position in some things be true, Bernard.
Praestat esse Concham quam canalem, it is better to be a Cesterne then a
sluse (and yet hereby many offend in retiring their labors, as well as others
in obtruding them) yet in Christianity, Prestat esse Canalem quam Concham: It
is better to be a sluse then a Cesterne, for that light is no light that is
not seen before men, that knowledge is no knowledge that is not imparted, that
wisdom is no wisdom that is not discerned: that faith is bare faith which
is not exercised, that seed is barren seed that is not fructified, for unless
Christians bring forth, they are idle and unfruitful in the knowledge of
Christ. Apelles could make Artificial Grapes, Archimides an Artificial flying
Dove, the Alchimist of making artificial men, but all their birthes be
abortiue.

When God had ordained a Church at the first, this was his appointment, that
she should fructify and bring forth, and therefore ordered her that she
should be ever increased by her own afflictions, perfited by her
persecutions, erected by her own dilapidations, Hilar lib. 4. de Trinit.
by her own tears her thirst should be quenched, by her fasting she should
be refreshed, and by the blood of her Martyrs, her vineyard should be
watered. In the former time of his Church, he watered her with the blood of
beasts, but in the latter time by the blood of men, making white Lillies to
become red roses: and then he promised to make sinners that were as red as
scarlet as white as snow; now he has made some servants that were white as
snow, to be by Martyrdom red as scarlet, and in the time of love has
required more sacrifices then in the time of the law he had sacrificed beasts,
because as Saint Jerome observes in his Epistle ad Heliodorum, that for every
day of the year, even in his time, Jerome. ad Helio
there were five thousand Martyrs which had shed their blood for the truth;
he that watered his Vineyearde plentifully with the springes of Caleb, springs
beneath, the springes of the blood of the Saints; and springes above, the most
pure and precious springs of the blood of his Son: how does he expect that
this vineyard should bring forth fruit in due season, and as Esaias speaks,
how has he hedged, and gathered out the stones of it, and planted it with the
best plants, Isai. 5.2.
and built a tower in the midst thereof and made a Wine Press therein, and
looked that it should bring forth. When he made the world, he bad that the
earth should bring forth; and when he made the waters, let the waters bring
forth: and so to the Fowls, Genesis 1.
and to the Fishes, shes, and to the creeping things, and to the growing
things, and last of all, to man; Bring forth: he brought forth all things,
that all things might bring forth to man, and therefore expects that man
should bring forth to him; and as in the former birth he has taken care to
bring forth to us, So in the latter and better birth he has vouchsafed to
bring us forth, for God is our Father, the Church his Spouse our mother to
conceive us his word the seed the means to beget us: 1. Pet. 1.3. Gal. 4.26.
his spirit the soul and life to quicken us: 1. Pet. 1.23. Ephesians. 2.5.
his Ministers the Nurses to feed us, 1. These. 2.7.
his Gospel the milk to nourish us, 1. Pet. 2.2.
that so we may increase and grow, and be able our selves to bring forth.

The Doctrine is, that God cannot endure that any of his servants be barren in
Christianity: Barrenness was a reproach among the Jews, Doctrine.
much more among the Gentiles: it was a natural reproach in the Law, but a
more spiritual reproach in the Gospel

Plato observed, Plato. Pieran Hierog.
and Pierius in his Hierogliphics, that a man is Arbor inue^sa, a tree turned
upward, his hair of the head the root, his arms the branches, and so of the
rest; and therefore in Scripture, the godly are called trees of righteousness,
and fruitful branches, Es. 61.3.
the Vinetree of the Lord: The trees in Gods Orchard, Ioh. 15.2.
as one well observes, Esa. 61.3.
are either Palms or Cedars: The Palms bear fruit from their first growth:
the Cedars though they bud long before they bear fruit, yet bring forth
beautiful fruit: That which Saint Austen in his 44. Homily de Sanctis
observes of Mary and Elizabeth, may I observe of the Palm and Cedar; De
sterili seruus, de virgin dominus, de sterili vox de virgin verbum, Austen.
Hom. de Sanct. 44
the servant John Baptist was borne of a barren woman: JESUS the Savior of a
Virgin, the voice by a barren woman, the word by a Virgin: Mary was as a
Palm, Elizabeth as a Cedar. Never such a Palm, but many such Cedars; Sara
barren, and yet the mother of Isaac, Rebecca barren, yet the mother of Jacob,
Rachei barren, yet the mother of Benjamin: Manoa barren, yet the mother of
Sampson: Hanna barren, yet the mother of Samuel, Elizabeth barren, yet the
mother of John Baptist, the Father of my Text

More blessed are these barren then they that had many children. Isaac the
Heir apparent of the Promise, Jacob the Supplanter, little Benjamin the
Patriarch, Sampson the strong, Samuel the Seer, John Baptist a Prophet, and
more then a Prophet: all of them most Honorable in their generation, the seed
of the barren, and yet many of them were sent to sow the barren world; yea, and
out of the seed of the barren, Isaacks seed became as the stars of Heaven,
or the sand of the Sea, and all Nations of the earth were blessed in his seed.

The Eagles Emblem is sublimius to fly loftier, even to behold the Sun, as
Pliny notes, the Suns Emblem is celerius swifter, Ald. Emb. Sotinus. Psalm.
19.
the Giant refreshed to run his course as David speaks. The Wheat in the
Gospel has this Emblem, perfectius riper; First the Blade, then the ear,
then full corn. Ezechiels Emblem is profundius, deeper first to the ancles,
Mark 4.28.
then to the knees, Ezec. 47.4.
then to the thighs: Luke 14.10.
Christ's Emblem was Superius, sit up higher: Carolus Quintus Emblem was
vlierius, Go on further, the woman with child, has this Emblem, before
fuller, until she bring forth: and so ought every Christian that is not dry
and hardened and barren, and withered, to mount loftier with the Eagle, to
run swifter with the Sun, to grow riper with the Wheat, to wade deeper
with Ezechiel, to sit up higher with the Guest, to pass on further with the
Emperor, to wax fuller with the Woman, that so they may bring forth fruit
in due season. Many are long in bringing forth fruit, they are as long barren
as any.

The world has expected Elephantinum Partum, and yet when it has been
brought forth, Horatius.
Parturiunt montes; nascetur ridiculus mus, The best deed that ever they did,
was that they died, and so the world was rid of such dry, empty, windy, bare,
barren, dead, withered, hardened Tenants, who never did good, or had any mind
of goodness.

The Spouse in the Canticles is moved to come away, for the Fig Tree says
Christ has brought forth her young figs: never did any tree bring forth
better fruits then the Fig Tree, and never did any tree bring forth worse
fruits then the Fig Tree. The good fruit was Zacheus, who climbed into a tree,
that from a tree he might behold Christ, who was to suffer on a tree, for man's
salvation, this fig tree bare most precious fruit, even such as Christ
himself vouchsafed to pluck, a happy tree that bare such precious fruit as
Zacheus was, but thrice happy Zacheus, that so happily climbed on that happy
tree: the tree brought forth Zacheus, Zacheus brought forth a confession, the
tree such fruit, that fruit such faith, that Christ professed, this day is
Salvation come unto this house, Luke. 19.9.
forasmuch as he is also becomme a Son of Abraham. He that could have raised
out of the stones sons to Abraham, has raised out of a wild fig tree a
son unto Abraham: here was the good fruit of the Fig Tree. For the bad
fruit, the Rabbis affirm that the tree in Paradise from which Adam, and Eve
took the forbidden fruit was a fig tree: and many hold that the tree that
Judas hanged himself on was a fig tree, as Iuuencus the Poet testifies;
Exorsusque suas Laqueo sibi sumere poenas,
Informem rapuit ficus de vertice mortem.


And to these we may join, that God cursed no tree but the fig tree. Mald.
in. 27. Math.
It was an inhumane speech of Timon, when he saw a woman hanging on a
fig tree that had hanged her self, he wished that all trees might bear such
fruit: it had been a speech sauouring of humanity to have said as Christ said
of the fig tree, never such fruit grow on thee more.

The use of the Doctrine is to move us that we be not unfruitful in the
work of the Lord: The Use.
has God so cared for us and planted and watered, and dressed, and hedged us
in: The word, the seed so often falling: Christ the son of righteousness so often
shining, the dew of Heaven, Manna, so often shedding, the holy spirit the wind
so often blowing, and yet shall we remain dead, dry, barren, hardened,
withered and accursed Trunkes? In the Gospel of Luke you may observe the
Parable of the fig tree in the Vineyard, Luke 13.6.
which did not bring forth; he came and sought fruit and found none, then
said behold this three years have I come and sought fruit of this fig tree,
and find none; cut it down why keeps it the ground barren?

I know that some of the Fathers interpret it only of the Synagogue of the
Jews, and so that the three years wherein Christ expected fruit, Greg. Hom.
31 in Euang.
were the three times 1. before the Law, 2. in the Law, 3. after the Law, as
Gregory on the 31. Homily on the Gospel, Ambr. in Luke 13.
or the three Laws, the first Natural, the second written by Moses, the third
Evangelical by Christ, as Ambrose upon the 13. of Luke, or the three
gouernements of the Jews, the first under the High Priests, Theoph. in La.
can. Atb. q. 16
the second under Judges, the third under Kings as Euth^mias on that Gospel
observes, But Theophilact and Athanasius and Saint Basil do expound it more
largely, Basil. Br. in Js. 5.
to signify the three ages of Men, Childhood, youth, and old age, and that the
Lord does look and expect fruit in every one of these years, in every one of
these States, and when he has expected again and again, then he proceeds
to that fearful sentence: Cut it down why keeps it the ground barren.

It was the 21. of March this present Month as Maldonat on the Gospel
observes, Maldonat.
that Christ the way seeing a fig tree in the way, he came to it and found
nothing thereon, and then said, never fruit grow on thee henceforth. Christ the
way is yet in the way, Mat. 21.19.
he knows your sitting down and your rising up, he understands your
thoughts, for he is about your paths, and about your beds, Psalm. 139.1
and spieth out all your ways, and words and works and thoughts. If he should
come as he has often come, and find no fruits in many of us, O how terrible
would that sentence be. Never bear henceforth; Never? no Never, neither in
this world, nor in the world to come, Never to bring forth any more, Reap ye
shall, but bring forth ye shall not; but ye shall reap the fruit of judgment,
of punishment: other fruit never bring forth sin henceforth: Never any more,
dead trees cut off from the land of the living, dead branches cut off from
the tree of life. It was a lamentable complaint that the mother of Tobias made
for her son Thou light of our eyes, staff of our age, comfort of our life,
hope of our posterity, all the joy that we had was in thee, and have we forsaken
thee? But it will be a more lamentable sorrow when the wicked shall find they
have forsaken all the hope and joy and comfort and light and happiness of him:
But I come to the 2. part.

Not buds or blossoms or flowers, 2. Part.
or flourishes but fruits: GOD does not so much respect Adjectives as Aduerbes
as the Canonist teaches, and God does not love Flowers, Canonists.
so much as fruit, as my Text proves. The Spouse in the Canticles had Roses
and Lillies, but (except that one Rose of the field, and one Lilly of the
Valley) she prayseth the Pomegranates and Vines, Figs and Grapes, and Olives
and Camphire, and Spikenard, and Cynamon and Saffron, and Incense and Aloes.
She had her flourishing Garden of Lillies, but she had also her fruitful
Garden of nuts, and Apples and Pomegranates. In all the Scripture I read but of
one Flower that is praised, and that Rose from the root of Iesse, sprung in
the Vallyes, Cant. 2.2.
and grew among thorns, and flourished in the Winter, and withered in the
Spring, and was the most fragrant flower that ever grew. It was the Lilly among
Thorns: A flower not easily to be gathered: for we must undergo much labor
and smart if we will enjoy it: the Head thereof is crowned with Thorns, the
Heart is pierced with a Spear. Ansten.
the hands and feet struck through with Nails: It is a Lilly among thorns.
From the flower we have received fruit, and to this Flower we consecrate all
our fruit, not leaves of good profession, not blossoms of good purposes, nor
branches of great semblances, but fruit, for as of false prophets, so of true
professors, Christ has spoken, Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos, ye shall
know them by their fruits.

There may be trees without branches, and branches without fruits, but
branches growing without a tree are more strange. Christ came into the world to
find fruit, and when he came to Icrusalem, the Jews presented him with
branches, and cried Hosanna, but the branches had no fruits, for they soon
showed how vainly, variable the opinions of men are constant only in
inconstancy, persisting in nothing, but in change, for they who had cried
Hosanna in the highest, do shortly after cry let him be crucified, Bernard.
they who saluted him for their King, do presently protest they have no King
but Caesar: they who met him with Olive branches, do presently after present
him with swords and staves, they who spread their garments before him, do
after despoile him of his garments, they who adore him for the Son of God,
after prefer Barrabas an Assacinate before him. These were branches
deceiving, stealing, fading, flattering, fawning, vanishing branches: teaching
for ever those that have such branches carried before them, to contemn the
base and mutable breath of that Monster the multitude, never coveting their
judgment, never trusting their affection, never believing their opinion, but
as the body remains one, although the shadow be at one time long, at another
time short; so the Soul retain the same constancy both in the sweet gale of
the applause of men, and in the bitter blasts of their opprobrious outrage, let
the storm root up shrubbes but not Cedars, let the wind toss chafe but not
wheat, and let vain, either honor or infamy move no man, who is not either
light or weak; let no noble spirit be servile in caring for the praise, or
fearing the unjust disprayse of vulgar shallow brains, if they be put upon
him, let him resist the one with modesty, undergo the other with gravity,
never being so careful what the world will say of him, as what God will say to
him, when the world shall be at an end: for the praises of the world be but
branches.

I have staide too long on these fruitless branches, yet I hope you have
received some fruit in knowing them to be fruitless.

God regards not the tree without branches, and yet not the branches without
fruit: he has planted a Vine in every one, the branches of this Vine are the
faculties of the Soul, they must bring forth flowers unto him, namely good
Desires, they must bring forth fruit unto him, Arist.
even good works; the tongue to praise him, the feet to follow him, the ears
to hear him, the hands to be lifted up to him, the knees to be bowed to him,
the eyes to be bedewed to him, the understanding always to contemplate on him,
the memory always to remember him, the will to delight in him, the desire to
affect him, the soul to be enflamed and enfolded in the flames of his love.

John Baptist spoke to the Pharisees, who were most glorious in flourishes but
wanted fruits; O that hypocrisy had ended in them, and not descended to our
times. It was a hereditary disease to the Pharisees, it is no less to us, they
had the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau, feathers of the Eagle, but the
wings of the Ostrich, they had the habit of sheep, but the disposition of
Wolves, Plut. I. ac. Apo.
like the Musicians that Diogenes taxed, they had care of tuning their
instruments, not their minds, like unto Copper which had colorem, non valorem
auri, like Great pieces of Ordinance in the time of Peace, they had the fashion
but lacked their charge. They were the Masters, the Players, the Painters, the
Tyremongers, the Visard-makers of their time, they were the Images, Semblances,
Pictures, Statues, Shadows and Sepulchers of their times, empty clouds, windy
Pipes, void Tents, tinckling Cymbals, dry Cesterns of their time. They bear
flowers but not fruits.

The Spouse in the Canticles inuiteth her well-beloved not only to come to her
garden, Cant. 4.16.
but also to come and eat of the fruits. Psalm. 102.
The Angels in heaven, not only sung the praises of God, but also do the
will, the will of God. Reucl. 1.
The blessing in the Revelation, is not only made to those that read and
hear, but to those that keep the words of that Book. S. John commands to
love, not only in word and in tongue, 1. Ioh. 3.
but also in deed and in truth.

The Doctrine, That the true Professors of the true faith are discerned by
their lively and effectual works. Exfructibus little is the Note, mark,
Doctrine^
measure, and Cubite of the Sanctuary for the good and bad. The high Priests
garment had Pomegranates as well as Bells: The Sieling of the Temple had Palms
as well as Chains; The Cherubims had Wings as well as Feet; The fountains of
Lebanon had Pitchers as well as Cesternes; The Spouse had Vines as well as
Lillies, and her Pomegranates had Fruits as well as Flower, and faith must
have a Nature as well as a Name, we can never divide luster from this Diamond,
light from this Sun, life from this Soul, heat from this Fire, flowing from
this Sea. The true servants of God may be found with Abraham walking, with
David running, with Jacob wrestling, with Paul following, with the wise Virgins
watching, the good Servants working, with the good Tree bearing fruits.

The conflict between us and our adversaries about Faith and fruits has
been much, they in to much advancing them, some of us too much extenuating
them, they so earnest for fruits, that little less then blasphemously they
affirm that they deserve Salvation: We so negligent in fruits, that to do a
good work, we think it superstition, they so much hanging on the branches, we
so much rooting at the root, as if we would sue out a divorce between Faith
and Fruits, neither of us looking to the moisture of the root or branches.
When we see good works, we must acknowledge them to be fruits, Austen.
and fruits, that we must bear upon pain of damnation, and yet to be but
fruits: we must seek out the root of them, and when we have the root, we
must have regard to the moisture and juice whereby it is nourished: for as the
fruits of the earth grow from the root, and that root lives and has
vegetation, not by it self, but is fed and preserved by the fatness of the
soil, warmth of the Sun, and benefit of the air under which it stands:
so good works grow from faith, and that faith lives in the object; the merits
and obedience of Jesus Christ, feeding and strengthing it self, by the sweet
influence and sap of those divine dewes of Mediation, that in him we live,
in him we grow, in him we are grafted, in him we flourish, in him we
fructify: for without him, though we should wish to be as righteous as Noah,
as obedient as Abraham, as holy as Job, as faithful as David, as devout as
Daniel, as zealous as Elias, as clear as the Sun, or pure as the stars, yet
our fruits were not acceptable, nay not tolerable in his sight, having no
opinion of our own wisdom, no hope in our own works, nor wisdom in our power.

The use of this Doctrine is to contemn the folly of those that think that a
bare and barren Faith will serve without any fruits or effect: Doctrine.
either the frost of devotion, or the fear of the hate of superstition, or the
wind of contention has blown away our fruits. Ientilet.
It was an observation of Ientilet upon the Monks of his time, that their Fasts
were very fat, and their prayers very lean: I cannot say so of our Faith that
it is fat, but I am sure our fruits are very lean, like to Pharaohs withered
thin blasted cares, that it is a wonder that the lean, starued carcass of
faith has so long continued.

Luther gave a good note to this purpose, Luther.
that faith ought pinguescere operibus, to wax fat with fruits; but alas
fruits be as lean as faith. In times past says wrought miracles, and
removed mountains, so may it yet, if it were true, for our sins that are as
mountains, would be removed as far as the East is from the west, but faith
has wrought a more prodigious wonder, like the lean Kine that devoured the
fat Kine; our bare profession of faith has eaten up the rich Alms and
fruits, and works, and deeds of mercy.

A misery it is to see, that there be no fruits to be gathered, but only
the fruits of sin, and that whereas virtue and goodness can take no root,
sin begins in the buddes of infirmity, and by little and little steals
to the fruits of negligence, and being increased and watered by custom, it
grows to be the stout tree of contempt, which will rather break then bend to
any instruction. Surely beloved, this is not the cause why God has so planted
and watered, and kept and dressed his Vineyard: these be not the roots, the
plants, the branches, the sprigges, the buds, the blossoms, the flourishes,
the field: fruits worthy amendment of life, And so I come to the last part.

Not branches, for the Jews bare branches, Part. 3.
yet were accursed, not flowers for the flower perishes, and the grace thereof
withers: not leaves for the fig tree had leaves and yet was not blessed;
not fruit for the Pharisees bare fruit, and yet that fruit was despised: their
fruit was like to that fruit which grows where Sodom and Gomorrah stood,
Josephus.
fair and beautiful to the eye, but being touched they dissolve to a
sulphurous and vaporus fume, more odious to the smell, then they were pleasant
to the sight. S. John therefore makes difference between fruits, fruits
worthy of amendment of life; in other things there is a difference as also in
fruits, I er. 1.7.
there is a pure and fresh Doctrine; Math. 16 6.
there is a sour and leauened doctrine; Mat. 9.7
there is a new wine of the Gospel; and there is a mixed wine of Babylon: Reu.
17.4.
there are wholesome words: 2. Tim. 1.13.
There are unwholesome words: there is a Doctrine of God, Ephesians. 4.29.
there is a Doctrine of Devils: Ioh. 7.16.
and there is a guiding word, 1. Tim. 4.1.
and a fretting word: Gal. 5.22
fruits of the flesh, and fruits of the spirit: worthy and unworthy fruits.
Lesbian vines be more honored by Aristole then the vines of Rhodes: for under
that Parable he alludeth to succession of his school, chosing rather
Theophrastus born at Lesbos, then Menedemus born at Rhodes: Aul. Gel. N^ct. At
lib. 13.5.
there was some comparison between them, for they were both good. But these
fruits that I speak of, be as contrary as light and darkness, the
Northern and Southern Poles not so Diametrally opposed the one against the
other, as these fruits of the flesh and Spirit: Nor the comparison of Tares
eating up the Wheat, Eagles feathers consuming all other feathers; Moses
Serpents devouring the Enchanters, and Arc demolishing Dagon.

There are all kinds of fruit, and all colors of fruit in evil, the green
fruits of imperfectness, the yellow fruit of Gall and bitterness, the red
fruit of blood and cruelnesse, the tawny and Morian fruit of sinful
deformednesse, the Sky color changeable fruit of vnstaiednesse, the Leopard
spotted fruit of vnholines, the blush color fruit of profaneness, and the red color fruit of drunkenness, the pale color fruit of uncleanness, the
flame color truit of blasphemous wickedness, they have many colors, by the
which they may be known, yet but only one taste; They are for the most part
bitter sweet, bad trees and bad fruit, Concupiscence is the root, Consent
the trunk, Bad desires the branches, Lewd words the buds, Vile actions the
flowers, Lewd customs the fruits, Satan did plant, Suggestion did water,
Continuance in sinnne does increase them, Necessity in sin does ripen them,
Judgment does gather them, and Hell does burn them: Because they be not
fruits worthy amendment of life.

That you may know them both, in the fifth to the Gallat. 22. you may take a
survey of them both; The fruits of the flesh are Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Gal. 5.21.
Wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Debate, Emulation, Wrath,
Contentions, Seditions, Heresies, Envy, Murders, Drunkenness, Gluttony, and
such like. The fruits of the spirit are Love, Peace, Long suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance.

The forbidden fruit of Paradise proved accursed, but the fruit of that fruit
more accursed, so the fruits of the flesh be most hateful and fearful, but
the fruits of those fruits exceed. Pride is a fruit of the flesh, but the
fruit of the fruit exceeds: It blinds the eyes, darkneth the mind,
deceives the understanding, depriueth the reason, disguiseth the countenance,
makes the proud man in the sight of men a fool, in the sight of God a
Devil. The fruit of this fruit thrust the Angels out of heaven, ouerthrewe the
Tower of Babel, confounded the Tongues, drowned Pharaoh, deprived Saul, hanged
Haman, slew Baltasher, changed Nebucadonosor into a beast. Luxury is the fruit
of the flesh, but the fruit of this fruit brings polution before God,
uncleanness before men, filthiness to the body, rottenness to the bones, it
burnt Sodom, slew the Sichemites, destroyed the Beniamites, cursed Ruben,
beguiled David, betrayed Sampson, deceived Solomon. Envy is the fruit of the
flesh, but the fruit of that fruit excels it, it punishes it self,
fretteth the heart, shortneth the life, eats the flesh, consumes the Spirit,
turns a man into a Dog, a Christian into a Devil, it made Caine envy Abels
sanctity, Rachel Leahs faecunditie, Saul David's felicity, Satan man's
innocence, Haman Mordecaies honesty; the Pharisees Christ's heavenly Dietie.
Drunkenness is a fruit of the flesh, but the fruit of this fruit exceeds:
It confounds the brain, consumes the body, drowneth the judgment, steals
away the sense, wit, memory, health, credit, friends and all; And has
overthrown not only many thousand particular men, but many great Houses,
Families, Cities, Countries, Nations, Generations, for this last sin is more
presumed upon, then almost any other; for since that God made that promise,
never more to drown the world, the world has almost drowned themselves by
this beastly, ugly, monstrous, loathsome Inundation.

The Doctrine, Doctrine.
that good works must be worthily performed, or else they be not fruits
worthy: The difference between digna and digne is much: Art Aethick. Justus,
Justa, Just.
many do worthy works but not worthily: and therefore it is not to bring
Digna worthy fruits, which unworthy men may unworthily do, but God also
requires, dignus, digna, digne, the name of goodness in the doer, the rules
of goodness in the things done, and the end of goodness in the doing, for Caine
offered, Simon Magus believed, Herod listened, Foelix feared, Saul obeyed,
Iezabel fasted, the Pharisees prayed, these were worthy fruits, but not
worthily performed. There may be a zeal without knowledge, aknowledge without
conscience, a love without Holiness, a Prayer without Faith, a Faith without
fruits, otherwise had not the Pharisees lost so many Prayers, so many Fasts,
so many watches, so many works, so many washings, so many tythings, so many
howrs in hearing, reading, interpreting Moses and the Prophets,, otherwise had
not the Papists lost so many Orisons, so many observations, devotions,
contritions, confessions, satisfactions, penances, pilgrimages, so much labor
in examining their heart, chastening their flesh, whipping the body, punishing
the Soul.

The fruits of Faith as all the Fathers agree, Aug. Ambr, Bernard, Ierom,
Theop. Theodoret, Epiphanius, and all others in their writings observe, are
Repentance and good works, these are the fruits worthy amendment of life.
Ctesias in describing India makes mention of a tree that besides fruits,
droppeth and distilleth certain tears, of which are made precious Amber. The
true Christian must be like this tree, his works must be his fruits, his
repentance his distilled drops. The drops of the Vine-tree are prescribed
against the Leprosy, he that is a branch of the true Vine must yield these
drops against the Leprosy of sin, and so he shall be sure to bring forth
fruits worthy of amendment of life, though not worthy merito condigni of
eternal life, yet worthy in some sort, merito congrui, of amendment of life.

The Use.
The use hereof is, to incite you all by all the mercies of God, as ever you
hope to stand before the Throne of Grace, to bring forth at the length some
fruits acceptable to God, profitable to men, available to your own Souls,
that ye no longer turn the Grace of God into wantonness, not looking upon
Faith with the eye of curiosity, but hearing with the ears and hearts of
obedience, rather bringing good minds then sharp wits to Sermons, that so
Religion may no more fly in the air of your opinion, but be settled in your
souls to fruitful operations.

John Baptist, you hear cries out for Reformation; a thing long prayed for
and sought for in the former Ages of Idolatry, sudore and sanguine with the
blood of Myriades of Martyrs. The last Centurie performed it, but performed it
so, as that the Cure is become as dangerous as the disease, and religion has
taken as deep a wound in the Reformation, as she had in the deformation, for
in place of the hypocrisy of seeming, there is brought in the impudency of
neither being nor seeing, and to cure superstition, a neglect of devotion, to
avoid the opinion of meriting, a defect of the care of well doing, to take
away the superfluity there is not enough left for the necessity of the Church,
the faith which was wont to be in words, is scarce found in the oaths of men,
the Doctrine of the Church not followed, the censures of the Church not feared.
The pride and excess of the Clergy taken away, and the poverty and contempt of
the Clergy remaining; then there were wooden Priests, golden livings, now
golden Priests, wooden livings. The Garden of the Spouse blasted, her trees
blemished, her branches withered, her fruits vanished, that as he said, No
fear of God; so I say, no fruit for God in the land, and yet who is not
thought a Professor? who is not thought religious? It was worthily objected to
an unworthy fellow in Rome, who putting on a grave countenance in the Senate
was taken up thus; Plutarch.
Quis te ferat aedificantem vt Crassus, caenantem vt Lucullus, loquentem vt
Cato: who can abide thee building vaine-gloriously as Crassus, banqueting
riotously as Lucullus, and yet speaking gravely as Cato: so may it be asked,
who can abide that those that are as great Church-robbers as Nabuchodonosor, as
envious as Haman, as riotous as Balthazar, as proud as Herod, as disobedient
as Corah, should be thought Religious, or should offer to take the word of the
Lord in their mouths, and yet hate to be reformed.

My speech draws to the close. The place wherein I speak represents that
tree of Theophrastus, which at every time does bud and blossom and bear fruit:
O ever let there be found here, some ripe, some drawing to their ripeness,
some in the flower, some in the bud of hope, some plentiful in fruit: if there
were no other motives to incite this presence, and if neither watering,
planting, nor any other means would draw you, yet the President of our young
Cedar might draw all that make their nest under the shade of his Greatness,
seeing his Highness like to that YOUNG PRINCE, is increased in wisdom, and
stature, Esaias. 9.
and favor with God and men. It was but the speech of a Poet, Exeat Aula, qui
vult esse Pius, that Godliness is no good Courtier; I hope it, and with the
bended knees of my Soul pray for it, that that position never take place here,
but that holiness may crown this house for ever, and that not only in the
Chapel and Clossetts, but that the face of godliness may be seen in the
presence, and the heart of goodness attend the inmost Privy Chambers, and that
every one here may in every action both public and private yield a savor of
God, and a taste of godliness, and bring forth fruits in due season, fruits
worthy amendme^t of life, that so this Court may bring forth increase, and God
even our own God may give us his blessing, yea God may bless v^ and we all:
and the ends of the world may fear him, and we may yield Glorit to the
Father, and to the Son and to the holy Ghost, as it was in the beginning,
both now and ever, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

