A SERMON OF SPIRITVALL LIFE AND DEATH.

Preached before the King, at White-Hal, November, 1626

By the late faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, John Preston, Dr. in Divinity,
Chapplaine in ordinar to his Majesty, Mr. of Emmanuel Colleage in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher at Lincolnes Inn.

John 6. 53. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no use in you. Printed at London by
T. C. for Michael Spark, dwelling at the sign of the Blue Bible in Green
Arbor. 1630.

ILLVSTRISSIMIS, VENE RABILISSIMIS, ET PIISSIMIS VIRIS NATHANIELIRICH MILITI;
RICHARDO KNIGHTLY, ET IOHANNI PIM, ARMIGERIS; GVLIELMVS PRYNNVS Hancposthumam
aulicam concionem Clarissimi IOANNIS PRESTONI, SS. Theologiae Doctoris, Regis
Capellani, Collegij Immanuelis Magistri, et Hospitij Lincolniensis nuper
Concionatoris, nunc primum typis mandatam, Annotationibusque nonnullis
marginalibus illustratam, Amoris et Beneuolentiae suae minutulum pignus D. D. D.

Gellius, Noctium Attic. lib. 17. cap. 14.

Beneficium dando accepit, qui dignis dedit.

A SERMON OF SPIRITVALL LIFE, AND DEATH.
1 JOHN 5. 12. He that has the Son, has Life; and he that has not the
Son, has not Life.
THe Apostles scope here, is to show us what great privileges we have by
Jesus Christ; amongst which this is one of the chiefest, That he that has the
Son, has life; that is, he has a life of grace for the present, and shall
have a life of glory for ever hereafter; which he sets down by the opposite,
Mors est ^ita sine Christo Ignatius Epist. 15. ad Romanos. The general
Doctrines.
He that has not the Son, has not life. So that the point lies evidently
before us: That whosoever has not a spiritual life for the present, he is
not in Christ, and whosoever has it, is in Christ, and shall live for ever;
whence these two points are to be observed.

1. That every man by nature is a dead man; The doctrines
that is, dead in trespasses and sins. 2. That yet there is a life to be
had, which is contrary to this death.
First, I say, Every man by nature is a dead man, The first doctrine.
for life you see here is from the Son: now there is Fiunt enim, non nascuntur
Christiani. Tertullian. Apolog. aduers Gentes. Hierom. Epist 7. ad Laetam. c. 1.
no man borne a member of the new Adam, but every man is borne Psalm. 51. 5.
Romans 5. 12. 18
a member of the old, and therefore in that sense is borne a dead man, though
otherwise endued with a natural life: for if the Math. 7. 17, 18. c. 12. 33.
Jude 12. Spiritual life wherein it consists.
root be dead, as the old Adam is, all the branches that rise from the root,
must be dead also.

Again, spiritual life is nothing else, but a conjunction of the soul with
the Spirit of God; even as the natural life is a conjunction of the body with
the soul: now as the soul leaves the body, so the holy Ghost withdraws him
self from the soul, when it is disioynted, distempered, and made unfit for
use. For even as a man dwells in a house while it is habitable, he plays on a
musical instrument while it is fit, and in tune; he uses a vessel while it
is whole, and sound; but when the house grows ruinous and inhabitable, he
departs from it; when the instrument is vnstrung, he lays it aside: when the
vessel is broken or boared through, he casts it away. And as the soul departs
from the body when it is grown ruinous, when it is made inhabitable through
mortal diseases, it lays it aside as an ouerworne garment: after the same
manner, the holy Spirit withdrawes him self from the soul of a man, when it
is broken, ruinated, and distempered, through the mortal disease of sin and
of natural corruption: and this is the case of every natural man whatsoever,
till he be revived by the infusion of a new life. And yet it is the common
opinion of natural men, that if they live in the Church, and be baptized, and
pray, and hear the word, and embrace the true religion, and practice the
outward duties of it; that they are out of doubt in the state of this
spiritual life. And therefore I think it would be an hour well spent, to
discover dead men to themselves: to persuade them, that except they be made new
creatures, d Except they be John 3. 3. 5.
borne again, they are in a state of death, and cannot be saved in that state
and condition: For you see, he that has not life, has not the Son, and he
that has not the Son shall dye, the wrath of God abides on him for ever,
John 3. the last verse.

Now it is said, Ephesians. 4. 18. That men are strangers from this life, through
the ignorance that is in them, and the hardness of their hearts: Mark it;
they are strangers from this life, partly through ignorance, because they are
Pessima ignorantia boni est, bonum non esse. Prosper. Cont. Collatorem. cap. 3.
9.
Ignorant of this work of life and regeneration: they think there is a
greater latitude in religion than there is; within which compass if they come
they are safe: that is, though they be not so strict, and so zealous; though
they go not so fast to heaven as others, yet they shall do as well as the
best: In a word, they are ignorant what belongs to this life, says the
Apostle, and therefore they are strangers to it. Partly again they are
strangers to it, because of the hardness of their hearts; that is, either
because they are so distracted and possessed with worldly business that they
cannot attend it; or they are so besotted and surfeited with pleasures and
delights, that they are not sensible of the things that belong to this life,
and therefore they are strangers to it: that is, they are not able to judge of
it, whether they have this life of grace or not.

You will say unto me, how shall we know it?

You shall know it, from those properties of The properties and marks of
spiritual life and death.
life and death that are taken from the natural life and death.

1. A man may know whether he remain in First property
the state of nature, whether he be a dead man or no, by considering whether
he have any change wrought in him. For as it was said of Christ; Revel. 1. 18.
He was dead, and is alive; so it is true of every man that is in Christ,
Ephesians. 2. 1. Romans 6. 11, 1^. Luke 15. 24, 31.
He was dead, and is alive: Now there are many changes in a man; age makes a
change; place and company makes a change; education, custom, and experience
makes a change: but when a man is translated from death to life, it is another
kind of change; Pa^ca Del praecep^^ sic totum ^omic nem immutant, vt expo^ito
vetere novu^ reddant. Lactant. de falsa Sapientia cap. 26.
As if another soul dwelt in the same body; that a man can say, Ego non sum
ego; That when his old lusts, his acquaintance, his old temptations shall come,
he is able to answer them, and to say, he is not the same man: though they
knock at the same door, yet there is another inhabitant come into the house,
and they find not him they look for. Even as you see when a graft is put into
a Crab-tree stock, it changes all; the sap, and the fruit, and the leaves,
and all are of another fashion; so it is, when the life of grace is put into
the heart of a natural man, it changes the inward man and the outward; it
changes the whole frame of the soul. For my beloved, this is not a light
alteration; but as the old stamp must be obliterated before the new can be
imprinted; as the old building must be pulled down, before you can set up the
new; so this old nature of ours, must in a great measure be broken in pieces,
before a man can be made a living man; which is done, by the infusion of the
supernatural qualities of grace and holiness: I say, supernatural; for even
as the earth may bring forth grass and common wild flowers of it self; but
it must be plowed and sown before any wheat, or choice plants can grow there;
even so, (my brethren) these corrupt natures we have, may bring out things that
are morally good, many moral virtues; but before they can bring forth fruits
of true righteousness, they must be Ier. 4. 3. Hosea. 10. 12.
plowed and sown: plowed; that is, a man must be Psalm. 51. 17. Isai. 66. 2.
Initium enim est saluti^ notitia peccati. Seneca. Epist. 28.
broken in heart with an apprehension of his sin, and of Gods eternal wrath:
he must see himself but a dead man; he must be Primum enim ^pus fidei pe^
dilectionem operantis, cordis companctio est: in qua sine dubi^ ejiciuntur
daemonia, cuu eradicantur decorde ^eccata. Bernard. in A^centione. Dom. Sermo.
1. Col. 191. M.
pricked and wounded in heart with the fear of it, as those Acts 2. 37. after
the Sermon of Peter, it is said, They were pricked in their hearts, and cried
out; Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? This is that plowing and
breaking the heart. But this is not enough, it must also be sown; that is,
there must be an implanting of spiritual graces, which change and renew us:
according to that which you shall find, Romans 12. 2. Fashion your selves no
more after this world, but be ye changed, or metamorphosed, by the renewing of
your mind: And this is the first way by which you may discern, whether you be
dead or alive.

Secondly, when there is no action, when there is no motion in a man, you say
he is 2. Property.
dead; when a man acts nothing, when he stirs not himself, we reckon him a
dead man; and this is the case of every natural man, he is not able to move
hand or foot in the way of true godliness. And if you say, Yea Objection.
but they are able to pray, to hear the word of God, to receive the Sacrament;
they are able to do many excellent duties of justice and righteousness
amongst men.

I answer, it is very true; but yet the Scripture Answer.
speaks of certain dead works, as Heb. 9. 14. The blood of Christ, is there
said, to purge our conscience from dead works; that is, all these before
mentioned they may be done, and they are good works in themselves, having all
the lineaments of good works, as you know a dead body has of a living; but
yet indeed they are but dead works; that is, they may have a golden outside,
and be very beautiful in the sight of the world, and also in the sight of men;
but yet as Christ speaks, Luke 16. 15.
be abominable in the sight of God: For so a natural man may pay a certain
debt of duty and obedience to God; but he pays it in counterfeit coin, that
has the stamp, the similitude, and color of true coin; yet it consists (if
you look to the inwards) but of base metal. As I remember a story, that In
his book de Damonolatria. Lugdumi. 1595. See Dell. Rio. Disquisitio. Mag.
Remigius tells, who was a Judge in Lorreigne, under whose judgment many
hundred of witches were condemned upon their own confession; who said, that
the devil did bring them many boxes of current coin to the apearance of the
witches, but when they came to use them, they proved nothing but withered
leaves. I say after the same manner Satan cozens natural men in things of
greater moment; he suffers them Omnes enim sua extollunt: omnes etiam minima
qua in altum contulere dilatant. Seneca de Beneficijs, l. 3. c. 7.
to think well of the good works and duties that they do, to make them
think they are current coin: but when they come to make use of this treasure
at the day of death, they find them to be but withered leaves, such as God
will not accept of in the time of extremity, at the day of judgment. The
Apostle in the 1 Timothy 3. 5. speaks of certain men, Who had a form of
godliness, but denied the power thereof: that is, that have a formal
customarie performance of good works, and good duties, with which the
conscience is satisfied; and not able to judge because it is ignorant. And
therefore Satan does with men in this case, as we are wont to do with
children; take from them true Gold; and when they fall a crying, stop their
mouths with Counters. So I say, Satan labors to keep men from the lively
and through performance of good works and holy duties; and then satisfies their
consciences, with that which has but a form of godliness, without the power
of it.

But you will say; How shall a man discern Question.
this, whether these good works which are good in themselves, be good in such
a manner as they are wrought by him?

To this I answer; you may know it by these Answer. Two ways to discern
whether the works we do are good or no.
two things.

First, it is certain, that except they be vital actions; that is, except they
proceed from an inward principle of life within, they are not First if they
proceed from an inward principle of life.
good actions, they are such as the Lord regards not. Now you know, there are
motions, (as the motions of clockes and watches) that proceed not from life,
but from Art; so it is in this matter of religion; many good actions may be
done, many good motions in the ways of godliness, which yet may not proceed
from the life of grace, but from outward respects to men; from fear of hell;
from fear of judgment; or in sickness; from the apprehension of death and
calamity. In such cases, we may be stirred up to do them; and then even as the
wheels that are set a going by the spring, when it is down, you know they
cease their motion: So commonly it is in these good fits, in these good moodes
of godliness, when that which set them on work is removed Caduc^ sunt
quaecunque sucata sunt; nec fiduciam praebent, possidentibus stabilem, quae
possessonis non habent Veritatem. Cyprian de habitu Virginum. lib.
There is an end of them. And therefore if you would know whether the works
you do be right or no, such as God will accept at the last day, consider if
they proceed from an inward principle, from a principle of life within.

2. You shall know them by their coldness. Secondly, if there be warmth in
them.
For coldness you know, is a symptom of death. Now these good works when
they are done by a natural man, there is no life in them; there is no warmth
in them, no viuacitie nor quickness in them: where as you know, it is said,
James 5. 16. Prayer if it be fervent, preuailes much: and Romans 12. 16. Be ye
burning in spirit, serving the Lord: that is, all those duties that have not
heat in them, that have not fire in them, why, the Lord regards them not: the
reason is this; because if there be no heat there, there is none of his Spirit
there; and then you know our prayers are but the voice of our own spirits: the
works we do are but dead works, because they are but the fruits and effects
of dead flesh, if there be none of the Holy Ghost there. Now if there be no
heat there, I say, there is none of the Spirit there; for the Spirit is as
fire: and therefore ye know what John Baptist says of our Savior: Math. 3. 11
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire: that is, He shall
baptize you with the Ignis vero qui Deus est, consumit quidem, s^d non
affligit: ardet suauiter, desox latur faeliciter. Est enim vere carbo
desolatoriut; sed qui sie in vitia exerceat (...) ignis, vt in anima vicem
exhibeat vnstionis. Bernard. super Cantica, Sermo. 57. Col. 536. A.
Holy Ghost, which is as fire. And therefore you shall find that holy men have
been usually described by the similitude of fire: as Petrus Christ's amore
vstus ardebat. Hom. 6. in Romans 11. 1. 4 c. 42.
Chrysostom says, that Peter was like a man made all of fire walking among
stubble: And one that desired to know what kind of man Basil was, it is said,
there was presented unto him in a dream a pillar of fire with this motto, See
Greg. Nazianzeni Monodia, in Basilij Mag. vitam.
Talis est Basilius, such a one was Basil; and old M. Fox in his Martyriologue.
Latimer when he was asked the reason why there was so much preaching and so
little practizing, gave this answer, Deest ignis, fire is wanting. The same we
may say in this case; there may be a performance of many good duties, of
prayer, of hearing, of receiving the Sacraments, of worshipping God: but
consider whether there be fire, consider whether they be not done without
that liveliness, that feruencie that the Spirit of God requires; either done
without heat, or but half baked, as Hosea 7. 8.
Hosea's cake was; and if so, they be but dead works: whereas true praying in
secret between God and us, why? it is such as warmes and quickens the heart:
it is such as brings the heart into a good frame of grace, and sets it right
before God: and right hearing is such as kindles a fire in us, that in great
measure Hoc igne consumpta emni labe peccati, et rubigine vitiorum emundata,
atque sanata conscientia sequitur. Bernard. Hom. 57. super Cantica. The 3.
property.
burns up the dross of sinful lusts and corrupt affections. And so we have
dispatched the second means, by which we may know whether we be alive to
righteousness, or dead in sins; to consider, whether we have any motion, and
of what kind those motions and actions are.

Again, you shall know it, by considering what you contend for most, for life
is sweet, and every creature would maintain this life, and Job. 2. 4. Nihil
homini tanti est vt vita, Homer. Ili. l 9 p. 324.
would part with any thing rather then that. For a man that has this life of
grace in him, Nunc incipio discipulut esse, cum nihil expetam visibilium, vt
Iesum Christum assequar. Ignes, crux, ferarum concursus, sectiones, ^auiena,
ossium discerptiones, membrorum concisiones, totius corporis solutio, diaboli
tormenta in me veniant, tantummodo vt Iesum nanciscar. Melius mihi emori
propter Iesum Christum, quam imperare finibus terra, Ignatij Epist. 15. ad
Romanos.
he will suffer any thing, he will lose his life, his credit, his goods, his
liberty and all rather then he will wound his conscience, and violate his
peace and communion with God, because that Psalm. 63. 3.
is as sweet and as dear to him as life; whereas another man contends as much
for his life, his credit, his profit, his pleasure, and sin, and will
rather suffer the loss of a good conscience, rather suffer any unevenness in
his ways toward God and men, any sin, rather then he will be prejudiced in
these things, because in this is his life, being dead to Christ and alive to
sin.

Again, such as the food is, such is the life: If it be the life of sin that
a man lives, which The 4. property.
the Ephesians. 2. 1.
Scripture calls death, why then the secret thoughts and inward affections feed
on carnal delights, either past, present, or to come; that is, either he
solaceth himself with the contemplation of what he has had, or he feeds on
that which is present, or he cheares up himself with the thought and project
of those carnal delights that are future: whereas a man that lines the life of
grace, the contrary is most acceptable to him; For every life draws to it
self that which is most suitable and most agreeable with it, that is the food
wherewith it is maintained, and that wherein it delights; for pleasure is but
applicatio conuenientis conuenienti; but the application of that which is
convenient and agreeable to us.

And if you say now, they may occupy themselves in hearing, reading, and
praying, Objection.
and such like holy exercises.

I answer, they may, and it is well; these Answer.
things are very commendable, and not to be omitted; but yet there is some
thing must be added, for that is not enough, except we be nourished by these
duties, and grow by them; as you know it is said, 1. Pet. 2. 2. Desire the
sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby: and as your common saying
is, Show me not the meat but the man. For Christ, Heb. 13. 20.
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, is affected in this case, as Shepherds are
wont to be, that say not to their Sheep, Show me the hay I have given you, but
show me, (...) qui diuinas Scripturas legens, verba vertit; in opera. Bernard.
de ordina vitae. Col. 1. 16. H.
Lac and lanam, the wool and the milk; that is, Show me the fruits and
effects of all thy ^^bus Christianorum est verbum Dei, quo pascuntur omnes
sancti tam homines quam Angeli Bernard. in Assumpt. B. Mariae; Sermo. 5. Col.
258. C.
hearing, reading, and praying; for a man may be conversant in all these
duties, and yet for want of life, and for want of a digestive faculty within;
that is, not turning them to blood and spirits, he may not be nourished, he may
not grow and be strengthened by them, but be as a man in an Atrophy, that eats
very much, and yet is as lean, and as meager, as if he had eat nothing: Of
such the Scripture says, that Revel. 3. 1.
they have a name to live, but yet are dead; 2 Timothy 3. 7.
that they are always learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth;
that is, to the saving knowledge of it.

Last of all; the last property of life, either The 5. property.
of sin, or of grace, is, (as the property of every life) not only to draw
to it self things suitable, but to Omnes dolos et consi ^a tex^i ob vitam.
Homeri Odys. l. 9 p. 25.
expel and oppugn whatsoever is contrary and hurtful: so he that is a
living man in Christ, though he has the relics, the weiftes and remainders
of sin still in him, yet he is sick of them, Gal. 5. 26, 17. 1 Cor. 9. 25,
26, 27. Romans 7. 14, to the end. 1 Timothy 6. 11, 12.
he fights against them, and resists them continually, as health resists
sickness, or as a living fountain resists mud that falls into it, it works it
out, and does not rest till it be clean again; when another man works out
those good things, those good thoughts, and motions that are iniected and
kindled in him (for some good moods and fits they may have;) I say, they Mal.
1. 13. Zach. 7. 12. I say 22. 12, 13 Acts 24. 25. And no marvel, for
Luxurioso frug al^tas p^na est, pigro supplicij loco labor est, delicatus mise^
retur industria: desidioso studere torquert est. Seneca Epist. 71.
reject them and are sick and weary of them, and the means that should
increase them, and they are not well, till they have gotten themselves into
another element: but for the sins that are suitable to them, either by
disposition, or by education, or by custom, Non prius est vt de vita homines
quam de iniquitate discedant. Quis exim non cum iniquitatibus suis ^oritur, et
cu^ ipsis, atque in ipsis sceleribus sepeliatur.
Tunc enim consummata inselicitas, vbi turpia non ^^^um delectant, sed etiam
placent: et desi^it esse re^ed^o locus, (...) qu^ suerant. vitta, mores fiun^.
Seneca Epist. 39.
those they suffer to lie vnexpelled, unresisted, as mud in ponds, or dead
waters. And this (my Brethren) is a great sign of death: for I will be bold
to say this, that if we lie in any known sin, that is, if there be a
continual tract of any sin, that we know to be sin, that is drawn as a
thread through our whole conversation, (be it Fornication, or Adultery, or
Swearing, or Drunkenness, or Malice, or Envy, or any other) I say, it is n
very dangerous, yea deadly, if it have any dominion, if we lie in it: For you
know, a prevailing disease will kill, and one disease will do it as well as a
hundred: as a Swine that passes through a thousand durtie puddles and wallowes
but in one, it is enough to make her unclean and filthy all over as well as if
she had done it in more. The Scripture is plain in this case, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
Whosoever is in Christ is a new creature, old things are passed away, all
things are become new. Gal. 5. 24. Whosoever is in Christ, has crucified the
flesh with the affections and lusts thereof. So that if there be any living
lusts in a man, I say, if there be one lust that is perfectly living, Nihil
enim prorsus de virtutum splendore attingit, nihil de pictatis suauit^te g^stat
qui magis vul^ sordescere in ijs quae i^munda sunt, quam in ijs splendere qua
sancta sunt, Leo de Ieiunio 7. Mensis Sermo. 8. c. 2.
it is an argument, that the whole body of death is in us. And if it be so, we
are yet in the state of death, and are not translated into the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God. And so I have showed you, That every man by
nature is dead in trespasses and sins, and how you may know it, and that if
we continue in that condition, and are not partakers of the first
resurrection, Revel. 20. 5, 6. The 2. doct.
we shall never be partakers of the second resurrection.

Now we come to the next, which we will dispatch very briefly; namely, That
there is a life contrary to this death.

And that you may understand what it is; you must know, that every man by
nature is in a dead sleep; and therefore he sees not this death, nor feels
it, nor regards it: for it has this property of death, that as a dead man
feels not that he is dead; so he that wants this spiritual life is not
sensible of it; I say 42. 24, 25. Hosca 7. 1, 2. Vulueri vetusto et neglecto
callus obd^citur et eo insanabile, quo insensibile fit. Bernard. de Consider.
l. 1. c. 2.
For the soul in the worse condition it is, the less it feels it. It is not
so with the body: and therefore the first thing that is to be done to bring a
man out of this miserable condition of death, is to waken him; to open his eyes
to see that he is a child of wrath, and to see what extreme need he stands in
of Jesus Christ, and to seek and long after him, as a condemned man longs
after his pardon; as Deuteronomy. 19. 5.
He that was pursued by the Auenger of blood, in the old Law, ran to the City
of refuge for shelter; I say, after that manner we must first be wakened. This
you shall see, (...). Qua propter dicit: Wherefore it says; not he says: that
is, the light mentioned in the former verse, says: Awake thou that sleep
etc. hence we usually say to those which lie long in bed in the daytime; Awake
and arise for shame, for the very daylight, or Sun does call you up; which
interpre tation the very dependency and connection of the words, together with
the 1 These. 5. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and Romans 13. 11, 12, 13. do fully warrant.
Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light; that waking therefore is the first work: and Romans 7. 9
(it is an excellent expression of the Apostle) says he, I was once alive
without the Law, but when the Law came, sin revived, and I dyed; the meaning
of it is: Before, when I was ignorant of the Law, I thought my self a living
man in as good estate as the best; but when the Law came, that is, when I was
enlightened to see the true meaning of the Law, that I see my self and sin
in a right glass, then sin was alive and I dyed; that is, I found my self
no better then a dead man. So that is the first work that God does to a man
that he means to save, to waken him out of this dead sleep, to lay him upon
his conscience, that is, to set it upon him, and to pursue him as the auenger
of blood we spoke of before: when that is done once, then a man will fly to
the City of refuge, that is For amina petrae vul^^ra Christi. In his passer
in^e^it sibi (...), and (...) nidum vbi reponat p^llo^ suos: in his sec^lumba
tutatur, et circumuolat, etc. Bernard.
to Christ, as 1 King. 2. 28
Ioab did fly to the Horns of the Altar, and cry earnestly for pardon of his
sins, even as Judges 15. 18.
Sampson did for water, or else I dye. And when a man comes thus to Christ,
thus humbled, Psalm. 51. 17.
then Christ accepts him, and then he breathes this breath of life into him,
Genesis 2. 7.
as God breathed the breath of life into Adam, and so he is made a living man,
according to that, Ioh. 5. 25. The hour shall come and now is, that the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and those that hear it shall live.
For when a man touches Christ by faith, Math. 9, 20, ^2.
as the woman touched the hemme of his garment, there goes a certain virtue
out from him that Mat. 4. 2.
heales his soul, as that virtue healed the bloody issue. This then is a thing
much to be marked, that even as you see, when Iron comes near the Lodestone,
there goes a virtue from the Lodestone that draws the Iron to it, so though
Acts 1. 11.
Christ be in Heaven, and we upon earth, there goes a certain attractiue
virtue from him, that Cant. 1. 4.
draws us to him; and not only so, but it changes us, it quickens and Romans
12. 2.
reformeth us, by this infusion of a new life, by this transmission of a
certain power and virtue that comes from him.

You will say, This is somewhat obscure; Question.
What kind of virtue is this? What kind of infusion? What kind of transmission?

My beloved, it is true, it is the great mystery Answer.
of life and regeneration: but that we may explain to you what virtue this is,
that comes out from Christ; what kind of infusion and transmission it is, we
will explain it as far as it is expressible; and it is done after this
manner: Even as you see an Artificer, when f Manna absconditum est, nomen novum
est, quod nemo scit nisi qui accipit. Non illud eruditio, sed vnctio docet; nec
scientia sed conscientia appraehendit. Bernard. de Conuersatione ad Clericos,
cap. 21.
he goes about any work of Art, there goes a certain influence from the skill
that is stated in his mind, that passes upon the work as he molds it, and
fashions it, and sets a stamp upon it, according to the Idea that is seated
within: Or as when the will moves the members to and fro, there goes a
commanding acting power, that acts the members, that stirs them according to
the disposition of the will: Or as we see in the work of Nature, when as Bees
make their Combs, or Birds their Nests, there goes out a certain instinct
from God the Author of Nature, that impels and instigates the Creatures to do
according to their kind. Such a kind, I say, such a kind it is of virtue and
power (which the Scripture calls, the Phil. 3. 10, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20.
virtue of his resurrection) that comes from Christ: the Spirit of Christ, that
Ezech. 36. 26, 27. John 3. 3, 5. Romans 12. 2.
molds and fashions the heart of a man, that Ephesians. 1. 18, 19. 20. and 3. 7. 30.
commands powerfully in him, and Romans 2. 1, 14. Gal. 5. 16.
guides and directs him to do agreeable to his will. And this is it (my
beloved) which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 1. 19. he prays there, that
their eyes might be opened to see the exceeding greatness of his power; that
is, it is not an empty form of godliness, but an effectual preualent power,
that puts not upon us only a washy color of a good profession, but dies the
heart in grain with grace and holiness; that is, it does not only alter the
superficies, Ezech. 36. 26, 27. 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. Psalm. 51. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 7.
but changes the whole frame of the heart, Romans 6. 4. 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2.
and turns the rudder of the life, and guides the course to a quite contrary
point of compass. And thus it differs from the form of godliness we spoke of
before, as the life differs from the picture, the substance from the shadow; as
that which has sinews and efficaciousnesse, differs from that which is weak
and powerless. This virtue and power comes from Christ to the soul, when God
means to make any one a living man; it not only makes proffers and offers,
not only breeds good desires and purposes in the heart, Isay 37. 3.
that when they come to the birth, have no strength to bring forth: but it so
plants them in the heart, that they live as the Creatures live in their own
Element; whereas in those that have their old natures still, they wither and
vanish away, as Plants that are in a soil that is not connaturall and suitable
to them. Therefore if we would know, whether this life is wrought in us or no,
let us consider whether ever we have had experience of such a great power,
virtue, and influence from Christ, that has changed, reformed, and renewed us,
and not only made us Obedientia ^ollis imperium; nec dura ibi necessitate
seruitur vbi diligi^ar, quod iubetur. Leo de Ieiunio 7. Mensis Sermo. cap. 1.
willing to live a holy life, to have our lusts mortified, to pray fervently,
and to keep the Sabbath with delight, but likewise enable us to do the things
also, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 4. 13.
I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

So much shall serve to show you that we are by nature dead, and that yet there
is life to be had contrary to that death.

Now for application of this, which shall be threefold.

First let us be exhorted to believe that 1. Use.
there is such a life, for it is said, Col. 3. 3. that this life is hid in
Christ with God: it is hid, and therefore to be believed. The things that we
see, we need not believe, but it is said, it is an hidden life; now why it is
said to be an hidden life, let us consider from whom it is hidden, and with
what it is hidden: It is hidden from q Quia lu^en cacis oculis non vident, non
oculorum ^utant esse culpam, sea Soli^. Hierom. Epist. 22. c. 13
natural men, even as colors from a blind man, or as they are hid in the
dark: the colors are there, but they are said to be hid from him; because
either there wants an eye, or there wants light to see them.

Again, with what it is hid. 1.


This spiritual life, this life of grace, first, it is hid with this natural
life, we see men to breath and live, but this life is within, we cannot see it.

Again, it is hid under a base outside, as Math. 13. 55.
Christ was under a Carpenters Son, as the 1 Cor. 1. 18
2.
wisdom of God is hid under the foolishness of preaching; as Heb. 11. 37, 38.
those Saints the world were not worthy of, were hid under Goats-Skins; and as
the great mystery of salvation hid under 1 Cor. 11. 23, to 30.
the Elements of Bread and Wine: after this manner, I say, this life is hid
under a base outside, because they that live this life of grace, for 1 Cor. 1.
26, to 31.
the most part are base and contemptible in the eyes of the world: and this is
one thing that hides this life from us.

Thirdly, it is hid with the infirmities of 3.
the Saints, even as you see this natural life is hid in a swowne, or as
reason is hid in drunkenness; there is life there, there is reason there, but
it is not seen. So it is true, that James 3. 2.
holy men have many infirmities, and because of them we cannot see this life,
and we think therefore there is no life in them: You know 2 Samuel c. 11. and 12.
David and Math. 26. 69, to 75. 4.
Peter what they fell into.

Last of all, this life is hid from us by misreports, even as Christ was hid
from the world, being Luke 7. 34.
reported to be a Wine-bibber, a companion of gluttones, and Math. 9. 34.
one that cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Thus he was hid.
So the Apostle Paul; and the rest of the Apostles, he says, they were hid from
the world after this manner, 2 Cor. 6. 8. says he, we are as deceivers though
true: that is, though we be true, yet we are as deceivers: that is, we are
reported to be deceitful, and false men. And therefore they that are in great
place should take Exodus 23. 1.
special heed how they admit of reports. For ye shall findethis, that See
Tertulli an, Justin Martyr. Tatianus, Arnobius, in their Apologies for the
Christians against the Gentiles.
in all ages, in all stories, as they say, men for the most part are
mis-reported: Good men are reported the worst of, and evil men are reported
the best of. So that, if we judge by reports, we shall Prou. 17. 15
justify the wicked, and condemn the generation of the just. I say, all these
ways this life is hid from us, and therefore we must believe it, though we may
help our selves a little by experience. We see there is a generation of men
whose life is not in carnal pleasures and delights, that give not themselves
up to sin against God; and it is certain that no man can live without some
delight, no creature can live without it, and since their delight is not in
these things, it is likely there is an other life that they live; that is, an
inward and retired life, even this life Col. 3. 3.
that is hid with Christ in God.

Again, you see there is a generation of men that are k willing to suffer
tortures, and imprisonments, to suffer death for Christ; and h Acts 21. 13.
Revel. 12. 11.
sure they would not be so willing to part with this natural life, if there
were not a better life that they set a higher price upon; they would not let
this go, if they did not hope for another. Thus we may help our selves with
experience, we see not this life, but yet we must believe it. And this is the
first use we are to make of this, to believe there is such a life.

Secondly, if he that has not this life is not in Christ; why then (my
beloved) it 2. Use.
concerns us all to see, that we have the fruits and effects of this
spiritual life in us, that that change be wrought in us which we speak of,
that we have these motions and actions that proceed from an inward principle of
life; that we have that attractiue, and that expulsive disposition, that may
empty the heart of all known sins, which is the effect of this life. And
further (which for ought I see, the Holy Ghost points at above all other signs
of this spiritual life) you must consider whether you love the brethren, you
have it in the first of John 3. 14. We know by this we are passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren. You know a dead member has no sympathy
with the rest, but a living member has a fellow-feeling, yea, a quick and
exquisite sense within, when any member is pained and hazarded; therefore let
us labor to find this character in our selves, by being affected to our
Neighbors, Brethren, and Churches abroad; by having bowels of compassion in us
to melt over their condition, and to desire their safety as our own. For why
should we not? Are they not Ephesians. ^ 4, 5, 6.
the same Church of God that we are? Are they not the same piece? And are they
not as dear to God? And certainly if we show love unto any Church because it
is a Church, Ephe. 1. 15. Col. 1. 4. 1 John 5. 1, ^.
we would do it to one as well as to another. Again we have reason to
commiserate them for our own sakes, for we cannot stand alone, and God has
so ordered it by his providence, Luke 6. 38. Look what measure we mete to
others in their distress, the same shall men measure to us in our necessities:
and how soon the fire may take here also we know not, but this we shall find
in the Prophet Ier. 25. 15, to 30.
Jeremy, when the Nations drank of the cup of Gods wrath, we see there the
cup went round, All the Nations drank of it, some more, some less. But yet if
we drink it not, yet certainly God will recompense us, with good if we do
it, with evil if we omit it. For though he seem angry with his Churches for a
time, as 2 Samuel cap. 14.
David was with Absalon, yet Ioab never did David so acceptable a turn in all
his life, as when he sought to bring home Absalon his banished son, though he
were angry with him all the while. So we cannot do God a more acceptable
service, than to help the Church, though for the present she seem to be
under the cloud of his anger. And doubtless, as the Lord would take it
exceeding ill if we should neglect our duty to them (as I hope we do not, and
shall not) as we see in Judges 5. 23. how the Lord is affected in such a case
as this: Curse ye Merosh, says the Lord, yea curse ye the Inhabitants of
Merosh bitterly, because they came not out to help the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty. Mark, not because they did them any wrong, but because
they came not out, but sat still; and you know the rule; Qui cum possit malum
non impedit, mali est act or potius quam qui id facit. Thucydides Historiae, l.
1.
He that keeps not off an injury when he may, does it. Again, mark the
ground why they came not out, because it was to help the Lord against the
mighty: when the enemies were mighty, they had respect to their own safety,
and sat still; and the phrase is to be observed chiefly, they came not out to
help the Lord: it was not to help the Lord, but to help the Churches at that
time: but yet the Lord takes it as done to himself. So I say, as the Lord will
take it ill if we do it not: So again, if we do it, he will take it
exceeding well at our hands. This work has meat in the mouth of it, it will
bring Prou. 11. 18.
a sure reward with it. Even as 2 Samuel 6. 10, 11, 12.
the Arc when it was harbored by Obed-Edom and others, it brought a blessing,
you know, to them. So certainly the Church brings a blessing to them that
defends it: whereas on the other side, 1 Samuel cap. 5. 6.
when the Arc was violated and ill used by the Philistines, and the men of
Beth shemesh, you know how many thousands were slain for it. Whence I gather,
if God would do so much for that which had but a typical holiness, that
which was but a dead Temple, where he dwelt but for a time; what will he do,
if this living Temple be destroyed? For the people of God are a 1 Pet. 2. 5.
living Temple. Ier. 2. 3, it is said there, Israel is an hallowed thing, he is
my first fruits, therefore he that deuours it shall offend, and evil shall
come to him, says the Lord: therefore in helping the Church of God from being
devoured by strangers, we help an hallowed people, as we see the Lord reckoned
Israel, though they were subject to many failings. I say, let us be stirred up
to do it with all diligence: we may fall out and in at home, and the
vicissitude of fair and foul weather within our own Horizon may pass away
and blow over, as I hope it will, and I pray God it may: yet in the mean
time, if any of the Churches be swallowed up, you know that it is a thing that
cannot be recalled: and therefore let us do our best, and do it in time. And
this I will be bold to say for our encouragement, they are the Churches of God;
and there is a God in heaven that tenders them, and he is a God that Genesis 22.
14.
delights to be seen in the Mount, even when things are past hope; and though
their enemies be exceeding great and mighty; yet when they go about to oppress
the Church, they are as an Zach. 12. 2, 3, 6.
heap of straw that goes about to oppress a Coal of fire that will consume
them; or as one that deuoureth a cup of poison that will prove his death; or as
one that goes about to overthrow a great stone that will fall down again and
bruise him to powder: they are all the Scriptures expressions, as you shall
find them in Zach. 12. though we have not leisure to quote the particular
places. So, I say, will the Lord deal with the enemies of his Church, and will
preserve her: Therefore let this hope encourage us to do it: and for those who
have greatest power and opportunity of doing good in this business, let them
consider that excellent speech of Mordecay to Hester, Hester 4. 24. says
Mordecay to her, If thou hold thy tongue at this time, deliverance shall
appear to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy house shall perish.
The meaning is this; there was then an opportunity of doing good to the Church,
(you know then what extremity the Jews were in;) therefore says he, if thou
do it not, Thou and thine house shall perish. So if any be impediments; nay if
they do not their best; I pronounce this in the name of the most true God, that
will make it good sooner or later, They and their houses shall perish: they
shall be as the straw we spoke of before, that oppresses the Coal of fire. So
I say again on the other side; if they seek to deliver the Churches from
their and her enemies, there is this great advantage in it, it will move God to
deliver them from their enemies again, and to deliver them: as Solomon says;
Prove. 16. 7.
When a man's ways please the Lord, he will make his enemies be at peace with
him.

Thirdly and lastly, wherein I will be very 3. Use.
brief; let us be exhorted to live this life of grace, that is, to do the
duties of obedience, wherewith this life is nourished and maintained: For so
the Lord says, Leuit. 18. 5.
He that keeps my Commandments, shall live in them: even as the Flower lives
in the oil; as the creature lives by food: So man lives by keeping the
Commandments of God; that is, this spiritual life, this life of grace; it is
maintained by doing the Commandments: whereas every motion out of the ways of
God, and into sin, is like the motion of the fish out of the water; every
motion is a motion to death: and oh that we could think of sin as a motion
to death, and of every good action as a putting on toward life; that we could
think this life of grace far more excellent then the life of nature, or of
sinful lusts, pleasures, and delights; for so it is. For surely the life that
God and Angels live, it must needs be the most excellent, and fullest of joy;
and this life they live. And to encourage us to it, let us consider, how God
interlaceth this life of grace with the life of joy, of peace, and outward
prosperity; as you see in diverse examples. Judges 8.
Gideon while he did the actions of this life, you know how he prospered; but
when he set up a golden Ephod, after which the people went a whoring, it was
the destruction of him and his house. 2 Chronicles. cap. 1. to 8.
Solomon, how glorious was his rising, like a bright morning without clouds,
and so he continued till the evening of his life; but when he begun to suffer
rebellions in his Kingdom against God in matter of religion; as it is said, 1
Kings 11. 5.
He set up Ashteroth the abomination of the Zidonians, and Milcom the
abomination of the Ammonites, etc. then God stirred up rebellions against him:
1 Kings 11. 9. to the end of the Chap.
Then it is said, that Hadad, and Reisin, and Ieroboham his own servant lift
up his hand against him; as it is said in the text, the Lord stirred him up for
that cause; so that as long as Solomon did the actions of this life, God
prospered him continually in high degree; when he fell from it, he fell from
his peace that he had. So God interlaceth the life of grace, with the life of
joy, and peace, and outward prosperity. And the like you see in his son
Rehoboa^ for 3. years: when he sought the Lord, says the text, and did the
actions of this life, 2. Chro. 11. 17. so long he prospered, things went well
with him and in Jerusalem; but after 3. years he forsook the Lord and
suffered the people to make them high places; then, says the text, in the 5.
year of his reign (God gave him 2. years respite) 2 Chronicles. 12. 5.
he powered out his wrath upon him and upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak
King of Aegipt; because they had transgressed against the Lord. Where it is to
be observed, that it was not because that Shishak the King of Aegipt, was
angry with Rehoboam, for it is not said it was Shishaks wrath, but the Verse 5.
Thus says the Lord: Ye have forsaken me, and therefore have I left you in the
hand of Shishak.
Lords wrath, Shishak was but the instrument: he was but the viol through which
it was powered upon him. But an example you shall find of this most clear in
Vzziah, 2. Chro. 26. 5. it is said, Vzziah sought the Lord all the days of
Zachariah the Prophet, and as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to
prosper. As long as he did the actions of this life, the life of joy,
prosperity and peace, ran along with it. But after, in verse. 10. when the Lord
had helped him that he grew mighty, then (says the text) his heart was lifted
up to destruction; that, even as you see blasings Comets (though they be but
Comets) yet as long as they keep aloft, they shine bright; but when they begin
to decline from their pitch, they fall to the earth. So when men forsake the
Lord, and mind earthly things, then they lose their light, and are dissipated,
and come to destruction: Whereas on the other side, you see all holy and good
Kings that lived the life of grace constantly, they shined in the dark World,
as Stars in a dark night, neither losing their light nor falling from their
place. And this you shall find in all the Stories of the Kings of Israel and
Judah; that either the suffering of Idolatry and superstition at home, or the
resting upon Ashur and Egypt abroad, was the cause of all their miseries. For
when they were in distresses they sought to these nations that proved Isay 36.
6.
broken reeds, that did not only deceive them, but run into their sides. On
the other side, you may observe, that those that lived this life of grace
perfectly, whose hearts were with God, that they emptied out all the old leaven
of Idolatry, and superstition at home, and in all their distresses, they
trusted upon God: And you shall find it proportionablie, as they did it more
or less, so they prospered. As you may see in Asa; it is the Prophets own
speech to him from the Lord in the 2. Chron. 16. 7. 8. says he, Because thou
have relied on the King of Syriah, and not relied on the Lord thy God,
therefore is the host of the King of Syriah escaped out of thine hand: were
not the Aethiopians and the Lubims an huge host, with very many chariots and
horsemen? Yet because thou reliedst upon the Lord he delivered them into thy
hand. Asa, when a mighty company came against him, of Lubim^ and Aethiopians,
that were, as it is in the chap. before, as the sands, because he rested on
the Lord, he gave him the victory over them: afterward a small army escaped
his hands, why? Because he rested upon the King of Aram. So likewise
Iehosaphat when he came back from helping Achab at the battle at Ramoth
Gilead, the Prophet Iehu meets him in 2. Chro. 19. 2. and says unto himthus:
Oh Iehosaphat, will thou help the wicked? will thou love those that hate the
Lord? Wrath is gone out against thee. So in the 2 Chronicles. 20. 2.
next Chap. ver. 2. it is said, that a great Army came from beyond the Sea, and
Iehosaphat was sore afraid: and likewise when he joined with Ahaziah to make
ships to go to Tarshish, the Prophet Eliezer goes to him and tells him, that
God bad broken the Ships at Ezion. Geber, because he had joined with Ahaziah
the son of Achab, 2. Chron. 20. the last verses. I might give you many examples
(I must not go beyond my time) Jacob, though the thing that he did was good,
as you know he might seek the blessing lawfully; for it was promised to him:
yet because he used evil means, Rebeccha and he used ill means, a lie, you
know what it cost him: he was banished from his Fathers house many years; and
you know how much sorrow Rebeccha had for it, even for failing in the manner.
So David, look what his intermissions were in doing the actions of this life,
this spiritual life, you see likewise his troubles were: and therefore let us
be exhorted to live this life of grace, seeing we have so great
encouragements: I say, if you observe throughout the scriptures, and above all
other places from the 2. Chron. 11. to the end of the book, which is exceeding
well worth the reading, where you have not only the Stories of the Kings set
down, but the causes of all the accidents that did befall them; we see all
along, as they lived this life of grace, as they did the actions of this life,
that is, as they kept their hearts perfect with God, so their outward joy and
prosperity was accordingly; and the interruption and intermission they found in
that, was according to their intermission in this. And therefore let us be
exhorted to live this life. For certainly, every life has an excellency, has
a sweetness in it, more then any mere being; and as any life exceedes another,
so it has it more: as the life of a man exceeds the life of a beast, so the
life of grace exceeds the life of a man: and therefore it is capacious of
greater joy, and of greater grief. On the other side; as you know the joy of
the Saints is unspeakable and glorious, and passes all understanding; so the
despair and horror of conscience again, exceeds as much. And let us mark
this; that as he that lives the life of a beast, destroies himself as a man;
So he that lives the life of a man, that is, the life of reason only, the life
of a humane wisdom and policy, he destroies himself as a Christian.
Therefore let us be exhorted to live this spiritual life of grace: it is the
best for our selves; yea let us abound in the Actions of this life as much as
may be; For one man may live more in a day then another man does in a year.
For life is in the action; so much as we do, as far as we exercise this
spiritual life, so much we live: and look what time is spent vainly and
idly, so much of our life death possesses: as in the 1 Timothy 5. 3. it is
said, The woman that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives.

FINIS.

