EPHESVS WARNING BEFORE HER WOE.

A SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross on Passion Sunday, the 17. of March last.

By SAMPSON PRICE, Bachelour of Divinity, of Exeter College in Oxford:

Imprinted at London by G. ELD for John Barnes, dwelling in Hosier lane, near
Holborne Condut 1616.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Lisle, Lord Chamberlain to the
Queens Majesty, and Lord Governor of his Majesty's Cautionary Town of
Vlushing, Mercy and peace.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
THat Speech of Solomon is, Eccl. 12.12. ^lc. Alex. l. 1. str. p. 1. Hic
scripto, ille vece praedicat. Animae sunt soetus Orationes. Id. ib. Mar. 12.41,
43. Cyp. Tr. de op. and elcemos. (...)
and must continue true: of making many books there is no end; while the world
continues, occasion will not be wanting of speaking and writing. Our Church
has many deserving Laborers, who by voice and pen seek to build up the
walls of Jerusalem. My desire is to cast my Mite into the Treasury, as that
poor widow did, whom our Savior commended, not considering quantum, sed ex
quanto de disset; how much, but of how much she offered: respecting rather the
affection of the giver, then the quantity of the guist. This Sermon (by the
earnest solicitation of some religious hearers and my dear favorers) was
brought from the Cross to the Press, and is now licenced to be a general
Remembrancer of all those who shall read or hear it; Spartian. in vita Adrian.
Imp.
to whom I wish as happy a memory as that of Adrian, who perfectly (ever
afterward) knew them that had but once spoken unto him. (...)
In Moral actions and civil affairs fear oftentimes has hindered the memory
of the wisest; as it is recorded of Demosthenes, that he was at a Nonplus
being to speak before Philip King of Macedon: and as it fell out to
Theophrastus before the Areopagites of Athens. But a holy fear of Gods name,
must be the ground of our Remembrance and Repentance. Your Honor has
obtained a blessed report for your Noble Virtues, and imitation of your
Heroical Brother. Sir Phil. Sidney.
I have therefore adventured to dedicate this poor labor unto your
protection, to lodge safely from the snarling of biting censurers, as under the
covert of Minerua's shield. Your honorable countenance so lately and
cheerfully ready to call me (from this stipend which I enjoy amongst many
loving and worthy friends) to a more ample maintenance (though God disposed
otherwise of it) has obliged me to acknowledge by that little cunning which
my right hand has; S. Olau^. in Southwarke.
so great a Kindness. I can seal my thankfulness by no better a testimony then
this; Ps. 137.5.
craving still the continuance of your honorable favor. God the great rewarder
continue his blessings unto you and your Honorable Lady and hopeful children,
and at the resurrection of the Just, crown he you all with everlasting glory.

Your Honors in all duty. SAMPSON PRICE.

EPHESVS WARNING before her Woe.
Lord Jesus begin and end.
REVE. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
Candle stick out of his place, except thou repent.


WHen the sin of the old World did multiply and grew a burden to the Earth:
the Sons of God taking them wives, of all which they chose, whether Virgins
or married unto others.; the most of them being Giants, Mercerus and ^unius in
Genesis
not only in stature, but in cruel conditions, according to Philo and
Damascen, infamous for their tyranny over others, bringing them in subjection,
and eating their flesh; Theod. q. 84. ^n Genesis
every imagination of the thoughts of their hearts only evil continually. It
repented the Lord that he had made man on the Earth. Genesis 6.6. It is Verbum
nostra paruitati accommodatum, a word applied to our weakness, Chrysostom. ho. 22. in
Genesis
to express the greatness of their sins, Quae misericordem Deum indignari
fecerunt, which compelled the merciful God to be angry.

Non perturbatio sed iudicium quo irrogatur poena, Aug. li. 15. de ciu. c. 25.
says Austin, It is no perturbation in God, but an imposition of punishment.
Rup. l 4. in Genesis
Rupertus calls it an argument of his pity, showing that he is loath to
punish.

Six ages he did forbear them, a thousand years and more, and gave them Noah
to preach repentance 120. years, before he purged that Augaeum stabulum with
a deluge of waters. The Sins of Sodom and Gomorrha were exceeding great, Genesis
19.24.
before fire and brimstone were rayned down by the hand of Christ from Jehovah
his father, as Marcus Arethusius in the Syrinian Council does interpret that
place, Syriniens. conc. c. 16.
against the heresy of Photinus, that held Christ not to have been before his
Mother. His Cup of wrath is never full mixed with red Wine, Psalm. 74.8.
to pour out the same with the dreggs thereof, till the measure of our Crimson
and Scarlet sins be filled in. He sends Watchmen to blow the Trumpet and
warn the people; but if they take not warning, their blood shall be upon their
own heads. Ez. 33.4 If the Rod of his mouth, and Breath of his lips (so the
word is called Is. 11.4.) cannot prevail, he takes away this Candlestick.
And when once a Church shall loose Prophets which are ready to teach, Seers to
foretell, Ge. 20 7. 1 Sa. 9 9. 2 Pet. 1.13. 1 Cor 3.9. Lu. 12.42. Ez. 47.10.
Remembrancers to put in mind, Husbandmen to plow up, Stewards to distribute,
Fishers to catch men, Stars to give light, and Shepherds to feed, all
blessings depart and curses follow. Yet now it is threatened to Ephesus.
Remember.

It was truly acknowledged by Clemens Alexandrinus, that Bona est ars terrere
ne peccemus: It is a good art which terrifieth from sinning: yet as Aust.
fatherlike, Aug. Ep. ^.8.
Si terrerentur et non docerentur improba quafi dominatio videretur, If those
that err should be terrified only, and not be taught, it might seem a kind
of tyranny: Sed rursus si docerentur et non terrerentur, vetustate
consuetudinis obdurarentur, But again, if they should be taught and not
terrified, custom would harden them, and make them pace but slowly to the way
of eternal life. Therefore S. John, Legatus a latere, The Ambassador who
leaned on his Lords breast, partly by instruction, and partly by correction,
seeks to win these collapsed Churches, whose reprehension may stir us up to
hearken, whose threats may make us fear, whose fallings may make us stand. Our
sins are as theirs, we have the luke-warmenes of Laodicea, which in this
place I once proposed as a warning. c. 3.16.
Add to this the little strength of Philadelphia: v. 8.
Imperfection of works with Sardis: v. 2.
searching the depths of Satan with Thyatira: Nicholaitans, c. 2. v. 24.
as in Pergamos which held fornication to be no sin: Many professing to be
Jews, V. 14.
as in Smyrna, V. 9.
(Christians amongst us) but are the Synagogue of Satan: with Ephesus we have
left our first love, of which I am come to put you in remembrance by this Text.
The Lord make it as profitable as it is useful. Remember.

The Author of which words is one who appeared unto John like the Son of man,
c. 1. v. 13.
Christ Jesus like unto a man, clothed with a Garment down to the foot,
signifying his Priesthood and Principality: Girt about the paps with a golden
girdle, signifying his care ever to be ready for his Church: his head and
hayres white as wool and snow, signifying his eternity: his Eyes as a flame of
fire, signifying his quick sight peircing to the very thoughts: his Feet like
unto fine brass signifying his ability to encounter against Sin, Satan and
Death. His voice as the sound of many waters, signifying the greatness and power
of it. The 7. Stars in his right hand are the seven Pastors of the Churches
in Asia, called Angels, vt dignitatem seruent in nomine quam explent in
operatione, Greg. in Mat.
that they might retain that dignity in name, whereunto by office they are
entitled. Not some Bishops only, as Alcasar the lesuit in his new painted bull
ke would have it, Arcan. sens. in Apoc.
or the people apart are aimed at, as Per erius thinks, but more truly
according to Saint Ambrose, Haimo, and Bid, both are to be joined, Pastors and
people. S. John was now (as our Savior) at this time led into to the
wilderness, where being disabled to preach because he was an exile, like
Zachary, Ambr.
cum loqui non potuit scripsit, when he could not speak, he wrote; that the
pen might make supply of the want of his tongue, especially having his
commission from him who is the first and the last, from him who was dead and is
alive, and has the keys of death and of hell. He that runs by may read his
writing, bringing back Ephesus to her principles. Remember.

A Text as necessary for our times, Ep. 5.16.
as our times are near unto Ephesus backsliding: we may complain as Saint
Paul, the days are evil. The sound of the word has gone into all our land,
the bright beams of the Gospel have gloriously shined upon us, the Bells of
Aaron have been long rung amongst us, yet we are like those whom S. Austin
taxed calling them Dormitantes, Au. l. 3 c. 14. de doct. Chr.
half waking, neither altogether asleep in ignorance, nor thoroughly awaked to
see so much of the truth as we may. We have many Professors in mouth, Atheists
in life, Protestants in appearance, Papists in heart, zealous in snew, nothing
in deed. Others halt betwixt two opinions, and so fall from drowsines to
sleep, from slacknes to defection, from indifference to senslesnes, and so to
a loathing of all religion. The greatest part have forsaken their first love.
But here is a scripture aiming at these and all other sins, be they of never
so transcendent an elevation. At those Magistrates, which like Wolves raven the
prey to shed blood, and to destroy souls to get dishonest gain, Ez. 22.27.18.
that though a man's cause be never so light in the balance of equity, it is
not material if he can make it up in gold. At those Prophets which daube with
untempered mortar, seeing vanity and yet divining lies, promising peace unto
the wicked and never speak of wrath. At the idle Lozzel, who had rather beg and
steal then labor with his hands. At the edge of private revenge which will
have eye for eye, hand for hand, satisfaction for any wrong. At the soaring
Pride of Ambition, flying so high out of compass that it flies it self out
of breath, crying still aut Caesar aut nihil, as good to be last as not first.
Mic. 6.10 11.12.
At the treasures of wickedness in the houses of the wicked. At the
abominable scant measure, bag of deceitful weights, and violent tongues.
Mic. 6. At those who have erred through Wine and strong drink, whose belly is
their God. At those Tables which are full of vomit and filthiness: though they
hear precept upon precept, line upon line, they will go and fall backward and
be broken, and snared and taken making a covenant with death, and an agreement
with hell. Ie. 48.11.
At those who like Moab have been at ease from their youth, and are settled upon
the lees of their sins, their sent never changed, Ie. 48. That I say to
these, I say to all who have forsaken their first love, Remember.

As a tenderhearted Surgeon coming to his sick Patient for the cutting off a
joint, seeing him fear and tremble, handles it with much care and compassion,
and suddenly strikes the stroke: so says Gregory, Gr. ho. 11. in Ez.
deals Christ with his Church, his beloved Spouse Ephesus. Saluberrimum
temperamentum miscens laudationem cum correptione. Rupertus calls it a
wholesome mixture where is commendation and reproof. Both are met in this
Epistle: where the Angel, that is the Pastor of Ephesus: Timothy as Aureolus
would have it: or Onesimus as some: or Tychicus as others and under him whole
Ephesus is taxed for remissnes: the matter being thus debated. Ephesus think
not but that I know thy works: Thou may deceive the world, thou can not
deceive me.

Soloculis hominem, quibus aspicit omnia, cernit. Guide. metam.
This Sun of righteousness, whose eyes are ten thousand times brighter then
the Sun, can pierce through the cloud of men's actions if it were darker then
hell.

I know thy labor and it pleases me. He was worthy of double honor. 1. These.
5.17. I pity thy patience: This Angel was not like Jeremy, v. 2.
who at the mocking of the people cursed the day wherein he was born, and the
man who brought tidings to his father that a manchild was born unto him, not
slaying him from the womb, wishing that his mother might have been his grave,
and her womb always to be great with him: Ie 48.14.15.17.18.
Ie. 48.18. or like Jonas, who though he was schooled in the Whales belly, yet
when all things went not according to his mind in the destruction of Nineveh,
Ion. 4.9.
he became exceeding discontent, and defended his unlawful anger. He possessed
his soul in patience, Paetientia ipsum anat que^ portat Gr. in Ezech. h^. 7.
because he loved them whom he spoke unto. I commend thy discipline, how thou
can not bear them which are cuill. These and the like were the first fruits
of thy affection, but alas thou have fallen off from these: yet I will not the
death of a sinner, I rather wish thy conversion. Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen. Viega^ in text. Genesis 3.9. Am^^. l. de Paradise. c. 14.
They are like the words of God unto Adam, when he called and said unto him,
where art thou? De quibus bonis, de qua beatitudine, de qua gratia, in quam
miseriam cecidisti? From how many good things blessings and graces, into what
misery have thou fallen? Non tam interrogatio, quam increpatio est, it was not
so much an interrogation, as an increpation. Sometimes God uses to speak by
his secret inspiration, 2. Kin. 20.4.
as to Isaiah, 2 Ki. 2. Sometimes by his Angels, who speak by voice only as
to Christ, there came a voice from heaven Ioh. 12. or by vision internal, Ioh.
12.28 Ge. 28.12. Ge. 18.1.4.
as the ladder that Jacob saw in his dream. Ge. 28. external, in humane shape
as to Abraham. Ge. 18. By other Creatures either without sense, as by fire in
the bush to Moses; or having sense, as the Angel spoke in Balaams Ass. Here
because writing remains when the voice periseth, an Epistle is sent unto
Ephesus teaching the art of the happiest memory, whose objects are good things
once practiced, omitted, and evil things committed. Repentance must follow,
and doing the first works, Repent and do the first works: A Spirit of
slumber was fallen upon Ephesus, as heavy as that of Adam when he lost his rib,
or of Isbosheth when he lost his head. The case stood betwixt Christ and
Ephesus, as betwixt a loving son and his sick father, who laboring with a
lethargy, The Physician tells the son, that his fathers immoderate desire of
sleep is mortal, therefore he must nor suffer him to slumber. The son
seeing his father heavy, pulsat, vellicat, pietate molestus est, he knocks,
pulls, and so seems to be troublesome, but it is because he loves him.
Aug. ho. 11. quinque hom. and ser. 60. do verbis Domini inter se comp.
AEgrotat humanum genus, says Austin, All Mankind is sick of sin: amongst
these Ephesus. Christ Jesus the great Physician cries out Awake thou that
sleep, open thine eyes, that thou sleep not in death, it is now time to
arise, and repent, and do the first works. Either the Pastors seeing their
preaching take little effect grew negligent, as Hugo Cardinalis supposes the
fault: or they were not so liberal to the poor, says Arethas: or we may
understand it with Rich. de S. Victore of all faults now to be amended, for
Christ will bear no longer, he is impatient of any further delays, and
therefore threateneth, or else I will come unto thee quickly. (...) The
Original is, I will come to thee shortly, so the vulgar Latin gives it to
this sense, Venio tibi, words taken in good part. His going forth is prepared
as the morning and he shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and
former rain unto the earth, Os. 6. so Zac. 9. Rejoice greatly O daughter of
Sion, O^. 6.3. Zac. 9.9.
shout O daughter of Jerusalem. Behold thy King comes unto thee. But here it
signifies a judgment, and therefore is rendered by Beza in these words,
veniam aduersum te cito, I will come against thee quickly: and his coming is
for revenge, And will remove thy Candlestick out of his place. The Church shall
never be utterly destroyed, but for sin the Gospel is often removed: Merito
patietur vltorem, Aug. de verb. Dom. se. 12.
qui noluit audire praeceptorem. If men will not hear Gods precepts, they must
bear his punishments. Thus love is violent, and Foelix illa necessitas quae ad
meltora compellit, Aug. Ep. 45.
it is a blessed necessity which enforces us to virtue. God who forbeareth a
long time pays home at the last, by removing his Church: and upon this, the
taking away of the Ministry of the Gospel and the profession thereof, in stead
of truth there must succeed Ignorance, Apostacy and Heresy, unless
repentance and the fruits thereof attend the preaching of the word. Remember
therefore.

You see the drift of our wronged Savior: the sum of the whole is a
remembrance unto Ephesus of a decay in spiritual graces, which must be
recovered, else the means of salvation shall be taken away from them. We may
call it a sovereign remedy against the fearful sin of Apostasy, or a
heavenly qualification of Law and Gospel, mercy and judgment, or a divine
Remembrancer of al Churches by Ephesus Preacher, John an Evangelist, Apostle
and Prophet, whose words which I have read, without racking, fall a sunder into
two parts 1. A remarkable meditation for Ephesus, Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works. 2. A zealous
indignation upon the not practicing of this lesson, Or else I will come unto
thee quickly, and will remove thy canalesticke out of his place, except thou
repent.


The 1. general part contains 2. particular circumstances. 1. A recollection
of time past, Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen. 2. A Christian
resurrection for the time to come, And repent and do the first works.


The 2 points out 2. other. 1. A speedy visitation, Or else I will come unto
thee quickly. 2. A terible execution of this commination, yet mixed with much
compassion, And will remove thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou
repent.


The first includes an accusation of falling, delivered to the memory.

The second, an inquisition of the former works to keep from a final Apostasy.

The third, a sudden trial, wherein without repentance there must be severity.

The fourth and last, the downfall of Religion, and piety. Remember.

Thus Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and blessed Brethren, I have brought
you a Text, wherein there is not only John, a Son of Thunder, Mar. 3 17.
Act. 4.36. Re. 2.7 If. 51.17.
but Barnabas, a Son of consolation. He that has an ear let him hear what
the Spirit says, or rather sounds out, for there can be no man, unless he
have drunk the dregs of the Cup of slumber, but this message must awake him.
The Temple is opened, the lists and land-markes of this holy Land propounded,
and now come farther to be surueied. Let me beseech your Religious and
cherefull attention: My only aim shall be the glory of God, service of the
Church, discharge of my Conscience, and your instruction. The solemnity of the
time and place required a Passion-Text. Repentance is the Passion. The Lord
grant that it may find and leave us true practisers of it. But I must remember
to go back to the door of my Text, the front and forehead whereof is
Remembrance, the 1. particular of my 1. general. Remember therefore from whence
thou art fallen.

Amongst all the faculties of the soul, there is none which sooner waxes old
then memory. Sins obliquitie has caused the appetite still to desire, yet
never to be satisfied, the affections to deny obedience unto reason, the
desire to swell infinite, the will is often mad, the mind lame, the memory of
the best by nature forgetful, and therefore grace must teach us the art of
memory. Man forgets himself to be man: whereupon the conquering Romans,
Ierom.
amidst their greatest pomp and triumphs, had ever one at the back of the
Chariot to pull the Conqueror by the sleeue, and so often as the people shouted,
to cry to him again, Memento te hominem esse, Remember thou art a man. A
lesson which Simonides, the first humane inuentour of the art of memory, Tully.
taught Pausanias King of the Lacedaemonians at a banquet, being desired to
speak something of greatest importance, which for the present was taken
scornfully, but afterward in a famine, the King confessed the wisdom of the
heathen man. It was the morning voice of Philips boy. Pharaohs Butler forgot
Joseph, Genesis 40.23 Genesis 41.51. Da. 2.8. Mat. 16.5. Sab. l. 10. c. 9. Pli li. 7.
c. 24. Vola ter. l. 21.
Joseph forgot all his toil, and all his Fathers house. Nebuchadnezzar
dreamed, but the thing went from him, he forgot his own dream. The Disciples
forgot to take bread with them. Messala Coruinus after a sickness forgot his
own name. Another mentioned by Plinv, having a great fall, Zuing. Theat.
forgot his own Mother, Gregorius Trapezuntius in his old age the Greek
tongue, wherein he had excelled. Theseus the white sail which his father
charged him to set up if he returned a victor into Crete, and using a black
one it was dismal to Agetus. Orbilius forgot his Alphabet. Caluisius the names
of those with whom he conuersed daily. Curio the Judge forgot the cause he
should have given judgment upon. Atticus, the Son of Sophista, the names of
the 4. Elements. The Thracians their Arithmeticke, so that they could not count
above the number of 4. Ephesus here forgot her first works, her first love,
and therefore is roused up. Memory is the Diarie, Eph^^merides, and looking
glass of a Christian: It belongs to things past, as Sense does to things
present, and Hope to things future. Tully called it the print or trace of
things. Quintilian, the ground of all learning. Plato, the mother of the Muses.
Aristotle, the Scribe of the Soul. The Physician, the Lawyer, the
Mathematician, the Merchant holds his book of accounts, or remembrancer to be
his canticum canticorum, the most comfortable book that he has. Many have
been recorded for strange memories. Portius Latro, who never needed to read any
thing which he had once written. Aeltus Adrianus remembered the names and acts
of all his Soldiers. Carmides of Greece, any thing which he had heard.
Mythrydates was able to speak 22. languages. Caesar a Roman Dictator was able
to write, speak, and hear others discourse at one and the same time. Erasmus
of Roterodame had a memory like a Net. Blessed Jewel, usually began not to
commit his Sermons to heart till the ringing of the Bell. In vita eius.


It is a singular gift of God, an extraordinary perfection of art; which made
Pythagoras beg memory of Mercury, being commanded to ask what he would,
except immortality, and he should have it. But according to the object it is
more commendable. There is Memoria vitanda, The remembrance of injuries,
seeking revenge, as Juno never left her Trojan enemy but by Sea and land
persecuted him, which made him expostular Tantaene animis coelestibus irae.

Better it were for such to have, Virg.
as Themistocles wished, the art of forgetfulness rather then the art of this
memory. You know how it was rewarded in Caine, Esau, Absolon, Haman. There is
memoria timenda, Gods remembrance of our sins, in regard whereof David
prayed, Remember not the sins of my youth nor my transgressions, Psalm. 25. So
in our Lyturgy, Remember not Lord our offenses, Psalm 25.7.
nor the offenses of our Forefathers, that is, to punish them in us. There is
Memoria petenda, the remembrance of us in mercy, David's appeal, Lord remember
David and all his afflictions. Psalm. 132. and the good Thief, Psalm. 132 1.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Luke 23. Luk 23.42.
There is memoria tenend^, A remembrance of God, I remembered the Lord. Ion. 2.
Of his name, I have remembered thy name O Lord in the night, ion. 2.7.
and have kept thy law. Psalm. 119. We must remember his marvelous works that
he has done, Psalm. 119.55.
his wor^ers and the judgments of his mouth. Psalm. 105. Psalm. 105.5.
We must remember his Sabbath, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, Exo.
20. Not that we should remember God but one day in seven, Exo. 20.8.
but that if we would be forgetful, yet we should remember him one day in
seven at the least. We must remember Christ's passion: to this end we receive
the Eucharist: This do in remembrance of me. Luke 22. We must remember death,
iudgdement, Luke 22.19.
and hell.

We must remember our Parents. Remember that thou wast begot of them, and how
can thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee? Eccle. 7.
Our pastors, Remember them which have the rule over you, Ecc. 7.28.
who have spoken unto you the word of God. Heb. 13. And here our falls appear
to be remembered, Heb. 13.7.
by Ephesus, Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen: whence issues
this doctrinall observation.

That it is the duty of those who have fallen from any grace, Doct.
to look back upon their former estate.

The Lord himself is a witness to the truth of this point. Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, consider your ways, Hagg. 1.7.
Hag. 1. A Method which the Prophet Zephanie used unto the Jews: for having
rebuked them for their notable crimes, Zeph. 1.6.
Idolatry, fraud and cruelty, turning back from the Lord, being clothed with
strange apparel, and settled on their lees, then threatening the cutting down
of their Marcha^ts, that their goods should become a booty, and their houses a
desolation, that the mighty man should cry bitterly, that their blood should be
poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung, that neither their silver nor
gold should be able to deliver them, he exhorts them to consider their
estates. Zeph. 2.1.
Gather our selves together, yea gather together O Nation not desired.
Repentance will make a man gather himself and all his wits together, which
before were dispersed and wandered up and down in vanity. Excutite vos, Iunius
translateth it, search, try, fan your selves. This course the Prophet David
took, I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. Psalm.
119. This was the practice of Peter's repentance: Psalm. 119.59.
howsoever he followed his Master a far off, yet he came into the high
Priests house, and sat down when they had kindled a fire in the midst of the
Hall: Better it had been for him to have been without, freezing, then to stand
by the fire with so many infectious lepers. It was a cold night that took away
his heat of love.

No doubt he heard many hard passages upon his Master, one boasting that he
had cast down the Nazarite, another that he had tumbled him in Cedron,
another that he had given a blow. Peter is silent, whatsoever they say, and Vno
eodemque silentio firmat errorem, Fulg. de myster. Mediat. ad Thras. Vandal.
Regem.
qui loquendo non astruit veritatem. When a man does not seek to confirm the
truth by speaking, his silence establishes error: perhaps his silence betrayed
him: But a maid beheld him and earnestly looking upon him said, This man was
also with him: which words were as the stone of little David unto that great
Giant Goliath.

Dux Foemina facti. The Woman began in Paradise: no marvel she was in Court.
Aut amat aut odit, nihil est tertium: There is no love stronger then the love
of a woman. Can. 8.6.
It is strong as death: and no wickedness like the wickedness of a wicked
Woman. It abateth the courage, Ec. 25.13.23.
makes a heavy countenance and a wounded heart. Wine and Women will make Men
of understanding to fall away. Eccl. Eccl. 19.2. Luke 22.57.
19. Peter denied him saying,(...) Lu. 22. I know him not. He knew him not who
called him and his brother from their old nets, who healed his wives mother,
who was transfigured before him on the mount. He had first of all the rest
confessed him to be consubstantiall with the father. He had promised to live
and dye with him, Luke 22.33.
yet he denied him three several times. He stumbled and fell and dashed his
foot against the stone. Leo in mensa, lepus in praelio: like many who cry out
for war, inexpert in any thing but their heels. Saxa memor retulit rursus ad
icta pedem. Seven times in a day the just man falls, Luke 2^.59.
but Peter three times in one hour denies his Master: he had quickly come to
the number of 77. times a day, had God suffered him to go on, for at the last
he began to curse and swear, saying I know not the man. Mat. 26.74. Ioh. 18.26.
he was strongly tempted. A Kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, spyeth
him, Scribitque in marmore laesus:

Did not I see thee in the Garden with him? His valor, his Country, his speech
bewrayed him. Hoc factumest magnae pietatis dispensatione, vt qui futurus erat
Pastor Ecclesiae, in sua culpa disceret, qualiter aliis misereri debuisset,
says Gregory. Saint Peter was to instruct others, Gr. ho. 21. recitatur in
De^ret. di. 50.
and how could he with compassion, unless he had first fallen himself?
Behold his resurrection! Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said
unto him, Before the Cock crow thou shall deny me thrice, and he went out and
wept bitterly. No marvel that Saint Peter fell so grievously. He was but one.
Woe to him that is alone. Eccle. 4.9.10.
He has no man to help him. Ephesus is fallen; one of the most famous Cities
of the world, the Metropolis of little Asia, the glory of Ionia, built in the
28. year of David, Eusebius. in Chronic, Pausan. as ^n Achaicis. Chris. praes. ad
Ephesians. To. ^. conc Ephesians. c. 27. in Ep. ad cler. Constantinop. Lucian de
Morteperegr.
either by the Amazons or one called Craesus. Hence came Pythagoras,
Parmenides, Zeno, Democritus. Here John and the Virgin lived. Ephesus was
renowned for the great temple of Diana, one of the wonders of the World, 425.
feet long, 220. broad, having 127. pillars the works of so many Kings, 220.
years in building, which Xerxes spared when he burnt all the other Temples of
Asia, though Herostratus a base person, fired it on that day wherein Alexander
was born at Pella, only to make himself famous. Ephesus became (...) an
omission of good things, languishing in her first love, falling away. To search
the reasons with Pererius were curious, whether they fell because of the
instability of free will, or because no violent thing is perpetual, or because
Gods grace being supernatural and in man, is in a strange subject: we see
their fall yet it is not final. They are recouerable, else no reme^brancer
should be sent unto them. It is a most accursed gloss of the Rhemists, that
because Ephesus left her first love, In Apoc.
therefore our opinion is refuted that a man once in grace and charity can
never fall from it. I confess many examples in holy Scripture are terrible to
the weak Christian. David, whose conscience once was so tender that he cried
out, The Lord forbid that I should stretch out mine hand against the anointed
of the Lord, 1. Sa. 24 6.
yet causes Vriah to be slain. Noah preserved in the destruction of the old
World, Ge. 7.7.19.16.9.21.19.33. In Ps. 51.
and Lot in the overthrow of Sodom, were both shamefully drunk. Non cadendi
exemplum propositum est, sed si cecideris resurgendi, Examples says Austin for
our instruction, not that we should learn to fall, but having fallen to rise
again. There may be an Eclipse of Gods graces in the best, but he can never
fall away finally or totally from faith. Ioh. 13.1.
Whom God loves he loves to the end. He that believes on him has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from
death unto life, Ioh. 5. It may be with the child of God as it was with
Eutichus. Ioh. 5.24.
He fell into a deep sleep, Act. 20.9.12.
sunk down with sleep, and was taken up dead, yet when Saint Paul fell on
him, embracing him, he said trouble not your selves, for his life is in him:
and they brought the young man alive. So Gods Child, in his own eyes and the
judgment of others, may seem utterly to fall from grace, but he is built
upon the immouable rock Christ Jesus, and the greatest storms of temptations
cannot make him perish, Mat. 7.25.
He may diminish the good graces of God within him, else S. Paul had never
exhorted the Thessalonians. Quench not the spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5.19.
He may after repentance fall into the same sin again, else Christ had
never given that charge to the man that had been sick thirty and eight
years, Ioh. 5.14.
sin no more lest a worse thing come unto thee. He may sin presumptuously,
that is willingly, and in some sort wilfully, else David had never prayed,
Psalm. 19.13.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins. The Child of God may
seem to sin desperately, either through ignorance of his own estate, or
through horror of Conscience for sins committed, or through an often relapse
into some sin, or through a serious consideration of his own unworthiness, or
by abiuration of the truth through compulsion and fear. The incestuous
Corinthian was like to be holden in this transgression, and therefore Saint
Paul wishes the Corinthians to forgive him, and to comfort him, least perhaps
he should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. I am sure poor Jonas was
almost plunged in it: I am cast out of thy sight. Ion. 2. A dangerous
conclusion, Ion. 2.4.
a horrible sin, crossing Gods love which many waters cannot quench, neither
can the floods drown it, Cap 8. It crosses his truth, which proclaims that
if the wicked will turn from all his sins that Cap. 88.
he has committed, and keep all his statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live and not dye, Ez. 18.21.
Ez. 18. His power, which is able to subdue our iniquities, and cast all our
sins into the depthes of the sea, Mic. 7.19.
Mic. 7. His justice, who has laid upon Christ the iniquity of us all, Is. 53.
His mercy, Is. 53.6.
which upon our return will abundantly pardon Is. 55. A sin which being
yielded unto in a Melancholique nature, Is. 55.7.
the Devils forge, puts many bloody instruments into the hands of a man to
destroy himself.

Quid nunc diuitiae? quid fului vasta metalli Congeries? Claudian.
Heaps of gold and silver, wife, Children, friends and pleasures, seem then
miserable comforters: but the elect yield not, God forbid they should. Here
were leaping from the pan into the fire. Qui nihil potest sperare, desperet
nihil. Sen. Misericordiae Domini nec mensuras possumus conere, nec tempora
definire. Leo
It is an unlawful, murtherous, damnable riot, whether it be to prevent
bondage, as Cato Vticensis, because he would not be in subjection to Caesar,
killed himself: or Nero, being censured of the Senate: or when any thing
falls out contrary to expectation, as many hoorders up of corn in dearths,
seeing plenty: or to prevent sin and shame, as Lucretia, ravished by
Tarquinius: or preposterously desiring to taste of happiness, as Cleombrotus
reading Platoes book of the immortality of the soul: or upon horror of
Conscience, as Saul and Judas. For death is an enemy, and therefore not to be
procured. The Beasts hurt not themselves, and shall men? Every man should be
nearest unto himself. 1. Co. 15.26.
Our life is the gift of God, he only must resume it. It is an injury to the
common wealth, the glory whereof is in the multitude of Subjects. Patriarks,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, have walked another path, Ber. de vita solit.
patiently waiting for a dissolution. Jonas was in a dangerous pang, yet at
last overcame. There is a veruntamen, a yet, or notwithstanding, Tantam absur
ditate^ in dicando refutasse arbitror. Jer. Ep. 54.
which as the rudder in the sentence turns it another way. I will look
again toward thy holy Temple: Gods child cannot fall finally, or utterly:
Gods favor not depending upon man's free will, but his own free election,
whose decrees are unalterable, and gifts without repentance. I might show you
here Satan against Satan, the Jesuits against the Rhemists: Viegas words
crossing the former gloss: Non amisit charitatem, sed de charitatis feruore
nonnihil remisit, Ephesus fell not from charity, but was not so hot as before.
The mention of the Rhemists opinion confuteth it: so of their other errors.
The time would fail me to remember Rome of her great fall in many other
particulars. Au. l. de unit. Eccl. c. 16.
Her miracles being like the wonders of the Donatists, in S Augustines times,
Aut figmenta mendacium hominum aut portenta fallacium spirituum, Either
fictions of lying men, or fantasies of dreaming Devils. Claudius Espencaeus, 2.
Tim. 4. dig. 2^.
their own writer confesses: No stable is so full of dung, as the Legends
full of fables: yea fictions are contained in their Portesses. They have fallen
from the faith in Miracles. Sacramental. li. 1. c. 7. p. 30
Their Merits is a doctrine of Pelagianisme, says Waldensis; never allowed
(says judicious Perkins) of the sound professors for a thousand years after
Christ. Romes Cusanus maintains, Dem^. Probl. cir. Excit. l. 9.
that Christ's death was only of ability to merit eternal life. They have
fallen from the faith in merits. So in satisfaction, another twig arising from
the same root, then which no opinion is more injurious to the death of Christ,
wherein it were a shame to speak what Suarez, To. 1. disp. 4.
Durand, and other grosser Papists have discoursed. But their Bayus sticks
not to grant, that there is but one satisfaction only unto God, even that of
Christ. De indulg. t. vlt.
Let them remember how they have fallen in satisfaction. So in Purgatory,
worthy of a Satyr, which Luther in a frumpe called Stercus humanum: Popish
Doctors cannot agree among themselves of the fire, the torments, the subjects,
the duration, the exequutioners, the condition of the souls there detained. It
was unknown to the Church 1100. years after Christ. Their Suarez denies
their greatest argument, To. 4. in Th. d. 46.
the walking Ghosts of the dead. They must remember whence they have fallen
into Purgatory. So in their Invocation of Saints, and number of Mediators,
sometime making Christ S. Francis, and S. Francis Christ, as Turselline.

I am Franciscus erit qui modo Christus erat. A tongue worthy to be cut out of
his mouth while he lived, as Ierom spoke of his Vigilantius. Hence came the 7.
ceremonies of canonizing to be inscribed in a Calender with read letters,
praying, erecting Churches, Bell. de sanct. Beatit. l. 1. c. 8 ^. Dices.
ministering the Eucharist, and saying Canonical hours to them and in their
honor, dedicating holy days, setting up Images, and worshipping their
Relics: yet the Saints canonized may be no Saints; and the miracles,
whereupon their canonization is grounded, may be false, says their Caietan.
Others complain, Tract. de concept. et de indulgent.
they have worshipped many for Saints in heaven, who may be presumed to be
tormented with the Devils in hell. They have fallen in his. So in their
Transubstantiation, going about to overthrow the truth of Christ's humanity,
which makes us cry out in much passion, as Auerroes iested of old, Is it
possible that Christians should make themselves a God of bread? An error
containing as many absurdities, as there have been minutes of time from the
first forming of it (that is from the Council of Laterane) until this hour.
Anno 1215.
They have fallen in their precepts and practice of eqiuuocation, and mental
reservation: worse herein then the Devil, The Reu. B. of Salisbury in his
Sermon called The old way.
for he equiuocated to hide his ignorance of that which he could not reveal:
these equivocate to hide their knowledge of that they an and ought to reveal.
In their King-killing doctrine: In their assertions, that Dogs, and Mice, and
Swine, eating their consecrated Host, Aq. p. 3. q. 80. art. 3.
do eat into their bowels the very body and blood of Christ. That it is more
lawful for a Priest to commit fornication, Coster. enchir. c. 15. Rota:
indecis. 1. Nu. 3. in Nouiss.
then to marry a wife: That the Popes power is greater then the Apostles. And
that the Pope may derogate from the Apostles sayings. That the holy Scripture,
Hosius de express verbo Dei.
as it is aleaged of Catholics is the word of God, but as it is aleaged of
Heretics (so they call Protestants) is the express word of the Devil. Here
is the mark of a reprobate illusion: They receive not the love of the truth,
that they might be saved, 2 Thessalonians 2.12.
therefore they believe lies, that they may be damned. 2 Thessalonians. 2. I leave them
to God, and come nearer to our selves. Remember etc.

Lesson to reprove many prodigal Sinners, who run so long upon the score of
Satan, that they can never endure to hear of a reckoning and remembrancer.
Like Dicaearchus the Philosopher, who because it was hard for him to conceive
what the nature or properties of the soul were, Tull. Tuse.
therefore affirmed the soul to be nothing. So these, because they have lost
the sense and sting of sin, think nothing they do to be sin, though, as
Austin spoke of the drunkard, they be all sin. How many are there who think,
that because they are not as bad as others, therefore they are good enough.
Hence is it that the offers of Gods mercy are so disdainefully entertained,
and so commonly rejected. Men, not knowing their own necessity, do despise
the riches of Gods bounty, Heb. 10.29.
and tread under feet the son of God. Heb. 10. One colors a gross sin
with a tolerable name, that so either it may not be seen, or may not appear
in its own likeness, calling haughtines magnanimity, ignorance innocence, Aug.
cons. l. 2. c. 6. Sen. ep. 45.
heresy deep learning, Machiauelianisme, policy, giddiness zeal, fury
manhood, oppression the making the most of a man's own, Usury, interest, or
usage, or putting out, any thing save plain usury. Another draws a false
conclusion out of Gods mercy, and will continue in sin, that grace may
abound: like the Devils conclusion to our Savior, Cast thy self down, for
the Angels shall bear the up: Mat. 4 6.
as if a man should poison himself, presuming upon a counterpoyson, or
desperately surfeit because he is nere to a Physician. David confessed, There
is forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared. Psa. 130. Ps. 130 4.
But these use it as if it made God neglected. Others run on in all kinds of
riot, hoping to satisfy for all by some special devotions. A device by which
many worldlings deceive themselves, who having by rapine and extortion, by
grinding the faces of the poor, and eating them up as if they were bread,
raked much together, imagine to remedy all this with God and the world by some
largess to the poor, and therefore will stick at no violent and indirect
course. (I pray God I be not now in some of your bosoms that hear me this day)
S. Austin propounds the case thus: The Extortioner says thus unto me, De
verb. Apo. ser. 21. to. 10
I am not like the rich man in the Gospel, I feast the poor, I send
sustenance to the prisoners, I cloth the naked, I entertain the strangers: to
whom he answers, Dare te putas, tollere noli et dedisti, Thou think thou
give, do not take away and thou have given. He rejoices to whom thou have
given, but he weepeth, from whom thou have taken away. It is not sufficient to
cease from evil, but we must learn to do good. It is not enough to stand
still in the path of goodness, but we must go on.

Every man must examine himself, search out his own wants, and remember from
whence he is fallen. Else, if men fall and will not arise, if they turn away
and will not return, if they slide back, if they repent not of their
wickedness, saying, what have we done? every one turning to his course as the
horse rusheth into the battle: Their wives shall be given unto other men, and
their fields unto them that shall inherit them. Ie. 8.7.
Ier. 8. Had I the voice of more then a man, and louder then a Trumpet, I would
cry unto all the world, as S. John unto Ephesus, Remember from whence thou art
fallen. Miserrimum est fuisse beatum, It is most woeful to have been happy. O
it is a great misery to have been zealous, and now to be lukewarm: to have
put our hands to the Plough, and now to look back: to have a beginning
laudable, but an end damnable. Does not thy own soul proclaim thee guilty?
neither do I: but be not deceived, God is not mocked, We all either go
forward or backward. If we fall back: As in the days that were before the
flood, They were eating and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the Arc, Mat. 24.38.39.
and knew not until the flood came and took them all away: So shall the
coming of the Son of man be unto us, except we remember from whence we
have fallen.

An instruction to us all to recollect our best thoughts for our forepassed
lives. Is. 1.3.
Shall the Ox know his owner, and the Ass his masters cribb: shall the Storke
in the heavens know her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Craine, Ie.
8.7.
and the Swallow observe the time of their coming: and shall not we consider
the passages of our lives? Do we with Agathocles (a Potters son, made a
King) carry about us earthen vessels, which may remember us of our mortality,
and yet forget death? Shall it be with us as in the time of Simonides, who
complained, that after the use of letters was invented, the virtue of memory
decayed? The more the Gospel is preached, and mercy offered, shall we be the
more dull? Blessed Christian, be not like a painted Tomb, gilded without,
rotten within, tipping thy tongue with godliness, and filling thy soul with
bitterness, bearing a bible in thy hand, and Mammon in thy heart: Remember thy
oath in Baptism, many vows and resolutions since. If we have broke them we
must be answerable unto God. It is not with us, as it was with Fabius Maximus,
who, in prolonging the time, stayed and assuaged by degrees the fiercenes of
Hannibal, and by delay delivered the commonwealth of Rome. For God cannot
endure delay in heavenly matters. O then Now sit down, look upon thy life,
catechize thy self as he did, Anima quid fecisti hodie? O my soul what have
thou done? If with Demas we have forsaken Paul whom once we loved, 2 Ti. 4.10.
and are entangled in the world, Let us remember from whence we have fallen. If
with Peter we have failed in our true service unto Christ, let us remember this
word of my Text, Remember that this life is but horoe momentum, yet in this
moment of an hour we save or loose all. O before thy weak days come, wherein
one poor Ague or some other disease, shall shake all the frame of the house,
sum up thy thoughts, words, actions, before the time come wherein thou must
await the heavy doom of the Physician, as the thief does the sentence of the
Judge: when phlegm and spittle shall so woefully besiedge thy life, besides
groans, stitches, cold sweat and burnings: thou must then forget thy fathers
house, and leave all the world: therefore let this day be unto us all as if it
were our last. Let not sin reign in our mortal bodies, Heb. 10 27.
for if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment, and fiery indignation. Repentance is our guide, and therefore
Repent and do the first works.

If a man read over the moral writings of some Heathens, Pri. sec.
he would pity them, to see their witty and careful disquisition of true rest
lead them to much unquietness. They are like wandering Empiricks, which in tables
and pictures make great ostentation of cures, yet can never approve their skill
to their credulous Patients. Many wrote of it, none attained it. Some placed
true tranquillity in a constant estate of outward things; whereas these vary
as often as the weather, being got with care, kept with fear, lost with
sorrow. Others, in such a temper of the soul, as that it should never be
affected with any casual events; whereas, while it is prisoner in the Dungeon
of flesh and blood, Seu. de Tranquil.
it is one while cheerful, another while dull, drowsy, comfortless, prone
to rest, loathing former resolutions. Others hold the best way for peace to be,
when a man imployeth himself in some public affairs, then retyreth himself
to his private studies, thinking upon the trial of his ability, nature of his
businesses, choice of his friends, fore-imagining the worst in all casual
matters; Nay further, Sen. c vlt.
in making the most of himself, chearing up his spirits with the variety of
recreations, and other indulgences. Miserable comforters are all these. Here is
no mention of the greatest enemies, Conscience of evil done, and fear of
evil to be suffered. Can any man have peace that is at variance with God and
himself? Or is that peace the peace of God, which is thought to be with out
him? Ephesus is better instructed, Repent and do the first works.

Jn aureis carminibus.
Pythagoras advised, that every man's examination in private should run upon
three Artcles, Jn anrcis car. minibus.
(...) wherein we have transgressed, that we may repent; (...) what good we
have done that we may hold out, (...) what we have omitted which we should
have done. My second circumstance is more direct, in as great a Laconisme, and
as perfect breuity as can possibly be described. And therefore as Justin Martyr
spoke of Aristotle's book de mundo, In Apol.
which he wrote to Alexander, that it was the Epitome of all his Philosophy:
So may we of this lesson of S. John to Ephesus, It is the sum of all his
Divinity. Repent.(...) Where if I would be contentious about words, that
cavil of Gregory Martin might give sufficient occasion who taxes reverend
Beza, Greg. Mart. in a book entitled, A discovery etc. auns. by D. Fulke.
for translating the word Resipisce, which (says he) should be rendered as the
Vulgar, Age poenitentiam. I answer, we refuse those words which they
translate, Do penance, because they mean thereby satisfaction for sins past
to be a necessary part of true repentance; which is not contained in the Greek
word, signifying only a change of the mind, that is, not only a sorrow for
the sin past, but a purpose of amendment, which is best expressed by the
Latin word Resipiscere, which is always taken in good part, as (...) is in
Scripture, whereas the latin word poenitere and poenitentia, may and are used
in latin of sorrow and repentance that are too late, as of Judas grief of
mind, which caused him to hang himself: but not (...) or (...) Resipiscere
and Resipiscentia: and therefore the holy Ghost, speaking of his sorrow, uses
another word (...) and (...). We abhor that translation which maintains
satisfaction for sins by any suffering of ours, as blasphemous to the
satisfaction of Christ, whose blood only cleanses us from all sin. 1. Ioh.
1.7.
If the word Satisfaction were used by any fathers of the Church, It was not
that they had any meaning to satisfy the justice of God by external works,
but that by those outward trials of their repentance, the Church was satisfied,
which by their fall was offended: and the governors of the Church, by such
signs of true sorrow and amendment, were persuaded to receive them again into
the congregation, from whence until sufficient trial had of their repentance,
they were separated and excluded. But I remember my Text is doctrinall and
moral, Repent and do the first works: whence this collection necessarily
arises.

That Repentance and the practice of a holy life, Doct.
are the direct means whereby sinners are reconciled unto God.

The proofs hereof are so many and pregnant throughout both Testaments, that
whatsoever is there written may serve for a testimony. All the Sermons of
Prophets and Apostles proclaim this. This was the charg of Ezekiel: Say unto
them, Eze. 13.11.
As I live says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will ye dye O house of Israel. Ez. 33. This was the
subject of the preaching of Isai. Wash ye, make you clean, Put away the evil
of your doings from before your eyes, Is. 1.16.
Is. 1. Of Jeremy, Return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your
ways and your doings good. Ie. 18. Ie. 18.11.
Of Hosea, O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thy
iniquity, Of. 14.1. Mat. 3.2. Mat. 4.17.
Hos. 14. Of John the Baptist, Repent ye for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. Mat. 4. Of Christ Jesus himself, the beginning of whose preaching was
Repent. Mat- 4. This was the end of his passion and resurrection, that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name amongst all
Nations. Lu. 24.47.
Luke 24.

How many promises are added unto this! If thou will put a way thine
abominations out of my sight, then shall thou not remove. Ier. 4. Ie. 4.1.
If the wicked restore the pledge, give again that he has robbed, walk in
the Statutes of life without committing iniquity, he shall surely live be
shall not die. None of his sins that he has committed, shall be mentioned
unto him: if he has done that which is lawful and right, Ez 33.15.16.
He shall surely live. Ez. 33.15.

Job prayed for this: a space to repent. Are not my days few, cease then and
let me alone that I may take comfort a little, before I go whence I shall not
return, Job. 10 20.21.
even to the land of darkness, and the shadow of death. Job. 10. Unto this the
goodness of God leadeath us. Romans 2. Romans 2.4.
It removed the plague from Israel. Ki. 24.16.17.
1. Kin. 24. brought deliverance unto the Jews, when Shishak King of Egypt
came against them with twelve hundred Chariots, and threescore thousand
horsemen, and Egyptians without number. 2. Chro. 12. 2. Chapter 12, 3.
It stayed judgments from Pharaoh: For when he saw the Waters anoyed with the
first plague, the Earth with the second and third, and the Air with the
fourth, Dr. Hall coutemplat.
(a winged Army coming from an angry God, not from Nature or chance) finding
it impossible for him to stand out with God, since all his power could not
rescue him from his least Creatures, his heart begins to thaw, saying to Moses
and Aaron, Go and do sacrifice in this Land, or because that had been an
Abomination, Go into the wilderness, but not far. He will not leave them:
But when the voice of Gods thunder and hail, mixed with fire, rouse him up,
then (as betwixt sleeping and waking) he starts up, I have sinned this time,
Ero. 19.34.
the Lord is righteous and I and my people are wicked. Mere necessity
constrained him to relent: For the Fish being destroyed with the first blow,
the Cattle with the fifth, the Corn with the seventh, the fruit and leaves
with this eight, and now nothing left him but a bare fruitless earth, to live
upon, he was mollified: and howsoever constrained repentance be ever short and
unsound, yet upon Moses prayer the thunders and hail ceased. But this
repentance is not that which can prevail. So Caine repented, My punishment is
greater then I can bear, Genesis 4. From thy face shall I be hid; He knew that
Nihil grauius quam errantem a Deo deseri, Amb. lib. 2. de Caine and Abel c. 9.
vt se reuocare non posset. Nothing is more grievous, then for him that erreth
to be forsaken of God, that he cannot recall himself. So did Saul repent,
Jeroboam, Ahab, Ananias and Saphira, Agrippa, Foelix, Simon Magus, Elimas. But
the true practice of a right repentance consists in an inward sorrow, when we
are displeased with our selves for sins; and in an outward, when we testify
it by tears and such like; when we resolve to sin no more, but to do the
good and acceptable will of God; when with humiliation there is faith added;
when we grieve that we cannot grieve enough. The Angels in Heaven sing at
this lamentation, neither does the earth afford any so sweet Music in the
ears of God. Many may be vexed with an extreme remorse for some sin from the
gripes of a galled Conscience, playing at once the Accuser, Witness, Judge,
Tormentor, and yet never know the power of repentance. But an earnest sorrow
for the want of sorrow, was never found in any but a gracious heart, whose
tears are as the rain in a Sunshine, comfortable and hopeful.

This is that which melts us, purges us, rinseth us, and so makes us of
drossie, pure; of foggy sound; of crooked, straight Christians. And as impure
gold cannot be rid of the dross, until it be moulten and dissolved, (...)
neither unsound bodies full of vicious humors come to any good estate till
they are well purged: No more can we, till Repentance break us, and cause us to
do our first works. This remembers us of good omitted, and evil committed.

Sum Dea quae facti, non factique exigo poenas, Ausonius Gallus in paroemia.

Nempe vt poeniteat, sic Metanoia vocor.
This is like the river Nilus which turned furious Io into a glorious Virgin:
David, Ezekiah, Manasses, Mary Magdalen, the Prodigal, Zache, the Jews are
examples. It is like the sea, provoking the vomit and loathing of our sins.
It is like the sand, staying the violent rage of the waves of our
transgressions; like the herb Century, bitter and sweet; bitter in meditation
of Gods judgments, sweet in embracing his mercies; like a thunderbolt
extinguishing the corruption and poison of our Serpentine nature; like an
earthquake, whose trembling is a filial fear, whose rent and scissure is the
breaking of the heart, whose sound is a crying voice, whose motion is a growing
in grace, whose winds are temptations, and the dust is the remembrance of our
mortality. Repentance is our Armor to quench all the fiery Darts of the flesh,
world, and Devil. It is as Hilary shows, Hill. in p 118.
ab eo quod poenitendum intellexeris destitisse, a ceasing from that which we
understand must be repented of. It is proeterita mala plangere, and plangenda
iterum non committere, a mourning for sins committed, and a purpose never to
commit them being to be lamented. Languores sanat, leprosos curat, mortuos
suscitat, etc. as Saint Austin sweetly. Aug. l. de poenit.
It heals faintings, cures lepers, Aug. l. de poe^it.
raises the dead, increases health, makes the lame to go, the blind to see,
expels vices, and comfort the Soul of a Christian. It is the medicine of
our wounds, the hope of Salvation, ^fid. Aetim. l. 6. c. 18.
per quam peccatores saluantur, Deus ad misericordiam prouocatur, by which
sinners are redeemed and God is provoked to mercy. It is iugum suaue and leave,
Aug. sup. Ps.
quia non est sarcina viatoris sed ala volatoris, A sweet and light yoke, not a
burden for us trauailers, but a wing to make us all fliers to Gods Kingdom.
It is our second lauer of regeneration, the only rebaptization, allowed in
divinity, consisting (...) as Chrysostom speaks, Chrysostom. in To. 12
as well in the contrition of the heart as the reformation of the mind.
Repentance is the Christalline humor of the eye of faith, (...)
the best Aqua-vitae to revive our dead spirits, that Aqua coelestis which God
keeps in his bottle that not one drop of it can be lost, and it is the brine
wherewith both flesh and spirit must be kept from tainture and corruption,
therefore prescribed unto Ephesus, Repent and do the first works.

Use. 1. A Caveat for us to beware of the leaven of the Romish Synagogue,
whereby they offer much wrong unto this holy ordinance of God. I shall but
touch on some points of their greatest Patrons, aiming rather at our own
reconciling with God, then quarrelling with such obstinate Adversaries, who as
they may well seem to have no faith, annihilating it by merit of works; no
hope, weakening it by doubtfulnes of salvation; no Religion as it is the true
knowledge of the true God, concealing this from the people, by causing the
Scriptures in a strange translation, or as it is the sincere worship of one
God, defiling the purity and dividing the integrity thereof by that
latrioduliacall distinction of Idols Adoration, and Saints invocation; no
Charity, witness their Gunpowder plot; so they have no Repentance, avoiding it
by their Indulgences. Sometimes they make it a Sacrament, because it is the net
that takes all their provision: and yet they know not when or where it was
instituted or who commanded it. L. cum de lege ff de proba. and Gloss. Ibid.
Coll. Ratisp. Anno 1601. habitum Mat. 12.3. Mat. 15.3.4. Aug. 10.9. de Catachs.
c 4. p. c. 75. Edit. Ba. 1529. Cypr. Ep. l. 2. Ep. 1. ad Steph. p. 42. Ed t.
Bas. 15 30. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Tertull. cont Marcion. l. 1. and 4. Amb. de
Sacr. Cyrill. in Mystagogitis Alexa. 4. q 8. m. 2. Art. 1. Bo^^u. quem refe^t
Ouand. q. d. 1^ pr^^^.
They affirm it, we deny it, and the civil law concludes, that Probatio
incumbit affirmanti, and the Jesuits confessed it in colloquio Ratisbonensi,
for Christ proved that doctrine which he affirmed as the plucking and eating
of the ears of corn by his hungry Disciples Mat. 12. The Pharisees to be
transgressors of the law, Mat. 15. In the 20. ver. he denies that to eat with
unwashed hands defiles a man, he leaves the Affirmative part to the Pharisees
to prove. Antiquity is against their seven Sacraments, Aug. To. 9. and Cypr.
Ep. l. 2. Besides Just. Martyr, Tertullian, Ambrose, Cyrillus Alexandrinus: I
leave the ground of it, their private Confession, which the Jesuits Paracelsians
of the text seem to prove, from John 20.23. But Alexander Bonauenture, and Fr.
Ouand. deny that ever Christ ordained it: nay for the space of a thousand
years after Christ and upward, it was not reckoned amongst the Sacraments.
They overthrow the nature of true repentance, by giving so much liberty to
sin, holding that Prisoners may break the Iayle: a point practiced by Romish
Priests amongst us. Caietan defends it, Calet. 22. page 144. Tolet. sum. page
548. Gl. v. multorum Can. vidua. did. 34.
That Children may marry without consent of Parents. That she only is
meretricious, that has polluted her self with more then twenty and three
thousand men. It is their damnable gloss.

Magne Regnator Deum tam lentus audis scelera?
Tam le^tus vides? Ecqua^do saeua fulme^ emittes manu?
Seneca. He that reads Nauarrs Manual, shall find choleric blasphemy a
venial sin, page 91. some ^heft venial p. 140. common lying venial p. 191.
cursing of Parents, if not malicious, venial p. 100. And these Venialls (says
Francis a Victoria) by a Pater noster, or sprinckling of holy water, or knock
of the breast are cleared. Let these pretend perfection Evangelical never so
much, whereby (as the Ass with the Lions skin on his back) they gull the
ignorant, yet you see what large Consciences they have: These are their works:
examples of their enjoined penance are infinite. M. Fox p. 1. p. 141.
King Edgar was enjoined by Dunstan not to wear his Crown in seven years,
for deflouring a Virgin: The carrying of a Faggot was an ordinary penance upon
this day unto this place. P. 671.
The carrying before the Procession bags of straw, P: 511.
for not bringing litera (the Popish latin word) for a popish Prelates horses.
^onfinius l. 1. Occad. 2.
Hildebrand commanded Conradus a German coming a penitent to Rome to wear a
coat of Maile in stead of his shirt, and fastened it with five chains, giving
him sealed letters containing the Catalogue of his sins, and commanding him
to visit all the holy places of the earth. Are these their first works?

They overthrow the nature of true repentance, by their prodigal grants and
shameful Martes of Pardons: Cap. inter ope^a charitatis ^ispons. l. 4.
^^cretal.
giving a Pardon for all such men as shall take common Women out of the Stews
and marry them. A pardon for twenty thousand days by the grant of Pope
Innocent the 6. for saying one A^e at the elevation. M. White in is way to the
Church. P. ^55 and 256.
A pardon for 6666. days, as many days say they as Christ had wounds in his
body, for saying a prayer as long as three Auees before the Crucifixe. A pardon
for forty thousand years, by Pope Sixtus the 4. to him that would say a prayer
of his making, not five above 40. words long. A pardon of forty days to him
that bright a faggot, ^ox p 2. p. 897.
or but a stake to the burning of (...) Protestant. A pardon to any man to
deliver one soul out of Purgatory for ten shillings, p. 771.
by Leo the tenth, in the year of our Lord 1516. If there be any one in this
great Congregation, intoxicate with the Popish potions of Rome, let him see
what mercy is in the Pope, who holding that it is in his power to call
miserable souls out of this tormenting fire (which hell it self is said to
exceed only in the continuance) yet that he should suffer them to lie houling
there, and not mercifully bestow on them all the heaps of his treasure, as the
spiritual ransom of so many distressed Spirits. O inhumane acceptance of
persons, that the wealthier sort may by their purses deliver others from this
prison, while the needy soul must be still frying in that flame, without all
hope of pardon until the very last judgment day! But I remember their own men
doubt whether there be a Purgatory, and we know there is none: and they
conclude, that the Pope may lead with him innumerable souls to hell to perish
with him for ever (much more leave some in Purgatory if there were any) yet may
no mortal man take upon him to reprove him. D^. 40.50. Si^apa.
Thus Babylon, I mean Rome is fallen, yet she remembers not that she is
fallen, she will not repent, you see her works, we would have healed her but
she refused.

Yet let us be here admonished to consider our own ways, Use. 2.
and looking upon our first works, bring forth fruit worthy amendment of
life. ( Blessed and beloved Christians) We cannot be so happy as Tullies wise
man, Tull. Tusc.
to do nothing for which we need to repent; as Isidore which voluntarily
protested, that for forty years space he found not in himself any sin, not
so much as in his thought, not so much as any consent to anger or inordinate
desire: Dr. Hall. No peace with Rome. Tit. de
a testimony given to Gonzaga for some years that late Saint by Baronius and
Bellarmine: Justificat. Qu. vitam e. ius.
The offall of the schools may hold of Bonauenture, that in him non peccauit
Adam, Adam sinned not. Let Manichoeus protest it of his Masters, Priscallian,
Euagrius, Iouinian; the Messalians of themselves: We must all resolve as S.
Ambrose, not to boast because we are just, but because we are redeemed, not
because we are void of sin, but because our sins are forgiven us. But
without repentance and doing the former works, there is no remission of sins;
Repentance, the gift of God, joy of Angels, haven of sinners. Awake thou that
sleep in thy sins, 2. Ti. 2.7.
I say unto thee as Saint Paul to his Tymothy, Consider what I say, and the
Lord give thee understanding in all things. Come now and reason with God,
though thy sins be as scarlet, they may be as white as snow, Is. 1.18.
though they be red like crimson, they may be as wool. God is able to bring
light out of darkness, life out of death: our sins shall turn to our good if
we rise from them more humble, more fearful, more careful and wary then we
were before. Happy is that fall that is taken up by humility. Bar.
To our repentance we must add our former good works, from whence we are
fallen: For by our good works we glorify our father which is in heaven. Mat.
5.16.
Mat. 5. By them we show our faith Ia. 2. By them our consciences are quieted,
Ia. 2.18.
being sure never to fall, making our calling and election sure. 2. Pet. 1.10.
Yet merit by these we cannot, 2. Pet 1.10.
Justified by them we are not. Every one must confess as Gregory, Nudum me in
fide prima gratia genuit, nudum eadem gratia in assumptione saluabit, Gr.
Meral. l 2 c. 40. p. 11. col. 1. Edit. Par. 1551.
the first grace begot in us faith when we were but naked in good works, and
the same grace shall save us hereafter when we shall be but naked in them
neither. Non proecedunt iustificandum, sed sequuntur iustificatum, they are the
signs of our sanctification, not the causes of our justification. That learned
speech of reverend Calvin shall ever be true, Fides sola est quae iustificat,
fides tamen quae iustificat nonest sola. Vt solis calor solus est qui terram
calefaciat, Col. in Act. Synod. Trid. Sext Sess. Antid. Tract. Theol. p. 336.
col. 2.
non tamen idem insole solus est, quia coniunctus cum splendore. It is faith
alone that justifies, and yet that faith that justifies is not alone. As it
is the heat alone of the Sun that heateth the earth, yet is not that heat in
the Sun alone, because it has brightness joined with it. Repentance and good
works cannot be severed. Behold a Christian must labor, else he shall never
taste the sweet Manna of comfort from above.

The Angels of heaven need not to repent because they sin not: the Devils in
hell care not for repentance, their judgment is sealed, but it appertains to
us all who are the sons of men, and must be practiced if ever we will go to
heaven. Our marble and flinty hearts must be sofrened with the sweet showers
of Gods heavenly word. Our stiff and iron-sinued necks must be bowed with
the yoke either of the Gospel or of the law. Our foreheads must not be like
hers that refused to be ashamed. Math. 11.30. Act. 15.10. Ie. 3.
Our ears must not be so deaf, our eyes so dry, our senses so dull, our
wills so obstinate, our affections so barren, our desires so cold, but we must
awake. The golden bells of Aaron, the thundering trompets of Esaias, the well-tuned
Cimbals of David, the shrill sound of preaching, aim only at our conversion
to God. O consider this you that forget God. (I speak only to them whose
consctences accuse them) If you make religion but fashion, seeking only to
seem Christians, having Gods livery on your backs, and name in your mouths,
yet outfacing all reproves by your insatiable covetousness, biting usury, false
measures, forsworn valuations, adulterat wares, catching at the possessions of
the Church, grinding and griping the faces of the poor, by which means,
howsoever you fill your Coffer, you fester your souls, though your faces were
like Angels, without repentance and good works there must follow a portion
with the Devils, from which Good Lord deliver us. O then while it is called to
day, let us ransacke our hearts and get a sound affection to God, a firm
resolution to goodness, hatred to sin in all men, especially in our selves,
and an obedient keeping of the commandments. O then you whom God has endowed
with holy and upright hearts, that have done and intend still to do honor to
your maker, honesty to the Gospel, credit to this famous City, Be steadfast
and immovable always abcu^ding in these works of the Lora, knowing that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord. You are not Treasurers but Stewards, whose
praise is more to lay out well, then to have received much. Neither the times
nor your selves are in your own disposing, the more speedily you do good, the
more comfort you shall receive. O then let us all follow Austins advise, Aug.
(...). 33. in Job.
, take time while time is offered, least the gate of mercy which to day is
open, to morrow be shut and never opened again unto us. Let us beware that
we abuse not the patience and long suffering of so good a God, least after
so-many calmes of comfort, he power down upon us the bitter storms of
indignation and come quickly against us, as he threateneth to come against
Ephesus; which is the first particular of my second general. Of else I
willcome unto thee quickly. Prima secundae.


Such are the neuer-stinting streams of Gods mercy, that he never
overthrows any King dome or nation, City or people, before he send a warning
piece to admonish them. He endured the people of the Jews sufficiently in the
wilderness, protesting in the Psalms: Ps. 95 10.
Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, not only provoked,
offended discontented, but grieved at his very soul: who could have grieved
all the veins of their hearts, and taught them the price of angring so
dreadful a Majesty as his is. A generation for whose sake he had wrought many
wonders, preparing a table for them in the desert, their diet Qu^iles and
Manna, in such abundance, in such delicacie, that never any Prince was so
served in his greatest pomp, he delivered them from a bondage worse then
death, vanquished many Kings for them, and led them by miracle through the red
Sea, yet they murmr, repine, grudge, rebel; and when no favor could move
them, God swears in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest. His
patience being moved turns into fury. Here are mercy and judgment, that he
threateneth before he punishes: and it is conditional. Upon the opening of
the air and shutting of the windows of heaven, after the waters had ouer-run
the world in 150. days, God set his bow in the cloud, a token of Covenant
betwixt him and the earth: Not but that there was Rain and a Rain bow before
the flood: for how else could the plants and fruits of the earth have been so
many years preserved without Rain? but Now it began to be a sign twixt God
and man, Genesis 9.11. Doct. Will^t in Genesis
that there should be no more a flood to destroy the earth. A sign so terrible
to the Jews, that upon every appearing of it they come forth, confess their
sins, and dare not look up toward heaven. But it is an emblem of Gods
mercy (says Ramban) the ends turned downwards and the back to heaven, he that
shoots holding the back from him: or (says Ambrose) it was mercy that he
made the bow his token, and not the arrow: the Bow is but the instrument, the
arrowe wounds. So deals he with Ephesus, his Bow is bent, but he will not
shoot if they repent. Else I will come. Many parts of man's body are ascribed
unto God in Scripture, the face, the mouth, Ps 34.16. De. 8.3. 2. Ki. 19.16.
Zac. 4.10. 1. Ki. 8.42. Mat. 22.44. De hoec. c. 50.
the ears, the eyes, the arms, the feet: whence most grossly Tertullian, and
some Heritiques, who by Epiphanius are called Audiani, and by Augustine,
Vadiani: and the Egyptian Monks the Anthropomorphitae collected that God was
a body: an error so absurd, that the maintainers of it are rather to be
punished then answered. For it is a true axiom in schoole-Diuinity, that
Quaecunque de Deo corporaliter dicuntur, dicta sunt symbolice, Whatsoever is
spoken of God bodily, must be understood figuratively. It is the wisdom of the
spirit to fit the scriptures to our weak capacities, to use known familiar and
sensible terms, thereby to raise up our conceits to some knowledge of the
everliving God. His coming signifies his readiness. Behold says Solomon, He
comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills, like a Roe or a
young Heart. ca. Ca. 2.8.9.
2. His coming is either for mercy, as to Adam with the promise in time of
despair; to Abraham with supply in time of sacrifice; Ge. 3.8 15. Ge. 22.13.
Ge. 26 2.3. Ge 41.40. 1. Ki. 19.5. Iu 6.21.
to Izaac with relief in time of famine; to Joseph with honor in time of
exile; to Eliah with comfort in time of persecution; to Gedeon with a staff in
time of battle; to Ezechia with triumph in time of invasion; to Daniel among
the Lions; to the Children in the furnace; to Susanna at the place of
judgment; to the Apostles in the iayle; to the Thief upon the cross. Veniens
ventet, He shall come quickly when he comes to deliver; or he comes in
judgment speedily and quickly: It is long ere he revenge himself upon
sinners, but when he comes his hands be of iron, he pays home and with a
witness. If a man turn not, he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow
and made it ready, Ps. 7.13.13.
he has also prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordains his
arrows and these sly swiftly. God comes (...), quickly; which leads us to
this collection.

Doct. That Gods judgments come speedily upon the impenitent and obstinate. The
reason is given Genesis 6. My spirit shall not always strive with man, that is,
Genesis 6.3. Olcaster.
he would no longer reprove and admonish them, seeing they reguarded it not;
or he would no longer consult and dispute the matter as it were with himself
what to do with them, but if they amended not within the space given them to
repent, Iunius.
he would suddenly destroy them; and so he did. One poor family was called
out of a world, and as it were eight grains of corn fanned from a whole barn
full of chafe; the rest were drowned. How speedily and quickly was he revenged
upon Lots wife, turning her into a pillar of Salt! Genesis 19. A sudden
Metamorphosis or strange transformation of a miserable and sinful woman, Genesis
19.26.
for but a glaunce of her eye: she goes forward and looks backward, as if
her neck had been broke when she was brought out of Sodom from that kindred
and country where she had lived, from her house where she had dwelt, from her
gardens, pleasure, sweet air, green pastures and pleasant waters, which she
had enjoyed. O what a bewitching is it to the soul of man to fall in love with
the fleshpots of Egypt! Poor woman she had particular warning of the
destruction of Sodom, which, her house and kindred excepted, none in Sodom had
beside her. Angels sometimes stood with a sword to keep men out of Paradise,
M. Wilkinson in his sermon upon Lots Wife.
but these who were appointed to destroy Sodom bring peace to her, and bring
her out of Sodom. Angels appeared to her, not as to Jacob in a ladder, nor as
to Moses in a bush, nor as to Samuel in the Tabernacle, but they came into her
house. She had leave to carry her goods with her. She was pardoned one delay
before, an Angel laying hold upon her hand. She was charged not to look behind
her, yet she did: and therefore for her disobedience unto this command, her
incredulity not giving credit to Gods word, her curiosity in desiring to see
the city burning, her folly in pitying those that would not pity their own
souls, her affection to that place which was loathsome to God, she was quickly
turned into a pillar of Salt, vt praestet fidelibus condimentum, An: l. 16.
deciu. Dei. c. 30.
as Augustine notes; that it may be a seasoning to faithful men to take heed
of backsliding. Thus the Lord punished her body, though in charity we must
think he had mercy upon her soul. I appeal unto our own daily experience,
Whether many who led the dance in the morning have not fallen foul, and been
blasted in the evening.

Quem vidit dies veniens superbum: Sen. ^
hunc vidit dies sugiens iacentem. Moses sang this song, Is not this laid up in
store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? To me belongs vengance and
recompense, their foot shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity
is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them make have. De 32.35.
Deu. 32. Thus Ezechiel threateneth Jerusalem, Thoa art betome guilty in the
blood which thou have shed, and have defiled thy self in thine Idols which
thou have made; and thou have caused thy days to draw near, and art come even
unto thine years, therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the heathhen, and
a mocking to all countries. Eze. 22. Thus Saint John threatens Ephesus. Ez.
12.4.
I will come unto thee quickly.

Which may serve as a terror unto all lingering and irresolute Christians, Use.
that put a far off the day for wrath from them, crying out as those scoffers
which walk after their own lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his
coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, al things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation. 2 Pe. 3. Like that evil servant which said
in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, 2 Pet. 3.4.
and therefore smites his fellow servant, eating and drinking with the drunken.
Mat. 24.48.
Mat. 24. O did the oppressor, that Misanthropos, that Sarcophagus,
Anthropophagus, Anthropomastix, the hater, whipper, and eater of men, which
with the sharpnes of his talents gripeth his tenants with miserable oppression;
and in his contracts plucking out the very hearts of his creditors by an
execrable defalcation of their debtes, eats them up like bread. But remember
that the Lord is coming unto him quickly: then should not the poor man's
pledge be wrongfully witholden, the laborers hire kept back till the morning,
so many buildings be enlarged by Ahabs cruelty, so many coffers enriched by
Judas treachery, so many shops sorted with wares, so many warehouses with store,
so many tables with dainties, so many Cubbards with plate, so many wardrobes
with suits, so many granaries with corn by biting usury: then would he not
walk as Leuiathan in the Sea without a hook in his nostrils, as Behemoth in
the wilderness having no bridle in his jaws, as a ramping and roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour. I am sure goods so gotten shall be but as a
broken staff of reed: if a man lean, it will pearce into his hands. Such
pleasures are but as Dalilah to Sampson, gives and fetters of Satan to
entangle them: such gold will be a millstone about their necks, to carry them
into the bottomless pit: such lands and goods, as a bunch upon a Camels back,
not suffering them to enter into the narrow gate which leads to Jerusalem,
unless they quickly repent. O did the Glutton remember that God is able to come
quickly against him, he would not make his Church his Kitchen; gurmundizing his
Chamberlain; his table, his altar; his Cook, his Preacher; the O dours of his
meat, his sacrifice; swearing, his prayer; quaffing, his repentance; and his
whole life, wanton fare. O did the Drunkard but remember this that God is ready
to come quickly against him, he would not rise early to follow strong drinks,
which trouble the head, overthrow the senses, cause the feet to reele, tongue
to stammer, eyes to roll, and the whole fabric of his little world to be
possessed with this voluntary madness, loss of money, friends, credit, time;
This sweet poison and flattering Devil. What shall I say more? I must proceed,
for I have more vices to tax, and the time runs. It is like a river,

Nec enim consistere flumen,
Nec leuis hora potest.
We have as much need to be terrified, as Ephesus: our sins are the like. I
confess they are not expressed in my Text, but elsewhere so manifest, that he
that runs by the passages of holy Scripture, may read them largely
described. Ephesus had many backsliders in Religion, reuolting Apostataes: have
not we the like? It would make a man amazed and ashamed, to see the zeal of
the first Christians, and our coldness; to look upon the valiant onset of our
heroical reformers, and the flagging seconding them in these days. The people
of Samosatum would not come into the Church when their good Bishop Eusebius was
deptiued, Theod. l. 4. c. 14.
and Eunomius an heretical Bishop thrust into his place by the Arrians: None
of the inhahitants eithir poor or rich, husbandman or grafter, man or woman,
young or old (says Theodoret) would come to the Church, either to see him or
confer with him. But how many are there now that will come to no Sermon, unless
the Preacher be some mongril temporiser, too forward to snarle at those blessed
worthies, Calvin, Beza, Luther etc. Better it were for our Church, if these
giddy censurers were open Heretics. Aust in thought it a scandal to hear a
Donatist speak, L. de pasto. c. 7.
and he to hold his peace, least the hearer should take falsehood to be truth.
But how many seeming Protestants are there, that by their silence encourage
railing Rabshakees black mouthed followers of the Romish sectto disgorge
loathsome contumelies against our Religion, Sovereign, and whole estate?
oftentimes speaking blasphemies, ex destinata malitia contra conscientiam, Aq.
upon prepensed malice against their own knowledge and conscience. John would
not be in the same bath with Cerinthus; Polycarpus would not salute Marcion:
Eus. bist. 1.22. l. 4.13. Theod. hist. eel. l. 4.14.
Antiochus would not suffer Iouianus to touch him because he was an Arrian: Our
own Ridley coming to the Lady Mary, offering to preach and being reused, yet
entertained by some religious Courtier to diner; after he had drunk, looking
sadly, he cried out I have done amiss to drink in that place where Gods word
offered has been refused, Fox. p. 1270. Anno 1553.
whereas if I had remembered my duty, I ought to have departed immediately, and
have shaken the dust off my shoes for a testimony against this house. But what
is more common now then for the Sons of God to match with the daughters of
men, and Protestants to converse with Papists, who can never be true to us,
being so false to God and their Prince? Comparisons would prove odious if they
were further prosequuted, as they might be: yet let me add somewhat else.
Ephesus had many who addicted themselves to spells and charms and knots, called
Ephesiae literae, Suidas in exico. Philostratus l. 4. Eustathius in odyss.
insomuch that one Milesius at the Olympian games by the help of these
conquered 30. of their valiant'st men, but when these Sorceries were taken from
him, Plut. in Symp. l. 7. q. 5. athenaeus l. XI. Bud. de ass. l. 5.
he fainted. Their books of these curious arts were worth 50000. pieces of
silver. Act. 19.19. that is 5000. crowns as Budaeus accounts. Have there
been none amongst us so that there were not more remaining, but some men's
sins are open before hand, 1 Ti. 5.24.25.
going before to judgment, and they who are yet concealed cannot be hid that
wit Saul forsake the true Prophets, 1 Sa. 28.7.
and run to some Woman that has a familiar spirit; that with Ahaziah, 2 Kit
1.2.
for a fall send to Baalzebub the God of Ekron, to enquire whether they shall
recover of this disease. And it falls out with them according to the Spanish
Proverb, from long iourneyes large lies are afforded. The Jews could reason
thus. Da luengas vias luengas menticas.
He has a Devil, why hear ye him? (a damnable aspersion put upon Christ)
but these will harken unto none Ioh. 10.20.
so much as to them who have Devils. And whereas Philosophy teaches that
nothing can be in intellectu, which has not first been drawn by fantasy from
common sense, yet these hold That future things which never came within the
sense, may be comprised in the understanding. Yea though an Angel could not
tell Esdras how long he should live. 2. Esd. 4 52.
2. Esd yet these will profess to put a period unto our lives, when our days
are determined, our months numbered, our bounds appointed which we cannot
pass, only in Gods hand. Job. 14.5.
Job. 14. So detestable were these to the old Christians that they were adorned
with this title Incantamentorum oppugnatores, Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 16.
oppugners of all kinds of sorcerie; as the Kings and Queens of our realms
are called Defendors of the faith. I leave our Starre-gazers, which seem to
find under the Moon unconstant friends; under Mercury, chaste men borne; under
Venus, lustful wantons; under Sol, honorable preferments; under Mars, valiant
Soldiers; under Jupiter quick-spirited students; under Saturn, sober and
Charitable Censurers.

A Meditation which made Austin commend his friend Firminus for leaving this
study, as a spoil of time and school of vanity; when two children were born
in the same moment under one roof, Aug Conf. l. 7. cap. 6.
and yet so much difference to be betwixt them, that the one was by a custom
of the Country to be slave to the other. And Clement inueighed bitterly
against those, Clemens. recogni. l. 9.
which ascribed to Andromeda banishment, to Orion an influence of hunting, to
Canopus a desire to fish, to Medusas star sudden death, etc. But I remember
Tertullians opinion, De Astrologis ne loguendum quidem esse, Tertul. q. 11. c.
Sed and illud.
That we should not so much as speak of Astrologers; because they honor
Idols; registring their names in heaven, Mars, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn; because
they seek to tie us to the course of the Planets, and leave Gods providence;
because their grounds were invented by the Devil: and therefore says he,
eadem poena exitii and discipulis and Magistris, there is one penalty of
destruction provided both for the scholars and the Masters; to be excluded out
of heaven. I pity such, as Cambises did himself, Euse. in Ora. Constable.
adsancta. c: 17.
of whom Eusebius testifies, Cambisen poenituit malcuolis, Magorum vocibus tam
facile fuisse persuasum, He repented that he had suffered himself so easily
to be persuaded by these seducers. Upon Repentance such have been forgiven, and
suffered with much compassion the judgment of the laws. I look back upon
Ephesus.

Ephesus had many contemners of the Apostles, men speaking perverse things to
draw disciples after them. Act 20.30. 1. Co. 16.9.
Act. 20. We have many who quench the Spirit by despising our Prophets: yet a
Remnant is left amongst us, as in Ephesus, who are as unwilling to leave their
zealous Pastors, as the Ephesians were to leave Saint Paul; Act. 20.25.37.
who when he had told them, Ye shall see my face no more, they all wept sore,
and fell on his neck and kissed him. He had warned every one of them night and
day with tears, v. 31.
by the space of three years, and therefore they shed tears at his departure.
Many such Prophets and men of God are amongst us, who with praying, preaching,
weeping and watching, labor to do the works of Evangelists, and to prepare
us quickly for the Lord, least he come upon us as he threatened to come unto
Ephesus. Else I will come unto thee quickly.

A Lesson for our instruction, to admonish us quickly to repent. Use. 2.
For delay breeds danger, one sin tolleth on another. If we are not fit to
day, we shall be less fit to morrow the custom of sinning shall take way the
sense of sin, and our offenses will go over our heads, a burden too heavy
for us to bear, without speedy conversion. Alas can that work be effected
suddenly which requires carefulnes, clearing of our selves, indignation,
fear, vehement desire, zeal and revenge. 2. Co. 7. renewed and reformed
affections? It is not enough to repent for gross sins, 2. Co. 7.11.
adulteries, theft, drunkenness, etc. but we must repent for the want of
grace as of the knowledge and love and fear of God, of brotherly love, and the
decay of any grace be it never so little. I charge thee therefore, (blessed
Christian) before God and the Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and
the dead at his appearing, 2. Ti. 4.1.
and Kingdom, Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Remember what good motions,
desires, affections and actions were in thee, and if thou decay recover thy
loss, do the first works quickly.

I appeal unto thine own soul, whether thou have not had sometimes a purpose
to repent, seeing others live religiously, and dye peaceably, hearing so many
calls, tasting so many mercies of God. What lets at this instant but that
this course should be taken, to resolve as David, I made have, and prolonged
not the time, I delayed not to keep thy commandments. Ps. 119.60.
Ps. 119. to do as Peter, as soon as the Cock crew, he went out and wept
bitterly. Mat. 26. Then we should prevent the evil day, Mat. 26.75.
which suddenly may else overtake us. Then we should have our lamps ready,
whenever the Bridegroom passes by us: then we should be furnished with
wedding garments, when the master of the feast comes to take notice of us.
God commands this, Reason directs to it, and therefore we must do it: for
to say we cannot, is childish, and we will not is peevish. Sen. consol. ad
Polyb. 28.
Shall Seneca call our whole life a penance, and we bestow no time in
repentance? Shall that testimony be given of us which Lactantius gave of
Greece: There was never less wisdom in Greece, then in the time of the 7.
wisemen? Never more Preaching and less practicing. Vide Plin. l. 30. c. 4.
Shall we be ready to receive so many gross Medicines, bitter pills, violent
potions, cuttings, Galen l. (...)
cauterizings and launcings of the flesh, to be freed from a bodily disease,
Paul. Aegin. l. 7.
and use no helps to be eased of our foul sins? The Heathen could tell us,
Epiour. apud. Laertium.
that no man was too old to learn those things which concerned the health of
the mind. Come hither therefore if thou labor and art heavy laden under the
burden of thy sin. Christ Jesus raised Lazarus out of his grave, after he
had lain so long that he stunke, John 11.39.
and therefore can raise us out of the grave of sin, though we seem past
recovery. Tertull. de pae. c. 8.
God would not threaten him that does not repent, if he would not pardon him
that does repent. The first degree of happiness is not to sin, Cyp. Ep. 55.
(a thing which no man can challenge) but the second degree is to confess our
sins and be sorry for them. Is. 55.7.8.9.
O then let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God for he will abundantly pardon. His thoughts are not our thoughts: for as
the heavens are higher then the earth, so are his ways higher then our ways.
Despair not: Our sins may be measured and numbered; Bas. reg. contract.
quaest. 13.
but it is impossible that Gods goodness should be measured, or his mercies
numbered. Despair for sin, Greg. Mor. l. 3. c. 11.
is worse then sin it self. But let our conversion be speedy. True
Repentance can never be too late, yet late repentance is seldom true. We read
but of one that repented at the last, Aug
that no man should presume: and yet of one that none should despair. O then
before the pearl be taken out of our field; before the sound of the Gospel be
removed out of our land; before the Ark of God be taken from us, 1 Samuel 4 11.
as it was from the Israelites: let us be moved to awake up our first love
quickly. Gods mercy and judgments, and word; the infiniteness of our sins,
shortness of our life, small number of those that shall be saved, joys of
heaven and torments of hell; are motives: and if these prevail not, our Church
must fall as it is threatened to Ephesus, in Gods visitation, And will remove
thy Candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

The Church of God is compared to many things in holy Scripture, secunda
secundae
to a house 1. Ti. 3. to a Body Ep. 1. to a field, Mat. 13. to a net, 1. Ti.
3.15. Ep. 1.23. Mat 13.24. v. 47. Mat. 25.1.
v. 47. to ten Virgins, Mat. 25. and here to a Candlestick. So it is expounded
in 20. v. c. 1. The seven Candlestickes which thou saw are the seven
Churches. God threatening to remove the Church. A fearful judgment, whether
we take it concerning the Minister, that he should be deprived of his
calling, as the Lord threateneth unto Jeremy, If thou return I will bring thee
again, and thou shall stand before me: giving him to understand when he had
been wanting in delivering the Lords will unto his people, partly through
fear, and partly through impatience, that if he returned not, he should cease
to be a Prophet unto him. Or if we take it for the whole body of a Church,
that they should procure the removing of the Gospel from them, and the
abolishing of the Gospel: or if we take it as it concerns every private
man, Commi^a^iones et promissines diuae sunt hypotheticae. 33, mor. c. 15.
that he shall lose the knowledge of God and other graces. It is condionall,
Except thou repent. Thus, as Gregory notes, Vt pius, it a iustus est Conditor:
As our Maker is merciful, so is he just, Gracious and righteous. Good and
upright is the Lord to teach sinners in the way. Ps. 25.8.
Ps. 25. Good and gracious in the multitude of his mercies to them that turn
unto him: Righteous and upright in the severity of his judgments to them that
cast him from them. Here are love and wrath, pity and revenge, two Daughters
of a great King go hand in hand: If the one cannot draw, the other must, the
Church shall be removed, the light of the Gospel shall be put out; For as the
Candlestick holds the light, so does the Church the word: without this we
walk in darkness and obscurity: so that here I must land and fasten upon this
note, Doct.
That the taking away of the Ministry and preaching of the word is the greatest
plague that can befall any.

The reasons are well known. Where there is no vision the people perish. Pro.
29.18. 2. Chapter 15.3. To. 10.17.
Pro. 29. Where there is not a teaching Priest, and law, there is no God. 2.
Chapter 15. Faith comes by hearing. Romans 10. so that take away the word, and take
away faith; take away faith, take away Christ; take away Christ, and take away
eternal life. Therefore upon Aarons robe there were golden Bells, signifying
the preaching of the Gospel; and Pomegranates, signifying the sweet savor of
Christ's death. Exo 28.34.
Ex. 28. The miseries which follow this are unspeakable: To be blind and have
no guide, and yet to walk there where treading awry is the tumbling into hell:
to be hungry, and to famish: to suck, but on dry breasts: to be pined, and not
perceive it, which is an evil of evils. Therefore was Jerusalem threatened,
that their prophets tongue should cleave to the roof of his mouth, and he
should be dumb, and not be unto them a reprouer. Ez. 3. Ez. 3.26.
and this fearful sentence was urged from the mouth of Christ himself. I say
unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof. Mat. 21. Mat. 21.43.
And if this kingdom be once gone, their joy goes with it: All the Empires
and dominions in the world subdued, all Scepters and Crowns heaped together
cannot bless them. A greater judgment then any invasion of enemies; then
firing of towns, ruinating of houses, rauishing of wives and daughters,
dashing of Infants against the stones in the streets, pulling out the eyes
from the heads, and bowels from the bodies of a people. Therefore the best have
ever dearly respected Gods Ambassadors, the Pastors of the Church, and the
Ministers of the word. Thus did they in the old law; Iehoiada a Priest,
marrying Iehoshabeath the daughter of King Iehoram, the sister of King Ahaziah
2. Chapter 22. 2 Chapter 22 11.
Thus Ioash the King of Israel came down in person to visit sick Elisha, and
wept over his face, saying, O my father, my father, the Chariot of Israel, 2
Ki. 13.14.
and the horsmer thereof. 2 Ki. 13. In the new Testament we find many
Possessors of lands and houses, selling them, and laying down the prices of
them at the Apostles feet. Act. 4. Act. 4.34.35
The honorable Treasurer of Ethiopia, Act. 8.31. Act. 10.25. Act. 17.4. Gal.
4.14.
taking Philip up into his Chariot. Ac. 8. Cornetius a devout liberal
Martialist, falling down at the feet of Peter. Aect. 10. The chief women in
Thessalonica, consorting with Paul and Barnabas. Ac. 17. The Galathians
receiving S. Paul as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. Gal. 4.14.
Ecclesiastical stories abound in examples of Valentinian, Ambr in obitu.
Valentin.
so reuerencing Ambrose, that seeing him in his sickness come unto him, salutem
sibi quandam venturam arbitrabatur, he thought he saw health it self coming
unto him; of Alexander lighting from his horse, and bowing to Iaddus; of good
Theodosius sending for Meletius to kiss his lips and embrace him: Theod. l.
5. c. 7.
of Constantine, kissing that eye of Paphnutius, R^ff 1.4.
a Bishop of Thebes, which had loft light by the violence of the Arrians: of
that noble Earl Terentius, who having obtained a great victory, and being
bidden of the Emperor Constantius to ask what he would, Templum petiit pro
orthodoxis, Theod. l. 4. c 3^.
he asked to have the Church restored to the orthodoxall teachers. I omit how
much others have been honored, Hilarious at Arles, Paulinus at Nola, Cyrill at
Alexandria, Chrysostom at Constantinople, Plut. in Demo.
Augustine at Happo, Ambrose at Millan, Cyprian at Carthage: For if the
Orators are once yielded, Athens must soon to wrack: Zac. 13.7.
if the Shepherd be smitten, the Sheep will be scattered: if preaching, and
the Candlestick of a place, which is the Church, be removed, men's souls will
run to ruin.

The 1. Use is to tax the Papist, Use 1. Mat. 5.15
who hides this candlestick and candle under a bushel, that it cannot give
light to them that are in the house; setting lock and key upon the Scriptures,
that the laity may not come in, marking them with a Noli me tangere; Hard. act.
15. sect 6. Mat. 7.6 Ioh. 7.49
calling the Comonalty Swine, and a rude people, as the Pharisees in their pride
keeping their followers from the knowledge of the law, calling them cursed.
Ioh. 7. And as the Spartans enacted, that none should walk by night with
Lantern, Torch, Plut. Lycur.
or any light, so have they forbidden this which is a lamp unto the feet, and
a light unto the path, Psalm 119.105
least the peoples understanding might prove the discovery of those errors,
wherewith before they were by their own ignorance mizled, or by their blind
guides misse-led. I appeal to ancient customs. Soc. l. 4. c. 33
Why then did Vlphilas Bishop translate the Scriptures into the Gottish tongue,
that the Barbarians might learn them? S. Ierom into the Sclauonian language?
Hos and Alpho.
S. Chrysostom into the Armenian? Ier. Athen. insynop.
Why did Origin labor so much in his Exaplus? not to search those of Aquila,
Symmachus, Theodetion, and Eucian a Martyr? Why did S. Austen commend this, the
translation from one tongue into diverse languages as a guide unto salvation?
why did Macrina, Basils nurse, August, de doct. chr, l. 2. c. 5. Bas. op. 74.
Ier. epit. Paulae
teach him the Scripture of a child? Paula set her Maids to read the
Scriptures? Why did S. John dedicate his second Epistle to the elect Lady? It
were impious to think that he would send her a letter which she might not
read. I leave that other error of Rome, preferring the Church before the
Scrioture: whereas the Word is the Candle, and the Church but the Candlestick;
yet if this be removed, curses must follow. From the thief in the Candle, the
Papist, I must come to the thief which would take away our Candlestick, the
honors and endowments of our Church: crying out,

Dicite Pontifices, in templo quid facit aurum? What should the Church do with
gold? Persius.
In the time of superstition, when the Pastors had conspired either not to
preach at all unto their charges, or if they did bring any thing it was poison
for meat, and venom in stead of water: when Antichrist, with his Pomp, and
his followers with the brightness of earthly and carnal glory, had daseled the
peoples eyes that they could not see truth from error: when the knowledge of the
tongues, and almost all other literature was raked up under the ashes: when the
decrees of Popes and canons of councels, and customs and traditions were in
place of the written word: when some schoolmen had conspurcated and abused
true divinity with their filthiness: when a lively faith and understanding
knowledge were not heard of; it was thought the glory and merit of the Papists
to enrich and endowe the Church: wherein howsoever they offended, yet (as the
Moralist has it) it was on the safer part, being in excess in making the
Church exceed in riches. And certainly their excess in the day of judgment
shall condemn the defect of many temple-Pirats, and Church-robbers, who pare
and loppe the temporal estates of the Church: but such stolen waters shall be
unto them like Eagles feathers, to eat and consume the rest of their substance;
Pli. l. 10. c. 3. Aul. Gel. l. 30. c 9
like Equus Seianus, and aurum Tolossanum, which were still unfortunate to
those that had them. O now miserable times, wherein the Ship of our Church is
tossed betwixt Scylla and Charibdis, Aram before and the Philistimes behind:
Atheistical Politicians seek our livings, as the Papists our lives. How many
fair portions of the Lord, which to bestow upon him Devotion disinherited her
own dear Children, have been taken away from the Church! Many golden vessels
have been taken from the Lords table, to furnish private houses. Many great
barnes have been filled, and bords maintained, with the tiths of the Church:
Had not the Doners ius proprietatis, power to make such donations? had not
Princes in those times ius domini, power to allow such? Had not the laws ius
determinationis power to fasten these by their determinations? When they were
taken from the Church, Is. 34.11.13.
the Cormorant and the Bitterne have possessed them, the Owl and the Raven
have dwelt there, there have been the line of confusion, and stones of
emptines: Thorns, nettles, and brambles have come up in their fortresses: yea
the remaining relics of those goodly walls have been dig'd up with the bones
of the founders. If the sins of some have brought such a judgment upon some
Church houses, what shall become of many which turn Bethel into Beth^uen, Gods
house into a house of vanity? taking the bread of Prophets and Prophets
Children, to maintain their own pomp and feed their horses, hawks, hounds,
and much worse creatures. This is the cause of so much sickness in Religion:
many submit neither their hearts to the doctrine, nor their lives to the
discipline of the Church, because they see it so trampled upon. So reverend M.
Calu. confessed, Calu. Ep. ad Cranmer Brent. ep. ad. Ioh. Schopper.
vnum obstaculum intelligo, quod praedae expositi sunt Ecclesiae redditus,
matum sane intolerabile. This terrifyeth so many in the study of divinity,
causes schools to be contemned, and learned men to be disheartened. I would
to God these would remember Balthasars end, who profaning the vessels of the
Temple, saw such a hand writing upon the wall, that his countenance was
changed, his thoughts troubled him, the joints of his loins were loosed, his
knees smote one against the other, and in that night he was slain. Da. 5. or
Antiochus upon his death bed, Da. 5 6.30 1 Mac. 6.11.12 2 Mac. 3.26. Theod. l.
3. c. 11.
confessing this to be the occasion of al his misery. 1 Mac. 6. or Heliodorus
whipped by Angels for it. 2. Mac. 3 Or Iuliau wounded to death with an arrow from
heaven, for robbing Churches; or Achans stoning, or Judas hanging. When I name
Judas, I must remember another thief in our Candle and Candlestick, the
Simoniacall Patron, which will not part with that portion which is due unto the
Sons of Leui, and committed unto them, as the golden Apple was unto ^aris,
with DETVR DIGNIORI, let the worthier have it, Valesse with Judas they covenant
for a price beforehand; never regarding the excellency and abundance of a man's
learning, the soundness of his says, the uprightness of his conscience, the
integrity of his conversation, the ^^^kenes of his spirit, the discreetnesse of
his behavior, and efficacy of his Preaching, but had rather feel their
payment of gold, then hear their preaching of the Gospel; preferring the gain
of their purses before the gaining of the souls of their brethren unto Christ
Jesus, turning patronage into pillage, and trust into treachery, presenting
Magus unto Balaam: so that though he be as stupid as Philips Ass in Plutorch,
Plut. Apoth.
yet it he be laden with gold, he shall be admitted and commended for a man of
gifts; howsoever the old law appointed the neck of an Ass to be broke. Exo.
34. Exodus 34.20.
This is the reason why there are so many Mutes in this kingdom, and so few
vowels in some places; so many vowels which are short in delivering the Lords
presage: like Cilchas in Homer, I liad a.
who knew the truth but was afraid to speak it, least he should anger the
hearers and hurt himself; like the flattering Priest of Jupiter, who when
Alexander the great came to the Oracle, saluted him by the name of Jupiters
son, Plut in vit.
and all to get some great rue ard. So did not S. John with Ephesus, but
threatens a speedy judgment without quick conversion. Behold how this
concerns you! Fail not now in attention. Ephesus is fallen upon that night
wherein Christ died; one judgment came upon it, Applicatio. Zorin. Ac. 18.19.
and though it was afterward reedified, yet now it is become miserable by
Turkish tyranny and Greekish superstition; a poor Bishop and some remnants
remaining. God is the same God still, as just, as jealous as ever he was. Our
sins being as great as those of Ephesus, nay greater, the like end must come
upon us without repentance. My zeal to Gods glory, and desire for the
saluations of you all, command me not to flatter. Remember, London, from whence
thou have fallen: Many glorious things have been spoken of thee, O thou city
of God. Alexandria in Egypt was never more happy, Ammian. Marcell. l. 22.
that for many years together, scarce any one day has been seen, that the
Sun has not shined upon it. Platina.
But if your glory were as great as that of Rome, when Cyneas the Epirote
reported that he had seen so many Kings as Citizens; though the number of your
city has sometimes been found (and now runs numberless) above eight
hundredth thousand living souls; though you are situate among the rivers,
having the Sea for your rampart; as many learned and religious Teachers to
instruct you, as ever any one Church since the Apostles times; though you have
goodly houses to receive you, pleasant shades to cool you, all delicats of Sea
and land to feed you: Plut in Lacon. Theopomp. In hist.
yet if your streets abound with men like the Graecians, which knew what was
honest but did not practice it; like Philips soldiers, who held periuries,
impostures, sharkings to be but tricks of a good wit: if you suffer many
rorers to swear away all reproves, and drink away the chidings of their own
conscience: if you suffer painted Iezabels to draw the eyes, and chain the
hearts of many unto them by their witchcrafts: if you suffer young Gallants to
be more forward for the flesh then the Spirit, being borne to great
possessions, but like ripe figtrees full of fruit growing over deep waters
are eaten by the Iayes, so the hopes and means of these to be blasted and
consumed by biting Vsuters, enticing Dalilaes, and cozening Cheaters, till they
become sports and subjects for Theaters; if you suffer many conscience
cauterized foolish Atheists to scoff at the Gospel, violently extinguishing
to themselves the Sunne-light of the Scriptures, Moone-light of the creature,
nay the sparks and cinders of nature, and to be worse then the Devil, who
belieueth with trembling that there is a God; If you suffer prophaine Neuters
to wear Gods livery, and serve the Dinell, to be as mutable as Proteus, as
changeable as the Camelion, one day a Protestant, another day a Papist,
resolving like Denton, in King Edwards days a true Professor, but in Q.
Mary's days crying, I CANNOT BVRNE, For which God so followed him, that
shortly after his house was fired, and he with two other perished in the flame;
Fox martyr p, 1558. edi^. Anno 1596.
nay to turn Turks, Jews, Infidels, any thing for advantage. If you suffer
blood-thirsty Papists, those undermining Foxes, to have not only foueas, but
fonentes, their holes, but friends and fautors, and more Idolatrous abominable
Masses in some Prisons, then there are sermons in some Churches, God must come
against you quickly and remove his Candlestick. I remember that of Lipsius,
Ipsa clementia est, in desparate malos non esse clementem, Lips. l. de. vna.
rel.
It is good clemency, not to show any clemency unto those that are
desperately evil. Suffer therefore the words of exhortation, and let me be
your remembrancer in these things, else I can be no good Minister of Jesus
Christ. 1. Ti. 4.6.
I am now his Ambassador, and were I before the greatest Monarch of the world,
my resolution should be as that of Ambrose to Theodosius,

Neque Imperiale est dicendi libertatem negare. Amb. ep. l. 5

Neque secerdotale quod sentiat non dicere.
Neither becomes it you to forbid free speech, neither beseems it me to
keep in silence what I should speak.

Right Honorable Magistrate of this honored and admired City, Sir John
Ioules Mayor.
who sit at the stern of this common wealth, whose breast is like an Ocean,
whereinto all the cares of private men empty themselves, except you protect
with Gods sword the service of God, except you put to death the deadly and
crying sins which live in this City, except (like those good servants of the
great King) you sometimes walk the streets, and many idle and irreligious
corners, compelling the obstinate, our Candlestick must be removed, God will
come against you quickly. You Angels and Ambassadors of the Lord, Messengers
and Ministers of my God, except you cry aloud against sin, strengthen the
diseased, heal that which is sick, bind up that which is broken, bring again
that which has been driven away, ^z. 34.4.
and seek that which has been lost; except your life and doctrine agree
together, as it was spoken of Origin Quale habuit verbun, talem habuit vitam;
except you pass your time as Ambrose did, Hieron Ep. ed Marcel.
who spent his life either in reading, or meditating, or praying, or
conferring, or counselling, or comforting, or writing, or preaching, Our
Candlestick must be removed, God will come against you quickly.

Let me remember you, aged and gray headed Fathers, whose years have taught
you experience for the world, 1. Io. 2.14.
and you profess that you have known God from the beginning, think upon
your latter end. Let not your last act be the worst. For honorable age, is
not that which stands in length of time, nor that is measured by number of
years: but wisdom is your gray-hayre, Wisd. 4.8.9.
and an unspotted life is your old age.

Let me remember you young men and blessed Brethren, to begin betimes a holy
and pure life: Faint not at that Proverb invented by the Devil that young
Saints prove old Devils. Be now trained up in the way wherein you should go,
Eras^col. piet^s pucril.
and when you are old you will not depart from it. I exhort you as Austin,
Etiam atque etiam, etc. Pr. 2^.6. ^ug t^a. l. 2. in Ep Io^.
Consider ye diligently that ye are young men. Fight to overcome: overcome ye
to be crowned: Be humble minded least ye fall in the fight: up and be
doing, and the Lord shall be with you.

Finally to speak unto all and so to end all: while the Lord woeth us, as he
did Ephraim and Judah, O England what shall I do unto thee? O London how shall
I entreat thee? Let us embrace the riches of his merciful call: Let every one
apply that unto his own soul, which is spoken unto the Angel of the Church
in Sardis: Remember how thou have received and heard, and hold fast and repent.
Re. 3.3.
Let thy moist eyes, furrowed cheeks, hard knees, humble detection, broken
sighs, testify an humble sorrow. Hereafter let us never look toward Sodom,
but run in a holy race till we come to the gole. Let us cast anchor in the
fair haven of Gods mercies, the safest harbor for distressed Consciences. Let
us commune with our own hearts, and make this one word Repent the watch of our
lives. Let us write this lesson with the pen of a Diamond upon the tablet of
our hearts. Heaven and our souls are upon this work, and it should be our
only labor, for Tempus vitae est tempus poenitentiae, the whole season of our
life is but lent us for mortification. O then while Gods patience expects us,
let us not defer our repentance; while he importuneth, let not us sleep;
while he knocks, let not us shut the doors of our hearts: but let us draw
nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto us. Iam. 4.8.
Let us cleanse our hands and purify our hearts. Let us humble our selves in
the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift us up: He shall be our God and we
shall be his People; Peace, shall be in your houses, and plenty in your
dwellings; there shall be no decay, no leading into captivity, no complaining
in your streets: and which is better then all these, our Church and
Candlestick shall never be removed, till Christ Jesus come unto Judgment: To
whom with the Father and the Spirit be ascribed all honor and glory, power
and Majesty, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

