LONDONS REMEMBRANCER: FOR THE STAYING OF THE CONTAGIOVS SICKNESS OF THE PLAGVE:
By David's Memorial. AS IT WAS FOLLOWED in a Sermon Preached in Christs-Church
in LONDON, the 22. of January. 1626. Upon occasion of the public
Thanksgiving, enjoined by his Majesty's Proclamation. By SAMSON PRICE, Doctor
of Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chapleins in Ordinary.

PSALM. 63.6.7. When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the
night watches, because thou have been my help: therefore in the shadow of
thy wings will I rejoice.

AT LONDON: Printed by Edward All-de, for Thomas Harper. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS COVENTRYE, KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT
SEAL OF ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
IT is the great work of God, to reclaim from their offenses, those whom he
loves, by corrections: To this end as he bestows favors upon some in anger,
as he did Quails upon the Israelites: so strikes he others in mercy, that
they may be zealous, and repent. The late Pestilence amongst us of this City,
Re, 3.19.
and the other infected parts of the Kingdom, bringing wonderful Plagues, and
sore sicknesses: came rushing with such violence, De. 28.27.58.59.
because we did not serve the Lord our God with ioyfulnes, having abundance
of all things; and because we did not fear this glorious name, The Lord: yet
mercy showed it self stronger then Judgment, 2. Sa. 24 16.
and upon our weak and unworthy humiliation, the destroying Angel has in a
great measure stayed his hand: Beauty therefore being given unto us for ashes,
the oil of Joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, Js. 61.3.
The Lord is to be praised. To this end has our Royal zealous anointed
Sovereign, sent forth a solemn command: This, to fasten as a memorandum in
the ears and hearts of those committed to my poor charge, I endeavored, By
King David's memorial, of what God had done for him. A subject fit for an
Angel from heaven to comment upon.

A THANKSGIVING: All the works of the Lord praise him: Angels, Heavens, Sun,
Moon, Stars, showers, dew, wind, Winter, Summer: Wels, Whales, Fowls,
Beasts: All holy and humble men of heart desire to remember the Lord. This is
here pressed, wherein my only aim was to speak what was plain, profitable,
necessary to the glory of God, and good of the people. This Mite I now offer
to the Treasury (Talents I have none) Knowing that in a willing mind, it is
accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not,
2. Cor. 8.2. Whatsoever it is, I am emboldened, by your late Noble
encouragements, to present it to your Honors acceptance, protection,
perusal. It is the joy of many, that God has given you a large, just, and
faithful heart: a desire rather to be an vmpire of equity, Amb. de Theodosio
Aequitatis Iudex nonpaenae arbiter. Ps. 82.1.
then a Decreer of severity; and as God has exalted you, so you remember by
your resolute, yet meek carriage, that God stands in the Congregation of the
mighty, he judges among the Gods. I shall still rest a continual Peticioner
to the throne of grace, that in these slipperie times, all the foundations of
the earth being out of course, you may be kept by the power of God, through
faith unto salvation.

New Rents 1626. Febru. 10. Your Honors in all duty to be commanded, SAMSON
PRICE.

Lord Jesus begin and end. LONDONS REMEMBRANCER BY DAVID'S MEMORIAL.
PSALM. 42.4. When I remember these things, I power out my soul in me.
IT was the confident profession of royal David, when some did strive with
him, fight against him, and persecute him: Ps. 34.19.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all. 1 Sa. 21.1. Eusebius. Bas.
The whole Psalm was composed when he came to Achimelech the Priest, craving
bread and arms: A Psalm written (says Cassiodor) for the times of
Christians; A Psalm which Athanasius persuaded Marcellinus to sing upon any
deliverance: As David's afflictions were great; so were his deliverances;
consider him a caula ad aulam, from the Sheep-coate to the Scepter; Ps. 78.71.
being sent to follow the Ewes great with young, either by his Fathers neglect,
or his brothers envious conspiracy, and plotting against him: the day
consuming him with heat, and the night with frosts; in danger of Lions and
Bears; (...).

Gods hand shook his house from the foundation. Bas. 1. Sa. 21.13. Ps. 62.1,


his Father in law unkind, Michal his wife froward; having breaches in his
family by his Thamar, Ammon, Absalon; bruises by the pestilence, brunts by
wars, which made him water his couch with his tears, and would have made him
mad indeed, as he but feigned when he was before Achish, had not the Lord
delivered him: But his soul truly waited upon God, because his salvation came
from him. A text urged by St. Austin against the Donatists: prescribed by Basil
as an Antidote, 3. Co. lit. Potil. c. 18.
to every Christian against corrupt passions, Bas. hom.
that the soul be not made a slave to lewd affections. Every creature is to
obey the Creator, and may be enforced; but a voluntary subjection is expected
of the reasonable soul of man, that our will follow Gods will, that we desire
nothing contrary to his will, that we incline our hearts to his pleasure. For
we are the creatures, he is the Creator; we but clay, he the Potter; we
captives, he the commander; we servants, he the Master; we Scholars, Ie.
2.20.
he the Tutour; and none but the son of Belial, that cannot endure the Lord,
will seek to break his bands: the life of Christ was a life of subjection; to
his Parents, to Magistrates, to the Law, to the Baptism of John; yea, he who
was Lord and Master, washed his Apostles feet, not only because the devil
had supplanted Adam in his feet: Am. l. 1. de Sac. c. 1.

Gre. 18. Mor. c. 19. Js. 52.7.


or because they were to be his feet to carry him through the world, and as
beautiful feet upon the mountains to publish peace, and bring good tidings
of good, publishing salvation; but to give them an example of humility; Jo.
13.14.
that seeing he washed their feet, they ought also to wash one another feet.
He who was God and man, was subject, that man might learn to submit himself
wholly to God. Anima is quasi (...), a breathing: and the tongue of the soul is
the Zeal of devotion: Bar. se. 45. in c. Ps. 25.1.
our devout Kingly Prophet in all humble submission cried out: Unto thee O Lord
do I lift up my soul. Happy is he only who can say it with the heart of
David; Greg. in Ps. vlt. poenit.
sin does not ouer-burthen him; worldly delight draws him not back from
the service of God; pleasure boweth him not down; covetousness does not make
him stoop; opulencie does not puff him up; ambition does not carry him away.
His soul made her boast in the Lord; because confirmed, strengthened, Ps. 34.2.
and able to endure so wonderfully from his power, M. Ro^ 1. singular. c. 13.
by which he was whatsoever he was. He prayed that God would say unto his
soul, I am thy salvation: Ps. 35.3.
For Gods word is his Act, and his dixit a fiat: His soul followed hard after
God, because his right hand did uphold him: Ps. 63.8.
He followed not the allurements of the world, which by vices draw men from
the love of God. Hill.
His soul kept Gods testimonies; Never did Burgensis so justly entitle his
book Scrutinium scripturarum, Ps. 119.129.
as David might his meditations Scrutinium praeceptorum. Ps. 130.6.
His soul waited for the Lord, more then they that wait for the morning: He
that hops must hope to the end. Aug.
He prayed that his soul might not be gathered with sinners; Ps. 26.9.
that his soul which was his darling, might be rescued from destruction and
the Lions. Ps. 35.17.
This, has breath breathed into it by the spirit of God, and therefore is ever
ready to breath out sighs, groans, supplications, thanksgiving unto God upon
the remembrance of his works, his mercies, his judgments, his providence, his
deliverances as here. When I remember these things, I power out my soul in me.

When word came to the King of Nineveh, that God had thundered out a judgment
against that City, by the voice of Jonah, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
overthrown: Jon. 3.4.
He caused it to be proclaimed: Let neither man nor beast taste any thing: Let
them cry mightily unto God; Let them turn every one from his evil way: and
God saw their works, and God repented of the evil that he had said he would
do unto them, and he did it not. That King was as all great ones should be,
carbo and lampas, a coal burning to himself, Gr. in Ez. ho. 1
a lamp shining to other men. As he for Nineveh: so our gracious King CHARLES,
seeing the Lord angry with our City and Kingdom, and sending out a Preacher
unto us of the strongest lines to terrify us; by a Pestilence; sent forth a
solemn Edict for a public Fast through the whole Kingdom: We have seen a
blessed effect: and therefore now our gracious Sovereign with zealous David,
willing to have a Memorial kept of that late, sudden, miraculous stopping of
the vyals of Gods wrath amongst us and others, in staying of the Plague; is
this day with his Nobles and Courtiers, assembled to give public thanks in
the Congregation; and has commanded a general and public Thanksgiving to
God throughout this whole Realm, for so great and gracious a deliverance,
Procla. Ia. 22.
acknowledging that they are not worthy of future favors, who are not truly
thankful for benefits already received: To this end we are met. A King has
commanded us; and a Prophet is his leader. We have had sad times, as our David
in this Psalm: V. 1.
As the Heart has panted after the water brooks, 3.
so has our soul panted after God: Tears have been our meat: the
multitudes with whom we used to go to the house of God and keep holy day,
have been taken away: 4.5,
our souls have bin cast down; we have been disquieted; V. 7.
Deep has called upon deep; Waves and billows have gone over us: God seemed
to forget us, 9.
and therefore have we mourned. Yet again, we are come to appear before God,
and therefore let us praise him, 11
who is the health of our countenance, and our God; Let us remember what is
past: as David; When I remember, etc.

My Text shows us the two hands of God; the one with a wound, the other with
a plaster: the one casting down, the other raising up: the one killing, the
other making alive; Both pile up a Beacon to call us together, to see what God
has done for us, and what we are bound to do unto God: teaching us, that
though our miseries, troubles, fears, infirmities, Plagues, be as the host of
the Aramites, 2. King. 6.14.
a great host, yet more are with us then against us. Does God send a sore? he
sends a salve also: sorrow for a night? joy in the morning: sobs and
lamentations sometimes? but songs and congratulations afterward: we see it in
this Psalm, in this Memorial: When I remember these things, I power out my
soul in me.

The sum of which words is David's Memorial, of Gods mercies, favors,
deliverances: you may call it, The oblation of the soul: or hope for the
Saints: or a form of thanksgiving: or the refuge of the afflicted: or the
safety of Gods children: or Londons remembrancer by David's Memorial: showing
us mercy in the midst of judgment, by our deliverance from the late great
Plague.

Wherein observe 1. A divine Art of memory: When I remember these things, 2. A
zealous Act of piety: I power out my soul in me.


In the 1. See his commemoration. 2. His devotion.


When I remember these things.
The whole verse is dark, as reverend Calvin Aug. haec meditatus sum, I have
meditated upon these things: By St. Amb. Psalter, Haec memoratus sum, I have
remembered, rehearsed, spoken of these things: Simmachus (...): observing, or
registring, and recalling in my mind. Campensis interprets it of Gods
providence showed, and his promises made for the deliverance of the Fathers
before David: Folengius of Gods promises to all his servants: Valentia of his
promise concerning the coming of the Messiah. But others, Euth, Niceph.
Hesych. Eusebius. Bas. Theo. Amb. Aug. Ruff. Cassiod.
that David was recounting with himself what troubles he was in, when his
enemies reproached him in his miseries, as if God had forsaken him, forgotten
to be gracious to him; and in his adversity, Psalm. 35.15.
the abiects gathered themselves together against him to tear him. He
remembers that God had brought him out of the horrible pit, Psa. 40.2.
of the mirie clay, and set a new song in his mouth. Memory is taken either
for an intellectual habit left by some act, Gab. Biel. d. 27 q. 2. act. 1. l.
1.
or for some thing that sticks to the soul, comprehending things past, making
an Act of them: It is a resuming of any thing apprehended in the sense or
understanding. Ar. de mem.
Sense is for things present; Hope, for things to come; Memory, for things
past: Memory, is the lieger book of the brain; the Ianus that has an eye
behind; the storehouse of the mind: but there is a threefold memory.

Beneficiorum, This is to be retained in us,

Exemplorum, This is to be exhibited by us.

Iniuriarum, This is to be relinquished from us.

There must be a remembrance of Gods blessings and benefits: therefore says
the Lord to the Church by Isai: Put me in remembrance; Let us plead together:
43.26.
Remember what I have done for thee in creation, redemption, preservation. The
best Art of memory is to be humbled at Gods threatenings, and comforted at his
promises: for exceeding griefs or exceeding joys leave great impressions in
us. But this memory is hindered by worldly prosperity: as the chief Butler
forgot Joseph, Ge. 40.23. Musculus.
a right temporizing Courtier, who partly for fear to move the King, partly
addicted to his own profit, and serve his own turn, would make no mention of
Joseph: So the children of Israel called Iesurun, waxed fat and kicked, and
then forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his*
salvation. David remembered God on his bed, and in the night watches; Ps. 63.6.
whiles others slept and snorted in their sins. There is a remembrance of
examples: Moses was a merciful man, which found favor in the sight of all
flesh, beloved of God and men; His memorial is blessed. There is a remembrance
of injuries, Ecc. 45.1.
whereas the best remedy of an injury is forgetting. Sen.
And at Athens it was enacted a decree obliuionis iniuriarum, Plut. praec.
Reip. Jer.
of forgetting of injuries, for when Thrasibulus had freed the City of thirty
Tyrants, and restored it to peace, he made a Law, that none should remember
any injuries past, which the Athenians call the Law of oblivion: Gutter. de
Treio in Euang. l. 3. ex Sueton.
and this we read of the Emperor Augustus, who though of a most tenacious and
retentiue memory: Iniurias tamen cum primis obliuisceretur, could yet forget
wrongs as soon as they were offered: To this end is that remembrance: thou
shall not avenge, Le. 19.18.
nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people: that, Ecc. 28.6.
remember thy end, and let enmity pass: that as when Bees fight, the casting
of a little dust upon them ends their strife: Pli. l. 11. c. 17.
so the remembrance of our end by common mortality in pestilence or otherwise,
still toling for the last gasp, should ring out the death of malice, and bury
all wrongs in the grave of oblivion, never to rise up again: But I must not
forget the remembrance of God, the remembrance of us here. Ps. 98.3. Ie. 15.15.
He remembers his mercy and truth toward Israel: He remembers us, and
visits us, and reuengeth us of our persecutors: Ps. 111.4.
he takes us not away in his long suffering. He being gracious and full of
compassion, has made his wonderful works to be remembered. Therefore he
commanded that a golden pot of Manna should be kept to remember what bread the
children of Israel had in the wilderness: Ex. 16.32.
Lu. 22.19.
The Sacrament of the Lords supper is a remembrance of the death and passion of
our blessed Savior.

All the feasts enjoined Israel, required of them a memorial of Gods benefits
done unto them.

Le. 24.7.
The twelve Cakes on the pure table before the Lord, were for a memorial.

1. Chr. 16.4.
David appointed the Levites to record, and to thank and praise the Lord God
of Israel.

Ez. 6.9.
They that escaped of the sword when they were scattered, were to remember him
among the Nations.

Ex. 28.12.
The two stones upon the shoulder of the Ephod, were for a memorial unto Aaron.

La. 3.20.
Jeremy remembering his afflictions, misery, and wormwood and Gall, his soul
was humbled, yet he hoped.

Jonas remembered the Lord, and his soul fainted, when no doubtful earthly
natural help, could release him: when his father, mother, friend, Jo. 2.7.
land, sea, his soul, all had forsaken him: yet the Lord took him up, and
gave him better hope. Is. 63.7.
Isai made mention of the loving kindness of the Lord, and the praises of the
Lord, his great goodness, and multitude of loving kindnesses. Never did David
more truly remember Jerusalem: If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand
forget her cunning. Ps. 137.5.6.
If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; a
greater torment he wished not to his enemy in the Poet: On. iulbin.
Nec possis captas inde refer manus.
Sic fit in exitium lingua proterua tuum.


God has plagues in store for them that forget him: They shall be delivered
into the hands of their enemies, 1. Sam. 12.9.
as the Israelites forgetting the Lord, were sold into the hands of Sisera,
they wither in their greenesse before any other herb, Job. 8.13.
their hope being cut of: They forget God, Psalm. 44.21.
and stretch out their hands to a strange God, and then God searches this out:
Psalm. 50.22.
they shall have their sins set in order before them, and be torn in pieces,
and none shall deliver them: they have forgotten God, and trusted in falsehood,
Ier. 13.26.
therefore their skirts shall be discovered upon their face, that their shame
may appear: Though then thou forget to take bread for a Journey, Mat. 16.5.
as the Disciples did: or forget thy friend in thy mind, Ecc. 37.6.
and be unmindful of him in thy riches: Remember the Lord.

Thy brethren may be put far from thee, thine acquaintance estranged, thy
kinsfolk may fail, and thy familiar friends forget thee; Job. 19.14.
thy Lovers may forget thee and not seek thee, there may be none to plead thy
cause: Ier. 30.13.
but the Lord remembers us: provoke him not therefore; forget not the
everlasting God that brought you up; Baruc. 9.8.
grieve not Jerusalem that nursed you.

There are some things that especially affect the memory, and we shall find
all singular in God.

Assidnum, Mirum, Cognatum, Dulce, Decorum. Hugo in Psalm. 105.22.

Triste, Nouum, Munus, Amor, Aetas, Spes, Timor, Auctor.
Are we mindful of things frequent and usual: In God we live, Act. 17.28.
move, and have our being.

Of things wonderful? His Name is wonderful; Isa. 9.6.
The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father.

Ib. 16.
Of things near us or persons alyed? We are all his offspring.

Psalm. 34.8.
Of pleasant things: O taste and see how the Lord is good!

Psalm. 45.2.
Do we remember Fair, Beautiful, Goodly things? He is fayrer then the
children of men.

Lam. 1.12.
Sad and sorrowful things? Behold and see if there be any sorrow like that
of the Son of God.

Ier. 31.22.
Gifts? There is a New-yeeres gift: The Lord has created a New thing in the
earth: A woman shall compass a man.

Ioh. 3.16.
Love? God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.

Ephesians. 5.1. 1. Pet. 2.2.
Carry we in memory our age? we are his dear children; as newborn babes.

Phil. 3.21.
Any thing we hope for? No hope to that for the Savior, who shall change our
vile bodies.

Eccl. 1.8.
Any thing we fear? There is one wise and greatly to be feared, the Lord
sitting upon his throne.

Iam. 1.17.
Our Benefactours? Every good and perfect gift is from the Father of lights.

King David had infirmities and did bear them, but this was his supporter: Ps.
77.10.11
I will remember the years of the right hand of the most High. I will remember
the works of the Lord: Surely, I will remember thy wonders of old. Wonderful
are the works of Nature: but more wonderful are the works of grace in our
Justification. A wonder it was that the dead was raised: Hill. 2. de Trinit.
but a greater wonder that a poor fisherman whose hands were practiced in his
old torn netts, and feet in the slime and mud of the sea, should have the
power on a sudden of converting souls. A wonder that's above all wonders,
that the Creator should become a creature; Ruffin.
with his blood restore the lost sheep from death to life; Lu. 1.74.
yet thus He has remembered his holy Covenant to deliver us from our Enemies.

Can a woman forget her sucking child, Isa. 49.15.
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? they may: yet
God will not forget us. He remembers us, that we may remember him. This made
those who received blessings unexpected from God, to keep some special
memorial; as Leah conceiving and bearing a son, she called his name Reuben,
for she said, The Lord has looked upon my affliction, Genesis 29 32.
now therefore my husband will love me. She bare another son and called him
Simeon, Verse. 33.
Because the Lord has heard that I was hated, He has given me this son also.
Hence the name of Immanuel God with us, Isay the help of the Lord, Gabriel the
strength of God, Gamaliel the Reward of God: Philo.
Jeremy the high of the Lord; Joseph the increase of the Lord, Israel
prevailing in the Lord, Theodorus the gift of God, Nathaniel the gift of God,
Matthew Gods gift, Lazarus the help of the God, Raphael the physic of God,
Samuel placed of God, Theophylus a lover of God, Tobias the Lord is good,
Zachary the memory of the Lord. Therefore Hagar having an Angel to come to her
by the Well, to tell her of Ishmael whom she should bring forth, the name of
the Well was after Beer-lahai-Roy. Genesis 16.14.
The Well of him that lives and sees me. By living, understanding her self,
that lived after this glorious sight. By seeing, God who sees our afflictions.
Genesis 21.14.
Thus Abraham called the place of Isaacs deliverance Iehouah-ijreh, The Lord
will see or provide, which some take to be a prophecy of the Temple which
should afterward be built at Jerusalem, Chald. Par.
where the Lord would manifest and show himself. Calu.
Others collect hence an argument of our confidence: all other means failing;
to cast our care upon God, as Abraham did, who had another sacrifice provided
in stead of his son, which he thought not upon. Thus Jacob having visions of
comfort rose in the morning, and set up the stone that he had used as a pillow,
for a pillar, calling the place Bethel, the house of God; Genesis 28.19. Aug. l.
16. ciu. 38.
a pillar not for adoration but commemoration, yet that anointed pillar was a
figure of Christ, who is so called of his anointing. As now, he testified his
thankfulness for the vision of the ladder, so afterward having wrastled with
an Angel, he called a place Peniel, The Face of God. For, Genesis 32.30.
says he, I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved* that his
posterity might remember the place and vision: he spoke with him praesens
praesentem, he talked with God present, Mercer.
as Moses with whom God did speak mouth to mouth, and apparently, not in dark
speeches. Number. 12.8.
Thus he being delivered from Esau, erected an Altar, and called it
El-Elohe-Israel, Gen 33.20.
God the God of Israel; erecting as it were a Chapel unto God, calling the
Altar God, the sign by the thing signified; so the bread in the Eucharist is
called, the Body of Christ: so Moses built an Altar, and called it Jehovah
Nissi, The Lord my banner: Exodus 17.15.
and David here has his Memorial, When I remember.

Which is the shame of many in these days, Use 1.
and reproves their dullness who are like those Citizens against whom when a
great King came and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it: a poor
wise man by his wisdom delivered that City, yet no man remembered that poor
man. Eccl. 9.14.15
They are like Ioash the King, who remembered not the kindness which Iehoiada
did to him, 2. Chr. 24.22
but slew his son Zechariah the Priest: Isa. 17.11.
like Syria that forgetting the God of salvation, had a harvest of desperate
sorrow; like Babylon, saying, I shall be a Lady for ever, not laying the word
to her heart, neither remembering her latter end, and therefore in a moment, Isa.
47.9.
had loss of children and widowhood to come upon her in her perfection; they
drink and forget the law, Pro. 31.5.
and pervert the Judgment of any of the afflicted:

Do not we forget the things which our eyes have seen? Do they not depart
from our hearts? Deuteronomy. 4.9.
Do we teach them our sons? Is. 57.1.
The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart. We remember the least
wrong of another to us, and forget the greatest of our sins against God. We
write injuries in Marble, but benefits in the sand. We forget our Founders,
Patrons, Benefactors. We remember not the hand, nor the day when we were
delivered from the enemy, from the land of Egypt, De. 6.12.
the house of bondage, the doctrine of Rome: the Spanish Invasion: we forget
the tossings of the Palatinate, Bohemia, and those sweet Royal Princes living
amongst Strangers.

Ge. 41.51.
Every one may be called Manasseh. Forgetting. This was the sin of Israel, now
of England. We are like the strange woman that forgot the covenant of her God.
pr. 2.17.
It is storied, that in a great battle, Vincentius in speculo. histor.
many being slain, and the bodies unburied, there followed a great Plague; and
this so infected men, that they forgot their fathers names, their childrens,
their own names: I am sure our forgetfulness of God, and our Idolatry,
brought the last Plague among us. There was a Plague in this Island upon an
Eclipse of the Sun, Anno Dom. 644. when the shauing of the Clergy, C^^tur. 7.
c. 13
Latin, Service, Inuocations of Saints, were added (with other Idolatrous
corruptions) to the Church: whereupon the death of the Emperor Constance
followed. Since the building of London.
Have not we made an Idol of this City, which has stood 2733. years, and
being infected with the number of our people David's sin: boasted of the
multitude of heads, riches, buildings: that this was the Imperial City of the
Kingdom, Chamber of the King, Re. 3.17.
that with Laodicea we were rich, increased with goods, and had need of
nothing: that with Tytus our City has been replenished, the harvest of the
time her revenue, a joyous City: her Merchants Princes, Is. 23.8.
her Traffic the Honorable of the earth. Have not Parents gloried in the
number of their children, and set too much their hearts upon them? Have we not
ascribed our peace to the strength of our arm, and not to him, who teaches as
he did David, Ps. 144.1.
our hands to war, and our fingers to fight? For this we had a Plague, and as
a Pestilence followed Idolatry, so often a war follows. They chose new
Gods, there was war in the gates: As war follows; Iud. 5.8.
so famine: When the land sins, I will break the staff of bread, and will
send famine upon it, Ez. 14.13.
and cut off man and beast from it. Such is that threat: If ye will not be
reformed, Le. 26.25.
I will send the Pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand
of your enemy. A consumption, a fever, an extreme burning; the sword,
hunger, thirst, nakedness, want of all things: All these things for forgetting
the Lord. De. 28.22.48.


Yet: How many do lightly esteem this great token of Gods wrath, The Plague
which made David pray? Remove thy stroke away from me, Ps. 39.10.
I am consumed by the blow of thine hand: Ps. 38.1.2.
O Lord thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore, when
he had the Plague. It made Ezechias complain, that as a Lion, so the Lord did
break his bones; Is. 38.14.
that like a Crane or a Swallow, so did he chatter; mourn as a Dove: that his
eye did fail with looking upward; Iun. annot. in 2. Re. 20.
For morbi natura indomita erat a medijs naturalibus, and therefore God
challenges the cure of it to himself. 2. Ki. 20.5.
I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears, Behold I will heal thee.
Hezekiah was sick to the death, Dr. Prideaux in a learned Sermon on it before
King JAMES. 2. Chr. 32.24.
and prayed to the Lord: Isai prayed, the Priests prayed, the Courtiers, the
people; yet he must pray himself: then God spoke and gave most comfortable
signs of his favors: So has he miraculously, suddenly, most graciously,
stopped the current of his fury amongst us. He has not dealt so with others.
How fearful was that Plague, in Phrygia, Euag. l. 2. c. 6.
Galatia, Capadocia, Cilicia, when no one remedy could be found for any
infected? That among the Vandals, when according to the Proverb (...), Cent. 5.
c. 3.
after a famine the pestilence was so great, that the living could not bury
the dead, and the high ways were full of carcasses: That under Justinian,
Procop. l. 11. de bello Perfico.
when in Constantinople, and near there abouts, there dyed at least five
thousand, and sometimes ten thousand in one day.

Euagr. l. 4 c. 28
That mentioned by Euagrius, which ran over the whole world, when men might
have complained, Hor. l. 1. Od. 2.
Macies and noua febrium terris in cubuit cohors.

It continued 52. years: he lost his wife, many of his children, the greatest
part of his kindred: whomsoever it took, it dispatched out of the way. It
exceeded all diseases that ever were before. How fearful was that Plague in
Alexandria described by Eusebius? Eusebius. l. 7 c. 21
Now all is replenished with lamentations. Every man howleth through the City:
There is no house where a dead carcass is not found.

That in Rome, when, says Chronicon Fuldense, Anno 1213.
scarce the tenth man remained alive; nay, but ten men in all were preserved,
says Chronicon Isenacense. I lead you too far. To keep in our own
Kingdom and near home. Sa. Dan. Anno 1348.
In the Reign of Edw. 3. there was a Plague in this Kingdom that took away
more then the half of men, and in one year of this, in the Charter house were
buried above fifty thousand: and it dispeopled almost utterly a great Town,
Cambd. Barksh.
Wallingford in Barkshiere, bringing 12. Churches to 2.

See how much more sparing the Lord has been of us: your memory may be fresh,
in recalling to mind that Plague, in the beginning of the Reign of Royal
King JAMES, from the 23. of December, Anno 1602.
Anno 1602. to the 23. of December. Anno 1623. wherein there dyed thirty thousand
five hundredth, seventy eight; and this to be stayed, that the next year there
dyed in London and the Liberties; but four thousand, two hundredth, sixty three
of all diseases: And in this late Visitation, God so manifested his mercy, The
red Cross.
that from the 25. of August it decreased, from 3344. to 2550. and then to
1672. and then to 1551. and then to 852. and then to 538. And this last week
but to three; and Lord let thine Angel not strike any one more among us with
the Plague.

Use 2.
Let this remembrance ever be written on the doors of our hearts: Is. 47.9.
Say not as Babylon, I shall be a Lady for ever. David foresaw a curse upon it
for that pride of heart. Ps. 137.9.
Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth the little ones against the stones:
It was fulfilled, the enemy came, Virg. En. 2.
Natum ante ora patris, patrem obtruncauit ad aras.

Let not the Merchant burden his memory only with his Creditours, nor the
Lawyer with his Clyents, nor the Landlord with his Rents, nor the Husbandman
with his Cattle, nor the Captain with his Soldiers, nor the Physician with
his Patients: but let all keep a Register of this black Plague in red
letters, in the Ephemerides of their memory, and the staying of it.

It was not the season and coldness of the weather that stopped it. De rebus
Moscouieicis fol. 11.
Posseuinus writes, that when he was Ambassador for the Pope in Moscouia, the
Plague which had scarce ever been heard of before in that Country (ob
intensissima frigora) by reason of extreme cold, yet killed then many
thousands. It was not a Popish Prayer to Saint Roche.

Dr. Rain. de Idol. l. 1. c. 6. s. 7.
Tu qui Deo es tam charus,
Et in luce valde clarus,
Sana tuos famulos,
Et a peste nos defend.
God alone is our defense; forget him not. Ps. 9.17.
The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God
Study not for a vainglorious commemoration of thy good works after thy death.
Set God as a seal upon thine heart, Ca: 8.6.
as a seal upon thine arm. He is as a bundle of Myrrh unto us, let him lie
all night betwixt our breasts; never breath but remember him; Ca: 1.13.
at morning, noone, and night: at thy lying down, and rising up: staying at
home, or going a Journey. Naz. Or. 1. de Theol.
This Remembrance shall put us in mind of our Profession and heavenly
Country. It shall shut the door to all unclean actions. It shall comfort us
when we are alone: Let him be the a and o of our remembrance.

When the Jews were building in Jerusalem, the Nations whom Noble Asnappar
brought and set in the Cities of Samaria, wrote to Artaxerxes, telling him; If
this City be builded, then will not the Jews pay tole, tribute, and custom,
and so thou shall endamage the revenue of the Kings: Ezra 4.12.14.
Because we have maintenance from the Kings palace; it was not meet for us to
fee the Kings dishonor, therefore have we sent and certified the King. The
greatest dishonor to God is to forget him: and would we but Remember what he
has done for us, we would not so suffer his Word to be despised, Ministers
wronged, his holy day to be profaned; and other sins to out-braue
Authority, which in time will pull another plague down. It was a grave
conclusion of the Senators of Troy, concerning Helena, Homer. Iliad.
the worlds wonder for beauty and excellent parts; That though she were such
a one and unmatchable, yet Rid her hence, say they, rather then to us and our
posterity; (...): She should abide here for a snare and destruction. The
counsel was wise, but Indulgence refusing it: it brought forth twenty four
books of Iliads, and an Iliad of miseries. The Philosopher elegantly applies
it to any vice, Ar. Eth. 1. c. 9.
seem it never so delightful. O that we would banish from us the vice of our
Kingdom, Forgetfulness of God. O that we would Remember that from him, we have
whatsoever good thing we have, and deliverance from all evil. He gives his
Angels charge of us, Ps. 91.11.
to keep us in all our ways: which charge is not only begun to be executed
in Baptism, Or to: 5. in Mat. primas. Heb. c. 1.
as some would have it, or when there is the use of Reason manifested, but in
the birth, yea in the conception. Sure it is, they watch over us, and yet all
see it not; and when they see it, it is by the effect of their Ministry: Mr.
Greenham in grave couns.
For though their Ministry be certain, yet the Manifestation of it is
extraordinary.

He by the heavens gives unto us Influences, least we languish with famine.

He feeds us with the fruits of the earth.

He blessed our Land by the government of famous Queen Elizabeth, who with so
long, so great wisdom and felicity governed her Kingdoms, (...) Praef: ad
lect,
as the like has not been read or heard of (said Learned King JAMES when he
reigned in Scotland) either in our time, or since the days of the Roman
Emperor Augustus. Quodl. l 1.
Lopez was set on to poison her by Holt the Jesuit: so was Squire by Walpoole
the Jesuit; Parry was authorized by the Pope to murder her, Stow:
commended by him for intending it, absolved from all his sins for pursuing
it, and assured of merit for performing it. Card: com: his letters.
And when armed for the point, was confronted by her, amated with her presence,
and prevented by him that keeps Israel and never sleeps. The same Right
hand of the Lord, delivered King James himself, of blessed and worthy memory,
from the blow by the POVVDER-PLOT, a designment like those which He spoke of,
Liu: Dec. 1. l. 2.
Plus samae apud posteros quam fidei habiturae, which are and shall be rather
memorable for the singularity, then credible for the horror. A deliverance of
our whole State, and while we have pens to write, tongues to speak, a
generation living, or a posterity succeeding, we will report it, and repeat
it to God with David's Memorandum; Remember O Lord the children of Edom in the
day of Jerusalem, who said, Raze it, raze it, Ps. 137.7.
even to the foundation thereof. EDOM signifies Red, and he was so called,
because he desired and longed for the red pottage of Jacob. Do not they thirst
after our blood? Ge. 25.30.
A generation spoken of by Obadiah: Obad. 1.
concerning Edom. An Ambassador is sent: By Isai, Is. 34.6.
a sword is made fat with the blood of Lambs, and a great slaughter in the
Land of Idumaea. By Amos, Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom
and for four, Am. 1.11.
I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because he did pursue his
brother with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear
perpetually, and kept his wrath for ever. Ie. 49.10.
By Jeremy, I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places, and he
shall not be able to hide himself; his seed is spoiled, and his brethren, and
his neighbors, and he is not. By Ezekiel, Ez. 25.14.
I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and they
shall do in Edom according to mine anger, and according to my fury; and they
shall know my vengeance, says the Lord God. Mal. 1.4.
By Malachy: whereas Edom says, We are impouerished; but we will return and
build the desolate places: Thus says the Lord of Hosts, They shall build, but
I will throw down, and they shall call them, the border of wickedness, and the
people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever: and King David
zealously would have set upon it, Who will lead me into Edom? wilt not thou O
God? wilt not thou O God go forth with our Hosts? Ps. 108.11.
Let Genebrard interpret it of the Church oppressed by the Turks; It shall
be the endeavor of Religious Kings against Rome: there the Edomites, Ge.
25.25.
Esauites, Idumeans lurk. Esau came out of the womb Red, betokening his
bloody disposition; and all over hayrie which was extraordinry; for children
usually are borne only with hair on the head, eyelids and eyebrows, and
afterward it grows on other parts; and such hairy conceptions are not without
much grief and trouble, causing loathsomnes in the stomach, Perer.
Ge. 25.7.
heart-burning and such like. Esau was a cunning Hunter. Esau had three names,
Esau of Gnaschah to make, which is passiuely to be taken, coming forth with
hair as a perfect man: not actiuely, as though he should be prompt in his
business. It applies it self, to the Romanists, whose bloody, rough,
turbulent, equiuocating dispositions are most apparent: Hungry Hunters after
the true Church of God. Remember those children of Edom; and remember that God,
who hitherto has preserved us. Let us say, He is our refuge, and our
fortress, our God; in him will we trust.

He delivers thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome
pestilence. Ps. 91.3.


It is a warrant for Gods care, providence, help, R. Salo. l. 3. c. 52.
dubiorum.
protection, in any thing that may fall out to the body by natural causes,
wicked men, or our own corruptions. Let us ever remember this: Remember not
piles of buildings, pictures, paintings, flowers, and other toys which cannot
help, but take that fourefold remembrance.

Memento peccati vt doleas.
Memento mortis vt desinas.
Memento diuinae Iustitiae vt timeas.
Memento misericordiae ne desperes.
Sin, Death, Judgment, Mercy.

I power out my soul in me. Scounda pars.

It was a comfort that God had delivered him, Vatablus. Genesis Note.
and therefore his soul is (as it were) melted into joy, that he was
delivered. God was pacified. He was very glad, his wits were dispersed, and as
it were ravished. Thom. Calu. Ianfe Genebrard. Pintus.
He was enlarged, and scarce can contain himself, sorrow being driven away:
As sorrow says, H. de vict. keeps in the soul, so joy powers it out.
Therefore (says David) Trust in him at all times, power out your heart before
him: God is a refuge for us.

Ps. 62.8.
The soul is the whole inward man, wherewith this mass of clay is quickened and
governed, having several names according to her several offices in the body.
Quickening the body it is called the soul: Aug. de Ecles. dogmatibus c. 34.
having an appetite to any thing, it is called the will: for knowledge, the
mind: for recordation, memory: for judging and discerning reason: for giving
breath spirit: for apprehending outwardly, sense. The soul is the life of the
body, Bar. sc. 3. ex minor.
God is the life of the soul, and as the body is dead, when not vegetated by
the five senses of the body; so the soul is dead, that is not truly humbled to
God. But God is good to an humble soul; Id. se, 68. in ca.
he meets it, embraces it, and God over all, blessed for ever, marries it.
An humble soul has two wings, Fear, and Hope; Fear in judgment, Id. in
sent.
Hope in mercy: so David in his soul powered out in him. He confessed, Thy
judgments are good: To the wicked, crosses are curses; Ps. 119.39.
but to the godly, corrections only of a Father, not to destroy, but to try
and purge: and as the Rod makes, the Scholar learn: so knowledge by
affliction is beaten into us, by poverty, sickness, and the like: And as a
woman that has fore travail, when she is delivered, rejoices that a
man-child is brought into the world: so the servants of God are in sorrow,
till by troubles they are made the children of God. Through the Sea and
wilderness, we must pass, if we would go to Canaan. 2. Sa. 14.14.
Herein God is our guide; he can make us as water spilt on the ground, which
cannot be gathered up again, and expects the pouring out of our souls in us.

There is a bad effusion, when men no faster receive the word, but they power
it out again, as he that earneth wages, Agg. 1.6.
and puts it into a bag with holes, the brand of Ruben: unstable as water:
Ge. 49.4.
But there is a good effusion of the soul, by confession, prayer, devotion,
humility, and tears. To this end is the beating of the breast, Cyr. Lu. 18.13.
as we see in the Publicane. This was the custom of Hilarion, to beat his
breast in prayer, Hier. in viia.
as if he desired with his hands to take revenge upon his sad thoughts: and
surely in the godly, obtritio cordis, Aug. in Ps. 31.
tuntio pectoris, the smiting of the breast, is the stamping, beating down,
and brusing of the heart.

This has often tears, as in Hannah who was in bitterness of soul, and
prayed unto the Lord, 1. Sa. 1.10. Luctu anima pascitur, cum ad superna gaudia
flendo subleuatur. Gr. 5 Mor. 7.
and wept sore: which is the food of the soul, and which feasted Christ more
then all the provision of Mary Magdalen besides: while we eat the bread of
sorrow, drinking the wine of compunction, we hunger and thirst after heavenly
things, and shall be comforted. This is the constant alimonie of the righteous,
at dinner and supper, in life and death, in prosperity and adversity. The
Proverb is true, (...).
Boni autem valde flebiles viri.


Job. 33.20.
In this case was Job, when his life abhorred bread, Job 16.13.
and his soul dainty meat: When he complained that his gall was powered out
on the ground.

Ps 6.3.
Thus David when his soul was sore vexed, and he cried, Thou O Lord how long?

Ps. 13.2.
When his expectation was not satisfied: How long shall I take counsel in my
soul.

Ps. 142.2.
When he powered out his complaint before God, and showed before him his
trouble: but now he is delivered, and his soul is powered out in thanksgiving.

Use 1.
How justly may this condemn many, who are so foolish and slow of heart, that
they never stir up their souls to the service of God, but suffer the body
like a thief to rob it: The body is deified, but the soul pined and famished:
no bread of life is sought to strengthen her: no Gospel of peace to comfort
her: no devotion to cherish her.

Some sell their souls: as covetous and usurious Monsters, who for wealth will
commit any rauine, robbery, theft, perjury, false merchandise, simonie.

There is not a more wicked thing then a covetous man, Ecc. 10.9.
for such an one sets his own soul to sale.

Some cast away their souls, as the envious and furious, for nothing. The
covetous man has wealth: The Epicure, pleasure: The ambitious proud vpstart,
honor: The Glutton, meat and drink: but the envious man consumes himself in
pining, being a thorne-hedge covered with nettels.

Some lay their souls to pawn to Satan, that they may swim in the world
prosperously and wantonly, running on in sin so long, being deaf to God,
caring neither for words nor judgments, so soked in sin, that they cannot
redeem these pawnes, because they can not repent.

Yet God cries by his Prophets: Ie. 44.4.
Oh do not this abominable thing that I hate: but if we incline not our ear
to turn from our wickedness, his fury must be powered forth, to cut off man and
woman, child and suckling, and leave none to remain. We may forget: but God
remembers us, our Fathers, our Kings, our Princes, and the people of the Land;
and woe unto their soul, who declare their sin as Sodom, for they have
rewarded evil unto themselves.

Which may teach us to remember the Lord, Is. 3.9.
Use.
in pouring out our souls in all devout and humble acknowledgement of his
mercies, Zac. 11.8.
least our souls abhorring him, his soul loathe us.

Lor. in Ps. 17.9
It is reported, that at a Sermon of Vincentius Ferr: one was so moved in
spirit, that his face shined on the sudden very glorious. O that when we
hear the great works of the Lord, we would stir up the graces of God
within us, that the Spirit of God might not be quenched in us.

Nothing is more precious, then the soul within us, which made David pray:
Mine eyes are unto thee, Ps. 141.8.
O God the Lord, In thee is my trust. Leave not my soul destitute. Arise, O
Lord, disappoint him, Ps. 17.13.
cast him down: Deliver my soul from the wicked, which is thy sword.

Ps. 25.20.
O keep my soul, and deliver me. Let me not be ashamed, for I put my trust in
thee.

In a well disposed Christian, the body is servant, the soul is Mistress, but
in an infected person the body is predominant: Take heed of this Plague: The
body is but the weight and burden of the soul: Se Ep. 101.
while this oppresses, the soul is in prison.

Heb. 12.5.
Forget not the exhortation which speaks to you as children.

He. 13.2.
Forget not to entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels
unawares.

Os. 4.6.
If we reject knowledge, and forget the Law of our God, he will also forget our
children: O be not as Jerusalem, having her filthiness in her skirts; she
remembered not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully, she had no
comforter, La. 1.9.
the enemy magnified himself.

Before we be driven to remember the Lord in far countries: Zac. 10.9.
Let us set our heart and our soul to seek the Lord: If we return to the
Lord with all our heart, and with all our soul, and pray, 1 Chapter 22.19.
our supplications shall be heard, 2. Chapter 6.39.
our cause maintained, and we shall be forgiven.

Remember this late mercy in the midst of Judgment; Extol the admirable
lenity of the Lord toward us, who has gleaned but some, when all feared to be
cut down. Anno 1587.
The years are not many since the Lord with a famine did shake many parts of
this Land; a terrible sword, which made Julius Caesar in all his wars, to
conquer more by famine, then the sword. It made Lysimachus in Thracia to yield
himself captive to Domitian the Emperor; it brought up that bloody Law
amongst the Soldiers of Cambises, marching toward the Aethiopians, that the
Tenth among themselves should be killed in the Army, to assuage hunger: It made
the Roman Mothers eat their own children: Eus. Jose.
The Athenians vexed by Sylla, to eat the green grass of the fields, and
moss of the walls: Q. Curt.
Alexander to eat his Camels, Elephants, and other beasts, that carried
luggage for the wars: the Hymmi to eat their Dogs: It made Abraham fly
from Canaan to Egypt; Isaac to Abimelech King of the Philistines; and all the
sons of Jacob to go to Pharaoh King of Egypt: God like the Physician makes
us fast, to recover health: Upon Famine, have we been so humbled as we
should have been?

Anno 1588. etc.
The years are not many therefore, since the the Lord threatened us with
another sword; that of a Barbarous Nation to devour us; how soon was it
forgotten: This year therefore the Lord seeing us wantonly secure, and
sleeping, and snorting in our sins, drew another sword against many parts of
the Land, Psa. 91.3.
by a Plague: This is the snare of the Hunter, it catches suddenly; some
walking, some feeding, some sporting, some waking, Ps. 91.5. Metonimia, ab
Effectu.
some sleeping: It is the terror by night, breeding many terrors and fears
in the night; the night being a solitary time, and solitarines increases
fears; the night being a time of Incendiaries and Robbers, Euthym.
which set upon men unawares; Rickel. Eugub. Geneb. R. Kim.
a time of fear, in regard of the weakness of the Imagination, or of terrible
dreams, or sudden affrights: a time terrible to trauelers, where the least
noise amateth them.

Silius Jtal.
Per noctem metantur agros, sonus omnis, and aura
Exterrent, pennaque leui commota volucris.
v. 5. Chald.
It is the arrow that flies by day: Sagitta Angeli mortis quam emittit
interdiu, the arrow of the Angel of the Lord sent forth in the day, coming
swiftly, striking suddenly, wounding deadly: It is the Lion, v. 13. Pli. 8.15
Adder, Dragon: No beast for strength co^parable to the Lion; so no disease so
deadly as the Plague: such as the Aspe biteth, are smitten with a numnes
throughout all parts, and there follows coldness, gasping, heaviness in
the head, sometimes heat and burning in the body: Are not such Symptoms in the
Plague: A Dragon tearing in pieces with all violence, sparing none; which moved
Reverend Beza being sick of the Plague at Lausanna, not to suffer Calvin and
Viret, B. depeste.
those zealous Lights to come to him when they offered it freely, least they
should be infected, because he preferred the benefit of Gods Church, before
his own particular comforts.

The Plague is Gods hand, Iad Jehovah, 2. Sa. 24.14.
because the might and power of God is more manifested in this then in other
punishments. O let not this hand be out of our sight, but as that hand that
wrote at Balshazars feast; Da. 5.
and thereupon his countenance was changed, his thoughts troubled him, the
joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another: so
let the remembrance of this great late Plague humble us, and make us mourn;
but upon the deliverance, Let us power out souls in us, and let us rejoice.

It was a sanctified remedy, Greenh. grave Couns. p. 23.
which reverend M. Greenham used, being often in his public Ministry and
private conference, troubled with a sudden failing in his memory: so as by
no means he could recover himself in those things he purposed to speak. He
would presently groan in his heart, and humble his soul under the holy hand
of God. O let us with groans lament our dull forgetfulness of the great
works of God.

Socrates complained, that after the use of letters, the Art of memory
decayed; for the care which before was had in heart and memory, afterward was
put in books; and that which was committed to the mind, was after put in
trust in writing. Zac. 5.4.
O let that flying roll of Gods judgment, which lately has gone over the
face of the whole earth, and cut off so many, and entered into houses, and
remained in the midst of them, and consumed the houses, with the timber and the
stones, ever be in our memory.

Sen.
Books not used gather dust, and memory not employed, will be dull and heavy.
Satan desires to deal with us, as Heringius did with Bamba his predecessor,
a King of the Goths; who gave him a draught of drink, whereby he lost his
memory. Let us often meditate upon the works of God, Read and Pray. To read
and not to meditate, is unfruitful. To meditate and not to read, is dangerous
for errors. To read and meditate without prayer, is hurtful. Let us not be
as Ephraim, Os. 11.4.
who knew not that God healed them. He it is that has drawn us with cords of
a man, with bands of love: He has taken off the yoke on our jaws: He has
laid meat unto us: He turns away his anger, is as dew unto us: Os. 14.5.6.7.
He makes Israel grow as the Lilly: cast forth roots as Lebanon: his
branches to spread: his beauty to be as the Olive tree, revive as the corn,
and grow as the Vine. All the wonders he does, are to confirm our hope, raise
up our faith, and nourish our love to him. To remember him, Bar. se. 4. de asc.
is like the delight which the Apostles had at the transfiguration of Christ.
It is sweeter then the honey and the hony-combe. Ecc. 49.1.
It is sweeter then the remembrance of Josias, which was like the composition
of the perfume made by the Art of the Apothecarie: sweet as music at a
Banquet of wine. If we have a mind to remember God, comfort will be near in
the mouth and in the heart. Nothing is more ready then this remembrance. It is
an easy medicine, a speedy cure, a precious cordial. It remoueth sadness,
heaviness, melancholy, and brings with it joy in the holy Ghost. Nu. 10.10.
Let us then in the day of our gladness offer sacrifices for a memorial
before our God. In the way of Gods judgments, let us wait for him: Let the
desire of our soul be to his name, and to the remembrance of him: Is. 26.8.
Let us look into the perfect law of liberty, and continue therein, not being
forgetful hearers, but doers of the work, that we may be blessed in our
deeds.

And this is the work of the day, of our whole lives, to power out our souls
in us. 2. Chapter 15.12.
O let us then enter into a covenant, to seek the Lord God of our Fathers, with
all our heart, and with all our soul. Then he will set his Tabernacle among
us, his soul shall not abhor us, he will be our God. Le. 26.11.
Then being instructed, his soul shall not depart from us: we shall not be
left desolate. Ie. 6.8.
His soul shall delight in us: Js. 42.1.
To this end are his mercies offered, and his deliverances continued.

How miraculously has he of late delivered many of us, Application.
as he did the three children in the fiery furnace: when some were constrained
to fly from this mountain of Moriah, Munster.
to the little hill of Hermon, as David, where they could not look out, but
messages of Death, and the increase of the Plague in black bills, was brought
unto them: when in this City the doleful Bell ringing out, there was wringing
of hands, and shrieking in the most places: there for a Father, here for a
Mother: there for a Husband, here for a Wife: there for a Master, here for a
Servant: there for a Mistress, here for an Handmayde: there for Children, here
for Kindred. We expected triumphs for the Coronation, and alas! in stead of
these, had Funerals of dead men, who being weary of the earth, went to triumph
in heaven: But behold, men cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he
brought them out of their distresses; He made the storm a calm, Ps. 107.29.
and the waters were still. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has
redeemed from the hand of the enemy, and gathered from the East, v. 23.4.
from the West, from the North, from the South, when they wandered.

Has the Lord removed his anger? Let us remove that which was, and is the
cause of his anger.

The Plague of the body being ceased, let not SIN the plague of the soul,
continue.

Sweep your houses from swearing; avoid the company of the ungodly; get the
inward mark of Gods Spirit, by making your Election sure: Let your selves
blood, of envy, hatred, malice, covetousness, and all uncharitableness.
Beware of dogs: Infidels, as Christ calls the Gentiles in his speech to the
woman which was a Syrophenician by Nation. Mar. 7.26. Ath. or de Idolis. Lact.
l. 2. di. Inst.
It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. Beasts
without reason, forsaking the Creator to worship the creature. Ignorance of
the true God, and blindness of heart, were in the Gentiles the Nurses of
Infidelity, and brochers of Idolatry. These make men run headlong, like the
swine of the Gergesits, into the maine Ocean of all uncleanness, and filthiness
of fornication. Beware of contemners of the Gospel, called dogs by Christ:
Mat. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, such as will fully resist the
truth, and bark at the Ministers of the word: Beware of Schismatickes, who
though they be not altogether so dangerous as the Bloud-hounds of Babylon, yet
are they very troublesome, tearing the Church, and running themselves, and
drawing others from the Church, Ansel.
and so from Christ: Never go abroad, but with the Pomander of faith, full of
the sweet spices of good works. God has been mindful of us, Ps. 115.12.
and can increase you more and more, you and your children: The dead praise him
not, but the living must bless him: O therefore that men would praise the Lord
for his goodness, Ps. 107.8.
and for his wonderful works to the children of men. An Eucharistical song,
ever to be repeated for any blessing, as Bernard presses it, speaking of the
custody of Angels: Bar. se. 12. in Ps. ^0.
O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, for David repeates it, v.
15.21.31. v. 32.
Let them exalt him in the congregation of the people: Not because, as Hugo:
Princes, Hugo. Bas. Theod.
forget to exalt God, but magnify themselves: but that all must exalt him,
high and low, rich and poor, old and young, Princes and Subjects: And exalt
him with a song in the Churches. Amongst other songs, take that especially, O
give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. O
give thanks unto the God of Gods, Ps. 136.1.
for his mercy endures for ever. v. 2.3.
O give thanks to the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endures for ever.
Cassiodorus.
A Psalm, which being sung at the consecration of the Temple, the fire came
down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering, 2. Cb. 7.1.3.
and the sacrifices, and the glory of the Lord filled the house. A Psalm which
Iehoshaphat appointed singers among the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, in
the wilderness of TEKOA to sing, 2. Cb. 20.22.23.
and then the Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammor, Moab, and
mount Seir, which were come against Judah, and they were smitten.

Let us not uncharitably censure those that are gone down into silence, by the
arrowe of the Plague.

Thuanus.
Learned Gesner dyed of the Plague; a little before his death calling for some
of his papers in his Study, giving a charge, that the world should not be
deprived of them: He that wrote of Stones, Gardens, Libraries, Measures, four
footed beasts, Birds, Fishes, of Herbs, Chirurgerie, Measures, Medicines.

Francis Iunius, the glory of Leyden, Reverend Bezaes family had the Plague
four times. Arg in Ps. 91.
the oracle of Textuall and School Divinity; rich in Languages, subtle in
distinguishing, in argument invincible, dyed of the Plague: A fixed star in
the firmament of that Church; a hammer of Heretics, Champion of the truth,
the honor of the Schools. I could name some of your own religious Divines in
this City, who dyed of the Plague, for whom the Congregation may mourn, and
would God the loss could be as easily supplied, as lamented.

Resolute Camillus, dyed of the Plague, having saved his unthankful Country
from the Veians, Au. 3. ciu c. 17.
and after from the Galls. Job had the Plague, when he had vl^us ex
caliditate, that Botch which proceeded from that burning heat in his body; R.
Mordechai.
and as it is probable, beneath the reins, betwixt the thigh, and the belly,
or bowels, which is the flank or grain; into which place, the confluence of
vicious corrupt and malignant humors commonly betake themselves, Gnlen. 1. c.
Particula. 6. de oculis.
as being one of Natures Emunctories, and a part prepared for euacuation of
Impostumation, by reason of the tenderness and rarity of the skin, and other
passages: All his body over was almost a plague. Chrysostom.


Let us above all sores, fl^^ the plague of sin: It is in vain to purge our
houses, cleanse our streets, perfume our apparel, unless we beware of the
Infections of the soul.

We have lived to meet again our friends; O let us not by our corruptions
make them Gods enemies.

We have vowed to be new creatures, in Christ Jesus, when we were under the
rod; Remember that, Aegrotus surgit, sed pia vota valent.

Take this Antidote against poison; JUSTICE will strike us with greater
Plagues, being delivered from the former, if we mock it with broken devotion.
O let our thankful hearts testify our contrite spirits.

Let the house of Judah the Royal COURT remember this deliverance, and
acknowledge that God can break those who will not bow. Let them banish those
Moaths and Mice, of Flatterers, Tincae and Sorices Palatij.
Epicures, doubling professors, bad counsailours, who clime high to fall
foul; and let not that old writing under the picture of Ignatius Loyola be
forgotten, D Hall. Dec. 5. Ep. ^.
Cauete vobis Principes, Be wise O ye Princes.

Ps. 115.10.
Let Moses and Aaron, Prince and Priest, remember that the Lord is their help
and guide: and as the Priest has been zealous to pray: Spare thy people whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, from Plague and Pestilence; so
now let them sing, Glory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will
toward man.

Let Samuel among the Prophets, and the young children of the Prophets remember
this deliverance; Their buildings have been stately, Revenues large, Students
many; but they have been scared, feared, driven thence, yet now the voice of
joy and health is in their dwellings, OXFORD has bin visited, and CAMBRIDGE
threatened.

Let us of this City especially remember this: Great deliverances should have
great remembrances.

Now again, Ps. 122.3.
your Jerusalem is as a City compact again: Now are the Tribes come up again.

Now again, here are the Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the house of
David; Upon which, Lord let there be ever men of courage, fearing thee, dealing
truly, hating covetousness, that they may appear confidently before the great
Parliament of heaven.

Let us all take up that of our Prophet: Ps. 28.6.
Blessed be the Lord, because he has heard the voice of our s^pplications. The
Lord is our strength, and our shield, our heart trusted in him, and we are
helped; therefore our heart greatly rejoices, and with our song will we
praise him. The Lord is our strength, and the saving strength of his Anointed.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them, lift them up for
ever: that so being comforted after our affliction, raised up after our
detection, and clothed with immortality after this mortality, we may
hereafter with the Angels round about his Throne worship him, saying Amen.
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power,
and might be unto our God, for ever and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

