PRINCE HENRY HIS SECOND ANNIVERSARY.

ECCLESIASTICVS 50.6. Who was as a morning star in the midst of a clowd.

BY DANIEL PRICE Doctor in Divinity, one of his Highness Chaplains.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes and are to be sold by John Barnes over
against St Pulchers Church. 1614.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE PRINCE CHARLES Duke of CORNWALL the happiness
of the present, and hope of posterity.
MOST Gracious PRINCE, my vowed Annual service to the memory of your blessed
Brother craveth your shelter; for, under the shadow of your Princely Cedar, I
humbly desire to spend my days. Not only the praise of the dead, but also the
profit of the living be my inducements to this work; both which I hope, will be
acceptable arguments to your Highness. I am encouraged the rather hereunto,
because I see your Princely spirit dare look death in the face, and can be
content to hear, that as your renowned brother's fortunes, so his fate also
shall one day be yours. Many, and happy be your Highness days, that you may
so long continue in the world, as the world shall continue; that goodness may
guide, and Religion may guard you, both which will assure more safety to your
precious soul, then the Prevention of the world, and presumption of the Court
can afford you: for these will sanctify the Circumspection of the wise in
helping you, and terrify the Circumvention of the wicked from hurting you. So
shall your Highness remember your Creator in the days of your youth, and walk
in the paths of Abraham before God, till you come to the passage of Henoch to
walk with God. In the mean time the great Palmoni the numbrer of times make
your days as happy as the days of Henoch, whose years were as many as the
yearly days of the sun: that in your felicity, you may ride on prosperously
because of truth, of meekness and righteousness; and having ended your course
in Grace you may begin never to end in glory. Which is the daily prayer of your
Highness most observant servant

DANIEL PRICE.
Ex. Coll. November. 6. the fatal day of Prince HENRY'S decease.
PRINCE HENRY'S SECOND ANNIVERSARIE.
1 MIsprission may assail, and Envy seek to silence, the memorials of those
gracious instruments of Gods glory, who being delivered out of the burden of
the flesh, be in joy and felicity, but religious Piety toward God; and
obsequious duty toward man, do both warn and warrant, our grateful and
faithful remembrances of those Worthies, of whom the world was not worthy,
Heb. 11.28. Rev. 14.13.
who now rest in the Lord, and are free from their Labors, which may seem to
be the motive of Salomons speech, Eccl. 4.^.
Eccl. 4.2. I praised the dead, which are already dead, more then the living
which are yet alive, and of the Reverend Practice of ancient times, which did
adorn the names of the good, the wise, the just, the valiant, and not only
honored their Persons in their lives, but bemoaned the worlds loss by their
deaths, and by their praises, held out the light of their virtuous Lamp, to
lead others into those ways, which these worthies had walked in, with comfort,
and in which, they had finished their race with Conquest. Rude and polite,
Divine, and Profane history does countenance the continuance of such Customs,
and therefore though Snakes may bite, and dogs may bark, and nothing within
the Circumference of heaven can be, without the compass of censure, duty only
being my Apology, with a patient content and contempt of gainesayers, I
proceed in my professed, service, to the Annual remembrance of my blessed
Master Prince HENRY, S. Austins rule being my reason, Nec laudantem movet
adulatio, Austin
nec laudatum tentat elatio, when neither he that praises, is moved with
flattery, nor he that is praised, can be tempted with vainglory, when neither
affection enticeth, nor opinion entangleth, it may be both lawful and useful
that the righteous, may be had in everlastinst remembrance.

2 It being now therefore the entrance of the third year, The fatal 6. of
November.
since it pleased the Lord to deliver the Princely first borne out of the
misery of this sinful world, and that the Winter Sables of November do now
represent our former sorrows, it will be not unseasonable to remember the holy
passage of that heave^ly soul, which was freed from Adams body, to be
translated to Abraham's bosom, and his spirit to return to God that gave it.
So in our observance running with Peter and John to the Sepulcher now, our eyes
have lost him, and our feet cannot follow him, our spiritual ambition may
lead our contemplation where he is, and season our souls with joy, to know
what he is. For, what other is he (if we dare look upon the sacred blaze of
aeternitie) then a Celestial spirit, and glorious Saint, a Pillar in the
Temple of God, one of those fed with that Manna, clothed with the white robe,
called by the new name, carrying the triumphant Palm in his hand, following the
Lamb, whether soever he goes. An immortal glorious Creature, Partaker with
the best, and most blessed of Saints, more beauteous then the stars, and equal
to Angels, A Divine separated soul, refined and enflamed, by beholding Gods
unutterable majesty, in inioying whereof the Angels are insatiable, and
incessant in the Love and Lawd thereof. A fixed star, whose luster is as full
of beauty as glory. A substance more pure the^ the heavens, more orient then
the rising of the Sun. How excellent is HE in thy Tabernacles, O Lord of
hosts, where being delighted with all manner of satietie: satiety breeds no
manner of dislike, where now HE has the endowments of an heavenly inhabitant,
and knows the difference between the conditions of a momentary, and eternal
life, and though the Immortality of his body have not yet enjoyed the rights
of that world, eternal bliss, of the soul, shall one day entertain the body
with eternal beauty.

3 It was David's precept to Solomon his son, 1. Chr. 28.9.
Solomon my son know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and willing mind, and it was Iosiahs practice, that in the eight year
of his reign, when he was yet a child, 2 Chr. 24.3.
he began to seek after the God of David his father, where, as Alexander was
incited by Achilles example, and Caesar by Alexander: So David moves Solomon,
and Josias is enflamed by David's religious profession. These Renowned worthies
began early, Psalm. 19.5.
and gloriously came forth as a bridegroom out of the Chamber, and rejoiced as
Giants, to run their course, Prince HENRY was the true representation of
these. In him God had set a Tabernacle for the sun, Wisdom, Religion,
Valor, did shine in his blooming, his first fruits showed that the Lord had
showred upon him the gracious dew of his inheritance, Esaias. Mat. 6.33.
he did first seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness there of, and
referred the administration of other things to the hand of Providence,
Judgment did master opinion, and by early accustoming his taste to the truth
of spiritual pleasure, he contemned the false and abhorred the filthy
pleasures of the world, lust or pride could not fasten upon him a desire to
spend, nor avarice a thirst to spare, fear or favor could not cause him to
prefer shadows, or neglect draw him from rewarding the meanest deservers,
Ambition drew him not to hasty adventures, nor danger ever put him to
distrust, the sun beams of his morning were most radian, yet his thoughts
calm, and a heavenly peace in all his passions, his blessed mind was never
racked with desire or fear, nor ever troubled with the sad burdens and
consuming CANKERS of this life, never afflicted with the surbate of cares or
surfeit of riots, froathy praise he avoided as infectious goodness was his
aim, which being the cause, led him on in the course of all those most
honorable actions, he intended, in all which, he was free from the taint, much
more from the stain or sting of ill: Sophocles his (...), Sophoc. Xenoph.
or Xenophon in his (...), nay with all reverence to holy records, Salomo^ or
Josias so soon, did not so much, the later and the better of these began but
in the 16th year of his age, in the 8 year of his reign, 2. Chron. 1.3.
but blessed PRINCE HENRY as if he had been consecrated from the womb, in the
morning watch of his life, was a morning star in his luster, and considered
that the Fear of God which the preacher made to be the end of all things in
the end of his Ecclesiastes the same is the beginning of wisdom in the
beginning of his Proverbs. Eccles. 12.13.
Prove. 1.7.
Neither differring nor dissembling had place in him, or power over him, no
excuses no refulals staid him, he Remembered his Creator in the days of his
youth, he thought it good for him to bear the Lords yoke in his youth, Lam
3.27.
he studied wherewith a young man might cleanse his ways, lovely Isaac, loving
Joseph, Princely Josiah, true hearted David, beloved Daniel, holy Samuel,
faithful Timothy were his patterns, Psalm. 119.9.
to consecrat his first and best endeavors to God, Not only his Martial and
Scholastical exercises did honor him with that title which Livy gave to M.
Cato, Si arma sumpsisset in armis natu^ crederes, T. Livius Dec. 4. lib. 1.
si se ad studia convertisset inter liter as educatum, but his daily holy
conversing with God in the path of goodness, his spiritual progress in grace
and favor testified that from his youth up, his conversation was in heaven,
this was the grace of his child hood, and garland of his youth, this blessed
his life, and comforted him at death, and shall commend him to all posterity.

4 Learn hence ye young Gallants, that put far from you the day of the
Lord, ye that neither in the morning nor meridian of your lives, Prepare your
selves to meet the Lord, or care that when he comes he may find you
watching and working. To die well, is a long art of a short life, and a speedy
beginning is the shortest method to this longest art, Solomon tells of a
time, Eccl. 3.2. 2. Cor. 6.2.
Eccless. 3.2. Tempus mortis, But as if that were too general, Paul confineth
that time to a day. 2. Cor. 6.2. dies salutis, and Christ limiteth the time of
that day to an hour, Mat 25.13.
Mat. 25.13. Hora acceptationis, In the Revelation Babylon is lamented that in
one hour her judgment is come, Rev. 18.10. that in one hour so great riches
came to naught, verse. 17. and that in one hour she was made de solate, verse.
19. But times and days and hours are scantled yet shorter, 1. Cor. 15.52.
by the Apostle, Judgment shall be in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,
in the last trumpe, that as God gave his law with the sound of a trumpet, Exodus
19.16. So he shall call for account of it with the sound of the Trumphet, Ex
19.16. 1. Cor. 15. Hieron.
1. Cor. 15.52. How shrill should this trumpe be still in our ears as S.
Hierome witnessed of his own, ever sounding and ecchoing this, that the surest
way to a good life is to begin betimes, considering that though Gods mercies
oftentimes affords us, many years to repent, yet his Justice affords not an
hour to sin, Greg.
Peccanti Crastinum non promisit says Gregory, he promises not to morrow to
the offendour, who is always ready to receive the penitent: How should this
consideration draw us on, Trahit enim non cogit Deus, Austin.
and lead us along by the waters of comfort, and admonish us all if hitherto we
have neglected, to fasten upon the first opportunity of seasoning our souls
with that blessed spirit of Janctification, while they be fit for impression,
and that by a gracious meditation we consider the race we are to run, and the
many encombrances which always cross us, That, delay augmenteth difficulties,
and more do perish by this Temptation then by all the toiles and guiles of
Satan, the longer we persist in sin, the more God plucketh his grace and
assistance from us, our good inclinations are the weaker, the under standing
more darkened, the will more perverted, the appetite more disordered, the
passions are more strengthened, that at length the stupid and benumbed soul,
may loose the spiritual light of grace, and natural light of reason, and
retain only the sensual twylight of affections, common with bruit beasts, and
so the the youth being il spent, Satan will plead possession in age, and
therefore the dawning, springing, morning, time of life must be consecrated to
God, it was not only the piety of Job to rise up early in the morning of
every day to facrifice and sanctify his son. Job. 1.5. Job. 1.5.
But his own practice in his own young years in the morning of his life, in
the days of his youth, the secret of God was upon his Tabernacle. Job.
29.29.4. For this is the time as S. Ambrose describes it, Job. 29.4. Ambros.
wherein the eleme^t of fire predominateth in the sons of men, calore
corporis feruente, estu sanguinis vapor antis ignescente, viribus invallida,
consilijs infirma, vitio calens, illecebrosa deliciis, est Adolescentia, This
is the spring of life, and how easily may a springtide drown all the summer
hopes of youth, the time of strength and beauty both easily inflamed by heat
of vanity, the time of growth and activity, both soon nipped with the frost of
mortality, Aug.
now visus acutior, auditus promptior, incessus rectior, vultus iucundior, now
the sun of the understanding does most appear, and the stars of the senses
most gloriously shine, then the 4. humors resembling the 4. Elements, the liver
as the sea, the veins as the rivers, are in their most pure, most active
operation, the heart immovable as the earth, is most fruitful, and the
countenance so amiable is, as the heaven beautiful, Goodness then appearing is
like Adam in his innocence, it makes the possessor to be noted and called the
child of God this character is bonae spei nu^cia, bonae indolis index, virga
disciplinae, gloria co^scientiae custos famae laus naturae insignae gratiae
virtutum primitiae, as S. Bernard reverently collecteth the attributes. Alas?
how is that spark of understanding, the small portion of the vulgar dimmed
with the mist of prejudice, and obscured with the Tempest of Passion, that the
natural youngling, will not perceive the things that are of God, contenting
himself with Salomons young man, to rejoice in his youth, and let his heart
cheer him, to walk in the ways of his heart and in the sight of his own
eyes, Eccl. 11.9.
but not considering, that for all these things God will bring him to
judgment, growing hereby to that Epidemicall case that S. Chrysostom
describes in such a one, Chrysostom Hom. 1. ad Pop.
Difficilis fallibilis vehementioribus aegens fraenis Adolescens. unfruitful
thorns then choking the good seeds of Religion and grace, customable evil
actions being his co^trollers of judgment, seducers of will, betrayers of
virtue, flatterers of vice, underminers of courage, slaves to weakness,
infection of youth madness of age, curse of life and reproach of death. Is it
not a witcheraft that any should be so chained with enchantment, of a mome^tary
estate, as scarce to think upon the Condition, which never shall have end, to
satisfy the flesh, a nest of worms and to neglect the soul a Companion of
Angels, to desire rather to fill up met am naturae, Beaux.
Natures aims of long life, then mensuram gratiae, Graces full measure of a
good life, or Coronam gloriae to attain Glories Crown of eternal life;
crooked ways, base wealth, false pleasures, vain hopes, lying promises,
sweet poison, and senseless sensual satisfaction enticing their souls, to
joy in those things, whereof they will be ashamed seeing the end of those
things is death. Adams apple, Esaus broth, Judas sop, Babylons cup, are more
powerful, with these sons of disobedience, then Henoks whirlewinde, Eliahs
Chariot, Paul's assumptio^, or John's Revelation, and hereby many sweetly
tempered dispositions. And worthy spirits are swallowed up, and led a way
Captive like the Gallant in the Proverbs, who went to the house of the Harlot,
the way to hell going down to the chambers of death, Prove 7.7.
in the prime and spring, coming to the fall of their leaf, continuing their
life, in a wintry stormy Tempestuous course, the surges of lust beating the
ship, till the sails of pride be torn with the winds of violent passions,
punishing themselves with that horrid curse, Peccatu^ poena peccati, the guilt
of one sin becomes the punishment of another.

5 I call to witness against such this Princely Saint, who having obtained a
gracious report and received the promise is now a triumphant Chiefetaine in the
army of Saints: whose Scutchion bare this In the Lottery, Armory, and Funeral.
Motto, Et nos fas extera quaerere regna, as if he had come into the world but
to learn to die, and as Israel came through the wilderness of Sin, to pass
through it toward the land of Caanan, he began to seek as the text speaks
of Josias, 2. Chr. 34.3. the (...) in the original importing not only to seek
and to inquire with all diligence, as Avenarius renders it. Aven.
But to consult, to deliberate, to search with all care, for any thing that
pertained to the worship of God. Not so to seek as Pyrrhus ambition trained
his thoughts from Macedon to Greece, from Greece to Italy, Plut in vita Pyrrhi.
from Italy to Sicily, from thence to Afric, and so to Carthage, it was no
earthly, no worldly adventure, his chief aim was at; though so far as the
Royal rights of his Puissant Ancestors, and the service to his Sovereign
Father, in a just war might have given cause, our undaunted Alexander, needed
no encouragement, for he was so nobly furnished with all abiliments of a
strong body, and valiant disposition: as if victorious Joshua had revived to
edge, these ill, and dull, and resty times, drowsed, and almost drowned in the
sweet have^ of Peace, Peace being alienated from its own grace, and become the
truce of lust, and rust of valor, the death of the army, and decay of the
navy. And even then when this high borne Champion, the grace of the Court, and
hope of the Camp, might have recovered, if not improved the limits of this
kingdom, when all good spirits not only affected, but addicted themselves to
honorable Martialisme, expecting generally a day wherein they might hear
young Caesar's Venite, and his brandishing sword, the joy of the soldier,
drawn by right, edged by valor, might have been attended with victorious
acclamation of Conquest: even then, so did he season and sanctify his Martial
exercises, and Princely studies of arts, and fortifications, that he remembered
the weapons of a Christian warfare, were not carnal but spiritual, and
howsoever in the flesh, he warred not after the flesh, 2. Cor. 10.3.
as the blessed Apostle does distinguish (...), making that holy use of that
useful knowledge of fortifications, as that he used them in a spiritual
sense, as S. Paul counsels, to the pulling down of strong holds, to the
casting down of imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, bringing into captivity every of his thoughts to
the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.4.
2. Cor. 10.4, 5 So did he enter combat, and receive conquest of both his
enemies and himself, and bare before him a shield which was never missed, yet
never pierced. It was strange in S. Ieroms opinion, Hieron. in Ep. ad Theod.
quod corpus assuetum tunicae potuit sustinere onus Loricae, that the emblem of
Arts, the Gown, and the ornament of Arms, Armor, should fit one and the
same; that so tender, Courtly, Princely breeding could afford so well set a
soul, a body as willing as able to have endured the Laborious watching,
toyling, fighting, bleeding life of a Camp. But that which is more wonder
appeared in him, that the Cankers or vipers of a Courtly life, Lust, Pride,
Ambition, Irreligio^, never durst approach him, no nor the worms or moaths of
greatness, sloth, or flattery, or vanity ever receive acquaintance, much
less entertainment with him. All which creeping, or crying sins, be as
visible as indivisible from such Courtly places: which may be some cause that
the word aula, which the Greeks translate (...), Athen.
is by Athenaeus interpreted to be perflatile^ ventis domum; like the house in
the Gospel beaten with the winds, furious passion tearing, or climing Ambition
overturning, or envious contention breaking, or lustful daliance blasting, as
by violent storms the fairest and most hopeful fruits of Court and kingdom,
have been often, not only blemished but demolished. That we fitly might take
up for such Palaces, that Lamentatio^ of David for Mount Gilboa, o ye
Mountains of Gilboa, ^. Sam. 1.19.21.23.
how are the mighty fallen! how has the beauty of Israel been slain upon thy
high places! they that were swifter then Eagles, stronger then Lions are fallen
in the midst of thee, Pillars and Cedars in Salomons house have sunk down
even to the ground, and yet this excellent Mirror of Princes stood as a center
vnmoved, and retained his station. His liberty more, opportunities more, power
more, and incitations more the^ other great ones, yet he more free, because
more faith full then others, yea, so free that infernal malice, nor the
curious inquiry of Popish Pioners could ever fasten any taint of blemish,
either before or since his death, upon his Saintlike life. I abhor flattery,
and dare call evil, evil, were it in Bethell the kings Chapel: let (...)
and (...) a Courtier and flatterer be the reciprocal terms of those that
tune their tongues to enchantments; I had rather be a Citizen of Verona then
Placentia, and with S. Austin, mallem pati supplicium, Aug. ep. 68.
quam foeda adulatione consequi beneficium, I had rather endure punishment for
truth, then get favor by flattery. Diogenes the Cynicke contemned it and
joined together linguam adulatoris and manum interfectoris, Diog in Laert,
and blessed Prince, who now is in heaven, in his life laughed flattery to
scorn, and held that as the Tyrant among the wild, so the flatterer among
tame beasts is most pernicious. It may be Aulica Rhetorica, to give more then
is due to great ones in their life, but that candle being extinguished how
busy are tongues and pens to break open the sepulchers of the deceased, a
thing more common the^ commendable in this age. But to give the amplest
testimony of truth as well as of affection, Testimonia virtutis and veritatis,
Bern.
is an office in S. Bernards judgment that we are bound unto, Piety as well as
duty requires it, and quitteth herein flattery, that a sea man when he is come
to the haven, and a warrior when he is brought to his triumph, and the blessed
that die in the Lord and rest from their labors, Rev. 14.
they that have been the great lights of our firmament their works following
them, propter opera and exempla accipiant benigna hominum verba and iudicia,
may be honored in the monuments of their memorials by just praises, not
issuing from Hypocrisy or flattery, to neglect which service, were profane
ingratitude, or to deride it impious presumption. For, to any honest mind, how
unworthy will it seem to deny, or malign virtue its due, which so abundantly,
did appear in this triumphant Saint, the living glory of the Protestant, and
rising envy of the malignant world, as if the Graces had been midwiues at his
birth, the Muses his nurses, the virtues his attendants, and goodness as a
good Angel, his guide to direct him in all his ways. And as if acquainted with
Saturn the Planet of Conte^plation, and with Jupiter the Planet of Action
Quaerere.
Quaerere was the word best liked him, the work that best fitted him. As if he
had duly considered our Saviors council, Primu quaerite, first seek; Cum
dicit quaerite en diligentiam, Mat. 6 33.
cum primum quaerite en sapientiam, diligence in seeking, Chrysostom.
wisdom in seeking first. It was the fruit of both, in Josias to begin to
seek God the first time of his reign when he was a child, in Mary Magdalen
to come to the sepulcher the first day of the week before the dawning of the
day, in those that were first admitted into the vineyard, that they were in the
market the first hour the Master came to hire; the firstlings of the cattle,
first borne of the children, first fruits of the earth, first hopes of the
promise, first tithes of the year, and first times of the day were ever dear
and acceptable to God. To instance in the last only, the first opening of the
day, seeing, there is no word unnecessary in the book of God, every jot
therein, affording observation, if not Admiration, why so precisely is this
time of the day the morning mentioned in scripture? the Angels hastening Lot out
of Sodom in the morning* Genesis 19.15. Abraham his preparation by rising early
to go to sacrifice Isaac in the morning, Genesis 19.15.
Genesis 22.3. Jacob to set up a pillar at Bethel rose up early in the morning,
Genesis 22.3.
Genesis 28.18. Moses commanded to stand before Pharao early in the morning,
Exodus 9.15. Joshua in his care in the conviction of Achan rose up early in the
morning, Josh. 7.16. Elkanah and Hannah their early worship, 1. Sam. 1.9. 1.
Chr. 33.30. Job. 1.2. Chr. 31.3. Ier. 17.13.
the Levits early standing before the Lord, Job early sanctifying of his sons,
Hezekias early sacrificing, David early praying, Jeremy early preaching, and
Christ early rising, with infinite other examples of the morning service that
the Saints have performed. I say wherefore is this especial circumstance so
exactly placed in the front of so many of the sacred histories, if it did not
note unto us, Aquin.
how acceptable the first fruit of time is unto the Lord, and therefore first to
seek, in the beginning of our day, whether as Thomas distinguishes, it be in
the morning of the natural day, or of our humane life, or of our state in
grace, or passage to glory, the Prime of our Calender to be consecrated to God,
and the sun no sooner to display its light upon the earth, then we to lift our
souls unto the heaven. As was the daily and early course of this devout
Prince, who in his private morning prayer, early seeking the God of his
Fathers, communed with his own heart in his chamber, and was still. Psalm. 4.4.
It was a gracious promise made in the time of the Law, If thou seek the Lord
thy God, thou shall find him, Deuteronomy. 4.29. and ever since it has been the
precept, or rather the sum of all precepts to seek the Lord, as appears by
the Phrase of Scripture, either faciem quaerendo, by seeking his face, Psalm.
24.6. or bonitatem quaerendo, by seeking his goodness, Esra. 8.22. Or mandata
quaerendo, by seeking his Commandments, Psalm. 119.100. Or misericordiam
quaerendo. Dan. 2.18. etc. and the blessing promised is, that the hearts of
them shall rejoice that seek the Lord, 1. Chr. 16.10. Yea the hearts of them
shall live that seek the Lord, Psalm. 69.32. Which made the Royal Psalmist so
experimented, that he proclaims, they that know thy name will put their
trust in thee, for thou O Lord never failest them that seek thee, Psalm. 9.10.
Which may serve as a brief application to all his acknowledgements of
deliverance, from the paw of the bear, the Iaw of the Lion, the Iauelin of
Saul, Goliahs spear, Achitophels trappe, Absolons treason, Doegs sla^der,
Shemei his curse, from the mouth of the sword, the murren of his people, the
horrors of his sins, and the rebellion of his own sons. S. Austin in his
meditations on the Psalms asks the question upon David's speech, Quaerite
faciem eius semper; Si semper quaeritur, quando invenitur, Aug. in Psalm.
inventus est, and tamen quaerendus est? Seek his face evermore? why if he
must be sought evermore, when shall he be found, is he found, and yet is he to
be sought? and answers himself thus, Deum invenit fides and adhuc eum
quaerit spes, charit as autem and invenit eum per fidem and eum habere quaerit
per spem, faith has found God, and hope seeks him, but charity both has
found him by faith, and seeks to have him by hope. According to the measure
of which method our now Immortal, then mortal Prince, did seek the Lord,
being steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in charity; he has
passed the waves of this troublesome world, and is come to the Land of
everlasting life, and there has found the Lord.

6 Learn hence then from the Cedar ye fir trees, and shrubs of the forest,
ye that ever lived under his shadow, or now are in the sunshine and
countenance of greatness, learn to seek the Lord: this is the whole duty of
man, the sum of all Gods will revealed in his word. Ye may see in the
natural agents, whether they be to bear rule, as the Sun and Moon, which
are placed in the firmament, or be ruled, as the Elements and parts of this
lower world, they all work, as if they knew what they wrought, and in their
several courses seek to perform his will, as if they were acquainted with
his will. How much more does it concern men, whom in a manner he has made
partakers of the divine nature, to seek his glory, seeing that by his glory,
they seek their own good? The Orbs and Arches of heaven, with their stars
and planets, and the whole fabric of nature, were ordained to finish their
course by motions and operation: and so man as he was created to a more, nay
to the most, happy and blessed end, should attain thereunto, not by sloth
and idleness, which (as the worm in the guord) be the devourers of goodness;
but by endeavor which is the spirit, and by ambition the spur, should stir
on in the ways of grace, being in the glorious liberties of the sons of God.
How commonly known be those notions, that our life is but a journey, a race, a
votage, a combat, and we are but travelers, soldiers, workmen in the
vineyard, etc. All which are with many more notes of seeking and laboring,
which should edge a good mind to wish as Heathen Seneca did, Seneca.
that he might ever be in action, Malo enim (says he) vt me fortuna in
castris suis, quam in delitijs habeat, he had rather be fortunes warrior
then her wanton, and rather dwell in her Camp then in her Court. Erasmus
professes that he had no time to be sick, or opportunity to take Physic:
and the former Seneca, that he had scarce leisure to sleep, Nullus mihi per
otium dies exit, partem noctium studijs vendico, Sen. Ep. 8.
non vaco somno, etc. neither day nor night, eating or sleeping could withdraw
him from studies; and the devise of Aristotle, who by letting a ball fall into
a basin, kept himself waking. Which starre-light of good in them should stir
us up, who are in the sunshine of grace, and lead us on to the search and
discovery of Immortality. These meditations should lead us on further to the
Queen of the South, 1. King. 10.
seeking by a long iourny to come to hear Solomon: she and the Ninivits, Genesis
2.
and other Heathens, may justly arise in judgment against this generation, and
condemn us Christians. For not to flatter our selves in a matter of so great
importance, we cannot plead ignorance, neither can we excuse negligence, in
the care of our searching, and manner of our seeking. The devouring sword,
terrible shot, wounds, outcries, alarmes, groans of the dying, danger of the
surviving, cannot keep the valiant war riour from seeking the laurel of
victories. The untamed Sea, and tottering ship, the storms, or calmes, or
rocks, or sands, or shipwreck of others cannot detain the Mariner from
seeking for his hoped for commodities. And yet the one in the height of his
honor makes his way through blood, and the other, as if borne under Aquarius
wastes his life in the waters: whereas many, whose whole life never partakes of
any painful interruption, whose belly God has filled with treasure, and
satisfied with all manner of content, have not begun to seek, nor cared to
find the God of their Fathers; thinking it then time enough, when the cloud of
sickness portendeth the Tempest of death, which like a da^pe puts out all the
light of pleasure. How dear therefore ought that counsel to be, Seek the
Lord while he may be found, (i) to seek him while we may seek him: for (...),
Time is fixed on a wheel, Athe.
that incessantly whirleth, and draws with it us, and all our actions. And
our lease of life is, as the ancient Hebrews have by calculation of the years
observed, so short, that if we would with all our forces and studies endeavor
to atchieue some matter of worth, we should be in danger of wanting day
light. For if the days of our age be threescore years and ten, or if men be
so strong that they come to fourscore, which was the longest date of years
that Moses afforded; Psalm. 90.10.
deduct first the time of eating and sleeping, which is the greater moetie of
man's life; and then deduct the days of childhood, which is an ignorant folly,
and innocent simplicity, then deduct the days of youth, which is no better
then and indiscreet heat, rash and heady, and as Solomon calls it, an
inconstant vanity; deduct yet the days of age, which is life's wast, and man's
winter, a hoare frost, cold and unhealthy: and when we think this Survey and
substraction is ended, and we have seen all the travel, that God has given
unto the Sons of men, to be exercised therein; yet deduct the days of
Sorrow, the souls fever, an eating viper, a fainting misery, a little cold
to pinch us, a little heat to parch us, the aching of a tooth or finger, able to
distract our studies, or sports, or labors; in sickness weak, in discontent
withered: and all these hours of childhood, youth, age, sleep, sickness,
sorrow, subtracted, where is that life of man threescore years and ten?
Which if it were full, it were but the number of the years of Babylos
captivity. Nay where is the year, the day, the hour, that man may be said to
live? The life of man is but a spa^ long, nay less, it is but instans
te^poris, a moment. Number and weigh the time past, it is spent, it weighs
nothing. Number and weigh the time to come, it is uncertain, we cannot weigh
it. Number and weigh the time present, is is not a dram, a grain, a mite, it
is but a moment. Eudaeus, Villalpanda, nor all the measurists have weight or
measure to express such a fragment, a moment, being not so much in proportion
to eternity as the least moat in the air, to the body of the whole earth.
Wherefore, if God, even beyond the course of the natural compass of life do
vouchsafe those who^ he has chosen from the world, and called out of the world
to endow them with the life of grace, to the end they may seek his glory, and
even in the frailty of life to afford many so blessed and gracious
opportunities to seek him* let us gird up our loins, and seeing the day star
has shined in our hearts, and the day sprang from on high has visited us, let
us run with patience unto the race that is set before us, Heb. 12.1.
looking, seeking, striving, earnestly endeavoring, and pressing hard to the
mark, unto Jesus the author, and finisher of our faith; whom if we seek we
shall find, and with him all things necessary for us. To which glorious
acquisition as this blessed Prince was faithfully addicted, so now is he of it,
in soul, fully possessed.

7 Whose noble thoughts aimed at more, then either his Royal birth could
design him, or Regal succession assure him, desiring to improve his
Patrimony: Regna extera.
Regna extera, that is, coelica Regna, or Pithagorei vocant (...) ex adverso
sita^ Terram. Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 5. cap. vlt.
Regna extera quaerere that is, Regna ex terra, or extra terram; celestial
kingdoms, were his aim, and hope, a kingdom that has no end for
termination, no confines for limitation, far above principalities and powers,
wherein no man can resolve whether his sanctified ambition were more high or
more happy. For had his desires levelled, at the regaining of a neighbor
kingdom, which either by match has been conjoined or by prowess has been
conquered, the example had not wa^ted followers, nor the enterprise honors.
Our Chronicles have bequeathed a testimony unto al posterity in this kind of a
* renowned Prince of Wales, whose honor shall not lie in the dust, The
victorious Black Prince.
while the life and light of books, shall remain whose much honored example,
no doubt, did much add valor, to Great HENRY'S disposition of warlike honor,
in the atchieving of some Princely adventure, and giving life to that
honorable, though now lamentable estate of English Martialists. Whose valiant
service, against Popish and Turkish enemies, has been sealed with their
blood, and they had in high esteem among all the military men in the world,
whose renown had enjoyed a resurrection, had this Loadstarre of honor
appeared longer. But his designs being directed to a more spiritual mark,
heaven was his hope, beginning his voyage to glory in the way of grace: through
which kingdom of grace he passed, not as an alien, or traveiler, but as an
inheritour, not as a servant but as a Prince ly son, an heir, a coheire,
acquainted in his passage, with the word, and accompanied with the Angels of
God. Seeing al worldly things, beneath him, he esteemed them as sublunary,
neither altogether worthy of contempt, nor any way as able to afford content to
his spirit, which like an Eagle fled up into the sphere of divine
contemplation: and so far was he above his nature by grace, as he was by
Royal birth in nature above other men. A kingdom he might have affected: for
worldly honors sanctified, may be sought by those whom God has thereunto
appointed. Genesis 49.1.
Jacob besides his legacy of spiritual blessing, left temporal legacies to
his sons, the blessing of the Sea to Zabulon, blessing of fruits of the land
to Issachar, Judgment to Dan, victory to Gad, staff of bread to Asher,
Eloquence to Nepthali, fruitfulness to Joseph, the scepter to Judah, and so of
the rest. And it was David's acknowledgement, The king shall rejoice in thy
strength O Lord, exceeding glad shall he be of thy salvation. Thou have given
him his hearts desire, and have not denied him the request of his lips. Psalm.
21.3.
Thou have prevented him with the blessings of goodness, thou have set a
crown of pure gold upon his head, Psalm. 21.3. When the kingly Prophet
confesses with much joy the blessings he had received from the Lord generally
here as in other places, particularly he names these blessings of good
things, how he was chosen before his brethren, wiser then his teachers,
worthyer then the ancients, stronger then his enemies, and not only expresses
God to be the author of his Royal power, but also of his Martial prowess,
Blessed be the Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war and my fingers
to fight, my goodness, my fortress, my tower, my deliverer, my shield, Psalm.
140.1.
Psalm. 140.1. Yea and the preservations of him in vtero, ex vtero, ab vtero, to
bring him to that dignity, by covering him in his mothers womb, Psalm. 139.13.
by receiving him from the womb, Psalm. 22.10. yea by taking him out of the
womb, Psalm. 71.6. All religious Princes will acknowledge Tuum est regnum
Potentia and gloria: his was the Practique well as the Theorique, he put
kingdoms in the scales of judgment to examine as well the weight of their
worth and Gods blessing in so great gifts, as the weight of their labyrinths of
cares, and fears, and Maeanders of troubles; he found the honors to be
transcendent, that good kings were the Dearlings of God, his deputies, stars in
his hands, signets on his finger, the great lights of his firmament; those, to
whom he not only partaked his scepter, his power, his honor, but even of his
own omnipotent Titles, not only as the woman of Tekoa gave the attribute to
David, 2. Sam. 14.17.
My Lord the king is wise, as an Angel of God, but God bestowing his own
name, Dixi quod Dij estis, I have said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. and his sons
name, Nolite tangere Christos meos, Touch not my Christ's, Psalm. 105. and not
only the name, but the power and speech of his spirit, as in David, Spiritus
Domini loquutus est per me, the spirit of the Lord has spoken by me, 2. Sam.
23.2. and, that they have ever been esteemed the chiefest of the sons of
men, the chariots of Israel, Oracles of wisdom, Cha^pions of valor, Guardians
of Justice, the Gemmes and Diadems of governments beauty. Yet, in all this
Sovereignty, they are subject to more violence of storm, then their subjects,
they are no more free from emptiness, weariness, thirst, heat, cold, sweat,
labor. They are like the heavenly bodies, which cause good or evil times,
which have much respect and no rest, ever in motion, never freed in their
persons, actions, or times; being in great state, they are greatest strangers
to themselves, and have (if they duly execute their great places) small time to
attend the health either of body or mind. Nay more the^ others their provident
watchfulness expressed in the Egyptian Hierogliphicke, Pier. Hierog.
sceptrum cum oculo she weth that day nor night, any intermission should
exclude their cares, for the state they govern, by the influence of their
goodness: seeing as the dignity, so the burden of duty is so great, as that
Seneca his speech upon this occasion is found most true,

Quis quamne regno gaudet? O fallax bonum,
Quantum malorum, quam front blanda tegis!
The best of Kings finds, that sometimes he wears a Crown of thorns.
Coronets and Chapplets of Olives, or Lillies, or Laurels, or Roses, or Violets,
or Gold, or Pearl, are not without somewhat that will often vex the wearers,
and they will confess that within that small circle there is the weight of a
world. The boystrous troubles attending on which caused the heathen to profess
that if a Crown lay before him on the ground, he would not think it worth the
taking up; Cassiodor confirming that by the neglect of the heathen, Regnum est,
nolle regnare. Cassiod. Ep. 3.
And therefore did our Blessed Prince lay his project for a kingdom, out of
compass of trouble, or treason. Howsoever by the dues of Nature, and custom,
and succession he was hair apparent to three Crowns, yet he took up the
motto of that Reverend St. Thomas Bodley.
Centurion, who built us a Synagogue, Quarta Perennis, and most divinely
considered, that an earthly kingdom was like the place, where Paul rested
called the fair havens, Act. 27.8. yet Eur oclydon, Act. 27.8.
a tempestuous easterly wind may arise, no safety in a kings Palace, be it
never so strong: not in his dining Chamber, Belshazzar was astonished there;
nor in that Privy chamber, Eglon was slain there; nor in the bed chamber
Ishbosheth was slaughtered there; nor in the Chapel, Zenacherib was murdered
there: Only, safety is to be expected there, where never harm entered in,
since Satan was put out, where there is a kingdom, where the Prince is
verity, the Laws Charity, and the limits Eternity, where the meat is Manna,
the exercise rejoicing, the music Haleluiah, the company Saints, and the
Quire Angels. Not only a kingdom of Priests, as in Exodus 19.6. or a kingdom
of Prophets, as in Luke 13.28. but a kingdom of kings, Rev. 1.5. but a
prepared kingdom Mat. 25.34. A heavenly kingdom, 2. Tim. 4.18. An eternal
kingdom, 2. Pet. 1.11. The kingdom of heaven Mat. 18.3. The kingdom of
Christ, Ephesians. 5.5. The kingdom of God, Ioh. 3.3. A kingdom where there is
power and glory. Into which kingdom, power and glory, that triumphant Saint,
blessed Prince Henry is already entered, and having kept his faith, fought his
fight, ran his race, and finished his course, he has obtained a Crown laid up
for him, the Crown of life, Iam. 1.12. a Crown of righteousness, 1. Tim. 4. an
immarcessible Crown of Glory, 1. Pet. 5.4.

8 Learn hence ye dunghill muckwormes, whose base earthly and beastly
thoughts never strain further then to be ambitious of Mammon, and to lay up
treasure where the rust and moath does corrupt and where thieves do break in,
and steal; never partaking any spark of a noble spirit, whose soul is not
only encouraged, but enraged and enflamed with the desire of a kingdom. How
ought this ambition of the soul, to be of force, to darken and dull all
sensual senses and worldly regards, and to carry ye up, upon the wings of
desire and hope, that ye may perform the passage with more alacrity, to come
to this kingdom: that when ye are no longer capable of this world ye may be
established in a kingdom of most happy condition. It was the speech of Philip
to his son Alexander, Idoneum and compar tibiregnum fili invenias, quoniam
Macedonia tui capax no^ est, Son seeing Macedonia is not a place fit for
thee, thou may find a more competible and capacious kingdom. The world is
not capable of us, it is a limited finite small compass, the soul though it
be but the inmate of the body, is a celestial transcendent creature, and being
rightly guided, is ever ascending upwards, not here transported, either with
desire of that which she has not, or with carnal delight of that she has,
never entertaining at one time and together, those two extremes, the love of
God and of the world; her single eye not being able to behold heaven, and earth
together, and therefore neglects riches as a thorn, pleasure as a spur,
glory as a blast, beauty as a flower, lust as a fire, and Joy as a fury. It was
Cyrus proclamation to animate his army, and to draw valiant spirits to his
party, that, whosoever would serve him in that war should worthily be
preferred, Plut in vitae Pyrrbi.
whatsoever his condition were. If he possessed a Cottage, he would give him a
village; If he had a village he should be governor of a City; if Ruler of a
City he would make him Prince of a Region, or king of some Country. What he
promised to the best of his, God proclaims to the least of his even a
kingdom, even a kingdom of such majesty, that neither in desire this ca^
wish, nor in hope aspire, nor in imagination feign any greater glory. What
empty and spungy creatures then be they, who desire to satisfy their fill with
any thing, and bestow all their lives in seeking only those things, which be
wished sine providentia, and kept non sine poenitentia. What fruit can appear
in those things, Quae possessa onerant, Aug. in 119. Ps.
amata inquinant, amissa cruciant, in possessing whereof they burden, in loving
whereof they defile, in loosing whereof they torment themselves. S. Chrysostom.
fitly proposes a great man in the highest sphere of earthly Elevation, and
thus bespeaketh him, O man, Chrysostom.
Is es quem sensus fallit, tempus deserit, etc. Thou art he whom sense
deceaueth, and time forsakes, whom Pomp hurts, and age changes; the
greater fret thee, and the lesser flatter thee; ever in fear, never in rest;
all this but golden misery. When Satan tempted our Savior with the greatest
temptation, Mat. 4.
he presumed to offer him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them. It was a great offer, all the kingdoms of the world, and yet small
glory, that it could be showed ictu oculi, in the twinkling of an eye, as S.
Luke reads (...) in an instant of time: the glory that is in the Celestial
kingdom, Non videt oculus, no eye has seen. It was a great trance in Peter,
when at Christ's transfiguration he cried out, Let us make three Tabernacles one
for Thee, Mat. 17.
one for Moses, one for Elias: Moses Tabernacle was dissolved, he must have
none, he had no commission to make a new one: Elias was taken up into heaven,
he rested on the holy hill more glorious the^ to abide in a Tabernacle, he
needed none; Christ would not enjoy so much as a hole to hide his head on
earth, much less a Tabernacle on a hill, he would have none. It had been
glorious to be present at the majesty of that meeting, where in body, were
represented Elias from heaven, Moses from the grave, Peter and others from the
world, nay where Pater in voce, filius in carne, spiritus sanctus in nube,
where the blessed Trinity, as at the Baptism before, so now again at the
Transfiguration, were all present, the Father in the voice, the Son in the
flesh, the holy spirit in the cloud, as the ancients have collected. Upon this
short show of the glorious presence of Christ, Peter was in an ecstasy,
faciamus Tabernacula, yet this felictie had bin but momentary, if made
Tabernacles had served, though S. Peter had made them; for Saint Paul tells
us, Non manufactum Tabernaculum, it is not a Tabernacle made with hands will
serve, but the true Tabernacle which the Lord has pitched and not man, Heb. 8.2.
and which David asked of in his 15. Psalm, Psalm. 15.1.
Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle, who shall rest upon thy holy hill? The
Monarchs of the earth that shall enter hereinto, may cast away their crowns,
as Elias left his cloak, and repent of nothing, save that they came no sooner
hither. It was as it seems an honourables, and a Commendable ambition in the
Disciples, that there was a strife among them who should be the greatest in
the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 18.1. Their other ambitious thoughts were not so
law full. It was, I confess a monstrous sight to see the Saviors servants,
(who should not have savoured of earthly things) disputing who should be the
greatest among them, as in Mark 9.34. and a much more prodigious spectacle to
behold a contention among them, in an ambitious manner at the Lords table in
the time of the Passover, Luke 22.24. nay of the last Passover that ever
Christ did eat with the^, which he had desired with such a desire to eat with
them: it was much to dispute it, more to strive for it, much to question in the
way, contention for it at the Table, much to do it, when their Lord heard them
not as in Mark, when no danger near their Lord: more now when their Lord
heard them, and they saw him in sorrow, when it was but the day before his
death, and bitter Passion, then his comfort a quarrel of his Disciples; this
Passover was truly eaten with bitter herbs. Both these contentions were
grievous in common men, more grievous in the lights and fathers, and Chariots,
and horsemen of Israel. But the question propounded in S. Matthew 18.1. may
seem tolerable, Mat. 18.1.
for our Savior had taught them, Primum quaerite Regnum Dei, first seek the
kingdom of God, and now they desire but to learn Quis primus in regno Dei,
who should be the first and greatest in the kingdom of God. And in the answer
to this seeming tolerable, and Commendable question, Christ not only teaches
but taxes the^ for the swelling ambition of that question, and answers the^
that unless they were converted, and would become as little children, they could
not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Mat. 18.4.
He instanceth in a little child thus, Whosoever therefore shall humble himself,
as this little child, the same is greatest in the kingdom of heaven: teaching
thereby that Humility is the gate to heaven, that though the children of God
must lead an inoffe^siue kind of life, yet they think meanly of themselves,
and the more holy a man is, the more has he sense of his own corruption. He
must walk with God, and yet humble himself under the mighty hand of God. No
opinion in his own wisdom, no confidence in his own power, no hope in his
own works, he must deny himself if he profess Christ. And here by the
consequence of the instance, he reproves his disciples that did confound the
good motion, by the swelling disposition of their mind, not content to be
inheritours of the kingdom of heaven, but took upon them, to strive for
superiority in that kingdom, where the meanest inhabitant shall be a king, the
meanest reward a Crown, and all shall be like the Angels of God. Where our
Newborn Prince now is, and enjoys a permanent triumph, most glorious among
them, that follow the Lamb whither so ever he goes, among those which are
redeemed, from among men, and are the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb,
having there the Royalty of happiness, as he had here the right of inheritance.

9 Ambition could not tempte him, nor slander stain him, that ever his
thoughts did seek that which was not lawful; neither in his intentions did he
approve nor in his actions did appear any show of unjust acquisition. Fas.
Fas was the limitation of all his resolutions. The ancient revenewes which his
Royal progenitors had designed in his Principality and Dukedom, he regained
from the unjust possessors (for the Patrimony of Prince and Priest has been,
and is intruded upon,) but such Princely clemency herein appeared, that law
having restored their lands and revenevves unto his Highness, his gracious
bounty restored the possessours upon small considerations unto that which
without right they formerly had detayned. Hereby giving a taste as well of
Provident managing of his state, as of his benign regard of any, that had any
tenure under him, as if his law had been rather Ius Praetorium, then Ius
Censorium, and he had affected the rules of Chauncery, more the^ the kings
bench: what Equity did yield him, his Clemency moderated, and law in his breast
was attended as Virgo in heaven, as with Leo on the one side the power of a
Prince, so with libra on the other side, scales to try the weight of right,
wherein, as in the divine scales of omnipotency, so in his weights, the worth
of mercy, outweighed the right of Justice. So far was he from gathering the
Treasures of wickedness, by the balance of deceit, from countenancing Laws to
be snares to good minds, or quirkes to mercenary wits, from denying the Kings
measure to any man, or turning Judgment into wormwood, that in many things he
desisted from acquiring his own right: when the right hand of aequitie led him
thereto: though the heathen observed that Justice is a virtue in nature, so
conioyning with the heart of man, that there is no greater sympathy between
the Loadstone and Iron, then between Justice and the heart. So that in a
Prince especially, absolute Justice in its rigor, cannot seem deformed; that
of Heraclitus being most true, (...) a Prince the Image of God, Heracl.
the Law, the work of the Prince, and Justice the end of the Law; yet such a
sweet match was in the temper of the absolute Prince, that as he never passed
over the Line of Justice, in wresting any thing from the true owner, so did he
not neglect the exercise of much clemency, even unto those that unjustly, and
some of them unmannerly had intruded into, and continued long in the Rights of
Princely demaines. As all that had occasions to negotiate with his Highness
worthy officers of Revenewes in the settling of estates, cannot but confess
out of a due consideration, if any spark of truth and integrity be in them;
as I acknowledge much in many of them, contemning the viperous tongues of
malignant and mad Detractors. Right was the level, and square that ruled him;
kingdoms or Empires were not forcible enough, much less the possession of
some small Cantons, or Countries able to withdraw his eye, and heart, and
hand, from a just proposal, or his foot from the path of lawful proceeding.
His soul abhorred the speech of Polynices in the Tragedy, Imperia precio
quovis constant been kingdoms in his opinion were not to be bought at any
rate. Sen. Trag.
He esteemed Power without Justice, our of course, as a Lion broke from his
cage, furious and insatiable: unjust suits he held blots of the Courts and
enemies of Conscience; unjust wars abuse of force, the usury of fraud;
unjust claymes, Contentions fire, and Opinions falsehood; unjust possessions as
Ahabs vinyard, though the acts of power, yet the dwellings of horror. Injustice
in any case, was not only distasted but detested by him, he yielded no
countenance, no encouragement to such acquisitions. Rapine durst never fly for
shelter under his shadow, it feared, nay it fled his countenance; neither his
practice, nor protection yielded favor to that horrid Pyoner and Monster of
the Palace, Injustice: Fas est, was (...), as Aristotle calls it (...), as S.
James terms it, an unwritten, yet a Royal law to him. The Portion of the
Levite he esteemed sacred, sacrilege he accounted as neighbor to blasphemy;
the Church was as happy by him, as he by it holy: he wished the Arc and Aaron
their dignity and dues; not the meanest of that tribe, but had from him upon
any occasion, more respect then from the most of that time; and for their
maintenance, by his Religious Arithmetique, he intended rather addition to it
then substraction from it, whatsoever to the contrary was thought by some hot
spirits, Herostratus heirs, who think to get honor by setting fire on the
Temple: No place complained of any Injustice in him, much less Gods house, or
the maintenance thereof. The Temple was his high way to heaven, and
righteousness his guide, felicity the Patrimony he expected, and yet violence
the means by which he sought it. Was violence the means? Sacred Prince! he
was another Moses, the meekest that ever his name styled great, Anger was a
stranger, and Passion an exile with him, his pulses equal, speeches temperat,
his countenance as the sun in it self, always fair, his entendments just,
and actions iuditious. Where then had violence either dwelling or lodging in
him? Nec irritabilis nec implacabilis; he was not easily angered, yet easily
pleased, a storm could not smite him, nor the violence, which shipwrackt
others, shake him. Coelum non patitur, this celestial creature was not subject
to the passive motions of distempers: the change of the moon had not power,
nor the violence of Planets predominancy in his Nativitie. In all his sailing,
he was in a calm, he had learnt the lesson which was taught to Traian, Nec
minus se hominem esse quam hominibus praeesse, Pliny.
His practice was as much in the Politikes to obey, as in his Oeconomicks to
rule: and how then was violence the means of his acquisition? I say again
Violence was the means to obtain his felicity, even that holy sanctified
violence, which our Savior exhorts unto, Mat. 11.22. Mat. 11.12.
The kingdom of heaven must suffer violence, and the violent take it by force.
The Saints of God shall drink of the Flood of life, Ps. 36.9. The holy spirit
descended in a fire, Acts 2. And what more violent then a flood, or fire? In
what is so much earnestness showed, as in a race, or a Combat? yet these be
the terms of Scripture, to incite to a more urgent violent pace in our
passage toward heaven. Which Course, as this Peerless Creature knew, so did
he with his best affections bend toward it, Spiritual pride, and carnal
security were rocks on either hand him, which he avoided, a continual
remembrance of his Creator, the Lord that directed him, and as if his vessel
had been more speedy then ordinary, he happily passed through the waves of
this troublesome world, and ankor in the haven of heaven, unto which he had
the height of inheritance.

10 Learn from this Holy pattern, all ye that torture Justice, and extend
the limits of right to your own ends, using the Law, as a Law of liberty,
bla^ching of bad, darkning of good courses, changing the face and speech of
Justice, making her pronounce as the heathen Oracles, often ambiguitie, if not
falsities. Behold a Prince, whose power might have betrayed his will, and his
will corrupted the Law, but he walks upright before his maker, violence or
cruelty had no place in his habitations, all his intentions were weighed, with
how lawful, not how gainefull they were: the kingdom of heaven to which he
had right by adoption is his aim, is his desire; to seek other things if this
were any hindrance to this atchieument he forbore: hereby teaching the
unrighteous Ahabs of this time, who seek for all things else but heaven, by
all means else but right, how great their offense is, who in the placing of
their officers be like Nero, Eras. Apoth.
whose speech was to his servants, scitis quibus mihi opus. and hoc agamus ne
quis quid habeat, as if his treasures should have been the Ocean into which
the rivers of private men's states should have emptied themselves: Vox praedone,
qua^ principe dignior, a speech fitter for a Pyrat, Lang loc. Com.
then a Prince, as one censureth him. Where if such would be content, to prey
only on the great ones, the fault were less, as Tibullus tells the great
thieves of his time,

At vos exiguo peeori furesque lupique Tibull.
Farcite: de magno praeda petenda grege. It caused David's anger to be greatly
kindled against the rich man in Nathans parable, who took away from the poor
man, 2. Sam. 12.
the one, and only little ewe Lamb, which he had bought and nourished up; and
David sentenceth it thus, As the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing
shall surely die, and he shall restore the Lamb fourefold because he did this
thing, and because he had no pity, 2. Sam. 12.6. And not to heap testimonies,
that one of Cassiodore is enough, Cass. lib 5. Ep.
Vltra omnes crudelitates est divite^ velle fieri ex exiguitate mendici.
Amentur honesta lucra, horreantur damnosa compendia. Pudeat ab illus tollere
quibus inhemur offerre. It is cruelty in the abstract that any man should grow
rich by excorting from the poor; honest gain is lawful, damned rapine
hateful: the extreme of shame is to take from them, to whom we are commanded
to give. God hears their cries, reme^breth their sighs, puts up their
tears; their complaints as darts pearce heaven. The observation of S.
Chrysostom is worthy, that of all the blessings of our Savior in the Mount,
the blessing of inheritance is only given to the meek, Mat. 5.5. Blessed are
the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. Which is mainely contrary to the
course of the world? for if meekness were the best fortress for possession,
how so one would the snares and subtilties of Law-wresting underminers,
prevail! wherefore the violent Nebuchadnezars of the world, by usurpation
rather then by possession, retain their seats, and may be said rather to
inhabit then inherit the land. But unto the Godly says God; What man is he
that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose,
his soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the land, Psalm. 24.12.
Not only the meek themselves but their seed, shall not only possess but
inherit, not only the earth but the land of the living; when as the unjust
Intruders shall make but the spiders nest, or build their houses, as upon the
sands, a wind will come to cast down their Palaces, and to root them out of
their possessions, and to rot their memorial from of the earth. When as, they
that by right and righteous dealing have enjoyed the blessing of inheritance,
shall shine by their good works while they live, and by their good name when
they are dead; as now this Gracious Glorious Triumphant Saint does, whose name
shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

It a in singulis virtutibus eminebat, He was so eminent in every virtue, to
use S. Hieroms words, that with out much amplification the Apophthegmes of his
own life, will furnish a large discourse. He was never beaten down with his
own passions, but did conquer his own conquerours; his anger served only to
inflame his zeal, height of spirit, to despise the world, Fear, only to
abstain from sin, joy to praise God, sadness to repent, hatred, to pursue
vice love, to ensue virtue; so his passions, being subdued as Rebels, were
singular helps in the exercise of virtue. And for himself, and his worthy
followers, the words of Hierome of Nepotia^ will fitly serve the close of this
discourse Domus eius, and conversatio, magistra erat publicae disciplinae, Hier.
his own Princely conversation, and the course of his house was a mistress
(or rather a mirror) of public discipline, the model of a wel-managed state.
Mars and Minerva dwelt in his Palace, which in it self was a second Paradise.
Religion was of his privy chamber, and virtue a great officer in his house,
knowledge was a companion with him, good inclinations had breeding here, and
good men preferment, and his Countenance did change the face of the times. But
as Cestius in Seneca spoke of Altius Flavius, Senec. Lib. 2. Cont. con. 1.
Ta^mature magnum ingentum non esse vitabo, it proved to be a fatal Truth in
him, that so great a spirit, so soon to appear, was a prodigious sign of the
loss, which ensued by the end of his life, such an Epiphany was the speedy
forerunner of his mortality. No preuentio^ could stay the wheel running at the
Cesterne of his life, his days were numbered, the stealing steps and insensible
degrees of death did approach even like the sun, which maintains a very
swift motion, yet does not the eye perceive it to move. Death the Tyrant,
exercised his rage, with the greatest cruelty upon this Princely subject, and
suddenly cropped of, this fairest of Natures flowers and overthrew him in the
Principal strength, and beauty of his age: at which blow, the world staggred,
and being old and naught it feared the date of its own dissolution. All
natural things, must increase and decline, the sun shall end the course and
consume, heaven shall be wrapped up as a scrowle, and the stars shall fall,
Psalm.
Death does restrain the spirit of Princes and is wonderful among the sons
of the earth. It was the last lesson that ever this excellent Prince was
publicly taught, that though common me^, dare not be acquainted with kings,
yet death is more commonly boistrous and more violent with kings, then other
men, Of all the kings of Judah, from Rhehoboam down to Zedekiah, there were in
number twenty, and six of the^, that is almost a third part slain; of the
kings of Israel from Jeroboam to Oshea, there were also in number twenty, and
ten of them a just half slain, yea look into our own stories and our
English Chronicles are all bloody from the Conquest downward of three and
twenty deceased, eight which is more then a third part slain: whereupon the M.
Wilkinson, who preached at S. James that day his Highness sickned.
Reverend Preacher concluded, it were a most fearful thing amongst the common
sort of men, if one, in every three were subject to such violent death. But
Death durst not come with such violence, nor so rudely intrude into this
Princely Sanctuary, it came in by stealth, yet being entered, it severely did
exact obedience, it expugned all desences against it, and undermining all
Physic, was not content with blood, but commands life: when Natures frame
seemed firm, and a countenance of continuance appeared in this Divine Prince,
Death led him into the unavoidable passage of the farthest and fairest path of
nature, and kept him 13. days in this Labyrinth. In which time, daily
changing, daily dying, HE, though entangled in the snares of disease, yet
avoided the snakes of distrust or distemper, and with a noble Courage like the
sun, did show greatest countenance, in this lowest state, and with a brave
yet blessed behavior in contempt of death, gave a grace to the greatest
extremities the Tyrant could devise: for when the Tragic Monster, stopped his
breath closed his eyes and drew the curtains, the Princely soul took wing
and with troops of Angels fled to heaven.

It is not without warrant, O Death!
that God disclaimeth any interest in thee, thou Infernal yet Imperial
Commander: he has pronounced by the mouth of the wisema^, that he never made
thee, but that thou had thine entry into the world by the very malice and
subtlety of the Devil. Wisd 1.13.2.24.
Have thou hurried about the world, and compassed the whole earth to and fro?
and have thou considered Great Henry, who was perfect and upright, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil, and have thou privily shot at him that was true
of heart? Cursed be thy anger, for it was fierce, and thy wrath it was cruel!
Did thou mistake Iehoshaphat for Ahab? 1 King. 22.32
this holy Prince, for some Idolatrous Pagan? or was thy aim only at this
beauty of the world? Why had thou not gorged thy hollow hellish appetite,
with some blasphemous Rabshaked, or cursed Sanballat, with some aspiring Haman,
or Church-robbing Nebuchadnezzar?

Joseph lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 5. Hosp. de Grig. fist page 48. November.
12 November was the dismal time death fitted for this Tragedy, a time noted by
the Orator dysastrous. It would rather fill a Library, then a volume to descend
to particulars. It was the Month of the Flood, as Josephus among the ancient,
and Hospinian among the modern do affirm: and if ever a second Cataclysme
fell upon the earth, the Tears shed in the sorrow of this loss, may deserve a
Chronicle; many expectations were sunk, and some Gallants went to heave thy
water, sorrow killed them. What hopes were shipwrackt in this storm, and what
a general deluge, over streamed all honest hearts, will never be forgotten,
while that black day, the 6th of November shall appear in our Calendar.
Quintus intendit, Sextus intulit. The 5. day was by the Sons of Beliall a day
dedicated to our destruction, a day by Hesiod, and Virgil, and all the
heathens, as Hospinian collecteth, most ominous: but the Lord was more careful
in the prevention, then we thankful for preservation herein; therefore what
was but threatened on the fifth day was showred down the 6th day, at which time
the storm fell upon us. It was a strange prodigy, that on the fifth day at
night, about the hour of 8. a Rainebow appeared, seeming as it were by the
sight and Judgment of some, to compass the house of S. James. I refer the
Learned to those that have written of prodigies: for my own part I have learned
that lesson, In pluribus Domini operibus non esse curiosum, Eccl. 3.22.
not to be over curious and inquisitiue in many works of the Almighty.
Lactantius much inveigheth against those, De falls. sap. lib. 2. c. 20.
whose chief delight was, Inconcessa / crutari, to search for unlawful
things; and I know that Jacob striving with an Angel, got the shrinking of a
sinew: yet that the covenant of the flood, sold so dysastrously appear in the
month of the flood, in the night beyond the rules of Nature, and course of
custom, did certainly portend somewhat. Indeed after the flood God hung up
his bow in the Clowd, in token of reconciliation unto men, and the bend and
arch of the bow is turned from us, Lib. de operibus creat. cap. 3.
as Zanchius observes. But he hung up his bow, says Ambrose, Arcus habet
vulneris indicium, non vulneris effectum, the bow makes a show of hurting,
but it does not hurt, it is the arrow that wounds. But now God seems for
our sins, to have taken down his bow again, it was an arrow he shot with
the fervency of his fury, the Court was wounded, the Commo^wealth; the Church,
the whole Protestant world received a wound, in the death of Gods deareling,
the Renowned Prince now in heaven.

13 Let all the world stand in awe of their pow erfull commander, that shoots
his arrows of desolation among the Children of men. All the trees of the
Forest must know, that the Lord has brought down the high tree, has exalted
the low tree, has dried up the green tree, and has made the dry tree to
flourish as he threatens Ezekiel. 17.24. and that all the sons of men are under
one common condition. Our lives are short in all things except miseries and
troubles, our continuance is only certain in uncertainty. God has reserved
our times, unknown, because we should be always ready.

Quo propior quisque est, servitque fideliusaegro In partem laethi citius
venit. By how much the nearer men come about dying persons, by so much the
sooner should they consider their own deaths. Wherefore Noble and worthy
Gentlemen, who were sad spectators of the blessed passage of his Princely soul,
sequester all humane wisdom and policy, all Court vanity or glory, look upon
the Glass of mortality; the more ye are entangled either in the delights or
affairs of this life, the more grievous death will be to you. It will be
unseasonable, when the pains and perplexities of the souls departing from two
friends of so long familiarity, the body and the world, shall draw your powers
from true repentance. Seek therefore the Lord while he may be found, blow
the dying fire of your devotion. Look back, and esteem the whole race which
ye have run, as a short step, look foreward, and behold the infinite space
of eternity, wherein by grace ye may continue: here ye have no abiding city,
your service is no inheritance. Lift therefore your minds to heaven, and
discover the most bright and beautiful glory; your life is your candle, wast
it not in idle play, it was allowed you only to light you to ed.

Finally, whosoever of you beholds the present Princely family, and saw it in
her first glory; doubt not but God will make good his word to this house, which
he promised in Haggci, The glory of this later house shall be greater then the
former, Hag. 2.9.
says the Lord of hosts. Lord make this promise good. Bless our most hopeful
Charlemaine with all thy choice graces. Let the enemy have none advantage of
him, nor the wieked approach to hurt him: but for ever let thy mercies compass
him, give unto him the doubled spirit of his now blessed and immortal brother;
indue him with the hand of Gedeon, the heart of David, and the head of Solomon.
Grant him in health and wealth long to live, that at the length he may attain
everlasting joy and felicity through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

