THE MERCHANT. A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES Cross on Sunday the 24. of August,
being the day before Bartholomew fair. 1607.

BY DANIELL PRICE Master of Arts, of Exeter College in Oxford.

Oxford crest

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1608.

TO THE HONORABLE Company of Merchants of the City of London.
Honorable, worshipful, and beloved, at the last I am come to the execution
of my first intention to the dedication of this Cross labor. It was long
since prepared for you, and now at the length presented unto you, the Lord give
all of you a spiritual blessing by it. Some honorable, and many favorable
gales of wind have at length brought home this Merchant unto you, though in my
labor in conducting thereof, I have ventured my credit to the wide sea of
common opinion. I confess it is not the Merchant Royal coming to Solomon,
laden with gold, and silver, ivory, and apes and Peacocks: But yet is such a
Merchant as Solomon in all his riches was not so great as he. It is a holy and
heavenly Merchant careful in search, happy in success whom neither the
tediousness of the way, nor difficulty of the straites could hinder, but that
he passes through the worlds Ocean, with speed, and gain, and glory, Christ
being his Pilot, faith his stern, hope his ancor, Conscience his card, good
works his lading, happiness his landing, and his haven heaven.

At that great Mart whereas I was commanded this business I fitted the time
with this Text, I hope this Text fitted some of you at that time, and my prayer
unto God shall be that you may be fitted by this unto the attaining of your
eternal salvation, and so I commend these labors unto you, and your selves
and them unto God.

From Exeter College this 20. of April. 1608. Yours in the Lord Jesus DANIEL
PRICE.

Matthew. 13.45.46. The kingdom of heaven is like to a Merchant man, that
seeks good Pearls, who having found a Pearl of great price, went and sold
all that he had, and bought it.


RIght Honorable, Right Worshipful, and the rest right well-beloved in the
Lord, ye are all here present before God, to hear al things that are this
day commanded by God, the Lord bless you al, and increase the number of
Christian, faithful, diligent, and obedient hearers. It is not long since that
(being commanded to this place) in a more private audience, Hol. 1.2.3.
I proposed unto you a Text that contained the sum of the Law, and Gospel,
nature and grace, sin and righteousness, life and death, Judgment and
mercy, affliction and conversion, adversity causing man to return to God, and
repentance causing God to turn unto man; which subject I had now followed but
that this time and meeting, and the expectation of so great an assembly do
challenge this day, some other discourse: And therefore I have, (as you hear)
provided a text of trafique, and trading, of buying, and selling, of
merchandise, and marting, of gayning, and bargaining, an example of a good
merchant, of good merchandise, of good policy, of good piety, of a roial
exchange, nay more, of a holy and heave^lie exchange; The kingdom of heaven is
like to a merchant man, etc.

Our Savior in this Chapter by seaue^ parables sets forth the state of the
kingdom of heaven, by the seed, ver. 3. of the tares, verse. 24. of the mustard
seed, verse. 31. of the leaven, verse. 33. of the treasure, verse. 44. of a net,
verse. 47. and here of a merchant in this 45. herein showing the Ministers of
the Gospel their liberty, left to them in performance of their calling, not
only nakedly to lay open the truth, but also to use helps of wit, invention
and art, the good gifts of God, which may be used in Similitudes, Allusions,
Applications, Comparisons, Proverbs, and Parables which tend to edification and
illustrating of the word, that so the weak may be comforted, the rude may be
informed the drowsy may be awakened, the hard-hared may be suppled, the
perverse overwhelmed, and so by all means God himself may be glorified, and
the Hearers bettered. S. Paul, the Doctor of the Gentiles professes of
himself that he became all, unto all men, that he might by all meares, 1. Cor.
9.2.
win some of all. More truly may it be spoken of Christ who was the
Schoolmaster of this master of the Gentiles he became all unto al men, not
only as he was sent Dives diuitibus, pauper pauperibus, flens fle^tibus,
esuriens esurientibus, sitiens sitientibus, Rich unto those that are rich,
poor unto those that are poor, weeping to those that are weeping, hungry to
those that are hungry, thirsty to those that are thirsty, Ambroseir 4. Luc.
as S. Ambrose speaks, medicus ad aegrotos, redemptor ad vendites, ad
errantes via, ad mortuos vita, a Physician to those that are sick, a ra^somer
to those that were sold, the way to those that did wa^der, the life to those
that were dead; as S. Bernard, but because he is truly (...), Cor. 15.
even al in all as S. Paul speaks, 1. Cor. 15.28.
and even al to al in that he seeks to draw al me^, by the very similituds
drawn from their trades of life. So he called the wise Astronomers of the
East by a star. Math. 2 10
He drew the Fishermen unto him by a draught of fish, Luke 5.6.
the Samaritane that came to draw water at Jacobs well he drew by drawing for
her the waters of life. Ioh. 4.14.
To Marie in the garden he appeared like the gardner? Ioh 20.15
To the travelers his disciples he appeared like a traveller. Luk, 24, 16
So also frequently in the Gospel he teaches many by many exemplarie
similitudes, the rich man by the rich man's care and greedy gathering, the Vine
dresser by the vine dressers digging, and hedging, and dressing, The Labourer
by the Laborers hire and working, the builder by the builders laying good
foundation, the husbandman by the husbandmans sowing, the fisherman by the
fisherma^s casting nets and drawing: and here the merchant man by the merchants
buying and selling, Quibus exemplis Doctores Evangelij monentur, by which
examples the teachers of the Gospel are admonished as Musculus observes, to
become al unto al, not only as S. Paul, Mus. in 4. Matthew.
qui omnium ingenijs se acomodovit, who did apply him self to the capacities
of all hearers whatsoever, or howsoever different as Piseator observes, but
even as my Text master verbu^ vitea and vita verbi the word of life, Piscator.
and the life of the word who spoke as never man spoke, by framing themselves
to al men's knowledge and nature as he did by allegories, stories, parables, and
what not. Which may for ever serve to stop the mouths of those traducing and
ignorant Scepticks who vilify the ingenious endeavors, of the best deserving
labors in Gods vinyard, when they be fitted for the day, times, place,
persons, or other circumstances, with stories of husbandry from Columella,
axioms of philosophy from Aristotle, Pet. Mart in 1. Cor. 15. Hem Com. in Tit.
1.12. Pis^. in Tit. 1 ^^. Call. in. Cor 15.33.
aphorisms of Physic from Galen, maxims of Law from Justinian, so using
Demosthenes and Tully for force of speech, Plato for Similies, Lyvie for
historian eloquence, Virgil for descriptions, Tacitus for wit, Seneca for
excelle^ce of humanity, and Plutarch for morality. Sure J am that profound
Austin in his questions, learned Jerome in his expositions, patheticall
Chrysostom in his amplifications, melifluent Bernard in his meditations,
pitthie Cyprian in his persuasions, sweet Ambrose in his allusions, eloquent
Nazianzen in moving affections do make good use of these writings, knowing
that Quodcunque scriptum est etc. whatsoever is written before time is written
for our learning, as for example in this Text wherein (as in all parables Christ
applies them to heavenly uses so more especially in this) he implies thus
much, that if a Merchant in his worldly vocation does so continually follow
his trade in seeking, finding, buying, selling, and exchanging; how much more
should a Christian labor in his profession, and in his conversation to run
his race, to fight his fight, to finish his course? And if the merchant do so
much travel for the attaining of a pearl, how much should a Christian labor
for the precious pearl of his salvation?

The K. of heaven is like unto a merchant man etc. which is (as you see Ho,
Worshipful and beloved) a parable for the Author most blessed, for the matter
most gracious, for the example of the merchant most famous, for the marcha^dise
most glorious, for the gain most desirous, more to be desired then gold, yea
then fine gold.

The Kingdom of heaven is like to a man, not to every man but to a merchant
man, not to every merchant but to a merchant that seeks pearls, nether to
one that seeks al kind of pearls, but to a merchant that seeks good
pearls, nether to one that only seeks but finds, and having found
sells, and having sold buieth, and having bought exchangeth many good
pearls for one, naie all his good pearls for one goodly pearl, a pearl of
great price, and so you see that the kingdom of heaven is compared to a wise
diligent, seeking, finding, buying, selling, exchanging merchant.

The K. of heaven is like to a merchant etc. Beloved the action of this
merchant is not for any small, but for great gain, not for any carnal, but
for spiritual glory, not for any transitory, but for an eternal treasure.
The K. of heaven is like to a merchant etc. What trade more honorable then the
merchant, what merchandise more honorable then the Kingdom of heaven? Ye are
many of you come hither as buiers, as sellers, as merchants, and therefore at
this time what argument more suasible, more plausible, more forceable, more
available then this the K. of heaven is like to a merchant? like to a seking,
finding, buying, selling, exchanging merchant.

diligent, careful, assiduous, industrious, laborious, and indefatigable of al
other kinds of life. 2. The earnestnes required in pursuing this kingdom
expressed in the seeking, finding, buying, selling, exchanging al.

The kingdom of heaven. 2. The thing to the which it is compared. Is like to a
Merchant man. In the 2. observe 1. the wisdom in seeking, who seeks good
pearls, 2. his success in finding, Who having found a pearl of great price,
3. his dear purchase in obtaining, went and sold all that he had and bought it.

These be the limits of my passage, the land marks of my merchant, the
particulers to be entreated of at this time and the proper circumstances of
text. The Lord bless me in speaking, and you in hearing, and give us al a true
understanding in all things in Christ Jesus. First of the first.

1. The thing compared.
In Scripture we had read of many and sundry kingdoms; of the K. of Satan,
the K. of the world, the K. of Antichrist, the K. of Christ, the kingdom of
God, the kingdom of heaven. The kingdom of Satan being that tyrannical
regencie, by which the Prince of darkness rules in the children of
disobedience. The K. of Antichrist whereby the Pope the ille ipse iste
Antichristus does by his false doctrine, blind and afterward bind the
children of darkness to be obedient to him: The kingdom of the world is
properly that humane government by which one or diverse do by Gods ordinance,
direct and govern the children of men. The K. of God, or of Christ, or of
heaven, is that spiritual government begun in every of the elect in this
life, by the glory of grace, and fully accomplished in the life to come by the
grace of glory. There is much difference between the regime^ts of these
kingdoms, the government of Satan's kingdom Tyrannical, of Antichrist
Papistical, of the world Political, of heaven spiritual. Nay there is much
difference eue^ amongst the kingdoms of me^, as they be subdivided in the K.
of the world. Aventinus in his bello Turico could observe that the Empire of
Germany was regnu^ regum, a kingdom of kings, because there were so many
princes in that dominion that the kingdom of France was regnum asinorum,
Aventi. bell. Ture.
a kingdom of asses because of the many taxes and grievous burdens they
endured that the K. of Spain was Regnum hominum, a kingdom of me^, because
they are so obedient to their prince. That the K. of England, was Regnum
Diaboloru^ a kingdom of Devils, because the subject, had so often proved
Traitors and betrayed and deprived their Princes. If the kingdom of me^ differ
so much, how much does the kingdom of God differ from men. The K. of this
world, from the kingdom of the world to come, the kingdom of earth, from the
kingdom of heaven? For this kingdom is that whereof Christ is the king, the
Christians the subjects, the laws the word, the officers the Preachers, the
vicegerents the governors, the enemies of this kingdom, sin, satan, death
and damnation, the weapons of this kingdom prayer, faith hope, and charity.
The place of this kingdom, this world, and the world to come, the continuance
of this kingdom for ever and ever. It is a prepared Mat. 25 44
kingdom. It is an eternal kingdom, 2 Pet 11.
it is a blessed kingdom, ^uc. 14.15
it is a heavenly kingdom. Mat. 24.34
It is a powerful kingdom, a glorious kingdom, an everlasting kingdom, for
his is the kingdom the power and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

In scripture it is diversely taken, Call. in Mat 2.3. Mar. in. Math. 18. 1.
Beza in Math. 5.20.
sometimes pro restitutione ad Beatam vitam, as Master Calvin; sometimes pro
Ecclesiae renovatione, as Marlorat, sometimes pro immortalitate Dei filijs
promissa, as Master Beza; here it is taken pro Ecclesia, as the Common Gloss,
pro Ecclesia milita^ti, as Carthusian, pro Evangelij predicatione as Lyra, pro
Notitia scripturarum, as Aquinas, most properly for the Gospel as the current
of Interpreters do run; for this is that light of the la^thorne of Jsrael,
the knowledge of the Aphorisms of Christ, the wisdom of the Cross, the
Beacon of the soul, the Cubit of the Sanctuary, the Glad tidings the power of
God to salvation, and the Encyclopaedia of al knowledge; Hugo.
because Quicquid in eo docetur veritas, quicquid praecipitur bonitas, quicquid
promittitur foelicitas est; Quia Deus veritas est sine falacia, bonitas sine
malitia foelicitas sine miseria. Whatsoever is taught herin is truth,
whatsoever is commanded is goodness whatsoever is promised is perfect happiness
etc.

It is a mystery 1. Cor. 4.1. a mystery hid from the beginning of the world.
Ephesians. 3.9. the revelation, of this mystery Romans 16.25. It is a new covenant
Ier. 3.31. It is the administration of the spirit. Clem. Alex. 1. stromat.
2. Cor. 3.8. Clemens Alexandrinus observes in the 1 of his Stromato^ that the
law was a schoolmaster to the Hebrews and philosophy a schoolmaster to the
Grecians before Christ, but after the coming of Christ, the law and Philosophy
became handmaids of the Gospel, and the Gospel was the only schoolmaster to
the Jews and Gentiles, to the Grecians and Barbarians, bond, and free, Law and
Philosophy being subject to the Gospel, as Agar and Ismaell to Sara. And
therefore well may the Gospel be called the K. of heaven, because it is the
means to bring Christians to the K. of heaven: so that the doctrine I observe
out of these first words is this. a minore, David thus speaks, Psalm. 19.8.
the Law of the Lord is powerful converting the soul. The testimony of the
Lord is sure, and gives light unto the simple. The statutes of the Lord be
right, and rejoice the heart. The commandments of the Lord be pure, and give
light to the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever. The
judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether, more to be desired
then gold, yea then fine gold, sweeter also then the honey and the honey comb.
Psalm. 19.8. How much more the Gospel that was not delivered with thundering
or lightning, or trembling, or with the Trumpets sounding, or with the earth
quaking, but was delivered by God, received by Angels, proclaimed to
shepherds, preached by fishers, and yet so ioiefully delivered, received,
proclaimed, preached, as that all the host of heaven, the sweet singing quire
of Cherubins, at the receiving of it sang that Angelical and Evangelical
hymn, Gloria in excelsis, Glory be to God on high, in earth peace, good will
toward men. No man I hope doubts of the supremacy, and supereminency of the
Gospel, having such comforts and ioies, and pleasures, as it is received by
men, and such exceeding authority as it is received from God written by the
finger of God, revealed by the will of God, inspired by the spirit of God,
pronounced by the mouth of God, and proclaimed by the power of God, the
knowledge of the gospel, being the knowledge of C. the knowledge of C. being
life eternal, and life eternal being the K. of heaven. This made a father thus
to speak, Nihil in hac vita dulcius sentitur, nihil avidius sumitur, Iugo li.
30. de Anima.
nihilita me^tem ab amore mundi separat, nihil sic animum co^tra tentationes
roborat, nihil it a homine^ excitat ad omne opus bonum. Nothing in this life is
more sweetly affected, nothing more earnestly desired, nothing does so fortefie
the soul, against the assaults of temptation. Nothing does so excite a
Christian, and assist him, in the performance of any good work. of many who
do serve to affect this knowledge, having a name as the Church of Sardis,
having a name that they are alive, when they are dead. Ana^harsis
Anacharsis told the Athenians, that they used their money to no other end, but
to number with all, so sure may it be said of many, that they use the gospel,
but only for a show, only for a name. They can cry, Templum Domini, Templum
Domini, and yet will be ready to persecute Dominum templi, they seem to be as
Aaron, but are as Abiram, to be as Simon Peter, but be indeed as Simon Magus,
to be as Paul a Doctor of the Gentiles when they be but as Saul, a persecutor
of the Christians, to carry the name of Judah, and the mind of Judas. The name
of Cephas, the mind of Cayphas, and so are become as backsliding Ephramites,
or as rebellious Israelites, or as reuolting Apostats, turning the grace of God
into wantonness, by their bare and naked and earth creeping hypocritical
profession. Beloved, beware of such, and set your desires be hearty in purity of
mind, christianly in conversation of manners, and entirely without feigned
dissembling. Let every one of you covet these spiritual things, it shall not be
any usurpation if every Christian, in a spiritual ambition, seek this
kingdom, and desire to be entitled with the name of a king, for as Greg.
observes, Optime Sancti viri sacrae scripturae testimonio reges vocantur quia
praelati cunctis motibus carnis, Greg.
modo luxuriae appetitu^ infranant, modo aestum avaritiae temperant, modo
gloriam inclinant, modo suggestiones obruu^t modo igne^ furoris extingunt.
Gregory,
Worthyly are holy men called by the name of kings, by the Testimony of the
holy Scripture because of resisting the motions of the flesh, sometimes
bridling their luxurious appetites, sometimes tempering the heat of their
covetous desires, sometimes humbling their glory, sometimes repressing the
suggestions of the flesh, sometimes extinguishing the fire of their anger. Let
me^ remember that God has made them spiritual kings, and therefore they walk
worthy of their calling, swaying their thoughts, ruling their wills, ordering
their affections, correcting their corruptions, and managing all their actions,
that so by the loosenes of their lives, the blindness of their minds, the
rebellion of their affections, they become not servants unto sin, so shall
every of you obtain that kingdom where the K. is Verity, the Law Charity, the
honor equity, the peace felicity, the life eternity, even the K. of heaven,
which is here compared to the Merchant, My second observation

The kingdom of heaven is like to a Merchant man.

Erasmus took up in his time against merchants, it is a marvel why J should
compare the K. of heaven, to a merchant, when so few merchants are like to the
kingdom of heaven. His words are these. Negotiatorum genus nihil habet sacram
praeter vnum pecuniae lucrum, cui se totos seu deo consecrarunt; hoc pietatem,
hoc amicitiam, hoc honestum, Erasm.
hoc famam, hoc diuina pariter and humana omnia metiuntur. The trade of
merchants account nothing good or holy, but only the only lucre of money, for
the attaining of which they have dedicated, and consecrated themselves as unto
God, by this they measure piety, amity, honesty, credit, and fame, and al
human, and divine things. I am sure he spoke by the figure of some, in the
name of al, for the stories, and customs of Jews and Gentiles, Grecians and
Barbarians, Infidels and Christians, do acknowledge the necessity, dignity,
and excellency of merchants, Praise of the March.
and they have approved the merchant of al me^, to be the most diligent for his
life, the most assiduous in his labor, the most aduenterous on the sea, the
most beneficial to the land, the glory of his country, and the best pillar
of his common wealth. The word in the original is (...) translated by some
mercator, by some Negotiator. Caesar makes a difference between Mercator, and
Negotiator, Hesich. Caesar. Co^. Iunius.
and Iunius affirms it videntur differ in hoc quod mercator domicilium, and
familiam habet negotiator peregrinatur incertas seeds permutans. The words
differ in this; that mercator has a house and family, negotiator is, he that
still trauaileth, voiageth, venttreth, changing his seats tike the true
Christian, who is ever travailing to change his country, knowing that here he
has noe abiding city, but does seek on to come.

The Common Gloss shows, why this kingdom is for our instruction compared
to the marcha^t. Gloss. Ord.
Quia debemus omnes intellige^do certe, and operando been negotiari. Because we
ought by right understanding and by good practicing to negotiate. There be 2.
things to be observed in the merchant, the profit, 2. Things. Profit. Danger.
and the danger of the Trade, of the profit we shall find what great commodity
came of Solomon, by the Triennial coming of the Navy of Tharshis, that
brought unto him gold, and silver, I vorie, and apes, and Peacoks, even al
things, for profit, and for pleasure 1. Kings. 10.22. where the holy Ghost does
show, that this trade was the occasion of the enriching of Solomon, And surely
it does mutually enrich al kingdoms, making the proper commodities of one
country common to another Witness our gold from India, our spices, from
Arabia, our silks from Spain, our wines from France, and so many other
commodities from other countries, whereby the merchant is the Key of the land,
the treasurer of the kingdom, the venture of his soiles surplassadge, the
combiner of nations, and the adamantine chain of Countries. of the danger
David speaks in the Psalm, They that go down to the sea in ships and
merchandise in great waters, these men see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep, for at his word, the stormy winds arise, which lift up
the waves thereof, they are carried up to heaven, and down again to the deep,
their soul melts within them, and al their cuning is gone Psalm. 107.22. etc.
Which peril and danger of them was the cause that Pittacus held that sea
adventurers, were neither among the living, nor the dead, but did hang between
both, Virg. Aen.
Nauigantes neque inter viuos nec mortuos, for if once the winds did arise,
Vna eurusque notusque ruunt, The east and the weast, the north and the south
winds blow, then be the keele never so strong, the ribbs never so stiff, the
chleets and clampes never so fast set on, yet if the tempest arise al is
enda^gered, if a joint crack al is hazared if a planke shoot up al is gone.
Quamuis Pontica pinus siluae filia nobilis, Horat. Od.
though the frame should be of pine tree, nay though it should be as noble a
Navy as that of Tyrus in Esec. though the bords were of fur trees of Shenir,
the masts of the Cedars of Lybanus, the oars of the Oaks of Basan the banks
of the Ivorie of Chittin, the sails of the imbroidred linen of Egypt. Though
they of Sidon, and Arvad, were her mariners, the wise in Tyrus her Pilots, the
Antie^t of Gebal her Calkers, yet they, their riches, and Mariners, and
Pilots, and Calkers, and Merchants, and men of war, may be overthrown,
perish, sunk, dispersed and come to a fearful ruin. So that of all men J may
say with David, these men see the works of the Lord and his wounders in the
deep. And surely so it is with the state of the godly, in this life in most
danger, subject to the greatest afliction, they are in the waves of the world,
yet they above all others, see the works of the Lord and his wonders, in the
deepest of their misery his power in delivering them, his favor in preserving
them, his mercy in comforting them, his love in careing for the^, his care in
protecting them, though with Paul they be in perils in the City, perils in the
wilderness, perils amongst false brethren, perils among his own, perils in
the sea, as he was most fearfully, the winds being contrary, the sailing
ieopardous. The voyage with hurt and much damage, not of the lading, and ship
only but of their lives, the fearful wind Euroclydon arising, that they were
tossed with an exceeding Tempest, and that they saw neither sun nor stars
apearing for many days. Yet at length, a calm a sunshine, a Iubile shall
come, he turns away the storm and the waves thereof are still, the^ are they
quieted and are glad, and he brings them to the haven where they would be.
Merchant, is this, that the state of a Christian is not an idle vain
speculation, but must be a careful, painful, diligent, walking in his
vocation. Contrario by the Antithesis between the state of the Godly, and
ungodly, under the name of the fool. The fool fouldeth his hands, and eats
up his own flesh. Better is on ha^dful, says he with quietness, then two
handful with labor and vexation of spirit. Prove.
But contrariwise, the wise Merchant, the true Christian, he seeks, he takes
pains, he labors, he endeavors to follow hard to the mark, per Saxa per
ignes currit mercator ad Indos, as the Poet speaks noe pains, Horatius.
noe peril noe danger, noe cost, noe temptation noe opposition can confront him.

Lepidus the heathen was taxt for a sluggish and idle fellow that siting lasie
in the sun shine, cried out vtinam hoc esse laborare! And so surely they that
think Christianity an idle kind of life, god shall laugh them to scorn, we al
have a goal, for which we must run, we al have proposed to us a garland for
which we must wrestle, we are al to have a Crown, for which we must strive, we
are al Mariners, and we must sail in danger, before we come to the haven of
happiness, we are al Trauailers, and we must toil before we come to the Period
of our journey, which is Paradise, we are al laborers, we must endure the
heat and burden of the day before we receive our hire in heaven, we are al
soldiers, our Tropheies be not celebrated till the victory be achieved, we
are al Merchants, we cannot find the Pearl of great price, until we have
sought for many good pearls. O the^ run, wrestle, strive, sail, toil,
labor, fight the good fight, finish the course, seek to be like to the good
Merchant. The K. of heaven is like to a Merchant man.

Merchant here is so studious, careful, diligent, and earnest in good pearls,
that every one of them seek by all means to become heavenly Merchants to
seek, and labor, and endeavor to obtain this Merchandise, to lay up his
treasure in heaven, where neither rust nor moath does corrupt, and where
thieves break not through and steal, that as their trade of life is more
honorable then others among men, so God should be more honored of them then
of other men.

When Jonas did flee from God, and was detected by the voice of God himself,
in the lot, the Mariners raise as great a Tempest in the ship about Jonas, as
was raised in the sea about the ship, and in that amasednesse they dischardge
this peale of Gunshot upon him, what is thy fact, thy travel, thy Country,
thy people, whence come thou? Nay more then all this, what is thy occupation?
Showing in this exquisite inquisition, even in their last interrogatorie, that
every one should have some means, some art, some trade, some calling to live.

Jf many about this Honorable City should be asked this question, you
should find an infinite number that walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, and
stand in the way of sinners, and sit in the seat of scorners, able to answer
no otherwise then Satan did to God, that they live by compassing the earth to,
and fro, and by walking in it. They are vagrants, I may say vagabonds,
wandering persons, as the Planets in the Zodiac, never keeping a fixed place.
Of no endowment, imploiment, art or trade, or calling, or mystery, unless
they profess the mystery of iniquity. Philip of Macedon took notice of two
so lewdly disposed, and took this order with them, Plut.
alterum e Macedonia fugere, alterum persequi iussit, he made one of them run
out of the Country, and the other to drive him.

Another sort there be as bad as these Coniurers, Charmers, Tellers of
fortune, Robbers by land, Pirates by sea, Couseners, Harlotts, Brokers, Vserers,
who by cousenadges, Impostures, frauds, tricks, and circu^ventions, do set
at sale, honesty, truth, conscience, oaths, their soul and own salvation.
The sum of that I would speak in this point if the time did serve is this,
that every man ought to look well, to the lawfulness of his calling. 1. Cor.
12.
God has given diverse gifts but the same spirit, he has given diversities of
spirits but the same Lord, he has given to the warriers a spirit to fight, to
Counselors a spirit to direct, to Judges a spirit to discern, to magistrates a
spirit to govern, to ministers a spirit to convince, to instruct, to reprove,
to direct, to Marcha^ts a spirit to trade, to trasique, to buy to sell, to
exchange, but of every one of them in their vocation, he requires that as he
is holy, so they should be holy. Wherefore beloved, seeing the Merchant in my
Text, is by the singer of God particulerlie pointed at in this place, give me
leave in one word, to remember you, that as your calling is honorable, and
here your comparison is honorable, in that you are compared to the K. of
heaven. O remember beloved, that if ye so much care, and labor, and travel
for earthly things, how much more ought ye to care for spiritual things? I
know not what reason many learned men have to condemn Merchants, and
merchandise so much, that Tully in his book de Republica, should affirm of
the Phenicians, that being Merchants, Tully. Cor. Agryp
they by their Merchandise brought in covetousness, pride, luxury, and al kind
of wickedness into Graecia. Hier in. 3. Ser.
That St. Hierome on the third of Jeremy, calls the Arabians, who much traded
in merchandise, the Thieves of the world. Canhag. Grecian.
That the Carthaginea^s would not suffer the^ to be common with their Citizens.
That the Graecians would not let them enter their City, but caused them to
keep their markets without the suburbs, as Cornelius Agrippa observes, that
Plato admitted them not into his Common wealth. Cor. Agryp
That Aristotle detested the^ and their life, Plato. Art. Laws. Cicero.
that the ancient laws did not admit any merchant to bear any office, or to
be admitted into the Counsel or Senate, that Cicero affirms their geting of
money to be most odious, giving this reason nihil proficiunt nisiquodammodo
mentiuntur, that they get their living by lying. I hope the merchants of our
time, deserve not to be so thought of, many of these merchants were Jews,
Gentiles, Heathens, Infidells, Pirates, Robbers, I hope none such are to be
found among you, for you are Christians, I hope there be some such merchants
amongst you, Theophr. zuingl. Theat. mu^ di. Apolonius
as those of whom Theophrastus testifies Thuriaci exercentes mercaturam
absque omni dolo vendunt omnia. Some such as Apolonius, who having long used
Merchandise at the last became a Phisitio^ of the poor and needy and bestowing
al his time and store in providing necessaries, for poor, aged, lame, blind
people. Some such as that famous founder of that worthy house of the Prophets
St John's Coll in Oxford by whose godly care and liberal maintenance, St Th. Whit
many Reverend, Learned, and religious, have been raised up in the Church, and
common wealth, I mean St Thomas White, who no doubt has received the
blessing of the promise to be clothed in white array, to receive a white
stone, and in that stone a new name, which no man can read, but he that
receives it: some such merchants to be found among you as that worthy Burser
of the Exchange, the beautifier of your City, and founder of that little
Academy Gresham house, by whose love to learning and eternal honor to
himself, St Th. Gres
he has built a place, and provided for ever a large pension for the Readers
of Divinity, Law, Physic, Logic, Rhetoric, Philosophy. Nay I doubt not,
but there be many amongst you who having sought with this Merchant good
Pearls, the glory of God, and the blessing of his Church, and Common wealth,
have had your hands in the building of hospitals, spittle houses, bridges,
Schools, and maintaining of poor Scholars at the University. If there be
such wise, careful, merchants amongst you, then I can assure you, you are free
with the Christian Merchant in my Text, that seeks good Pearls. And I would
to God that every one that hears me this day, were such a Merchant, I can
assure you it would be no hindera^ce to your trade, if as the world is the sea
so our bodies were the ships, our Consciences the Pilots, our heart the
compass, our faith the stern, our hope the Anchor, our prayers the
Merchandise, our good works the oars, our Country to trade in Jerusalem, our
haven heaven, that at length with the good Merchant seeking good Pearls, we
might find that goodly Pearl.

And so I come to the 2. part of my text, which seeks good pearls, etc. 2.
Genesis part Tully.
Here is a personal distinction, a Merchant that seeks good Pearls, Tully
observes a diversity of Merchandise and Merchants, and uses the word
negotiator aerarius, ferrarius, vinarius as we say a Merchant Tailor, Merchant
venturer, Marcha^t Vintner, Merchant Jeweller, as here a Merchant that seeks
good Pearls. A Lapidary, a Jeweler, for every Marcha^t seeks not pearls,
but they that have know ledge in pearls. In the 21. of the Revelation, Revel.
21.
we shall find that the spirit of God sets forth the heavenly Jerusalem
with all the glory, and luster, and splendour, that it is possible to be thought
for the length, and the breadth, and the building, and compass, and the walls,
and the gates, and the streets, and the foundations, that the City had 12.
gates, and at the gates 12. Angels, and the names of the 12. Tribes of the
children of Israel, and the wall of the City had 12. foundations, and in them
the names of the 12. Apostles, that the 12. gates were 12. pearls, and the 12.
foundations were garnished with all precious pearls, being the same kind of
pearls, which were in the high Priests brestplate, Exodus 28.15 or those
wherewith the K. of Tyrus was decked. Ezec. 28.13. as the 70. Interpreters
observe. Many Allusions, allegories, comparisons, similitudes, and paralismes,
are drawn out of these 12. stones, and applied to the 12. Patriarchs, 12.
Prophets 12. Apostles, 12. Tribes, and at the lest, 12. times 12.
interpretations of these 12. stones, but I will not follow them.

Our merchant seeks good pearls. I might here stand upon the color,
splendor, luster, nature, effect and form of pearls: The learned know their
color to be diverse, their splendour to be gracious, their luster glorious,
their nature and effect miraculous, their orbicular form most persit, and
surely many great wonders has God made known unto men, in precious pearls,
but the time J have to spend is precious and J must not linger longer in these.
By good pearls in my text, Auendanus understands virtutes animi, Albertui
legem and Prophetas, Avend. Albertus, Hierome.
Hierome caelestia dona, and others diuersty do expound these words, but the
proper doctrine arising naturally, is this, that it is a Christians part to
seek the best things. The reason of this doctrine is drawn ab universally, al
things do desire that which is good, 3. Doct. ib universally.
and therefore of al, a Christian ought to desire it, and to endeavor to
obtain it. Not that which is good in opinion only, for so good may be evil,
and evil good, not good in imagination only, for so light may be darkness,
and darkness light, sweet may be sower, and sower sweet. But good indeed
bonum qua bonum. The difference that men have made of Good is infinite. St
Austen in his 15. book de Ciuitate Dei out of Varro collecteth 288. opinions
that men had concerning the summitie of goodness. Aug. 288. opinions Concerning
good
So much men have differed, some in missing of their good in reason, some in
religion, some impropriating the name of good to bad, of bad to good.

The philosophers vanity excepted, none were more vain and vile in this then
the Heretics, of all ages who professed that their religion was only true
and good, the rest were most abhorrent and false. Arians Soc
The Arians as Socrates records, affirmed that their religion was only good
and al others false. Ebion Epi. Here Is. 30. Nest. Theo.
Ebio^ as Epiphanius records being a Samaritan yet would be called a
Christian, Nestorius as Theodoret witnesses, seeking to cover religion with
the name of truth, when it was false and lewd. The Turk Sozom. Ec. hist. lib.
6. c. 38.
The Turks as Sozomen records, coming lineally from Agar will be called
Sarazens of Sara. The scripture has taught us that there be some that cry
Templum Domini Templum Domini, and yet would destroy Dominum Templi. Ier. 7.4.
That there be some that call themselves the seed of Abraham that be malicious
Pharisees Ioh. 8.39. That there be some that call themselves Jews, that are
but the Synagogue of Satan. Apoc. 3.9. That there be some that had Abraham to
their father, and yet are not Israe. lites. Ro^. 9.7. That there are some that
have the name of Jesuits, yet have no part of the faith of truth or profession
of Jesus. Some also I fear that are called Christians that have noe part or
portion in Christ. Thus has Satan masked folley in the habit of wisdom,
fasshood in the habit of truth, vice in the habit of virtue, sin in the habit
of godliness, lewdness in the habit of goodness and as Polidor Virgil has
observed of the Romish Church in electing their Popes if any were fearful they
would call him Leo, Pol^virg.
If any cruel, Clemens, if any wicked Pius, if any covetous Bonifacius, if
any most vile Innocentius. So has good been essteemed bad, and bad good, and
so many have deceived themselves in the seeking of good pearls.

ignis fatuus of lewdness under the name of goodness.! O beloved how many
there be whose hopes and desiers, and labors, and endeavors do only lead to
the attaining of vise and transitory, earthly, momentarie, false, affected
pleasures, and delights! Which as Meteors, or Comets, have their local being
for a time, but after vanish and dissolve. Take the counsel of David seek
peace, seek that which is good, Psalm. 37.
and dwell for ever more in the Land of of the living, so shall you be sure to
seek good pearls.

And so I come to the words following, and having found one pearl of great
price, etc. the secunda secundae of my Text, secunda. secundae.
The anchor of our trust, and the author of our truth, in the 7. of Matthew
promises, that if we ask, seek, knock, we shall receive, find, it shall be
given unto us. Who then would not ask, seek, knock, ask with the mouth,
knock with the hand, and seek with the heart? The Merchant here having sought,
finds, seeking many, finds one, seeking good pearls, finds one goodly
Pearl, vnionum vnionem margaritarum margaritam, a pearl of great price. In
pretio pretium nunc est. Aug. charity, Avend.
Some of the Fathers understand this pearl to be Charity, and Love, which is
indeed the Lapis Chimicus, of al other virtues, or as one speaks, the
Godmother of all the rest, as if the rest remained unbaptized, moral virtues,
for without this, faith is idle, hope a vain presuming, holiness hypocrisy,
zeal fury, and this of al others is the mother of sanctify, the daughter of
grace, the mistress of truth, the Glass of religion, the marriage Garment,
and the key of Paradise, above all the rest of the virtues Mayor his, 1. Cor.
13. the bond of perfection, Col. 3.14. the fulfilling of the Law, 1. Tim. 1.5.
The new and old commandment.

Containing all other virtues, as the Philosopher witnesses, sicut causa
vniversalis particulares vel exagonum tetragonum. Others expound this vnans
margaritam, to be celestis vitae dulcedinem, the sweetness of the life
everlasting, the glory of the blessed, their ever lasting pleasure, their
Crown of honor, their laurel of felicity, their inward and outward joy, their
divine Paradise, their heavenly Jerusalem, their fulness of bliss, the eternal
comfort, the peace of God which passes al understanding, when the Lord will
gather his faithful together, and will wipe away the tears from their eyes, and
will crown them with glory, cloth them with gladness, satisfy them with
exceeding sweetness, and make them partakers of eternal happiness, when they
shall see the Courts of the Lord of hosts, having Palms in their hands, Diade^s
on their heads, Haleluiah in their hearts. Having riches without measure, life
without labor, light without darkness, health without sickresse, joy without
ending, and eternal solace without any intercessing.

Or as Hierome understands this pearl of great price to be Sacramentu^
Passionis and Resurrectionis C. the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Hier. Soer.
wherein every Christian does acknowledge, how great blessings, we receive by
the death, and resurrection of Christ, in that he that was liberty, was tied
to make us free, he that was justice, was condemned to acquit us, he that was
life, was executed to save us, and he that was the beauty, the glory, the
wisdom, the power of his father, was defiled, derided, obscured, despised to
preserve us from eternal demnation.

Or some others interpret it to be C. Jesus as St Austen, Aug. C. Ies.
who expounds Margaritam here to be C. Jesus our blessed savior, the only
begotten son of God, the brightness of glory, the express character of his
father, the first begotten of al creatures, the day spru^g from an high, the
seed of Abraham, the son of David, the light of the Gentiles, and the glory
of his people Israel, who is become our wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, Caietan.
and redemption, Sapientia in intellectu, iustitia in voluntate, Sanctificatio
in opere, redemptio in statu, wisdom in our understanding, righteousness in
our will, sanctification in our work, and redemption to our whole man. Anchora
spei, Nauis fidei, terrae sal, caeli Sol, and animae salus, the Anchor of our
hope, the ship of our faith, the salt of our earth, the sun of our heaven,
the salvation of our souls, C. Jesus who was manifested in the flesh, justified
in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, and received to glory.

The doctrine Jobserue is this, that the true faithful man never rests until
he have found the true heavenly soul saueing wisdom. a fine from the end of
his acquisition, for this wisdom is the period, the point the complement, and
perfection, and consummation of his desiers, this is that bdellium and Onix
stone found in the river of Paradise Genesis 1.12. here is true wisdom found
Prove. 1.13. here is the beloved found Cant. 5.8. here the virgins have found
the sweetness of his ointment Cant. 1.2. here the spouse has found him whom
her soul loves Cant. 3.1. here Peter and Andrewe have found the Master Ioh.
1.4. Here is true wisdom, here is the place of understanding, man knows not
the price thereof, for it is not found in the land of the liueing, the Depth
says it is not in me, the sea also says it is not in me. Gold shall not be
given for it, nor the wedge of the gold of Ophir shall be waid with it, Nor the
precious Onix stone, nor the Saphir, not the Crystal, nor the Coral, nor the
Gabish, nor the Topas of Aethiopia, Job. 28.18.19. For it is vnionu^ vnio
Margaritarum Margarita, a pearl of pearls, a Margarite of Margarites, a
pearl of great price.

pleasure,! O let not this pearl be cast before swine, seeing it is certain
security, secure tranquillity safe iucunditie, happy eternity, and eternal
felicity! O then be ye wise, now o ye marcha^ts of the world seek it,
esteem it, respect it, love it, find it, buy it, yea rather then miss of it,
sell al you have to buy it, as it follows. He sold all that he had and bought
it.

The Israelits when they did offer to the Temple, Tertia. secundae.
al did offer, but they did not offer all, Exodus 35.22. The young man in the
gospel was ready to follow Christ but loath to forsake al, Luke 18.22. Anamas
and Saphira were willing to bring a part to the Apostles, but they were loath
to bring al, Ast. 5.3. So that the word al, marreth al, it is a hard, harsh,
difficult, odious, tedious word, to sell al. The Philosophers in scorn of being
entangled with the worlds pleasures, did contemn al, Socrates went farther
then any, and did utterly despise al, Crates went farther then he, and did cast
away al. In the Gospel Zacheus did restore al, Luke 19.8. The disciples did
forsake al, Math. 19.27. S. Paul did vily value al. Phil. 3.8. and here the
Merchant sells al, and all this casting away, dispising, restoring, forsaking
vily valuing al, and selling al, is but a giving of al, and indeed a gaining of
al, for by this Socrates despising al became Crates to cast away al, and Crates
by casting away al did become Polycrates to find al, Polycrat. Not Histor.
for whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother or children, or wife, or lands for Christ's sake, shall receive an hundred
fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life. Tertull. in Apolog.
We read that Democritus put out his eyes for sear by sight to be tempted to
incontinencie, of Thracius, that he cut down his vines for fear of being
drunk with wine of them. Gell. Noc^ Art. 1.19. Lactant. Orig. Eu^ hist l. 6.8.
That Zeno put of his life as a garment, to put on immortality. That Origin
made himself an Eunuch for the kingdom of heaven. That the Jews did offer
their Jewels, Exodus 35.22 Abraham was ready to offer his Isaac, Genesis 22.19.
That Matthew did leave his custom, Math. 9.9. Peter and Andrew did leave their
nets, Matt. 4.26. These did these things for g^ine but al these did not gain
al, because they al did not give al. Over Mercha^t does despise al, contemn
al, forsake al, cast away al, offer al, leave al, s^l al, to but this one only
pearl.

ab vtili, for a greater Commodity, Ab vtili.
who would not change? now look how much difference there is betwixt heaven
and earth, so much is the gain in the exchange.

Another reason may be drawn a necessario, that necessarily he that will
obtain Christ, must forsake al: A necess^rio.
for Christ will not part stakes, he will not take the moitie of the heart, he
cannot abide Isaac and Ismaell in one house, the Arc and Dagon in one Church,
holy and profane fire in one Censor, Christ and Antichrist in one Temple. For
the Apostles ground is that there is no fellowship between righteousness and
unrighteousness, no communion of light with darkness, no agreement between the
Temple of God and Idols, no Concord between Christ and Belial. 2. Cor. 6.14.
Now the Pearl that he buyeth is Christ, he sells all and buyeth this. The
word bought here as Mr. Calu. observes does not signify any Compensation
that man should yield to God for attaining eternal life, ^^lu
for C. proclamation as it were in the beginning of a fair is, Ho every on
that thirsts come to the waters of life, and ye that have no silver come,
buy and eat, buy I say wine, and milk, without silver and without money,
Esaias, 55.1.

S. Ambrose upon the 6. of Luke observes this, ^^nbr. ^^k. 6.
Christus vult se vilem aestimari vt ab omnibus ematur, ne quis pauper
deterreatur. And surely beloved well is it that C. is not to be bought of us.
For such is the vnthriftenesse of Christianity, that if we have any good, any
goodness, any spiritual treasure, any precious pearl, any portion of land
in the land of the living, we are ready to sell it, either to the devil, the
world, or the stesh, those common purchasers. And I am sure it Christ were to
be bought and sold, we should rather sell him, then buy him.

When God came into the world to save man, man went about to destroy God; when
God came to buy man, with the dearest drops of his blood, man went about to sell
God, for 30. pieces of silver, he that came into the world to sanctify it with
his justice, to enrich it with his grace, to instruct it with his doctrine, to
redeem it with his blood, to confirm it with his example, he is sold for 30.
pieces of silver, more vily valued then the basest beasts, that they sold in
their market. I fear me that there be now as cunning buyers, and sellers, as
skilful Merchants as ever there were, even such as would sell Heaven, Angels,
Saints, Seraphins, nay God him self.

Who lives amongst us and knows not our merchant Divines, who being
Ephraimiticall Temporizers will sell the liberty of a good conscience, for favor
and preferme^t? who knows not our Merchant Lawyers who not only sell their
labors but the laws and Justice it self? Who knows not our Merchant
Physicians who sell ignorance, vnskillfulnes, great words, and insufficient
druggs? Who knows not our Merchant vserer who (against so many places of
scripture, the judgment of all the ancient fathers, the Canon, and Civil laws,
the constitutions of al good Common welths, the reasons of heathen
Philosophers, the counsel of the schoolmen, and the opinion of al our Divines
except they be vserers) knows that usury is condemned, as uncharitable, and
Antichristian, and yet this biter, sets his soul at sale, and receives quarter
rent for his salvation? Who knows not our marcha^t monopolists who by gross
engrossing and by art and cunning do arise the price of commodities which by
ordinary course would be much cheaper, and so against the laws and custo^s of
al Common wealths, they are the pilling, polling, Caterpillars of the Common
wealth? For if ever of any it were true, it is of them vivitur ex rapto. Here
might I put up a Siquis for cruel Ahabs, churlish Nabals, De populating
Landlords, incloasing Cormorants, Simoniacall Patrons, and Church-robbing
Nebuchadnezers. O those monsters of men, contemners of God, impious,
sacrilegious Church-robbers, irreligious Iulianists, which do rifle and spoil
Churches of the ornaments, and other riches, lands, and reuenews, which were
given unto God to maintain his house and household. That whereas Churches in
Chrysostomes time were Regijs aulis clariora, now Canescunt turpi templa
relicta situ. That whereas sometimes the Jews brought more to the founding of
the Tabernacle then Moses would; now Christians take from the Temple more the^
ever Jews, Gentiles, Heathens, Pagans, or Infidells would, That whereas
sometimes they were houses of prayer, now they are become dens of thieves, that
whereas sometimes the price of a dog or the hire of a whore, might not be
brought into the Temple, now the price of the Temple is brought to maintain
dogs, and whores etc. And Temples made stables, Shipcoates, store houses for
wool, hogsties, Barnes, maulthouses, Alehouses, nay worse then all this, if this
be not the abomination of desolation what is? O Lord thus have they defiled thy
Temple, and made Jerusalem a heap of stones. Lord take thy own cause in hand
thou did drive the buyers and sellers out of the Temple. O what had thou
done if they had been buyers and sellers of the Temple?

I know notwithstanding the general, and just complaint against the corrupt
custom of many Simoniacal Patrons, that the Lord has reserved for himself a
remnant who in honor of learning and care of the glory of God have made choice
of scholars from the University (to inioie the spiritual preferments, whereof
they were Doners.) who might otherwise long have waited at the poole until
Angels had put the^ in. I must confess Gods favor to my self in this, and
the worthy mind of an honorable Patron; Thomas ^^erley of ^^iston
the Lord reward him and his, according to their own desire. Presidents of this
kind be miracles in our age, wherein the abomination of desolatio^ has got the
upper hand. Let it for ever be worthy the observation, I say worthy the
observation to the terror of these diuils, that Nabuchadnezar, Balthazar,
Antiochus, Helidorus, Pompeiius Magnus, Marcus Crassus had unhappy success and
most of them died miserably by reason of their sacrilegious Church robbing: and
it was well observed 500. years since spiritualiu^ venditores semper egestate
confundi, that the pinchers of spiritual things are at last pinched with
extreme penury; if ever by simony or sacrilege they come to any true profit
let me for ever be branded with the name of a false Prophet. Cursed be such
seeking, finding, buying, selling, purchasing, when God and his Church are
robbed.

Beloved we have not learned C. so and therefore let every of us make this use
to beware of the execrable things not to set our selves at sale, to commit
iniquity, to set at sale our truth, honesty, conscience, oaths, souls, and
salvation, by bryberie, forgery, perjury, hypocrisy, simony, or sacriledg:
the name of such things should not be hard amongst us as becomes Saints; the
practice hereof is the mystery of iniquity, and the practisers hereof they be
the devils tradesmen.

I should now make some application of that has bin said unto the purpose, and
time present, but the time present, does not afford me time, to stay here
upon, and it is but in vain to ad precept upon precept, and line upon line,
seeing you observe nether rule, nor line It will be the more to your
condemnation, if I should stand upon any further application. For how shall I
think to speed in gayning of you when so many, so heavenly, so powerful
messengers, have bin sent to you that have nailed your sins often to this
Cross with the hammer of the word and yet they be as many, as mighty, as
bloody, as silthie, as crying, as fearful, as ever they were. Notwithstanding
my exhortation in a word shall be first to the^, ^xhor.
that at this time are assembled at this great fair, or Mart, or Market, that
they by lying, swearing, forswearing, sell not them selves to Satan, but that
they make a Conscience of their words, works, oaths, asseuerations,
protestations, that in a greedines of gain they call not God to witness, for the
prices of their wares against their truth their oath, Conscience, and
knowledge. O beloved, sell not soule^ and salvation, loose not the substance for
the Accident, heaven for earth, that which will never perish, for that which
does perish. Lastly, my exhortation in a word is to this City in general. O
London thou that sit like a Queen, al thy Citizens being as so many
Mercha^ts, thy Merchta^s as so many Princes nay, as so many polished corners of
the Temple. Remember them, that for all their port, and state* and dignity, and
riches, They are unworthy to enioie the lest of these blessings, unless they
be like to that good Merchant here that seeks good pearls, their carelesnes,
hautines, oppression, wickedness, are but the worms and moathes of their
greatness, and these worms and moaths will corrupt them, and their greatness.
Neither they, nor thou, shall sin with impunity, the mightines of thy state,
singularity of thy government, climing of thy walls, aspiring of thy Towers,
multitude of thy people, cannot make thee secure against the wrath of the Lord.
Thought thou were a City of Palm trees as Jericho or the joy of the world, as
Jerusalem, or the glorious and populous City of earth, as Babylon or the mart
of the Nations, as Tyrus, whose Mercha^ts were Princes, and their Chapmen the
nobles of the world, yet the time may come, that thou may say, I was a Queen
I sit now as a widow, because I have not remembered the day of my visitation.
The L. may stain the pride of thy glory and bring to contempt al thy
honorable. in all the stories, either rude, or polite, profane or divine, I
find no City more honored for Merchants and Mercha^dise, the^ Tyrus in the
prophecy of Ezec. They of Iauan Tuball and Meshech were her Mercha^ts. Ezech.
27.
They of Togarmah and Dedan were her Merchants. They of Aram and Damascus were
her Merchants. They of Judah and of Israel were her Merchants. They of Sheba
and Ramah were her Merchants. They of Haram and Cameh and Eden of Sheba, Asher,
and Chilmad were her Merchants, and they did bring fair horses and mules, and
Unicorns horns and Peacocks, and Emeralds, purple and broidered work, and
fine linen, and pearl, and Coral, and wheat, and wine, and honey, and oil, and
bawm, and Cassia, and Calamus the chief of al spices, of al precious stones,
and gold, and raiments of blew silk, and broidered works, and rich apparel. So
that by her Merchandise she was replenished and made glorious in the midst
of the sea. And yet for all this, in the end of the chapter, the L. threatens
this fearful desolation to Tyrus for her abominable sins. Thy riches, and
thy faires, thy Merchandise thy mariners, thy Pilots, thy Calkers, and all the
occupiers of thy merchandise, and all the men of war that are in thee, and all the multitude which is in the midst of thee shall fall in the midst of the
sea, in the day of thy ruin. Thy suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry
of the Pilots, and in their mourning they shall take up this lamentatio^, what
City is like unto Tyrus so destroyed, and the merchants among the people shall
hiss at thee thou shall be a terror and never shall be any more. Beloved it
is a terrible, fearful unspeakable judgment. But you see greatness of sins will
shake the foundations of the greatest city upon the earth, and though their
heads stood among the stars, yet he is able to bring them into the dust and
rubble; multitude of offenses will consume multitudes of me^, and you know many
thousands thousands have been swept away in your City. The days can speak
and the years can witness, how the plague has been a leidger for many
years amongst you.

O my beloved in the bowels of C. Jesus. at the length remember that the fear
of the Lord is your safest refuge, righteousness your strongest bulwark,
sobriety and sanctimonie of life your wales of Brass, Piety your best
pearl, C. Jesus your best Jewel. O then seek, search, labor, endeavor, find,
buy this pearl, this peace, merchandise in this til he come that will come to
judge the quick and the dead! The Lord make you rich in his wisdom, and make
you al wise in Christ Jesus. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

