A VERY GODLY and Learned Sermon, treating of Man's mortality, and of the
estate both of his body and soul after death.

Preached at Denham in Suffolk.

AT The celebration of the solemn and mournful funerals of the right
worshipful Sir Edward Lewkenor Knight, and of the virtuous Lady Susan, his
wife, both at once.

By M. Robert Prick, their beloved and faithful Minister: now also since that
time (to the increase of our sorrow for the loss of so excellent a light)
departed this life.

Man goes to the house of his age: and the mourners go about in the street.

Eccles. 12.5. Yet,

Christians must not mourn as other which have no hope.

1 Thessalonians. 4.13. For,

To be loosened and to be with Christ, is best of all.

Philip. 1.23. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1608.

To my loving friend M. Timothy Prick, Minister of the word of God, hearty
Salutation in the Lord.
MY well-beloved, and very dear friend in the Lord: as God of his great goodness
and abundant mercy has vouchsafed you no small favor, in that you are not
only the natural son of a good man, but also the son of a very faithful
Minister of his holy word, thereby also a spiritual Father unto you in the
Gospel of Jesus Christ; even to you a son of his best desires, and most
comfortable hope, an heir to many his earnest prayers* and supplications to
God, a behoulder and witness of his holy life, a sheep of his dear flock,
and now a pastor of those who were lately his sheep: so I beseech you for the
Lords sake, to endeavor after no small and vulgar fruits of duty and thanks
to God your heavenly Father; nor of imitation in respect of the excellent
virtues of your both natural and spiritual Father.

Lay sure and fast hold, I pray you, on the blessing of his holy and fervent
prayers, wherein with great wrestlings, he entreated God often, that he would
make you an instrument of greater glory to him, in foyling the devil, and
furthering the salvation of his people much more then he thought himself to
have attained unto: though in truth he quitted himself exceedingly well, and
greatly prospered in that spiritual fight and dangerous battle, and in
promoting the salvation of very many.

Thus comfort you us dear friend, the dear and loving friends of your worthy
Father: thus rejoice you the hearts of Gods people: and thus tender the good
peace of your own conscience I heartely entreat you. Where much has been
bestowed, there much may justly be looked for: and therefore as good ground
having received the best seed, yield you your best endeavor that you may bring
forth fruit after the fullest measure even to an hundred fold. Among other
prouocations and encouragements let the present Sermon of your Father be as the
lift of a strong shoulder to further you (as long as you shall live) in the
care of a godly life as he constantly lived: that growing to like perfection
and ripenes of all holy ministry, you may after ma^y years die the like death
of the righteous that he died.

In the mean season, give me leave to commend it unto you, as a most
artificial picture, better representing to the view of your inward sight, the
spiritual image of your Father: then any the skilfullest Limmer could have
drawn his outward shape, to the beholding of your bodily eye.

Esteem it, dear friend, as a very worthy and memorable monument of that
pure and pithie manner of preaching which he used: and as a notable president
set before you, and before us all; let us follow it with as prosperous a
pursuit as we may. And if we cannot attain unto it: yet let us press toward
it as near as we can. We all know what a blessing God gave to his sincere
and faithful dealing: that is, so plentiful a blessing, as is seldo^e to be
seen upon the ministry of any in a far greater congregation.

Now further, that which remains: join with me in request to the right
worshipful, to whom your Father did, both with hand and heart, while yet he
was living, dedicate this memorable gift, (a testimony of his special love,
from a most parentlike and pastoral affection toward them) that they will
accept it as one little silver strea^e, of pure and precious water, derived
unto them from that more full and living spring, which was wont to flow daily
more plenteously, to the sweet refreshing and comfortting of their souls. And
albeit his person be now gone, and his pastoral care over them has had an
end, (which if they had continued to this day, would surely have procured their
most ready and thankful accepting of the same) let us be suitors, that the
thing it self being of great worth, may be never the less regarded of them:
remembering still that they must give an account unto God, how they have
profited by his holy ministry. In which hope, let us for conclusion, (omitting
all complements wanting) beseech God the only full supplier of all defects: to
bless the holy doctrine of this one blessed Sermon, to as many good ends and
purposes, both to them, and to our selves, and to many other, as any one Sermon
may be blessed and sanctified unto.

And thus with my most hearty prayer, I do commend both your self, and that
right worshipful family, and all of the families of the Church of God, at
your and their little Denham, to all further and more full blessing of God.

Your loving friend and brother in the Lord. ROBERT ALLEN.
London, this 2. of May. 1608.
To the right worshipful and Christian posterity, the Sons and Daughters
of the right worshipful Sir Edward Lewkenor Knight, and of the virtuous Lady
Susan Lewkenor his wife. Grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
THE Prophet Isaiah by the motion of Gods holy spirit, did long since in great
zeal utter this holy saying. The righteous perishes, Isa. 57.1.
and no man considers it in heart, and merciful men are taken away, and no
man understands that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.
Which, as it has in former times been true, so is it proved most true in
these our miserable and desperate days: as may hereby appear, for that
although the Lord withdraws and takes out of this world by death many of his
principal and excellent servants, thereby setting up (as it were) prodigious
Comets, to premonish all men not only of the uncertainty of this natural life,
but also that his judgments are near hand: yet few do so much as once turn
their eyes toward this hand of God; and fewer do make use thereof, and apply
it to their heart, for the increase of true godliness and reformation of life.

Against which estate and disposition graceless, and more then brutish, some
what was uttered at the Funeral of your said worthy Parents: which although
it has hitherto lain in silence, and been wholly suppressed, yet now by the
grace of God it is come to light.

The discourse (I confess) is homely and rude: and the rather, because that in
the extreme cold when it was delivered, the natural instruments and parts
of the Preacher, did perform their duties not so well as at other times. But
seeing it does contain nothing but the plain and simple truth, there is no
cause why it should fear the curiosity of proud carpers, and deprauers.
Whatsoever it be, I do here present it to you all jointly, and that for
diverse reasons.

The first is, in regard of the manifold benefits and favors, which I and
mine have enjoyed both from your selves, and at the hands of your said
deceased Parents: which because I can in no wise requite, I content my self
with this slender signification of thankfullnes (following therein the example
of many in all times, who have by small gifts, as of a root, or water taken
up in the hollow of the hand, expressed their love, and dispatched duty
toward great persons) and do by prayer commit a fuller recompense to be made
by him who has promised not to forget a cup of cold water bestowed upon any
of his.

Secondly, for that the treatise does not only put you in mind of your
frail and mortal condition, even now in this your youthful and flourishing
estate; that so you might walk in fear, and every hour fit your selves
for the Lords calling of you away by death: but also contains, or rather
briefly touches diverse necessary points of Christian doctrine and religion:
which may serve as a remedy against the horrible profaneness, Atheism, and
contempt of GOD, which (as some great flood) does at this time, ouerflow the
bancks of this whole Land.

Lastly, to stir you up (although forward of your selves) to follow and
tread in the holy steps of your worthy Parents gone before: the traces
whereof, are in this Sermon truly and faithfully set down, without all
flattery or ostentation.

They were both of them careful in their life to provide for your good and
happy estate, both in this life, and the life to come. If therefore you shall
after their death, run on in the course of righteousness, and holiness, of
wisdom, temperance, zeal, and love to religion, with all other good virtues:
you shall not only honor them here, but also shall shortly meet with them in
the kingdom of heaven; where children and Parents shall incessantly together
praise and glorify God for evermore.

You are (as it were) set upon a stage: the eyes of many are fixed upon you.
If you do well, you shall satisfy the expectation of your friends, and make
their hearts rejoice: if you do ill, your enemies will be glad, and your well
willers lament.

In the mean season, receive, I beseech you this small gift, with the same
affection wherein it is delivered by his hand, who does daily in his unworthy
prayers, crave earnestly of our merciful Father, all good blessings and
graces in your behalf: and (when they are according to his promise, performed
to you) will think all labors and endeavors, in what respect soever, fully
satisfied. And thus in have, I commend you to the blessing and tuition of the
same Almighty God.

Yours as his own in the Lord. Robert Prick.
Denham in Suff. September. 1606.
Epitaphium.
MAgnorum seruent nomen, monumenta Virorum
Marmorea: his, Pietas, marmora vera dabit.
Stemmatis antiqui, faciant insignia claros:
Virtutum, his cumulus, fixa columna manet.
Isa. 57.1.2.
AVreum Par amisimus (heu) miselli,
Stemmate insigni, pietaterara:
Nec valet damnum reparare nobis,
Aurea moles.
Iustus e terra perijt, nec est qui
Curet, aufertur medio benignus:
Interim, mundus sine cura, in aurem
Dormit vt ramuis.
Tollitur iustus, perijt benignus,
Ne malos casus videant propinquos,
His quetem (nemine pensitante)
Numine dante.
Corpus infirmum tumulus recondit;
Continet fulgens animas Olympus:
Gloria plenum, dies and supremus,
Iunget vtrumque.
Mente quis sanus (sua si darentur
Vota) nondum secla beata malit,
Cord suspirans; cito (vece clamans)
Christ venito.
Richardus Blackerbie. Mr Richard Blackerby Dyed in the year 1648 in his 74th
year.

F.H. Van Houe. Sculp.


A Sermon preached at Denham in Suffolk.
I Wished, that the charge of preaching at this present, had been laid upon the
sholders of another more fit and able for the purpose then I am: but seeing the
duty does fall upon me so necessarily, that I cannot put it from me, either
with honesty, or with a good conscience; I must needs make trial by the
assistance of God, what I am able to perform.

Wherein, because I mean, not so much to apply my self to the dead, as to
the instruction and edification of the living: I have therefore chosen a Text,
fit as I hope, for the present purpose and occasion out of the last chapt. of
Ecclesiastes, 7. verse. in these words.

And dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to GOD that
gave it.

The principal ground or scope of the whole book of Ecclesiastes, is that all
things in this world are exceeding vain.
The chief and principal point or ground of doctrine, whereabout Solomon (the
penman of the holy Ghost) is principally occupied in this book, is briefly
propounded and set down in the 2. verse. of the 1. chapt. and that in this
manner; Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is
vanity. Whereby is signified, that neither true comfort, nor assured
happiness does consist in any creature under the sun: The meaning of the
same doctrine, in the general seope of it.
and all to the end that the holy Prophet, or rather the Spirit of God, might
call men's minds back from too much study and delight in earthly and worldly
things, The general end or use of the doctrine.
unto the knowledge and fear of God; wherein only true comfort and
felicity are to be found. And for this purpose, he turns his eyes round
about the huge frame of this world, The reasons of it are mame.
and by a divine spirit, does search into the nature, properties, effects, and
events, with the mutable estate of all things contained therein: from all which
he gathers sundry and manifold arguments, whereby he does often prove and
conclude the same proposition: namely, that all things under the compass of
heaven are nothing else but vanity and vexation of mind.

The last reason of all (and the same a very special one) is contained in the
present text taken from the consideration of man's mortality.
After all which arguments, follows this argument, which I have read, And dust
return, etc. taken from the death and dissolution of man. The reason why this
argument, being so strong and perswasiue, is put in the last place; is not so
much in regard of the order and degrees of man's life younger or oulder, whereof
he treated a little before: not yet to prove that both man himself, and all
things whereof he is Lord and possessor, The use which is to be made from the
same last reason: namely, that we be careful to spend our life in well
doing.
are frail and transitory: but for another more weighty and principal end;
namely, to premonish all men to give themselves in their life time to well
doing, seeing that after this life is finished, a man can perform nothing,
either for his own comfort, or for the benefit of other. Which is a most
infallible truth, The reason why such use is to be made.
as is clear and manifest, both by natural reason and experience: as also by
the light of the word of God, which is the principal judge and determiner of
all things. The first reason is from experience and the light of nature.
And for the first; in death we all know that the instruments and faculties of
the body, cunning, and skill, matter and opportunity, do all perish
together. Whereupon it follows, that all actions and duties either
acceptable to God, or profitable to man, do utterly cease, and have an end.

The second reason is taken from the word of God.
But for a second more clear and certain proof: the Prophet David Psalm. 6.
verse. 5. says: In death and the grave is no remembrance of God. That worthy
King Ezechias, pleading with God, Psalm. 6. verse. 5.
for longer continuance of life, utters these words: Esa 38.18.
The grave cannot confess thee, death cannot praise thee, they that go down
into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth, but the living, the living, he shall
confess thee, as I do this day. To this purpose Job affirms, Job. 3.17.18.
that In the grane all sorts do rest and cease from their labor, and duties
wherein the living are exercised and toyled. We will therefore conclude with
the 9. Chapter and 10. verse. of this book, Eccles. 9.10.
where the Prophet exhorts all me^ in these words. All that thine band shall
find to do, do it with all thy power, for there is neither work, nor
invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whether thou go.

Exhortatio^s are often set down in the word of God to stir us up to make the
use above mentioned from the consideration of our mortality. Ioh. 12.35.
In regard hereof, the holy Ghost in sundry places does exhort us, that we
should in our life time when fit occasion is offered, perform all good duties
which are commanded in the word of God. As for example, our Savior Jesus
Christ to this purpose, says unto the people: John. 12.35. ver. Whilst it is
light, take the opportunity offered: because when the night comes, no man
can work. The Apostle Paul in the 6. 2. Cor. 6.2.
Chap. of the 2. to the Corinthians, 2. ver. says: Behold now the accepted
time, behold now the day of salvation. But yet more plainly, the same Apostle
exhorts: while we have time, let us do good to all: Galat. 6.10.
that is, while we have time and opportunity (which only consists and
remains in this life) let us perform duties: for when opportunity is once
gone and past, it can no more be called again, then the wind or lightening,
when they are passed from one part of the heaven to the other.

So that it appears by all these testimonies, that it is the will of God,
that whilst men live; and before their life is expired by death: they should
bend themselves with a^ll their strength, while time is granted to them) to
omit no Christian duty which they owe unto Almighty God, and unto their
brethren. Whereunto, because we are negligent and untoward (as unto all other
duties and courses which the Lord in his singular wisdom has appointed)
therefore it is good to consider certain reasons, Other reasons to the same
end.
whereby we may be persuaded and forced thereunto.

1. From the example of the brute creatures which ale diligent in their kind.
And first of all, we will begin with brutish and unreasonable creatures (as
the Pismire, the Storke, the Crane, and the Swallowe) whose nature and
property is, as the Scripture reports, to discern the fit seasons to
provide for their own commodity and benefit; from those times wherein they
cannot provide: and therefore take the opportunity of the first, before the
latter comes. And for proof hereof, Pro. 6. Chapt. 8. verse. Pro. 6.8.
the holy Ghost speaking of the Pismire, says, that she having no guide,
governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in summer, and gathers her food in
harvest. And the Prophet Jeremy 8. Chap. 7. verse. says, Ier. 8 7.
Even the Storke in the air knows her ap pointed times, and the Turtle, and
the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time of their coming. And to those are
all men sent, to learn this lesson: that fit opportunity is to be taken, when
it is offered; least it be afterward denied.

The 2. reason from the diligence of men in their worldly affaites.
But if they be ashamed to learn of such vile and base School masters (as
indeed they have cause to be ashamed; then let them learn of Mariners,
husbandmen, and men of all trades: who (lest they should be prevented) do
take fit occasion and opportunity, to perform all actions, both by sea and by
land; which may make for their worsdly gain and benefit. Much more then,
should christians do the same, for the obteining of heavenly and divine things.

The 3. reason is the singular fruit of a good life, which follows after
death.
Besides this, it is most certain, that as men have lived, so shall they die.
If they have done no good, nor brought forth christian fruits in their life
time: death shall come upon them sodenlie in that estate, The 4. is the most
woeful event that follovveth upon a wicked life.
and as a mighty and fearful axe or instrument of the wrath of God shall cut
them down as fruitless trees. And all to the end, that they may be cast into
unquenchable fire: where is no place of doing, but of suffering importable
torments; except to weep, howl, and gnash the teeth, be doing. A matter
plain and clear in the rich glotton. Luke 16. Where it is evident, that after
he had spent his time not in well-doing, but in pride, excess and pampering
his belly; sodenlie he died, and was cast into the place of torments, where he
could neither provide for himself and his own deliverance, nor for the
benefit of his friends here upon earth: but desires water to cool his
tongue, and relates in what extreme misery he was continually vexed and
tormented.

The 5. reason is the comfort of a godly life, even here in this life.
There is no greater comfort under heaven, nor security in all desperate
temptations of Satan; then the conscience of a life well led: as may appear
in the example of Job, in the whole 31. Chap. Wherein it is evident, that he
armeth himself against Satan, and all instruments which labored to bring him
to despair; with no argument so much, as by calling to mind, how
religiously, and justly, he had behaved himself in the former course of his
life; and hereby carried away a most renowned victory.

The 6. reason is the discomfort of conscience in time of sickness, specially at
the hour of death, for neglect of leading a godly life.
Furthermore, many in sickness and great extremity (specially at the hour of
death) are troubled, and do lament; for that they have suffered the former
part of their life, to pass a way without doing any good duties, either
toward God or their neighbor: but all in vain. For oftentimes, the season
being past, and death oppressing them; their breath is shut up in horrible
despair: whereupon insueth eternal misery and destruction.

The doctrine concluded with an earnest exhortation. Front capillata, post
est occasio calua.
Let all persons therefore, old and young, men and women, of what estate,
degree, and quality whatsoever; lay hold upon fit time and oecasion:
remembering what the very heathen have said, that occasion wears a bushe
before, but is balde behind; so that being gone, it cannot be laid hold one
afterward.

Oh that christians had wisdom to consider the exceeding goodness of God, who,
where as he might have cut of their life, so soon as they were borne; he
grants them longer time; and fit opportunity, to prepare themselves for the
obteining of everlasting life and happiness. Which metcie of God, if they
lightly pass over: they show themselves most unthankful to God, and enemies
unto their own souls.

And thus much for the reason, why the argument of the death and dissolution of
man follows in the last place: and now, The text divided into two parts.
let us come to the Text it self, which contains two parts.

1. A description of death. The 2. is the estate of the two general and
principal parts after death.
The first part of the text, what death is.
Death then is nothing else, but a separation of the soul and body a sunder:
or, a seuering and divorce of the soul and body. This description is not
expressed plainly, and in so many words: but it is necessarily concluded
from the Text. For if death do separate the soul and body, as far one from
the other, as the heavens are distant from the earth: the^ does it follow
necessarily, that death is a separation of the soul and body. Which is also
manifest, by diverse phrases and forms of speech in holy Scripture: by which
we may (by the way) clearly see, that death is not a small or light punishment
of sin; Death a great punishment of sin.
but great, heavy, and terrible. For is not that a great and mighty Tyrant,
that does rend a sunder things that are knit, and joined together, with so
strong and wonderful a band, as is the body with the soul? And is not that a
heavy and fearful thing, that does part two dear friends one from an other,
who should have lived in an eternal union of joy and happiness, had not sin
been? Death justly terrible to all flesh.
In regard whereof, it is no marvel, if all flesh (even the best of Gods
children) do tremble, and are astonished at the remembrance of death, 1. Cor.
15.
as being a terrible enemy and a very cruel Tyrant.

Death common to all men: and the reason why. 1. For all have sinned.
But whatsoever death be, it is certainly a state and condition common to all
the posterity and generation of Adam. All men must die, and none can avoid the
stroke of death. For if death be the fruit or effect of sin (as it is most
certain, as appears Genesis 3.) then, seeing all men have sinned, partly in
Adam, partly in themselves: it follows of necessity, that death reigns,
and has dominion over all mankind. Romans 5.12. Which thing may yet be proved,
and made more clear. First of all from the Scriptures.

Secondly, by continual experience.

From the Scriptures, two ways.

2. It is Gods decree and just sentence.
First, by the sentence of God pronounced upon all mankind.

3. God is faith full in executing his sentence as experience confirms.
Again, by the execution of that dreadful sentence.

For proof of the first: It appears, that the Lord gave charge to Adam in
his innocence, that he should not eat of the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil: threatening, that if he did eat, The proof and amplification of the
first and second reason.
or taste thereof, he should die the death. But Adam did eat of the tree
forbidden, and so trespassed against the Commandment: and therefore God forth
with gave sentence in these words; Earth thou art, and to earth thou shall
return. That is, I have decreed and appointed as a punishment for thy sin;
that both thy self and all thy posterity contained in thy loins, shall not
only be subject to eternal misery, but also shall suffer a corporal or natural
death. Whereupon it follows, that death is most certain and inevitable. For
why? all men must of necessity taste of death: it cannot be shunned or
avoided. And as the sentence it self is certain, and vnrepealeable,
proceeding from the mouth of him that is truth it self, and unchangeable: so
the execution of that sentence, is so certain and infallible, that no means
or prerogative can resist, or prevail against it. The proof and amplificatio^
of the third reason.
Neither length of days, nor wisdom, nor riches, nor honor, nor strength:
no, not that excellent gift of regeneration. The ancient Fathers, The
Patriarks though they lived long, yet are long since dead. Salomo^ though most
wise: yet is dead. Samson, though most strong, yet he is dead. David, Moses, all
the Prophets, though most holy in their times, are dead.
and Patriarchs before the flood, lived very long, some 700. some 800. some
900. years: yet it is said of every one, he died and was gathered to his
Fathers. Solomon was wise, and excelled all Kings before him, and since his
time, in riches and glory. Sampson was endued with extraordinary strength.
David was a man after Gods own heart. Moses saw God face to face. The
Prophets were endued with a great measure of sanctification: yet the Prophet
Zachary ioynes them all together in one state of mortality, in the first Chap.
verse 5. Your fathers where are they? and do the Prophets live for ever? Zach.
^.5.
Upon this ground, the Holy Ghost in diverse places of the Scripture, affirms
that man borne of a woman is of short continuance, and full of trouble: that he
shoots forth as a flower, and vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not.
That a man can by no means redeem his brother, that he may live still and not
see the grave. Yea, as a thing commonly known, death (in a prouerbiall manner)
is called the way of all flesh. So loud cries the holy Scripture, that all
men are subject to death. But if this voice were silent, yet experience does
speak out the matter so plainly, that the greatest dullard and rude person may
understand. For to what end serve so many Funerals of all sorts, All sorts of
me^ die every day.
old, young, rich, poor, noble, and base? To what end, so many Graves and
Sepulchers, in the places of burial? so many dry bones cast out of the
Graves? but to set forth visiblie before our eyes, the mortal estate of
mankind.

Whereby is discovered, and laid open, the extreme blindness and dullness of
the most part. For although they be convinced both by the testimony of God and
nature, that all men must die: yet reap they little or no benefit by it. The
greater and more gross is the sin of all that profit not by the
consideration of death, in the care of a godly life.
For some lie rocked so fast a sleep in security, and in the pleasures of
this world, that they think no more of death, then the brute beast that is
without understanding. Other can discourse finely of death, to make show of
their eloquence and learning: and yet will not by serious meditation, apply
the remembrance of death to their hearts. Finally, very many do quake and
tremble at death, who yet for all that, use no means that they may die well.

I will not at this time, recite the causes and reasons hereof, which are
diverse and manifold: only I may conclude, that all these sorts are in a
miserable case.

The duties of all Christians in respect of their mortality.
For avoiding whereof, we must take a clean contrary course; which stands
herein, that we do seriously meditate of death, and as it were continually set
it before our eyes: and that not for discourse, or speculation; but for more
weigntie and profitable ends.

1. We are to withdraw our hearts from all inordinat love of this world, and
the transitory things thereof.
And first of all, to the end we may withdraw and weane our hearts from too much
delight in this natural life; and in the things that belong thereunto. And
there is great reason thereof. For seeing that both life, and the things of
this world, are frail, transitory, and uncertain: true felicity cannot
consist in them. How much better then were it for men, by the consideration
hereof, to set their affections, not on things below, but upon things that are
above: and to lay up their treasure in heaven, where neither rust, nor moath
can consume, nor thieves break through and steal?

2. We are to humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and his
fearful sentence of death against sin.
The second end, is to beat down the pride and insolency of men, whereby
they are puffed up as though they were Gods immortal here upon earth. From
which conceit (as from a cursed sink) do flow blasphemies against God;
outrages, do flow blasphemies against God; outrages, injuries, and violences
against men; yea, a thousand mischiefs and abominations; whereat the Sun in
heaven, does as it were stand amazed. For which cause, the hand of the Lord
does strike the world with infinite calamities and judgments.

3. We are to lead our lives in godliness, and use all good means there. of,
that we may die with comfort.
The last and special end, is, that men may be induced to apply their hearts
unto wisdom; that is, that by diligent and careful using the holy and good
means, which God has set up in the church (as the ministry of the word and
Sacraments, etc.) they may thereby attain such a measure of faith, repentance,
and holiness, that they may not tremble at the terrible face of death: but
(knowing, and being persuaded that his sting is pulled out, and his weapons
broken by the virtue of the death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ) they
may entertain him as a friend, and yield to him as to a Porter or Harbinger,
appointed by GOD, to make a way for all the faithful, unto the place of
everlasting happiness.

Again, that they may not die in trouble, or vexation of conscience: but in
such a sweet tranquillity of mind, that they may with Simeon say: Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace. Luc. 2.29.


Finally, that they may not see the mouth of hell gaping to devour and
swallow them up: but by the eyes of faith, behold with Stephen, the heavens
open, and the Lord Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God his Father,
ready to receive their souls.

It is a special grace of God, which teaches men to make the former good uses
from the consideration of our mortality.
We see here, the singular fruits that grow from the seriours meditation of
death, and the due preparation for it. Which yet is not a work of nature, but
proceeds from God and his holy spirit: without whose virtue and operation,
nothing (be it never so clear, never so great and forcible) can work
effectually in the hearts so great and forcible) can work effectually in the
hearts of men. Which thing was so well known to Moses, that in the 90. Psalm.
he cries out, And therefore we ought to pray earnestly to God for so
special a grace Psalm. 90.12.
Teach us O Lord so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom. Which example, every one of us are to follow; not only because it is
recorded in Scripture: but because that sudden and unprovided for death, does
bring so many evils with it: to wit, such fear and trembling, such horror,
anguish, and despair: that many wish at the first assault thereof, that they
had never been borne, nor seen the light of the sun: as we have had too
many examples in these our days.

Well therefore did these two worshipful persons, who long before their death
and dissolution, The godly couple late departed, were notable examples right
worthy our imitation herein.
) had not only the name of death, and of the end of this life, often in their
mouths: but by all good means fitted themselves for the coming of the Lord.
Which many neglecting, death comes sodenlie upon them, before they can
prepare oil for their lamps: and so are they shut out of the Tabernacles of
eternal life and happiness; and cast down into an estate most miserable, and to
be trembed at of all Christians.

And thus much of death, with the certainty and universality thereof.

The second part of the Text.
Now let us come to the second point of the Text: namely, of the estate of the
general and principal parts of man, after death.

The parts are two, The estate of man after death both in body and soul.
The Soul, and The Body.


Of which the holy Ghost speaks severally, and distinctlie.

But because the body is more visible, and best known; The estate of the
body. The original of the body is from the earth. And this consideration
te^deth very aptly to the illustration following after, both in, and by death.
Genesis 2.7.
he begins first with that: which he describes two ways. First, in it
self.

Secondly, by relation: that is, by reference to the place to which it
belongs, or whereunto it is to be committed.

In it self, by this word dust; in the original [He gnaphar] noting out the
matter whereof the body is made, agreeable with the history of the Creation.
Genesis 2.7. in these words. The Lord also made man of the dust of the earth:
where the self same Hebrew word is used.

The reason why it pleased God to make the body of man of the earth.
The reason why God mad the body of man of such base matter, and does so often
mention it in holy Scripture; was (no doubt) to humble man, and to repress
that insolency wherewith he might easily have been puffed up, in regard of
his excellent estate in comparison of other creatures: if he had not set before
his eyes, both his original, and also what manner of mansion place, or
dwelling that is, It is a most effectuallmeanes to humbleman
wherein th soul is still to be lodged. For these are very forcible
Arguments, to abase and cast down the lofty hearts of all men, which
otherwise might (as was said) have been more easily puffed up. As for example,
if his body had proceeded from the glorious matter of the sun, and the
heavens above, Job. 37.18.
which Job compares to moulten glass for the purity and brightness: and so
consequently his soul had dwelt in a stately palace, suitable to the
excellent nature thereof: he had had (as might have seemed,) some greater
occasion to lift up himself above other creatures. But now when as earth and
dust is his mother, which he daily treads upon and dwells in, Job. 4.19.
as ( Job says) in an house of Clay: there is small cause why he should
conceive highly of himself. If a man which comes of a Noble parentage, and
dwells in a house agreeable to his estate: it is (as we would think) some
piece of an excuse, though he should be something high minded. But if a poor
creature, who is descended of base parentage, and withal dwells and lodges
in a poor cottage built and framed of mudde and clay, should nevertheless
hautilie exalte himself above others: The pride of man is the more monstrous
and finnefull.
it would justly be counted so much the more monstrous, and intolerable pride.
How monstrous then and absurd is the pride of man: who being but a wretched
worm and dirt it self, does yet exalte himself, not only above all other
creatures, but eue^ against the mighty Lord his Creator, whose seat is the
glorious palace of the whole heavens? From whence, we may gather a double use.
And first of all, that whenever we feel our selves conceited with any
special gift or quality, which we lift up and spread abroad as peacocks
feathers: that we presently look upon our vile and frail bodies, as upon
black feet, which will easily cause our glorious tail to sincke and fall
down.

Secondly, hereby we may see the extreme madness, and more then devilish and
Luciferian pride of Atheists, and profane worldlings: The pride of man is the
more foolish, vain, and pernicious to himself.
who do so swell, and are puffed up with such a vain conceit of their own
excellency, that they do not only contemn God their Lord and Creator; but
as Giants do make open war against him. Which persons, (seeing that the
sight of their own baseness will not humble them) assuredly, the hand of God
(with some fearful thunderbolt of his wrath) will one day so repress them and
crush them: that they shall be enforced to confess (will they, nill they) their
base estate and condition, in comparison of their Lords and Creator. Which they
may see by an example verified in Nebuchadnezzar, Examples of
who because he would not acknowledge God; and stoop to him as to his
Superior: Gods judgments against proud persons.
was by the just judgment of his mighty Lord and Sovereign, stripped and
spoiled of his kingdom, Dan. 4.30.
and lived the space of 7. years in the state of a bruit beast that eats
grass, till he did acknowledge himself a mortal man. 2. Chro. 32.10.
They may see it likewise in Sancherib the great King of Assyria, who was
lifted up so high in the pride of his heart, that he durst blaspheme the
Eternal. But what got he thereby? 21.
The Lord made hauock of his huge Army: put a hook in his nose: caused him to
return home again with shame and confusion: and anon after, stirred up his
two sons, who most unnaturally slew him in the temple of his false Gods.
What shall I speak of Herod the King, Act. 12. vlt.
Act. 12. who could find in his heart to arrogate to himself the worship and
honor due unto God, which was given unto him by his wicked flatterers? but the
Lord by his Angel stroke him with a lousy and loath-full disease, A zealous
and godly admonition to all, that they beware of pride.
whereof he miserably perished. Wherefore Oh earth, earth, earth, humble thy
self, and stoop down before him, whose glorious Majesty, not only the
Elect Angels, but also the devils adore and tremble at. And always remember
thou, that God, of all other sins cannot abide the pride and loftiness of
Man: It is the usual way and dealing of God to take vengeance upon proud
persons. 1. Pet. 5.5. Luc. 2.52.53.
as may appear by sundry speeches, in diverse places of the holy Scripture,
which testify that God resists the proud: that, He beholds the proud a
far off: that, He fills the hungry with good things, and sends the rich
empty away, and such like. Which all do serve to bring all men to true
humility: which is a sweet and amiable virtue, opening a way for all
excellent graces of God into the soul of a man that is truly humbled.

But this which we have spoken hitherto of the matter whereof the body is
made, was the estate of man before sin, and should have continued though man
had not trangressed. That is, he should have consisted of an earthly body and a
spiritual foul.

Now that which follows in the next words of our Text, came in by sin:
and therefore is far worse, and more miserable; in these words, return to
the earth as it was. For thereby is signified, not only the simple burial of
the dead body: The estate of man's earthly body in, and after death. It may be
considered in three degrees. 1. It is void of sense and motion 2. It is
utterly defaced. 3. It putrifieth and turns again to base earth.
but also the estate thereof after it is buried, and laid in the earth. Which
consists of diverse effects.

For first of all, the body lies in the grave senseles, and without motion
even as a block or stone.

Again, the majesty and beauty of the face and whole body departs: and a
pale, deformed, and ugly form succeedes.

Thirdly, the body putrifieth and rotteth: and from thence proceeds a most
horrible and stinking savor, and in the end is wholly turned into dust. Which
is the estate of all men (yea, even of David himself,) the body of our Lord
Jesus Christ only excepted, which by a special prerogative, saw no
corruption at all.

The uses to be made of the former consideratio^s of the bodies estate in and
by death.
Which being so: what do young gallantes mean (both men and women,) so to
paint their faces, and frownce their hair as they use to do? seeing that
baldnes shall cover their heads, and their visages shall become so pale, and
fearful; that the strongest hearted; yea they themselves, if they could
possibly discern it; should not be able to bear the view thereof: but they
must needs quake, tremble, and abhor themselves. And what reason have the
Epicures, delicates, and belly-gods of the world, excessiuelie to pamper and
stuff their bodies with the most dainty meats and drinks, seeing they must
of necessity rot, putrify, and consume to dust and ashes?

And to what purpose, do a great many carry about them continually such
excess of sweet savors and perfumes? for as much as their carcasses are
within a while after, to cast forth such an horrible and contagious smell, as
the least part whereof, were able to infect a whole city or country. All
which expenses therefore, are but superfluous, vanity and lost labor.

Nevertheless, the bodies of those that have led a godly life shall not
continue always in this senseless, deformed, and abased estate.
But here, some man may demand, whether the bodies of the dead, shall always
remain in this estate, without change and restitution? which if it be so, it
seems that the soul is evil matched, with such a body: and that there is
no difference between the state of the bodies of brute beasts, and the estate
of men, who are (by the dignity of creation) their Lords and Superiors.

The answer hereunto is, that the dead bodies of men shall be restored by the
last and final resurrection. For by the virtue, power, and spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ; whereby his own body was quickened and raised up from the dead:
shall the bodies of all the faithful, first of all be quickened, and raised
up (their souls restored to them again) and therewithal the qualities of
their bodies shall be changed from their former worse, The bodies of the
faithful shall be raised from death and be made thenc forth glorious and
immortal.
to a better renewed estate: to wit, from mortal, to immortal: from
corruption to incorruption: from earthly, to heavenly: from weak, to strong,
from base to glorious. For why? their bodies shall be conformed like to the
glorious body of of our Lord Jesus Christ: so that the just shall shine as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father. All which is very largely handled, 1.
These. 4. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 3.21. Mat. 13.43.
and set forth, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 3.21. Mat. 13.43. Wherein it
appears, that whatsoever wound, or loss, the body receives by death: the
same is healed, and restored again, by the resurrection of the dead. And
therefore, as the Scripture does often make mention of the resurrection of the
dead, and all the faithful do earnestly wish and long after it: Three uses
to be made from the doctrine of the resurrection and our belief in that
respect.
so I beseech you let our meditations, and thoughts, be continually occupied
about it. For why? the true knowledge and remembrance of it, does serve for
many good and comfortable uses. 1. we are more willing to die our selves when
the time appointed is co^^.


First of all, it causes a man willingly to put off his earthly Tabernacle,
seeing he shall resume, and be clad with another from heaven, far more
excellent and glorious. 2. we have comfort in the death and burial of our godly
friends who die before us.


Again, it ministers comfort to them that bestow and lay up the dead bodies of
their friends, in the graves: for why? they know they do not yield, or deliver
them up to destruction; but lay them up, as it were in soft beds: to the end,
that they may sleep quietly, till they be awaked by the sound of the last
Trumpet.

3 It stirs us up to the care of a godly life that so we may have comfort in
death.
Finally, if men think earnestly of the last resurrection: it cannot but stir
them up, so to live and behave the^ selves in this life: that they may have a
joyful and blessed resurrection. For why? all shall not be raised up to
glory and happiness; but many to shame and eternal confusion, as appears.
Ioh. 5.29. Dan. 12.2
5. Ioh. 29 12. Dan. 2. All which, being true and undoubted: let us hold and
maintain the true doctrine of the resurrection, The former doctrine concluded
with a loving and mild exhortation.
and continually set it before our eyes, to the end that we may thereby
stir up our selves to walk on and continue in such a holy conversation; that
at the second coming of Jesus Christ the Lord of the resurrection, we may not
desire the mountains and hills to fall upon us: The estate of the soul after
the death of the body.
but rather lift up our heads, and look for the full accomplishment of our
redemption. Thus much of the state of the body after death. It returns to
God.


Now follows likewise, the estate of the soul after death, in these words.
The soul of man is immortal* as it is proved by many reasons. And all these
make way very profitably to the description of the estate of the soul
following after.


The spirit returns to him that gave it.

From whence, we first observe, that the soul of man is not the natural
spirits of the body, nor fire and heat: nor breath and vapor, nor any
accide^tal quality, which perishes with death, as we see in brute beasts:
but a spiritual and immortal substance, which remains after death. 1 Because
it vanishes not, but goes to God.
For how can a vapor or rather that which is nothing, remove from earth to
heaven? Yea, for further confirmation; when our Savior says to the repentant
Thief, Luc. 23.43.
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise: that is, in everlasting joy and
happiness: he could not possibly mean the body; for that was taken down from
the gibbet and laid in the earth: but he must needs mean the soul divorced
and severed from the body. 2. Because the servants of God desire to have their
Souls loosened from the body.


In like manner, the Apostle Paul desired to be dissolved and to be with
Christ: he knew very well that his body should return anon after, to the dust
and therefore desires to be present with Christ not in body but in soul.

3 Because they do with comfort commend them to God when they die Psalm. 31.5.
Luke. 23.46. Act. 7.59
Furthermore, with what conscience, and truth could the holy servants of God,
say, Father into thine hand I commend my spirit: if the soul did immediately
after death, perish and vanish into the air?

Lastly, how is it possible, that empty air, and a thing without essence,
should be endued with such affections, 4 Because they are endued with pure and
earnest affections after that they are sundred from the body.
as that in heaven and eternal glory, they should wish and desire the
accomplishment, and perfect felicity of all the elect: as the Evangelist does
attribute to the souls of the servants of God, which are departed in the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ?

5 The immortality of the soul has many famous testimonies from many of the
heathen.
Whereupon it follows, that the soul of man is an immortal substance. Which
was a thing well known also to the heathen, by the light of nature: whose
judgment and sentences, it wear an easy matter here to recite: but that the
holy Scriptures are so clear, and sufficient in the point (as in all other)
that he which will not credit them: will not believe nor be persuaded, though
one should rise again from the dead. And yet some of the sayings of heathen
men, are here set down to the view of those that have a mind to see them: First
of Plato, of whose disputation of the immortality of the soul, this is the
sum. Psuche ara athanatos, etc. The soul the^ is immortal, and cannot
perish, etc

Phocylides.

Psuchaigar mimnousi acerioi. etc. The souls remain in corruptible, or
immortal, etc.

Cyrus apud Xenopho^t: in his Oration to his children a little before his death.

Plutarch cites an Oracle for this purpose, uttered to one Corax Naxus, in
these words Ouc hosionesti tes psuches catagnonai thanaton. It is a wicked
thing to acknowledge any death of the soul. See also the disputation of
Tullie, in the first book of his Tuscul. questions.

Hitherto do pertain the fancies of Hell: of the Elysian fields, etc.
described in Homer and Virgill.

Hither, the honorable and careful burials of the dead, the imagined walking
of Ghostes, or spirits after death, and such like.

and to make some use of them, against all profane and hellish Atheists, that
(living under the Gospel) go not yet so far in this point, as they did: nay
come very far short of them, to their great shame. From all which reasons it
may be concluded, that in vain do the Atheists (whereof we have too many
examples) puff out a little warm breath in scorn and derision, saying, there
goes my soul: he being therein fowlie deceived, and shows himself utterly
impudent and shameless. It were a blessed thing for thee, oh thou Atheist, if
thou were in the estate of a bruit beast. But alas, thou art endued with an
immortal soul, which can never die: whereof thou art even convinced in thy
self; but that the devil has blinded thine eyes, and strongly possessed thy
heart.

For what is the reason that thou do so tremble at death, and art so loath to
die? Is it because this life is a paradise, full of all pleasure and happiness
to thee? that cannot be: for rather it is a Sea, fraught and tossed up and
down, with such extreme miseries, woes and calamities, which do oftentimes
cause thee to groan and complain. And therefore, the cause is the guilt and
accusation of an evil conscience: from which thou do conclude, that
immediately after death, thou shall suffer everlasting torments and confusion in
hell fire: which does plainly prove to thy shameless face, that a principal
part of thee does still remain after death: and that is thy soul.

The estate of the soul of man after the departure from the body.
But to omit these graceles Caitifs: let us in thesecond place, consider what
becomes of the soul after death. For answer hereunto: it does not wander up
and down from place to place, nor yet remains in a third place, as Papists
and Pagans have dreamed, without warrant of gods word: but presently (as our
text says) it returns unto God that gave it, Genesis 2.
or created it: as appears Genes. 2. which speech (if it be not warily
understood) does first of all seem to favor the opinion of them, that
affirm that not one of them which God has created shall be condemned. And
secondly, profane Epicures, and ungodly persons, will thereof conclude, that
they may live as they list. For howsoever they tumble and wallow in all manner
of sin and abominations: yet all is very well, For why? as they imagine;
after death, their souls and spirits shall enjoy the presence and glory of
God for ever and ever, insomuch as they return to God.

The estate of the souls of the godly and wicked are exceeding differing, yea
clean contrary: though the souls of all do go unto God.
For preventing, and answering of both which sorts: we are to understand, that
in this place, the holy Ghost means not, that the souls of all men without
exception, shall be saved; or enjoy the merciful presence of God for ever: but
that the souls of every one, shall immediately after death, appear before
God their creator and Judge; who will reward the^ according to that they have
done in the body, whether it be good or evil. 2. Cor. 5. For confirmation
whereof, it is said, Heb. 9.27.
that after death comes judgment. And the truth thereof we see Luc: 16. in
poor Lazarus and the rich glotton. Luc. 16.22.23


The souls of the godly are blessed and happy for ever after this life ended.
So that the souls of them that that have believed in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and obeyed the will of his heavenly Father; do presently meet with the Lord
Jesus in Paradise: are gathered into the bosom of Abraham: do enjoy
unspeakable happiness and glory. But contrariwise, the souls of such
infidells, as have contemned Christ and his Gospel, The souls of the wicked
are for ever most accursed and miserable.
and have showed themselves disobedient: they do forth with and without stay,
pass into a place of torments: where the worm never dies, and their fire
never goes out: yea, where they live in anguish, pain and affliction, till
the body (for the further increase of their misery) be restored to the soul
again.

The doctrine is doubled, to shevve the certainty, and to cause the more deep
impression in the hearers.
From whence it follows, that as the estate of infidels is most cursed and
fearful: so is the estate of those that die in the Lord, most blessed and
happy. For why? (says the Spirit) they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them: and all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, being not only
delivered from all matter of grief, sorrow, heaviness, and calamity; but
also do enjoy at the right hand of God, pleasures for evermore: to wit, they
are partakers of such comfort, peace, and felicity, as the eye has not seen,
the ear has not heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man.

A worthy exemplification of all the former doctrine, from the godly couple
lately departed this life, and living assuredly in heaven with the souls of
the righteous for ever and ever.
Into the which estate, there is no doubt, but that these two right worshipful
persons, I mean Sir Edward Lewkenor Knight, and the virtuous Lady Susan his
wife, (whose funeral this day is here celebrated and held) are, by the free
mercy of God, placed and advanced. For why? as they lived well, so they dyed.
In their life they loved, and served God: and at the length slept in the Lord.
For proof hereof, we will not resort to the deceitful weights of humane
reason, nor any moral or civil Virtue, which may be found in heathens that
never knew God: Reasons for proof of their blessed estate.
but to the golden and infallible balance of the holy Scripture. Wherein
(among other signs and arguments) we find especially two, whereby a true
Christian may be descryed and discerned: 1. They were called by the preaching
of the Gospel. 2. They were truly sanctified by the holy Spirit of God. Many
reasons alleged to prove their effectual calling.
and that, both in life and death.

The first, is a true and effectual calling.

The other, is true sanctification: after which follows eternal
glorification. Romans 8.

That they were both effectually called, may appear by diverse arguments. And
first of all, they were enlightened and converted by the ministry of the
Gospel preached: which in an ordinary time, is a sure token of an effectual
calling.

Besides, 1. Reason. Romans 10.15.17
they both embraced Christ Jesus by a lively faith, 2. Reason.
in whom they found and felt such sweetenes and assurance, with peace of
conscience, and fulness of life and salvation: that they accounted all things
in the world but dross, in comparison of him. Yea, they renounced and abhorred
from their very hearts, all means of salvation, redemption, and
reconciliation with God, invented by man's brain, and joined with him in the
work of justification, either in part or in whole.

Again, they loved most dearly, the ministry of the word, and ministers
thereof, all their life after: 3. Reason.
by the which, as by an immortal seed, they knew they were borne anewe,
through the operation and working of the holy Ghost. And therefore pursued
this holy ordinance of God, and the ministers thereof, with no less reverence
and tender affection; then natural children do their natural Parents, of
whom they are bred and begotten.

Furthermore, 4. Reason.
all such as were begotten by the same means (and thereby had the image of God
repaired in them) were so dear and precious in their eyes: as that they
preferred the^ before all others (although nearly linked to the^) that were not
in the same estate of grace.

To conclude: they were not contented with their own calling, 5. Reason.
but they desired and labored the conversion of others; especially of them of
their own family: as may appear by their holy exhortations, and careful in
couragements, and by their virtuous example of life set before the eyes of all.

Lastly, by their continual praying, reading, meditating, 6. Reason.
and conferring of the word of God, with other holy exercises: wherewith the
hearts of many were exceedingly ravished, and the remembrance whereof (as I
trust) will never dye in the hearts of them that were partakers thereof, so
long as they shall live.

By all which arguments, their effectual calling is clearly proved. And if
they be not sufficient to argue and prove it, I know not what is. Now
concerning their Sanctification, another sign that they dyed in the Lord.

Reasons to prove their sanctification.
Sanctification, is known unto man by the outward conversation, man ca^ search
or see no further. For that be. longs to God the searcher of the heart and
reins. Therefore what their outward conversation was, we will next enquire: and
that concerning both of the^, severally and apart.

And first the virtues of the Christian Lady who dyed first, are faithfully
testified and rehearsed.
And first, we will begin with the Lady, because it was her lotte to depart
out of this world before her husband. What her conversation was, it is well
known to all: and yet it shall not be amiss, at this present, more
distinctlie to declare.

An example worthy the imitation of al, women: specially of Ladies and Gentle
women. Read it diligently good Gentlewomen and weigh it through out.
To this purpose more generally, she was endued with most of those virtues,
expressed in the Epistles of Paul, in the Prouer. of Solomon, and other places
of holy Scripture, required in a true Christian, and an holy woman. For why?
although she was worshipfullie descended, and endued with excellent gifts: yet
she walked not with hautie eyes, despising and disdaining the baser sort, and
such as were far her inferiors; but willingly and chearefully did stoop
down to them, and so humbly conuersed with them, as if they had been her
equals. She was temperat in her diet and apparel, professing that from her
childhood she never delighted in those toys, An observation most necessary for
the women of this most vain and new fangled age.
vanities and superfluities of attire, wherewith many women, (otherwise
virtuous and truly religious) are. She was loving, and tender to her children:
but yet with singular discretion. She loved her Husband, and was dutiful to
him, shining before his eyes (as a star) in chastity and holiness. She was
sparing in speech, considerate and advised in all her ways and deeds. She
was as loving and dutiful a daughter to her mother, as ever I knew living:
which virtue, God recompensed in her life time with the like: that is, with
very dutiful and obedient children. She delighted in peace and concord: and if
she espied any variance toward, either in regard of her self, or others: she
never ceased nor gave herself rest, till she had made up the breach, by
christian reconciliation. She thought much of death, and specially a little
before her departing out of this world: wishing if it could be by the good
pleasure of God; that she might not out-liue her husband, but die at the same
time, which thing accordingly came to pass. Mine ears heard it of her in
private; and therefore I dare the more boldly auoucheit. She was not like the
foolish woman, that pulls down the house: but she built up her husbands
house, by wise and frugall ordering of her domestical charges, and
maintenance. And yet for all that, she knew how in season to open her hand, A
conclusion most aptly fitting the premises. Pro. 31.29.30 God of his infinite
mercy grant us the increase of many such good women.
and to give liberally to the needy: unto whom, she was a nursing mother.

So that we may (in regard of the premises) truly and rightly conclude with the
holy Ghost. 31 Pro. 29 30.31. ver. Many daughters have done virtuously: The
virtues of the right christian knight to manifest and confirm the truth of his
sanctification.
but thou surmountest them all.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity: but a woman that fears the Lord
shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her own works praise her in the
gates.

The outward conversation likewise of her worthy Husband, was very Christian,
unblameable, and without just note of reprehension. An example worthy to be
followed of all men: specially of persons in, special dignity and authority
above the rest.


For first of all, whereas (all men know) he was endued with excellent
ornaments of nature and learning: yet knew he, how to make himself equal to
the^ of the lower sort. And whereas he could have made many afraid (as it is
said of Job) yet was he continually fearful to offend the meanest. An
excellent virtue: the true valor of great and mighty me^.
In which respect, if he had at any time ouerseene himself: his soul was
never at rest, till he had removed the offense, and satisfied the party. He
bare a fervent love and zeal toward the truth, which he was ready at all
times, to defend against Papists, Atheists, and Heretics, etc. as diverse do
well know, who have felt the force and weight of his arguments in disputation.
He was bountiful and liberal, according to the measure of that portion and
revenues that GOD had bestowed upon him: as the poor round about him can and
will testify: whose sides were warmed with the fleece of his sheep and their
empty and hungry stomachs, relieved and satisfied of his own provision. How
he carried him self in his public calling, concerning the administration of
Justice: the worshipful magistrates, both here and else where in this country,
can both know and judge. Yet thus much I know, and dare affirm: that he was
careful to do his duty. A conclusion not forced but very well applied.
And that which is more, and a very special grace of God in a magistrate: he
hated and avoided privy bribes and rewards; 1. Sam. 13.
least his eyes should be blinded therewith and his heart corrupted, God
grant us many such good Maiestrates, even for the Lord Jesus sake: and bless
these excellent examples to help forward so gracious a work of his and so
necessary for his church. Amen.
and so turned aside from justice and equity. So that he might (if he were
alive) make his just Apology for himself, as Samuel did 1. Samuel. 13 in
these words.

Behold here I am, bare record of me before the Lord, and before his
anointed: whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I
done wrong to? or whom have I hurt? or of whose hand have I received a bribe
to blind mine eyes there with, and I will restore it you.

All this, and the rest, I speak (God knows) not in the way of flattery, to
gratify the ears of any (as it is the manner of too many in assemblies upon
such occasions as this is, The common abuse of funeral Sermons justly taxed.
to make their tongus saleable in decking them with ornaments of commendation,
which are most unworthy of any great commendation) I have abhorred flattery
since I knew the Gospel, and rather run into the contrary. Neither need I
in this case to use flattery: seeing I may appeal to the consciences of al
them that knew them. Yet did they not want their blemishes and infirmities: all
which (I doubt not) are covered and washed away in the precious blood and death
of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore, seeing that they both drew in one yoke
of obedience; The uses of the former sonotable an exe^plification.
and not only walked hand in hand in the ways of righteoussnes while they
lived, but also were not much divided in the act and instant of their death: 1.
For christian consolation and comfort.
what envy of man? what rage of Satan? what power of hell can let, but that
both of their souls are now in heaven, amongst the Angels and souls of the
righteous? triu^phing against the devil, the world and the flesh, and all
their spiritual enemies: singing praise to God with the whole Church, for
their creation and preservation hereupon earth; specially for their redemption
and salvation by the blood of the Lamb: wishing the accomplishme^t of the
number of Gods elect; that the miseries of the faithful might have an end:
standinge at the fountain of living waters: wearing long white roabes, washed
in the blood of Jesus Christ: fedd and nourished continually, with the fruit
of the tree of life, beholding the glorious face of their sweet Lord and
Savior, whose presence in their life time, they wished and longed for, with
tears and earnest prayers. Finally, they live and remain in such fulness of
joy and happiness: as to the perfection thereof, nothing ca^ be added or desired.

So that they need no outward solemnities of Burial, although it be
agreeable to their estate; and serves very well for the avoiding of
Anabaptisticall confusion. For why? in their life time, they reared up to
themselves a Tomb in heaven, not perishing or corruptible, but ever during and
eternal: not polished by the art and cunning of man; but graven and commended
by the hand of Gods spirit. And therefore so glorious, as it is not only
pleasant and acceptable to God and his Angels: but also makes co^tinualie,
for the increase of their own comfort. 2. For christian sorrow and mourning:
yet with godly moderation.


All which, notwithstanding this their great happiness, yet is there cause, why
their death and departure should be lamented and bewailed: It is the duty of
al sores moderately to mourn at the death and burial of their friends
specially of such as were of best imploiment and use.
not only generally, but also by particular persons.

Generally, the Church militant has great cause to lament: that two such
excellent and profitable members, are rent from it.

Particularly, their chlidren have cause to mourn, and sorrow: for that they
want two such excellent Parents, who did so tender and love them as their own
souls; Children.
and therefore sought both by example and al good means, to procure their
comfort and good estate, in this life, and in the life to come.

Servants, for that they have lost the government and direction of such a
Master and Lady, Servants.
as continually expressed no less love and care over them then if so be they
had been their natural children: so that by their death, they are bereft of
many sweet comforts and helps, which many a year, some of them inioyed.

Let the ministry of this congregation, mourn and sorrow: Ministers.
for that it is disappointed, and left destitute of such worthy Patrons.

Let students and favorers of Learning, Students.
join with the fotmer in mourning: seeing they shall all see the^ no more in
this world, by whom, before times, the received comfort and incorageme^t in
their studies

Let the Noble and worshipful race of Gentry, Magistrates.
lay to heart the loss of two such familiars, as were most faithful and
dutiful to them.

Poor of Den. ham, and in the towns adjoining.
But O ye poor and miserable of these parts, howl ye and cry out: seeing
they are taken from you, whose hands in times past were always open to relieve
your necessities.

The Minister himself then a chief mourner for them on earth: but now achiefe
reioicer with them in heaven.
And would to God, mine eyes would gushe out tears, yea rivers of tears;
seeing the place and seats open, now empty and without them whose presence in
times past, was comfortable to my heart: where unto they always bent
themselves, as did appear, by their readiness and willingness to repair to
this place.

Finally, there is cause, that all should mourn for the death of such persons:
according to the laudable custom and manner of the Church, The causes of
comfort are resumed and more fully amplified because they are greater and
therefore ought to receive the deeper and more durable impression, chiefly in
the hearts of those that are most subject to pass bounds in mourning.
in all times.

Yet, least we should pass measure, and run into the excess of mourning,
we want not just cause to moderate and temper our mourning and sorrow: and
that not only for that we are not without hope, as were the heathen but for far
better and more agreeable causes. And first of all, although they be go^e, yet
have they left behind them many persons equal to the^ in degree and dignity:
who are not only endued with excellent gifts, but ready and pressed to perform
the same duties, which they in their life time performed

As namely, to profess and maintain the Gospel, The 1. cause of comfort.
sincerely to worship and serve the Lord, and to go before other in a holy and
christian example of life. A 2. cause of comfort.


Again, it ought not a little to mitigate our sorrow, in regard of their
departure, because as they honored God in their life, so God has now honored
the^ in their death: as appears this day not only by the solemnities of their
burial, but also in the great concurse of all sorts; who are come together,
every one according to his place, to testify, what honorable and loving
affections they bare toward them, A 3. Cause of comfort.
both in life and in death.

The last and full cause shuttinge up and perfecting all our comfort, against
all our mourning:
Lastly, that we may at length conclud: the greatest matter of comfort is, that
although they have left us for a time; yet, ere it be long, we shall meet
with them in the Kingdom of God. For which purpose, because we know not how
suddenly the Lord will come either by death, And thus a sweet conclusion of a
very sweet, godly, learned, and fruitful Sermon. To God be all the praise,
honor, and glory: and to us much benefit and spiritual edificatio^, through
his most gracious blessing.
or at the last judgment (as we have good cause to bethink us thereof, by the
present occasion) let us not drive off, as the slothful servant in the
Gospel; or as the foolish virgins: but let us fit our selves before hand, for
his glorious coming: that is, let us get oil in our lamps with the wise
virgins; and every one of us behave our selves faithfully in our place and
calling, by employing such gifts as we have received of our Sovereign Lord and
Master, to the glory of God, and the benefit of our brethren. And then (no
doubt) as the second death, shall not hurt us, so shall we enter into our
Masters joy: where we shall with the souls of the righteous, cry
continually, Lord Jesus come quickly, Reu. 22.21.
as the souls of these two persons do. And in the end, we shall doubtless hear
those sweet words of heavenly entertainment, which Christ our Lord and
Savior, from his glorious throne shall pronounce, to the unspeakable comfort
of all the elect: saying, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, Math. 25.34.
from the foundation of the world. Which, the Lord of his infinite mercy
hasten: and speedily put an an end to the miseries of this world, under which
we do continually sigh and groan. 2. Cor. 5.4.
And that even for Jesus Christ his sake, our only Redeemer and Savior: to
whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be rendered and given for ever and
ever, both in heaven and earth, all possible praise, honor, glory, and
immortality. Amen.

And thus an end.

Let us pray.

