THE PATRIARCHS PORTION. OR, The Saints best Day. Delivered in a Sermon at the
Funeral of Sir THOMAS REYNELL of Ogwell in Deuon. Knight, April. 16. 1618.
Wherein may be seen, 1 The shortness of man's life. 2 A Christians combat
against 1 Satan. 2 The World. 3 The Flesh. 4 Sin.
3 A preparation to die well. 4 The reward of glory after Warfare.
By John Preston, Preacher of Gods Word at East-Ogwell, in Deuon.

LONDON, Printed by A. M for Roger Iackeson, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetstreet near Fleet Conduit. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Richard Reynell, Esquire, and Thomas Reynell, and
Walter Reynell, his brethren, Grace, happiness, and Peace, etc.
Right Worshipful,
THe world may well wonder what wind has driven these Papers of mine to the
Press, or what should press me to send these unpolished meditations (...)
the Censure of the world, which ^ere conceived and brought forth in fewer days
then a week affords, but (being sent abroad) why I should bequeath them to
your protections, none need to wonder; considering the many encouragements and
continual kindnesses I received from your worthy father, whose Funerals these
are, and unto whose favor, next under God, I ascribe, the greatest part of my
worldly wel-being. I am ^ot^ to r^bbe up and open (...) ^ound of grief, which
o^r co^ntrey recei^^d; but you most of all by the death of the Right
Worshipful, your dear father. The grief will be the less to you, for the
loss of his Person, if you follow his footsteps in that Religious course of
life which he has trodde forth before you. For I may say of him as Austin^ o^
(...), (...) quidem ^ma in ^ocieta (...) fidelium and c^^t^ru^ recepta, lauds
nec curat nec quaerit humanus imitatione^ tantu^ quaerit: The imitation of his
virtues will be more pleasing and praiseworthy, then either my commendation of
his life or your lamentations for his death. Children will most willingly write
after their father's Copy, and few fathers can set fairer Copies (...) (...)
children (...) yours has done to you if you write not well, the world will
wonder: But ^old on as you have begun and you ^il make it doubtful (...);
whether (...) happy, the children who had such a father (...) them, or the
(...), who had such^ children to follow fast after him; My due respect for that
undeserved love which I have always found from your (...) these papers ^^to
your hands, wherein you may find something which may help forward your happy
course toward heaven, it has pleased God to set some of you in places of
Authority, to serve (...) Country, others he has sent to serve his Prince at
the Court, and you have need both of good heads and good hearts too, that you
may hold out in these high places. If these poor meditatio^s of mine may serve
as Phillips boy, to put yo^ in mind of your mortality, which it may make you
di^ the happier, but neuer^ whit the sooner; I should think my small labor full
ly recompensed, and m^ maine end, which is God: glory* somewhat furthered, To
your honorable acceptance therefore, I comme^^ these short meditations, and both
you and them t^ Gods blessing.

Yours in the Lo^d. I. P.

THE PATRIARCHS PORTION, Or The Saints best day.
JOB 71. Is not time determined of warfare to man upon earth; And are not his
days as the days of an hireling;
THat which God sometime said of his Holy City Jerusalem, Many excellent things
are spoken of thee thou City of God; the same we may say of holy Job, many
excellent things are spoken of thee thou servant of God: yea more, many
excellent things are spoken by thee. His Piety and his Patience are most
remarkable: For the former is praised by God Job. 1. 1
: The other proposed as a pattern to be practiced by men Iam. 5, 11
: He spoke of man's entrance into the wo^lde, Naked came I into the world, and
of his passage out of this world, Naked shall I go out again Job. 1, ^1
: of man's short continuance in this world, and of the many miseries that meet
him while he does continue: Man that is borne of a woman, is of short
continuance, and full of t^oubl Job. 14, 1
: That profession which the good Patriarch Jacob makes before Pharaoh. Genesis 47,
9
Few and ^uill are the days of my pilgrimage, might Job as truly take up, few
in comparison of his Fathers, For Abraham lived 175. years, Genesis 25. 7
Isaac lived 180. years, Genesis 35, 28
whereas ^^cob lived but 130 years. And are not my days few says Job Job.
10. 28
: and as for the quantity they were few, so for the quallity they were evil,
in regard of the misery and sorrow which in these few days he endured. For
who more exercised in miseries then Job was, who was harder held under the
correcting hand of God then he. For first, God delivered all that he had into
the hands of Satan Job. 1, 12
who did not abate him an inch of all the ill he could do, him but by degrees
brings him to the height of misery The Sabeans took away his Oxen and Asses,
Ver. 4.
which we must needs grant was a great loss. The fire burned his sheep and
servants V^^. 17.
, and this was more fearful then the former. Then the Caldeans fell upon his
Cammels, a greater cross in his commodity then all the former. Then a wind
from beyond the w^lderness^ blows down the house over the heads of his Sons
and Daughters, and they are all dead in one day, a greater heart* ^reake then
all the rest: and yet the Devils spite does not rest, but gets leave from the
Lord to f^nite Job with boyles, from the sole of his foot to the crown of his
head Job. 2, 7
: Whether it were a L^prosie as some say, or the French disease as others
think, or some other more loathsome disease, and such as never man before him
felt, doubtless it was fearful and foul.

In all these, it was not the least part of his misery, that these come so
thick one in the neck of another, before the former have done his full spite.
But what comfort has he in the midst of these crosses, a man would imagine
his wife should comfort him, but alas she adds unto his cross, and proves
the sharpest corrasiue unto his soul, when she bids him blaspheme God and die
Job. 2, 9
: and what comfort he had from his friends we find, Job. 16. 2
Miserable comforters are you all. Hereby I hope you see what cause Job had to
say, Is there not a time of warfare appointed to man upon earth, and are not
his days as the days of an hireling, as we have it in my Text: In which
words Two things are obseruable, 1. The sharpness of man's life, subject to
many troubles, in these words: Is there not a time of warfare to man upon
earth. 2. The shortness of man's life, in these words: Are not his days as the
days of an hireling.


For the meaning of the words, you may conceive them better, if we enlarge
them a little, as if Job had in more words said thus. As God has appointed how
long every man shall live, of which time he cannot come short if he would, nor
go beyond it: So it is Gods pleasure that they shall find little pleasure,
this short shall not be sweet, but as a warfare wherein he must fight against
his enemies, the Devil, the World, and his own Flesh: neither may he give
over when he sees good; for as he that is hired, must look to do some work
for his wages, for that short time that he has undertaken: so must we in the
days of our lives; they may not be spent vainly and idely, but in doing
good. I must yet come nearer the words.

Is not time determined of warfare to man upon earth: Some read the^ thus, The
life of man is a warfare upon earth: Some thus, Is there not a certain time of
warfare determined unto man upon earth: Some thus, Is there not a day of warfare
to mortal man upon earth: Others thus, Is not time determined to man upon
earth.

The world signifies an Army a w^rfare an end or determinate time, as God has
appointed that men shall die Heb. 9, 27
: So he has determined a time how long to live, and then to die: Are not man's
days determined, the number of his months are with thee; thou have appointed
his time, which (if he would) he cannot pass Job. 14, 5
: All the days of my appointed time, will I wait till my changing come, Job
14. 14.

Henc^ then we may draw this Doctrine. That God has decreed how long every man
shall live; no man can live beyond the time determined by God. David's child
does die young 2 S^m. 12 18
: but God had determined it should then die. Methus^^la^ does die aged Genesis 5,
27
and God had determined he should not die till then. The one in his infancy,
the other in his old age; both in the time determined by God. To all things
(says Solomon) There is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under
the Sun, a time to be borne, and a time to di^ Eccl 3, 12
. Let men use what means they will to bring matters to pass purpose and plot
all is to small purpose: for b^ore the time they shall be frustrate, but if the
time be come wherein God will have his will and work effected, it is neither
force nor fraud, neither power nor policy, neither money nor might, that can
hinder it. The Israelites could not be delivered from Egypt, before the time
appointed, Four hundred years they must be in bondage Genesis 15, 13
: but when the date of this indented time is out, Pharaoh cannot keep them one
day longer, for even the self same day that it came to pass, That all the
host of the Lord went out of the land of Egypt, Exo. 12, 41
, yea for the performance of Gods purpose at his appointed time, the course of
nature shall give way to the cause of nature, I mean the God of nature.

The deep Sea shall become dry Land, and the liquid waters shall become a wall
to make way for Gods people to pass at their appointed time: Of this miracle
Asaph may sing; O God thy way is in the Sea, and thy paths i^ maine waters,
and thy footsteps are not known Psalm. 77, 19
: a like marvelous work was at the river Jordan, when Israel entered into
Canaan, then the waters that came down from above, stayed and rose upon an
heap, so the people went right over Jericho. Josh. 8. 16.

The Israelites wandered up and down in the wilderness forty years, being
oppressed of their enemies, Et in ipso articulis te^poris, In the very instant
of time which God had decreed, they were delivered. David was tossed hither and
thither, yet could not obtain the kingdom before the time appointed came. The
Jews could not be delivered from the Babylonish captivity, til the seventy
years were expired. The godly expected the coming of Christ, as was foretold
by the Prophets; but he came not till the fullness of time was come Gal. 4, 4
: when our Savior taught and wrought Miracles, the Scribes and Pharisees
sought to take him, but they could not till the time appointed of God. The
people took up stones to cast at him, Ioh 8, 59
they gave a Commandment, that if any man knew where he was he should show
it, that they might take him Ioh. 11, 57
: but when the time appointed by God was come, he offers himself, saying,
Whom seek ye Ioh. 18, 4
. The Soldiers could not keep the body of Christ, in the grave, beyond the
appointed time, and then, notwithstanding watch and ward, and stone, and
seal, they see, and an Angel says it, He is not here, for he is risen Mat.
28, 6
: Why do the Sun and the Moon keep their true turns and times of rising
and setting, the Summer and Winter, and Atumne, and Spring, their settled
seasons, but because God has appointed them Genesis 8, 22
: And can we doubt then but that God himself does keep his due times, or may
we think that that is not the most due time which God has determined.

The very plough-man is taught by experience to take his time, when to plough,
and when to sow; when to reap and when to gather into the barn, and shall not
God that great Husbandman of the whole world, both know and keep his time, to
plant, and pluck up as he has determined; or has he not determined a time
for man, both to be borne and to die; or has he left it in the power of man
to live when he list, and die when he will, doubtiesse no. The time of death
none can prevent before it come, none pass it when it does come.

The shortness of man's life.
THou have numbered my steps says Job Job. 14, 16
and when David desires of God to teach him that heavenly Arithmatick to number
his days, he did not doubt but God had done it, he knows not the number
only, but the measure, both how many and how long the days are which we must
live, as you may see Psalm. 39, 4
: yea he that has numbered the hairs of our heads Mat. 10, 30
, has numbered not only the years of our life, but the months of our
years, and the weeks of our months, and the days of our weeks, and the
hours of our days, and the minutes of our hours, which point we cannot
pass. Indeed, God does diverse ways take men out of this life: Some by
murder, as Abel Genesis 4, 81
, Some by drowning, as the old world* Gen 7, 21
: Some by burning, as the Sodomites* Genesis 19, 24
: Some by stoning, as the Sabbath breakers, and Achan Number. 15 36.
: Some by being cut in pieces Judge. 19, 29
: Some by the fall of an house, as the Philistims Iug. 16, 30
, and such as they upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell Luke 13, 4
: Some by a nail as Sisera Iug. 4, 21
: Some by Lions, as the young Prophet 1 King. 13 24
: Some by Bears, as the scoffing children 2 King. 2 24
: Some sawen to death, as Esaias: Some hanged, as the good Thief Luke 23, 39
: Some crucified, as Christ: But none of these sooner or later then the Lord
has appointed. The same God that has determined the manner how, the means
where, had likewise determined the time when they should die.

The consideration of this, may first Use 1.
comfort the godly, in that their lives lie not in the power of men, or malice
of Satan, for these indeed would swallow them up quick when they are
displeased at them, and the godly never want the wicked or the Devils
displeasure; you shall see some of the Jews band together, and bind
themselves by an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink, till they have
killed Paul Act. 23. 12
, but their plot shall be prevented, and Paul preserved till the time
appointed of God. Tyrants may take away the life of the godly, but they cannot
cut off the lappes of their coats, nor touch the skirts of their garments
without Gods permission, and he will never permit them before the appointed
time. Pharaoh would have taken away Moses his life often, but God had not
appointed it so, for Moses died in the land of Moab Den. 34, 5
, Saul thought to make sure work with David when he ran at him with a spear,
but God had appointed that David should die a natural death, in his bed as
he did 1 Kin. 2, 10
: we see such men as are grievously wounded, oftentimes do not die, as on the
contrary, the cutting of a corn does kill some, what is the cause but the
performance of Gods appointed time in both. Asaph was but sick in his feet,
far from the heart; he ^s to seek help of the Physician, yet dies of the
disease 2 Chro. (...) 12
: Hezechiah was sick at the heart, and at the point of death, yet lives many
years after, because his time determined by God was not yet come when he
should die, though in regard of his disease in the sight of man, the day was
come that he should die. One lies long sick, yet recouers because his time is
not come, another as he walks in his chamber, or sits in his chair, drops
down and never rises because his time is come.

To conclude this Use for the comfort of the godly, though their enemies that
seek to spill their blood be many, and those mighty and malicious withal, yet
all these cannot diminish one day of this life which the Lord has decreed.

Secondly, this may serve for reproof Use 2.
of such as dream and dote only upon second causes, and never look to Gods
council and decree. This makes these men cry out and say, when their friends
are taken away, Oh it was for want of learned Physicians about him, yet died of
no dangerous diseases, while he looked to second causes and not to the Lord
without whose appointment nothing can come to pass. A Sparrow cannot fall to
the ground without Gods guiding providence Mat. 10, 29
: nor a bird fall into a snare where no fouler is Amos 3, 5
: In the pestilence they cry out of the infection of the air, in consumptions
of sorrow and grief, in fevers of cold, in famine of foul weather, in war
of the malice of the enemies, but Moses would have men to look to a higher
hand in all these; For it is the Lord, says he, that shall smite men with
consumptions, and with the fever, and with the burning ague, and with fervent
heat, and with the sword, and with drought, and with the mildew. Deuteronomy. 28. 21.
The second causes I know, that is such means as God has appointed for the
preservation of life, must not be despised, yet they must not be doted upon;
use these carefully, but commit the success to God, who only can bless these
means, and will, whenever they may serve for the performance of his purpose
and his time appointed, which can by no means be either prevented or avoided.

Thirdly, this may teach us to wait 3 Use.
with patience, expecting when our changing shall come, Job 14. 14.
It is not for us to know the time and season, the year or month of our
appointed time which God has kept secret to himself. It is comfort enough,
and powerful to persuade a patient expectation of our change, to think how
happy a change we shall have; Christ shall change our vilde bodies, that they
might be like unto his glorious body Phil. 3. 21.
: when we have the world at will, and nothing comes cross unto us, we can be
content; we say to live as long as the Lord has appointed, but when we are
pinched with poverty or surcharged with sickness, or vexed with sorrow and
grief, then most impatiently we pray, and wish that we were out of the world,
and we will not wait the Lords leisure; but with the King of Israel we
wickedly resolve, be hold this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the
Lord any longer? (...) Kin, 6. 23.
In these cases, we can allege Scripture, that it is better to die, then to
live; because Solomon says, that the day of death is better the^ the day of
our birth. Eccles 7. 4
Solomon does not say that the day of death is good simply, but by way of
comparison better then the day of birth; and yet this may seem in humane sense
and reason to be absurd, for there is joy when a man is born into the world.
Ioh. 16 21
The number of the children of God is increased, life is the gift of God; 1.
Sam. 2. 6.
How the^ can the day of death be better then the day of life. The meaning of
Solomon is, that life is attended with many miseries, for we are borne to
labor and travel, subject to sickenesses and sorrow, and sin, nothing but
death can deliver us from all these; and therefore better is the day of death
then the day of birth; yet be it never so good, be it better then life, yea, be
it best of all to be with Christ: Phil. 1. 23.
Though we have here no abiding City: Heb. 13. 14.
Though we be strangers and pilgrims: 1 Pet. 2. 1.
Though soiourners, as all our fathers were: Psalm. 39. 12
Dust and ashes, Genesis 18, 27
Worms of the earth; Psalm. 22. 6.
Though we were worse then all these; yet we must wait Gods appointed time.
Though the everliving God has condemned mankind to death, which is the wages
of sin: and to the grave, Romans 6. 23
which is the house appointed for all the living, Job 30. 23
yet may we not either hasten our death, or dig our own graves, and descend
into them before we be dead. Though our bodies be but houses of clay, Job 4.
19.
earthly houses or tents rather, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
yet may we not pull down these houses over our heads, or remove these tents
before our General give command, but wait till our changing come. In a word,
God has determined that we must die, and therefore death should be welcome,
when it does come, but he has determined withal when we must die, and
therefore nothing should make us weary of waiting, till it do come.

Fourthly this point duly considered may reprove such that go about to 4
shorten their lives, these men presume to appoint their own time, and with a
falls key to open this prison of their body, and let their souls depart before
God call for it, or give them any commission unto it. It is true that God has
appointed this time for these men's deaths in his secret counsel, but it is
more then they know; and for ought that they see, they might live longer if
themselves were not the cause, and so they cross the reneiled will of God,
which only can be our warrant in all our actions. Again, though they were so
much of Gods secret Counsel, as to know that God had appointed this to be the
time, yet they know that God has not appointed either themselves or such
violent means to make good his purpose at his appointed time. No, no: it is
misery that makes these men weary of their lives; and therefore like the
foolish fish, they will leap out of the Drying Pan, into the fire; out of
short trouble here, into eternal torments hereafter. He that will live godly,
must suffer persecution; 2 Timothy 3. 12.
he that will come into heavenly Canaan, must pass through this earthly
Egypt; Through many afflictions, we must enter into heaven, Acts 14, 22
and shall we then cut off the thread of our life, because we find some knots
in it. Abimelech cut off his own life, Iug. 9 54.
so did Saul, 1 Samuel 31 4.
so did Ahithophell, 2 Samuel 17. 23.
so did Judas, Mat. 27. ^.
and so do many in their desperate humor now a days, by the cunning of
Satan, but not without the secret unsearchable and just judgment of God.

Fifthly, and finally if our time be determined, and that time known to God, 5
unknown to man, certain to him, uncertain to us, we must prepare against
that time come, we are men, and therefore mortal; weak men, and therefore
secure, for we are every day dying, and cannot long live, as old men have death
before their eyes, so young men have him behind their backs: and betwixt old and
young, I desire no other difference but this, that young men may die quickly, and
old men cannot live long, and therefore all must be prepared. Be ye prepared
therefore, for the Son of man will come in an hour when ye think not: Luke
12. 40.
All must prepare, old and young, rich and poor, great and small, noble and
ignoble; old men must prepare, for they must shortly die, they should put their
houses in order, Isa. 38. (...).
they should with sense and sorrow, confess their sins to God, saying,
Against thee, against thee only have we sinned, Psalm. 51. 4.
they should labor for life to be at peace with God and their own
consciences, and if it be possible to have peace with all men Romans 12. 18
. Young men should prepare, for they may die before those that go crooked with
age: they have no Charters of their lives. It is not policy, nor gay and
gorgeous apparel; not eloquence of an Angels tongue, not strong Castles and
stately houses, not pomp nor promotion, can take day with death, or persuade
the worms to pity them, nor preserve their names from perpetual infamy.
These things may procure honor on earth, but no happiness in heaven. If all
were not subject to death, young men might hope to be exempted, but a new ship
may as soon be dashed in pieces meeting with a rock, as one that is old and
weatherbeaten, a young tree may be ouerturned with a whirlewind, as soon as that
which is old and blasted, many old men have out-liued these tha^ were young, but
never any young or old that lived and did not die: Does not every man bear
about him in his own bosom, that which will bring him to his end: are we not
all sick of the same disease, even the consumption of our days.

Time, precious time, passes away swiftly, and with it we pass toward our
end, and like those in a ship, we perceive it not, and therefore prepare not
for it, or think not of the danger of it; for as death leaves us, so the day
of Judgment shall find us. They that build fair and sumptuous houses, are
not certain how long they shall hold them; they that purchase lands and
livings, cannot tell how long they shall possess them; they that have gathered
in a great harvest, cannot tell whether they shall be better by it; they that
plant, cannot tell whether they shall eat of the fruit of it; yet all these
men are provident to prepare for life that is uncertain, and forget death
which is most certain shall come, and more uncertain when it shall come.
Prepare then in health, for it may hardly be done in sickness, or at the
hour of death. Sickness may be so full of extreme sorrow and pain, and
death so sudden and present, that thou can not prepare thy self if thou
would; or if thou do, yet not so well as thou would: many neglect to
prepare themselves when they may, and when they would cannot. So the five
foolish Virgins might have had Oil in their Lamps, if they had looked to it in
time; but afterward, when willing they would, could neither buy nor borrow any.
These men consider not how dangerous it is to procrastinate, and p^ ^ff their
repentance from day to day, a^ that for two causes.

First, God does leave the wicked destitute of divine help in that hour, I
have called, says the Lord, but ye refused, ye were in health in the prime of
your time, in the flower of your age, in the heat of lust, having by nature
corrupt hearts and carnal affections living in pleasure, passing the time in
mirth, subject to youthful wantonness and to vnstaidnesse of affection, full
of looseness, which is the way to lewdnes; of weakness, which is the way to
wickedness, then you would not hear, now in your deathbed, ye shall call,
but I will not hear, but laugh at your destruction, P^o. 1. 24.
They that forget God living, God will forget them dying.

Secondly, in the time of death men are more grievously tempted, and therefore
it is dangerous to defer repentance to the dying day. Remember (says
Solomon) thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccles. 12, 1.
why should we remember God in youth, because if youth be spent in vanity,
commonly old age will end in profaneness.

The Prophet speaks of Crimson sins, sins of a double die, if it be
right Crimson or Purple, it is dyed in thread and in the wool, and that is ever
a deep dye, so if Satan dye us in our wool, in our youth before we be men,
before we be made cloth, it is like to stick by us, and to go with us to our
grave. If Satan make thy youth unprofitable, of all the ages after, there can
hardly any good be hoped for; if the blossom be nipt, where is the hope of the
Autumn. Thus much for the first point, that God has determined the days of
man how long he shall live.

A Christians combat against 1 Satan. 2 The World. 3 The Flesh. 4 Sin.

THe second point of Doctrine which does arise from these words, is this; Doct.
2.
That the time appointed by man to live upon earth, is a time of warfare. Men
must live Soldiers, and die Conquerours; live fighting, and die ouercomming;
from the cradle to the grave is a time of warfare; we have many enemies, all
fierce and furious: 1. The Devil. 2. The World. 3. The Flesh. 4. Sin. All
these we must encounter and overcome too, if it go well with us; and woe is
unto us if they overcome. Conquerors shall be Crowned, but C^wards shall be
shamed, and the Conquered shall be captiuated.

The first enemy is the Devil.
Satan is a great enemy, A roaring Lion going about seeking whom he may devour
1 Pet. 5, 8
: A Lion for his might, roaring for his malice and wrath, with a hungring
desire to hurt, going about without weariness, seeking through his
studiousnesse to deceive, who^ he may devour with an implacable wrath, to
wreake his malice both upon God and man; for all his pains and policy, all
his force and fraud aims at this, that neither God may be served, nor man
may be saved. When he cannot secretly deceive by the subtlety of a Fox, he
runs upon men with open mouth, like a devouring Lion; in peace he is
crafty, in persecution cruel. You may perceive the Lion by his claw, and
judge of his nature by his names: He is called a Serpent, Genesis 3. 1
and therefore subtle, wise, and crafty: A Tempter, the Tempter Mat. 4, 3
to persuade, and a Devil to destroy Luke 4, 2
whom he does persuade; before the sin we shall find him a Tempter, after
the finne we shall find him a Devil; kind in the entrance, cruel in the
end. He proves a Tempter that he may play the Devil, and that in every place;
he made war in Heaven, practiced fraud in Paradise, sowed hatred amongst the
first brethren, and tares in the wide field of the world. We know tares will
grow fast enough of themselves without fowing, yet in hope to have fuel
enough for hell fire, he will take pains to sow them, and that in the night
when others sleep. In eating he has surfeting, in drinking drunkenness, in
generation wantonness, in labor idleness, in conversation envy, in
government covetousness, in correction anger, in promotion pride, in honors
ambition, in talk vain ostentation, in profession hppocrisie, and backsliding
in the Christian race, and in every blessing of God some secret bait to draw
men to sin. Into the heart he does iniect eeuill thoughts, into the mouth
evil words, into the members evil works: He moves the merry to be
dissolnte, and the mournful to be desperate. What then shall we do? shall
we faint and fear, and fly from him; no, then we are sure to be foiled; we
must fight it out with him, and resolutely resist him, and he will fly. Indeed
we cannot do it by our own strength, flesh and blood are but unequal
matches for spirits of the air, as these are. What then, We must put on the
whole Armor of God, that we may be able to resist in the evil day, and having
finished all things stand fast Ephesians. 6. 15
: The first weapon is the truth of God, with this the mind must be so
confirmed and strengthened, that Satan do not keep us continually in doubting.
The second weapon is innocence of life, that Satan do not extinguish all heat
and light of Religion in our souls and service of God. The third is an
allacrity and cheerfulness to embrace the Gospel of peace. The fourth is
faith, which the Devil desires to robvs of, because it is the Casket, yea the
Castle of all our comfort; and in this warfare both sword and buckler. Resist
steadfast in the faith 1 Pet. 5, 9
: and this is our victory whereby we overcome the world, even our faith 1 Job.
5. 4
: And the Apostle says, Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, gird you like men
and be strong 2 Cor. 16 13
: VVatch, sleep not in sin; stand, fly not to sin^ stand fast, fall not
through sin; watch, for the Lord comes to Judge; stand, for Satan comes to
tempt; stand fast, for the flesh persuades to yield; in faith, for Satan
would winnow us like wheat Luke 22, 31
: and not winnow us only, but also win us from God. The fifth weapon is hope,
which in this skirmish must hold up our hearts. The sixth, is the word of God,
which is powerful to salvation Romans 1, 16
: which is sharper then a two edged sword Heb. 4, 11
: which is a lantern to our feet Psalm. 119, 105
: which is able to make us wise unto salvation Tim. 3. 15
. The last spiritual weapon is prayer, which to the party that prays is
aid, to God a sacrifice, and to the Devil a scourge. In sickness, prayer is
a medicine. Hezechias prayed in his sickness unto the Lord 2 Kin 20, 2
. In sorrow it is a sollace Iona. 2, 1.
. In trouble it is a comfort Psalm. 50. 15
: Prayer overcomes the Devil, and stays the hands of God, it is the
messenger which relates our affairs to God faithfully, and brings his
answer wished for, speedily. God that would not be overcome with the brags of
the proud Pharisie, was over entreated by the prayers of the humble Publican
Luke 18. 13
: To conclude, All these weapons we must have if we conquer Satan; and all
these weapons we shall have if we put on Christ.

The second enemy is the World.
THe second enemy is the world, and there is a world of enemies in the belly of
this beast, worldly pleasures, and worldly pomp, and worldly pride, and
worldly prophanonesse, and worldly profits, which all fight together against
our poor souls, and fight amongst themselves which shall have the first blow
at us. But the love of the world is the Captain of them all, which has
carried many captive. Demas loving the world did forsake the world 2 Timothy 4 10
: nay it makes men forsake God himself, and become Gods foe; for he that will
be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God Iam. 4, 4
: And love not the world says Saint John, For whosoever loves the world the
love of God is not in him 1 Ioh, 2. 15
. This world is a strumpet which by her beauty does bewitch us; a staff of
reed which by his brittlenes does deceive us, when we lie or rely upon it.
The world does promise unto men mountains of gold, huge and high towers of
honors, but these are but towers of Babell, which will fall upon the heads of
the builders, and bring them to confusion. The Sea sometime does hoise up the
Ship toward heaven, but presently it is plunged down in the deep; so does the
world lift up many men for a time, but ere long they fail of their footing,
and fall down to the bottom of baseness or beggerie. That part of the wheel
which is one while highest, is presently down again in the dirt; so they that
to day are in the top of honor, before to morrow may be brought to deep
disgrace.

Agathocles of a Potter became a Potentate, being advanced from the dirty Clay
to the Crown and Diadem: On the contrary Dionisius fell from his princely
Throne to a poor Pedagogue in Corinth, God has put down the mighty from
their seat, and has exalted the humble and meek Luke 1, 52
: God takes the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire,
that he may set him with Princes, even the Princes of the people Psalm. 1* 3,
7, 8
: Wrastlers use to list the^ up on high whom they purpose to cast down on the
ground, with greater violence: such a wrastler is the world, that has hoysed
many, but to give them a greater fall. The world is troublesome as the Sea
which cannot rest Esaias 57. 20. such tossing and troubling there is in it; It is
as brittle as glass, very bright but quickly broken; The world passes away
and the lust thereof 1 Ioh, 2, 19
: The world is a swelling Sea through pride, blew through envy, fervent through
anger, deep through dissembling, unquiet through covetousness, fomie through
wantonness, supping up all through the care of the belly.

Where the greater fishes eat up the less. Is the world so turbulent and
transitory, what madness is it then to be so fast nailed to it in our
affections, that we can hardly be knocked off from it, or as we did verily
believe there were no other world to come. We suffer a great deal of trouble
which is certain to prolong our days a little time, which are uncertain; for
this world is not our mansion house; or permanent; but an Inn or rather but a
thorow-fair, through which we must pass to our own house and home: Here we
must so lodge this day, as that we must be ready to depart the next; and though
we love it never so well, and live in it never so long, we shall find, and be
forced to confess at last, when we must leave it; that it hurts many, heales
few; promseth much, performs nothing. Let worldly men vaunt of their
knowledge, how to get, and keep, and save, and thrive; the knowledge is little
worth while the world knows not God Job. 1. 10
: they may speak of their quick and stirring spirits, but a better Spirit then
theirs has spoken it, that the world receives not the spirit of truth Ioh,
14. 1^
: They may reprove the Saints of God for singularity, but the Holy Ghost
reprooueth the world of sin Ioh. 16, 8
: They may think themselves jolly wise men, But the wisdom of the world is
but foolishness with God 1 Cor. 1^ 20
: They may prey upon the poor, but our Savior did not pray for the world Ioh.
17, 9
: They may play Rex, and domineere as Kings here, but Christ's kingdom is not
of this world Ioh. 18. 36
: Now if any godly soul shall say, how may we overcome this world; I will
tell him in a word or two, but it is sooner said then done: First, We must not
love this world, nor the things of this world more then God. Secondly, we must
not live after the fashions of this world, which are all either vain or wicked
Romans 12. 2
: Thirdly, We must use this world as though we used it not 1 Cor. 7, 31
: Fourthly, we must not be servant to our servant the world. Fifthly, if we
truly judge of the world, of all the pleasures, and profits, and dedelights
thereof, as Solomon has taught us, who had tried it well, that all is vanity
and vexation spirit.

The best but vanity, and the most vexation; and so much for our second maine
enemy which is the world.

The third enemy is the Flesh.
THe third enemy is our flesh, an enemy in our own house which lies betwixt
our breasts and bosom, and therefore more dangerous. This flesh of ours is a
Judas which does kiss, but it is to kill; a Dalilah in Sampsons bosom, a
Caine to Abel, an Absolon to Ammon, a Ioab to Amasa, and in a word the common
cutthroat of our souls. As a moath which is bred in a garment and nourished
by it, does notwithstanding fret and spoil it, so the flesh does go about to
eat out our souls, and does fight against the spirit which gives life and
being to it Gal. 5, 17
: Civil wars you know are far more fearful then foreign innations: such
is this fight of the flesh against the spirit, it is inward, and near at hand
to hurt upon all occasions, we bear about with us our greatest enemy, which
will stab the soul, or rob it of all rich graces of the spirit; darken the
understanding, dull the memory, fat the heart, blind the eyes, stop the
ears, and strip the soul stark naked of all goodness. If we have a Pharaoh
a bloody Tyrant abroad, we shall have a Judas a plodding traitor at home, and
how hard is it to prevent the harms which such an insinuating and close
adversary may pull upon us. He that rules his own mind, is better then he
that wins a City Pro. 16, 32
: He that represseth and keeps under his intemperate passions and violent
affections, does a greater exploit, and more praise worthy, then he that
conquereth Cities, and Castles, and Towns, and Towers, Anger, wrath,
covetousness, and such corrupt affections are our capital enemies; I may
term them our Turks against whom we must daily war and fight, and that
without fainting, least they bring us into bondage, for of whomsoever a man is
overcome, even unto the same is he in bondage 2 Pet. 2, 19
: Sampson did much hurt to his enemies the Philistims, yet himself was
overcome, if not with filthy, yet with fond and foolish love. Alexander the
Great Conquered a great part of the world, yet would he not conquer his own
anger, or command his drunken desires. Many rule and govern Cities, Armies,
and Families, yet are servants to their sensual pleasures and delights. That
Emperor therefore is worthy praise, which rules his own propper affections;
If thou will have all subject to thee, subject thy self to reason. Thou shall
govern many, if reason govern thee, and rule many, if thou be ruled by
reason, but if thou suffer the flesh, to have the sovereignty, and set the
Crown on her head, thou shall be sure to live like a slave, and die no better
then a beast. But how shall we overcome this Enemy that is always at home? I
will tell thee, by these means, and with these weapons.

First, we must obstaine from fleshly lusts which sight against the soul 1
Pet. 2. 11
. Secondly, we must tame our bodies by fasting and bring them into subjection 1
Cor. 9. 27
. Thirdly, we must mortify our members Col. 3. 5.
. Fourthly, we must abstain from all appearance of evil. Fifthly, we must not
pamper the flesh. Sixthly, we must reject such motions as the flesh does iniect,
and that at their first entrance, the Serpent must be crushed in the shell, the
Fox must be taken while he is a cubbe.

The last enemy is sinnne.
THe last Enemy with whom we are to make war in this world, is Sin, a busy
enemy, because he is a borderer, an inhabitant, an innmate; one that eats
with us, sleeps with us, walks with us, rides with us, and meets us at
every turning: as fire in the flint, so sin is in the seed, it is bred in
the bones, and will not out of the flesh, until Joseph's bones be carried out
of Egypt; that is, until we be out of this World. Sin is a Iebusite, a
seditious neighbor, and an insinuating mate, so has it eaten into the nature
of Man with its canker and contagion, that his affection is infection, his
reason treason, and his will wayward altogether, and auerse from good.

The more the Law of God does forbid sin, the more does man commit sin; we
run with all might and maine to that which is forbidden, for it falls out
commonly with sinners as it does with sick men: Commonly the meats that are
forbidden by the Physician, are a kind of sauce to provoke appetitite in the
patient, most of all to desire these meats. As swelling waters, the more they
are barred their course, the more they rage and swell, and ouerflow and bear
down all before them; so the more the Law does seem to bar and bolt the
current of committing sin, and to set the bounds which they should not pass;
the more is sinful man's nature enraged, and the more the swelling waves of
wickedness do ouerflow and make their fultide; the more should be our care and
courage to encounter it, and set our selves to fight against it. Of our selves
indeed we cannot overcome it, but if we follow our Captain Christ Jesus, it
shall never overcome us. Saint Paul had experience both of his conflict with
sin, and conquest over sin. O wretched man that I am (says he) who shall
deliver me from the body of this death. I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord Romans 7. 25
. He it was, that was made a sacrifice for sin 2 Cor. 5. 21
, as Joshua shut up Kings and Princes in Caves of the earth, and rolled great
stones on the mouth of the Caves Josh. 10. 27
: So sin shuts up greatest Emperors prisoners, and rowleth stones, and
lays great stumbling blocks in their way: and as none could overcome the
roaring Lion, but the Lion of the tribe of Judah Reu. 5. 5.
: So none could free men, out of the prison whereinto sin had cast them, but
only Christ; For this cause Christ took flesh upon him, that so he might die
in his flesh, and through death destroy death, and him that had the power of
death that is the devil Heb. 2. 14
. So that Christ has carried away the gates of death, as Sampson sometime did
the gates of Azzah Iug. 16. 3.
, and has by his power prevailed over those uncircumcised Philestims, even
sin and death, and the devil and hell; and though we be too weak of our
selves to conquer sin, yet we must follow our Captain Christ, as fast as we
can, and as far as we may. First, by flying from sin. Secondly, by dying
unto sin. Thirdly, by hating all sin, yea the very garments spotted with
the flesh Jude 23.
. Fourthly, by true faith, for that does purify the heart Acts. 15. 9.
. And thus much for the fourth Enemy, now take a view of all these together,
consider their malice, their might and the multitude of soldiers which fight
under them, and we shall plainly see the truth of the point proposed, that
while we live in this world, we must look to fight and prepare our selves for
this Warfare.

A preparation how to die well.
The first Use is for instruction, in Use 1.
that we have so many Enemies to stand upon our guard, let us keep watch and
ward continually, let us be as careful to resist, as our adversaries are to
assault. A careful watch is the chiefest point in War, and therefore this is
often commanded in the Word of God; Watch, for you know not what hour your
master will come Matthew. 24. 42.
: VVatch and pray Mat 26. 4
, Awake to live righteously, 1 Cor. (...) 34.
, Be sob^r and watch 1 The. (...). (...)
. Unto this command, God had for our encouragement annexed a promise of no
less then blessedness. Blessed is the servant whom the Master when he comes
shall find watching Mat 26 46.
. Blessed is he that watches Reu. (...). (...).
. Blessed is the man that watches daily at my gates Pro. 8. 33.
. Christ will cause them that watch, to sit down at Table with him, where they
shall be at ease from pain; at rest, from labor; full without hunger, healthy
without sickness; and have fullness of ^irth and solace, without any mixture
of sorrow or mourning: God is the Center of the soul, as every thing does rest
in his Center, so our souls shall rest in God: My people, says God, by his
Prophet, shall dwell in the Tabernacle of Peace, and in sure dwellings, and in
safe resting places Isa. 32. 18.
. Thirdly, as we have precept to watch, and promise of blessedness if we do
watch; so we have a pattern and example of watching, worthy to be imitated,
for it is Christ himself. What Soldier will not be glad to watch with his
Captain? what Christian will not run to watch, when they hear Christ thus
kindly calling them? Could ye not watch with me one hour Mat. 26. 38.
. VVatch, Behold the easiness, I bid you not fight for me, or die with me;
but watch only, and that an hour: Behold the easiness, not a year, or a
week, or a day, but an hour.

Lastly, by watching as we follow Christ's pattern, so we shall be prepared
hereby for Christ's coming, which will be in an hour that we know not Luke 12.
40.
.

The second Use serves to teach us to cast off all carnal security seeing we
have Use 2.
so many enemies to encounter withal. The Devil is another Herod; the World
is a flattering Pharasie, the Flesh a treacherous Judas, and Sin a seditious
Iebusite; And therefore little cause have we to walk without our weapons, or
sleep in security. When the old world was secure, it was drowned Genesis 7. 23.
. When Sodom and Gomorrha were secure, they were burned Gen 19. 24.
. When Sampso^ was secure, his eyes were put out ^ug. 16. 21.
. When Jonah was secure, and slept in the side of the ship, he is shaken with
the waves, and the lo^ does design him to be cast into the Sea Ion. (...). ^5.
. When the rich man was secure, his soul was taken from him Lu^. 12. 1^.
. As Bankrupts never care to pay their debts till the Serieant be upon their
backs; so many secure men never think how far they run daily in arrerages
with God, till they be arrested by death, at the suite of the great Judge, and
so be cast into prison. This security is the Mother of negligence, and high way
to destruction; for as the ox when he is driven to the slaughter, goes
willingly, because his hope is (if I may so speak it) that he shall go to
grass in some better pasture, and never fear, till the axe be ready to fall
upon his head; or as a fool, when he is led to the stoak^, goes cheerfully,
and never shrinketh until his feet be fast snared therein; even so many men
go securely forward, wandering in the broad way without remorse of conscience,
persuading themselves they are safe, when indeed they are secure, and never
perceive their own folly; till they be ensnared in destruction: many are
careful for others, but secure for themselves; they look on other men's faults
with both eyes, but scarcely with one on their own; either they will not see
their sins, or if they see them, they will slightly pass them over without
any serious consideration: They cry Peace, Peace, when destruction is at their
doors 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
. They that find themselves in good health, never seek or send to the
Physician; and they also that are soul sick, and dangerously diseased, but
feel it not, do never cry after Christ, they seek little after him, and set
less by him:

Thirdly, the hope of a happy reward should encourage us to wage War against
those our enemies; He that never comes forth to fight, can never conquer; and
he that does not conquer, shall never be crowned; he that overcomes, will I
give to eat of the Manna that is hid, and will give him a white stone, and
in that stone, a new name written, which no man knows, saving he that
receives it Reu. 2. 17.
. He that overcomes and keeps my words to the end, to him will I give power
over Nations Reu. 2. 26.
. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the Tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God Reu. 2. 7.
. And so often in the same Chapter you may see it to be the posee of all the
Epistles; to him that overcomes will I give, either grace, or glory, or both;
not to him that steppeth forth into the battle, and starts back again; nor to
him that draws his Sword, or give a blow, or loses some blood; but to him
that overcomes, that fights it out till he have foiled his enemy and won
the field. So if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him; suffer here,
reign in heaven; suffer misery, reign in glory; for, from the cross, we
must come to the Crown. A Soldier must fight before he can win the victory;
he must be a Soldier, before he can be a Captain. There is a Crown of
righteousness laid up; But for whom? for such as have fought a good fight 2.
Tim. 4. 7
; and it is not a good fight, unless we ^uercome. The penny of eternal life
is promised to laborers, not to loiterers, to workers, not to idle ^wanderers;
to those that are in the Vineyard, not to such as stand staring in the market
place. Suffer affliction, says the Apostle, as the good Soldier of Jesus
Christ; No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life, because he would please him that has chosen him to be a Soldier; and
if any man strive for a mastery, he is not crowned unless he strive as he
ought to do 2 Timothy 2. 34.
, and can we then hope to be crowned, if we strive not at all. Worldlings
wrestle for a corruptible Crown, as uncertain whether they shall obtain it
or no; but it is not so with the true Christian, he runs not as uncertainly,
he fighteih not as one that beats the air 1 Cor. 9. 25
: Some will say that afflictions and troubles do hinder many Soldiers that
they cannot fight as they would: but the Apostle puts them both together.
Suffer thou affliction, as the good Soldier of Jesus Christ, looking to the
reward that Christ is ready to give thee as soon as the battle is ended. Thy
fighting is but for a moment; thy triumph is for ever; thy fighting is light,
thy reward heavy; A weight, and excellent weight; a more excellent, a far
more excellent and eternal wayght of glory 2 Cor. 4. 17.
. Where God purposes to heal, he spares not to lance; he ministers bitter
pills to purge corrupt humors, and sends Embasies of death and renenge where
he means to preserve, and where he purposes to bestow eternal life and
felicity. Joseph accused his brethren as spies, when he meant them least hurt,
and restrained little Benjamin as guilty of that, whom he knew full well to be
a guiltless innocent; but these accusatious were like water in a Smiths Forge,
which serves to kindle, not to quench; it was a rough entrance, to a most
kind usage; an outward show of suspicion, the more plainly to utter his entire
affection; so deals God with his children for they have gone through fire and
water, but he has brought them out into a wealthy place Psalm. 66. 12
. Many go out of prison and chains, but their iourneyes end is to a Kingdom,
many in few things are vexed, but in more they are well considered. Though the
godly are tried like gold in the furnace, yet God loves them never the less
for it, but makes them the purer by it: If afflictions be grievous, yet at the
least the godly gain this by it, that it makes the soul more sober: If God
begin, with I have afflicted thee, he will doubtless end with I will afflict
thee no more Nah. 1, 12
. And as we are partakers of Christ's suf^erings, so we shall be also of his
consolation 2 Cor. 1, 7
: If we die with him, with him shall we live: And if we bear his Cross we shall
wear his Crown, God wounds us sometimes, but his wounds are the wounds of a
friend, for whether he denounce judgment, or inflict it, all is for our good
in the end. He sent Jonah to Ni^^neh to threaten and overthrow, but his intent
was to bring them to repentance, that he might manifest his greater mercies.
He sent Esaias to Hezekiah to tell him of his dying day Esa. 38. 1
: but his meaning was to move him to amendment that he might adiourne his life
yet longer: He suffered Daniel to be thrown into the Den of Lions but it
was to advance him to greater credit. He that had seen Joseph in prison
unjustly; Mordacay with a gibet before his eyes, would have bewailed there
case, but had he known that Joseph's prison would have ended in a Princedome,
and Mordecay his peril with royal preferment: he would rather think them
much beholding to God for the ensuing felicity, then greatly to be pitied for
their present misery.

The Musician straineth not his strings to high for fear of breaking, neither
does let them to low, for fear of discord; so God will keep a mean, neither
suffering us to be carelessly secure, nor driving us for want of comfort to
despair. Who then will not war when he shall be sure to triumph hereafter;
If we overcome, we shall go home to our fathers house Ioh. 14, (...)
: To the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem: Heb. 12. 22.

Lastly, we must fight for fear we be overcome, for then what mercy can be
expected at the hauds of our spiritual Pharaoh, what delight in the prison,
where there is nothing but: howling for griese, gnawing of the tongue for
sorrow, gnashing of the teeth for fear and pain Re. 16. 10
: There is neither hope, nor help, nor ease, for the fire is unquenchable, and
the worm shall not die Mat. 3, 12
: there is no end, for the pain is everlasting; there is no light but
darkness, nay a land of darkness more palpable then that of Egypt Job. 10, 21
: It is violent fire which shall devour the adnersary Heb. 10, 17
: A lake of fire burning with brimstone Reu. 9, 20
: In which Lake the men that are overcome are cast, and shall lie burning day
and night for evermore Reu. 20, 10
: where instead of order, there shall be confusion; instead of Halaluiah,
there shall be cursing; instead of mirth, mourning; instead of joy
unspeakable, inconceivable, and which is worst of all, eternal torments. In
that place the sweetest harmony shall be howling, and the greatest comfort
confusion of faces. When Adeni-zedeck was taken the men of I^da and Simeon cut
off the thumbes of his hands, and of his feet Judge. 1, 6
: So our spiritual enemies will deal with us if they overcome us, and far
more cruelly. They will put out our eyes that we shall not lift them up to the
heavens from whence our help does come; they will cut off our hands, that we
shall not lift them up in prayer unto God, as the Apostle exhorts 1 Timothy 2, 8
: They will pull out our tongues, that we shall not speak to God in prayer,
and they will bind us hand and foot that we shall not be able to help our
selves, or go to other to seek for help Mat. 22, 13
: Thus we have seen the quality of man's days, how they are sharp; The
second general point notes the quantity of our days, that they are short in
these words, Are not his days as the days of an hireling.

The Christians Crown of glory after warfare.
ARe not his days as the days of a ^ireling, an hireling has a time
appointed and limited how long he shall labor, and then to have his wages; so
man has a time appointed to war and fight, and then to have his reward,
which is promised by him that di^ never deceive any, the grand Captain, Christ
Jesus, who will confess such as serve him before his Father, and before the
holy Angels Reu. (...). 6^
: an hireling looks and waits when his day will end that he may have his
hire; so the godly, desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, that they
may receive the Crown, of glory prepared for the^. Many profitable points might
hence be collected, but the time will not give me leave to stand upon all,
only this I will briefly urge.

That man shall then receive his reward when he has overcome, when he has
done his work, God will not deny his wages, this reward is not carnal but
spiritual, not earthly but heavenly, not man's but Gods, not merited but given
of mercy. This reward is laid up 2 Timothy 4, 8
: and it is a Crown, not of thorns, as on Christ's head, nor of gold, as on
earhly Kings heads, but a Crown of righteousness, so Paul calls it a Crown of
life; so James names it Iam. 1. 12
: a Crown of glory; so Peter styles in 1 Pet. 5, 4
: yea a Crown incorruptible and everlasting. When thou hear of a Crown
conceive a triumph, for Crowns are laid up for them that after victory
triumph over the enemy. There is no garland where there is no gole to run to,
there is no victory, where there is no enemy; there is no hire, where there is
no labor; and there is no happiness, where there is no trial by temptation:
and rather then such as fight the Lords battles against sin and Satan, the
world and the flesh, shall want either Credit or Comfort, God himself shall be
their Crown. In that day shall the Lord of hosts be for a Crown of glory, and
for a Diadem^ of beauty unto the residue of his people, Esa. 28 5.

So run that you may obtain this Crown. Such as wrestle or run in a race,
will diet themselves before hand, and endure much when they come to fight or
run, even sweat, and pant, and blow, and bleed; how much more should
Christians in this course and conflict of Christianity; especially,
considering the enemies with whom we are to fight and wrestle are far
mightier; for they wrestle but with men made of the same mould and metal that
we are: we with principalities and powers, and wicked spirits: the time that
we are to fight is far longer, they but for an hour or two; but we all the
days of our life, the Crown for which we strive is far better: they did
wrestle for the applause and commendation of men, or for a garland of flowers,
which did fade in a day: we for an incorruptible Crown of glory, which God
shall give us in his kingdom. Let no man look for his reward in this world,
but in the end of the day, that is, after death: then the wages shall be paid,
when we rest from our work. As L^ch called his son Noah because he should
comfort him, and make all his labor and sorrow to eease and end Genesis 5, 29
: Even so all just and righteous men may call death their Noah, the son of
their rest, and end of there labors, and sorrows, and sicknesses, and sin,
and shame; for then these and all other miseries shall be done away, and shall
never be again, and then shall he be crowned that has overcome.

This may serve to let Christians see what a gracious Master they serve, who
will not see their work unrewarded. The wicked indeed in a pow^ing and
repining humor, will say as Job settes it down Job. 21, 15
: What is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit should we
have of we pray unto him: But the Christian will gladly confess, that their
wages is far beyond their work, for if we overcome, the Crown is not due
of debt: heaven is no purchase of ours, but a free inheritance given to the
godly for Christ's sake. Eternal life it the gift of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord Romans 6, 23
: Every man shall receive according to his works, but not for the worth and
merit of his works. The Crown is of mercy, not of merit, and where there is
need of mercy (as what man does not need it) there is no standing upon merit.
The Apostles reason in this point is plain: If salvation be of grace, it is
no more of works, for else were grace no more grace, and if it be of works it
is, no more of grace, for else were works no more works Romans 1. 6
: But salvation is of grace, as the same Apostle has plainly delivered Ephesians.
2, 8
: By grace are you saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works least any man should boast. Indeed we are created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, that we should walk in them, as it follows in
the same place; that we should walk in them, not that we may merit by them.
For good works are the way wherein we must walk to the Kingdom of Heaven,
but they are not the cause that we are Crowned when we come there. Good
works we all know proceed from the grace of God and therefore God cannot any
way be indebted to us for his own which he gives us. Does not David say, all
things come of thee, and of thine own hand, we have given thee 1 Chro. 29 14.
. Who has given unto him first, and he shall be recompensed Rom 11. 35
. We are borne to do good, and our whole course must be to walk in Gods
commandments, and a special commandment is, to be fruitful in good works
Coll. 1. 10.
: As hirelings are busied all day, so must we as long as we live here exercise
our hands unto good works.

These are the best apparel of Christians, and their most durable riches and
treasures. What one point does God more press us unto, then this duty of doing
good works, bring forth works worthy amendment of life Acts 26. 20
. Be zealous of good works Tit. 2. 14
. And this we cannot be till we be in Christ; without me, says our Savior,
ye can do nothing Ioh. 15. 5^
. As a graft can bring forth no fruit which is not set into a stock: so no man
can possibly turn his hand to any thing that is truly and formally good, till
he be ingraffed into Christ: and therefore it should be our wisdom and
comfort to show by good conversation our works Iam. 3. 13
, and our love to provoke one another to good works Heb. 10. 24
. A faith busy in obedience, and fruitful in good works, is the fruits of
profitable Preaching, and conscionable hearing; a godly life is the Christians
badge whereby he is known, it is the Ensign, showing whose Soldier he is,
and to whom he belongs. As the pleasant and delghtfull fruit which the Spies
brought out of the promised land; showed that that was pleasant and profitable,
so a godly conversation, shows that a man is the child of God, and servant of
Christ.

Last of all, let this serve to exhort all true Christians to live godly in
this present life, and always to look for, yea, and long for death; to welcome
and embrace it when it does come, for there is no other means to put an end
unto our troublesome Warfare, and to put us in possession of our promised
reward, but only death. The poor Apprentice counts when the date of his
Indentures end, that he may be made free; the Day-Labourer looks when the
Sun will set, that he may leave work; The Seafaring man and Passenger is
feign when they come within kenne of land, that they may attain the Haven; and
shall not we, whose Indentures end not but by death; who must not leave working
till the Sun of our life be set; and who can never come within ken of the
Haven of Heaven, till we see some signs of death, welcome it with all our
hearts. It is no wonder indeed, if the wicked look pale and wanne at the
warning of death, because they discry beyond death, a day of Judgment, and
beyond that, they behold hell; well may they be dejected, when they feel
sickness, and almost desperate, when they find the pangs of death upon them;
for besides the pain of death, every sin serves as a Fury to torment the
soul, and to make it loath to depart out of the prison of the body. But the
godly who have wrastled and made War here with their spiritual enemies, are
glad to hear that the time is come when they shall be crowued. It was a clear
heart, nothing else could do it, that gave so bold a f^rehead to that good
Bishop, who durst on his deathbed profess; I have so lived, as I neither
fear to die, nor shame to live; for if we so l^, as always looking when we
shall die; we shall so die, as not doubt but be Crown^d with Christ in his
Kingdom.

The Commendations of the deceassed Party.
ANd now blessed and beloved Brethren; That little Box of ointment which I
have brought for the burial of this worthy and Worshipful Knight; I hope you
will give me leave to power forth (for a good name is like a precious ointment
powered out) and I doubt not but to fill the house with the sauoure of it; and
though I cannot sufficiently set forth his commendations, yet I dare not so
much wrong him that deserved it, or you that expect it, or my self that owe
it, as to be altogether silent; lend me your patience then a little, till I
discharge this due debt of deserved praise, not to be denied unto the dead.

To live well, and to die well, as they are inseparable companions; so they are
the most certain tokens of a true Christian, and the greatest commendations
that in fewest words can be given a man; which whether they be not due to the
deceassed Party, those that knew him best can well witness, and you will
confess when you shall have heard the particulars which I can but only point
at.

The Hebrew Doctors say of their meanest Magistrates, whom they call the Court
of three men, that there must be in every one of them these seven properties;
Wisdom, Meekness, The fear of God, Hatred of Mammon, Love of the Truth,
Love of their fellow Creatures; that is, of other men, and that they be men of
good name; and these seven are indeed the same in effect with those that we
find mentioned in Exodus 18. 21. and Deuteronomy. 1. 13. And did sweetly concur in
this Man menaging the affairs of the Common wealth whereunto he was called;
and did carefully and consciouably discharge.

I. His wisdom.
FOr first his wisdom was well tried and proved to be sound in his singular
dexterity to search into, and his happy success in putting an end, to such
Causes and Controversies as were committed to him; which commonly were as many
and material, us to any one man; and what was it but his wisdom and mature
judgment which made cunning and crafty Companions, by all means fear to come
before him, lest they should be detected; and poor ignorant and innocent
people so fast to flock unto him, that they might be directed, by his
direction.

II. His Meekness.
ANd how could he choose but be wise, who was so meek; and so mildely and
calmely did he ^^rry himself: that as the Heathen Hit^ites, when they saw
Abraham's meek and mild carriage toward them; said, surely thou art a Prince
of God amongst us: so stubberne and sturdy Malefactors were almost well pleased
with those punishments he inflicted upon them, so sweetly tempered with meek
and soft answers to their doubts and admonitions for their well doing: Thus did
he carefully practice that precept of the Apostle; which as it concerns all
Christians, so particularly Ministers and Magistrates. Gal. 6. 1. Brethren, if
a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are spiritual restore
such one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also
be tempted.

III. His fear of God.
ANd how could he choose but be both ^ise and meek, whose soul was seasoned
with the fear of God, which is both the beginning of Salomons Proverbs Pro. 1, 7
: The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: And the end of Salomons
preaching Eccl. 12. 13
: Hear the end of all, fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the
whole man: without this I know not whether men be more foolish or fierce, by
this they are made both wise and meek, and for his fear of God (though this
be a spark which the fiery eyes of God can discern, the fleshly eyes of men
may be deceined) yet those that knew him, how duly and daily he observed his
Devotions, both for prayer and reading; How willingly and feelingly, he would
confer of matters of Religion; how deeply he detested all Popery and
superstition; how diligently he frequented the gates of Gods house; how
attentively he hearkened to the preaching of Gods Word, and for the help of
his memory, would note down many worthy sayings delivered by diverse Preachers,
which were found in his study after his death: how wisely he made choice of
such books, as may help forward our mortification, wherein he could not too
much commend Master Perkins Works, the Deceitfulness of the heart, and the
Practice of Piety: must needs confess that he did indeed truly fear God

IIII. His hatred of Mammon.
Covetousness and Contentedness, can no more agree together, then fire and
water; and how could he but be content whose delight was in the Lord; which as
David says, will bring a man his hearts delight: Godliness is great gain with
contentation, not if a man can be content, for that brings contentation with
it, wheresoever it comes: And as impossible it is for a Godly man not to be
contented, as it is for a contented man to be covetous; his fear of God
therefore frees him from this breeding sin of covetousness: Covetousness is
cruel, so was not he; but kind hearted toward all. What Tenant can complain
that he did over rack their rents? what neighbor can justly accuse him that
he did ouer-beare them in their right? or ouer-burden them with his might?
Covetousness is always complaining of some thing that it wants; so was not
he, but most thankefully acknowledged Gods goodness for that he had.
Covetousness keeps no hospitality, he did; and that not only upon good
days, like some that will kill an Ox or two at Christtide, that scarce kill a
Sheep all the year after: but all the year long, yea many years together,
without ever seeking to live in some corner of a City to save charges, as too
many far more able then he, daily do. Covetousness is ^unning and crafty, so
was not he; but like a true Nathaniel in whom there was no guile; he loving
nothing better in others, nor practiced nothing more carefully in himself,
then plain downright honest dealing.

V. His love of the Truth.
ANd this is not ouely the word of truth, as the Gospel is called; as here
it is taken, that is, true dealing both in word and deed. He who knew that
David would not endure a liar to tarry in his sight, and that God will not
suffer a liar to come in his kingdom, made it his Christian (...) that neither
his tongue might belie his heart by speaking otherwise then he thought; nor his
hands belie his tongue, by doing otherwise then he spoke. Li^ not one to
another, says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.
: for you are members one of another.

VI. His love.
ANd indeed such was his love to his fellow members, that he took as tenderly
what did touch the^, as if himself had felt it; his sympathy and
fellow-seeling of his brethrens wrongs, made him ready to hear any poor man's
complaint, and to help them if he could: sometimes speaking for them,
sometimes writing for them with his own hand; always in his heart pitying
the poor and oppressed. He knew how fatal it is for members of the same
bododie to fall out amongst themselves, and therefore he was always busy in
that blessed work of making peace: Composing controversies, and ending suits
of Law; sometimes by fair words, entreating; sometimes by giving counsel,
aduising; sometimes by plain and and pregnant places of Scripture, conuincing
the wilful: there were not many days in the whole year (excepting the
Sabbath) wherein he was not sought unto: and many times would he sit from
morning till night, hearing and examining such matters as came before him,
being demanded by some why he would sit so long, so tyring out himself,
spending his spirits, and endangering his health: his answer was, that by his
place and calling, and good of his country he was to do it: and for himself
he said he was as a Candle, wasting himself, to give light to others;
disquieting himself, to quiet others; and troubling himself, to free others
from trouble. To conclude, this particular, there are more then many that can
witness, that as it was said of Job Job 24, 15 16.
: so we may say of him, that he was eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a
father to the poor, and a friend to all.

Finally, for his good name, the sweet savor of it spread it self further
then himself was known, and begins now after his death to grow stronger and
stronger. Jacobs body was never embalmed with so sweet spices, as this man's
name and memory is seasoned with the savor of his virtues; and ever shall be
honored with variety of fresh praises, which not only his godly life which you
have heard, but his gracious death which in a word you shall hear, will
always afford.

It is the nature of natural motions, that the nearer they come to their end,
the swifter they are: surely we may easily imagine that this man's motion to
heaven was come naturally; such haste he did make thither, now toward his
end. Hence it was that he professed that he was weary of this world, wherein
he never found any sound comfort or content: that he was desirous to go to
his own home, for here he said, he was but a stranger and pilgrim; not long
before he fell a sleep, he cited two verses of the 39. Psalm. The words are
these, Hear my prayer O Lord, and hearken unto my cry, keep not silence at my
tears (and with those words wept) for I am a stranger with thee, and a
saiourner as all my fathers were, stay thine anger from me, that I may recover
strength before I go hence, and be no more seen: What shall I say of his
humble Confession, that he was a great sinner, his strong Considence in Christ
his Savior, that sweet peace of conscience which he did find in his foul,
by the assured remission of his sins, and that infallible assurance of
salvation, that he should l^^e for ever with God: of which, and other points
he sweetly discoursed five days before his death, not without sighs and
tears, the true messengers and best Orat^rs of a penitent soul.

Thus might he at his death make as bold a profession as that good Bishop: I
have so lived, that I am neither afraid to die quickly, nor ashamed to live
l^nger: he need not indeed, for a good life is the forerunner of a good death:
As I^r^^ says, I have not read nor heard, but that he who lived well, died
well. Thus we know this Worshipful Knight, and worthy Governor in his
Country lived; and thus, we doubt not but he died in the Lord, and lives with
the Lord. The Lord grant us all grace to live and die in him,

Amen.
FINIS.

