UNTO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY Prince, his Sovereign Lord King JAMES. A poor
Subject sends, A Soldiers Resolution; humbly to wait upon his Majesty.

IN THIS LITTLE Book the godly Virtues of our Mighty King are specified, with
disscription of our late Queen, (and still renowned) ELIZAS Government: The
Pope and Papists are in their colors set forth, their purposes laid open, and
their hopes dissolved, the happy peace of England is well described, and the
long continuance thereof humbly prayed for.

LONDON Printed by John Windet, for Walter Burre, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyeard at the Sign of the Crane. 1603.

TO THE MOST High and Mighty Prince JAMES by the grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
MAY it please your Majesty, when I consider my own unworthiness, I check my
self for my presumption, in that I have adventured to write unto a Prince of
so great power and wisdom, as is your kingly self: but when I do remember
that your Highness desires to be approved a good poor man's King: then in the
hope of your gracious acceptance, I not repent the little labor that I have
bestowed: in which the clearenes of my conscience bears me up, and makes me
hope, that in my upright course, I shall not in the least sort displease the
mightines of your great majesty. I have like a Soldier hent my self against
your public enemies, and the foes of Christ, in the justice of which course my
resolution has resolved in life and death to do your Highness faithful and
obedient service: your poorest subict, my renowned Soueraign, humbly entreats
that you would be pleased gratiousely for to accept this his trifeling gift,
and with your mercies eye to view the lines unto your princely self directed,
and if they shall procure your content, your servant then receives the fulness
of his joy, and gains unto himself his most desired recompense, with all
submission he refers himself, and this his work to be censured by your
Majesty, unto whom he wishes Salomons wisdom, David's heart, and Ioshuas
courage, with all the best commended virtues which did attend on them: that
Englands king may be a mirror to the world, and that the nations of the earth
may wonder at the long continuance of your most happy and princely government.

Your Majesty's poorest Subject ROBERT PRICKET

A SOVLDIERS Resolution.
MOst mighty Prince: the Angelical graces wherewith your kingly spirit is
endued the divine excellency of whose virtues worthiness, your royal hand
has in heavenly lines unto the world commended, as an apparent testimony of
your sound belief, arightly grounded upon the corner stone Christ Jesus: by the
grace of whose asistance your sacred Majesty is made to be the worlds chief
Christian king: so that in all the kingdoms of the earth, that does homage to
the name of Christ, there is not any Prince of so absolute a power, being
arightly incorporated in the proper strength of his own inheritance, that can
compare with the greatness of your Magnificence, nor is their any king under the
heavens great Canopie, that stands like your royal self, so clearly
sequestered from the Roman Antichristian leprosy: the demonstration of which
apparent truth does undoubtedly prognosticate that God has raisde your
highness up unto the throne of royal dignity, that by the happiness of your
godly government, you may increase and beautify the glorious kindgom of his
blessed Son. And that your Majesty like a most valiant, victorious, and
triumphant captain under the banner of the worlds Redeemer Christ, should with
maiesticke power confront, and underneath your princely foot tread down all
oppositions, that by secret plots of devilish treachery, or public force of
hostile arms, dares but presume by their tirannicall aspiring menaces to
threaten the ruin of the house of God. And as the Church in England has for
these last precedent four and forty years, been ruled by a godly religious
maiden Queen, renownde Elizabeth of famous memory, unto the glory of whose
virtuous government, Revel. cap. 12.
may with a Christian consideration be ascribed the long-agoe prophetical
wonder seen in heaven: Of a woman clothed with the Sun, in whom the Church
was figured, compassed about with the illustrate and shining beams of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. And underneath her feet the wavering and unconstant
Moon was put. For by her means from forth the Church was cast the vain
inconstant mutabilities of Romes invented strange traditions. And upon her
head a crown of twelve stars stood, which did foreshew, as was by her made
manifest, that from the doctrine of the twelve Apostles should derived be, the
form and order of her government, the brightness of whose illuminating light
should with an uncontrolled power: from forth her kingdom drive, the
loathsome darkness of that souls poisoning contagious smoke which flies from
forth that hell-borne pit, the gulf of Antichrist. And in despite of that
great red Dragon, having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon
his heads. By which is mentioned the devil, the Pope, Spain, Monks, Friars,
Jesuits and Seminaries, with the rabblement of that Antichristian power,
burning with fury against the Spouse of Christ, having made themselves red
with the effusion of those streams of blood, which their cruelties caused to
gush forth from the innocent bodies of thousand martired Saints: yet maugre the
force of al their hellish tyrannising rage, divine Eliza during all the time of
her most happy, blessed, peaceful, and victorious reign, traveled in the
desire of her religious care to be a gracious mother, and a tender nurse unto
the children of the Church of God, and in the continuance of her now out dated,
and yet datelesse time: her subjects being fed with the Nectar and Ambrosia of
a heavenly diet, by the ministry of that euer-enduring truth contained in the
canonical Scriptures of the old and new testament: many thousands were
begoten unto Christ and taught arightly how to ground their faith, upon the al
and only sufficient sure foundation of their redeemers love. That plain and
simple people in her land could with divine and godly wisdom maintain the
argument of their faithes belief, against the cunning coosening sophistry of a
pernicious Popish Priest.

But now that our late maiden Queen, whose sanctified soul unto her God,
brought forth so many Saints, has left this earth to be a Saint in heaven,
whither should my eyes return themselves with joy, unless to look upon your
Majesty. And in this thought my soul is ravished with a private meditation,
my Country England has stood as a glorious City built upon a Mountains
top, whose beauty, wealth, strength, and government, has lifted up it self
with admiration to the world; the temple of the house of God was from mount
Sion brought and placed in the midst of Englandes territories. Were the
government of Rome now as then it was when England was converted there should
be no Pope as now the^e is, nor Mass, nor Purgatcrie, nor approbation, to any
of their erroneous constitutions, Ethelderius brought with him none of their
new blasphemous doctrine Joseph of Aramatheus before him was a stranger
thereunto.
And since this Island first converted was from Pagan Athisme, it never stood
so dignified by the true profession of a sound religion as now it did, by the
isntrumental means of heavens Elizabeth: And when this glorious England
seemed to fear if self being mourner-like wrapde up in sable blackenesse, and
timorous minds speaking to themselves that their best days were past, and
dangerous times were near at hand, the silly Lambs that feared the tyranny
of the Roman Woolfe, wept in their thoughts, and did this question ask: Where
shall we sing our songs of Sionnow: The Woolfes they met in flocks together,
hoping that their long wishde for time was come, when they again should glut
themselves with blood, the rich did fear to loose their wealth, the poor did
fear to loose their lives, the vilder sort did hope to live up on their
countries spoil. And when this cloud of danger had brought it self even unto
the strength of his supposde combustion, then as a vapor into air dissolved
were all the meateors that did seem prodegious for the living mistres of our
happiness, Our late Qu^ did in the time of her sickness bequeath her crown unto
our now king, affirming it (as in in deed it is) his proper right.
did in her life time bequeath her crown to him whose right it was, and when
her soul was unto heaven ascended, forth with heavens God, into the mouth of
Englandes nobles put, the name of him who by their Queen was named to be their
sovereign, and they together with united love, did unto Englands commons
straight praclaim that great King James was made their lawful king, Then
England did unto her self retain, the vigor of her former strength, and the
beauty of her glory was presently sequestered from all occasions that might
diminish, extinguish or in the least sort eclipse the Sunshine of her
precedent dignity, never was a land to God more bound then England is for
this abundant mercy, who has unto us raysde a King, not only heir unto
Elizaes Crown, but also an inheritor of all those gracious virtues wherewith
her righteous soul is crowned. And now my sovereign Lord from saint Elisa to
your godly self descended is her kingdoms government, and all the Saints on
earth, within the limits of your large and spacious confines, do humbly wait
upon the assurance of your blessed hope. And for your royal hand has
manifested that your princely heart obeys the precepts of heavens written
word: what should I say, but certainly resolve your royal self, descending
from a race of Kings, and from that mighty King, whose euerconquering arm, at
first did break the head of Romes vsurpde authority, that now the mighty
God of heaven, whose wrath has always threatened the destruction of that
Babilonian Whore, has raised up your regal Majesty to break the neck and
back of that soul devouring beast: Revel. cap, 12. ver. 8. 9.
so as the Dragon, and his Angels shall no longer rule in Christendom, nor
shall the nations of the earth continue to be deceived with the infectious
Locusts of their lies and heresies, but his kingdom shall be razed to the
earth, and the world shall wonder at his destructions, overthrow (sure I am)
this truth must come to pass before the second coming of the king Christ
Jesus, since whose being upon the earth, until this present time, there never
was a true believing king (removed from the Popes authority, and yielding to
the government of Christ) that was of so absolute a power, to bring to pass,
the prophecies against the City of Rome, as is your majesty undoubtedly, my
sovereign Lord, this relying age is leaning to the latter end of time, and
all the signs forerunniug the day of judgment, have put themselves into a
perfect view, the revolution of the heavens, being so shaken as that the
planets are removed from their wonted stations, one having stepped into an others
place, and this massy globe of earth, has often with fearful earthquakes
trembled, the seventh and last Angel in the Revelation specified, has (as it
well was calculated by a reverend and learned minister in your Scotlands
kingdom) been sounding the last general summons for this already fifty five
years past: Reave, 11. ver. 9
and time it self has almost brought his course unto a whole united period,
whereby is threatened more then ordinary change. And at this present your
kingly self, having as it were by miracle been until this time preserved, and
now being created Gods great Lieutenant upon earth, and the only warrior and
chief Champion for his Jesus Christ, why should not every Christian soldier
then resolve that your magnanimious spirit, and glorious race from you
proceeding, shall be the guard unto the Church of God, and bring confusion upon
all her enemies. For as from the root of righteous Iesse did proceed the
liniall race whence Christ himself descended: so unto me it seems that
heavens eternal King in his secret wisdom, knowing the world is measured
with a little length, has raysde you up (most mighty Prince) that from your
righteous self might spring a glorious rank of godly and religious Kings,
and Queens, that might unto the Nations of the earth, maintain the glory of
his heavenly name, until himself shall in the Clouds appear, and summon all
the world unto a general judgment.

Worlds peerless Prince, and my renowned Sovereign, the consideration of
these things before discribed, have compasde me within a heaven of joy. And
though I am the vnwoorthiest of many thousands that in your England lives,
and far unfit to undertake this weighty business, having been always
trained up in the exercise of Arms, yet for I know there is nothing dignifieth
a Soldiers sword so much, as well to understand the justice of the cause for
which he fights, I have in the hope of your Majesty's acceptance, adventured
to make this little work, the armor of a Christian Soldiers Resolution, and
do resolve for God, and for his truth, in life and death, to vow my self a
faithful servant to you my sovereign Lord: the earths most godly and chief
Christian king. And so much the more have I tasked my weak and shallow
understanding muse, to this performance, because I must confess unto your
Majesty; that in a zealous loves affection to your highness, I have before
this time adventured to let a little Pamphlet, A book entitled, A Soldiers
wish unto his Sovereign Lord King James.
pass unto a public view, which has drawn unto it self, a partial
judgment from some opinions, as I think, not worthy any great respect, for by
the idleness of their inuectiue words, they seem to prove, that I deserved
blame, because I dealt so roundly with the sea of Rome, which vain imagination
found some show of cause to ground it self upon, the present times
incertaintie, feeming as if they desired to make a doubt, The Papists desire to
make a doubt of the certain continuance of our religion in the form which now
it does.
whether Religion should stand in that same form, which now it does or whither
it should be brought unto a more near affinity with Gehenna, the
Antichristian church of Rome. When this I heard, I could not choose, my
soueraign Lord, but second that my foregoing work, with this my named
Resolution: For when I with my self considered how Rome was figured by your
own disoription, and saw with what feruencie of spirit your divine and
sanctified heart did oppose it self against that worlds disceiuing,
irreligious, pernicious, blasphemous monstrous Pope; I could not but in my
soul resolve with a Soldiers Resolution, to follow your kingly Majesty in
your virtues steps, and not to suffer a little Monkish Mowle hill heap of
tongues, that rides upon the skirt of Peevish Popery, to derogate from your
kingly name, the glory due unto the honor of your faithes profession, nor
suffer that the godly people in your land (whose hearts prepares, as
befitteth loyal, faithful and obedient Subjects, to bid your Highness welcome
to your Kingdoms Crown) that the joy which they conceive in the excellency
of your great Majesty should be eclipsed by the inftigation of any secret
Papisticall objected doubt, The doctrine of Rome and Spain poysoneth both body
and souls, but helps neither.
what should let my resolution to speak plainly to my King, whole Highness
knows what drudges are sent from Rome, and therefore will not take Physic
for his soul from their impoysoned proiected potions. Boniface 3. by the leave
of Phocas the foolish Emperor, did first write himself papa, and then
presently began the ruin of the Church, the full effect whereof was concluded
by Adrian. since whose time as says planlina in the life of popes, there was
never any Emperor of might, nor pope of any virtue.
The Chronicles with innumerable Tragike scenes, have made description of the
Roman regement, showing to the world, that not any king nor Queen, nor Prince
in Christendom, that ever did displease that proud usurping Bishop, since he
ruled alone, and gainde unto himself, the name of Papa; but they were all of
them either poisoned, murdered, or otherwise betrayed, or their lands invaded,
or their Subjects moved to rebellion, or many times nearly brought in danger of
those evils, either by Monks, Friars, Jesuits, Seminaries, or some other
villainous minded slaves, sent from the Popes diuelishnes (but mis named
Holiness, to put in execution those three damned purposes, Bohemia, Lombardy,
Germany, France, and bleeding Belgia have bought their to true experience, with
a dear and bloody prise. And though that Spain be Romes chief Champion, yet
king Philips eldest son, even in his Fathers sight, must bleed to death, when
he displeasde the Pope: England has had a hard experience of his Tyranny, and
in the days of Queen Elizabeth, the multiplisity of traiterous plottes laid
against her life, all wrought by Romes confederates, were to long to specify:
and for your Scotlandes Kingdom, (Mighty Sovereign) neither your royal
person, nor your public state, have stood exempt from their most vilde
attemptes: and assuredly (my Sovereign Lord, no other then such like
strategems are to be expected from their hands who by their oaths have sworn
and vowed allegiance to the Sea of Rome; yet among them, but not of them, Some
seem as if they were papists, but indeed are not.
is there some, that gives themselves unto the use of ceremonial customs,
first brought in by Rome and yet no doubt they see the hellish evils that
springes from thence: but what they do, is done for fashion, and for custom
sake, and peradventure with some religious observation, yet in their hearts I
verily believe they hate the proudnes of the Popes supremacy, and grieves to
see the Villainies wrought by his Workemanshippe, and such as these I think are
nothing dangerous, for I have observed in them a due obedience to your
Englandes laws: but for the former sort, your Majesty knows, the danger of
their evil effects, for be they but once reconciled to the Pope, so as they
dare not like loving and obedient Subjects, What manner of Subjects, papists
were unto the Queen, and now what hope there is of them.
take their oath to your supremacy; it cannot be but their intentions must be
dangerous, they cannot in their hearts endure to be your subjects, but as they
lately were her Majesty's, in continual hope of change, nor do I wonder at
their minds in this, for their subjection has vowed it self an other way, and
upon the pain of deadly sin, their consciences are tied unto the laws of
Antichrist, and they are taught by the doctrine of Rome, and Roman
dispensations, to suppose, that unto you belongs no obedience; then unto them
I am sure there belonges no trust: The Schools of Rome and Spain, are the
nurseries of treason.
And for the scholars, that the schools of Rome and Spain brings up, your
kingly self and al your kingdoms, have by an often taught experience learnd the
true understanding of their traitorous documents: Jesuits, Seminaries, and
Popish Priests, I do resolve, will never be thought to love your Majesty, nor
ca^ they at any time deceive your Highness, when they are at no time trusted,
and surely no trust to them belongs, that are the empoysoned branches, sprung
from the venomous head of earthes corruption. And because I would not have the
Papists think, I speak by guess, but want authority whereon to ground my
self, I have to that end set down some of the dangerous decrees made by the
laws of their misbeleeuing church, for the Pope to establish his devilish
authority has thus decreed.

First, Did 40, etsi papa, 9. q. 6. ea cuncta.
that no man may judge the Pope, nor give sentence about his judgment, for he
is to judge al men upon earth.

2 That the seat of Rome, 30 q. 1 Cap.
gives strength and might unto all laws, but it is subject to none.

3 That he has authority to break all oaths, In 6. lib. 2. de sen.
bonds, and obligations made betwixt any man of high or low degree.

4 That he has power to interpret, 26. q. cap. Quouenc.
declare and lay forth the holy scriptures, according to his own will, and to
suffer no man to expound it contrary to his own pleasure.

5 That he is a God upon earth, In. 6. lib. de sent. Apostelatus in verb
continetur.
over all heavenly, earthly, ghostly and worldly, and no man may say unto him,
what do thou.

6 That he has authority to dissolve subjects from their obedience to their
Lords and Princes, In 6. lib. 2. de sen.
and that he has power to depose kings. King Herold exiled Robert Archbishop
of Canter. To. gat him to William D of Norm. Pope Alexander to he revenged of
King Herold, sent unto duke W. a banner to go and conquer England, and eleane
remission of sins both a pena and a culpa, to all that would follow the banncr,
and by this means was England the last time conquered.


7 That he may give clean remission unto whom he will, both a pena, and a
culpa, and he whom he forgiueth must needs be the child of salvation: for he
has absolute power to bind and to loose upon earth, and says he, the holy
Church has so determined and the force thereof (as faith his lying blasphemy)
is greater then the canonical scriptures.

From the authority of these laws does this effect proceed, that so soon as
any Prince displeafeth Rome, he is presently by the pope cursed, excommunicated
and proclaimed no right inheritor, and that it is not lawful for to hold of
him, his subjects are absolved from their true alega^ce and blessings, with
clean remission of sins sent to all those that will invade, spoil, or conquer
the land of any kingdom or Prince, with whom the Pope shall be displeased, And
the beter to effect these his often performed deeds of charity, he sends his
leaden Bulls, unto whom he lists, thereby giving authority unto subjects,
to resist their kings; and lustely to take up arms against them, when by the
Pope they shall be commanded. Their oaths for their allegiance are dispensed
with, so as although a subject betray, murder, or by any means kill his
lawful Prince, Perpetual malses appointed to be su^g in Swin fted Abbey for the
Monk which poisoned king John. So is it now in Rome for him which slew the
Prince of Orringe, and for the Friar which killed the French King.
and Gods anointed king, yet shall not their accounted very honest
executioner, be adjudged a traitor, but rather a holy man, for that he has
done, it on the Popes behalf, and in that respect, his act shall be
registered for a heaven purchasing meritorious deed, and after the death of
such a one, there shall be diverse misnamed holy, but unhallowed Masses, sung by
a company of black, white, gray, and pibal asses, for the redeeming of his
soul, out of their fools invented purgatory. And although this monstrous evil
be against al laws of God, and godly men, yet does the brase^, impudent, and
shameless pope, with all the multitude of his masse-monging shauelings, strive to
maintain the lawfulnes thereof, against the written word of the eternal law of
God: affirming that on earth, al power is given unto him, and that his seat is
established by general counsels (which as he says cannot err: Declectio et
Significatio, Panormitanus says that councels may err, as they have done
inter raptorem et rapta^ Hierom, 39. q. 2. tria: does affirm as much and
August. de bap. lib. 2. ch 3. contra Donatistas.
) And therefore what the Pope decre^th, must stand of force against all
authorities, for says his law, Did. 19. 51. To. er enim vero et nulli facit
cap. 5. omnes.
What the Sea of Rome does decrce, must needs be allowed: And what she
reproves, must be of no strength: For so must the decrees of the Sea of Rome
be accepted, as if they were spoken by the godly mouth of Peter himself. And
the more to approve his presumptuious blasphemy, the Pope has provided that
himself may be avillaine, both to God and men; and yet himself not to be
found falt with. For, says his law, Distinction the 40. Who doubts but the
Pope is holy, the which is exalted unto so great a dignity, in whom though
good works of his own merits be wanting, yet were those good works
sufficient, which were done by his predecessors. And therefore has his law,
in the place before recited, thus decreed, that though the Pope sin never so
grievously, and draw with him to hell, by his example, thousands innumerable:
yet let no man be so hardy to rebuke him: For he is head over al, and none over
him. And by this usurped authority, is that 7. headed beast, approved the very
open and revealed Antichrist, of our time, who by the treacherous and devilish
authority of his Antichristian law, has given unto hsmselfe a power, to set
up and at his pleasure to cast down kings, Pope. Celestinus. 4 crowned the
Emperor Henricus 6. with his sect.
and with his foul ungodly hel-path treading feet, to set the Crown upon an
Emperors head, and upon an Emperors neck to tread, when he displeases him:
And unto such a base subjection has he brought the mighty Princes of the earth
as that they think it no small honor, to kiss the stinking feet of that
inhumane monster. A true descrip- of Rome, as is declared in the Reuela, chapter 17.
This is the rich and wealthy whore, bedeckt with Jewels and ornaments of
gola: Whose Scarlet robes, are dyed in Christians blood: Whose variable
garments, betokens diverse liueries of religious orders: Holding in her hand, a
cup full of abominations: the Popes decrees, Bulls, dispensations,
suspensations, and cursings: And the beast she sits upon, is the papal sea
of Rome: And with this whore the nations of the earth hane committed
filthiness.

But now since that the the light from darkness is distinguished by the glorious
ministry of saluations Gospel, and that Romes Idolatrous whore dome, is made
known unto the world. Oh that any Prince should desire to contaminate his
soul with her uncleanness, or endure to rest himself in the serpentike
bosom of such dangerous wickedness. But Rome thy pacht up Iron legs are
broken, and like a haulting cripple, thou stand reeling in thy weakened
strength: Thy nakedness is made a public scorn, and but a very few (to
what had wont to be) are left to stand on thy pernicious part: Thou may
perceive how God does by degrees r^^e down the kingdom of thy Satan's
Sinagogue. I will not labor to advertise thee, Fury, wrath, and indignation is
thy portion, thou art thrown out unto a fierce and strong destruction. And in
thy day till which it is not long, thou shall not find any means for to
prevent the fearful stroke of thy all confounding judgment, unto which I
leave thee: be thou an heir unto thy prepared inheritance.

This truth discribed, I know my Lord and king, is rightly known unto your
Majesty, your self have drawn the portrature, of Romes Antichristian beast,
and laid him open in his full description. And in your Scotlands kingdom, all
the time of your most blessed government, having once grown past the years of
your minority: your highness, did religiously maintain a reverent, learned,
wise, and godly ministry, whose labor was to cast Romes Kingdom down, and
in true form, for to erect and govern the house of God, and Church of Jesus
Christ. And should I be so vilde to think, The Authors Resolution does in
this place resolve upon sufficient reason that the King has no affection unto
papists.
that now your Majesty would let a Tyrant loose, or lend an ear to helles
inchaunting charms, or please to love, or in weighty cause, to trust the
dangerous Imps, by oath ingrafte into the Roman stock, whose hearts has
vowed allegiance to the Sea of Rome, by whose vilde laws, a seeming just
authority is given, to execute the deeds of villainie, and under pretext
whereof, so many have been made approved villaynes, thrusting themselves into
the speedy execution of bloody treacherous strange inhumane stratagems,
accounting as if in them they had performed honest and Christian like
meritorious deeds: Or that your Majesty would suffer a popish tolleration, to
bring forth thorns, whose points will turn themselves against your life, and
strine to work your kingdoms overthrow. No, no, my sovereign, my Resolution
shall in life and death, resolve that your Kingly Majesty, has not a thought,
that bendes it self to such little purposes: Your highness has already joined
unto your Majesty, a company of honorable, valiant, grave, prudent, wise,
godly, and religious Councellers: whose foreseeing providence, in the time of
our late Queen, and ever renowned Elizabeth, did at all times worthily prevent
the evil effecting policies of Rome.

And when of late the house of Dagon, was in it self divided: Secular Priests
and Jesuits, being each to other, The Church of Rome is in it self divided,
secular priests and sesuits being at a desperate variance.
in apparent opposition, the Priests by printed Pamphlets, proved that the
Jesuits were the Arch Traitors of the world: and that by them were
complotted all the treasons, against the Majesty of our late Queen: The
Priests thinking by this their accusation, to gain unto themselves a
favorable opinion, and by that means, The reason why the priests did accuse
the Jesuits and what their labor did unto them procure.
in time to win the minds of men unto their love: then presently the wisdom
of our Queen, with those your now honored Counselors, perceiving both sorts
to be no less, then dangerous Traitors to the public state: did forthwith
requite their cunning, with proclaimed banishment, annexing thereunto the
penalty of death to be inflicted upon all those that by their wilful staying,
should exceed the time limited in the Proclamation.

And should I think your Majesty would not now command the performance of
the selfsame course, against those, who by their continual practices, have
always sought the utter ruing of the house of God, the murdering of Gods
anointed, and the subversion of all your kingdoms: In this for to resolve the
doubts of men too timorous, thus much assuredly, my Resolution knows, that the
observation your kingly self have made of Romes performed treacherous tyranous
and tragic massikers, will give warning to your Majesty, with prudent
wisdom, to prevent their mischiefs, and were they not altogether in their
vain expectatio^s, merely reasonlesse: I wonder what show of hope, could give
occasion to suspect that now the reine of justice, which did govern them,
should be let slip, and they turned loose unto a dangerous liberty, The name
of iudifferenttolleration could not be endured in the days of Qu. Elizabeth.
when in the time of our late Queen, the smoath coynd name of indifferent
tolleration, was always counted in it self to hold a threatened desolation to
the publik state. And from time to time the Lords and Peers of England
assembled in high court of Parliament, did with one consent join with our
Sovereign, to enact those laws and Statutes, which always did suppress the
least raisde up show of an Antichristian head: And when they were thus
confronted by a Maiden Queen, and such course taken during the happy time of a
woman's government, upon whose Sex a small perswation is said to work with an
accounted greatest force, and yet in all those times they could never bring to
pass the effecting of the least material substance upon the gound, The
papists in the time of our late Qu. were always overthrown in the least
occation of their hope.
whereof their weakest hopes were flattered, and yet now a swarm of droanes,
which desires to live upon the spoil of the laboring bees sweet hiue, flies
bussing up and down, and sends a whispering noise unto the ears of men, and
tells that now they hope the time of their deliverance draws near, and that
forsooth they shall be smilde upon with gracious favor, and their long (as
they say) continued hard restraint shall now be pitied, The hope of the papists,
and the effects thereof.
and that their (supposed holy) but unhallowed patcht together seamerent
sacraments, shall be quietly amongst themselves administered: for either an
alteration (which desires freely to feed upon the food of blaspemie, and fat
it self with this lands confusion) or a tolleration secretly bending it self
to such like purposes, shall now, say they, assuredly be accomplished.

But as the mighty God of heaven does in derision laugh their hopes to scorn,
The God of heaven and our godly king on earth, do despise the secret
imaginations of the Papists. 1. Sam. chap. 15. ver. 32. 33.
so does the great King James, Englands God on earth, in the priuacie of his
meditation smile, to see a rablement, of traiterous minds and soul devouring
murderers, expect to reap kind favors from his kingly hand, but so fare
they all, as did Agag, at the hands of Samuel, who came smyling forth in the
expectation of his supposed liberty.

So shall it be unto them all, my Sovereign Lord, for my Christian
Resolution tells my soul, that your Highness is in the zeal of your faithful
thoughts resolved, never in the least sort to lean unto their vilde
profession. And against the adversaries of God and of his Christ, The sword of
justice cannot take to strike a course againgst the enemy, of God.
the sword of justice, cannot take too strict a course that valiant Joshua the
first, and worthiest Worthy, stood always cleared from a tyrants name,
although his powerful arm did ever execute a strong austere severity upon the
heads and hearts of them, that were the foes to God and to his truth, the sword
of Joshua in a glorious battle offered up a pleasing sacrifice unto the eye of
heaven, the sight whereof so pleased the heavens Creator, that he gave power
unto Ioshuas tongue, that by his word he did command the Sun against the
nature of her fiery swiftest course to stand and give him light, till he had
slain his enemies, five mighty kings he tra^pled under foot, and was loath to
leave the smalest remnant of their seed.

Your Majesty may still be merciful, as late our Queen Eliza was, Parsons
and Sanders, on the behalf of the Papists have in their printed books affirmed
that ourlate Queen was a cruel tyrant, and they affirm that Q Mary was more
merciful to the protestants, then E. unto their named Catholics.
and for your labor reap her recompense from those your enemies, unto whom
your mercy chiefly does extend it self: Her Majesty was by the Papists in
printed books accounted far more tyrannous, then was Dioclesian, or that
murdering Nero: Parsons and Sanders in their traiterous libels, did liberally
affirm so much: And I know a Papist, ye alive in England, that did verify
unto my face, that Queen Mary was far more merciful unto the Protestants,
during her reign, then was Elizabeth unto the Catholics, what thanks your
gracious lenity shall reap from such like minded men: Your Majesty can with
best commended wisdom judge: how they affect the right of your succession,
their Dolmans Book does plainly specify, in which with cunning shows, strange
derived pedegrees, and vprearde mountaine-lyes, they have entitled the Infant
of Spain to your inheritance, The Papists have entitled the infant of Spain
unto the crown: of England.
and striued with a devils invented policy to dispossess your Majesty of
your lawful right; this course they took before you were their king, and
since that time, as by a truth which my self reueald unto the Lords of your
most Honorable Privy Council, it seems that your Englands Papists have
amongst themselves adventured to calculate the number of your days on earth,
The secret intention of the Papists is merely treacherous both unto the king
and public state.
if your Highness shall deny to grant one of the two before deseribed dangerous
extremes, which are either alteration or tolleration in religion: so as what
loyalty is to be expected from their hands, more then by constraint, your
Majesty may directly judge. And therefore because I know the remnant of these
Roman Moabites, will be the continual sowers of seditious seed, and dangerous
dissturbers of your Englands public weal* I could be content to wish for Gods
glory, my countries good, the safty of your royal self, and security of all
your princely progeny: that the whole pack of Papists were sent unto their
Holy father the Pope, that they even in his City Rome might stand together
under the safe protection of the Popes abominable blessing, mean while during
their stay, if so they dare but once begin to stir, I doubt not, but all the
arguments wherewith they finely use to plead, will bring themselves to be
divided into five several parts, which division will in England work Romes
dissolution, and in time I hope the gates of Rome will all be ramparde up, so
as we shall no more be troubled with his straggling runnagates, but that the
Pope shall be enforced to live within himself, and only take the profit
that his town allows, his contributary whores can pay him 30. thousand pounds
a year, and no doubt he has many other such like honest helps. Assuredly,
the times will shortly come, when all the true religious kings in Christendom
will join together, and fire his sink of sin about his ears.

And thus my sovereign Lord with further joyful hope, then is as yet reuealde
by me: unto the vnstaynde beauty of your princely Majesty, my resolution
humbly bringes it self, and though perhaps the Devil will shortly roar, and
send abroad his instruments to hold his kingdom up.

Yet most puisant and valuorous minded Prince, I know your kingly heart being
endued, as it is, with true prowes, and perfect fortitude, can not endure the
operation of timorous effects, but your kingly wisdom will prudently prevent
all the occasions, whence those monsters are begoten* stand fast therefore and
God from heaven will give unto your majesty a powerful and uncontrolled
strength. And by the best commended ordinary means, the better to protect your
safety, I make no doubt, but your highness shall be continually attended with
honorable, valiant, wise, and faithful gentlemen, whose loyal hearts will
carefully defend the safety of your royal person: and sure I am, the subjects
of your kingdom generally, All well affected people do rejoice in the
establishing of our now renowned king.
unless some few scattered companies of Roman straglers, do in their souls
rejoice that God has raysde your royal virtuous self to be their righteous
king: millions of thousands in your England lives, whose spirits by the
instinct of nature gives themselves to love the lawful exercise of Arms, and
they with joyful willingness, will wait upon the summons of their kings
command, and spend their lives, their lands, their goods in the performance of
faithful and obedient service: your England has for these many years
observed the manner of your neighbor bordering kingdoms government: and with
what prudent wisdom your majesty did protect the safety of your land, the
continued true report of your renowned virtues fed your Englands people with
delightful joy, and to their hearts it did a comfort give, when as they
thought upon that blessed hope, which built it self upon the well known right
of your succession, and though in christian policy. A public note was taken
from the vulgar view, yet all the world may witness that our late Queenerenownde
Elizabeth, did with her Lords and honored Councellers long ago decree to
yield unto your Majesty, the proper right of your inheritance, and that the
people of your kingdom did expect no less, was certainly approved by that
joyful and general applause, whichal your Englands subjects gave, when as they
heard king James proclaimde to be their Sovereign.

And now (most mighty Prince) since that in despite of Rome, the God of heaven
has established your name on earth, and made you greater then ever yet was any
Christian king, and has in peace confirmed the regal seat of your imperial
throne, I make no doubt but your Majesty, with a Christian constancy, and
religious care, will confirm the strength thereof, by the invisible force of a
prudent, wise and godly government, which does unto two special points direct
it self, The well ordering of divine things is chiefly to be respected in a
kingdoms government.
which is unto the well ordering of divine and humane things, wherein the
obedience unto God belonging, does challenge to it self a title Capital, the
celestial dignity whereof, is first before all other things in the chiefest
place to be preferred.

Divine regiment does therefore take unto it self the matter of Religion
only, and the ordinances to be used in the church; which in the time of the
Law, were commanded by God himself unto his servant Moses, and he by the
appointment of God, committed the principal charge thereof unto Aaron, and his
sons, and the tribe of Leui: but now in the time of the Gospel, they were
taught and commanded by Jesus Christ himself, and by him left unto his
Apostles: and from them the principal charge thereof is committed unto the
Bishops and Pastors of the Church.

And as in the time of the Law, Aaronthough he were the high Priest un to God,
yet was he subject unto Moses unto whom was reserved the supremacy of kingly
honou: for he was unto Aaron in the stead of God. Exodus 4. ver. 6.
Aaron though he were the high priest unto God, and had chief authority in
divine things, yet was not he the king, Prince, or supreme Magistrate over the
people of God, but that supremacy of kingly honor, was given unto Moses, who
was unto Aaron in the stead of God, and therefore next under God. Aaron and his
sons were accounted subjects unto Moses. So in the time of the Gospel,
though Bishops and Pastors have the chief authority to deal with the
administration of divine and holy things, yet they, nor any of them are the
kings, princes, or supreme Magistrates over the people of God, and Church of
Jesus Christ. But that supremacy of kingly honor is given unto Kings, and
Princes in their seuarall kingdoms, who are unto Bishops and Pastors, in the
stead of God. And therefore all Bishops and Pastors, are to be accounted
subjects unto their several Kings and Princes.

And as Moses in the divine ordinances concerning the law of God, Kings and
princes in cause divine, should not command unto their subjects things
contrary unto the word of God.
did command nothing unto Aaron, and the tribe of Leui; but that he had
expressly received from the mouth of God. So Kings and Princes in the divine
ordinance of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, are not to command unto their Bishops
and Pastors, any other thing then can be expressly warranted by the doctrine
of Christ himself, or his Apostles:

Lastly* as in the time of the Law; the Kings and Princes of Israel, and their
Priests, and Leuits, did bring on them and their posterity, Disobedience unto
the word of God brings confusion upon prince and people.
the eternal curse of God, when they fled from the obedience of the Law,
written by Moses in the old testament of God. Even so in the time of Gospel,
shall Kings and Princes with their Bishops and Pastors bring upon themselves
and their posterity the eternal curse of God, when they shall fly from the
obedience of the Gospel written by the Apostles and Euangelifts, and left unto
us in the new Testament of Jesus Christ, in which is contained the freedom,
liberty, and justification of our best esteemed, and most blessed peace. And
from the obedience thereunto, The peace of Englands happinnesse has been
continued by the ministry of the Gospel.
has proceeded the long continuance of Englands peaceful quietness: and by the
means thereof (most mighty sovereign) your royal person, and your Scotlands
kingdom (from every threatened danger) have until this time most safely been
preserved. And for from hence must spring the firm continuance of your royal
state, and kingdoms blessedness, your righteous soul, no doubt, will most
desire that things divine be chiefly lookde unto. and because there never was a
church so rightly ordered, Kings and princes in their several kingdoms have
authority to reform those things that are amiss in the Church of God.
but that some errors were therein remaining, the reformation whereof did
belong unto the kings, unto whose charge the government thereof in their
several kingdoms was principally committed, it now therefore remains
evident, that your religious understanding, wise, divine, and sanctified heart
will in the beginning of your most happy reign, look first amiddest your
Englandes kingdom with godly care to beautify the Spouses of Jesus Christ. My
Sovereign Lord, I doubt not, but your highness will be pleased to observe
the order given unto your princely son the happy comfort of your Englands
hope, and account it for your greatest honor, to see the Church of God well
governed. I am a soldier (my most mighty king) and my duty is (when just
cause requires) to fight for God and for his Church, and for you my sovereign,
next under God, within the compass of your kingdoms confines, the only
supreme head and governor. Be then (most mighty Prince) under your captain
Christ, a glorious instrument, as to that end you were ordained, Salomons
song. ca. 6. ver. 10. 11.
and above all things chiefly see his Church to be well ordered. O then let
your Majesty vouchsafe with Solomon, To walk down into the Garden of Nuts,
The Sinagogues and congregations in England, and see the fruit of the valley,
see if the Vine buddeth, and look if the Pomegranets flourish. Behold what
profit has proceeded from the doctrine of the Law and the Prophets, and in
many Congregations see nothing that your highness can take knowledge of, but
only ignorance, disobedience, and rebellion. The fearful danger of whose
desperate estate is principally occasioned, by the want of Pastors, able to
teach them to understand that peace in whom the law and the Prophets is
fulfilled, and then from the love of those ungodly guides, which takes up the
place bequeathed to better men: let your divine and heavenly soul, as swiftly
fly as did the Princes of Solomon in their Chariots, and them removing,
command that in their place be set the siluer-sounding voice of godly,
reverend, learned, wise and preaching Ministers, who by the power of their
ministry, may cause the true understanding of the peace of Jesus Christ, to
show it self unto the ignorant people of your land;, and that the only light
procuring beams of the most glorious Gospel, may with a sweet reflection
beautifully shine, and goldlike richly gilde all your poor and desolate,
dark, and desert towns and villages, that thereby all your English people may
with joy behold the beauty of Zion, and glory of Jerusalem, shining in the
Church.

This defect in Englands ministry has long go been seen, but not amended:
and our late godly Queen was in her time a stranger unto this corruption, and
that which in the Church did chiefly hold, the too long continuance of some
things amiss, was the word Improprio, from whence Impropriations were
derived, Improptiatio^s are the hinderance of a learned ministry.
which were they back returned unto their proper form, your Majesty should
quickly see a glorious Ministry, and till in this point reformation be, that
men of godly knowledge and honest life may go before the flock, unto their
charge committed, and by example teach the true performance of a Christian
doctrine, your Englands people will neglect the duties due unto their faythes
profession. For though I know good works can claim no merit: Faith does only
justify before God, but good works does justify our faith before men.
yet as faith only does justify us before the God of heaven: so good works
should serve to justify the soundness of our faith on earth, against all
tongues that would desire to frame objections against the purity thereof. And
undoubtedly (most mighty Sovereign) in your England there is nothing of more
strength, that gives a powerful liberty unto the exercises of sin, then the
vilde example of ungodly Ministers. Begin therefore (most mighty Prince) at the
first with them, and purge the Sanctuary, let it please your highness not to
suffer profane and irreligious men in the place of Ministers, to have to deal
with the administration of divine and holy things, nor once with their unclean
hands to touch the seals and Sacraments of our salvation.

For indeed they are no other then wormeaten trees; Jude. v. 12. 13. Isa. 56.
v. 10. 11 Eze. cap. 13. 4. Ier. c. 23. v. 1. 2
clouds without rain, dumb dogs, foxes, wolves, deceivers, and destroiers,
which have thrust themselves into the church by some unlawful means: their
own consciences can bear them witness that in them their rests no sufficient
power to teach the church the way unto the bridegromes love: for they rather
make deuorcement betwixt the bridegroom and his spouse, they have no right, no
understanding, no knowledge, nor wisdoms skill, to marry them together in the
unity of peace, themselves are of all others merely strangers thereunto, they
are in deed the ungodly number of those intrusiue flocks, which proudly and
unjustly have made themselves to seem, as if they were the brides companions,
but did the Church arightly know them as they are, she would not then of the^
enquire the way which leads unto the place where her souls beloved feeds, nor
would she endure any longer to be led, by their deceiving, dissembling, and
destroying, painted ignorance, she would not assuredly be as one that turns
her self aside unto the wickedness of their ungodly company. A description of
ungodly* ministers
But whither am I led with such like words as these, to speak against their
gross impieties. Strange thing it is, that such should be the watchme^ in the
house of God, that better knows what an Alehouse means, and more delights
to watch whole nights at dice and cards, then to spend one hour in the study
of divine and heavenly things, a pair of true running bowls, are more esteemd
with them, then all those truth teaching books, which should be the weapons
for men of their profession, Come honest neighbors, and my good friends (in
such like words consists all the smoothness of their eloquence) Let us in a
merry humor go drink half a doozen pots of Bear (this is the pith of their
persuasion) at the sign of the Cock, or some other place directly known unto
them: There is say they* as good heartwarming liquor as a man would desire to
drink (and in this is comprehended the whole argument of their divinity.
Whereupon being once at their place appointed together met, they set them down
and fall to reasoning, and all their bare-barly proofs, being brought in pots,
they use of them so many, that at last growing all together reasonlesse, they
are plainly overthrown in the dust, by the force of their own argument: in as
modest order as I can (most mighty sovereign) I have described the manner of
their immodest brutishness, I will forbear to speak of worse uncleanness
done by many of them. But it would make a Christian heart to rend it self with
grief in the consideration of that injurious wrong, which is done by them unto
the church of god: but now in the love your Majesty bears unto Jesus Christ,
let the^ all be turned out that they may learn to use their several
occupations, and find some means to live without feeding upon the souls of men.

For my own part (mighty sovereign) I affect not Brown, The author does
profess himself to be no Brownest.
Barrow, Penry, nor the schisms by them invented, I am a Protestant pro
Deostans, and do in my heart accord unto your Englands government, by our late
godly Queen established, and do account that the reverend Bishops in your
land, are worthy instruments for the glory of God, and benefit of his Church,
so far forth as they will with a religious care strive in their places to
beautify the Spouse of Christ, by a conscionable and religious government, to
which end they are undoubtedly ordained, and there authorities approved
lawful: for the Apostle Peter which commands that men of their calling
should not rule as Lords over Gods heritage, 1. Pet. ca. 5. v. 3*
does not say, neither shall you accept of any such titles, nor endure to be
called Lords over the flock of Christ, no though the Church of God shall in
the love and reverence that they bear unto you for their masters sake, call you
their Lords, their governors and teachers in divine and heavenly things. Surely
out of the Apostle Peter's words, to me appears no such kind of doctrine. For
I have reason to resolve, that the Apostle could not teach it to be a thing
unlawful for himself, or any other of the apostles or minister after the^, to
receive living or honor at their hands, unto whom they should administer in
the Lord. For the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Corint. and 9. chapter,
does plainly approve the lawfulnes thereof. And howsoever he did forbear to
exercise his power for the good of the Church, then being in her infant age,
yet notwithstanding it appears evidently, that he left that liberty of
power to be used in the Church. And therefore, if the Bishops since the time
of the Apostles, have by their lawful liberty of power, whereof Paul speaks,
received as given unto them by the Church, Oecumenius in. t. a. Tim. cap. 1. 2.
idem in 4.
unto whom they administered greater titles, riches and honor, then T. and Titus
had (who were the 5. Pri matii praefatio in 1. ad Tit.
Bishops in the primitive Church, of which sort there must be a continual
succession, 1. Tim. 6. 14* S. Ambrose in 1. ad Tim. c. 3.
even until the coming of the Lord Jesus, yet notwithstanding, if the Bishops
now do execute no other office, and that in no other sort then Timothy and
Titus did, then their titles, riches and honors being but external things
lawfully given, and lawfully received do, not prejudice the worthiness of their
calling. And about this the members of the church of God ought not to contend.
That the members of the church should not contend about the titles of bishops
For it is the zealous* godly, and religious care in the execution of their
office, which does only dignifie the approbation of their calling. And if they
fail in the performance of those godly duties to their place belonging, then in
the abuse of their titles, riches, and honors, the fault consists. And
whereas many in these our times do take offense against the names, titles,
wealths, and honors, which our Bishops have on them bestowed, thinking that
all such things at first proceeded from the Pope of Rome, they are therein
deceived: for since the time that christian Emperors, kings, and Queens became
the nursing fathers and mothers of the Church, both titles, riches, and honors,
were by them bestowed upon the Bishops in the Church who were notwithstanding
obedient subjects unto their Emperors, Kings and Queens, and were approved
glorious ministers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, and all this was done before
the Bishop of Rome did make himself the beast of Rome, which now he is, by
usurping unto himself the sole authority over all the kingdoms in Christen
dome: The manner how and cause why the Pope refused to be ruled by the word of
God.
Since which time, both the Pope himself and all the Bishops under his
Antichristian sea, have fled from the approved authority of Timothy and
Titus, in not being desirous to administer unto the church, but like
tyrannical Lords to rule and over rule the same, and by their ouerruling
utterly to overthrow the church, by extinguishing the purity of that light,
which shined in the same, placing in stead thereof the traditions of men, by
their approbation of unwritten verities. And thus being desirous to raise
themselves unto a higher height, then unto them was limited, they lest to
seek the glory of God, and only sought by perverting the Scriptures, to
glorify themselves above all the kingdoms of the earth, and by this his pride,
the Pope has made himself to be the open and revealed Antichrist, as is before
described.

But now my hope is, that not any will continue to contend about the estate of
Bishops as now they stand, since by their lawful liberty of power, they may
receive dignities, on them bestowed by those unto who^ they administer, which
example was obserud by many christian Emperors, and kings, and many holy and
reverent Bishops, long before the Pope was known to be that devil, which now
he is. And therefore let not any so contend about these things as if they
thought the abuse of the Antichristian sea could extinguish or race out the
lawful liberty of power, Eusebeus lib. 7 cap 3* he deriueth the successio^s of
Bishops in the 4. principal churches of the world. Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome,
and Alexandria, from the Apostles age, unto the counsel of Nice. A. 320
which was by the Apostles of Jesus Christ, left unto the godly Bishops in the
church. This may it please your Majesty, I have adventured to speak because I
know some few unlearned people in your land do desire to strive to much in this
contention. And though the authority of bishops be approved lawful, yet al
within the co^pas of your highness kingdoms, are your subjects, and in their
hearts no doubt they unfeignedly desire to be so, and do in their souls rejoice
because they are so: and your Majesty shall find them reverent, godly, wife
and learned men: yet if there be negligent defects in any, The reason why the
author hops that the defects in the Church will be amended.
they will assuredly, perceiving that your highness do look into their course,
speedily by your direction amend, the things amiss, and henceforth not suffer
that such unworthy guides as are before described, should by the laying on of
hands, be admitted to the ministry, nor allow of any Nisi probatus vel
Episcoporum examine, 1. Con Carth. 3. cap. 22.
vel populi testimonia, Unless he be allowed by the examination of the
Bishops, or testimony of the people. And the better to direct this course, no
doubt our Bishops will observe the saying of S. Ambrose, who speaks thus in
his exposition of Paul's Epistle unto Timothy: S. Ambrose in 1. ad Tim. ca. 6*
Paul Charge Timothy before God the Father, and Christ the Son, and the
elect angels: Under this charge be commands those things to be kept, which
pertain to ordination in the Church, least easily any man should get an
Ecclesiastical dignity, but inquisition be first had of his life and manners,
that a meet and approved minister or Priest may be appointed: neither any to
be ordained: whose faults deserve suspicion, for he sins, which or dayneth
and tries not.

This course observed, then shall your Majesty joyfully behold your Englands
famous universities: send forth worthy men, A description of godly ministers.
faithfully to labor in that worthiest work: then should your highness see your
England furnished with the blessed number of those preaching pastors, whose
heavenly minds divinely sanctified, will justify the approbation of their
calling, by the inward testimony of the spirit of God: Whose mouths are
touched with an hot coal, taken from the fire of the Altar: Whereby they are
purged that the work of God may be done by them with a pure performance, the
approbatio^ of whose ministry shall for ever ground it self, upon the
foundation of that written truth, contained in the holy Scriptures, by the
authority whereof, they will like faithful ministers, truly teach the church
of God, arightly to understand the worthiness of her peace in Jesus Christ, upon
which corner stone the truth of their doctrine being established, it will
manifest unto the world, that they are sent of God, and by the power of the
holy Ghost, are called to be the preaching ministers of salvation unto all
believers. Such as these are those of whom the Prophet Esaias with admiration
speaks. Oh how beautiful are the feet of those that declares and
publishes peace: that declares good tidings, and publishes salvation, saying
unto Sion, thy God lives. These are the well commended watchmen, which do
continually with careful diligence attend and wait upon the Church, and
gives warning when the enemy approaches near unto it, or unto any member of
the same, and so well they know all the public and private enemies that they
can describe the power, likeness, crafts, and policies by which, and under
pretext whereof, The devil with all his boares, and bears, and wolves and
foxes, seeks to deface the beauty of the Church, and utterly to destroy the
same, and so wise these godly watch men are, that they can prescribe and teach
the true and perfect use of every powerful means whereby the event of each
dangerous opposition shall soundly and securely be prevented, so that the
church notwithstanding, the force of all occasions, shall at al times know how
to enjoy the safety of her peace.

These are the faithful sheapheards, who being desirous not to lose a sheep,
without having any chief respect unto the fleece, carefully and conscionably
in the aboundancie of humility, love and zeal, do wholly betake themselves to
feed the flock in the sweet and pleasant pastures of Gods eternal grace,
warily keeping and protecting them, that they might not eat nor taste of any
rotten or infectious food. These are indeed the Stewardes of the house of
God, greatly dignified with the favor of the Bridegroomes love, and these can
inuit the soul unto a most delicious and spiritual banquet and feed it with
the bread of everlasting life, and can open unto it the rich treasury of the
heavenly paradise and show unto it the celestial glories, which are prepared
for all those that serve and fear the living God. And these are those that
should be exercised in the ministry, and to the number of them now in England,
I doubt not, but by the assistance of your Majesty, there shall be added a
glorious company: that then your highness may speak as the Prophet Esaias did:
Esaias, cap. 62 v 6. 7.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which all the day, and all
the night shall not cease, ye that are mindful of the Lord: and keep not
silence, and give him no rest, till he repair, and until he set up Jerusalem,
the praise of the world. A godly, reverent, wise, and learned ministry is the
beauty of the church
Then shall the beauty of the Church appear in the sanctity of her
perfection, and all Gods people shall rejoice to see their godly and religious
king, to dignifie honor, and adorn the sanctuary of Jesus Christ and then no
doubt, many that are now fallen off, will with joyful and obedient love, yield
themselves unto your blessed government, and then your people being taught to
understand the word, will prove themselves to be a chosen flock of heavenly
Lambs, by yielding true obedience to the truth-teaching shepheardes voice: by
means whereof they shall be brought with christian fruits, to show the glory of
that faith, which they have built upon that once for all, for ever sacrificed
spotless Lamb Christ Jesus.

And thus when by your Majesty, the Ministry shall be refined, and
corruption taken from forth the Church of God; Your Highness then shall see, that
for you first did seek the things to heaven belonging, all things else shall
be administered, and the house of your royal kingdom, shall be built upon a
rock immovable, and the strength thereof shall be of force impregnable, and
on your throne there shall for ever sit, a godly King or Queen, lineally
discending, in the glorious issue of your royal blood. And in your days (and
to your posterity,) your kingdom England shall retain a long continued happy
peace.

Although I am a Soldier, yet peace is it I wish unto your Majesty; A well
minded Soldier never wishes war unto his countries prejudice, nor peace
unto his kings dishonor.
for safe and calm contented smiling peace, is the gracious Mistress of a
glorious and golden government, the glory of a kingdom is to rule her state in
peace, and plenty does attend her regiment, when peace is with a conscionable
and religious virtue ioynde, reason, understanding, and wisdom being made her
Councellers, then with a heavenly Souerainety, she bears her self, and
dignifies the land in which she rules, with a most celestial happiness. For
where such a peace commandes, A description of our Englands peace.
justice bears the sword, good laws are made, and duly executed, within the
compass of her sway, each does possess his own and wealth so ruled, as that the
rich, relieues the poor man's want, where she protecteth, riots are suppressed,
and robberies, do not go unpunished, complaints are duly heard, the poor
man's cause not wantes to be considered, right is done, where wrong has
injured, from such a peace, oppression is exilde, and quietly, not being hurt
by war, peace moweth, sows, and reapes her fruit in joy: this was the
happy state of England in the time of our late (and now most blessed) Queen:
and by your Majesty, shall increased be, the undoubted hope of Englands
further happiness, and what by chance had stolen without the compass of
sufficient care, in the time of righteous Asa (now deceased) shall in the days
of our Iehosaphat be brought to light, and Church and commonwealth shall be
purged from corruptions blemish, that after ages shall in their worlds enduring
Chronicles report, how happy England was by the government of a maiden Queen,
and how much more happy by a godly king, that virtuous Queen succeeding. Oh
England let all thy well disposed people with one consent together clap their
hands with joy, and laud the mighty God of heaven, An admonision unto England
generaly.
whose mercies providence, has in Jove provided for thy public weal so far
beyond the compass of thy own unworthiness, God; chosen people the tribes of
Israel did not receive more mercy from his hand, then thou have done: Judea
did endure a stronger scourge for her iniquity, then thou as yet have felt
of, for thy worse impieties, no longer now provoke thy loving God, but turn
thy self unto his statutes with obedient thoughts, redeem the time by thy
repentant care, and escape the judgment of thy sins desert* behold thy king
whose godly Presedent, shall lead thee on in paths of godliness: join with his
righteous self, and let the world behold thy righteousness, so shall Romes
mouth be damde up, that speaks inuectiue words against the manner of thy
careless living, and for thou do profess the Son of God to be thy king, and
governor, ioyn with thy Sovereign Lord, Gods great Lieutenant upon earth, and
give thy self with an unfeigned heart to yield a true obedience to his
government, then shall the beauty of thy state like a lofty Cedar flourish and
thou shall stand a glorious spectacle unto the world, The happy estate of Eng.
if her people shall obey the laws of God.
and make the nations of the earth to wonder at the fame of thy admired
Worthiness: thy land shall be enuironde with a Wall of brass, no foe man's foot
shall once invade the same, but it shall be a peaceful habitation to thee and
to thy children whilst the world endures, in all which time the glorious
gospel shall adorn thy peace, and with power and triumphant victory on
earth, thy happiest government shall derived be, from the lineal race,
gloriously proceeding from thy now vpraisde most mighty and religious King,
this blessing God unto our England grant, and let the brightness of Englands
Majesty confirm in us the full assurance of this happiness, that king and
people may together live and walk before their God in righteousness and
holiness of life, then shall our Church be the spouse of Christ, and he will
come and lodge and dwell with us: and all the blessings that can make a
kingdom happy, shall unto us be given, unto the fullness of our joys
content, and when this human course shall have his end, the vncomprehe^ded
glory of eternal life shall be our recompense. Thus England with a rejoicing
faithful arm, in all abundant love embrace thy mighty king (for next unto
Christ) only by his means unto thee is brought, the full confirmation of thy
happiest happiness.

And because most mighty Sovereign your Englands nation has in times past,
English men have been admired and feared for their deeds in war.
been accounted famous in the exercise of Arms, and your people, for their
magnanimious valor in warlike cheualry have, not only been admired, but
feared of all the kingdoms in Christendom, and beyond those bounds, fair
Englands force has marched with a conquering arrne, so as the glorious renown
of honorable deeds being brought unto this present age (by the golden*
trumpet of fames true report) does make such deep impression in your
Subjects hearts, as that I cannot but suppose the flower of your Engla^ds
youth desires to be accounted soldiers, especially now that they are the
subjects unto a mighty king, lineally descended from the royal blood of
Englands mightiest kings: yet unto them whose hearts desires the exercise of
arms, my resolution thus much speaks, War is the shield of justice, and
ought not to be used, but when justice puts it on
and says, it is a thing convenient for them to consider, that war being the
shield of justice, is not to be used, but when justice does command the use
thereof: and that peace with safety to the public state, is in this christian
common wealth before war to be preferred, And therefore those that would
arightly be, true valiant minded men: ought thus to use the exercise of
martial discipline, not thereby within your Majesty's united kingdoms, to
infringe the happiness of a long continued peace, but that by their experience
in the use of war, they may become the most commended (...) is to maintain
the dignity thereof, against all occasions and powers, that shall seek to
disturb or over throw the same. Peace ought to be the mother, and the nurse
unto the child of war* and so bring up wars children vnderh as that they
might be able to defend their mothers right when just occasion calls for them.
And in regard the Church of God, your majesty's royal person, your princely
progeny, your kingdoms, and your Highness (...) are all to be defended by the
sword of war, when foreign foes, or private enemies shall with force in
opposition riser: no doubt but your Majesty will command such course to be
taken, as that your Subjects shall be taught the rudiments of war: so as they
shall be familiarly aqvainted with the things belonging thereunto: And that a
soldiers hand shall by your Highness gracious favor, be employedstd, Tac,
liber, 6.
in assisting those your Majesty's fa^thful friends and true believing
Protestants, whose country, and whose people, God in his abundant mercy, has
wondrously delivered from the tyranny of Rome, and bloody Spannish Inquisition*
and for they fight against the Beast, and those that on their foreheads bears
his mark. The state of Holland from Rome and Spain delivered, God has
justified their proceedinees with coutinuall blessings
God has with honor crowned the actions done by the (...) and dignified their
attempts in war with glorious victories the justice of their cause
(notwithstanding, the coynde objections made by Spain, is and has been by
tho hand of God approved: as may unto the world be witnessed, and your Highness
by assisting them does (as it was thought by our late Queen, and still renownd
Elizabeth, give a strong security unto the safety of your Englands peace: for
the maintenance whereof when your Majesty shall see your people trained up with
active skill to use their weapons fit for fight, and well to understand the
ordering of their Files and ranks, and several standinges in a pitched
Battalia, that all to be commanded may suddenly with speedy execution, know
how to make a true performance, The Romans taught their children how to fight
and did every 101. years, with great solemnity record the actions by their
people done in haughty deeds of arms. Horace. Certus vndenos decies per
Annos. Orbis vt cantus referat quaeludos.
according to directions given: and that not any may commanders be, but such
whose wise and valiant courage, with tried experience joined, shall make them
worthy of their place, and then al these throughout your kingdoms government,
being by a godly ministry taught to understand the justice of their cause.
More deeds of honor shall then in time to come by the conquering hand of
Englands king be done, then ever yet disciphered was by the Chronicle
description of precedent time: for now the foes to God and to his truth, shall
fear the name of English men, and your kingly Majesty with the glory of your
succeding princely race, shall be a terror to the enemies of Christ. For this
a Soldier prays, and all this to defend (being by his king commanded) he
has his sword in readiness. And thus most mighty Prince, and my renowned
Sovereign, A poor Soldiers resolution humbly offers up his lives employment
at your princely foot.

FINIS.

