SINS OVERTHROW: OR, A GODLY AND LEARNED TREATISE OF Mortification.

Wherein is excellently handled; First, the general Doctrine of MORTIFICATION:
And then particularly, how to Mortify FORNICATION. UNCLEANNESS. Evil
CONCVPISCENCE. Inordinate AFFECTION. and, COVETOVSNES.
All being the substance of several Sermons upon COIOS. III. V. Mortify
therefore your members, etc.

Delivered by that late faithful Preacher, and worthy instrument of Gods glory
JOHN PRESTON, Dr in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of
Emanuel College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes-Inne.

LONDON: Printed by I. Beale, for Andrew Crook, at the black Bear in Paul's
Churchyard. 1633.

The Contents.
First, In the Treatise of Mortification.
DOCRINE I. THe height of glory, which we expect by Christ, should cause every
man to mortify sin. page 3 DOCT. II. The frame of our hearts ought ta suit
with those conditions that we receive by our union with Christ. p. 4
Explication. Mortification is a turning of the heart from sin to grace, ibid.
Mortification called a turning of the heart, because the heart by nature is
backward and averse from God, page 5 Sin seemingly mortified; 1. When the
occasion is removed. p 7 2. When it is not violent and raging, but quiet. ibid.
3. When it is but removed from one sin to another. ibid. 4. When the
Conscience is affrighted with the judgments of God. p. 8 5. When the strength
of nature is spent, ibid. 6. Being restrained from sin by good education, p. 9
USE I. To examine by these rules sins Mortification, ibid. Mortified lusts
known, 1. By a deep humiliation of the soul, p. 10 2. By the generality of
it, ibid. 3. By the measure of grace, answering the measure of corruption, p.
11 4. By the continuance of them, p. 12
Motives to Mortification: 1. There is no pleasure in sin, p. 13 Pleasure in
sin is no true solid pleasure, but a sick pleasure, p. 14. 2. The satisfying
of lust is an endless work, ibid. 3. The great danger of sin, p. 15 4. The
deceit of sin, p. 16 Sin deceives four ways: 1. By blinding the
understanding, ibid. 2. By making large promises, p. 17 3. By promising
departure at our pleasure, ibid. 4. By making a show of friendship, ibid.
5. The rebellion it occasions in us against God, p. 18 6. The slavery it
brings us unto Satan, ibid.
USE II. To instruct us that in every regenerate man there is a freewill to do
good, p. 19 The power of a Regenerate man consists 1. In performing any duty
God commands, according to the proportion of grace he has received, p. 20 2.
Inresisting any temptation according to the same measure of grace, p. 21
OBJECT. In the Regenerate, the flesh lusts against the spirit, etc. ibid.
ANSW. Corruption reigns not, though it may take possession in the heart of a
Regenerate man; it exceeds not the measure of grace, ibid: USE III. To exhort
us to abstain from the sin of the heart, as well as sin in the outward
actions, p. 22 OBJECT. Men shall be judged by their works, not by the thoughts
of their hearts, ibid. ANSW. God will judge the thoughts of the heart, as the
cause; the actions, or works, as the effects. p. 23 USE IV. To teach us that
no man is so holy, but he needs mortification. ibid. The means how to come by
Mortification, are I. Outward. 1. Moderation in lawful things, p. 28 The
danger of excess in lawful things, ibid. 2. Vows and Promises, p. 29 The
lawfulness of Vows, and how they are to be esteemed of, ibid. 3. The avoiding
of all occasion to sin, p. 30 OBJECT. Professors being strong in faith, need
not avoid occasions of sin. p. 31 ANSW. Opinion of strength in faith is a
weakness in men, for the more fear, the more strength; besides, habitual
grace is but a creature, and therefore not to be relied on. ibid. 4. The
lawful exercise of Fasting and Prayer. ibid.
II. Inward: 1. To get a willing heart, p. 24 2. To take pains about it, p. 25
Two errors about Mortification: 1. That all sins have a like proportion of
labor to mortify them. p. 26 2. That mortification is not a continued work,
p: 27 The fruitless pains of Papists in afflicting their bodies, etc. ibid.
3. The assistance of the Spirit. p, 32 Means to obtain the Spirit, are 1. To
know the Spirit, p. 33 2. Not to resist, grieve, or quench him. ibid. What it
is to resist, grieve, quench
the Spirit. p. 34, 35 3. To use prayer, p. 35
4. To walk in the Spirit. p. 36 5. To get a lively faith, p. 37 Justifying
faith only purifieth the heart, p. 38 The holy Ghost not essentially but by a
divine power dwells in the heart. ibid. That Mortification goes before
Justifying Faith, is an error, p. 39 6. To get spiritual Joy. ibid. 7. To get
an humbleness of mind, p. 41

DOCTR. III. That all earthly members are to be mortified, p. 42 Members are
sinful, exorbitant affections of the soul, p. 43. for these reasons; because
1. They fill up the heart, ibid. 2. They proceed from the unregenerate part, p.
44 3. They are weapons of unrighteousness, ibid. 4. They are dear unto the
heart, as any member to the body, ibid.
Inordinate lust meant by earthly members, p. 45 What it is to be earthly
minded, ibid. By the power of nature a man may conceive of spihituall things
and yet be earthly minded: 1. Not spiritually, ibid. 2. Not from an heart
illightned by the Spirit, p. 46 3. By the knowledge of his understanding, ibid.
A man may come to know spiritual things, and not be renewed. 1. By seeing a
virtue in heavenly things excelling all all other things, ibid. 2. By being of
a noble spirit, ibid. 3. By seeing holiness in the children of God, p. 47 4.
By seeing the attributes of God, ibid. 5. By feeling the sweetness of the
promises, ibid. 6. By believing the resurrection to life, ibid.
The order of the faculties of the soul, p. 48 Whether Nature can attain unto
true knowledge, ibid. A natural man may know spiritual, in their substance,
not as a rule of his life, p. 49 Heavenly mindedness is the work of a new
life in a man, ibid. Heavenly mindedness admits increase in knowledge, p. 52
The Understanding the seat of heavenly mindedness, p. 53 An enlightened
understanding communicates its to the rest of the faculties; 1. By taking away
the lets unto good, p. 54 2. By withstanding the motions of inordinate
passions, ibid. 3. By laying open the vileness of inordinate affections, ibid.
4. By ruling and guiding them, p. 55
USE I. To reprove such as favor earthly mindedness, or inordinate
affections, ibid. Reasons against earthly mindedness, are I. In respect of
men; 1. It takes away the excellency of the creature, p. 56 2. It wounds the
soul, p. 57
II. In respect of God: It sets up spiritual Idolatry in the heart, p. 58 III.
In respect of Professors: It is unbeseeming them, and makes them like Swine, p.
59 Great difference between the back-fliding of the Saints, and of the wicked,
p. 60 Backsliding in the Saints is caused,

1. By hollow hartednesse. 2. By evil example of men. 3. By remouall from
under a powerful ministry. p. 61 A threefold caveat to the Saints. p. 62
Diverse Objections of earthly mindedness answered: OBJECT. 1. Earthly things
are present. ANSW. Heavenly things present, as joy in the holy Ghost, etc. are
to be preferred before earthly things. p. 63 Difference between nature and
sense, p. 64 OBJECT. 2. Earthly things are sensibly felt. ANSW. Men are
deceived; for the greater the faculty, the greater the sense. p. 65 A threefold
difference between the superlour and inferior faculties. ibid. OBJECT. 3.
Earthly things make us to be well thought of. ANSW. A good opinion must not be
regarded in any thing that shall occasion sin. p. 66 A remedy against opinion,
is a sound knowledge in the word of God. p. 67 OBJECT. 4. Earthly things seem
of great worth unto us. ANSW. They will not do so, if compared to spiritual
things. p. 69 All men's comforts stand in Gods face. p. 70 USE II. To exhort men
to leave their earthly mindedness. p. 71 Motives to mortify our earthly
members: 1. The devil ensnares us by them. ibid. 2. They bind us fast from
God to the devil. p. 72
Means to obtain the loathing of earthly things; 1. Sound humiliation, p. 73
Three false grounds thereof, ibid. 2. The royalty of spiritual things, p. 74
3. A constant and diligent watch over the heart, p. 75
Means to get heavenly mindedness: 1. Faith, p. 76 A twofold snare of the
world, ibid. 2. Humility, p. 77 3. A judgment rightly informed, p. 78 4. A
sight into the All Sufficiency of God, p. 79 5. A remembrance from whence we
are fallen, ibid. A comparison between a spirirituall and a bodily
Consumption, p. 80
Motives to heavenly mindedness; 1. Heavenly things the best object, p. 81 2.
No sweetness in earthly things, p. 83; for two reasons: 1 Because they are
mutable, ibid 2 Because they either belong to persons that are 1. Good,
belonging to God; and therefore cannot content them, because they draw their
affections from God, p. 84 2. Wicked, unto whom they are not sanctified, p. 85


3. No salvation by earthly things, p. 86 God will have all the soul, or none.
p. 87 Christ's two marks of a Christian, p. 88 4. Heavenly things are the
better part: proved, ib. 1 By Scripture, ibid. A fourefold difference between
earthly and heavenly things, ibid 2. By Reason, p. 91 5. All things are at Gods
disposing, p. 92
Marks to know whether we have lost our earthly mindedness. 1. By the
moderation of our care and delight in earthly things, p. 94 Signs of the
excess of our delight in them, are 1. Our immoderate desire of getting and
keeping them, ib 2. Our excess in our pleasures and recreations, p. 95
Recreation when lawful. p. 96
2. By the esteem we have of heavenly things, ibid. 3. By our Spiritual
taste, whether we relish heavenly or earthly things best: as the Word
Preached, p. 98 Eloquence no ornament to the Word preached, p: 99 The Word
should not be mixed with it, p. 100 How Learning and Arts are necessary to the
Preaching of the Word, p. 101 Ministers should not endeavor to please the
people with Eloquence, p. 102 4. By our judgment of heavenly things, p. 103
Spiritual knowledge wrought by the spirit, able to judge of 1. Persons, p. 104
2. Things, p. 105
Spiritual renovation is discovered 1 By the Affections, p. 106 2 By the
Speeches, p. 107 3 By the Actions, p. 109
5. By our brooking the word of reproof, 110
Use. To exhort spiritual minded men to grow more and more therein, p. 111 The
least sins to be avoided, ibid Secret sins are to be looked into, p. 112
Motives to grow in heavenly mindedness, are 1. Hereby we are able to do every
good work, ibid. 2. Hereby God is honored, p. 113 3. Hereby we may prevail
with God in prayer, p. 114
A few faithful prayers may do much good, ibid.
Of FORNICATION.
DOCTRINE 1. ALL Uncleanness is a thing God would have mortified, and quite
destroyed out of the hearts that he would dwell in, page 116 DOCTR. 2.
Fornication is a sin that must be mortified, p. 118 The haynousnesse of this
sin of Fornication appears; I. In the sinfulness of it: For, 1. It is
contrary to Gods Spirit, p. 119 2. It makes a strangeness betwixt God and us,
ibid 3. It is a punishment of other sins, p. 120 4. It lays waste the
Conscience, p. 121 5. It delights the body more than any other sin, ibid
II. In the punishment of it: For, 1. God himself ^^kes the punishment of it
into his own hand, p. 122 2, God reserves filthy persons for an heavy
judgment ibid.
III. In the danger of it, p. 123 IV. In the deceitfulness of it, p. 125
The deceits of the devil, whereby he enticeth us to this sin, are 1. Hope of
Repentance, ibid. With considerations against that deceit, p. 126, 127 2.
Present impunity, p. 129 Considerations against it, p. 130 3 Present sweetness
in sin, p. 131 Considerations against it, p. 132 4. The falsenesse of common
opinion and carnal reason, p. 133 5. Hope of secrecy, p. 134 Considerations
against it, p. 135
USE 1. To exhort all men to cleansethemselves from this filthiness, p. 137
USE 2. To persuade all men to mortify the inward corruption, as well as to
abstain from the outward action, p. 140 Trials whether this lust be mortified:
1. An Universal change, p. 141 2. An hate an loathing to this sin, p. 142 3.
A constant keeping our selves from the acting of this sin, p. 143
Means against Fornication: 1. For such as have been addicted to this sin;
Let them 1. Get an humble heart, p. 144 2. L^bo^r to bring their hearts to love
God, who has forg^ven so great a sin, p. 145 3. Reware lest Satan beguile
them.
2. For those that still live in this sin; Let them 1 Labor to get assurance
of pardon. 2 Endeavor to have a sense and feeling of their sin, p. 146 3 Lay
hold on the Promises, and apply them. 4 Use abs^^nence and fasting, p. 147 5.
Resolve against it, p. 148 6. Proportion the remedy to the disease, p. 149 7.
Turn their delights to God and heavenly things 8. Accustom themselves to
frequent prayer. p. 150


Of UNCLEANNESS.
DOCTR. 1. Uncleanness is one of the siunes that are here to be^ mortisied, p.
153 The haynousnesse of the sin of uncleanness, appears 1. Because it makes
the sinner herein, a man of death, 2. Because it is a sin against Nature. 3.
Because it is against ones self, as selfe-murder. 4. Because God makes it a
punishment of other sins, p. 154
The deceits of Satan to draw men into this sin, are 1. Hope of
after-repentance. What repentance is, p. 155 2. The deferring of punishment. 3.
The com^on opinion of this sin, p. 156 4. The privatenesse and secrecy
thereof. 5. The present delight they find in it, p. 157

Of Evil CONCVPISCENCE.
DOCT. I. Evil Concupiscence is a sin to b^e mortified, page 187 Reasons
thereof, are, 1. It will bring forth actual sins, p. 188 2. It defiles a man
by hiding sin in his heart, ibid. 3. It marres all good actions, ibid 4. It
makes Gods Commandments grievous unto us, p. 189
The nature of evil Concupiscence what, p. 190 The sinfulness of evil
Concupiscenee, ibid. The operation of evil Concupiscence in conceiving
bringing forth
sin. 191 Evil Concupiscence Habitual, Actual,
to be mortified, p. 193 All sin is to be abstayned from, because God forbids
it, p. 195 Acts to Mortification, are 1. A serious meditation upon men's
courses, ibid 2. A suppressing and keeping down of lust, p. 196 3. A
rectifying of the judgment, p. 197
VSEI. To get free from this sin, p. 198 The wrathof God on the creature
works terror in the conscience, ibid. Three signs of mortifying this sin; 1.
A general reformation in heart and life, p. 200 2. A right judgment of sin,
and a true loathing thereof, p. 201 3. Actual abstinence from sin, p. 202
QVEST. Whether man after true Mortification may fall into the same sin
again, ibid. ANSW. He may fall into the act, but not the love of that sin,
ibid Means to the mortification of this sin, are 1. A labor for an
assurance of pardon for our sins, p. 203 2. Abstinence from all occasion of
sin, p. 205 3. A delight in grace and holiness, p. 206 4. ^ervent and hearty
prayer, p. 207

Of inordinate AFFECTION:
DOCTRINE 1. ALL Immoderate Affections must be mortified, p. 211 What
Affections are, p. 212 The Appetite double, Sensual, Rational,
p. 213 Three sorts of Affections, Natural, Carnal, Spiritual,
p. 214 Affections when inordinate, p. 216 Trials of the inordit acy of
Affections, are 1. To examine them by the rule; the Rules are 1. The object
must be good, p. 217 2. The end right. 3. The measure right. 4. The order and
season sitting.
2. To examine them by the effects; The effects are 1. The disturbance and
hi^drance of reason, p. 218 2. An indisposition to holy duties, p. 219 3. The
production of evil actions. 4. The drawing us from God, p. 230

What it is to mortify affections inordinate, ibid. Keasons why they are to be
mortified, are 1. They are of greatest efficacy and command in the soul, p.
221 2. They make us either good or evil. 3. They make way for Satan to take
possession of the soul, p. 222 4. They are the first movers to evil, p. 223
USE 1. To exhort us to take pains in the mortification of these inordinate
affections, p. 224 Means to mortify them, are 1. Knowledge of the disease, p.
225 Two ways to discern inordinate lusts; 1 By bringing them to the
Touchstone, p. 226 2 By considering the stops of them.
2. The judgment of others concerning them, p. 227
The causes of inordinate affection, are 1. Mis-apprehension, p. 227 Remedies
against mis-apprehension. 1 To get strong reasons out of the Scripture, p. 229
2. To get a lively faith, p. 230 3. Experience of the naughtiness of them. 4.
Example of others.
2. Weakness and impotency, p. 232 Remedy against that, is to gather
strength. 3. Lightness of the mind, p. 233 Remedy, to find out the right
object, which is God. 4. Confusion that rises in the heart at first rising of
them, p. 234 Remedy, timely prevention, p. 235 5. Corruption of nature. p. 236
Remedy, to get a new nature. 7. Oue sin cause and root of another, p. 239
Remedy, to pull up the root. God the only agent of Mortification.
USE 2. To reprove us for sinful affections. Motives to conquer inordinate
affections. 1. They are the root of all evil, p. 240 2. They wound the soul,
p. 241 3. They breed foolish and hurtful lusts, p. 243 4. They hinder the
doing of good actions. 5. They bring shame and dishonor, p. 244 6. They blind
the reason and judgment, p. 245

Of COVETOVSNES.
Covetousness what, p. 1. 25 Why it is called Idolatry. DOCTR. 1. To seek
help and comfort from riches or any other creature, and not from God alone, is
vain and sinful, p. 2 DOCTR. 2. That Covetousness, which is Idolatry, is to
be mortified, p. 2. 25 Reasons that God only can be comfort unto us, and not
the creature, are 1. God is All-sufficient, p. 5 2. The creature is empty and
vain, p. 6 3. We commit the sin of idolatry in giving that to the creature
which is due to God.
USE 1. To exhort men to abstain from lusting after worldlythings, p. 7 God can
give comfort without riches, p. 8 The creature without the Creator is as the
husk without the kernel. p. 9 Considerations to dissuade from trusting in the
creature: 1. The creature of it self has no power to comfort, p. 10 2. The
creature reaches not to the inward man, p. 11 3. A multitude of creatures must
go to the comfort of one man, p. 12 4. The comfort of the creature is but
dependant felicity, p. 12
Whatsoever men leave their children without Gods blessing is nothing worth, p.
13 The deceits whereby men are hindered from mortifying this sin, are 1. They
think them Gods blessings, p. 14 Blessings considered without thankful
reference to God, cease to be blessings. We receive the creatures as blessings.
1. When we depend on God for the disposing, continuing and want of them. 2.
When we think the same things may be without comfort unto us, p. 15 3. When
we think we may have comfort without them p. 16
2. They apprehend present comfort from the abounding of them, p. 17 We may not
judge of outward things by sense and feeling, but by faith, and a rectified
reason. To help our judgment therein; Consider, 1. They are but vanity of
vanities, p. 18 2. What other men, that have bin afflicted, think of the^ 3.
What your selves wiljudge of the^ at the day of death 4. What you shall find
them for the time to come.

Sense of comfort double, preceding from a refreshing of the heart by the
Creature: an appprehension of Gods favor in those blessings.
Joy in the creature may be a 1. Remiss joy, as if we ioyed not, p. 19 2.
Loose joy, that may be cast off. 3. Dependant joy eying the fountain, p. 20
3 They reason falsely. Riches come not always by labor, nor comfort by
riches, p. 20. For 1. God makes a disproportion betwixt the man and the
blessing, p. 21 2. God hinders the effects, though the causes eoncurre. 3. God
denies success to the causes, p. 22
4 They see these things present and certain, other things doubtful and
incertaine.
Earthly things subject to change, but spiritual things unchangeable. Signs
to know whether our love to the creature be right or no: Consider, 1. Whether
our affection to the creature draws our hearts from God, p. 24 2. When earthly
and spiritual things come in competition, which we make choice of. 3. What our
obedience is to God. 4. What things trouble us most, p. 25
Our affection to riches said to be inordinate, p. 26. when we seek them; 1.
By measure more then we should. 3. By means that we should not, p. 27 3. For
wrong ends, p. 28 4. In a wrong manner; which consists in these particulars:
when we seek them, 1 Out of love to them. 2 To trust to them. 3 To be puffed
up by them, p. 29 4 To glory in them. 5 With too much haste and eagerness.
In the desire of riches there is a double content, p. 30 1 A contentedness,
with a dependence on Gods will. 2. A contentedness with a submission to Gods
will.
How far a man may desire wealth, p. 31 A threefold necessity of the
creatures. 1. Of expedience. 2. Of condition and place, p. 32 3. Of refreshment.
A desire of riches for superfluity and excess, sinful; for these reasons: 1.
Man's life stands not in abundance of excess. 2. It proceeds from an evil
root, p. 33 3. It may not be prayed for. 4. It is dangerous, for it chokes the
Word, p. 34 5. We have an express Commandment against it.
The end of a man's calling is not to gather riches, but to serve God, p. 35
Riches, the wages, not end of our calling. Rules to direct our care in getting
wealth, p. 37 1 No going into other men's callings. 2 The end must not be
riches, but Gods glory. 3 The care must not be inordinate.
Signs of inordinate care, are 1. Trouble in the acquiring, p. 38 2. Fear of
not attaining 3. Grief in being prevented.
A man is then covetous when he strives not against Covetousness.
Covetousness spiritual adultery, p. 39. aggravated in that 1. It makes men
wicked. 2. It does least good. 3. Riches are but false treasure. 4. They are
not our own.
andgt;A^tributes given to riches, are 1- They are many things. 2. They are
unnecessary. 3. They will be taken from us. 4. They are not the best.

USE 1. To exhort men to mortify this earthly member, Covetousness, p. 40
Means thereto, are, 1. Prayer to God. 2. Humility for sin. 3. Employment of
them to better things.

THE DOCTRINE OF MORTIFICATION.
COLOSSIANS 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is idolatry.
THis Chapter contains diverse exhortations unto heavenly mindedness, by
which the Apostle labors to dissuade the Colossians from corruptible things,
unto things not corruptible, but everlasting; not earthly, but heavenly; in the
which the life of a Christian, and true holiness stands.

In the first verse he begins with an exhortation to seek heavenly things;
If you be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above: that is, if you
be risen with Christ, and dead unto the fashions of men, then there is an
alteration and change in your souls wrought, by which you are brought to
affect that which is heavenly, and basely to esteem of earthly things:
therefore, If you be risen; that is, if this heavenly life, and disposition,
and change be in you, then let the same appear by your heavenly mindedness;
that is, by seeking of heavenly things.

In the second verse he joins another exhortation grounded on the first, to
be wise and to understand them; Set your affections on things above: that is,
let them be specially minded of you, let all your faculties be filled with a
knowledge of spiritual things; and this is so joined with the former, that
there can be no seeking without knowing; for how can a man seek that which he
knows not? and if thou have no knowledge of heaven, and heavenly things, how
can thou desire them? seeing where there is no desire, there is no seeking:
And therefore if thou would seek heavenly things, as Christ, and Grace, and
Salvation, then know them first.

Afterward in the third verse he goes on, and presses this exhortation with
diverse arguments; first, because you are dead: that is, seeing you are dead
unto earthly things, therefore strive not now to be earthly minded. Secondly,
Your life is hid with Christ: that is, your happiness is not seen with the
eye of the body by looking on these earthly things, but your happiness and
joy is by Faith beholding Christ, therefore set your heart and eye on him,
where your life is; that is, you look for a perfection of glory with Christ,
which you cannot have by minding earthly things: therefore be heavenly minded.

In the fourth verse the Apostle answers unto a demand: for they might thus
object, You tell us that we shall have a perfection of glory, and that it is
hid with Christ, but when shall we have it; that is, when shall it be made
manifest unto us? Unto this the Apostle answers, When Christ, who in our life,
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory. And hereupon he
groundeth another exhortation in the verse I have read: as if he should say,
Seeing you expect such a perfection of glory to be revealed unto you at Christ's
second coming, then it stands you upon to set upon your corruptions, to kill,
and to slay them, that seek to deprive you of that glory. Mortify therefore,
your earthl^e members; that is, slay every foul affection, inordinate desire
of earthly things, rid your hearts of them by slaying of them; and although it
may seem a hard work, yet fight still, or else you shall never attain unto
that life you hope for: So that the first general point hence, is this:

That the height of glory, which we expect by Christ, should Doctrine 1.
cause every man to mortify sin. This the Apostle makes the ground of our
Mortification; If you be risen with Christ, seek the things that are above,
mortify therefore your earthly members; that is, except you slay sin, that
has slain Christ, you cannot get life with Christ: Surely then, Mortification
is not as men think it, a needless work which matters not much whether it be
set upon or no, but this is men's sickness; for, as a man that is sick thinks
Phys^^ke Simile.
is not needful, because he is not sensible of his disease, when as the
Physician knows that it is amatter of necessity, and that except he purge out
that Corruption and humor of the body, it will grow incurable: even so, except
this corruption of nature be purged out, it will-grow incurable; that is, we
cannot be saved: therefore, we know to mortify sin, is a work of necessity,
whereupon stands every man's life and salvation.

The second thing which we note, is this:

That the frame of our hearts ought to suit with those Conditions that we
receive by our union with Doct. 2.
Christ. And this also the Apostle makes another ground of Mortification; if
you be risen with Christ, seek heavenly things, and therefore labor to
mortify your inordinate affections, and sinful lusts, that so the frame of
your hearts, and disposition thereof, may suit with heavenly things: as if he
should say, You profess your selves to be risen with Christ; that is, that you
are in a more excellent estate than you were in by nature, and you expect a
perfection of glory; then it must needs follow, That the frame of your hearts
must suit with your conditions; that is, you must be such as you profess your
selves to be; and this cannot be, except you mortify sin, all inordinate
affections, all worldly lusts, all immoderate care for earthly things: think
not to get grace, salvation, and eternal life, except first you slay your
corruptions and lusts; for Mortification is a turning of the heart from evil
to good, from sin to grace: or, it is a Mortification what it is.
working a new disposition in the heart, turning it quite contrary: Or else it
may be said to be the slaying of that evil disposition of nature in us.

Now we must know, that howsoever Mortification is a deadly wound given unto
sin, whereby it is disabled to bear any rule or commanding power in the
heart of a regenerate man, yet we say, Mortification is not perfect; that is,
it does not so slay sin, that we have no sin at all in us, or that we
cease to sin; for in the most regenerate and holiest man that lives, there is
still the sap of sin in his heart: A tree Simile.
may have withered branches by reason of some deadly wound given unto the root,
and yet there may remain some sap in the root which will in time bring forth
other branches: so it is with a regenerate man, there may a deadly wound be
given unto sin, which may cause inordinate affections to wither, and yet
notwithstanding some sap of sin may remain, which had need still to be
mortified, lest otherwise it bring forth other branches. Mortification is not
for a day only, but it must be a continual work; when thou have slain sin
to day, thou must slay it tomorrow, for sin is of a quickening nature, it will
revive if it be not deadly wounded, and there is seed in every sin which is
of a spreading nature, and will fructify much; therefore. when thou have given
a deadly wound unto some special corruption, rest not there, but then set upon
the lesser; mortify the branches of that corruption; and so much the rather,
because it will be an easy work to overcome the Common soldiers, and to put
them to flight, when the General is slain.

We call Mortification a turning of the heart; the Mortification why a turning
of the heart.
heart by nature is backward from God; that is, it minds and affects nothing
but that which is contrary to God, it is wholly disposed to earthly things; now
Mortification alters and changes the heart, turning it from earthly to heavenly
things; even as a river that is stopped in its usual course is now turned
another way; so Mortification stops the passage of sin in the soul, turning
the faculties, the stream of the soul, another way: the soul was earthly
disposed, the mind, the will, and affections were wholly carried after earthly
things, but now there is a new disposition wrought in the soul, the mind and
affections are wholly set upon earthly things; before he was for the world how
he might satisfy his lusts, but now his heart is for grace, justification,
remission of sins, and reconciliation. Here then, seeing Mortification is a
slaying of sin, and that many do deceive themselves in the matter of
Mortification, who think that sin is mortified when it is not; and
contrariwise, others think they have not mortified sin, that is, they have
not given a deadly wound unto sin, because they still feel rebellious lusts
intheir hearts; therefore for the better explaining of this point of
Mortification I will propound two Questions: the first shall be, for the
discovering of hypocrites; and the second shall be, for the comforting of weak
Christians.

The first Question is, Whether sin may not seem Quest. 1.
to be mortified when it is not mortified, but only asleep?

To this I answer, That sin may seem to be mortified Answer.
when it is not, and that in these particulars: When sin seems to be
mortified, and is not.


First, sin may seem to be mortified when the occasion is removed: As the
covetous man may not be 1
so covetous after the world as he was, because he has not so good an
opportunity, and thereupon he may grow remiss; and yet this sin of
Covetousness is not mortified; for let there be occasion, or an opportunity
offered, and you shall find this sin as quick and as lively in him as ever
it was before; and so for Drunkenness, or any other vice in this kind: when
the occasion is removed, the sin may be removed, and yet not mortified.

Secondly, sin may be mortified seemingly, when it is not violent, but quiet;
that is, when an unruly 2
affection troubles them not, they think that now that sin is mortified; but
they are deceived, for it is with sin, as with a disease; A man that is sick
of a fever, so long as he is asleep he feels no pain, because Simile.
sleep takes away the sense of it; but when he is awake, then presen^ly he
feels his pain afresh: Even so, when sin does awake them out of sleep,
then they shall find it was not mortified, but they only asleep. Sampson,
Judge. 16. so long as he was asleep in his sin, thought all was well, and that
his strength was not gone; but when he awakes out of sleep, his sin awakes,
and then with much sorrow he finds that his sin was not mortified,
especially when he fell into his enemies hands.

Thirdly, sin may seem to be mortified when it is but removed from one
sin unto another, when it 3
is removed from a less to a greater, or from a greater to a less. As for
example, A man may not be so covetous as he was, and think with himself that
this his sin is mortified, when as indeed it is not mortified, but only
removed unto another; for now it may be he is grown ambitious, and seeks
after honor, and therefore it stands not now with his reputation and credit to
be covetous: hereupon he may grow bountiful, and nevertheless his sin of
covetousness be unmortified: And so for drunkenness, and such as desire
pleasure, their minds and delights may be changed, and the sin of the soul
be not yet mortified. Sin is to the soul as diseases are to the body: now we
know, that diseases of the body usually remove from one place to another, or at
the least grow from a less to a greater: so it is with sin in the soul, it
will remove from one faculty to another.

Fourthly, sin may seem to be mortified when the 4
conscience is affrighted with the Judgments of God, either present upon him,
or threatened against him: now by the power of restraining grace a man may be
kept from sin; that is, he may so bridle his affections, that he may keep
sin from the action, he may forsake drunkenness, covetousness, pride, and
the like, and yet his sin be not mortified: for here is the difference
between a man that has his sin mortified, and one that has not; The first
is always careful, that his sin come not to action, he is careful and
watchful over his ways and heart, as well when the Judgment is removed, as
when he feels it: but the other hinders not sin longer than the hand of God
is upon him; remove that, and then his care is removed.

Fifthly, sin may seem to be removed and mortified when the sap and strength
of sin is dead, that 5
is, when the strength of Nature is spent. As the Lamp goes out when oil is
either not supplied or taken away, Simile.
and yet the Lamp is still a Lamp, for let oil be supplied, and fire put
unto it, and it will burn; so there may be not the action, and yet sin is
not mortified in the heart; for he is as well affected to sin as ever he
was, only the sap and strength of nature is gone; but if oil were supplied,
that is, if strength of nature would but return, sin would be as quick and
vigorous as ever it was.

Sixthly, good Education, when a man is brought 6
up under good parents, or masters, he may be so kept under that sin may
seem to be mortified, but let those be once at their own ruling, then it
will appear that sin is not mortified in them; that is, that they have not
lost their swinish disposition, only they are kept from fouling of themselves:
As a Swine so long as she is kept in a fair meadow cannot foul her self,
Simile.
but if you give her liberty to go whither she list, she will presently be
wallowing in the mire; even so, these are ashamed to defile themselves whilst
they are under good education; but opportunity being offered, it will soon
appear sin is not mortified.

The Use of this, briefly, is for Examination unto every Use.
one to enter into his own heart, and exam^ne himself by these rules whether
his sin be mortified, or no; and accordingly to judge of him else.

The second Question is for the comforting of weak Quest. 2.
Christians: Seeing there is corruption in the heart, how shall I know that the
lusts and stirrings of the heart proceed from a wounded Corruption, or else is
the Action of an unmortified lust?

To this I answer, You shall know them by these Answ. How o know when ^^st is
mortified.
rules:

First, you shall know whether the lust in the heart be mortified, and proceed
from a wounded heart or 1
no, by the ground of it; that is, if it proceed from the right root, or arise
from a deep humiliation wrought upon the soul, either by the Law, or by the
Judgment, of God, whereby the Conscience is awakened to see sin in its
ownenature; and then a raising up of the soul by the apprehension of the love
of God in Christ, and out of a love unto God to begin to mortify sin: if
the heart in this case do fight against the spirit, that is, the lust of the
heart, it is because it has received the deadly wound; but if it be not our
of love unto God that thou mortifiest sin, if thy heart, in this case, have
much rebellion in it, whatsoever thou think of thy self, sin is not
mortified in thee: Every thing proceeds from some Cause; if the Cause be good,
the Effect must needs be good likewise: as (for instance) if the tree be good,
the fruit must be good; but if the tree be evil, the fruit cannot be good: Let
every man therefore examine himself upon this ground.

Secondly, you shall know it by the generality of it: ^
For Mortification is general; and as death is unto the members of the body,
so is Mortification unto the members of sin: now you know that the nature of
death is tos ize upon all the members of the body, it leaves life in none; so,
where true Mortification is, it leaves life in no sin; that is, it takes away
the commanding power of sin: For what is the life of sin, but the power of
sin? take away this power, and you take away this life. Therefore it is not
sufficient to mortify one sin, but you must mortify all sins; to which
purpose the holy Apostle here bids them Mortify; when he had exhorted them
unto the general of mortification, then he subjoynes diverse particulars, as,
Fornication, Uncleanness; of which hereafter, (God assisting) you shall hear.
Hence then you learn it will not be sufficient for you to leave your
covetousness, but you must leave your pide, you vaineglory: So also when thou
have slain sin in thy understanding, thou must mortify it in thy will, and
affections; slay sin first in thy soul, and then slay it in the parts of thy
body; and so examine your selves whether you find this work of Mortification
to be general.

Thirdly, you shall know whether your lust be mortified 3
by this; Look if there be an equality between the life of grace, and the
death of corruption; that is, if you find grace in measure answerable unto the
measure of corruption which is mortified in thee, it is a sign thy sin is
mortified; for as thereis a dying unto sin, so there will be a quickening
unto holiness; seeing the new man will begin to revive, when the old man
begins to dye; Grace will grow strong, when Corruption grows weak; and
therefore the Apostle says, Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. As if he should say, you shall find by this whether
the corruption of nature be slain in you, if you stand fast, (as in the former
verse,) which you cannot do unless grace grow, except there be a proportion
betwixt the life of grace, and the death of corruption: Therefore examine your
selves by this, whether you do find that you are quickened in grace, to pray,
or hear, which is an excellent sign that sin is mortified.

Fourthly, you shall know whether your lasts are mortified by the continuance
of them: For if sin be mortified, and have received her deadly wound, it will
be but for the present, it will not continue; it may well rage and trouble
thee for a time, but it is only now and then by fits; whereas an unmortified
lust ever rages. It is with sin in this case, as it is Simile.
with a man that has received his deadly wound from his enemy, he will not
presently fly away, but will rather run more violently upon him that has
wounded him; yet let him be never so violent, in the middle of the action he
sinkes down; when he thinks to do the most harm, then he is the most
unable, because he has received his deadly wound, whereby he has lost the
strength and power of nature which otherwise might have prevailed: so it will
be with sin, and with a mortified lust, it may rage in the heart, and seem
to bear sway and rule over thee as lord, but the power and strength of sin
is mortified, and sinkes down, wanting ability to prevail; and why? because
it has received its deadly wound: Indeed the most honest man, and the most
sanctified that is, may have lust in his heart, and this lust may many times
for the present be violent; yet though it rage, it cannot rule; it may strive,
but it cannot prevail: therefore you may try your selves by this, whether the
corruptions and stirrings of your hearts proceed from a mortified lust, or no.

Now seeing Mortification is so hard a work, and yet a work that of necessity
must be done: Men also be so hardly drawn to mortify their lusts, which they
account as a part of themselves, not to be parted withal; for Nature her
self has implanted this principle in them, Every man ought to love himself,
what then should move any man to mortify his lusts? therefore Five Motives to
Mortification.
for the better persuading of men unto this work, we will lay down some
motives to move every man to mortify his corruptions.

The first Motive to move all men to mortify sin, is, Because there is no
pleasure in sin: Sin 1 Motive.
cannot content the soul; for this is the nature of sin, the further a man
goes on in sin, the further he goes on in sorrow, for in every degree of
sin there is a degree of sorrow: As on the contrary, unto every degree of
Grace, there is a degree of Joy; I say, the more thou gettest of grace and
holiness, of Faith and Regeneration, the more peace of Conscience and
spiritual Joy thou gettest; for Grace as naturally produces Joy, as sin
sorrow. Now if men did but consider this, that is, if they had any spiritual
understanding to know that degrees of sin did bring degrees of sorrow, they
would not so run unto sin as they do.

But they will object unto me, You are deceived, Object.
for there is pleasure in sin: we have found pleasure in sin, and what
will you persuade us against our knowledge? Have we not reason to distinguish
betwixt things which we know are of a contrary nature? Will you persuade men
that honey is not sweet, who have tasted of it? If you should bring a thousand
arguments, they will not prevail: even so we have felt sweetness in sin,
therefore we cannot be persuaded to the contrary.

To this I answer, That the pleasure that is in sin, (if there be any
pleasure) is no true solid pleasure, Az^^rer.
but a sick pleasure; such a pleasure as a man that is sick of a Fever has,
a pleasure to drink; not because he has a love to drink excessively, but
because Simile.
it is pleasing to his disease: even so, when men find pleasure in sin, it
is not because it is true pleasure, but because it suits with their disease;
that is, with their sin. Now that this is no true pleasure, appears, because
that which gives true content unto the soul is Grace, which ever is
accompanied with Faith in Christ; and this works that peace in the soul which
passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. whereas sin makes not peace but war
in the soul; and where there is war in the soul, that is, where the
faculties of the soul are in a combustion amongst themselves, there can be no
pleasure. A man that is sick of a dropsy may have pleasure to drink, but his
pleasure depends upon his disease; if the disease were removed, the pleasure
would cease.

The second Motive, is, Because when men go about to satisfy their lusts,
they go about an endless work: Now ^^ Motive.
men in outward things would not set themselves about a work if they did but
know before that it would be endless; that is, that they could never finish
it; for every one loves to go about things of a finite nature, which may be
accomplished: even so, if men did but know the nature of sin, they would not
give themselves to satisfy thsir lusts, because they go about a work that is
endless: for the nature of sin is like the Horseleech which the Wiseman
speaks of, Prove. 30, 15. that the more it is given, the more it craves, but is
never satisfied; so, the more you seek to satisfy sin, the more it desires;
like the fire, the more you cast into it, the more it burns: but if you will
quench it, then detract from it; so, if thou would have sin to dye, then
detract from thy plasure, from thy covetousness, from thy pride. A man that is
sick of a Fever, if you would not increase his heat, then keep him from cold
drink, and other things that are contrary to it; but if you do satisfy the
disease in these things, you do increase it: so, if you would not go about an
endless work, give your lusts a peremptory denial, please not sin; for if
you do, you will displease God: let this therefore move men to mortify their
lusts.

The third motive to move al men to mortify sin, is because of the great
danger it brings a man unto; it makes 3 Motive.
a man liable unto all the Judgments of God, it takes Gods special protection
from a man, it fills the heart full of slavish fear; it is like a quagmire
which may seem to be firm and solid, but being once in it, Simile.
the more you strive to get out, the greater danger you are in: Like a bird
that is taken with a gin, the more she seeks to escape, the faster she is
holden by it; so it is with sin, it carries a fair show, it will pretend
much good, but take heed of falling into it, for if you be once in it, it will
be a hard matter to escape. The Understanding is the Porter of the soul; so
long as there is spiritual life in the soul, the rest of the faculties do
parta^e of it, and so the whole is preserved; now sin blinds the
understanding, and when the understanding is misinformed, it mis-informes the
will and affections; that is, it breeds a disorder in the soul: and when once
there is a disorder in the soul, and among the faculties, then the means of
grace becomes unprofitable: To this effect the Apostle says, They became
blind in their understanding, and then they fell unto noisome lusts, giving
themselves unto a customary sinning, they became blind in their
understandings; that is, it put out their eyes, it made them blind as beetles;
and when a man is blind, he will run upon any danger, because he sees it
not: even so, when sin has put out the eye of the mind, the soul is in
mavelous great danger of falling irrecoverably: therefore let this move men
to mortify sin.

The fourth Motive to move all men to mortify sin, is, Because sin will
deceive men: Now there is no man that would willingly be couzened, every man 4
Motive.
would be plainly dealt withal; therefore if men did but know this, that if
they gave way unto their lusts, they would befoole them, surely men would not
be so easily led away by them. But men will not believe this, they cannot
conceive how there should be such deceit in sin, seeing they are of so near
a conjunction, as to be a part of themselves: and therefore I will show you how
sin does cousen them, and that in these particulars: How sin couzens.


First, it makes a man a fool, by blinding the understanding; and when he is
thus blinded, he is led 1
away to the committing of every sin: and therefore it is said, 1 Pet. 1. 14.
Not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your ignorance;
that is, before 1 Pet. 1. 14.
you were enlightened, your lusts had made you fools by taking away your
understandings, and putting out the eye of your minds, but now fashion not your
selves, suffer not sin to blind you again, seeing you now see.

Secondly, it does cousen you by making large promises: ^
if thou will be a wanton person, it will promise thee much pleasure; if
ambitious, much honor; if covetous, much riches: nay, if thou will be secure,
careless, and remiss for spiritual things, as grace, and justification, and
remission of sins, it will make thee as large a proffer as the devil sometime
made unto Christ, Mat. 4. 4. All these things will I give thee, if thou will
fall down and worship me: So, it may be he will promise thee Mat. 4. 4
salvation and life everlasting, but he will deceivethee, for it is none of his
to bestow; if he give thee any thing it shall be that which he promised not, and
that is, in the end, horror of conscience and destruction.

Thirdly, by promising to depart whenever thou will have it: Oh, says sin,
but give me entertainment 5
for this once, be but a little covetous, a little proud, or ambitious, and I
will depart whensoeverthou wilt have me: But give way unto sin in this case, and
thou shall find it will deceive thee; for sin hardens the heart dulls the
senles, and makes dead the conscience, so that now it will not be an easy
matter to dispossess sin when it has taken possession of the soul. It is
not good to let a thief enter into the house upon such conditions; therefore
the Apostle says, Heb. 3. 23. Take heedlest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of Heb. 3. 13.
sin; that is, sin will promise you this and that, but believe it not, it
will deceive you.

Fourthly, in the end when we think it should be our friend, it will be our
greatest enemy: for instead of life, it will give us death; it will witness
against us, that we are worthy of death, because we have neglected the means
of grace, neglected to hear, to pray, and to confer; and what was the cause
of this remissness but sin, and yet it accuses us of what it self was the
cause. Now what greater enemy can a man possibly have than he that shall
provoke him to a wicked fact, and then after accuse him for it: therefore let
this move men to mortify their lusts.

The fifth Motive to move all men to hate sin, is, Because it makes us Rebels
against God; and who Motive.
would be a Rebel, and Traitor against God and Christ, who was the cause of
his being? The Apostle says, Being servantsunto sin, we become servants Romans
6. 19.
of unrighteousness, Romans 6. 19. that is, if we suffer sin to reign in us,
then we become servants of unrighteousness, rebels unto God, and enemies unto
Christ, who love righteousness: now he that is a friend unto God, loves that
which God loves, and hates that which God hates; but he that is not, loves the
contrary, for unrighteousness is contrary to God, and he that loves it, is a
rebel against God: Every luft has the seed of rebellion in it, and as it
increases, so rebellion increases: therefore let this move men to mortify
sin.

The sixth Motive to move men to mortify sin, is, Because sin will make us
slaves to Satan: The Apostle Motive.
says, That to whomsoever you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants
you are to whom you obey, Romans 6. 16. that is, if you do not mortify your
lusts, you Romans 6. 16.
will be slaves to your lusts, they will bear rule over you; and miserable
will be your captivity under such a treacherous lord as sin is: therefore if
you would have Christ to be your Lord and Master, if you would be free from the
slavery of Satan, then fall a slaying of your lusts, otherwise you cannot be
the servants of God: let this move men also to mortify sin.

Now to make some use of it to our selves: The first Use 1.
consectary or use, stands thus; Seeing the Apostle says, If you be risen with
Christ, then mortify your earthly members, therefore Mortification is a sign
whereby you may try your selves whether you belong unto God or no. if you be
risen with Christ, that is, if the life of grace be in you, it will not be
idle, but it will be employed in the slaying of sin. Now if Mortification be
not in you, you can then claim no interest in Christ, or in his promises; for
he that finds not Mortification wrought in him, he has neither Interest unto
Christ, nor to any thing that appertains unto Christ: and seeing this is so,
let us be taught by it, that every one should enter into examination of his
own heart, to find out the truth of this grace of Mortification, especially
before he come unto the Sacrament; for if we find not Mortification wrought in
us, we have no right to partake of the outward signs.

The second Use or Consectary, is, That seeing the Use 2.
Apostle says, Mortify; hereby ascribing some power unto the Colossians to
mortify their Corruptions; as if he should say, You profess yourselves to
be risen with Christ, then let that life which you have received, slay your
corruptions. Hence we note, that there was and is in every regenerate man,
acertaine free will to do good. Now when we speak of free will, I do not
mean that Free Will which is in controversy now adays, as though there were
such a thing inherent in us; but this which I speak of, is that freedom of
will that is wrought in us after Regeneration; that is, when a man is once
begotten again, there is a new life and power put into him, whereby he is
able to do more then he could possibly do by nature: and therefore the
Apostle says unto Timothy, Stir up the 2 Timothy 1. 16.
grace that is in thee, 2 Timothy 1. 6. that is, thou have given thee the gift of
instruction; the life of grace is in thee, therefore stir it up, set it on
work, use the power of grace to do good: which shows that there is a
certain power in the regenerate man to do good: for although by nature we are
dead, yet grace puts life into us; As it is with fire, if there be but a
spark, by blowing, in time it will come to a flame; so where Simile.
there is but a spark of the fire of grace in the heart, the spirit does so
accompany it that in time it is quickened up unto every Christian duty.

But you will say unto me, Wherein is the regenerate Object. 1.
man able to do more than another man, or more then he could do?

To this I answer, that the regenerate man is able to do more then he could
do in these two particulars: Answ. 1.


First, he is able to perform any duty; or any thing 1
God commands, according to the proportion of grace The power of a regenerate
man.
that he has received; but if the duty or thing exceed the grace that he has
received, then he is to pray for an extraordinary help of the spirit: but he
could not do this before, neither is it in the power of an unregenerate man to
do it.

Secondly, he is able to resist any temptation or sin, 2
if it be not greater, or above the measure of grace that he has received; if
it be a temptation of distrust, or impatiencie, or presumption, if it exceed
not the measure of grace that he has received, he is able to put it to flight;
but if it do exceed, then he is to pray for an extraordinary help of the
spirit: now the unregenerate man has no power to resist sin or temptation in
this case.

But you will say again, that there is no such power in the regenerate man,
for the Apostle says, Gal. 5. 17. Object. 2.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against Gal. 5. 17.
the flesh; and these are contrary one to the other, so that you cannot do the
things that you would.

To this I answer; It is true, that in the most sanctified man thatis, there is
corruption; and this corruption Answ. 2.
will fight against the spirt, and may sometimes hinder good; but it is then
when it exceeds the measure of grace he has received; neither is it always
prevailing in this kind, for when it exceeds not the grace, the spirit
overcomes it: neither does it always continue; it may be in the heart, but it
cannot reign in the heart; it may be in the heart, as a thief in a house,
not to have residence and a dwelling place, but for a night and be gone; so
this lust in the heart of a regenerate man dwells not there; that is, it does
not always hinder him from good, but for a time, and then departs: but it is
not thus with an unregenerate man, sin takes possession and keeps possession
of his heart.

The third consectary or use stands thus; seeing the Apostle says, mortify;
that is, do not only abstain from the Use 3.
outward actions of sin, but from the thought of the heart; for Mortification
is a slaying of the evil disposition of the heart, as well as the slaying of
the actions of the body; Mortification is first inward, and then outward: Hence
we gather this point, That it is not sufficient for a man to abstain from the
actions It is not enough to abstain from sin in the action, but it must be in
the heart.
of sin, but he must abstain from sin in his heart, if he would prove his
Mortification to be true: 2 Pet. 2. 14. The Apostle says, that their eyes were
fullof adultery: Now lust is not in the eye, but in the heart; but by this he
fhewes, that it is the fullness of sin in the heart, that fills the eyes;
therefore look unto the heart, for the actions are but the branches, but the
root is in the heart; that is, whatsoever evil action is in the hand, it has
its first breeding in the heart; if therefore you would remove the effect, you
must first remove the cause: Now the cause, if it bring forth an evil effect,
is the greater evil; as the cause of good is greater than the effect it
produces: even so the sin of the heart, because it is the cause of evil
actions, is greater than the evil that it produces. Then think not with you
selves, that if you abstain from the outward gross actions of sin, that
sin is mortified in you; but go first unto the Cause, and see whether that
evil disposition of the heart be mortified, whether there be wrought in you a
new disposition to good, and a withering of all inordinate affections.

But you will say unto me, Our Savior says, that Every man shall be judged
by his works: and the Apostle says, that Every man shall receive according to
the Object.
works done in the body: by which it appears, that a man shall not be
judged by the thoughts of his heart, but by his actions.

To this I answer; It is true, that men shall be Answer.
judged by their works, because actions declare either that good that is in
the heart, or the evil that is in the heart; so that he will judge the heart
first as the cause, and then the actions as the effects. Romans 8. 27. it is
said, He that searches the heart, knows the mind of the spirit: so it is as
true, that he knows the mind of the flesh; that is, the actions of the
unregenerate part. Now as the sap is greater in the root than in the branches,
so the greater sin is in the heart, and therefore it shall receive greater
punishment. Therefore if the root be not purged, notwithstanding thou abstain
from the outward actions, thou have not as yet mortified sin, because thy
heart is impure; and seeing God will judge us by our hearts, if we have any
care of our salvation, let us labor to cut off the buds of sin that spring
from the heart.

The fourth Consectary, or Use, stands thus; seeing Use 4.
the Apostle exhorts the Colossians to mor^ifie their lusts, who had set upon
this work already; hence we note this point, That no man is so holy or
sanctified, but he had need still to be exhorted to Mortification; No man so
holy but needs Mortification.
For howsoever it be true, that in the regenerate sin has received a deadly
wound, yet it is not so killed but there is still sap in the root, from whence
springs many branches; and therefore had need of continual Mortification,
because the flesh will still lust against the spirit; and although there is such
corruption in them, yet are they not under the power of it, neither does it
bear rule in them. let them therefore that have not set upon this work of
Mortification, now begin to mortify their lust; and let all those that have
already begun, continue in this work. Thus much for the uses.

But you will say unto me, How shall we attain Means how to come to
mortification.
this work of Mortification? and therefore here will I lay down some means
how a man may come to this work of Mortification.

The first means is to endeavor to get a willing Means to get a willing heart
heart to have your sins mortified; that is, a holy dislike, and a holy
loathing of them, with a desire of the contrary grace: If men did butsee whatan
excellent estate regeneration is, it would breed in them a holy desire of
Mortification; therefore our Savior says, when his Disciples came to him, and
complained of the weakness of their Faith, Matthew. 17. If ye have Faith as a
grain of Mustard Seed, ye shall say unto this mountain, Remove, and it shall
be removed. By setting forth the excellency of Faith, he takes pains to work
in them a desire of it; even so, if a man once can get a desire but to have his
sin mortified, he will presently have it; for Christ has promised it, Mat.
5. 9. Blessed are they that bunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be fatisfied; that is, they which hunger in general for any part of
righteousness, they shall be filled: therefore if we can come but to hunger,
especially for Mortification, which is the principal part of righteousness; I
say, if we can but come unto God in truth with a willing heart, and desire it,
we shall be sure to have it: for besides his promise, we have him inviting of
us to this work; Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all you that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will ease you: Now what will he ease them of, the guilt? no:
(though it be not excluded) but pricipally of the commanding power of sin;
that he may not only be free from the guilt of sin, but from the power of
sin, that he may have his sin mortified and subdued. Now what else is the
reason that men have not their sins mortified, and that there is such a
complaint of unmortified lusts and affections, but because they come not with a
willing heart: their hearts are unstable, they are willing, and unwilling;
willing to leave sin, that they may be freed from the guilt; unwilling to
leave the pleasure they have in sin: therefore, says one, I prayed often to
have my sins forgiven, and mortified, and yet I feared the Lord would August.
hear my prayers: so it is with many in this case, they pray for
Mortification, but it is but verbal, it comes not from the heart; that is,
from a willing mind: therefore if thou would have thy sin mortified,
labor to get a willing heart.

The second means, if you would have your sins 2 Means, to take pains
about it.
mortified, is this, You must take pains; Mortification is painful and
laborious, and yet pleasant withal; it will not be done by idleness, a
slothful man will never mortify sin, for indeed it is a work that desires
labor: every thing that is of great worth, if it may be atrayned by industry,
deserves labor; that is, the excellency of it challenges it of men: even so,
the excellency and preciousnesse of this work of Mortification, because it is a
thing of much worth, deserves labor at our hands: The knowledge of every Art
requires Simile.
labor and industry, and the greater mystery that is infolded in the Science,
the greater labor it requires: even so, Mortification requires much pains,
for it discovers unto us a great mystery, the mystery of sin, and the
baseness of our nature, and also the excellencies that are in Christ, both of
Justification and remission of sins. And this necessarily flows from the
former; for if there be a willing mind in a man to mortify sin, then
certainly he will take any pains that he may attain unto it; as the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 9. 26. I run not in vain, as one that beats the air; that is,
I take pains, but it is not in vain; I take no more pains then I must needs,
for if I did take less, I could not come unto that I am at. The less labor
that any man takes in the Mortification of sin, the more will sin increase;
and the more it increases, the more work it makes a man have to mortify it:
therefore it stands men upon to take pains with their corruptions in time,
that so they may prevent greater labor: and this meets with the errors of
certain men:

First, thosethat think that all sins have the like Errors of men about
mortification.
proportion of labor in mortifying; they think that a man may take no more
pains for the mortifying of 1
one sin, than another; but these men are deceived, for all sins are not
alike in a man, but some are more, some are less violent; and accordingly,
Mortification must be answerable unto the sin. It is with Mortification
Simile.
in this case, as it is with physic in diseases; all diseases require not the
same physic, for some diseases must be purged with bitter pills, others not
with the like sharpness: again, some physic is for weakening, others for
restoring the strength: even so there are some sins, like that devil which
our Savior speaks of, that cannot be cast out but by fasting and prayer: that
is, they cannot be mortified without much pains; for if it be a heart-sinne,
that is, a sin that is dear unto thee, a beloved bosom sin, (as all men
are mavelous subject to love some sin above another) there must be, for
the Mortification of this, a greater labor taken then for a less corruption:
these are called in Scripture, the right eye, and the right hand; and as men
are very loath to part with these members of thebody, even so are they loath to
part with their beloved sins which are dear unto them.

The second error, is of those that think if they have 2
once mortified their sins, it is sufficient, they need not care for any
more, they have now done with this work. But these men are deceived, for they
must know, that the work of Mortification is a continual work, because the
heart is not so mortified, but there is still sinful corruption in it; so that
if there be not a continual work of Mortification, it will prove filthy. The
heart of man is like the ballast of a ship that leakes, Simile.
though thou pump never so fast, yet still there is work: even so, the heart is
a fountain of all manner of uncleanness, there is much wickedness in it,
therefore we had need pray for a fountain of spiritual light; that is, of
sanctification, that we may not be drowned in our corruption: Or, it is like a
brazen Candlestick, which although it be made mavelous clean, yet it Simile.
will presently soil, and gather filth, so it is with the heart of man, if
this work of Mortification do not continue, it will soil and grow filthy.

Now in this work of Mortification, the Papists The fruitles^ pain of the
Papists in the point.
seem to take great pains for the mortifying of sin; and indeed they might
seem to us to be the only men that take pains for this grace, if we did not
meet with that Clause, Coll. 2. 23. where the Apostle says, that this
afflicting of the body is but formal, will worship; they prescribe for the
disease a quite contrary medicine; for as the disease is inward, so the medicin
must be inward: Now Mortification is a turning of the heart, a change of the
heart, a labor of the heart, but whipping and beating of the body is but, as
it were, the applying of the plaster it self; for an outward plaster cannot
possibly cure an inward disease; that is, a disease of the soul; but if the
disease be inward, then the cure must be wrought inwardly by the Spirit.
Notwithstanding, I confess there are outward means to be used, which may much
further the work of Mortification, but yet we must take heed of deceit that
may be in them, that we do not ascribe the work unto them; for if we do,
they will become snares unto us; and therefore to prevent all danger of deceit
from thee, I will here set them down.

The first outward means, is, A moderate use of lawful things; The outward
means which further Mortification.
that is, when men use lawful things in a lawful manner; as a moderation in
diet, in clothes, First, Moderation in lawful things.
in recreations, and pleasures, a moderate use of a lawful calling, and many
more which may be means to further this work: but yet we must take heed of
excess in these lawful things; that is, we must take heed that we do not
go to Exces in lawful things is dangerous.
the utmost of them; for if we do, it is a thousand to one we shall exceed.
As for example, It is lawful for a man to eat, and to drink, and to use the
Creatures of God for his nourishment; and it is lawful for a man to clothe his
body, and use recreations so far forth as they may serve for the good of his
body; but if he use these inordinately, that is, if he eat to surfeit, and
drink to be drunken, and use his pleasure to satisfy his lusts by neglecting
his place and calling, they are so far from being means of Mortification,
that they become utter enemies unto the work; therefore if you would have this
outward means an help to Mortification, that is, if you would have them to
bridle nature, then look that you use lawful things moderately.

The second outward means are Vows and Promises, The second outward means,
vows and promises.
and these in themselves simply are good, and may be a good means to
Mortification, for they are as an Obligation to bind a man from the doing of
such or such a thing; for so the proper signification of a Vow is, to bind a
man, as it were, to his good behavior, always provided, that it be of
indifferent things; Vows when lawful.
that is, of things that be lawful, else Vows bind not a man to the doing
of that which is evil: now if it be made in things lawful, and to this end,
for the brideling of our evil disposition of nature, that we will not do
this or that thing, or if we find our nature more subject to fall, and more
inclined unto one sin than another, or more addicted unto some pleasure than
another, to make a Vow in this case, it may be a means to bridle our
affection in this thing. But here we must take heed, that we make them not of
absolute necessity, by ascribing How to b^ est^emed of and made.
any divine power to them whereby they are able to effect it, but to esteem
them things of indifferency, 1
which may either be made or not made, or else they become a snare unto us:
Again, if thou make a vow in 2
this case, that thou will not do such a thing, or such a thing; if it be for
matter of good to thy soul, make conscience of it, take heed thou break not
thy vow with God in this case; for as this ties thee in a double bond, so the
breach of it becomes a double sin: Again, take heed that thy vow be not
perpetual, for then it will be so far from being a means of thy 3
good, that it will be a snare unto evil; for when men make perpetual vows,
at last they become a burden, and men love not to bear burdens: Therefore,
if you make a vow, make it but for a time; that is, make it so that you may
renew it often, either weekly, or monthly, or according as you see necessity
require; so that when time is expired, you may either renew them, or let them
cease. Now if you observe this in the making of your vows, it may be another
means unto this work, otherwise it will be a snare.

The third outward means, is, The avoiding of alloccasion to sin: When a man
avoyds either the company The third outward means, Avoiding occasion to sin.
of such men as formerly were a means to provoke him to sin, or the doing of
such actions as may provoke lust or sin in this kind, or places that are
infectious this way; this will be a means to mortification. And this we find
was that command which God laid upon every Nazarite, Numb. 6. 4. they must not
only abstain from strong drink, but also they must cast out the husks of
the grapes, lest they be an occasion of the breach of their vow: So in Exodus
12. 15. the children of Israel were not only commanded to abstain from the
eating of unleavened bread, but it must be put out of their houses, lest the
having of it in their houses should be an occasion to make them to break the
Commandment: Thus we see that the avoiding of the occasion of sin, will be
a means to keep us from sin.

But some will say, I am strong enough, I need not have such a care to avoid
the occasions of sin: it is Object.
true, it is for Babes, and such as are weak Christians, to abstain from such
and such occasions; but as for me that have been a Professor a long time, and
have such a strength and measure of faith, I need not much to stand upon these
terms.

To this I answer, that this is men's weakness thus to Answ.
object, for this want of fear arises from the want of spiritual strength;
for this is the nature of spiritual strength in a man when he fears sin and
the occasions of sin, the more he fears in this case, the stronger he is,
and the less he fears, the weaker he is; the less spiritual strength he
has, whatsoever he may seem to have: therefore, do thou find want of
spiritual fear in thee, then thou may justly fear thine estate; for if
thou have true grace in thee, it will be so far from making of thee
careless, that it will make a double hedge and ditch about thy soul. Again,
know that all the strength thou boasts of, is but habitual grace, and what is
habitual grace but a creature; and in relying upon it, thou inakest flesh
thine arm; that is, thou put more trust and confidence in a creature, than
in God, which is a horrible sin, and flat Idolatry: therefore you see this is
men's weakness thus to object.

The fourth outward means is, Fasting and Prayer; The fourth outward means,
Fasting and Prayer.
though abused by the Papists, yet very necessary, and a good outward means to
Mortification, being used lawfully: for what is Fasting but a curbing of the
flesh, and a pulling of it down, a brideling of Nature, and a kind of
mortifying of the body? and what is Prayer, but a praying or begging of grace,
or for the preservation of grace, and power against corruptions? These two
things are very commendable, and much used in the Primitive Church; for the
Apostle says, Let Fasting and Prayer be made for all the Churches: which if it
had not been necessary, he would not have commended it unto the Church. And I
see no reason why it should be so much neglected amongst us, especially at this
time, in regard of the affliction of the Church abroad, whose necessity
requires it; and also being a thing so acceptableto God, and commendable in
the Church, I would it were in greater favor and request amongst us.

The third means, if you would have your sins 3 Means, The assistance of
the spirit.
mortified, is, To labor to get the assistance of the Spirit; for this must of
necessity follow, or else the other two will nothing avail us; for what will
it avail us though we have a willing heart to part with sin, and what
though we take pains in the mortifying of our lusts, if the Spirit do not
accompany us, all is nothing worth; therefore if thou would have this work
effectually done, thou must getthe Spirit.

But this may seem a strange thing, a thing of impossibility to get the
Spirit; for you will say, How is Object
it in our power to get the Spirit? How can we cause the Spirit to come from
heaven into our hearts, seeing our Savior says, John 3. 8. that the wind
blows where it lusts; that is, the Spirit works where it lists: now if
the Spirit be the agent and worker of every grace, then how is it in our power
to get him?

To this I answer, howsoever I grant that the Spirit is the agent and worker of
every grace, yet I say, Answ.
there may be such means used by us, whereby we may obtain the Spirit; and
therefore the Apostle says, Romans 8. 13. If you live after the flesh you shall
dye, but if you mortify the deeds of the flesh you shall live: which must be
done by the Spirit; for the Apostle makes us the Agents, and the Spirit the
Instrument; whereby he shows us thus much, that it is possible not only to
get the Spirit, but also have the work of the Spirit ascribed unto us.

Now as there is a means to get the Spirit, so also How the Spirit may be won
or lost.
there is a means to hinder the Spirit; so that the Spirit may be won or lost,
either by the doing or the not doing of thesethreethings:

First, if thou would have the Spirit, then thou 1
must know the Spirit; that is, so to know him as to give him the glory of the
work of every grace; for how shall we give the Spirit the glory of every
grace if we know not the Spirit? And therefore our Savior makes the want of
the knowledge of the Spirit the reason that men do not receive the Spirit;
Ieh. 14. 17. I will send unto you the Comforter, whom the world cannot receive,
because they know him not: that is, the world knows not the preciousnesse of
the Spirit, therefore they lightly esteem of him; but you know him, and the
excellency of him, therefore you highly esteem of him: The first means then
to have the Spirit, is, Labor to know the Spirit, that you may give him the
glory of every grace.

Secondly, if thou would have the Spirit, then 2
take heed that thou neither resist the Spirit, nor grieve, nor quench it.

First, take heed thou resist not the Spirit; now a How the Spirit is resisted.
man is said to resist the Spirit, when against the light of nature and grace
he resists the truth; that is, when by arguments, and reasons, and ocular
demonstrations laid before him, whereby he is convict of the truth of them, yet
knowing that they are truth, he will notwithstanding set down his resolution
that he will not do it; this is to resist the Spirit: Of this resisting of
the Spirit we read in Acts 6. 10. compared with Act. 7. Acts 6. 10. and 7. 51.
51. it is said of Stephen, that they were not able to resist the Wisdom, and
the Spirit by which he spoke; that is, he overthrew them by argument and
reason, and they were convinced in their consciences of the truth: and yet for
all this it is said, Acts 7. 51. Ye have always resisted the Spirit; as your
fathers have done, so do ye: that is, howsoever ye were convict in your
consciences of the truth of this Doctrine which I deliver, yet you have set
down your resolution that you will not obey. Now this is a grievous sin; for
sins against God and Christ shall be forgiven, they are capable of pardon,
but the resisting of the Spirit, that is, sinning against the light of the
Spirit, is desperate and dangerous.

Secondly, what is meant by grieving of the Spirit? Now a man is said to grieve
the Spirit when he How the Spirit is grieved*
commits anything that makes the Spirit to loath the soul; and therefore the
Apostle says, Grieve not the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. that is, by foul speeches
and rotten communication; for the Apostle in the former verse had exhorted them
from naughty specches, Let (says he) no evil Communication proceed out of
your mouths; and then presently adjoynes, and grieve not the Spirit: for if
you give your selves to corrupt Communication and rotten speeches, you will
grieve the Spirit, it will be a means of the Spirits departure: the Spirit is
a clean Spirit, and he loves a clean habitation, a heart that has purged
itself of these corruptions. Therefore when you hear a man that has rotten
speeches in his mouth, say, that man grieves the Spirit; for there is nothing
so odious and contrary to men, as these are to the Spirit: and therefore if you
would keep the Spirit, then let your words be gracious, powdered with salt;
that is, with the grace of the Spirit proceeding from a sanctified heart: and
as speeches, so all evil actions, in like manner, grieve the heart.

Thirdly, what is meant by quenching of the Spirit? How the Spirit is quenched.
A man is said to quench the Spirit, when there is a carelessness in theusing
of the means of grace whereby the Spirit is increased; that is, when men grow
1.
careless and remiss in the duties of Religion, either in hearing, reading,
praying, or meditating. Again, 2.
when a man does not cherish every good motion of the Spirit in his heart,
either to pray, or to hear, etc. but lets them lie without practice, this is a
quenching of the Spirit: therefore the Apostle says, 2 These. 5. 19. 2 These. 5.
19.
Quench not the Spirit; that is, by a neglect of the means.

Thirdly, if you would get the Spirit, you must use prayer; for prayer is a
special means to get the 3
Spirit; and it is the same means that Christ us^d when he would have the
holy Ghost for his Disciples, he prayed for him, as you may see, Ioh. 14. 14.
I will pray the Father, and he will send the Comforter unto you; that is, the
holy Ghost; for he can comfort indeed, and he is the true Comforter; and
indeed there is no true Comfort but what the Spirit brings into the heart. Now
that the Spirit may be obtained by prayer, is proved Luke 11. 13. where our
Savior makes it plain by way of opposition to earthly parents; Luke 11. 13.
For (says he) if your earthly parents can give good things unto their
children, then how much more will your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost unto
them that ask him: Therefore if thou would draw the holy Ghost into thy
heart, then pray for him; prayer is a prevayling thing with God, it is
restless, and pleasing unto God, it will have no denial; and to this purpose
says God to Moses, Wherefore do thou trouble me? that is, wherefore art thou
so restless with me, that thou will have no denial till I grant thee thy
desire? so then if you will prevayle with God by prayer, you may obtain the
Spirit.

The fourth means, if you would have your sins mortified, is, To walk in
the Spirit; that is, you 4 Means. To walk in the Spirit.
must do the actions of the new man; and therefore the Apostle says, Galat.
5. 16. Walk in the Spirit. Now here by the Spirit is not meant the holy Gal.
5, 16.
Ghost, but the regenerate part of man; that is, the new man, whose actions are
the duties of holiness, as Prayer, hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments,
works of Charity, either to the Church in general, or to any particular
member of it; and there must not only be a bare performing of them, for so an
hypocrite may do, but there must be a delight in them; thatis, it must
rejoice the soul when any opportunity is offered whereby any holy duty may be
performed. But on the contrary, when we grow remiss in prayer, or in any
other duty, the devil takes an occasion by this to force us to some sin;
hereupon we presently yield, because we want strength of grace, which by the
neglect of that duty we are weak in. We know some physic is for restoring,
as Simile.
well as for weakening, thereby to preserve the ftrength of the body; now this
walking in the actions of the new man, is to preserve the strength of the
soul, it preserves spiritual life in a man, it enables him to fight against
Corruption, and lusts; for what is that which weakens the soul, but the
actions of the old man? Therefore if you would mortify your lusts, you must
walk in the Spirit.

The fifth means, if you would mortify your lusts, is this, you must get
Faith: so says the Apostle, 5 Means. Faith.
Acts 15. 9. Faith purifieth the heart; that is, Acts 15. 9.
it slays the corruption of the heart, it mortifies every inordinate desire
of the heart, it purges out the filthiness of our nature, it makes it a new
heart in quality; that is, it makes it fit to receive grace, and who would not
have a heart thus fitted to good? Again, It is said, Ephesians. 3. 17. that Christ
Ephesians. 3. 17.
may dwell in your hearts by Faith: as if he should say, Faith will purge the
heart; for where Faith is, Christ is, and Christ will not dwell in a rotten
heart, that is impure, and not in some measure sanctified by the Spirit.

But you will say, there are diverse kinds of Faith, What Faith is this then
that thus purifieth the heart? Object. 1.


By Faith in this place is meant a Justifying Faith; Answ. 1.
Faith that applies Christ and his righteousness in particular unto a man's
self for his justification, and hereupon he is raised up to holiness, and
enabled, out of love unto Christ, to mortify sin.

Now the order of this grace in a regenerate man, is wonderful; for first, the
Spirit, which is the holy The order of Faith in the regenerate.
Ghost, comes and enlightens the mind, then it works Faith, and then Faith
draws down Christ, and when once Christ comes, he takes possession of it,
never resting till he has rid the heart of the evil disposition of nature
with a loathing of it; then the regenerate man hereupon out of love unto
Christ, and hatred unto sin, begins to mortify his corruptions.

But you will say, How can the Spirit of Christ, which is the holy Ghost, dwell
in the heart, seeing he Object. 2.
is in heaven?

To this I answer, that the Spirit dwells in the heart, Answ. 2.
as the Sun in a house; now we know that the proper How Christ dwells in the
heart.
place of the Sun is in the Firmament, yet we say the Sun is in the house,
not that we mean Simile.
that the body of the Sun is there, but the beams of the Sun are there in
the house: so we say, that the proper place of the holy Ghost is in heaven;
and when we say he is in the heart of a regenerate man, we do not mean
essentially, but by a divine power and nature; that is, by sending his Spirit
into the heart, not only to work grace in the heart, but to dwell therein.
Now when the Spirit has taken possession of the heart, it draws and expells
away all the darkness of the mind, and makes it to look and to see Christ
in a more excellent manner than before, assuring him of perfect Justification,
and remission of his sins.

And here the error of many is met withal, in the Error about mortification,
confuted.
matter of Mortification; they will have Mortification first wrought, and then
they will lay hold upon Christ for remission of sins. Oh, say they, if I
could but find this sin, or that sin mortified, then I would lay hold upon
Christ, then I would believe; for alas, how can I look for remission of
sins, how dare I lay hold, or how can I lay hold upon Christ, when I find
that my corruptions have such hold on me? But these are deceived, for this is
contrary to the work of the Spirit: for first, Faith assures of pardon, and
then follows Mortification; that is, when a man is once assured of pardon of
sin, then he begins to mortify, and to slay his corruption; for
Mortification is a fruit of Faith: and therefore the Apostle says, Phil. 3.
10. That I may feel the power of his death, and the virtue of his
resurrection: Now what is meant by this but the two parts of repentance,
Mortification and Vivification? The Apostle believed before, and now he would
have his faith appear in the grace of Mortification, that he might sensibly
feel it. And therefore, if you would have your sins mortified, you must by
Faith draw Christ into your hearts.

The sixth means, if you would have your sins 6 Means, Spiritual Joy.
mortified, is to get spiritual Joy. But this may seem a strange thing to
mortify corruption by; a man or a woman would rather think that this were a
means to increase sin: but it is not so; for spiritual Joy is a special
means to mortifiesin, if we do but consider the nature of Mortification; for
as I said before, what is Mortification but a turning of the heart, a working
in it a new disposition? Now we know when the heart is not regenerate it is
full of sorrow, and joy in this estate increases sin: But when the heart is
turned from sin to grace, that is, heavenly disposed, there is a pleasant
object represented unto the eye of the soul, as Christ, Justification,
Remission of sins, and Reconciliation: and hence arises a spiritual Joy in
the soul, which rejoicing is a Mortification of sin; for when a man or woman
sees such excellencies in Christ, (as before) he so rejoices in them that he
loatheth whatsoever is contrary to them. As a man that has gotten a fair
Inheritance which formerly was content with a small Cottage, but now the Simile.
right that he has to the other, makes him despise that: so it is with a
regenerate man, this spiritual Joy makes him basely to esteem of sin, and
his natural estate: and therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 31. I protest
that by the rejoicing I have in Christ Jesus, I dye daily: that is, that
spiritual Joy which he had in Christ, of Justification and Remission of sins,
and that sight of glory which he saw by Faith, mortified sin in him, made him
basely to esteem of his corruptions. We see, by example, a man that is
wrought upon by the Law, or the Judgments of God, may for a time leave some
sin, and rejoice in good, as Herod heard John gladly; and yet this his joy
does not mortify sin, because it is not wrought by the Spirit upon an
apprehension of the love of God; that is, it does not proceed from the right
root; for spiritual joy that mortifies sin, arises from an assurance of
remission of sins; but this arises from some other sinister respect, or else
for fear of hell. Now that spiritual joy mortifies sin, the Wiseman
proves, Prove. 2. 10. compared Pro. 2. 10.
with the 16. verse, When Wisdom enters into thy heart, and Knowledge is
pleasant to thy soul, etc it shall keep thee from the strange woman. When
Wisdom enters into thy heart; that is, when the Spirit enlightens thy mind to
see, grace and knowledge is pleasant unto thee; when thou do rejoice in the
knowledge of Christ, and graces of the Spirit, then it shall keep thee from
the strange woman; that is, from inordinate affections, which otherwise would
bring thee to destruction. Thus you see that spiritual joy is an excellent
means to Mortification.

The seventh means, if you would have your sins mortified, is, Humbleness
of mind: this is an excellent 7 Means, Humility.
means to Mortification; for when the heart is proud, it will not yield; that
is, it is unfit for grace; for there is nothing so contrary unto the nature of
the Spirit, as a proud heart; and therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5. 5. God
resists the proud, but he gives grace 1 Pet. 5. 5.
to the humble. He resists the proud; that is, he does stand in opposition
against him as one most contrary unto him; he rejects his prayers and his
actions, because they proceed from a proud heart: but he gives grace unto the
humble; that is, the humble heart is fit to receive grace, therefore he shall
have every grace necessary to salvation, as Faith, Repentance, Mortification,
Humbleness of mind, what it is.
Peace of Conscience, and Remission of sins. Now this humbleness of mind is
a base esteeming of a man's self in an acknowledgement of his unworthiness to
receive any grace with an high esteem of Gods love; which indeed may seem to
be contrary to spiritual joy, but it is not so; for the more humble any man or
woman is, the more spiritual joy they have: it is increased by humility, it is
decreased by pride; the humble heart is always the joyfullest heart; for the
more grace the more humbleness, and themore humility the more spiritual joy,
for where there is a want of grace there must needs be a want of spiritual
joy. Now dejection and humility are of a contrary nature; a man may be cast
down, and yet not be humble; humbleness of mind is more inward than
outward, but the other may be outward but not inward; thereforeif you would
have your sins mortified, get an humble heart, forit is said, Psalm. 34. 18.
The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: a broken heart is an
humble heart: and, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A Ezekiel. 36. 16
new heart, and a new spirit will I give you: that is, when I have thoroughly
humbled you, and cleansed you from your rebelliousnesse against me, then I
will do this and this for you: well then, labor for humbleness of mind, if
you would have your sins mortified. Thus much of the word, Mortify.

We now come to a third point, and that is, what are those things that are to
be mortified? and these the Apostle calls in general, earthly members: Hence
we note,

That all earthly members are to be mortified. Doctr.
For the better explaining of this point, we will first speak of the
general, and then of the particulars: but first of all, because the words are
hard, we will show you by way of explanation, first, what is meant by members;
and secondly, what is meant by earthly members.

For the first; What is meant by Members? By members 1 What is here meant by
members.
is meant sin, or any foul affection of the heart, when the heart is set
upon a wrong object; or else upon a good object, yet exceeding either in the
manner or the measure, makes it a sin: as first, when a man's heart is set
upon a base object, as the satisfying of his eyes according to the lust of his
heart, or set upon his pleasure inordinately to the satisfying of his lusts;
now these are base objects. Again, there are other objects which in themselves
are good and may be used, as care of the world, and the things of the world: a
man may lawfully care for the things of this life that has a charge, or a man
may use his pleasure for recreation, or may seek after his profit, thereby to
provide for his family; but if the care for the world, and the things of this
world, exceed either in the manner or the measure, that is, if they be gotten
unlawfully, and if the heart lust after them, if they breed a disorder in the
soul, and a neglect of grace, then they become sin.

Now they are called members for these reasons: Why called members.


The first reason is, because these base affections fill up the heart; that is,
they make the heart fit for all Reas. 1.
manner of sin, even as the members of the body make the body fit for action:
now we know that the body is not perfect, if the members be not perfect; so
when the heart is not filled with these members, it may be fit for sin but
not for every sin, but this filling of it makes it fit for all sin; and
therefore the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1. 3. According to his divine power he has
given us all things; that is, by his divine nature we all come to the knowledge
of the Faith: now that 2 Pet. 1. 13.
which is contrary to the Spirit, and the knowledge of him, is made up by these
base affections, even as the body is made up and complete by its members.

Secondly, they are called members because these Reason 2.
base affections do the actions of the unregenerate part, even as the members
of the body do the actions of the body; for they receive into the heart all
manner of sin, and thence they send base affections into all the rest of the
faculties.

Thirdly, they are called members, because they are weapons of unrighteousness;
for so the Apostle calls them, Reason 3.
even as the actions of the new man are called the weapons of righteousness;
that is, the care for the actions of the new man. Now we know that it is the
property of one member to fight for the good of another; as we see, one member
will suffer it self to be cut off, and separated from the body for the good
of the rest; and so it is in like manner with these, for all will join
together for the mortifying of sin one in another. On the other side, these
weapons of unrighteousness, they fight for one another against grace, they are
careful to perform the actions of the old man, and to fulfill every lust of
the flesh.

Fourthly, they are called members, because they are as dear unto the heart,
as any member is unto the body, Reason 4.
and therefore in Scripture they are called the right hand, and the right eye,
Mat. 5. 29. that is, they are as dear and stick as close unto the heart, and
will as hardly be Matthew. 5. 29.
separated from it, as the nearest and dearest member of the body: thus much
of the word member.

Secondly, what is meant by earthly members? By earthly members is meant al
earthly affections; as immoderate 2 What is meant by earthly members.
cares, inordinare lusts; or it is a depraved disposition of the soul, whereby
it is drawn from heavenly things to earthly; that is, it is drawn from a high
valuing of heavenly things to a base esteem of them, and from a base esteeming
of earthly things unto a high esteem of them, this is earthly mindedness. But
for the better explaining of this point; first, we will show what it is to be
earthly minded: secondly, what it is to be heavenly minded.

For the first, what it is to be earthly minded: It is to mind earthly things,
or heavenly things in an earthly What it is to be earthly minded.
manner; that is, when the soul is depraved so of spiritual life that it
looks upon grace and salvation with a carnal eye, when it is represented unto
it; because it is but natural, it is not enlightened by the Spirit; now till a
man be enlightened by the Spirit, he cannot see spiritual things in a
spiritual manner. Howsoever, I grant that by the light of nature, a man being
endued with a reasonable soul, thereby may come to discern of spiritual
things, yet so as but by a commonillumination of the Spirit, as we call it; not
as they are, but only as he conceives of them by his natural reason: For
first, by nature a man may conceive of spiritual things, but not spiritually;
for nature can go no further than nature: now what is competible and agreeable
to nature he has a taste of, he sees things so far as they are suitable unto
his nature; but nature can look no further; for this is the property of
nature, it goes all by the outward sense and appetite; and no man can apply
spiritual things by the senses, but earthly things.

Secondly, by the affections a man may conceive of spiritual things, for the
affections are the proper seat 2
of love, and a man being endued with love, may be affected with heavenly
things, so far as they are sweet unto nature; and hence may arise fear of
losing them, not because they are heavenly things, but because they are sweet
unto his nature. Besides, the affections may restrain him, and turn him from
esteeming of things base, to an esteeming of things that are more excellent,
and yet be but earthly minded: for it is not the affection to good that proves
a man to be good, but it is the rice of the affection that is the ground from
whence they spring; namely, from a heart enlightened by the Spirit: Herod may
affect John, and John's doctrine, but this is not bred by the Spirit, but a
carnal affection.

Thirdly, by the understanding, or mind, a man may come to conceive of
spiritual and heavenly things; 3 How a man may come to know spiritual things,
and yet not be renewed.
his mind may be enlightened with the knowledge of them, and yet be but
earthly minded: As for example:

First, he may see a virtue in heavenly things above all things in the world,
he may conceive of them 1
by looking into them, so that a virtue and power may appear in them excelling
every virtue in any thing else; and yet not renewed.

Secondly, if he be of a more noble spirit he may do good, either for Church
or Commonwealth; 2
he may be very liberal and bountiful unto any that shall seek unto him in
this kind, and hereupon may grow remiss after the things of this world, and
so be not all so violently carried away after covetousness, and yet not be
removed.

Thirdly, he may come to see holiness in the children of God, and thereupon
be wonderfully affected 3
with it, insomuch that he may wish himself the like: nay more, hemay wonder
at their holiness, and be astonished with an admiration thereof, as one
overcome of it, and yet not be renewed.

Fourthly, he may come to see into the attributes of 4
God, both the communicable Attributes which are communicated to the Creatures,
as Justice, Mercy, Righteousness, Patience, and the like; and also those that
are not communicable, but essentially proper to God, as Omnipotency,
Omnipresence, and the like; and hereupon he may acknowledge God to be such an
one as these declare of, or else as he has made himself known in his Word:
as we see in Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 4. 34. and yet be not renewed. Dan. 4. 34.


Fifthly, he may feel the sweetness of the promises, 5
of remission of sins, justification, and reconciliation, and rejoice in
them, as Herod heard John gladly, Mark. 6. 20. that is, he was glad to hear
John preach repentance and remission of sins, he felt sweetness Mar. 6. 20.
in this; so he was content to hear that it was not lawful for him to have
his brothers wife, but he was not content to obey; in like manner, any man or
woman may find sweetness in the promises, and yet not be renewed.

Sixthly, he may believe the resurrection to life, 6.
and hereupon rejoice after it, because he believes there is areward laid up
for the righteous with Christ, and may desire to be made partaker of it with
them, and yet not be renewed: For if you look into this man, none of all these
have the first seat in his heart, but they are, as it were, in a second room,
or closet; for earthly things have the first and principal seat in his heart,
but these come in after, as handmaids or servants unto the other, and therefore
have no spiritual taste to him.

To make this plain, let us consider the order of The order of the faculties
of the soul.
the faculties of the soul: the mind is the principal faculty, and this
rules the will and affections: now the mind being earthly disposed, the will
and affections can go no further then the mind guides them: every faculty
has an appetite, and the soul of a man has an understanding which governes;
now look what the mind of a man loves or hates, that the will wills, or wills
not; for the will is but the appetite that follows the understanding. Again,
every faculty in man has a sense, and by that it is drawn to affect that
which it chooses, for the desire follows the sense; and as it is with one
faculty so it is with all the other of the faculties; for the faculties suit
all after the senses, and affect that which the mind affects: and thus the
will and affections hanging upon the mind, it is unpossible that the will of a
man should will and affect any other thing then that which the mind is
affected with.

But here some Questions may be moved: the first Question is this; But is there
such light in the understanding Qu^st. 1.
as you say, then it seems that a natural man may by the light of nature come
unto true knowledge?

To this I answer, that a natural man may come for substance as far as a
spiritual man, but not in a right Answ. 1.
manner; the Apostle says, Romans 8. 5. They that are of How a natural man may
know spiritual things.
the flesh, do savor the things of the flesh: and, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural
man perceives not the things of the Spirit: where the Apostle says, he does
not know them at all, Romans 8. 5.

1 Cor. 2. 14.


for he wants a sanctified knowledge of them; he knows them, but not by that
knowledge which is wrought by the Spirit always accompanied with
sanctification; he knows them for substance, but not in the right manner, as
to be a rule to his life. A carnal man may speak of spiritual things, but
not religiously; that is, with an inward feeling of that in his heart which he
speaks of: so also a carnal man may have light, but it is but a dark light;
he may have light in the understanding, but it is not transcendent unto the
rest of the faculties to transform and enlighten them: and therefore though he
have light, yet still he remains in darkness.

The second thing to be considered is this, What it is to be heavenly minded:
A man is said to be heavenly What it is to be heavenly minded.
minded when there is a new life put into him, whereby he is able both to see
and to speak of spiritual matters in a more excellent manner then ever he
was: And therefore the Apostle says, Ephesians. 4. 23. and be renewed in the
spirit of your minds; that is, get a new Ephesians. 4. 23.
kind of life and light in your soul; for when Christ enters into the heart
of any man or woman, he puts another kind of life into them than that which
he had by nature; the Spirit works grace in the heart, and grace makes a
light in the soul; it makes another kind of light then before; for before
there was but a natural light, a sight of Christ and salvation, but with a
natural eye; but now there is a spiritual light in his soul whereby he is
able to see Christ in another manner, and therefore it is called the light of
the mind, the boring of the ears, and the opening of the eyes; that is, there
is a change and alteration wrought in him whereby he can perceive spiritual
things; his ears are opened to hear the mysteries of salvation, with a mind
renewed to yield obedience unto them, making them the rule of his life; and his
eyes are opened to see the excellencies that are in Christ, as remission of
sins, justification, and reconciliation in a more excellent manner then
before; he is, as it were, in a new world, wherehee sees all things in another
mannerthen before. Now I do not say, that he sees new things, but old things
in a new manner; he saw Justification, Remission of sins, and Reconciliation
before, but now he sees these and Christ in a more excellent manner; there is,
as it were, a new window opened unto him whereby he sees Christ in a more
plain and excellent manner, and hereupon he is assured in the way of
Confirmation of the remission of sins: he had a general trust in Christ
before, and he saw a glimpse of him, but now he enjoyes the full sight of him;
that is, such a sight as brings true comfort unto the soul. As a man that
travels into a far Country sees at last those things Simile.
which before he saw in a Map; he saw them before, but in a dar^e manner; but
now he has a more exact and distinct knowledge of them: even so it is with a
regenerate man, he saw Christ and the privileges that are in Christ before,
but darkely, as it were in a Map, only by a common Illumination, but now he
sees them by the special Illumination of the Spirit through grace: And
therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The eye has not seen, nor the ear
heard, neither 1 Cor. 2. 9.

opened.


has it entered into the heart of man to conce^ve of those things that God has
prepared for them that love him: Howsoever this place of Scripture be
generally expounded and understood of the Joys of heaven, yet, in my opinion,
it is much mistaken; for by this place is meant those spiritual objects that
are shown unto a man when the Spirit begins first to enlighten him; the eye
has not seen; that is, which it has not seen in a right manner: he never
saw them in such a manner as now they are shown unto him, he now sees heavenly
things in another manner, he sees Justification in another manner then before,
hec sees remission of sins in another manner than before: so likewise he
sees sin in another hew than before; for now he sees remission of sins
follow them as a medicine to heal them: Again, he sees Justification and
Remission of sins in another hew, he sees them in an higher manner then
before, he sees them now as suitable to himself, and necessary to salvation;
before he saw them as good, but now he sees them as most excellent. As it is
with a man that is well, so it is with a man that is Simile.
not regenerated: now tell a man that is well, of Balsome and Cordials, what
restoratives they are, and what good they will do to the body, yet he will
not listen unto them because he is well and needs them not; but tell them unto
a man that is sick and diseased, he will give a diligenteare unto them because
they are suitable for his disease: so it is with a spiritual man before he be
regenerate, he listens not, he regards not spiritual things; when he hears
of Justification and Remission of sins he slightly passes them over,
because he feels himself in health, and finds no want of them; for what
should a man take and apply a plaster to a whole place that has no need of
such a thing? but when he is once renewed and mortified, then he finds these
suitable to his disposition; and this is to be heavenly minded: A natural man
or wom^n may talk of grace, of Justification, and Remission of sins, but
they cannot say that these are mine, or that I stand in need of them; for so
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of
the spirit: that is, he may talk of deep points of Divinity, but not by the
feeling of the Spirit; he may see God and Christ, but not in a right manner.

But you may say unto me, If a man heavenly minded may see thus far, then
when he comes Quest. 2.
once unto this estate, he needs not seek any further Illumination?

To this I answer, that though the spiritual man Answ. 2.
be thus minded and enlightened, yet he must seek for more; because this
knowledge is but in part; For we know but in part, says the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 13. 12. that is, though we know much of heavenly things, yet it is
but a part of that we ought to know, or that we should know: therefore we
must ever be breeding in the Spirit, we must be ever growing toward
perfection: now there can be no growing till the mind be enlightened, for
this is a work of the mind; and so far as the mind is enlightened, so far
is the will enlightened, and not only that, but the rest of the faculties are
enlightened accordingly.

But you may again say unto me, If this light Quest. 3.
which you speak of be seated in the mind, then how far does this light
redound unto the rest of the faculties, seeing the other seem not to be
sensible of this light, because many times there is such rebellions in them?

To this I answer, That earthly and heavenly mindedness is seated in the
understanding, will, or mind Answ. 3.
of a man: as for example; A Lantern is the proper seat of a Candle, now it
receives not the Candle Simile.
for it self, neither keeps it the light to it self, but it receives it in
to preserve light, and to communicate it to others; even so does the
understanding, it does not only receive light for it self alone, but by
preserving of it, it does communicate his light to the good of the rest of the
faculties: so the Apostle says, You are begotten by the word of Truth, James
1. 18. Now Truth is properly in the understanding, it is first there, and
thence it does communicate unto the rest of the faculties by redundance; I say
by redundance, but not by infusion; that is, the light that is in the
understanding does redound to the enlightening of rest, but it is conveyed to
the rest by the Spirit, and so a man is renewed.

Now for the better explayning of this, we shall How the understanding
enlightened, may do good to the rest of the faculties.
show how the understanding being enlightened, may do good unto the rest of the
faculties.

First, the Reason or Wisdom being first enlightened, it rests not there, but
flows by a redoundancy 1
unto the other faculties, and thereupon may take away those lets and
impediments unto good: as thus, Whereas ignorance or infidelity was formerly a
hinderance unto good things, making him that was ignorant, incapable of the
mysteries of salvation, so that he could not believe the promises of the
Gospel, he could not bring his will and affections to embrace the truth; which
ignorance is now taken away by that light that is communicated unto him by the
understanding.

Secondly, although the understanding cannot remove fear and anger, because
they are qualities of nature, 2
and evil dispositions of the soul, which it got by Adams fall; yet it may
hinder the growth of them, it may withstand the actions of them. As a Pylot
cannot hinder the raging of the Seas, it is not in his power to Simile.
make them calm, yet he can, by using means, do so much as to save his ship:
so a regenerate man, though he cannot stay his impatient anger and fear, yet
he may keep himself from the actions of impatient anger, and so bridle his
immoderate fear, that he may not be distracted with it.

Thirdly, the understanding may do much good by instructions, when it is
renewed, and therefore it comes 3
many times that the rest of the faculties are overturned by the reason; as
thus, when the will and affections are immoderately set upon a wrong object,
the mind comes and instructs the will and affections of the vileness of the
object, and the danger that will ensue; and then contrarily informing them of
grace, propounds heavenly objects unto them; hereupon they become affected
with them, and so are turned by the Reason.

Fourthly, it may do much good by the ruling of 4
them, for the understanding is the superior faculty of the soul, and
therefore it becomes a guide unto the rest: now if the understanding be
enlightened (as I told you) it does communicate his light by redundancy unto the
rest of the faculties, then it must needs follow that the understanding being
enlightened truly with grace, and the other faculties partaking thereof, they
must needs be ruled by it. Every inferior is ruled by his superior, or at
least should be so; so every faculty should be subordinate unto the mind: now
if there be a rebellion in them, it is the disorder of the soul, as the other
is the disorder of the State. Thus much for the explaining of these points,
namely, what it is to be earthly minded, and what it is to be heavenly minded.

The first Use then shall be, to reprove sharply such Use 1.
as favor the members of this body, and are inordinately affected with this
earthly mindedness, such also as cannot deny these members any thing that is
pleasant unto them, whereas they should be suppressed and mortified by the
Spirit. The rich man feeds these members with his riches, the covetous man with
his covetousness, the proud man with his pride, and the ambitious man with his
vainglory, when as these are their greatest enemies, howsoever they are
couzened by them; but if they did but know, if they were but truly enlightened
with grace, they would perceive the evil of these members, and how great an
enemy this earthly mindedness were unto them, and then they would starve their
bodies, sooner then they should deceive them of their souls. For first, as
there is nothing more hurtful unto man than earthly mindedness; so, secondly,
there is nothing more hateful unto God; and thirdly, there is nothing more
contrary unto the profession of Christianity, than the loving of those earthly
members.

For the first, I say that there is nothing in the world 1 Nothing more
hurtful to man then earthly mindedness.
more hurtful unto man than earthly mindedness, because it makes him worse
than the beasts; the beasts do not sin, but these earthly members are the
cause of sin in us, and sin takes away the excellency of the creature.
Innocence is the excellency of the creature, simply taken as he is a creature,
and this was all the excellency that we had in Adam, but sin took away that
excellency: therefore what Jacob said of Reuben, Genesis 49. 4. when he had
defiled his bed, Thou have (says he) taken away my excellency; that is, that
which I outwardly respected most, may be said of every lust; When men are said
to lose their excellency.
for what a man keeps, that is his excellency; the wife is the husbands
excellency, and therefore when she is defiled, he has lost his excellency;
for as a man keeps or loses that outward thing which he most respects, so
he keeps or loses his excellency: The Stars that fall, when they are in
the Element they shine and give light, and then they are said Simile.
to keep their excellency; but when they once fall then they lose their
excellency, because they have lost their light and splendour; so men are said to
lose their excellency when they give way unto their lusts.

And the reason is, first, because when the mind affects earthly things, it
mingles together two contraries, Reas. 1.
Grace and Christ, with sin and the world, and so ecclipseth the excellency
of the one with the baseness of the other: As when gold and dross are
mingled, the baseness of the one does corrupt the other, Simile.
so as the excellency thereof does not appear; but mingle gold with silver, or
let it be alone, and then it keeps his excellency, and is not ecclipsed: even
so, when a man is earthly minded, and his affections are set upon base objects,
with that enlightened knowledge he has, he mingleth an ignoble and base object
together, and so loses the excellency of it. Now there is nothing that can
make a man to lose his excellency, but sin; for other things that happen unto
a man Sin only makes a man lose his excellency.
are not able to take away his excellency, as reproaches and imprisonments in
the world; for a man may keep himself heavenly minded for all the reproaches
and imprisonments that he shall meet withal, if he can keep out sin; al other
things are unto him but as a candle in a dark night, which makes a man see his
way the better; so all things in the world cannot eclipse the grace of a
Christian, but in the hardest estate he will so keep his heavenly mindedness
that his grace shall the more appear.

Secondly, sin pierces men through; for that which is said of riches, 1 Timothy
6. 10. is true of every Reason 2. 1 Timothy 6. 10.
sin, It pierces them through with many sorrows; that is, it wounds his
soul, and makes him to draw to his own destruction: Again, sin having once
gotten possession, will have no denial; if once you give way unto it, it is
restless; for when a man has satisfied one lust, another comes to be
satisfied, till at last his heart is hardened, and his Conscience has lost all
sense, and when it is thus with him he is drowned in sin: he is, in this
case, like the Silke-worme, that never rests turning her self in her web till
at last she Simile.
destroy herself: so earthly minded men, when they are once caught in this
snare, they never rest turning themselves from one sin unto another, till at
last they destroy themselves.

Secondly, there is nothing more hateful and offensive unto God then when a
man is earthly minded; 2 Nothing so hateful to God as earthly-mindednesse.
for when a man is earthly minded, he sets up Idolatry in his heart: I speak
not of the bodily prostration, howsoever in time it may be he will be such an
one; but I speak of covetousness, that spiritual Idolatry of the heart, as
the Apostle calls it; which is when the heart is once sotted with these earthly
things, that it draws all the faculties of the soul after them, so that the
Commandments of God become a burden unto him. Now there is nothing in the
world more odious unto God than to be an Idolater, for he is a loathsome
creature, one whom God has left to himself: now God never leaves a man till
he forsakes him; but when he does forsake God, then he is left to himself:
and this is properly called the hatred of God, for then God with-drawes from a
man his Spirit and special providence, because he loathes him: And as it is
with us, what a man loathes that he hates, and we know that a man cares not
what becomes of that which he hates; so it is with God in this case: For, I
say, the turning of a man's heart from spiritual things to earthly, is the
setting up of Idolatry in the heart; and nature her self abhorres to have the
affections drawn away: for as an Adultresse is odious unto her husband,
because her heart is drawn away from him; so an Idolater is odious unto God,
because it draws away the heart from God: and therefore the Apostle says, Iam.
4. 4. Know you not that the Iam. 4. 4.
love of the world is enmitieto God? that is, if you love the world it will
make you commit Idolatry, and then you are at enmity with God, and so
consequently God and you are at odds, you stand in defiance one against
another; for who is at greater enmity with God than an Idolater?

The third thing to be considered, is, That there is 3 Nothinglesse beseems a
professor then earthly-mindednesse.
nothing in the world that less beseems a Christian man or woman, especially
one that professes Religion, than earthly mindedness; for this cause an
unregenerate man is compared to a Swine, because all his delight is to paddle
in the world, and to be wallowing in it, as in his proper place; for what would
you have a Swine to do, but to delight in things that are agreeable unto his
nature? But for a man that professes Religion, to fall from his Religion unto
profaneness, and to the love of the world, this is most odious unto God, this
God hates with a deadly hatred, this is a despising of God, and a trampling
under foot the blood of Christ: It is nothing for a profane man that has not
given his name unto Christ, to lie wallowing in the world, and to go from one
sin to another; it is, as it were, but the putting off one garment Simile.
to put on another, which is not unsecmely; or the pulling of a ring off one
finger to put it on to another, wherein seems no undecency; so the sins of
profane men seem not to be unseemely in regard of the persons from whence
they come; for there is no other things, at leastwise better things, to be
expected from them: but for one that has professed Christ, after long
profession to fall greedily unto the world, this is unbeseeming a Christian
man; other things are contrary unto grace, but this forsaking of the world is
suitable unto grace. For a covetous man that is profane, there is no contrariety
in that, it is suitable unto his disposition, but for any man that has tasted
of heavenly mysteries, as the Apostle says, Heb. 6. 6. to fall away into Heb.
6. 6.
a swinish disposition, as to covetousness, or pride, he shall hardly be
renewed by repentance; that is, he will hardly scrape off that blot of relapse:
nay, many times the Lord meets with such by great judgments; as Solomon in his
youth how did he maintain Religion, yet in his age how fearfully did he fall
into idolatry? Asa being young, honors God in his youth, yet he fell away in
his age, and the holy Ghost has branded him with three fearful sins: and so
Ahaziah, he fell away from God to idolatry, and in his sickness sent to
witches to help him: how unanswerable were the ends of these to their
beginnings; therefore take heed of Apostasy. I speak of this the more, because
we see daily many in their youth are mavelous zealous, and pretend great
love unto Religion, and yet if you mark the end of these (I speak not of all)
who greater backsliders then them? and indeed this backsliding many times
proves the portion of Gods children; the most holiest, and dearest of Gods
Saints many times are subject unto this alteration, and yet be dear and
precious in the sight of God: As we see in David and Peter. Difference betwixt
the backsliding of the Saints, and the wicked.


But there is great difference betwixt the slacknesse of the Saints, and the
wicked, backsliding: the godly they may slack, but it is but for a time; he is
cold and remiss in the duti^s of holiness, but it lasts not, it vanishes
away: on the other side, the wickedlye and continue in Apostasy unto the end;
in these it is natural, but unto the other it is but the instigation of the
devil working by some lust upon one of the faculties. Now slacknesse or
coldness of Gods children may seem to A threefold cause of the backsliding of
the godly.
proceed from a threefold cause:

First, from that hollow ha^tednesse that is in the children of God, which like
a hollow wall falls when it is Cause 1.
shaken, because it was not firm: so their hearts being not firmly established
in grace, nor rooted in the knowledge of Christ, when afflictions or reproaches
come, it shakes down that hold which they seemed to have of Christ.

Secondly, the next cause may proceed from the evil Cause 2.
example of men, which by their insinuation may draw their affections away, and
carry them from that love that they had toward God: therefore take heed to the
insinuation of wickedmen, they will first labor to know the desire of your
heart, and then they will fit themselves accordingly to deceive you; and
besides, the devil works effectually by them.

Thirdly, the last cause may proceed from this, that he is removed from under a
powerful ministry which Cause 3.
formerly he lived under, unto a careless shepherd, or at least an
unprofitable one; hereupon he may grow remiss and cold in the duties of
Religion: but nevertheless although this arises from men, yet the cause is in
themselves; for what is the reason that they fall, but because they find
spiritual things dead in them, and an in-lacke of grace. Therefore I beseech
you take heed of falling away, for if a man should run in the ways of
holiness, and catch heat; that is, be enlightened, and then sit down in a
consumption of grace, or fall sick of the love of the world, surely it is a
fearful sin: therefore let this teach every man to take heed to his
standing.

First, for those that do stand, let them take heed 1 A caveat to those that
stand.
that nothing take away their hold, whether it be profit, pleasure, or delight:
these the devil will use as instruments to beguile you, but take heed that you
be not deceived by them.

Secondly, for those that have fallen unto earthly 2 Those that have fallen.
Revel. 3.
mindedness, let them learn with Philadelphia to repent, and to do their
first works; that is, let them labor to get out of this condition.

Thirdly, for those that have not yet tasted of the sweetness of Christ, let
them here learn to be ashamed 3 Those that have not yet tasted of the
sweetness of Christ.
of themselves, because they have neglected so great salvation: and those that
have had the means of grace a long time preached unto them in the evidence of
the Spirit, and yet have not been renewed; that is, have not left their
swinish disposition, may here be ashamed. But it is a hard matter to persuade
the world of the truth of this point; the Ministers may speak and persuade,
but it is God that must change the heart, and make the man willing to have his
corruptions mortified. We speak but to two sorts of people, young men and old:
First, young men when they are 1 Young men.
persuaded to forsake the world, they reply, It stands not with their youth to
set upon this work; they are not able, or at least not willing, to leave their
pleasure. Secondly, old men, when they are persuaded 2 Old men.
to forsake the world, reply also and say, They have been instructed, and have
made choice of this, and therefore arenow unwilling to repent of their earthly
mindedness, lest they should be reputed remiss and weak in their judgments;
and therefore now they will not change their estates which they have lived so
long in. But howsoever it is hard for a man to draw men out of their swinish
condition, yet it is an easier work if God will be the instructor, if he do
put his Spirit into the heart, it will easily expel the works of the devil,
those strong holds that Satan has in the heart:

Now the reasons that make men mind earthly Objections of earthly mindedness
answeted. Object. 1.
things, to stick so fast unto them, are these: First, because earthly things
are present. To this may be rereplyed, It is true, earthly things are not at
all to come, for that which we have is present; those things of the world which
we enjoy and have in possession, are present, as riches, honor, and the like:
yet there are other things that are present which are of a higher nature, which
we ought to set our hearts upon, if we will be lead by presents; for Joy in the
holy Ghost is present, and Justification is present, and Regeneration is
present, Remission of sins is present, Reconciliation is present; and you
will say that these are far better than the things of this world: But say
that these were not present but to come, yet we account it a part of wisdom to
part with a thing present that is of small account, for hope of a better
afterward; who is there that will not part with a small thing present, upon
condition of enjoying of a greater afterward? the world and the things of the
world are nothing in comparison of grace and salvation; therefore what if thou
forsake all these things, upon condition you shall get eternal life for them
hereafter. For this is the difference between reason and sense; Nature is
carried Difference between nature and sense
away by sense, it delights in that which it feels, now sense is present; but
reason goes according to judgment, and rests upon hope: therefore let the
children of God use their spiritual reason in the forbearing of present
worldly delights, in hope of enjoying of better things; and take heed of sense,
be not led away by it, for it is usually a great means to draw our heart and
affections from grace to earthly things. Luke 15. 23. the rich glutton when he
was in torment, had this answer from abraham, Son, remember that thou in Luke
15. 23.
thy life time had thy pleasure; that is, thou had it then when it was not
a time for pleasure; thou wast led away by sense, and now thou must be
punished. The Apostle, Iam. 5. 5. pronounces a woe upon rich men, because you
received your consolation here, that is, youhave received Iam. 5. 5.
pleasure in a wrong place, for the earth is no place for true pleasure;
therefore you have received your consolation: you can expect no other pleasure
herafter, for you have sought true content where it is not; therefore woe unto
you. A man that minds earthly things is like a man that has a great graspe,
which cannot Simile.
hold any thing more, except he let fall that which he has. earthly minded
men, they have their hearts full of earthly things and pleasure, and therefore
it is not possible that they should gripe Christ and grace, except they let
fall that g^ipe that they have already of earthly things: Therefore this is a
false reason that men do object.

The second objection is, because earthly things are (...) 2.
sensibly felt, and in things that are sensibly felt, there is sweetness; but
as for other things, they are only conceived by the imagination, as grace and
other spiritual things.

To this I answer, men in this are exeedingly deceived; for if the lesser
faculty be sensible, then much more the greater faculties; and if the inferior
part of the soul has a sensible taste, then certainly the superior part of
the soul is the more sensible part; for the greater faculties have the greater
sense, and as they are larger so they grow deeper. To explain this, take a man
that has an afflicted conscience, as the conscience is the greatest faculty,
so it has the greatest sense in it; for what it apprehends it is presently
sensible of, whether it be joy or sorrow.

Now in the matter of sense between the superior A threefold difference in
the matter of sense, between the superior and inferior faculties.
and inferior faculties, the Schoolmen make a threefold difference. First,
say they, that sense which the understanding or mind has, is permanent, it
lasts for ever, because the things themselves are permanent; it feels Grace,
Justification, Remission of sins, it 1
feels God, and Christ, and the Spirit; but the sense of the other faculties
vanishes and passes away: As a man that has for the present tasted a Sermon
well, and another has tasted a good work, or a good turn done, which in time
are forgotten; the remembrance of them lasts not for ever. Secondly, these
natural senses are but for the present; that which you now 2
taste is present, that which you tasted before is gone, this is the nature of
these faculties; but it is not thus with the understanding. Thirdly, these
senses lessen through defect and weariness; a man will be weary 3
with eating of honey, though it be pleasant unto the sense; a man is weary
with meat, and with sleep, with rest, and with pleasure, when as these are
delights, and very pleasant in the fruition; but over much of any of these
makes them a burden: but the spiritual senses are not so, for they are
endless; Justification, Remission of sins, and Reconciliation, are without
end; therefore labor to find the sweetness that is in God, rest not till
thou get the Spirit which brings grace into the heart; and do but talk with
those that have tasted of this sweetness, that have first tasted of earthly
things, and now have tasted of spiritual, and they will tell you of the
excellency of the one above the other. Heb. 11. 14, etc. They declare plainly,
that they seek Heb. 11. 14.
a City, not in this world, for then they might return, but a heavenly place.

The third Objection is, because of the opinion and Object. 2.
speech of men concerning these earthly things; and this has a great force:
Esa. 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am a Esaias 6. 5.
man of unclean lips, and dwell in the midst of a people of unclean
lips: that is, I shall have a base opinion of this people, if I shall
prophecy unto them. So, Mat. 24. 11. Many false prophets shall arise, and
deceive many: Mat. 24. 11.
that is, men shall be taken in a trap to do evil, by the false opinion and
speech of the multitude; for men that fall into errors, are always drawn by
fancy.

To this I answer, first, you shall find them but ^
mouth-friends, and therefore when they persuade men by speech and opinion, it
is because they would deceive; and therefore I beseech you take heed of them:
It is a dangerous thing when the devil will plow with our Heifer; that is,
when he will use our fancy and appetite as an instrument to draw us to sin:
You see the danger that Adam fell into, when Eve was made the instrument, by
being led by fancy and opinion; the devil shows her the excellency of the
Apple, and by his persuasion she is drawn to taste of it. So I read of a
Martyr, who when he came to suffer, his friends persuaded him to turn; he
answered thus, You speak it out of love, but there is one within The Marty^
speech.
who is mine enemy, that persuades you thus to speak. In like manner say you,
that the opinion and speech of men is good, but there is an enemy within that
uses deceit. We have a proverb, It is good telling of money after ones
father; so it is good trying the speeches of the dearest friends, lest there be
deceit in them.

Secondly, to this I answer, to be sure not to be deceived 2
by the false opinion of men, it is to get sound knowledge in the Word, and
from it to gather a peremptory conclusion, that we will not be drawn no
further than we are warranted by that: Now a man must look that he stand upon
his own bottom, and not wholly on another man's judgment. A man that sets
himself upon a good ground, will stand fast when others shake and fall; now
this ground is the word of God: and when we have this ground, to resolve with
Joshua, that whatsoever others do, I and my house will serve the Lord: and
peremptorily to take up the resolution of Peter, Though all the world should
for sake Christ, yet we will not. I say, a peremptory A good ground required
for doing of good
will to do good, is good; though we have not power to effect it: but we
must look that it be upon a good ground; for we must know that the way to
heaven is not a broad footway, where many footsteps appear, as a pathway is
to a great City; but it is a narrow way, and therefore we must throng hard:
besides, there are not many going that way; and therefore we must not give ear
unto the opinion and speeches of the multitude. You know a man of
understanding, if a child come unto Simile.
him and speak of his rattles and bables, he will not answer him, because they
are too base things for him to talk about; and if he do speak unto him, it
is because the child wants understanding to conceive of other things: so it is
with carnal men, as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 2. 12. They speak evil of
those things they know not, because they want spiritual knowledge: 2 Pet. 2.
12.
They are like a Countryman, that comes, and seeing Simile.
one draw a Geometrical line, begins to wonder what it means, marvelling
that he will spend his time in drawing of such a line, though he knows well
the use of it that draws it; and to this purpose the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 4.
4. They marvel that we run not with them unto the same excess of riot:
that is, they 1 Pet. 4. 4.
cannot see the reason why we should not be as profane as they.

The fourth reason wherefore men will not set upon these corruptions, is,
because of a false opinion and Object. 4.
overvaluing of them, and therefore they think they do nothing in the getting
of them but what they deserve, and that they are worthy their labor and pains.

To this I answer; Let men look unto this, that they be not deceived in them,
and compare them with the Scriptures: for if you judge of things as the
Scripture does, it will appear that the reason is false, but if you do not,
although they be vanity, yet they will deceive you whatsoever you esteem of
them; for the truth is, that there is nothing in them but vexation of spirit;
you shall find great inticements, and much evil in them: besides, they will
fill your hands full of much evil and blood; that is, they will give thee no
true Joy: for what joy has the murderer of his murder? Now the reason
wherefore they cannot give true Joy, is, because they are under the faculty of
joy: As the eye is weary quickly with looking on a small print, but let the
print be suitable unto it, Simile.
then it will delight in it; so it is with the faculty of joy, if there were
no weariness brought to it by them, then men would not be weary in the
acquiring of them; but we see there is such an awkwardnesse in the minds of
men for the getting of them, that it wears the mind, but satisfies it not.
Ier. 9. 23. says Ier. 9. 23.
the Prophet, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in
his strength, nor the rich man in his riches: that is, he has no cause to
glory in any outward thing, because it is the Lord that shows judgment, and
can dissolve any creature to nothing; but if he will glory, let him glory that
he knows God; for the true knowledge of God brings true Comfort and Joy.
But it is not so with the creatures, for there is no creature can bring good,
or do good or evil without God; I say, no creature can bring comfort unto a
creature without God; for God, if he is the sustainer of all creatures, so
likewise he is the Author of all. But if we come to spiritual comfort, God
does not communicate it unto any creature, no creature has part of it: The
creature nourishes us Simile.
not simply as it is a creature, but it becomes nourishable by reason of that
which is put unto it; as the fire brings light and heat, heat is the matter of
the fire, light is but a thing or quality that depends upon it: so the matter
of every comfort is God, and of all things in the world, though the instruments
that do convey this comfort be a creature: therefore you may have the husk
when you want the kernel, that is, you may have these outward things, and yet
want the sweetness of them. And this is when God turns away his face from a
man in the creatures, then the comfort in the creature is gone; and therefore
David prayed, Turn not thy face away from thy servant: that is, take not away
my comfort. All men's comforts All men's comforts stand in Gods face.
stand in Gods face: let a man be never so rich, let him have wife and
children, lands and possessions, give him what outward things you will, and
what joy and comfort is in them if Gods face be turned away? Ahab is rich
enough, and Haman has a wife and children, and yet what comfort and joy had
they in them? It is not the creature that can yield true comfort, but it is the
All-sufficiencie that is in God, and from him derived unto them: As for
example, Take a man that is Simile.
in despair, tell him of the world, make large promises unto him in this kind,
none of all these will comfort him, they are so far from ministering comfort,
that they add unto his sorrow, especially if his gri^fe be for a matter of
sin; but tell him of God, and his sufficiency of Christ, and of
Justification, and Remission of sins, then he will begin to have some joy
in God: And as the presence of God is now most comfortable, so in hell the
knowledge of God and his presence shall be their greatest torments. Therefore
let my advice be unto you that which the Prophet DAvid gives in the like case,
Psalm. 62. 23. Trust not in oppression, and if riches increase, set not your
hearts upon Psalm 62. 23.
them: that is, set them not so upon them, as to place your happiness in them.

The Use then may serve for the just reproof of all Use 2.
earthly minded men, and for exhortation unto all to leave their earthly
mindedness: Let us all therefore labor to deprive our selves of all
inordinate desire of them; especially it concerns those that abound in them,
to keep a strong watch about their hearts, lest this viper lay hold upon them:
for as it is a hard thing to keep a cup that is full without spilling, so it
will be a hard work for those that have their Closets full of earthly things
not to have their hearts taken up with them; and therefore our Savior says,
It is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. Why it is
hard for a rich man to be sared.
What is the reason of this? because it is hard to have abundance of outward
things, and not to put trust in them: and what is said of riches may be said
of any other outward thing whatsoever, whether it be pleasure, or honor; for
these all work the heart of a waxie disposition to evil, so as it will take
any impression, it will be ready to receive into the soul any sin, or
embrace any object, and carry the impression of it unto action.

Now what should move us to morifie these earthly Motives to mortify our
earthly members.
members? The first motive is, because if we do not moritifie them, the
Devil will ensnare us by these earthly members, though we seem not to be
within 1
his power: As a dog that has broken away from Simile.
his keeper, yet going with his chain he will the more easily be taken; so
these earthly members are as a chain, whereby the devil lays hold on us;
therefore if you would not be taken by Satan, then mortify these earthly
members.

The second Motive to move us to mortify these earthly members, is, because
one earthly member, or the reigning of one sin in us, ties us fast from God,
and bi^des us fast to the devil: now what matters it whether a man be tied
with one chain, or twenty chains if he be tied fast; so what matters it
whether he be yed with one sin, or many sins, if one keeps him from God:
For as one grace, truly wrought by the Spirit, makes a man righteous; so one
raging sin makes a man unrighteous. Men think that they may One reigning
sin makes a man unrighteous.
retain some sin, and yet be righteous; but I say, if thy heart be set upon
any earthly thing, if it be but an immoderate care for these earthly things, or
if it be but fear of such or such a man, which may seem to be but a small
thing, that ties thee from God; I say, if you look unto such a man, if a
matter of Conscience come before thee, and thou dare not do justice for fear
of him, but will in this case rather break with God, it is a sign that there
is no true grace in thee, thou art as yet earthly minded: but if thou be
heavenly minded, thou will set thy resolution thus; This thing I know to be
just and right, it is a matter of Conscience, though all the men in the world
should be angry with me, yet I will do it. And therefore our Savior says,
Except he deny himself, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke 9. 23. that is, if he
cast off all self-love of these outward things, so as he will not set his
heart Luke 9. 23.
immoderately upon them. But it is now far otherwise with men, they will do
as other men do; like the Planets, they will turn every way; and therefore it
is impossible but Satan should catch these men, because they love to play with
his bait: deceive not thy self, if thou forsake some, and do not forsake all,
thou art as yet not heavenly minded: For a man may not be altogether covetous,
and yet not renewed; he may not gripe so fast after the world as another, and
yet not be depending upon God, such an one is but an earthly minded man: so a
man may be religious a while, and he may deny himself either some sin, or
else the company of wicked men, and yet when he comes but unto this, that he
must deny himself in all his pleasures, here he stands at a stay, Gods grace
and salvation and he parts, he will not buy it at so dear a rate as to lose
his pleasure in these outward things.

But you will say unto me, How shall we do to get Object.
this loathing of earthly things? Therefore, for the better helping of you unto
this work, we will now come downeto consider some means by which you may
obtain it.

First, if you would get a loathing of earthly things, Answer. Means to
obtain the loathing of earthly things.
the first means, is, to get a sound Humiliation: For what is the reason men
do so mind earthly things, and why they do not place heavenly things before,
but because they have not felt the bitterness of sin. 1 Humiliation.
Now the true ground of Humiliation, is the hating of sin, out of love unto
God: but men turn it another False grounds of it.
way, they make another ground of Humiliation.

For first, it may be they are humble because the fear of judgment that is
present, or one that is likely 1
to ensue, but not for sin as it is displeasing to God; their heart, it may
be, is broken, but it is not made better.

Secondly, it may be they are humbled because of 2
some general loss of outward things, or of some general judgment that is
befallen the land; or it may be a particular loss of credit, or the like, but
not for any particular sin.

Thirdly, it may be there was a deeper ground, the 3
persons of some men that were rich, but now are fallen, and therefore because
their hopes depended upon this man, and now being unable to help them, they
are dejected. But this is a false Humiliation; for true Wherein true
Humiliation stands.
Humiliation consists in an abstaining from sin, because it is displeasing
unto God; and a raising up of the heart by Faithin Christ to believe the
promises both of Justification, and Remission of sins, and then from hence
flows a loathing of sin.

Secondly, if you would get a loathing of earthly things, you must remember the
royalty of the spiritual 2 The royalty of spiritual things.
things, what the excellency of them is; they far su^passe all the things in
the world: Grace has the greatest power in it, it is able to quench fire, to
stop the mouths of Lions, Heb. 11. 34. Now if men did but believe Heb. 11. 34.
that there were such a power in Grace, they would never be brought to mind
earthly things: therefore labor to ground your selves in the true knowledge of
God, get good arguments in your selves of the preciousnesse of heavenly things;
for if a man be not thus grounded, but shall see greater arguments to the
contrary, he will presently begin to suspect that spiritual things are not
the best. Now when a Christian is thus grounded, he is able to discern things
of a contrary nature; therefore bring them unto the trial, and the more you
try spiritual things by a sanctified judgment, the more excellent they will
appear; but if they be not spiritual things, the more you look upon them,
the baser they seem to be.

Thirdly, if you would get a loathing of earthly things, then labor to keep a
constant and diligent A constant and diligent watch over the heart.
watch over your hearts; for when a man sets his heart and mind upon earthly
things, they will work carelessness and remissness of better things; it so
possesses his heart with fear, that he altogether neglects spiritual
things; it will make thee careless in prayer, and other holy duties. Take
heed therefore of filling thy heart with earthly things, for it will take away
the relish of spiritual things; and if once the sweetness of them be gone,
thou will make small account of them: Take heed of too much pleasure, for then
you will neglect prayer in private; and take heed of abundance of riches, for
they have a drawing power in them: And here what Christ spoke unto the Church
of Smyrna, Rev. 3. 8, 9. I know thou art rich, etc. may be Rev. 3. 8, 9.
said unto you, I know you are rich, by the great labor ye take after the
riches: men take much pains forth getting and keeping of earthly things, then
how much more should they labor to get and keep spiritual things; labor to
keep your hearts in tune, labor to keep a relish of spiritual things in
your hearts, and expel whatsoever is contrary unto it: Take heed of immoderate
love of riches, pleasure, or honor; take heed that you incroach not upon the
Sabbath, set that apart for the enriching of your souls. I speak not this
because I would have you careless in your places and callings, but I would
have you cast off all unnecessary occasions and businesses which you draw upon
your selves, by reason whereof ye neglect better things. It now remains that I
give you some means to get heavenly mindedness.

The first means, if you would get heavenly mindedness, Means to get
heauenlymindednesse. I
is this, you must labor to get Faith; for the more Faith thou have, the more
thou art in heaven: Faith overcomes the world, which sets upon us two Faith.
ways: first, by promising things that are good; secondly, by threatening that
which is evil. Now Faith A twofold snare of the world.
overcomes both these: For,

First, the world tells thee, that if thou will be earthly minded, thou shall
get respect and credit, thou shall get an Inheritance, thou shall be a King;
but Faith tells thee, that if thou will be heavenly minded, thou shall get
credit and respect with God and his Angels, and an Inheritance undefiled,
immortal, which fades not away; thou shall be as a King, and a Prince here in
this life, over the world, the devil, and thine own corruptions, over all
these thou shall be more than a Conqueror, and have a Crown of glory in the
life to come.

Secondly, the world tells thee, that if thou will not be earthly minded, thou
shall lose thy wealth and riches, thy honor and thy credit, nay, thy life
also; but Faith tells thee, that if thou be earthly minded, thou shall lose
thy spiritual life, and riches, and shall be poor in the graces of the
Spirit; thou shall lose honor and credit with God and his children; nay, thou
shall lose eternal life. Thus Faith overcomes our inordinate affections to the
world, and makes us heavenly minded.

The second means, if you would get heavenly mindedness, 2 Humility.
is this, you must labor for Humility: this is that which the Apostle James
exhorts us unto, Iam. 4. 8. Cleanse your hands you sinners, and purisie your
hearts you Iam. 4. 8.
double minded; and then humble your selves, cast your selves down, and the
Lord will raise you up. Where we may note, that before our hearts and hands can
be cleansed, we must be cast down. This we may see in the parable of the Sower,
Luke 8. 8. two of the sorts of ground were not fit to receive seed because they
were not humbled, and therefore the Word had not that effect in them as it had
in those that were humbled, plowed, and had the clods broken. It is with an
humble soul, as it is with an hungry Simile.
and thirsty man; tell him of gold and silver, he cares not for it, only give
him meat and drink, for that is the thing he most desires, and stands most in
need of: or like a condemned man, tell him of lands and possessions, he regards
them nothing at all; for nothing will satisfy him but a pardon: so it is with
a Christian that is humbled and cast down under the sense of the wrarh of God
for sin; tell him of any thing in the world in the most learned and
excellentest manner that possibly you can, yet nothing will satisfy him but
the love and favor of God in Christ, he can relish nothing but heavenly
things; nothing will quench his thirst but the imputed righteousness of
Christ. Thus you see that Humility is an excellent means unto heavenly
mindedness.

The third means, if you would get heavenly mindedness, is this, thou must
labor to get thy judgment 3 A judgment rightly informed concerning earthly
things.
rightly informed, especially concerning earthly things: The reason wherefore
men are so besotted with the world, is, because they do not conceive of the
things in the world so as indeed they are, they think better of them then they
deserve, and look for that from them which they cannot afford them: therefore
hear what the Preacher says of them; Solomon Eccles. 1. 14.
says, that they are vanity and vexation of spirit; yea, he calls all vanity:
and in another place he compares them to things that are most variable, and
most uncertain, as to grass that withers, to a shadow that is suddenly
gone; this is the esteem that the Wiseman had of earthly things. And thereby
we may see, that they are not truly good, because they are uncertain things,
and promise that which they cannot perform unto us; for at the best they are
but things wherein, as through a crevice, we have a small glimpse of the true
good; yet they themselves are not overgood, because they are not the cause
whereby the chief Good is produced; neither are we able to keep them, for at
such or such a time they will be gone; so that they are neither true good, nor
our good: and therefore this should weane us and our hearts from them. But let
us strive to set our affections on things that are durable good, and
substantial good, which will not deceive us; and will promise us nothing but
that which it will perform far beyond our deserts: therefore labor for a
right informed judgment.

The fourth means, if you would get heavenly mindedness, 4
is this, Labor to get a sight into the All-sufficiencie of God: Remember what
the Lord said unto A sight into the All Sufficiency of God. Genesis 17. 1.
Abraham, I am God All-sufficient; walk before me and be upright. God is an
All-sufficient God for general good; things of this life are at the best but
particular good; as health is a particular good against sickness, wealth and
riches a particular good against poverty, honor and credit a particular good
against disgrace; but God is a general good, and the fountain of all
goodness: other things are but created, like cisternes, that good they have is
put in them; therefore the Lord complains of the people, Ier. 2. 13. They Ier.
2. 13.
have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and have dug to themselves
Cisternes that will hold no water; that is, they have forsaken God the
fountain of all good, and have chosen unto themselves the creatures, that have
no more good than that which comes from God, the fountain: As a man that
forsakes a fountain that continually runs, and betakes himself to a cracked
Cisterne that has no water but that which comes from the fountain, and is
also subject to lose his water; so when men set their hearts on earthly things,
they forsake God who is All-sufficient for them, and seek to his Creatures
which are insufficient and unable to help themselves: therefore you ought to
think of these things to the end you may be heavenly minded.

The fifth means to get heavenly mindedness, is 5 A remembrance from whence
we are fallen.

Rev. 2. 5.

Simile.


this, To Remember from whence thou art fallen, Rev. 2. 5. this is for those
that have been heavenly minded, and now are earthly minded. It is with many
Christians as it is with the shadow on the Dial, the Sun passes and they
know not how: or as a man going to Sea, first he loses a sight of the Towns
and houses, then the sight of the Churches and Steeples, and then he loses
the sight of the mountains and hills, then at last he sees nothing but the
motion of the Seas; so there are many Christians that make a godly show of
profession at first, but by degrees they fall away, till at length they become
nothing; they leave the good profession, and take up an outward professing of
Christianity, and do all in hypocrisy: it is with these men as it is with a
man that has a Consumption Simile.
in his body; first, he grows weak; secondly, he loses his color; thirdly,
he loses his relish and A spiritual consumption compared to a bodily.
taste, and this is the most dangerous of all: so it is in a spiritual
Consumption; first, they are weak and feeble to perform holy duties;
secondly, they lose their color, that is, their cheerfulness in the
performance of holy duties; thirdly, which is the worst of all, they lose their
relish, they cannot taste wholesome Doctrine, they delightnot in the pure Word;
and this is dangerous, and hard to be recovered. A Consumption at first is more
easily cured than discerned; and at length it is more easily discovered than
cured: so it is with the spiritual: the sickness and the weakness of the
soul may at the first be more easily cured than discerned, but when they
begin to lose their color and taste, it is more easily discerned then cured.
This is a mavelous dangerous case, and therefore to prevent this sickness of
the soul, let men remember from whence they are fallen: I can compare such
Christians to nothing so fit as unto the Image of Nebuchadnezar, which he saw
in a vision; the head was of gold, the breast, shoulders, and arms of silver,
the thighs and legs were of brass and Iron, and Such are fitly compared to
Neb^chadnezars ^mage.

Dan. 2. 32.


the feet were of clay: so many Christians, at the first, for their zeal,
knowledge, tenderness of conscience, are as pure gold; afterward, they grow
more cold and remiss in the performance of holy duties, than before; as also
not so careful in the keeping of a good conscience, and this is worse than the
first, even as silver is worse than gold; again, they come to a degree worse
than that, like brass and Iron, dead and cold to every thing that is good;
then at last they come to clay; that is, to be earthly minded, minding only
the things of the earth: and therefore if thou would get heavenly
mindedness, and keep off this spiritual Consumption of thy soul, remember
from whence thou art fallen.

Having already showed you the difference between earthly and heavenly
mindedness, and also showed you the means whereby you may get out of earthly
mindedness, it now remains that we lay down some motives to move you to this
work.

The first Motive to move all men from earthly Motives to heavenly things.
mindedness, is, because heavenly things are a better object: the desire does
not dye, but change; the affections 1 Heavenly things a better object.
and desires are but changed from earthly things to heavenly things: now every
desire has a conjunction with the things that they affect; if it be but an
earthly desire, it has a conjunction with an earthly object; so if it be an
heavenly desire, it has a conjunction with an heavenly object. Now if men did
but know, or at least would be persuaded of this, it would be an excellent
means to persuade men to leave earthly mindedness: for what is the reason
that men will not profess Religion, but because they say, then we must be
crucified unto the world, and the world must be crucified unto us; that is,
they must leave al their pleasure and delights. It is true, thou must be
crucified unto the world, thou must leave inordinate care of earthly things,
all distrusting care, which is a companion of earthly mindedness in
unregenerate men; now what loss will it be unto thee, if thou have heavenly
affections for earthly? Will not a man willingly part with dross for gold? A
man that is recovered of a dropsy, what if a necessity be laid upon him to
abstain from excess in drinking, would he not rather willingly leave his
desire, than have his disease to return? So, what if thy affections be changed
from earthly to heavenly things, so as thou do feel the burden of
immoderate cares cast off thee? what though a necessity be laid upon thee not
to entangle thy self with the things of this world; is it not forthy souls
health to keep it from a Consumption? If men would be persuaded of the benefit
that comes by this heavenly mindedness, and that it were but a change of the
desire; not to their loss, but their great advantage, surely they would not
be so backward from getting of heavenly mindedness: therefore labor to
persuade thy heart of the truth of this grace; for this does not so tie a man
from the world that he must not have any thing to do with it, but it orders a
man in the world, it keeps him from all inordinate cares of the world, and all
inordinate desires of earthly things, it sets all the faculties of the soul in
order, and it sets the body in order: now if men did but know the benefit of
this change, they would be more easily persuaded to leave earthly mindedness.

The second Motive, to move all men to leave earthly 2 Nosweetness^ in earthly
things.
mindedness, is, because there is no sweetness in these earthly members;
there is an insufficiency in them, they cannot give any true content to the
heart of a man; and that they cannot do it, this is clear by two particulars:
First, this arises from the mutabilitie of the things; Secondly, it arises
from the disposition of the persons.

First, I say, they can give no true content unto the 1 Because they are
mutable.
heart of a man or woman, because they are mutable, and subject to change: now
you know that all earthly things are mutable, they have a time of being, and a
time of not being: let the heart of a man or woman be set upon any of these
earthly things, and the loss of it will bring greater sorrow of heart, by how
much more he has set his heart upon them; if immoderately, then the sorrow is
the greater; if moderately, the sorrow is the less; but if he set his whole
heart upon any thing, whether it be his riches, or his honor, or his
pleasure, the loss thereof will cause much sorrow of heart: now it is only
grace that gives true content unto a Christian; spiritual things they change
not, they are constant, immutable, and permanent, as Justification, Remission
of sins, and Reconciliation, these are not subject unto any change, they
cannot be lost; for when the heart is set upon heavenly things, the comfort
cannot be removed, because the cause of that comfort continues. Now comfort in
Christ is the true content of the soul, and therefore where Christ is by his
grace in the heart, there is content.

Secondly, I say, they can give no true content unto a man or woman, if we
consider the condition and the 2 Because of our condition
disposition of the persons, and that two ways: first, if we consider them as
good men, and so belong to God; or secondly, if we consider them as bad men,
and so not belonging unto God, we shall see that outward things cannot yield
any true content unto either.

First, if they be good men, and so belong unto God; yet there cannot be such
sweetness in them as to give 1 Whether good.
true content unto the soul. For many times they are a cause, or at least a
means to draw afflictions from God upon a man: for God is a jealous God; that
is, a God hating spiritual Idolatry. Now when the heart of a man or woman is
immoderately set upon, when, I say, his heart runs a whoring from God after
earthly things, whether it be after riches, honor, or pleasure, the Lord will
be sure to meet with him, and whip him home for it: As we see in David and
Ely; if David will set his heart upon Absalom, the Lord will be sure to meet
with his Absalom above all the rest; if Ely will not correct his sons, but
let them dishonor the worship and service of God, God will correct them
himself. And this arises from the nature of God; for God has a fatherly care
over his children, and therefore will not suffer them to soil themselves with
the things of the world, nor their affections to be drawn away; and therefore
the Apostle says, that he chastises every son whom he does receive; that
is, if a man or a woman do belong unto God, they shall be sure of sorrow and
affliction; and these are sent unto them to weane them from the things of this
world, to purge out of their hearts that sweetness that they are ready to
conceive in these outward things by reason of that corruption that is in them.

Secondly, if they be wicked men and do not belong 2 Wicked.
unto God, yet there shall be no sweetness in them; for if he be not
regenerate, outward things are not sanctified, and where theyare not sanctified
unto a man or a woman, no sweetness can be expected from them: And the reason
is, because they have not peace of conscience, which proceeds from grace. Now
howsoever worldly men may seem to the world to have true content, and to be
filled with joy, yet the truth is, it is a sick joy; for their consciences are
ever accusing of them, and they are in a continual fear that they shall lose
one another: therefore the Lord will be sure to afflict them, Psa. 55. 19. the
Lord will hear and afflict these because they Psalm. 55. 19.
have no changes; therefore they fear not God: therefore do thou see a wicked
man prosper in the world, and is not subject to such crosses and losses as
other men are, it is a foul sign that that man does not belong unto God, but
is one whom God has appointed unto damnation: For this is the nature of
earthly mindednes, it casts out The nature of earthly mindedness.
of the heart the fear of God in an unregenerate man; now where Gods fear is
not, Gods grace will not help that man. But this is not usual; for the Lord most
commonly meets with them here either by afflicting of judgments upon them, or
else with sudden death; but if he do not meet with them here, it is because
their judgments may be the greater, that when they have heapt up the measure
of their sin, then God will heap up the measure of their punishment, and the
measure of his wrath, to press them down unto hell. Now what if God defer
the execution of Judgment, it is not because there is any slacknesse in God,
as if he did not regard them, but the Apostle says, that it is his Patience, 1
Pet. 3. 20. he takes notice of it, he 1 Pet. 3. 20.
puts it upon record, he remembers it well enough, but he is a patient God;
that is, he waits for their conversion. Now patience is an attribute of God,
and every attribute of God is God himself; for there is nothing that is in God
but it is God: Patience, I say, is one of the Attributes by which God has made
himself known unto us: now when men abuse this Attribute of God, hardening
themselves from his fear, he will certainly meet with them: what and if God
do defer long? it is not because he shall escape unpunished; for says God,
When I begin, I will make an end: that is, I will strike but once, they shall
have no more time for repentance, they shall not abuse my patience any more.
This is a fearful Judgment of God, when God does proceed by prosperity to
destroy them; and it was the judgment the Lord threatened against the two
sons of Ely, Hophni and Phineas, 1 Samuel 3. 22. 1 Samuel 5. 12.
Thus you see there is no sweetness in outward things for a man to set his
heart upon them.

The third Motive, to move all men to leave their earthly mindedness, is,
because if a man or woman be 3 No salv^tion (...) them.
earthly minded, they cannot be saved: and who is there amongst us that would
not willingly be saved? All men do desire salvation, and yet there are but few
that in truth do desire it, because their practice of life is not answerable
to such a desire; for the Apostle says, He that has this hope, purges
himself; that is, he will take spiritual Physic, the grace of the Spirit,
which will thoroughly purge out this earthly mindedness, or at leastwise keep
it under, that it shall not be able to bear dominion in his heart. Now I say
there is a necessity laid upon every man to be heavenly minded; for so our
Savior says, Mat. 6. 24. No man can serve Mat. 6. 24.
two masters, he cannot serve God and Mammon; that is, he cannot serve God
with one part of his soul, and God will have all the soul, or none.
the world with another, you cannot be earthly minded, and heavenly minded; God
will have all the soul or none, God will admit of no Co-partnership, he will
not be a sharer with the world of that which is his right. Again, two
contraries in nature cannot stand together; now there is nothing so contrary as
God and the world: and therefore the Apostle says, If any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him: that is, if he set the world in the first
place, he cannot keep the love of God, God and his grace will depart from that
man: It is a thing contrary to nature to serve two masters, men cannot bear
it, for there can be but part serving; and surely it is not so contrary to a
man, as it is contrary unto God; therefore it is the folly of men that think
they may retain their earthly mindedness, and yet serve God too; but it is
unpossible to join these two in any action, and yet be acceptable to God:
Faith is that which is the ornament of every action; Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin: now every earthly minded man, is a faithless man; it keeps
Faith out of the soul, whether it be love of riches; or honor, or pleasure,
though it be but a depending on the approbation of such or such a man, it will
keep Faith out of the soul; so says our Savior, Ioh. 5. 44. How can ye
believe, seeing ye seek honor one of another, and not the honor that comes
of God? The cause that they wanted Faith, was, because they preferred the
approbation of m^n, and sought that before the gifts and graces of God; for it
is unpossible you should believe, so long as you retain any affection of
vainglory. Luke 9. 23. our Savior Luke 9. 23. Christ's two marks of a true
Christian
gives two marks of a true Christian; the one is, to deny himself; and the
other is, to take up the Cross; therefore it is not only required that a man
deny himself the pleasures and profits of the world, and all inordinate
affections, but he must also take up the cross, he must be willing to suffer,
for Christ, reproach, disdain, and shame; for there is as great a necessity
laid upon him to suffer, as to deny himself: and think, think not your
selves heavenly mind^d, except you find in you a heart willing to suffer for
Christ.

The fourth motive to move all men to forsake earthly mindedness, is, because
it is the better part, and 4 It is the best part to do so.
every man would have the best part; but it is a hard matter to persuade men
that that is the best part, for they say they have felt sweetness in them, and
therefore now to persuade them, is to fight against reason; which is hard to be
evinced without manifest proof: First then, we will prove it by Authority:
Secondly, we will prove it by Reason.

First, I say, we will prove heavenly mindedness to Proved by 1 Authority.
Luke 10. 41, 42 opened. A fourfold difference between earthly and heavenly
things.
be the better part by Authority or Scripture. as Luke 10. 41, 42. where in
the story of Martha and Mary, our Savior makes a fourfold difference
between earthly and heavenly things; first, Christ says to Martha, Martha
thou carest and art troubled; that is, there is much care and trouble both to
get and keep earthly things, these cannot be gotten without great labor, it
is a part of that curse which God laid upon Adam, that in the sweat of his
brows he should eat his bread; that Genesis 3. 17.
is, he should find much difficulty and labor to get outward necessaries
for the sustaining of nature: Mary she sat down, she was at rest, which
shows us thus much, that it is an easy labor, and an easy work to seek
after grace: Indeed it is no labor at all, if we compare it with the earthly
labor; the one is the delight of the soul, but the other is the burden of
the soul: now that which is the only delight of the soul is grace, and
therefore what the body does to satisfy the soul in this, it accounts of it
as no labor to it self, for it yields willing obedience to the soul: now
where there is a willingness in any man to do a thing for another, the
performance of the thing is not accounted as a labor to him, but as a delight,
because he is willing; but earthly mindedness is a burden to the soul,
because it is compelled by the unregenerate part to yield obedience unto it:
therefore you see that heavenly things is the best part, because it is an easy
work.

Secondly, Martha is troubled about many things; 2
that is, there are many things required to make an earthly minded man perfect,
to make him such an one as he would be: if he have riches, then he must have
honor, and pleasure, and a thousand things more, and yet never come unto that
which he would be; it may be he is rich, but he wants honor; it may be he is
honorable, but he wants riches; or it may be he has both, but he wants his
pleasure, he enjoyes something, but he wants that which he would enjoy. But
Mary has chosen but one thing, and that is Christ, this satisfies her; but
she has not him alone, but with him she has Grace, Justification, and
Remission of sins; one spiritual grace with Christ makes Christian happy,
he needs not to labor for any other; if Christ be in the heart, he will draw
all grace with him into the heart: and therefore the Apostle says, He that
gave us Christ, will with him give us all things else: that is, all grace that
we shall stand in need of.

Thirdly, Martha was troubled, but about earthly employments, 3
t^ings of little moment in comparison of grace: but Mary's was for the
onething needful; namely, grace and holiness, and therefore Christ called it
the best part; and indeed what comparison is there between earthly things and
grace.

Fourthly, Martha's part is but of corruptible things, subject to change; they
were mutable, there was no 4
solidnesse in them; but Mary's part shall never be taken away from her: Now
with men, that which will endure the longest, is always esteemed the best:
Mary's shall never be taken away; which implies that Martha's was nothing so,
because it was set in opposition against it. Thus you see how Christ judges of
them, Luke 16. 8, etc. o^ened.
and therefore if you will believe Christ, spiritual things are the best part.
Again, Luke 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. there are four differences set down between
earthly things and heavenly things, whereby Christ proves that heavenly things
are the best part. First, they make us unrighteous, and therefore they are
called unrighteous Mammon, verse. 8. they draw the affections away from God, and
then a man becomes unrighteous; but that which makes us truly righteous, is
grace; so then it cannot be denied but that is the best part that makes us the
best. Secondly, they are the least part; He that is faithful in the least, is
faithful also in much; that is, all outward things are less than grace,
though they were never so great; a little Faith, a little Sanctification is
better than a whole kingdom without this. Paul reckons all his outward
privileges but dung, in comparison of grace, Phil. 3. 8, 9. which he would not
have Phillip. 3. 8, 9.
done if they had not been the better part. Thirdly, they make us unjust; he
that is unjust in the least, is also unjust in much; that is, he that sets his
heart upon earthly things, it will so draw his heart from God, that he will
make no conscience of right and wrong; now that which blindes the conscience is
certainly the worst part. Fourthly, it makes us unfaithful; If you have been
faithful in a little wicked riches, how will you be faithful in the true
riches? that is, he that is earthly minded God cannot trust with any grace;
for earthly mindedness takes away the fidelity of the creature; now where
there is no true faith, there can be no true repose in that man: A man without
faith, is like a house without a solid foundation, no body dares trust to it,
neither will God trust an earthly minded man with grace. Thus you see it proved
by Scripture, that heavenly things are the best part. Now we will prove it by
Reasons that it is the better part.

The first reason is, because Christ in the places before-named 2 Reasons.
proved it to be the best part, therefore if you will believe Christ on his
Word, heavenly 1
things are the best part. The second Reason is, because they make us the
sons of God, and consequently, 2.
the heirs of salvation; We are, says the Apostle, the sons of God by
faith in Jesus; but the other makes us the children of the devil: And the
third reason, is, because he rewards heavenly mindedness with salvation, 3
but the other he does not reward.

The fifth Motive to move all men to forsake earthly mindedness, (if none of
all these before spoken 5 All things are at Gods disposing.
of will move thee, yet let this move thee) is this, because all things are at
Gods disposing; he it is (as the Wiseman faith) that gives riches and honor,
poverty and want; all things are of God, there is nothing in earth, but it is
first in heaven: as the eclipse of the Sun is first in heaven, and then in
the water and land; so there is nothing that comes to pass in the world, but
it was in heaven before all eternity. This David confesses, Psalm. 31. 15.
They have laid a snare Psalm. 31. 16.
for me, but my times are in thy hands: that is, they have laid a trappe to
take away my life from me, but it was first decreed in heaven with thee what
they should do to me, all things come from God, whether they be good things
or bad, whether they come immediately from God, as life, health, joy,
salvation, or the like; or whether they come mediately by other means, as
friends, wealth, pleasure, sickness, sorrow, or the like: when thou art sad,
who can comfort thee if God will not? when thou art sick, who can heal thee?
when thou art going to hell, who can save thee? Art thou weak, who can
strengthen thee? Art thou poor, who can enrich thee? Preferment says David,
comes neither from the East, nor from the West, but from God that shows
mercy. Art thou in favor with a great man, Who promoted thee? Art thou in
honor, Who exalted thee? Perhaps thou will say, it was my parents, or this
friend, or that man; no, it was first decreed in heaven, or else it had never
been. This made David say, Psalm. 6. 8. The terrors of l^fe and death are in thy
Psalm. 6. 8.
power, or do belong unto thee; that is, nothing has any power to do any
good or hurt, but as God wills it; I say, good or hurt is of God: What evil is
in the City, and the Lord has not done it? that is, what evil is committed and
is not first permitted by God to be done. The blessing of the creature (as we
call it) is of God: Does the Lord send any creature to hurt thee? the creature
has no power to do it, except the Lord command him: As for example; You know
an axe is a sharp instrument, Simile.
which with help will do much hurt, yet let it alone and it will do no hurt
at all; but let a hand be put to it, and presently you may do much with it:
so the Creature has no power to hurt thee, except they join with them Gods
command; and this we call the evil of the creature. Again, does the Lord
send any creature to comfort thee? it is not because the Creature can comfort
thee, the Creature has not any such power in it self, but the Lord uses it
as an Instrument for thy good. Matthew. 4. 4. Man lives not by bread only, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God: that is, bread, although
it be a good Creature, yet it has no power to nourish thee, except the Lord
put power unto it, and command it to nourish thee. Now seeing all things are of
God, and this heavenly mindedness is a means to bring a blessing upon all the
rest; that is, to bless them for thy good be heavenly minded: This was the
encouragement the Lord gave unto Abraham, Fear not, for I am thy exceeding
great reward, walk uprightly with me: so if thou would have a rich reward,
salvation and everlasting life, then get heavenly mindedness.

But you will say unto me, it is true, we were once earthly minded, but now we
are heavenly minded; I am now another man to that I was, therefore that you may
not deceive your selves to think that you are heavenly minded when you are
not, I will give you some marks whereby upon examination you may Marks to
know whether we have lost our earthlylymindednes
know whether you have left your earthly mindedness or no.

The first sign whereby you shall know whether you be earthly minded or no,
is, by examining your Mark 1.
selves whether your delight in earthly things be immoderate, or an excessive
care; examine whether your hearts are so set upon them, that it deprives you of
all spiritual Joy, if you do, you are as yet earthly minded.

First, if you exceed in the matter of getting of 1
them, and then in the matter of keeping of them; when you make them the chief
end of your desire, and prefer your own profit in the getting or keeping of
them before Gods glory, this is to make them your God: yet I say not but it is
lawful to use things for an end; as Recreation, for this end, to fit our
bodies for the performance of better things, this is as it were to take
physic for health-sake: but when men will make them their end, nay, set the
creature in the place of God, which is spiritual whoredom. And this is when
men will scrape riches together, so much for this child, and so much for that
child; so much for this use, and so much for that use, in this thou seek
thine own ends; but if thou will get them, get them for the right end, that
is, Gods glory, and not thine end to satisfy thy lusts, let them be all at
Gods disposing: and remember, Luke 16. what became of the rich man's end, and
the end of all his ends. I speak not this as if now but unregenerate men were
troubled with immoderate cares; for many times the dearest of Gods children
have excessive cares for earthly things, and many times do exceed their
bounds, but yet it is not constant but by fits and away. Therefore try, is thy
excessive care constant? it is a manifest sign that thou art earthly minded,
thou art not as yet crucified unto the world: 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. the Apostle
says, They that would be rich, pierce themselves through with many sorrows: 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
that is, they slay themselves, they are their own greatest enemies: and 2
Pet. 2. 12. Saint Peter calls 2 Pet 2 12.
them natural bruit beasts, led with sensuality; because when men set their
hearts and affections upon earthly things, they are deprived of natural
reason: now the reason, we know, is that which makes the difference betwixt
reasonable and unreasonable creatures, and therefore when men come to lose
their understandings, then they become bruit beasts; and then no marvel ifthey
have beastly affections, and be led away with sensuality, to a satisfying of
their lusts, being mad to be taken in giving way unto their lusts, and
insnaring themselves with those pleasures wherein they be delighted, and so
make themselves a prey unto Satan.

Secondly, you shall know it if you exceed in your pleasure and recreations, as
gaming, and bowling, and 2
sporting; grant they be lawful, yet if they be used excessively it is a
note of earthly mindedness. Recreation should be but as a stone to whet the
Faith when it is dull, a means to sharpen the faculties, that they may
Recreation when lawful.
be the fitter to do the functions of the body and soul, but when it is
used excessively, it becomes a hurt and hinderance unto it; when men will make
a trade of Recreation, and spend their time in it from day to day, and so make
it their vocation; this is a wicked thing, and this is folly in young men, who
because they have means, therefore think that it is not unlawful to spend
their time in gaming, and the like; but they are deceived, for the Lord exempts
them from no calling that I know of; sure I am, idleness, and gaming, and
other recreations are no calling for them: And this is the reason that young
Students will not set themselves to their Studies, but because they have wholly
devoted themselves unto their Recreations. And therefore examine your selves in
these two, so likewise for all other in the like kind, and accordingly judge
of your selves whether you be heavenly minded or no.

The second sign whereby you may know whether Mark 2.
you be heavenly minded or no, is, by the esteem that you have of heavenly
things, whether you esteem them as a part of your selves: every faculty or
habit has an object, if thou be a carnal man then these earthly things are
that which delights thy soul, but if thou be heavenly minded, then spiritual
things are the delight of thy soul. Now touch a man that is not regenerate in
these outward things, and you touch his life, for he accounts his life as
them, for they are part of himself; but it is otherwise with the spiritual
man, he accounts not of these earthly things: 2 Cor. 4. 5. the Apostle says,
We preach not our selves; that is, we 2 Cor. 4. 5.
account not of the approbation of men, nor any outward thing, as a part of our
selves; therefore if we want these, we do not much care. Hereby then examine
your selves what are the things you most delight in? What, are they earthly
things, how to be rich or honorable? Does this take away all your time, and
employ all the faculties of your souls, that you can have no time to think
upon God; or at least if you do, yet it is very remissely and overly, with no
zeal or affection? Then certainly as yet thou art not heavenly minded: But if
thou be enlightened by the Spirit, it will be far otherwise with thee; these
earthly things will have but the second room in thy heart, all thy care
principally will be how to get grace, justification, remission of sins, and
reconciliation. Now if it be thus with thee, it is an excellent sign that
thou art heavenly minded; when thou can say with Paul, Romans 7. 17. It is not
I, but sin in me: that is, the lustings and rebellions which are in my heart
Romans 7. 17.
after these earthly things, have not the first place in my heart: It is not I;
that is, it is the unregenerate part, which I account not as part of my self;
if (I say) it be thus with thee, it ^s a sign that thou art heavenly minded*
for if thou have obtained this heavenly mingednesse, thou will be dispos^d like
a Traveller, who will ever be enquiring the way home, and whether all at home
be well: if he can meet with any that can thus certify him, and he h^are
that they are all well at home, then he will (...) more cheerfully undergo
any difficulty that (...) meet with all in the way; will undergo (...),
hunger and cold: in like manner it is (...) heavenly ^^i^ded man, he will ever
be asking the way home, (for indeed heaven is our proper home) and whether all
be well at home; that is, if God and Christ, and the Spirit and the Saints be
at amity with him: and in himself he will be inquiring if he find faith and
repentance and peace of Conscience, if he feels that for matter of
Justification and remission of sins he be well, he respects not the world, he
cares not much what he meets withal, whether reproach and shame, penury or
want, so he find no inlacke of spiritual grace all is well with him. Therefore
examine your selves whether you be heavenly minded or no by the esteem that
you have of earthly members.

The third sign whereby you may examine your selves whether you be earthly
minded or no, is, by Mark 3.
your spiritual taste, whether you relish heavenly or earthly things best:
and therefore the Apostle says, Romans 85. they that are of the flesh do savor
the things of the flesh, but they that are of the spirit the things of the
spirit; that is, if the heart be regenerate it will taste a sweetness in
nothing but in heavenly things, or at least nothing will be so sweet unto him;
and on the contrary, they that are earthly minded they can find no sweetness
in heavenly things. Now (as I said before) every faculty or habit has an
object in which it is delighted, whether it be unto good or unto evil, so
that if the heart be regenerate then it will find sweetness in nothing but
spiritual things, but if it be unregenerate then it can find no sweetness in
heavenly things, neither can it wish them so well as earthly things. Therefore
examine what you delight in, what delight you have of the hearing of the pure
word, whether you relish it then best when it comes in the plain evidence of
the Spirit, or when it is mixed with eloquence and wit, which if you do, it is
2 Pet. 2. 1.
a sign of earthly mindedness It is said, 2 Pet. 2. 1. As newborn babes
desire the sincere milk of the word; that is, the man that is truly regenerate
and renewed hoe does best relish the word when it is alone without any
mixture, and therefore he calls it the sincere milk, that is, the pure word; as
if he should say, It is pure of it self, but if there be any thing added unto
it or mixed with it, it detracts from the excellency of it; for indeed the word
is the purest thing in the world, all Arts and Sciences and knowledge of
Philosophy are good for morrall duties, but they are corrupt and unclean in
comparison of the Word; and the reason is, because these are the works of men,
now there is no work of man but it is subject to corruption, but the word of
God remains pure; therefore examine your selves how you stand affected with
the pure word.

But some will say unto me, that eloquence and wit Object. 1. Eloquence no
ornament to the word.
is an ornament unto the word, it lets forth the excellency of the word the
more; therefore if it be such an ornament unto the word then it out to be used,
otherways the excellency of the word will not appear.

To this I answer, that humane wit and eloquence Answ. 1.
is so far from setting forth the excellency of the word, as it obscures the
excellency of it: I say, there The ^superexcellency of the word.
is no Art, Science, Tongue, Knowledgeor eloquence in the world that has such
excellency in them as the word has, whether you respect the Author, God, or
the Inditer, the holy Spirit; or the matter of it, Christ and his
righteousness. Again, the style the Spirit uses in setting down the phrases
of the Scripture, shows plainly that it is excellent of it self, now if any
thing be added unto a thing that is excellent, either the thing must be as
excellent, or else it detracts from the excellency of it; but there is no man
but will confess that the Word is the most excellent thing in the world,
therefore it must follow, that Eloquence adds not to the excellency of the
Word.

But you will say unto me, May we not use Eloquence Object. 2.
and Science in the Preaching of the Word?

To this I answer, That it is an unseasonable thing, Answ. 2. The Word should
not be mixed with eloquence. 2 Cor. 4. 5. opened.
I say, a thing not seemly, that the Word be mixed with humane Eloquence; for
the pure Word should be purely delivered: and the Apostle says, 2 Corinthians. 4.
5. I Preach not my self unto you; that is, I sought not mine own praise by
using Eloquence of words, but I Preach the Word purely, without any mixture of
any thing with it: again, he says, 2 Cor. 1. 17. When I came among you, I
came not in the entising words of man's wisdom, lest the Cross of Christ 1
Cor. 1. 17. opened.
should be of none effect: that is, I came not with words more for show than
for substance; he calls the Preaching of the Word that has any thing mixed
with it, whither Wit or Eloquence, but entising words, such words as do rather
feed the humor, What meant by initsing words.
than work upon the conscience of a man. Now a man is said to be entised, when
he is drawns away from that which is good, unto that which is either evil
absolutely, or else not so good as that from which he is drawn; and the truth
is, he that ^seth Eloquence in the preaching of the Word, does nothing else
but draw the heart away from affecting the pure Word, unto that which has no
virtue in it to save. Again, he Preached not with entising words, lest the
Cross of Christ should be of none effect: that is, if I should preach my self
in mixing any thing with the Word, that would take away the power of the Word,
the Word would not be effectual to work grace in the heart; therefore I dare
not Preach after this manner, lest I should deprive the Chuch of the power of
the Word, for if it want power to work, it will also want power to save:
therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10. 4. The weapons of our 1 Cor. 10. 4.
warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, etc. that is, the weapons by
which we slay your corruptions and lusts, are not carnal; that is to say, are
not eloquence of speech, or any human art, but are mighty through God, that is,
by God there is a secret power given unto his Word, whereby it over-mastereth
the lusts in the heart, and works in it a new kind of quality.

But you will say unto me, What must we do with Object. 3.
our learning? or what must we not learn Sciences, or must we show no learning
in Preaching?

To this I answer, It is true, that we had need to use Answ. 3. How learning
and eloquece is to be used in preaching the Word.
all the Arts, Sciences, and knowledges that we can, and all will be little
enough; for as the Apostle says, Who is sufficient for these things? that is,
who has the knowledge of Arts, or Learning, or Eloquence sufficiently to
preach the Word: but yet we must take heed that we do not bring them unto
the Word as we find them, neither in them to show our selves, but only mak^
them as a means to help us for this work: As for example; The Children of
Israel might whet their sithes upon all the stones of the Philistims: so a
Minister may sharpen his faculties with Arts. A man that keeps sheep, he
feeds Simile.
them with hay, not because he looks that they should bring forth hay, but
Lambs and Wool; even so, let a man use these Arts and Sc^ences, yet not to
bring forth Eloquence, but to make us more able to Preach the pure Word. It is
good therefore that we take heed that we do not eclipse the excellency of
the Word by these: We know, apparel though it be laid in pure gold, yet so
much as is covered of it, detracts from the excellency of it, therefore it
were better that imile.
it were alone: so it is the Word, though the Word may seem to be gilded with
Eloquence or Philosophy, yet it were better that it were alone, for so much of
it as is covered with these, so much of the excellency of the Word is hid.

But you will say unto me, that we use Eloquence ^^iect. 4.
and the like, that men may the better conceive us, and that our ministry may
the better be respected; for we find this kind of teaching most pleases
them, and which most men affect, therefore if we shall not use such and such
phrases of Eloquence, we shall be little respected amongst them.

To this I answer, that every Minister is, or should be a Physician; now we
know that the part of a wise Ministers should not please their people with
eloquence.
Physicianis not to satisfy the humor of his Patient, for so he may increase
the disease, but to labor to cure him by ministering such Physic unto him, as
he knows by experience the necessity of the disease requires: even so, to
humor men in Preaching, is not the way to cure them, or to change the evil
disposition of their nature, but rather a means to increase their disease, and
to make them obstinate and rebellious against the Word, when it shall come home
unto them: For what is the reason that the Word is so opposed, when it is
Preached (as the Apostle says) by the evidence of the Spirit and in power, but
because it crosses their corruptions? It comes not in the same manner that it
was wont to do: therefore the best way should be to Preach in the Spirit; that
is, to apply the pure Word of God unto the Consciences of men, and so to purge
out the sickness of the soul before it grow incurable. There is a disease
that many women have at their stomachs, whereby they desire Simile.
to eat ashes, and other things, which poisons nature; now if they be not cured
of it by purging out the humors that lie there, but be satisfied in it, it
will at last destroy them: so it will be with these men; to satisfy them in
this sickness of the soul, is not the way to cure them, but to make them more
incurable: therefore let Ministers look that they Preach the pure Word, and
nothing but the pure Word; and let men examine themselves whether they be
heavenly minded or no, by their rasting and rellishing of the Word when it is
Preached purely without any mixture, or else when it is mixed with eloquence.

The fourth sign whereby you may examine your selves whether you be heavenly
minded or no, is, to Mark 4.
try the opinion and judgment you have of heavenly things, how you conceive of
spiritual things. Rom 12. 2. The Apostle says, And be renewed in the spirit
of your minds, that you may know what that good, and holy, and acceptable will
of God in Christ is: He that is heavenly minded has a new judgment given
unto him whereby he is able to see spiritually all things in another manner
then he did before; I say not, that he saw them not at all before, but he saw
them not in that manner that he does now, for he is renewed in the spirit of
his mind, says Saint Paul; he has a change wrought in his heart and
understanding, whereby he is able to know and to do the will of God in a more
suitable manner then before; he has a new light in his soul, whereby he is
able to know what the will of God in Christ is; that is, he knows what God
does require to be done by him for Christ, not carnally by a bare
understanding, but spiritually by the work of the Spirit: and therefore s^ith
Paul, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Henceforth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though we
have known 2 Cor. 5. 16.
Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more: that is, we
knew him before in a carnal manner, as he is man, or as he was a man amongst
us, but now we know him in another manner, as he is our Savior, and our
Redeemer, Christ my Savior and my Reconciliation to the Father.

Now it is not a bare knowledge that I speak of, What knowledge is wrought by
the Spirit.
such a knowledge as is attained unto by Learning and Art, for so a man may
have knowledge, and yet not be heavenly minded; but that knowledge I speak of,
is a knowledge that is wrought by the Spirit; when it has changed the heart,
then he is able to judge both of Persons and Things.

(...), for Persons; he is able to judge of the per^^^s 1 Persons.
of men, and accordingly to make a difference between men: if he see a poor
man that is a sound Christian, though he be contemned in the eyes of the
world, yet if it appear to him that he has grace in his heart, or if he make
an outward profession of love to God, he does highly esteem of him because of
grace; on the contrary, if he see a great man, though in great honor and
esteem with men, yet he respects him not if he want grace: Therefore examine
your selves whether you are able to distinguish of persons in this kind.

Secondly, for things; he is able to judge of things 2 Things.
whether they be spiritual or earthly, he is able now to know what is truth,
and to embrace it; and what is error, and to refuse it; he has now a
Touchstone in himself; that is, he has the Spirit of discerning, whereby he
makes trial of graces, and lays hold on those which will endure the touch,
those he will receive as spiritual; the other which will not, he casts out as
counterfeit: therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 2. 9. The eye has not seen,
nor the ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things that
God has prepared for them that love him: that is, he was not able to judge of
things in that manner as now he can. Therefore examine your selves whether
there be a new life put into you, whereby you are able to judge of persons and
things in another manner than you did before.

But you will say unto me, How shall I know that Object.
my heart is renewed by the Spirit, and that there is a new life put into me?

To this I answer, that you shall know whether your Answ.
heart is renewed by the Spirit, by these three things: To know whether the
heart be renewed by the spirit.
first, by thy affections: secondly, by thy speeches: and thirdly, by thy
actions.

First, I say, thou shall know it by thy affections; for by these thou may
know whether thou be heavenly 1 By his Affections.
minded or no: and that thou may not doubt of it, our Savior gives the same
mark of a renewed heart, Mat. 6. 21. Where your treasure is, there will your
hearts be also: you may know that where your heart is there is your treasure,
what your heart is set upon there your affections are; for the proper seat of
love is the heart. Now if the heart be renewed and regenerated by the spirit,
there will be a love of spiritual things, and this love will be get heavenly
affections. A man may certainly know what estate he is in, whether he be
regenerate or no by his affections, how he is affected, what love he bears
unto heavenly things; for there is life in affections, and as a man that lives
knows that he lives, so a man that has spiritual love in his heart toward
God cannot but certainly know it, except it be in time of temptation, and then
it may be he may not find that love of God in his heart; but this sense of the
want of the love of God is but for a time, it continues not; therefore the holy
Ghost when he would describe a heavenly minded man, he describes him by his
affections, as the best mark to try him by: as Abraham would command his
servants to serve God, and Nehemiah feared God, and David, Psalm. 112. 1.
delighted greatly in the commandments of God: now wherefore Psalm. 112. 1.
did they obey God, and fear God, and delight in the Commandments of God, but
because of that inward love they bear unto him. We know every man can tell
whether he loves such a man or such a thing, or whether he hates such a man or
such a thing by the affection he bears to them; in like manner a man may know
whether he be heavenly or earthly minded by the affections he carries toward
the things he affects: therefore examine your selves, what are the things that
you love most, that you think upon most, that you take care of most, that you
take most care to get and to keep, are they earthly or heavenly things? those
things you do love best and your affections are most set upon, that your
thoughts are most troubled withal, if they be earthly, you may justly fear
your estates; for the affections flow from love, and therefore if you did not
love them you would not set your hearts and affections upon them.

Secondly, you shall know whether your hearts be 2. By his Speeches.
renewed by your Speeches: now this may seem but a slender sign of a renewed
heart, because it is hard to judge aright by outward appearances, to know the
sincerity of the heart by the speeches: yet seeing Christ makes it a sign of a
renewed heart. I may the more safely follow him; our Savior says, Mat. 12.
34. Mat. 12. 34.
that out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; that is, there is
abundance in the heart either of good or evil: Now if the heart be full of
heavenly mindedness, if, I say, this abundance that is in the heart be grace,
then it will appear in the speeches; for the speeches do naturally flow from
the affections that are in the heart; but if the abundance that is in the heart
be evil, then the heart cannot but send out foul speeches and rotten
communication; and therefore our Savior says, A good tree cannot bring forth
evil fruit, nor an evil tree good fruit: it is unpossible that a heart which
does abound, and is full of earthly mindedness, but it will break forth and
appear by his speeches: the filthiness that is in his heart, if it have
Simile.
not vent, it will burst; as we know a new vessel that has wine put into it,
must have a vent or else it will burst; and by the vent you may know what wine
it is: so, the speeches are the vent of the heart, and by them you may see what
is in the heart; if grace be there, the speech s will favor of it, as a Caske
will taste of that which is in it.

But you will say, The heart is of a great depth, and who can search it? who is
able to know whether the Object.
heart be renewed or no, by the speeches?

To this I answer, I say not that a man may at all times, and in all places,
judge of it aright; but I say, Answer.
that a man may certainly know himself whether he be renewed or no; which is
the thing we seek to prove in this place; that a man may know from what root
they spring, whether of weakness, by rebellion, or naturally through
unmortified lusts: I say not, but sometimes a child of God, a regenerated man
may have foul speeches in his mouth, and yet his heart be good toward God; he
may have rotten talk, but it is but for a time, it will not continue, and it
will cause much sorrow of heart, if he have grace, when his conscience touches
him for it. 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. In a great man's house there are vessels of
honor, and vessels of dishonor; if a man therefore 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21 opened.
purge himself, he shall be a vessel of honor, and yet have corruption in him,
there may corrupt communication come out of his mouth, and yet he keep his
goodness; as a vessel of gold may be foul within, and yet cease not to be gold,
a vessel of honor, neither lose it excellency; so a regenerate man may have in
the abundance of his heart, some chafe as well as wheat, some corruption as well
as grace, and yet be a vessel of gold; that is, heavenly minded: for the
Apostle says, If anyman therefore purge himself, he shall be a vessel of
honor, notwithstanding his corruption in his heart, and it appear in his
speech; yet if he purge himself, if he labor to mortify them, if he labor to
rid his heart of the^, he shall be a vessel of honor.

But you will say, It may be that we shall have not always occasions to try
men by their speeches, how Object. 2.
then shall we know whether their hearts be renewed?

To this I answer, I^ is true, that it may so fall out that we cannot try men by
their speeches, yet silence will Answ. 2.
declare in part what is in the heart; let a regenerate man besilent, and his
silence will show that he has a renewed heart; if he be reproached or
slandred, his patience in suffering shows the uprightnes of his heart; but if
he speak, it has a greater force, and will more manifestly appear: so on the
contrary, the rottenness that is in the heart, will appear in impatiency of
spirit.

Thirdly, you may know whether your hearts be renewed, by your actions: this
also our Savior makes another 3 By his Actions.
sign of a renewed heart; Mat. 7. 20. By their works you shall know them; that
is, by their actions. Now every thing is known by his actions; therefore
examine your selves what are your actions, are they the actions of the
regenerate part, or of the ueregenerate part, are they holy actions, or are
they unclean actions? By this you may know whether you be heavenly minded or
no. Now this must necessarily follow the other two; for if the heart be
renewed, then there will be heavenly affections in it toward God, and
spiritual things, and if heavenly affections, then there will be heavenly
speeches; for these flow from heavenly affections; and if there be these two,
then there must needs be holy actions: therefore our Savior says, Luke 6.
45. A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth good
fruit; that is, if the heart have in it a treasure of heavenly affections and
speeches, it cannot be but it will send forth good actions in the life.

The fifth and last sign whereby you may examine your selves, whether you be
heavenly minded or no, Mark 5.
is, by examining your selves how you stand affected toward him that seeks to
take these earthly members from you; how you stand affected with him that
reproves you for your earthly mindedness. This is a sign that Paul gives of
an unsound heart, 2 Timothy 4. 3. The time will come that they will not endure
wholesome doctrine: that is, they will not endure the Word of reproof, 2 Timothy
4. 3.
but will be ready to revile them that shall reprove them: and therefore he
adds, that they shall heap to themselves Teachers; they shall affect those
that shall speak so as they would have them. Now this is a sign of earthly
mindedness, when they are offended with him that shall reprove them for their
sin; for if men reckon these members as a part of themselves, then you cannot
touch them but you must touch their lives, for these are a part of their life;
and if you seek to take these away, you seek to take away their lives: ^ow
what man will be contented to part with his life? It is a principle in Nature
that God has implanted in every creature, to love their lives; but if you
account them not as a part of your selves, but as your enemies, then you will
account him as a spiritualfriend that shall help you to slay them; for who is
there that will not love him that shall help him to slay his enemy? Therefore
if the heart be heavenly disposed, he reckons them as his enemies; but if he be
not renewed, he accounts them as a part of himself: therefore examine your
selves by this, whether you be heavenly minded or no.

The Use of this that has been spoken, is for exhortation Use
unto all those that are heavenly minded: Let me now exhort such to persevere
in heavenly mindedness, let them labor to grow every day more heavenly minded
then other. Rev. 22. 11. Let them that be holy, be holy still; that is, let
them be more holy, Rev. 22. 11.
let them labor to grow in heavenly mindedness, let them labor to keep
their hearts pure from this earthly mindedness, because it will soil their
souls: for all sin is of a soiling nature; if it enter into the heart, it
will leave a spot behind it: now we know that if a man have a rich garment
which he sets much Simile.
by, he will be mavelous careful to keep all kind of grease and spots out
of it; so it should be a Christians duty to labor to keep all soil out of
his soul, because it is a precious garment, and the residing place of the
Spirit: we know that if a man have one spot in his garment, it makes him out of
love with it, and then cares not how many lights upon it; so it is with sin,
if thou suffer thy heart to be spotted but with one sin, it will work
carelessness in thee, so that hereafter thou will not much care what sin thou
commit, nor how thy soul is soiled: therefore it behooves you to keep your
hearts from every sin, and to make conscience of little sins. And so much
the rather, because The least sins to be avoided
the glory of God is engaged on your conversation; if thou shall soil thy
self with any sin, that has taken upon thee the profession of the Gospel,
God will be dishonored, and the Gospel will be scandaled: Again, keep thy
heart, because God takes special notice of all thy actions; as for dogs and
swine, as for the actions of unregenerate men, he regards them not; because his
glory is not engaged upon their conversation, he expects nothing from them; but
as for you, he takes a particular notice of all your actions, speeches, and
behaviors, and therefore you should be mavelous careful over your hearts.
Again, look Secret sins to be looked into
unto secret sins, because he is the searcher of the heart; let the fear of
God set in order every faculty of your souls to keep out every sin, every
evil thought, because he takes special notice of it. And that I may the
better prevail with you, I will briefly Motives to keep watch over our hearts
lay down some Motives to move you to keep this diligent watch over your
hearts.

The first Motive to move every Christian to continue and grow in heavenly
mindedness, is this, because 1
by this means he may be able to do every good work. 2 Timothy 3. 21. If a
man therefore purge himself, he shall be a vessel of honor, fit for every
good work: that is, if 1 Timothy 3. 21.
he labor to rid his heart of earthly mindedness, he shall have a new life
put into him, whereby he shall be able to perform holy duties in another
manner then before. Now what is the reason that there is such complaint among
Christians that they cannot pray, and are so dull and slaggish in the
performance of holy duties, but because they have not rid their hearts of
earthly mindedness? What is the reason that there is so much Preaching, and so
little practice; and so much hearing, and so little edifying; but because men
are earthly minded? If they would purge themselves of this earthly mindedness,
it is unpossible but that there would be more spiritual life in them, in the
performance of spiritual duties. Therefore if it were for no other cause but
this, that you may be enabled unto every good work and holy duty, and that
you may keep in you your spiritual life, feeling and moving, labor to keep
thy heart clean from sin.

The second motive to move Christians to grow in 2
heavenly mindedness, is, because that by this, God is honored; I say, it is
a glory to God if thou keep thy heart clean: Now what man is there that
would not willingly glorify God, who stuck not to give Christ for him? It is a
glory unto God when the Professors of the Word live a holy life; for what is
the nature of the Word but to cleanse? now when it works not this effect in
them, or at least when it appears not in them, it does detract from the
excellency of the Word. The Apostle lays down the nature of a true
Christian, Iam. 1. 21. Pure Religion is this, to keep ones Iam. 1. 21.
self unspotted of the world; that is, a spotless life is that which best
beseemes a Christian man that takes upon him the profession of the Gospel, and
that which brings much glory unto God is a blameless conversation: and to
this end the Apostle exhorts, Let (says he) your Conversation be without
covetousness, Heb. 13. 5. as if he should say, an unsatiable desire does
detract Hebr. 13. 5.
from the glory of God: therefore let this move men to be heavenly minded.

The third Motive to move every Christian to grow in heavenly mindedness, is,
because he may prevail 3
with God in prayer: Iam. 5. 16. the Apostle says, that Iam 5. 16.
The prayer of a faithful man avails much, if it be fervent that is, it
has a great force with God for a blessing: Now this should be a mavelous
encouragement to keep the heart clean, in regard of the great necessity that
the Church has of our prayers; and therefore if we would not for ourselves
prevail with God, yet in regard of the great need that the Church stands in at
this present, we should be moved to do this duty.

But you will say, that we are but few, or that I am but one, and how can we
be able to prevail thus Object.
with God.

To this I answer, Grant that you be but a few, Answ.
yet a few may do much good; Ezekiel. 22. 30. speaking of the destruction of
Jerusalem, I sought, says Ezekiel. 22. 30.
the Lord, for a man to stand in the gappe, and there was none: He speaks
there in the singular number, if there had been but one; that is, but a few,
they might have prevailed much with God: so I say unto you, though we be but a
few, yet if we keep our hearts pure, we may do much with God; nay, though
thou be but a particular person, thou may prevail much with God; as Moses
did for the Children of Israel: when a damme is new broken, the casting in of a
little dirt will hinder the course of water, but if it be not helped in time,
it will not easily be stopped; ^o in time a few may prevent a Judgment; nay,
such a J^dgement as otherwise may destroy a whole land; if the heart be truly
sanctified, it has a great force with God: Again, a man that would pray if he
do not speak, but many times he is forced to send forth sighs and groans
unto God, this is of great power with God; but if he power out his heart in
voice, it has a greater force: and therefore the Wiseman says, that the
words of the righteous are precious; that is, of great worth with God: and
therefore let this move men to be heavenly minded.

HOW TO MORTIFY FORNICATION.
Colossians 3. 1. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth:
Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry.
HAving handled in general the Doctrine of Mortification, according to the
Method of the Apostle, I am now come to descend to the considering of
particulars, as they are laid down in my Text; and would speak of them in the
order as they are ranked by the holy Spirit, but that the affinity and
neerenesse betwixt three of these sins, namely, Fornication, Uncleanness,
and evil Concupiscence, makes me to confound them, and promiscuously to mingle
them together. Let us therefore consider first of the nature of every of these
sins particularly by themselves, and afterward make some use and application
to our selves of them altogether.

The Doctrine that arises in general from these words, is, That

All Uncleanness is a thing God would have mortified and quite destroyed out
of the hearts that he would Doctr.
dwell in. All filthiness and uncleanness is a member of the old man; now in
such as Christ dwells in, the old man is crucified, he is dead with Christ; now
he that is dead with him, is freed from him: and again, he that is in the
second Adam, has power to mortify the members of the old man. All Gods
children must be purified and cleansed from all pollution, as the Apostle
expressly commands us, Ephesians. 5. 1. Be ye followers of Ephesians. 5. 1.
God as dear children: that is, be ye like unto God your Father, as children
resemble their natural fathers; now God is pure and holy, therefore must ye
be so also: and then it follows, verse. 3. But fornication, and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as
becomes Saints: that is, let all such filthiness be so far from you, as
never any mention be made of it amongst you; if it should by chance enter into
your thoughts, be sure to kill it there, let it not come no farther, never to
the naming of it: As it becomes Saints; that is, holy ones, Gods children and
peculiar people, it were unbecomming, and a great shame to them to be unclean,
to be unlike God their Father, who is holy. In like manner, he exhorts us to
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. that is, Let us purify our hearts
from the corruption of lust and concupiscence which is therein, striving to
make perfect our holiness in the fear of the Lord; and so 1 Th. 4. 3, 4, 5.
more fully also in 1 These. 4. 3 4, 5. he sets down the particular
uncleanness should be abstained from, and mentions two of the very same
spoken of in my Text, namely, Fornication, and lust of concupiscence the words
are (for they are worthy your marking) This is the will of God even your
sanctification, that you should abstain from fornication: that every one of
you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor, not
in the lust of concupiscence, etc. and therefore we ought to m^rtifie and
destroy all the filthiness that is in our hearts, if we would be accounted
Gods children, and have his Spirit to dwell in us.

But that for the general: we come to particulars, and will speak of the
first sin that is named in the Text, Fornication: whence the point of
Doctrine is this, That

Fornication is one of the sins that are here to be mortified. Doct. 2.
Fornication is a sin between two single persons, Fornication what a
grievous sin.
and in that it differs from Adultery: and although it be not altogether so
heinous as Adultery, because by it the Covenant of God is not violated as by
the other spoken of, Prove. 2. 17. neither find we the punishment absolutely
to be death, yet it is a Pro. 2. 17.
grievous sin, and to be feared, in that it subjects those men that are
guilty of it, to the curse of God and damnation: for the Apostle says 1 Cor.
6. 9. No fornicator shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; It deprives 1 Cor.
6. 9.
a man of happiness, banishes him out of Gods kingdom into the dominion of
the Devil, and territories of hell, never to be exempted from the intolerable
torments of Gods eternal vengeance. But to lay open the haynousnesse of this
sin, we will consider these four things:

First, the sinfulness Secondly, the punishment Thirdly, the danger Fourthly,
the deceitfulness
of it.

First, the sinfulness of this sin of Fornication appears 1 The sinfulnes
of fornication.
first in great contrariety that it has with Gods Spirit, more than all other
sins. Betwixt Gods Spirit and every sin, there is a certain contrariety 1
and repugnancy, as in nature we know there is betwixt heat and cold; now in
all contraries an intense degree is more repugnant than a remiss, as an
intense heat is more contrary than an heat in a less degree; so it is with
Gods Spirit and this sin, they are contrary in an intense degree, and
therefore most repugnant unto; for the Spirit delights in holiness, and this
sin in nothing but filthiness; that is pure and undefiled, but this has a
great deformity in it, and therefore consequently must needs be odious in his
eyes. Besides, this is contrary to our calling, as the Apostle says, 1 These.
4. 7. For God has 1 These. 4. 7.
not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Again, it causes a great elongation from God, it 2
makes a strangeness betwixt God and us; all sin is an aversion from God, it
turns a man quite away from him, but this sin more than any other, it is
more delighted in, we have a greater delight in the acting of this sin than
in any other, and therefore it is a most grievous sin.

Furthermore, the greatness of this sin appears, in that it is commonly a
punishment of other sins; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 1. 21. and
24. Romans 1. 21. 24.
compared together, where he says, Because that when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, etc. wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the
lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between themselves.
To the same purpose is that of the Preacher, Eccles. 7. 26. where speaking of
the entising Eccles. 7. 26.
woman, whose heart is snares and nets, etc. he says, Who so pleases God
shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her: that is, whosoever
commits sin shall in this be punished, that he shall be intrapped and
ensnared by the subtle enticements of the dishonest woman. So also, Prove. 22.
14. The mouth of strangewomen is a deep pit, he that is abhorred of the Lord
Prove. 22. 14.
shall fall therein: Now all sin of this kind, and consequently sinners, are
abhorred of the Lord, and therefore he will punish them in letting them tumble
into this deep pit of strange women here, and hereafter without repentance
into the bottomless pit of everlasting destruction: As long as the Lord looks
for any fruit of any man, he keeps him from this pit; but such as
notwithstanding all his watering, pruning, and dressing, will bring forth no
fruit, with those the Lord is angry, they shall fall into it. Now as in a
ladder, or any thing that has steps to ascend and descend by, that stayer unto
which another leads, must needs be higher than the rest; so in sin, that
sin unto which other lead, as to a punishment, must needs be greater, and of
an higher nature than the other: and therefore this sin is a most grievous
sin.

Besides, the haynousnesse of this sin appears, because it lays wast the
Conscience more than other sin, it quite breaks the peace thereof; nay, it
smothers and quenches grace. The Schoolmen call other sins, habitudinem
sensus, a dulling of the senses; but this an extinction of grace: other sins
blunt grace, and take off the edge, but this does as it were quite extinguish
it: It makes a gap in the heart, so that good cattle, good thoughts, and the
motions of the Spirit may run out, and evil cattle, noisome lusts, and
corrupt cogitations may enter in to possess and dwell there, and therefore it
is a grievous sin.

Lastly the greatness of this sin appears, because 5
it delights the body more than any other sin does; and therefore the Apostle
in 1 Cor. 6. draws most of his arguments, to dissuade the Corinthians from
the sin of Fornication, from the glory and honor of our bodies; as that the
body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, verse. 13. And that our bodies
are members of Christ, verse. 15. The Temples of the holy Ghost, verse. 19. Are
bought with a price, verse. 20. and then concludes, Therefore glorify God in
your bodies: and so in another place it is said, We ought to possess our
vessels in honor: Now there can be no greater means to dishonor the vessels
of our bodies, than to pollute them by this filthy sin of Fornication.

Secondly, the haynousnesse of this sin will be the The punishment of
fornication.
better seen if we consider the fearful punishment of it, which because men
are more afraid of the evil of punishment than of the evil of sin, is
therefore set down to be the greater according to the greatness of the sin
it self: as may appear by these two reasons:

First, God himself takes the punishment hereof into his own hand; for so
says the Apostle, Heb. 13 4. Wh^remongers and Aulderers God will judge: that
Heb. 13. 4.
God himself will be the judge of all men, for the godly indeed it shall be
best, because he is righteous and will render to them a Crown; but for the
wicked, It is a fearefullthing to fall into the hands of the living God.

Again, God reserves such filthy persons for an heavy judgment; according to
that of Peter, 2 Pet. 2 9, 10. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment Pet. 2. 9, 10.
to be punished; but chiefly them that walk in the lust of uncleanness. And
this is manifest in that fearful and grievous judgment he brought upon the
children of Israel in the wilderness, when as there fell in one day three and
twenty thousand for the committing of this sin. 1 Cor. 10. 8; So God punished
Ruben for his sin, in that hereby he lost his Excellency, Ge. 49. 4. and by
losing this he lost three things which belonged to his birthright as he was
the eldest; first, the Kingdom, which was given to Judah. Secondly, the
Priesthood, which Levi had. Thirdly the double portion, which his father
bestowed on Joseph. Further, Sichem and Ammon also for their filthiness in
this kind were taken away suddenly: And how was David punished, though the
dear child of God, the sword shall never depart from thy house. etc. See also
what grievous judgments the Lord threatens to them that shall commit this sin,
Prove. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11. Remove thy way far from her Pro. 5. 8, 9, 10 11.
(meaning the strange woman, or harlot) and come not nigh the door of her
house; Lest thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years unto the cruel;
Left strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy labors be in the house of a
stranger; and thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body is consumed,
etc. So again, Prove. 6. 33. Who so commits adultery, destroys his own
soul: and Pro. Prev. 6. 33. 55.
5. 5. Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell: as who should
say, there is no escaping death but by shunning her, if not death temporal, yet
surely death eternal: nay, if this will not fright you, there is no escaping
between hell and her. Besides, as in that which is good, the more a man
delights, the more comfort it will bring him; according to that in Pro. Pro. 3.
4.
3. 4. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee; so shall thou find favor and good
understanding in the sight of God and Man: so on the contrary, those sins
wherein ae man most delights bring greatest punishment unto him as you may see
in the punishment of Babylon, Revel. 8. 7, where it is said, How much she has
glorified Rev. 18. 7.
her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. Thus
then ye see the grievousnesse of the punishment proves the sin it self to
be more heinous and fearful.

Thirdly, the ha^nousnesse of this sin will appear, if we consider the
danger thereof, and difficulty 3 The danger off^rnication Prove. 23. 27.
to get out, when we are once fallen into it. The Wiseman s^^h, Prove. 23. 27.
A w^o^e is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pi^. Now as it is
almost impossible for a man in a deep d^tch, or a narrow pit to get out without
some help from another; so is it altogether impossible for one that is fallen
into this sin of Fornication, to free himself from it, Prove 2. 19.
without the special assistance of Gods grace helping him thereto: and
therefore it is said, Prove 2. 19. None that go unto her return again,
neither take they hold of the paths of life: therefore also is, Eccels. 7. 26.
Eccles. 7. 26.
her heart said to he snares and nets, in respect of the entanglements
wherewith she intrappeth her followers; and her hands to be as bands, in
respect of the difficulty to get loosed from. This sin beso^ted Solomon, the
wisest among men, Neverthelesseeven him did outlandish women cause to sin,
Nehe. 13. Neh. 13. 26.
26. So also did it bewitch Sampson, the strongest amongst men, one that was
consecrated and set apart as holy unto God, even he was overcome hereby, as
we may read, Judge. 16. We know by experience, Simili.
as a man that is tumbling from the top of an hill, there is no staying for him
till he come unto the bottom; so he that has once ventured upon this deep
pit, and begins to slide into it, there is no staying of him till he be
utterly lost in the bottom thereof: or as a man in a quicksand, the more he
stirs, the faster he sticks in, and sinkes deeper; so it is with him that
is once overtaken with this filthy sin, the more he stirs in it the faster
he sticks, and harder will it be for him to get out. Therefore we conclude
this sin is a most fearful sin, and hard to be overcome, or left off if
once accustomed to the delight thereof.

Fourthly, the haynousnesse of this sin will be discovered, 4 The
deceitfulness of fornication.
if we consider the deceitfulness of it: it does so bewitch us, that we will
hardly be persuaded that it is a sin; now if we will not believe itto be a
sin, much less will we be brought to leave the sweetness of it, to
forsake the pleasure we find in it. Besides, the Devil, that old Serpent,
he comes and tells it is either no sin at all, or else but a small sin,
and may be easily left; we may turn from it when we please; and so he
dandles us till we grow to such an height, as we become insensible and hardened
in it. Here therefore I will lay down the deceits that Satan uses to beguile
us in this sin, which being Deceit, of the Devil discovered.
detected, we may the easilier shun and avoid this detestable and bewitching
uncleanness.

The first deceit wherewith Satan uses to beguile Deceit 1.

Hope of repentance.


us, is, Hope of repentance; we think we can repent when we list, that that
is in our own power, for God will upon any of our prayers be heard of us;
heaven gate will be open at first knock; and therefore I'lecommit this sin
to day, and to morrow betake my self to my prayers, and all shall be well. But
beware of this, lest you be deceived, God will not be mocked; if you will sin
to day, perhaps you shall not live to repent till to morrow; or suppose thou
do live, yet he that is unfit to day, will be more unfit to morrow: God
cannot endure a man that will fall into the same sin again and again, for
he styles it, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. adding drunkenness to thirst; thatis, never leave
drinking till we be athirst again; that Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
which should extinguish and abate our thirst, is made the means to increase
and inflame it: Now what punishment follows such as do so, you read in the
next verse, and it is a fearful punishment; The Lord will not spare him, and
then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord
shall blot out his name from under heaven: who is there among you that would
not be terrified at this sentence? Surely his heart is of Adamant, nothing can
pierce it, if this does not: it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God: Beware then of doing thus, go not on in sin upon hope to
repent at your pleasure, lest before you think it time for your pleasureto do
it in, the hand of the Lord be stretched out upon thee, and his jealousy smoke
against thee, or one of (if not all) his curses light upon thee. A man would
take it ill if his neighbor should wrong him to day, and as soon as he had
done ask pardon, and yet wrong him again the next day in the same kind, and
then ask pardon again, and so the third, and fourth, and forward; even so it
is with God, we fall into this sin to day, and perhaps at night beg pardon
of him, yet to morrow commit the same sin over again, as if we had asked
leave to sin the fr^er; take heed of this, do not bless thy self in thy
heart, saying, I shall have peace, or I shall repent when I list, for fear
lest God presently blot out thy name from under heaven.

Again, Hope of after-repentance does lead many men on to the commission of
this sin; they hope they may repent before death, it is a great while till
this come, therefore time enough to doethis in. But this God has threatened you
heard even now in the place abovementioned, I pray consider of it. Balaam his
desire was but to dye the death of the righteous, therefore he perished among
Gods enemies; he desired it, and whilst he remained only desiring, without
any labor to live the life of the righteous, God justly punished him with an
utter overthrow: as he did with those, Esaias 28. 15, who said, We have made
Esaias 28. 15.
a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: These men
thought all sure, nothing could come to hurt them, they are as well as any man;
for they had an agreement with hell and death, neither should the scourge
meddle with them: but these were but their own thoughts, they reckoned without
their host, as we use to say; for see what God says to them, verse. 18. Your
Covenant with death shall be dis anulled, and your agreement with hell shall
not stand; when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be
trodden down by it: They might contrive, but he would dispose; though they
did think all well, and hope for peace and quietness, yet he would disanull
their covenant, and breakc off their agreement, so that the overflowing
scourge, that is, sudden destruction should take hold of them, and utterly
confound them. Ammon going to his brother Absalom's feast, little thought to
have been so soon cut off; Sichem preparing himself for a wife, never
thought of a funeral; neither is it likely that Korah and his company thought
their tent-dores should be their graves; I warrant you they hoped for
repentance, yet this sudden destruction tookeaway all possibility of repenting
from them. Godthreatneth such, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Because Ezekiel. 24. 13.
I have purged thee and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. And indeed
we cannot repent unless God sends his Spirit into our hearts, and he will
not send his Spirit into such an heart as has filthiness in it: Will any man
put liquor into a glass where Toads and Spiders are? much less will Gods
Spirit come into an heart that is unclean.

Besides, such a man as is not purged from his uncleanness, of himself is
most indisposed to repentance; he is without feeling, as it is Ephesians. 4. 19.
Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, Ephesians.
4. 19.
to work all uncleanness with greediness: Now such a man as has no sense of
his misery, that cannot feel his wretc^ed condition, but is insensible of his
corruption, he can never repent; for as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 2. 14. He
cannot cease from sin: and where there is not leaving off, and forsaking to
sin, there can never be any true repentance.

Lastly, God refuses such a man, he will not endure to hear him if he
should beg repentance at his hands; and the reason is, because he cannot beg
it in sincerity; for true repentance argues a turning from, and loathing of all
sin: and therefore such a purpose as men use to have in the time of
extremity, while the cross is on them, that they will forsake sin, that they
will not do such and such a thing, this I say, will not serve the turn, it is
not sufficient; though they should mourn and seem to repent, yet God will not
accept it, for the very beasts may do as much; as it is said, Therefore shall
the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall languish, with the
beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, etc. Hos. 4. 3.

The second deceit, wherewithal Satan uses to deceive men, is, Present
impunitie: he labors to persuade Deceit 2. Present impunity.
us, because we are not presently punished, therefore God sees it not, or will
not punish it at all, and therefore will go on in our sin, and delight to
wallow still in our pollutions, according to that of the Preacher, Eccles. 8.
11. Because sentence against an Eccles. 8. 11.
evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons of
men is fully set in them to do evil. Against this deceit of Satan, to prevent
it lest we should be overtaken thereby, letus remember these following
considerations:

Consider first, that though execution be not presently ^
done, yet punishments are every where threatened, and Gods threatening is as
good as payment; his Word is sure, and one tittle of it shall not fall to the
ground unfulfilled: and when God begins to punish, he will make an end; as it
is said, 1 Samuel 3. 12. In 1 Samuel 3. 12.
that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have spoken concerning
his house; when I begin, I will also make an end: If he strike once, he need
not to strike any more, his blows are sure, when he strikes, he never
misses, his arrows kill at first shooting.

Consider secondly, that either a sudden judgment 2
shall overtake them, and so confound them in an instant; or if it be delayed,
then the fear it should light upon them, quite takes away the sweetness of
the sin they commit, and so makes the sin it self a vexation and
pu^ishment to them; or else lastly, if God suffers them to run on in sin
securely, and without all fear or remorse, he bears wi^h them but that he may
make his power known, and eminent, by bringing a greater judgment on them at
the last: as the Apostle says, Romans 9. 22. What if God, willing to Romans 9. 22.
show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much
long-suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: There is a time
that the wicked must be fitting, and be a preparing for their destruction;
which once come, let them be sure afterward God will manifest his power, will
compensate his much long-suffering with the greatness of the judgment he
brings on them: Now it is a fearful thing, and a dangerous case, when God
suffers a man thus to grow and thrive in his sin, that so his judgment may
be the greater.

Consider thirdly, that such go on in their sin which hope to escape; because
they are not presently punished, 3
they abuse the patience and long-suffering of God: Now the manifestation of
Gods Attributes, is his Name; and who so abuse them, take his Name in vain;
and you know, God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.
Let such then as thus abuse the patience of God, think not that they shall
escape the judgment of God, but remember to take into consideration that place
of the Apostle, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6. where it is said, Despisest thou, O man, the
riches of Romans 2. 4, 5, 6.
his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath,
and revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who will render unto every
man according to his deeds. He shall assuredly pay for every day and hour
that he shall continue in his sin; God takes account of every minute, and
will, when he begins to render vengeance, repay it to the utmost farthing;
every moment adds one drop unto the vials of his wrath, and when that is full,
it shall be powered out upon them. See this in the Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2.
21, 22. I gave her space to repent of her Rev. 2. 21, 22.
fornication, and she repented not; Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and
them that commit Adultery with her, into great tribulation, except they repent
of their de^ds: Because she did not repent while she had time, therefore she
shall have great tribulation: Let us consider then the fearfulness of
despising Gods patienc^ and longsuffering, and not think ourselves in a good
condition, because we go unpu^ish^d, but rath^r let his longsuffering and
goodness lead us to repentance, while he gives us space to repent in.

The third Deceit, whereby Satan beguiles men, is, Deceit 3. Present sweetness
in sin.
present sweetness in sin, the delight we take in the acting of this sin;
there is a kind of bewitching pleasure in it, that steals away our hearts from
holiness and purity, to defile them with filthiness and uncleanness, for if
we give never so little way to the pleasure and sweetness thereof, it will
bring us presently to the acting of it. But for answer unto this, and to
prevent being besotted with this delight and sweetness in sin, take notice
of these ensuing considerations.

First, he that denies himself in this sweetness ^
and delight, shall not lose thereby, he shall be nothing prejudiced thereby,
but shall find a greater sweetness, and of a far more excellent kind, a
sweetness in the remission of his sins, and reconciliation unto Jesus
Christ, a sweetness in the being freed and eased in the burden of his sins
and corruptions.

But some man here will be ready to say, It is not so easy a thing to
restrain ones lusts; it is a matter of Object.
great difficulty and consequence, and of more pains and tro^ble than you
spe^^e of; why then do you bid us deny our selves in this sweetness of sin.

To this I answer; Indeed it is true, it is hard at first Answ.
to be overcome and brough^ in subjection, yet in an heart that is truly
humbled, it may b^ mortified; and if it once come to that, then it will be
easy to moderate it, and bring it under our command.

Secondly, consider what Christ says, Mat. 8. 18, It is better for thee to
enter into life halt and maimed, rather 2 Mat. 18. 8.
than having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire: and
indeed, how much better were it for us if we would cut off this right hand, or
right eye of delight and pleasure in sin, and cast it from us, that so we
might go to heaven, than having pleasure here in this life for a season, to
be cast into everlasting fire, to have our part and portion with the Devil
and his angels: which we shall be sure to have, if we forsake not this filt^y
sin of lust and uncleanness; for the Apostle says it often, and that
peremptorily without exception, in many of his Epistles, that No Adulterer,
Whoremonger, Formcator, or unclean person, etc. shall enter into the kingdom
of Ged.

Thirdly, consider the more sweetness and delight 3
we take in this sin, the greater anguish and torment we shall find in the
renewing of our hearts, and the more difficult it will be for us to leave it:
besides, it is a dangerous thing to take our sweetness fully, for then perhaps
we may be so besotted therewith, as we shall hardly relish any thing else,
especially the contrary virtue, which will seem ^ery bi^ter and distastefull
unto us. And therefore let us be persw^ded not to adhere too much to the
swee^nesse and delight that we find present in the acting of this sin, lest we
become so bewitched with it, as we never beable to forsake it.

The fourth Deceit, which Satan uses to beguile Deceit 4. The falscesse of
common opinion and carnal reason.
men withal, is, The falsnesse of the common opinion of most men, and cunning
delusion of our carnal reason, unto which it seems either no sin at all, or
else so little as it ne^d not any great ado be made about it: Most men think
this sin of fornication but a trick of youth, whose blood heated with
intemperance, must have something to allay its lust on. Now these two be
incompetent Judges, both common opinion and carnal reason, they are altogether
unfit to judge of the notoriousnesse of this sin, but let us bring it to the
balance of the Sanctuary, and then we shall see the just weight of it, we
shall see it in its proper filthiness and native ugliness. No man that is
guilty of it can discern its depravity, for the very conscience is defiled by
it: now the Conscience is as it were the very glass of the soul, and if the
glass be defiled, how can we see the spots in the soul? and if these be not
to be discovered, then nothing is left whereby to judge aright of it; and
therefore we must needs be deceived in the perceiving the filthiness and
haynousnesse thereof. Let us therefore betake our selves to the Scripture, which
will show it truly in its proper colors, and then if we use the means, God will
assuredly send his Spirit to enlighten us. When Judas had but a glimpfe of this
light opened unto him, how great think ye, seemed that sin to him, which
before he durst commit boldly for thirty pieces of silver, yet now it drives
him to desperation and present hanging himself. We must pray therefore for
the Spirit to enlighten us, that so we may see the filthiness of this sin,
and be no more deceived by it, as if it were either but a small sin, or
hardly any at all, as many men think, and our carnal reason would persuade us
unto.

The fifth and last Deceit, whereby our cunning adversary, Deceit 5. Hope of
secrecy.
the Devil, labors to beguile us withal, is, Hope of secrecy: Men commit
this in private, no spectators, no secretaries shall be entrusted therewith,
the innermost closets, and most retired rooms, are the places destinated for
this work, and the time commonly is the most obscure and blackest season, the
night; and indeed not unfitly, for it is a deed of darkness: yet let all such
as be guilty hereof, let them lay to heart these following considerations:

Consider first, though they be never so private and 1
secret in it, yet God sees it; they cannot shut out his eyes, though they may
the light of the Sun; he knows it, and then it shall be revealed: that
which is said of Alms, Mat. 6. 4. may very truly be said of this, Thy Father
which sees in secret, himself shall reward Mat 6. 4.
thee openly: so, God that sees thy secret Adultery or Fornication, he will
reward it, he will punish it openly. See i^ for exam^le in David's adultery with
Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 12. 10, 11, 12. there the Lord says, 2 Samuel 12, 10, 11, 12.
Because thou have despised me, and have taken the wife of Vriah the Hittite,
to be thy wife; Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own
house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes and give them unto thy
neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this Sun; for
thou d ddest it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun. See the Justice of God in punishing; because David did it
secretly, and used all manner of means to conceal it, as making Vriah drunk,
and then sending him to his wife to lie with her, that so it might be hidden,
yet God withheld him from her, and so brought it about that David had no way
to cover his sin; therefore also because David labored to keep it close and
secret from all men, he will make his punishment public and manifest to all
Israel: Again, God says, Because thou have despised me, etc. whence observe,
in this secret committing of sin, a man does despise God in a more especial
manner; for he fears more the sight of men than the sight of God, in that he
labors to conceal and hide it from the eyes of men, but cares not though God
look on, as if he either would say nothing, or regarded not at all his sin:
But God has said, Them that honor me, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
I will honor; and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed: that is,
they shall be despised.

Consider secondly, the diverse and manifold ways God has to reveal it,
though men be never so close 2
and secret, and useall possible means to hide their sin, as fair outward
civility, a seeming to hate such 2 filthy notorious wickedness, or any thing
else an hypocritical heart can invent, yet God has sundry ways to detect
their filthiness, and lay open their hypocrisy: As first, by sensible things,
when there is no person near to see it, yet the v^ry birds and beasts have
revealed it: secondly, he gives them up to a reprobate sense; and then in the
end, though they have long lain in it unseene and ansuspected, at last they
become sh^melesi^, and so lie open to every man's discovery: thirdly, he can
make any man living to reveal his own sin, as we see in Judas, though all
the time he was working his wickedness he had carried the business close
enough, yet in the conclusion, when he had brought the business to pass, and
in all probability it being now finished, should never be concealed, even then
he must confess it, he must tell it every body: in like manner, it will be our
case, though we keep our filthiness never so private, yet God can make us in
the end on our deathbeds confess it, though all our life before we have
hidden it.

Consider thirdly, whosoever commits this filthy sin of Fornication, makes
himself a vile, and a base ^.
person; what ever he was before, though never so glorious, yet now he is but
as a Star f^llen to the earth, as it is in the Revelation. If a man be
godly, come what will come, there is nothing can make him base, nothing can
obscure him; though hell it self should labor to cast a darkness about him,
yet it shall be but as a foil about a Jewel, or a clo^d about the Sun,
make him shine brighter and brighter: We know a Torch light in a dark night
will shi^e brighter Simile.
than if it were at noonday; even so a godly man, whatever happens unto him,
whatever night of affi^ctions, crosses, or other disasters come upon him, yet
he will be the more illustrious, the moreclearer will he shine in the midst
thereof; and the more crosses happen unto him, the more will his glory appear:
but on the other side, let a man be ungodly, whatever outward glory or pomp he
may have, yet he is but a base and vile person, and so he shall ever be
esteemed of, even at the last, do all the world what they can. See this in
Paul, who before he was converted, whilst he was a persecutor, was counted a
pestilent fellow; but now after conversion, when he became godly, he was highly
esteemed as a chosen vessel of the Lord: So on the contrary, the Scribes and
Pharisees were the only men, who but they among the Jews, yet now how odious
is their names, they stink in all men's nostrils. Therefore let us have a care
how we suffer our selves to lie in sin, lest we become in like manner hated
of every man; and on the other side, let us get our selves to be godly, and
then our names shall be as precious ointment that sends forth a sweet savor
into every bodies nostrils. And thus much for the Deceits whereby Satan
deceives men; we will now come to some uses.

The first Use that may be made hereof, is, to exhort Use 1.
all men to be careful to cleanse themselves from this filthiness and
uncleanness: and to this end let them never give God rest, but with incessant
prayers still call on him, till they find that they are cleansed, that they
are out of this gall of bitterness; for as there is nothing that will be so
bitter and distastefull, nay terrible unto them, as this being liable to the
wrath of God due to them by reason of this sin; so shall they never find any
thing so sweet and pleasant, nay comfortable unto them, as to be in the favor
of God: for all that the creature can do is nothing without God, there is no
peace, no comfort, no rest without him; now if a man have not this favor of
God, but be without it, though he have never so many other blessings, as
wealth, honors and preferrements, yet if an arrow come out of Gods quiver,
dipped in the venom of his wrath, be it never so slight an affliction, it will
wound deadly. See this in Moses, who though the meekest man upon earth, and
highly in Gods favor, yet he for his impatiency had his cross in that which
he most desired, even in that he should not enter into the land of Canaan.
Sin conceiving must needs bring forth sorrow, and though it should fail in
all other things, yet here it is true, he that so was sin shall be sure to reap
affliction; this is the daughter, this is the fruit always of such a
motherbeware therefore how you take pains to serve sin, for he that does so,
shall be sure to have for his wages sorrow and afflictions, nay death it self,
as the Apostle says, the wages of sin is death. A sinful man, one that is
guilty of this sin or any other, is like a malefactor that has already
suffered the sentence Simile.
of condemnation to pass upon him, and thereby is liable to punishment when
ever it shall please the Judge to send a warrant, he may be called to execution
every hour, unless in the mean time he has sued forth his pardon; even so
it is with the sinner, he is subject to the wrath of God, when ever God shall
please to send forth his warrant against him, he must be brought to execution,
he has no assurance, no power of resistance till he has got his pardon.
Therefore let every oae of us labor to procure our pardons in and by Jesus
Christ, that so we may not thus lie open to the wrath of God which will
consume us when ever he shall but please to say the word in an instant.

But some man will be ready to say, what needs all this? I am strong and well,
in good and perfect Object.
health, is it likely the evil day is near me? no surely, I will therefore
go on still in my sin; what need I repentance, that am so well in all things?

To this I answer, though thou be never so well Answer.
in strength and health of body, yet if God hides himself, if he turns but
away his face from thee, thou shall find the matter changed; where and when he
is pleased but to turn himself, he turns with him al things upside down on
a sudden. See this in those two hundred and fifty men of the company of Korab,
they thought themselves well and safe, else think ye Numb. 16. 16
they would have took censers and offered unto the Lord, but see how in an
instant, fire came out from God and consumed them. So also Nadab and Abihu, no
sooner had they taken strange fire to offer unto the Lord, but straight the
judgment light upon them; for it is said, And there went out fire from the Lord
and devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord, Levit. 10. 2 they were
presently consumed even in the places where they stood: in like manner it will
be our case if we commit sin, God may, if he be so pleased to deal with us,
consume us as soon as ever we have done it, nay in the very manner, it is his
mercy that we are spared.

But some man will say again, there have many men escaped unpunished, they
have gone free for any Object.
thing I could ever see, why may not I escape also as well as they?

To this I answer, Gods decree concerning salvation Answ.
and damnation must be admired at, not pryed into: what though God in his mercy
has saved others, must he also therefore save thee, that wilt not repent, but
pres^mest on his mercies? he calls sometimes those which have been many degrees
worse than others, whom he has passed by, and that to show his power of the
Potter over the pot-sheard: but what is this to thee? look thou to thy self;
use the means, come unto him by true repentance, and cleanse thy self from
thy filthiness, and thou shall be sure to find mercy.

The second Use to be made hereof, shall be to persuade every one, not only
to cease from the act Use 2.
of so filthy a sin, but also to motifie these corruptions, which are the
source and fountain from whence these all unclean actions come: There may be
a restraining of our lusts and corruptions, but it is but for a time, it will
break forth again; or perhaps there may be an abhorrency and contrariety of
one man's nature from this sin, but this is not out of any hatred to the sin
it self, but a forbearance of the act, because his nature cannot abide it, or
for some other by-respect, as credit and reputation amongst men; but this is
not to mortify them: for mortification is then true and perfect, when there is
a contrary life; that is, when a man that before was unchaste, now if his lusts
be mortified, he lives quite contrary to that, and is now wholly chaste and
undefiled: now this cannot rightly be said to be in a man where there is but
only a restraint of his lusts. As in a tree, it is in vain to cut off the
top-boughs, so to kill it; unless the roots be plucked up, it will grow Simile.
again; therefore men begin at the root to stub up the tree: so it it is
with sin, lost is the labor that strives to keep it in and restrain it,
thinking so to kill i^, there is no other way to do it but by Mortification,
by rooting it up out of the heart, not suffering it the^e to have the least
room or place; for if it be but r^strained, at one time or other it will grow
again to full strength. And that this may the better be dispatched, let us
examine and try our selves by Trial whether this lust be mortified.
these rules and marks.

First, examine your selves and see whether there be ^.
a particular change which does follow the general one of the whole frame of
the heart; whether the heart is wholly changed and turned from all sin, for
if it be not, but is changed but by peece-meale, some of it being reserved for
the darling sin, then it is not true Mortification; which is always a
killing, and bringing under subjection, all lust and conc^piscence. Therefore
see, first, whether thy heart be thoroughly wounded with sin, whether thou
do grieve for all sin as well as for some partic^lar sin of profit and
pleasure. Then secondly, if thou be thus wounded, see whether thou longest
for nothing so much as pardon in Christ: a condemned person desires nothing,
delights Simile.
in nothing but in the news of a pardon; as other things are not at all
welcome unto him, a pardon is all that can be comfortable unto him; so thou, if
thou be truly wounded for thy sin, wilt desire and wish for nothing but a
pardon; the remission of thy sins in Jesus Christ will more comfort thee than
all the world beside. And lastly, if a pardon be granted, see, Is there a love
and a delight in Christ? Is he the only joy and comfort of thy soul? then well
is thy case, thou art in a good estate; thou may be certain the roots of
thy lusts are plucked up, and then the branches must needs dye.

Secondly, examine your selves and see whether out 2
of a loathing and hate of this sin you be able to judge aright of it, to
perceive it in its filthy colors, and loathsome pollutions: All the time a man
lies in a sin, he will have such a mist cast before his eyes, that he
cannot see it perfectly, but dimly, as it were by a small light, which will not
lay open all the spots and blemishes thereof. To explain this, I will use this
similitude; A man that lives continually in an house where a bad smell is, he
perceives not the ill savor, Simile.
it is all one to him as though it were pure and sweet air; but one that comes
in out of the fresh air, he smells it presently, to him it is exceeding
offensive: even so it is with sin, an unregenerate man that is used to it,
has long lived in it, and perhaps never knew any other, to him it is natural,
he perceives not the filthiness thereof; it is as good to him as the purest
action in the world; and why? because he is accustomed unto it: Now custom,
you know, is another nature: but let a regenerate man fall to commit the same
sin, why he is troubled, he is perplexed, he cannot be quiet, nor can he
find any rest in it, it is unusual to him, and therefore he is disturbed at
it. And indeed it is a good sign of a righteous soul to be vexed at sin; ye
may see it in Lot, of whom it is said, 2 Pet. 2. 8. That rightious man dwelling
among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to 2 Pet.
2. 8.
day with their unlawful deeds. Try your selves therefore by this mark, and
see whether you can brook sin well enough, or be vexed and disturbed at the
com^itting of ^t.

Thirdly, examine your s^lves, and see whether your abstaining and keeping your
selves from the acting of 3
this sin be general and constant, or respecting some places or persons, and
but for a short space: this is an effect of the former; for he that hates a
thing, hates every thing that belongs unto it, and that continually: this is a
sure mark and never fails. Ye may see it in other things; a Dove is afraid
of any feather Simile.
that has been an Hawks, it brings a great deal of terror unto her, almost
as much as if the Hawke her self were there; such a native dread is implanted
in the poor Dove, as it detests and abhorres the very sight of a feather; so
the godly man that has once conceived a detestation against his lusts, endures
not any thing that belongs to them, that comes from them. He that hates a
Serpent, cannot abide the skin, though it be never so finely speckled; so, true
hatred unto sin, cannot endure motion or inclination unto it, though it bring
never so fair pretenses and shows, it suffers not the least spark to kindle
or increase, as wanton speeches, lascivious looks, etc. A sore that is healed
at the bottom, is not easily hurt again, whereas if it be but skinned at top it
is never the better, for in a little time it will break forth again, and be
worse than ever: A bone broken and well set again, is stronger than it was
before: so a man that has once slipped into this sin, and is got out of it
again, shall find his strength to be increased, and himself more enabled to
resist that temptation than ever he was.

But some man will say, I read of some of the Saints that have fallen into this
sin, and that grievously, Object.
why then may not the dear children of God fall again into it?

To this I answer, Indeed it is possible, for we find it in the Scripture of
David and Solomon, that they fell; Answ.
nay more, it has many times so come to pass that they have fallen
grievously, as in them before mentioned, and many others; yet as we read of
their falls, so we read of their recovery out of it, they did not continue in
it. Here therefore I will set down the means against it: And they shall be,
Means against Fornication.


First, for such as have long lain in this sin, perhaps 20, perhaps 40, or
more years; let such, I say, observe First, for such as have been given to
this sin.
these rules following:

First, let them labor to get an humble heart in the sight of this grievous
sin, let them be cast down Means 1.
with grief and sorrow for so heinous a sin, that they have offended so good
and gracious a God, one that is of so pure eyes that he can endure no unclean
thing. It was the practice of the holy Apostle Saint Paul, he was so far
humbled, that he confessed himself to be the chiefest of all sinners; and
what could he say more? So also the Prodigal, Luke 15. when he came to see
himself, and to look upon his own condition, was so far from being puffed
up, that he was content to style himself no better than his fathers servant:
In like manner doethou, think thy self the worst of men, and greatest sinner
upon earth, and that God has been infinitely merciful unto thee, that has not
cut thee off in thy sin, though thou so long continuedst in it unrepentant.

Secondly, labor to bring thy heart to so good a pass, that thou may love
God exceedingly, who has Means 2.
forgiven thee so great a sinner. It is said of the woman in the Gospel, to
whom much was forgiven, that she loved much: A great deal is forgiven thee,
beyond what thy deserts are, do thou therefore so too: Love much, love Christ
that has been a Mediator to procure this thy sin e o be forgiven; love God
much, who has been so merciful as to grant thee pardon and remission of
sins for Christ thy Saviors sake.

Thirdly, take heed lest Satan beguile thee, and bring Means 3.
thee into the ^ame sin again: you know what Saint Peter says, 2 Pet. 5. 8.
where he exhorts the brethren to be sober and v^gilant, from no other reason
but only this, Because your adversary the devil, as a a roaring Lion 2 Pet. 5.
2.
walks about seeking whom he may devour: the same shall be my argument of
persuasion unto all of you, to beware of the Devil, to look to your selves,
lest he should deceive you, and entice you into the same sin again.

Secondly, for those that are guilty of this sin still, 2 For such as are
guilty of this sin.
but would feign be rid of the sore burden which lies heavy upon their
Consciences; Let them use these helps:

First, labor to get assurance of the pardon and forgiveness Help 1.
of it: No man can be assured of the love of Christ, till he be assured of his
love and favor in the free pardoning and remission of his sins: for how can
a man have peace and quietness without this, he is still in fear of Gods
wrath and vengeance to light upon him, and where there is such a sear and
dread, it is not likely there should be any love. And therefore in the first
place get thy sins pardoned.

Secondly, labor to have a sense and feeling of thy sin; this is a chief
thing to be obtained; for where Help 2.
there is no sense, there cannot be any remorse or sorrow for sin, without
which there can be no turning from sin, much less any hatred and detestation
of it. Now this sense and feeling is wrought in us by Gods Spirit, and
therefore thou must go to God by true and hearty prayer, that he would be
pleased to illuminate thee by his Spirit, that so thou may see the miserable
and wretched condition thou art in by reason of this sin.

Thirdly, lay hold on the Promises, and apply them to thy self, make them
thine own; for whatsoever Help 3.
a man's sins be, if he can come to thirst after pardon, to desire that
before other things in a right way, and to a right end, then he may be sure he
has the Promises belonging unto him: If he will take them, they are his own;
Christ is his, if he will take him, only he must take him aright, as well to
be his Lord, as his Redeemer: his Lord, to govern and rule him by his Laws
and Commandments, as well as his Redeemer, to save him by the merit of his
death and passion. Christ offers himself to him, Revel. 22 17. saying, Let him
that is athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take the waters of life
freely: and what greater love can Christ show, than to set himself out for all
to Revel. 12. 17.
take him, and that freely too? In the days of his flesh, who had more good by
him than the Publicans and sinners? them he called, them he saved: the poor
diseased wretches, how ready was he to heal them? even so he is still, he is
every whit as ready to save thee, to heal thee, as he was them, if thou will
come unto him, and endeavor to lay hold on him. To neglect Christ thus offered
unto thee, is to trample under Heb. 10 29.
foot the Son of God, and to count the blond of the Covenant an unholy thing,
Heb. 10. 29. now what think ye shall be done unto such? read that place, and
you shall find, that a much sorer punishment than death without mercy they are
worthy of, and are likely to undergo. You read what was done to those that
despised the invitation of the King to his Marriage Feast, Matthew. 22. 7. When
the King beard thereof he was wroth, and sent forth his armies, and destroyed
those murderers, Matthew. 22. 7.
and burnt up their City: In like manner will he deal with thee; if thou
despisest the offer of his gracious Promises now made to thee, he will account
thee but as a murderer, and will destroy both the^ and thy City; that is, all
that belongs unto thee. Take heed therefore that thou now layest hold on his
Promises, and make them thine own.

Fourthly, Use abstinencie and fasting, for thereby thou may get the mastery
over thy sin; give it altogether Help 4.
peremptory denials, suffer it not to delight thee in the least cogitation and
tickling conceit: It will be easy to abstain feom it, when the denial is
peremptory; if we cannot put out a spark, how shall we put out a flame? If we
get not the mastery over the first motion to sin, much less shall we be
able to overcome it when it is brought to maturity in action: Sin is like the
water, give it the least way and we cannot stay it, run it will in despite
of us: and Simile.
as a stream rises by little and little, one shower increasing it, and
another making it somewhat bigger; so sin rises by degrees. Iam. 1. 14, 15.
it is said, But every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own Iam.
1. 14. 15.
lust and enticed. Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and
sin, when it is finished, brings forth death: Where observe three degrees
in sin; first, temptation; secondly, conception; and thirdly, perturbation,
or bringing forth: So also Hebr. 3. it is said of the Israelites, that lust in
them brought forth hardness of heart. Beware therefore of the beginnings and
occasions of sin, and accustom thy self to use abstinence, thereby to
master thy lust.

Fifthly, Another help may be to resolve against it, to make Vows and
Covenants with out selves not Help 5.
to fall into any occasion that might be an allurement unto it: Let us bind
our selves from things indifferent at first, and then afterward from the
unlawful temptations. And that we may do it the more easily, let us make our
vows for a certain time, at first but for a little while, afterward for a
longer season, and then at last, when we have more strength, for ever.

But some man will here be ready to object and say, Object.
I find my self exceeding weak and unable to keep such Vows and Covenants;
What shall I do then, who shall be in danger every day to break them, and so
be guilty of a double sin?

To this I answer, If our frailty herein were a sufficient Answ.
argument, then would there be no Vows at all: What though thou be weak
and frail, and so subject to break thy promises in this kind, yet remember
that they are Gods Ordinances, and he will put to his helping hand to enable
thee, he will bless and prosper what ever thou do vow or promise this way,
as an Ordinance that he has commanded. Again, as thou see thy self more
weak, and subject to infringe those vows, so be sure to use the greater care
and diligence to keep them, be so much the more vigilant to avoid all
occasions that might tempt thee to break them.

Sixthly, Another help may be, to proportion the Help 6.
remedy to the disease; as thy lusts are greater, so use greater abstinence,
make stronger vows against them. As in a place where the tide beats strongly,
there the bank must be stronger; so where the current Simile.
and tide of thy lusts run more forceably, there resist them with greater
strength, keep the bank good, repair it by new renewals of thy graces in
thee, make new covenants against it: There is no man with one thousand, would
meet his enemy with two thousand; so do thou, get as much strength to resist,
as thy lusts have power to attempt thee.

Seventhly, Turn your delights to God and heavenly Help 7.
things; whereas you have long been given to earthly mindedness, now begin
to set your mind on heavenly things: There is no true Mortification that is
only privative, it must be also positive; a man cannot leave his earthly
mindedness, but he must presently be heavenly minded. To make this plain by a
comparison; A man cannot empty a vessel of water, but air presently will come
in its place: so a man can Simile.
no sooner be cleansed from corruption, but grace will immediately enter and
take possession of his heart; as Solomon says, Prove. 2. 10, 11. Wisdom
enters into thine heart and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul: Descretion
Frov. 2. 10. 11
shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee, etc.

Lastly, the last and greatest help will be, to labor Help 8.
by prayer: God would have thee know that it is his gift: pray therefore that
Christ would baptize thee with the Holy Ghost and with fire: that the Holy
Ghost may like fire heat the faculties of the soul, to inflame our love to
God: for as our love to God is stronger, so our love to holy things will be
more earnest, and consequently our hate to unholy things more strong and
perfect: the heart thus inflamed is turned quite another way; it does so
mollify the heart more and more, making it capable of a deeper impression from
the love of God. Hence it is that the Spirit is compared to wine, because as
wine heateth us within, and makes us more vigorous and lively: so does the
Spirit heat us with the love of God, and make us more apt to good works: Now
as when a Simile.
man comes nigh to any town, he goes further from another; so when the Spirit
carries us nigh to God, it carries us further from our lusts. Christ by the
Prophet is said Mal. 3. 2. to be like a refiners fire, and Mal. 3. 2.
like Fullers soap; Now as there is no way to refine silver but by fire, and no
way to purge and get out a stain but by soap; so there is no way to cleanse
ones self from lusts, to mortify them, but by the Spirit: take ye therefore
the Apostles counsel, Act. 4. 38. Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in
the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
Act. 4. 38.
gift of the Holy Ghost: let us wait for it, and we shall be sure to have it,
and when we once have got it, we shall find as evident a change, as the
Apostles did when the Holy Ghost in the form of cloven tongues came upon them,
as ye may read in the same chapter. And therefore also when we find weakness
in our hearts, let us know that we have not been so fully baptized with the
Holy Ghost, as we may be; according to that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 7. God
has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, etc. when the Spirit is
powerful ^ us it will inflame us with the love of God, it keeps men in
sobriety. Therefore art thou weak? art thou cold in holy performances? labor
to be baptized with the Holy Ghost more fully: John was compassed about with
the Spirit as with a garment, Rev. 1. 10. So should we be, for without this we
are but naked: God kept Abimeleech from sin, so he will keep us if we have his
Spirit: And David was bound in the bond of the Spirit, now the Spirit is like a
bond for two causes: first, every bond must be without us, and so is Gods
Spirit, it is his and not ours within us: secondly, every bond keeps the thing
that is bound in; and so does Gods Spirit, it restraines us, it keeps us in
when as otherwise we would run into all excess of riot. And therefore let
us pray heartily and labor earnestly to be baptized with the Holy Ghost.

HOW TO MORTIFY UNCLEANNES.
COLOSSIANS 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth:
Fornication, Uncleanness, Inordinate affection, evil Concupiscence, and
Covetousness, which is Idolatry.
HAving handled the Doctrine of Mortification in general, as also come to some
particulars, namely, that of Fornication; it now remains that in the next
place, following the method and order of the Apostle, I come to the next
particular sin named in the Text, Uncleanness: And because these two sins
do in many things coincidere, and differ not greatly in any thing that I can
set down as means to prevent them, for what has been said of the one may
serve for the other; therefore I shall be the briefer in this, and may
p^rchance make use of some of the things spoken formerly in the discovering of
the haynousnesse of Fornication. The Doctrine then that we shall at this time
insist on, is, That

Uncleanness is one of the sins that are here to be mortified. Doctr.
This sin of Uncleanness most Interpreters make The haynousnesse of the
sin of uncleanness.
to be the sin of Onan, Genesis 38. 9. and the haynousnesse thereof appears, in
that God was so displeased with him for it, that he slew him presently.
Besides, the grievousnesse thereof is is manifest, in that throughout the whole
book of God we find not any name appropriated unto it, as if God could not
give name bad enough, or would not vouchsafe it any, because men should not
know it at all. But now particularly I will lay open the vileness of it, by
these four arguments.

First, the haynousnesse of it appears, because that it 1.
makes a man that is guilty of it, a man of death; you may see it in the
example of Onan, Genesis 38. 9. before mentioned, God cut him off presently,
hardly gave any space for repentance. Where sudden judgment lights upon a man,
it is a fearful thing, and argues the greatness of Gods displeasure against
that sin; now where Gods wrath is so exceedingly inflamed against a sin, we
must needs conclude that sin to be very sinful, and of an high nature.

Secondly, it is an unnatural sin: All sin is so much the more heinous, as
it is opposite to the nature 2
of a man. We read but of three sins against nature, whereof this is one;
namely, bestiality, Sodomy, and this; and therefore it must needs be of an high
rank, and consequently a most notorious vilde sin.

Thirdly, the manner of it aggravates it exceedingly; 3
all things done against ones self, are the more heinous; as selfe-murther is
of an higher nature than murder of another; and the reason is, because all
creatures by nature seek the preservation of themselves: in like manner,
selfe-uncleannesse is a great aggravation unto it.

Fourthly and lastly, that sin which is made the 4
punishment of another, is ever the greater sin; now God has made this sin
to be the punishment of all other sins, for after a man has long continued
in other sins, at last God gives him up to this sin as to a punishment of
the former: and therefore questionless it is a great and an heinous sin.

Now since you have seen the haynousnesse of this sin, in the next place I
will show you the manifold The deceits of Satan to draw men on to the acting of
this sin.
deceits of Satan, whereby men are provoked to the commission of this filthy
sin.

First, Men do go on in the committing of this 1
sin, because they do hope to repent afterward.

For answer of this, I say, that man who has a will to sin, does harden
himself more and more by sin; and this sin of Uncleanness being a great
sin, it does harden the heart the more, and does the more indispose a man
toward God.

A man by common reason would think that great sins do make the heart to be
more sensible; but indeed it does not so, for it takes away the sense. Great
sins are a means to harden the heart, so that it cannot repent: Prove. 2. 19.
None that go unto her return again, neither do they take hold of the paths
of life; which is meant of repentance: for God does not give Prove. 2. 19.
repentance to this sin, because it is a sin so evident against the light
of Nature; as Ezech. 24. 16. Son of man, behold, I take from thee the desire
of thine eyes with a stroke, yet neither shall thou mourn nor weep, neither
shall thy tcares run down: that is, if man will refuse the time of
repentance which God does offer unto him, when he would repent then God does
deny him: It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but of God:
God will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, Romans 9. 16.

Now to show what Repentance is:

Repentance is a change of the heart, whereby a man is become What Repentance
is.
a new creature, having an inward affection to that which is good, and a
loathing and detestation of that which is bad. To show that Repentance is the
change of the heart, see how the Prophet Hosea, Chapt. 7. 14. does reprove the
Israelites for their howling on their beds, because Hos. 7. 14.
their Repentance was not from their hearts; they did howl much, as it were,
for their sins, but yet their Repentance was not from the heart, and therefore
nothing availeable to them. True Repentance does turn the disposition of the
heart of a man another way then it went before.

Another means that Satan uses to delude the hearts of men, and cause them to
be set upon evil, is, The second deceit of Satan.
because they do not see the punishment due for sin to be presently executed
upon sinners: For Answer of this; In that God does spare to punish sin, no
man has cause to joy in it. God is merciful, and does hear many times a long
while with men not to punish them for sin, to see if they will return unto
him, and repent: But as long as man does continue in any sin without
repentance, so long does he abuse Gods patience every day and hour, Romans 2.
4. Think thou this, O man, and despisest thou the riches Romans 2. 4.
of his goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to Repentance: Verse. 5. But after the hardness
and impenitencie of heart, treasurest up wrath unto thy self against the day
of wrath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

Another Deceit that Satan uses to provoke men The third deceit of Satan.
unto this sin, is, to judge of uncleanness by common opinion; that is, to
weigh this sin in a false balance, and to look upon it in a false glass,
and not to carry it to the balance of the Sanctuary of the Lord, and therefore
many times they esteem great sins to be little sins, and little sins to
be none at all; when men do thus mistake sin, they judge of it otherwise
than it is: As when bad company are together, they doeall allow and approve of
sin, and so evil words do corrupt good manners; and in their opinions 1
Cor. 15. 33.
do make sin to be no sin at all; not considering that place, Titus 2. 14.
That Christ gave himself Titus 2. 4.
for us to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. When a man has committed sin, his
Conscience is defiled, and so can no more judge of sin aright, than one that
would discern of colors in a foul and soyled glass; but when the Conscience
is clear, it sees things as they are, and so is able to judge of sin by that
rule by which our selves shall be judged at the last day: There is a
sanctifying Spirit, which if we had, we should judge of sin aright; and the
rule whereby we are to try sin, is the written Word of God.

Fourthly, Satan uses to provoke men to this sin, The fourth deceit of Satan.
when they can commit it in secret, then will they be bold to doeit: But
consider, God sees in secret, and he will reward them openly: Mat. 6. 4. Give
thine alms Matthew. 6. 4.
in secret, and thy father that is in secret will reward thee openly: Now we
may judge by the rule of contrarieties, that if God do see Alms that are done
in private, and will reward them openly, may not we think that he will do the
like of sin: For so he did by David, he spared not him though he were his
own 2 Samuel 12. 12.
servant: 2 Samuel 12. Thou did this sin secretly, but I will do this thing
before all Israel, and before the Sun. And thus they go on boldly in this
sin, thinking they shall escape well enough if they can do it secretly, and
not be seen of men; but they in this despising of God, make God to despise
them. Consider, oh man, the many ways God has to reveal sin that is
committed in secret: Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the Eccles. 10. 20.
King, no not in thy thought; and curse not the rich, no not in thy
bedchamber; for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter. Sin that has been committed in secret, shall
be discovered by ways that a man thought unpossible: Evil men are as a
glass that is sodered together; as soon as the sother is melted, the glass
does fall in pieces: So they that are companions in evil, may for a time be
true the one to the other, but yet the Lord will one way or other discover
their iniquities, so that they shall fall in pieces like a broken potsharde;
yea, perhaps the Sinner himself shall confess his sin, as Judas did.

The last Deceit which Satan does use to provoke The fifth deceit of Satan.
men unto this sin, is with the present delight which they have unto it: To
this I answer, as Christ in Mat. 5. 27. Thou shall not commit adultery, for
whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
already with her in his heart. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out and
cast it from thee, for it is profitable that one of thy members should perish,
and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell fire. Therefore, I say,
it were better for thee to leave thy delight, than to have thy soul damned in
hell for ever: by leaving thy sin thou do not leave thy delight, for then
thou have a new heart, new desires and affections to delight in better things;
so that the forsaking of sin is but a change of delight, and those sins
which have the greater delight in them, shall have the greater torment, as does
appear out of Revel. 18. 7. concerning Babylon, The more pleasure she had, the
more should her torments and sorrows be.

Thus have I dispatched, in brief, this sin of uncleanness, insisting and
enlarging only some two or three of the Deceits whereby the devil does
beguile the sons of men, and lead them captive to the commission of this
slavish and abominable sin; for motives and helps against it, I refer you
to those I produced in the handling of Fornication.

FINIS.
HOW TO MORTIFY EVIL CONCVPISCENCE.
COLOS. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanenesse, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, etc.
NOw I should proceed to some application of this point, but because there is
a third particular which has much affinity with the two former, namely,
fornication, and uncleanenesse, I will first speak of that which is here in my
Text, evil concupiscence.

By concupiscence men do understand a degree of this lust of uncleanenesse,
and it is an evil inclination in the power of the Soul.

The Doctrine is, this evil concupiscence is one of Doctrine.
the Sins which are likewise to be mortified; We had need give a reason for
it, because men will hardly be persuaded to think it a Sin, thus it was with
the Heathen, they thought there was no Sin in it.

The first reason is, If Concupiscence do cleave unto Reason 1.
a man, that is, evil inclinations which the soul by sin is bent unto, then
actual sin will follow, which is the fruit of this concupiscence: It is as a
spark of fire, which being let alone, will grow greater and greater, and like
a leven, though little at the first, yet does it leven the whole lump, so that
it does produce the works of the flesh, and therefore it is to be mortified.

The second reason is, although a man do not fall into actual sin
presently, after there is concupiscence Reason 2.
in the heart, yet being unmortified, it hides the sin in a man, and so
defiles him, and makes him proane to an evil disposition, and also to be
abominable before God: Therefore mortify concupiscence before it come to have
vigor and strength in thee.

A man is said to be an evil man, when he is distracted from Good to Evil,
now evil concupiscence makes a man to be so.

There are evil inclinations in a good man, and yet it is by way of
Antithesis, it is not his complexion and constitution to have them. Now an
evil man has concupiscence, and the same is his complexion, and constitution
so to be: Therefore if evil concupiscence be not mortified, it makes a man to
be bad, and in this regard we ought to cleanse our selves from the pollution
of this sin.

The third reason is, Evil concupiscence being in a man, it does mar all his
good actions. To mingle Reason 3.
water with wine, it makes the wine the worse; To mingle dross with silver, it
makes the silver the more impure; So evil concupiscence being in the Soul of
a man, it does stain and blemish his good actions; when the string of an
Instrument is out of tune; then the Music does jarre. A man that has strong
concupiscence in him, he will desire to come to the execution of the works of
them, and so it will have an influence to the effect, and will stain and
blemish any good work he goes about; so that evil concupiscence making a man
to be evil, it does blemish and stain all the good actions that man goes
about, in that he does perform them either with vaineglory or self respect.

The fourth reason why evil concupiscence should Reason 4.
be mortified, is, because that otherwise the commandments of God will be
grievous unto us, 1. John 5. 3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments, and his commandments are not grievous. The commandments of
God are not only to be kept of us, but so to be kept, that they may be
delightful unto us, Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy name: when concupiscence does lie in the soul of a
man, in its full vigor and strength unmortified, it does draw in him a
reluctance from good duties, as when a man does will one thing that is good,
and an evil inclination does set upon him, then the commandments of God will
be grievous unto him, even as a man will be unwilling to carry a burden long.

Now I proceed to show you three things observable Three things ob^erue to be
in Conc^piscen^e.
in this word concupiscence:

First, what the nature of it is. Secondly, the sinfulness of it. Thirdly, the
operation or works of it.
First, for the better understanding what it is, know that in the soul of man
there is a facility, Secondly, there is an inclination, which does adhere to
the faculty, and thirdly there are actual desires which flow from that
inclination, by way of Similitude, the Simile.
better to conceive. First in the mouth there is a palate, secondly, the
desired humor, and thirdly the taste; So in thesoule of man, First, there is
the natural affection, secondly, there is an inclination which is the
tuneablenesse, or untuneablenesse of it, and thirdly, there is the desire, or
actual works of it.

By concupiscence is meant, the evil inclination, What Is meant by
concupiscence.
and the fruits of the evil inclination, and by it the habitual
concupiscence, from whence the actual desires of evil will follow. Romans 6.
12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that ye should obey it in the
lust thereof. First there is a sin, secondly, the lust of that sin, and
thirdly the obedience, that is consent to the sin. There is a concupiscence
that is natural, and another that is moral. As there is a concupiscence that
is bad, so is there another that is good, and a third that is neither good nor
evil. There was in Christ a desire to live, though it were Gods will he should
die, yet obeying, he did not sin. On fast days we are commanded so to do,
yet the desire to taste corporal food on such a day is not sin.

Secondly, it does proceed from sin, and one 2
sin does beget another, James 1. 15. Concupiscence does bring forth sin,
Romans 6. 12. Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies (that is) Let not
concupiscence: but to understand what the sinfulness of it is, know that sin
in special, is the transgression of the moral Law, any faculty that is
capable of a fault, it is sin, that is the defect of it; Man shall be
subject to reason, and reason should cause him to submit himself unto the will
of God. The moral law is a rule A double Law
of action, not of habit. There is a double law, a law of action, and a law
which we call that law, which God did stamp on the very Creature. Take an
Epistle, or a learned writing that is made by art, there may be Logic,
Rhetoric, and grammar rules brought in to confirm it; So in the law, there
is a stamp and a rule, and every observation from it, is an error in it. If a
man did all that is in him, usedhis best endevor to subdue his evil
concupiscences, and yetcannot, yet it is not sufficient for him, every man
has, or ought to have strength in him, to rule his affections.

If a master command his servant to go and do such athing, if the servant go
and make himself Simile,
drunk, and then goes about it, and cannot bring it to pass, although he
do his good will for to do it, he is not to be excused, because he did loose
his ability through his own default; So we, God at the first did make us able
for to subdue our lusts, but we in Adam having lost the ability of our first
estates, and yet may recover strength again, to subdue our lusts in Christ the
second Adam, if we do it not, the fault is in our selves.

Now we proceed unto the third particular, to 3 What is the operation of evil
concupiscence.
show unto you what is the operation, and working of this evil concupiscence.

It is an inordinate inclination, which does cleave unto the faculties of the
soul, and does indispose a man to that which is good, and caries him on to
that which is evil, and so long as it abides in the soul, it makes him
fruitful to do evil, and barren to do good, so that evil actions the
fruits of evil inclinations do arise from it, even as water from the
sountaine, and sparks from the fire.

Concupiscence does conceive and bring forth sin.

There is a different work of Concupiscence in man that is evil, and a
regenerate man; In an evil man it has dominion over him, so that all his
actions and desires are sinful: In a good and holy man, there is
concupiscence also, but it does work in him by way of rebellion, he beholdes
it as a disease, and as an enemy unto him, and does labor to mortify it, he
is enlightened by grace to see it as a disease, and therefore does labor to
cure it, more and more. An evil man thinks it the best way for his
happiness, and that his chiefest good, does consist in giving satisfaction to
his concupiscences, and therefore does labor to satisfy them, and not to cure
them.

True it is Gods children, David, Peter, Solomon, and other holy men, have had
concupiscences in them but yet were not domineered over by them; So long as a
man does strive against evil concupiscences, against the motions and stirrings
of them, and that his own conscience can bear him witness, he does resist
them in sincerity of heart, they shall never bear sway over him: Take the best
actions of a wicked man, the utmost end of them are to himself, and if the
utmost end be bad, all he does must needs be bad, as for example. The End that
a husbandman Simile.
does aim at in tilling of the ground and sowing of his seed corn, is to
have a good harvest, and if his harvest prove bad, then all his labor is lost,
though the beginnings of a thing be good, yet if the utmost end of that thing
be naught, all is bad; So that the end of all things in moral actions, does
make the thing either good or bad: Every wicked man does seek himself in all
his actions, he does worship himself in the utmost end of all his
thoughts, so that all his actions, lusts, and desires, are evil continually.

Now I proceed to show you how it is the Apostle What is to be mortified.
Paul would have you to mortify, here some thing is presented, and to show you
plainly what it is, it does consist in these two particulars.

First, the habitual concupiscence, and secondly, the inordinate lusts and
desires that do arise from it, one we call habitual, and the other actual.
Now the Apostle would have the habitual concupiscence in nature weakened, and
secondly, he would have the acts of the lust to be suppressed. Now that it is
the Apostles meaning, that he would have them mortified and that which is to be
mortified is sin, mark that place I did cite before, Romans 6. 12. Let not sin
reign in your mortal bodies. In these words are three things observable,
First, there is a sin, secondly, a lust to the sin, and thirdly obedience to
the sin, thatis a will to execute the desire of this lust. When the Apostle
says, he would have the^mortified, he would have the heart to be cleansed from
the habitual custom of evil concupiscence, and secondly he would have them so
subdued, as not to obey them. That you may know the Apostles meaning, and not
to lay a straighter charge upon you, then the holy Ghost does aymeat he would
have all these three to be mortified, the lust, the consent to the lust, and
the act of ill. Consider the nature of the things that are to be mortified; If
you take the evil inclination, and compare it with the strength of the mind,
in committing of any sin, they are all of the same nature, they differ but in
degree, a lesser evil in the thought, before consent unto it is of the same
nature as a greater, as it is in murder: He that is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, commits a degree of murder; So he that slandereth his brother
by taking away of his good name, commits a degree of murder, and is a sin
of the same nature, as if he took away the life of his brother. So as in
taking away the comfort of a man's life, it is a degree of murder, in as much
as that man would take away the life of his brother if he might; So in lust,
if a man desire to commit adultery with a woman, and cannot come to the
execution of his will therein, to the committing of the actual sin, yet the
adultery of the thoughts and affections, are degrees unto this sin, and are
of the same nature, as if he had committed the sin it self. The Commandments
say, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors Exodus 23. 17.
wife, that is, in no degree at all to hurt her, or to wrong her. If all be of
one nature, and differ in degree, then all are to be mortified. The same nature
Note.
is in one drop of water that is in a whole Sea, and the same nature in a
spark, as there is in a great fire; If there be a right enmity between sin
and us, we will abstain from all Sin; a man does hate the very colors of
his enemy, as Toades and Creatures that are poysonfull: If a man do abstain
in sincerity from sin, he will abstain from all sin. The reason why men
abstain from any sin, is either for love of themselves or of God; if for
love of thy self thou do abstain from sin, thou were as good commit all
as some; If for love of God, thou will abstain from all sins, from little
sins as well as great sins. Here may a question be asked, Quest.
why men do abstain from murder and Idolatry? The answer is, because God
did forbid it; and Ans.
does not God forbid also, Thou shall not lust: God that does forbid the one,
does forbid the other; and for thy further consideration, know the holy Spirit
of God does hate every Sin, it does abandon and hate that heart where these
thoughts of lust are nourished. Now the heart is the habitation and residence
of the holy Ghost, wherefore all Sins are to be mortified, that the holy Ghost
may come and dwell there.

The acts of mortification are chiefly these, the Apostle would have us take
pains with our hearts, Acts of Mortification.
men might do much good unto themselves, would they but take pains to
consider and ponder their their ways, but when men are carried away with the
desire of riches, vainglory, and other inconsiderations, no mervaile if it be
thus with them: If they would but sit alone, meditate, and reflect their minds
upon what they should do, it would be a great means to make them to alter
their courses.

The Apostle when he would have them mortify these lusts, he would have them
consider the means how to suppress them, there be strong reasons in the word
of God for them: Let them search the grounds they have for the committing of
those lusts, and it will be an effectual means for the mortifying of them: If
men's judgments were rectified to see their follies, they would change their
courses, and turn the bent of their affections another way; I should deliver
many things unto you in this kind concerning mortification, to let it be your
care, that it may work upon your inward affections, that you may make it
profitable unto your own Souls, and that you do let it not pass from you
without doing you good.

The word of God which you hear is not lost, it shall certainly do you hurt
if not good, it shall harden if it do not soften: It is an ill sign if a tree
do not bud in the spring, but to see it without leaves in the Winter is no
wonder at all; So for any to hear the word of God powerfully preached, and not
to have good wrought on them by it; they have great cause to fear their
estates, It is this meditating Meditation and laying to heart, is the means to
mortification.
and taking to heart, which is the first means I prescribe for mortification.

We are said, secondly, to mortify, when we suppress 2
and keep down those lusts, if we keep them back from their courses, that
they do not bring forth the fruit of Sin: All actions when any Sin is
executed, they tend to evil corruptions. If we abstain from the action of
Sin, then it does kill the very inclination. Take any Sin that a man is
naturally inclined unto; whether it be the Sin of uncleanenesse, the desire
of Riches, or whatsoever, Custom does make his lusts to be stronger, and so
does add to the Sin, One light does show a thing to be so, but more lights
do make it appear more clear; so there is an addition in Sin as well as in
grace, the more they act in Sin, the more they increase.

Now when men complain they know not what to do, they cannot be without their
lusts; Let them thank themselves for it in suffering themselves by custom to
practice them, but by keeping down the act of Sin, the lusts will evaporate
away in time, though thy lust be strong and violent at the first; yet if thou will let it alone from the execution of it, it will consume and wear away at
the last; Therefore keep down thy lusts, and suppress them.

Thirdly, to weane these lusts, inordinate affections, and concupiscences; the
rectifying of the 3
judgment, and applying of right means, does mortify the higher reason: Now
for to mortify the lower reason, is to turn away the bent of affection on
another object: If grace be quick and lively in a man, it turns away the
mind from Sin, and the way to weane these lusts, is to keep the mind fixed
and bent on better things, as temperance, chastity, and sobriety; for all
intemperance does breed lust, and then the devil does take occasion and
advantage to work upon a man; but sobriety and temperance is a great means
to keep back these evil affections.

Now I proceed to make use of what has been Use.
formerly delivered concerning these three Sins, fornication, uncleanenesse,
and evil concupiscence: You may remember what has been said concerning the
greatness of the Sin of uncleanenesse, It will follow then if it be so great
a Sin, we should use means to be freed from it. Those that are guilty of
it, let them give themselves no rest, their eye lids no slumber, nor God no
rest, till they be delivered from the band of this iniquity. 1. Sam. 2. 25.
Remember what Elie said to his sons, If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him, but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat
for him? When God does take in hand to afflict the Creature, then it is
intolerable, man shall find it to be a^terrible thing to fall into the hands
of the living GOD. Take an arrowe, or a bullet, and let it be shot into the
body of man, it may wound deeply, and yet be cured again; but let the head of
that arrowe be poisoned, or the bullet envenomed, then the wound proves deadly
and incurable: There may be in the body of man many great gashes and deep
wounds, and yet be cured; but if affliction lies on the Creature from the wrath
of God, he is not able to bear it; it does cause him to tremble, and his
conscience to be terrified within him, as we see by men that are in despair.

Now the reason of it is, God when he sinites the Creature in his wrath, he
does wound the Spirit, and Reason.
as it were does break it in sunder, as God does break the Spirit, so he does
sustain the Spirit; but when he does withdraw himself from the creature, then
the strong holds of the Spirit are gone. This is to show you what a terrible
thing it is, to fall into the hands of the living God. This as it does belong
to all, so specially to those that have received the Sacrament this day or
before, that they make conscience of this Sin, if they do not, they receive
it unworthily, and he that is guilty of this, is guilty of the body and blood
of Christ; He discernes not the Lords body, neither does he prize it as he
should, nor esteem of the excellency of it as he ought: He discernes not
with what reverence he should come to the Lords Table; therefore says the
Apostle, He is guilty of the body and blood of Christ, that is, he is guilty
of the same Sin that those were that did crucify and mock Christ Jesus. The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is a special means, and chief ordinance of
God for the attainement of his blessings, if it be rightly received; and so it
is the greatest judgment that can befall a man, if it be not rightly
received, for Christ is chiefly represented therein: The blood of Christ is
the most precious thing in the world, when men shall account this holy blood of
the new Testament, to be but an unholy thing, and to trample it underfoot, God
will not bear with this.

Now when a man does come to the Sacraments in a negligent manner, in not
preparing himself worthily to come, he is guilty of the blood of Christ; For
ye are not only to be careful to prepare your selves, before the receiving of
the Sacrament, but also of your walking afterward. Therefore consider, you
that have received the Sacrament, or intend to do it, that you do cleanse your
selves from this pollution of heart and spirit, and that you do put on the
wedding garment, that is required of all worthy receivers, Let your hearts be
changed, and your affections, and actions be free from all kind of evil, and
your hearts be turned to God, else you cannot be worthy receivers, and so much
shall suffice for this use, that seeing this sin is so great, every man
should endeavor to free himself from it. Secondly, seeing the Apostle does not
only exhort us to abstain from it, but also mortify, kill, and subdue it, If
there were nothing but a mere abstinence from ill, then it is not properly a
mortification, for then the impurest adulterer should sometimes be chaste after
his impure manner of committing it, and therefore the cessation of it is no
true mortifying of it, and that you may know mortification aright, I will give
you three signs.

First, you shall know it by this, if there went a general reformation both in
heart and life before, 3. Signs of mortification.
when the heart is generally set aright, is changed and renewed to good, and
from thence 1 Is a general reformation in heart and life
does arise a dying to these lusts, then it is a good sign, but if otherwise
there be no particulars changed in thee, then it is but a cessation, not a
mortification, but when the whole frame of the heart is altered, yea even from
the very root, when the old man in the body of sin is wounded even to the
heart, that is, when a man has has been soundly humbled for his sin, and
afterward has his heart affected to Christ, and is come to love God, and has
his mind changed, then he may truly reckon it mortification.

Secondly, you may know true mortification 2 Sign of true mortification is a
right judgment of sin and true loathing it.
by this, by having a right judgment of sin, and a true loathing and
detestation of it; It is hard for a man while he has any sin in him, to
judge rightly of it, for then a man is given to an injudicious mind, while he
does continue in it, As when a man is in prison, if he Simile.
have continued there long, though the sent be bad, yet he cannot discern
it, but let this man be brought to fresh air, and be carried to that prison
again, then he will smell the noisomeness of it. So when a man is in sin,
he cannot truly judge of it, but when he is escaped from it, then he can
rightly and truly detest, and judge of it, when a man's soul is righteous,
there is a contrariety between him and uncleanness, a righteous soul does
detest sin, both in himself and others; as Lots soul was vexed with the
abomination of the Sodomites. Consider how you are affected with the sin of
others, Romans 1. verse 32. They were not only worthy of death, who did commit
sin themselves, but also they that had pleasure in others, when a man can
truly detest sin in others, as Lot did, and does truly loath it in
himself, then it is a true sign of true mortification.

The last thing to know mortification by, is an actual abstinence from every
sin, it is one thing 3 And last sign of mortification, is actual abstinence
from sin.
to dislike a sin, and another thing, to be weary of it, and to hate the
sinnefullnesse of it; If mortification be true, he will hate all kind of
uncleanness with an inveterate hatred, be it of what degree it will, Sheep
do hate all kind of Wolves, if a man do truly mortify, etc. his hatred to
sin will be general, not only in abstinence from gross sins, as
murder, adultery, and fornication, but also from all other sins; For when a
man forsakes sin, out of hatred, his rancor is of judgment more then of
passion, and so likewise his hatred will be constant. Men may be angry with
their sins sometimes, and fall out with them at other times, and yet be
friends again, but if they do truly hate sin, their abstinence from sin
will be constant, when a man becomes a new creature, there will arise a
contrariety to sin in his nature, so that if a man do hate sin, he is
truly said to mortify.

Here may a question be asked.

Whether after true mortification a man may fall Quest.
into the same sin again or no?

For answer hereunto I say, a man may fall again Ans.
into the act of sin and uncleanness after mortification, for the gates of
Gods mercy stand open to men after their greatest relapses; But yet he does
never fall into the love of sin, and of purpose for to sin. Though he do
fall into the act, he does not return to allow of it, and to wallow in the
mire, for it is impossible to do so after grace, yet we cannot shut up the
gates of Gods mercy to those that have often relapsed, so that a man's
conscience is witness unto him that he is not remiss in the means he should
use, though he fall into the act of sin unawares, yet he does it not with
set purpose: Now you may judge whether you be mortified yea or no.

The means to mortification are these.

The first means to mortify, is to labor for the assurance 1 Means to
labor for theassurance ^of pardon for one sins.
of pardon of thy sins; Sin is never mortified but by the sanctifying
Spirit, there may be a restrained spirit in us to keep us from the act of
fin, but it can never be mortified but by the sanctifying spirit of God,
pardon for sin is had by the assurance of faith in Christ, and the way to get
this for givenes, is to be truly humbled for our sins, acknowledging our own
misery, and our own wants, and to lay hold upon the mercies of Christ Jesus,
and to be lifted up by the promises of the Gospel; Consider, whatsoever your
sins be, whether against the light of nature, or against knowledge, Let a
man's relapses be never so great, and agravated with never so many
circumstances, Nevertheless, if a man will come in, our commission is to
propound unto them without all condition, or exception, that the gates of mercy
stand open for them, Mar. 16. 15. there is our Commission, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel unto every Creature. What this is in the next
verse it is said. If a man will believe, he shall be saved, but he that
believes not, shall be damned. Therefore whatsoever your sin be, let nothing
hinder you to come in, for if you come in, God will receive you to mercy, all
the hindra^ce then is in our selves. Consider these two places of Scripture, 1.
Cor. 6. 9. Paul speaking to the Corinthians, Of the greatest sin that ever
man's nature was capable of, such were ye, (says he) but now ye are washed, and
are sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit
of our God; So in the 2. Cor. 12. and last ve. The Apostle does make no
question, but that they might repent, and have forgiveness, you may know how
willing God was to forgive great sinners, all the matter is, if we be willing
to apply this pardon to our selves. To leave our sins in general, to take
Christ to be a King, as well as our Savior. To deny our selves, and to take up
Christ's Cross, and then there is no question, but we may have this pardon
sealed, and assured us.

Certain it is, men will not do this, as to deny themselves, and take up
Christ's Cross, till they be duly humbled, and have repented their sins, but
so it is, that men will not prize Christ, until that vengeance fall upon them
for their sins, would they but do it, they might be sure of this pardon, were
their humiliation true and sincere, it is sufficient, the last of the Revel.
verse. 17. And the spirit, and the Bride say, come, and let him that hears
say, come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take
of the water of life freely. First, here is, Let him that hears come, that
is, To all whosoever this Gospel is preached unto, the promise is general to
all: here is also added, Let him that is athirst come: there is further added,
Let whosoever will, come; come that will come, and take of the water of life
freely, seeking God in sincerity of heart, with forsaking of all their sins.
And so much for this means of getting pardon for sin, and to come to true
mortification by the sanctifying spirit.

The second means to mortification, is to abstain from all beginnings, and
occasions of sin, 2 Means is abstinence from all occasion of sin.
as precedent actions, and objects of ill, It is to have a peremptory
abstinence and full denial, not meddling with any thing that has any affinity
with sin; If you do not neglect to resist the beginnings, this is the way to
come unto the utmost ends of it, there be chains to draw to sin, James 1.
14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn of his own lust, and is enticed,
then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is
consummate, brings forth death. This is to clear God in the matter of
temptation, a man is drawn with his own lust unto it. First, a man does gaze
on his Sin, and dally with it, then he comes to be entangled in it, so that
he cannot get loose again, even as a fish that is fast to a hook.

Thirdly, follows the assent unto it, when he is taken in the net. And lastly
follows the committing of actual sin; which does bring forth Death; So
first there is the chain that draws to sin, Secondly the gazing on it; Thus
Evah did admire and gaze on the fruit, and did think that if she might taste
of it, she should come to know good and evil, but she was deceived, so we
are deluded by sin. First, by gazing on it, then by being entangled in it,
afterward proceeds a will thereunto, and lastly, the committing of the sin
which does bring forth death, so that death follows sin; When a man has
committed the sin, it causes the hardening of the heart, and so makes him
not sensible of the things of the spirit; The greater sins do cause the
greater hardnings, and makes the heart for to become evil, and so a man comes
to have an unfaithful heart, as an Athiest, to think that the Scriptures are
not true, that the promises of God are not true: and lastly, unfaithfulness,
it causes a departure from God, as in Hebrews 3. 13. An unbeleeving heart
causes a departure from the living God. Take heed there be not an evil and
unbeleeving heart in you, for if there be, then there will be a departing
from God, therefore we should not be led by any thing to gaze upon sin,
that we may not be entangled in it. Therefore let us at the first check the
very beginnings of sin, and resist all occasions.

A third means to overcome this sin, is to 3. Means, Grace, Holiness.
be exercised with the contrary delights, as with Grace, and Holiness. This
is the means to mortify the heart, and to empty it of all kind of lusts, and
they cannot be emptied out of the heart, unless better things be put in stead
thereof; you cannot weaken blackenesse, better then by white.

Therefore the way to change the heart after sinful objects, and the
mortifying of these lufts, it is to get delight in better things, and to labor
to have nearer communion with God, and to be zealous of Gods cause, 1. Cor. 106.

Last of all to conclude, The means for mortifying of this Sin, is, you must
add prayer unto all 4 Means is prayer.
the rest: To pray unto God to baptize you with his holy Spirit; Let a man be
left to himself, and it is impossible for him to mortify, except God will do
it; Therefore we are to pray unto God to give us his holy Spirit. When the
Spirit of God does come into the heart, it is as fire, and puts another temper
upon him then was before; It turns the strings of his heart to another tune,
and does make him approve of that which God does require. This is the way to
mortify lust. The more a man is carried to the love of one, he is many times
the more removed from another; but the more a man is carried to God, the more
heis wayned from inordinat lusts, and being mortified, he is the more inclined
to God, Mal. 3. 2. Who shall stand when he appears? for he is like a Refiners
fire, and like to Fullers Soap. Christ shall do that when he comes, that none
else is able to do. As in refining and purifying the heart, use what means
you will, except you use fire, you cannot refine dross from silver: So stains
that are in a man's garment, wash them as long as you will with Soap, they will
but seem the worse; but when they are brought to the Fullers hand, they are
soon rubbed out: So let a man be left to his own Spirit, he will run into
a thousand noy some lusts; but when Gods Spirit is clothed in a man's heart,
then it does keep him from the ways of sin, Revel. 1. 10. It is said of
John, That he was ravished in the Spirit, as a man locked in armor: When the
Spirit of God does possess the Soul, and compasses it about, it keeps it
from the ways of iniquity, and causes an aptness to good, 1. Tim. 17. For
God has not given us the Spirit of fear, but of power, of love, and of a good
and sound mind. And the reason why men do neglect it, is, because they know
not the way to get it. They know not the power and efficacy of the Spirit, and
that is the reason there is so little effect in this business. Let a man be
left to his own Spirit, and Gods Spirit removed from him, he will lust after
all evils: Take example of Eliah and John Baptist; It is said of John, that
he came in the spirit of Eliah, which did excel in him. Take Eliah, and
extract that Spirit from him which he had from God, and he would be but as
other men. Take the dear Saints of God, and take but this Spirit from them,
how would it be with them? Even as it was with David, when God did but as it
were hide himself a little while from him, into what dangerous Sins did he
fall. Therefore pray to God that he would give you his Spirit, and that will
be a means to mortify these lusts within you.

It is the Spirit that does make difference between Man and Man, and for the
getting of it, pray to God earnestly, and he cannot deny you. I will name but
one place more unto you, Acts 2. 38. 39. Repent, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of Sins, and you shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost, for the promise is unto you, and your
children, and unto all that are a far off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call. So that the men which were converted at Peter's Sermon, did ask,
What shall we do to be saved? He said, Repent, and believe, and ye shall
receive the holy Ghost; And further adds, The promise is made to you and to
your children, and you shall be partakers of it.

Not that the promise of the holy Ghost did belong only to those that were
then present, but to all that have been borne since, and are to be borne both
of Jew and Gentile, to as many as shall call upon the name of the Lord.
Therefore do you now as the Apostles did then, when Christ told them he would
send them the Comforter, they spent the time in prayers until they had it: So
do you pray earnestly, and be instant with God for it, and then certainly God
cannot deny it you; and when you have the Spirit; then you will mortify those
lusts, and all other Sins whatsoever; when you have this Spirit, of
Sobriety, of Temperance, of Love, of weekenesse, of gentleness, of long
suffering. The Lord grant you understanding in what has been spoken. And so
much for this time.

FINIS.
HOW TO MORTIFY inordinate affection.
COLO 1. 3. 5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and
covetousness, which is Idolatry.
SOme of those earthly members which the Apostle would have us to mortify we
have already handled; we are now come to speak of the inordinate affections.
The greek word is translated by a double word, sometimes passion, sometimes
affection, but it is alone, so as the point is clear, That:

All immoderate affections must be mortified. Doct.
A doctrine that may well be handled at large, it being general and
universal, an unlimited word that reaches unto all particular affections, a
doctrine that concerns every man; Men, for the most part, when they come into
the open view of the world, have a certain composed habit, but inwardly are
full of inordinate affections: It is a Doctrine therefore that searches the
inward parts, the minds and hearts of men: a Doctrine of continual use; for
though men press outward actions, yet affections remain unruled. Besides all
this, a Doctrine of no small difficulty. For as there is nothing easier than to
wish and desire, so there is nothing harder than to order these desires aright.
For the better handling of the point, observe these three things:

First, what Affections are. Secondly, when they are inordinate. Thirdly, why
they are to be mortified.
In the first place I must tell you what affections are: by affections you must
understand all affections and passions, whatsoever; for the better
understanding whereof, you must know that there are three things in the soul;
first, the faculties which are to the soul, as the members to the body.
Secondly, the inclinations of those faculties. Thirdly, the habits acquired
from those inclinations: for example, the appetite or will is a faculty of the
soul, and this taken in it self is neither good nor evil morally. Again,
there are the inclinations of What affections are.
that will, and these are goodor evil according as the objects that they
apprehend are good or evil; and lastly, the habit is, when the soul does
accustom it self one way or other; the habit is Three things nith^ Soul
good, when the soul is accustomed to good objects, in a good manner; and the
habit is evil, when the will accustometh it self to evil objects, or to good
objects in an evil manner. It is with the passions as it is with the senses.
First, we have the sense of hearing before we hear, and of seeing before we
see; Then from often hearing or seeing of the same object, proceeds an
inclination more to one object than to another. From that inclination, a habit
in the sense to turn it self with most easiness and delight upon that
object; Thus a corrupt habit is bred with us, when the mind or will turns it
self often to this or that evil object; and so gets agility and nimblene in
doing, as often doing brings dexterity to the hands; so if the will or
appetite have gotten a haunt either to virtues or vices, it contracts a habit
to it self. Now to show you what an affection is, we define it thus; An
affection is an inclination or motion of the Appetite upon the apprehension of
good or evil. I call it an inclination or motion, for it is the bent of the
will to this or that thing; as for example, when we outwardly love, fear or
desire, that is a motion; and for the Inclination we are to know that in man
there is a double Appetite; the first is sensual, which apprehends things
conveied to the senses, as to the eye and ear, and so is affected to love,
fear or grieve; this I call the sensual appetite, because it is of objects
What an affection is
apprehended by fantasy. Secondly, there is a rational appetite, the object of
that is that which the understanding apprehends; and from hence proceed
affections to riches, honor, preferment, etc. the will beeingconversant about
it. Remember this distinction, because of the matter that followerh, namely;
That the appetite is double sensual A double Appetite.
and rational, and affections are placed both in the sensual, as we love,
fear or desire objects exposed to sense; and in the rational, as we love,
fear or desire the objects which reason apprehends.

Now to draw this general division into two maine heads: Nature has planted
an appetite in the creature to draw to its self that which is good, and to
cast away that which is evil; therefore are these affections such as apprehend
either good or evil, to keep the one, and to expel the other; those that
apprehend good, if they see it and apprehend it, they love and desire it, and
love desires to be united to the thing loved, and a desire is a making toward
the thing absent; when the thing is present we joy in it; when it is coming
toward us, and there be a probability to have it, then comes hope in; if we
be like to miss of it, then comes fear; if no probability of attaining, then
comes in despair; if there be any impediments against reason and right, then
we are angry at it; and this anger is an earnest desire to remove the
impediments, otherwise if we see reason and justice to the contrary, then we
are not properly angry. These are the affections that are about good, and these
are the first kind of affections.

The 2. sort of affections are those that are about evil; as in the former
there is love of God, so here to turn away from evil, is hatred; if evil be
coming, and we be not able to resist it, we fear, if we be able to overcome
it, then are we bold and confident; if we be not able either to overcome or
resist the evil, we fly from it; if it be unavoidably present, we grieve at
it. But to handle them more severally, and so to know them as they have
reference to good or evil, for, except we know them thus, it is worth nothing
to us.

There are therefore three sorts of affections, natural, Three sorts of
affections.
carnal, and spiritual. First, natural, these affections arise from nature,
and tend to natural objects; as for example, to desire meat and drink is
natural, but to desire it in excess is not natural; because the objects of
natural affections are limited by nature, namely, so much and no more: Nature
has certain measures and extents and limits, and those she exceeds not:
Natural affections make us but even with beasts. Secondly, there are carnal
affections, which are lusts that arise from the corruption of nature, and those
tend to evil objects, or good objects in an evil manner: those affections
make us worse than the beasts, like unto the devil, Ioh. 8. 44. You are of
your father the devil, and his lusts ye will do, that is, those that have
these lusts are as like the devil, as the son is like the father, those that
are bound with these bonds, are like him; that is, they come in a degree to the
corruption the Devil has in a greater degree. Thirdly, spiritual affections
are such as arise from the spirit, that is, from the renewing part of man, and
tend to good objects in a holy manner: natural make us no better than beasts,
carnal than devils, spiritual make us better than men, like to God, having his
Image new stamped on us; they lift us up above men, and make us like to Angels.
Thus you see the 3. kinds of affections in men.

We must only answer one question before we go any further; the question is
this, Whether there be no spiritual affections, except they proceed from a
general disposition, because many men seem to have good flashes now and then,
and so seem to be regenerate?

I answer, no, they are not spiritual, regenerated affections, because these
affections in the soul, howsoever they are good in regard of the Author, the
holy Ghost that puts them in, are not so in regard of the subject, man, who is
yet in corruption and not renewed. If a man have never so much skill in
Music, if the instrument be out of tune the music cannot be good; so the
affections, as the spirits suggestions, are good, but in a carnal man, they
are as in an instrument out of tune: it is true that those flashes make way to
Conversion, but only when the heart is in tune and in a good frame, then are
the affections good, that is, then only effectively good, so as to make the
heart good, and then the fruit will be good, such as God will accept. So much to
show what affections are.

Now we are to show when they are inordinate: but first know, the affections
are placed in the soul for 2. Affections when inordinate.
the safeguard of it, that is, to give the watchword, that we may repel evil
when it is coming; those that are about good to open the doors of the soul to
let it in, and to make out for it, if it be wanting; as guides that are for the
service of the soul to put us on to work and to be more earnest in our
actions, they bring aptness and diligence in doing; when they miss these ends
then they hinder us in stead of profiting us, hurt us in stead of helping us,
carry us to evil objects in stead of good, then they are inordinate either in
the manner or the end. This premised now, that we may further know them when
they are inordinate, observe these 2. things.

First, examine them by the rule which is the maine way of trial, if they go
besides the rule they are inordinate.

The first rule is, that the objects must be good, The first cria of the
inordinate affections is to examine them by the Rule. Rule 1.
else the affection is inordinate; there must be love of God, sorrow for sin,
delight in God, then it is good; but on the contrary to disgrace holiness, to
condemn excellency in others, to hate that we should cleave to, abominate the
good we should embrace, these affections are naught.

The second rule is the end; examine if they take Rule 2.
their rise amiss though the object be good, yet if the manner be naught, they
are inordinate; now the manner is naught when the end is naught: as for
example, many men desire and seek for excellency of parts, but to what end?
why, for vain glory, not to do God service: This is for a wrong end: so zeal
is an excellent affection, none better, but if the end be naught, the affection
cannot be good. Iehu was zealous, but he altogether respected himself.

The third rule is, though the object be right, and the end right, yet if it
exceed the measure, Rule 3.
the affection is not good: David's love to his children was good, and the
object good, yet he failed in the measure. Moses anger was good, yet when he
cast the tables out of his hand, it was an excess, and defective because
exceeding, though excellent and commendable in another kind.

The fourth rule is, though the object be right, Rule 4.
the end right, the measure right, yet if the affection be not in order and
season, that is, if it take its wrong place, and thrust into the room of
another, it is a cause to make it inord inate: as for example, to desire to do
business in a man's calling is good, but if this desire prevail with him at
such time as he should bestow in prayer and holy duties; as when he should
come to hear the Word, then they are inordinate; for season must be kept to:
therefore, when an affection comes, if not in season, answer it as Christ did,
The hour is not yet come: this is the way to judge of them by the rule.

The second way of trial, is to know them by The second trial is by the
effects.
their effects, and they are four, as the rules are 4.

The first effect is, if any affection hinder reason, so Effect. 1.
as to trouble the action, then it is inordinate; for affections ought to be
servants to reason; if they disturb, then they are not right: as for example,
fear is set in the soul to give the watchword, to prevent evils; if it
shall appale a man, so as to let his weapons fall, thus it troubles reason: Joy
was put in the soul to oil the wheels, and to quicken it more; If it do more
astonish then quicken, if immoderate joy cast a man into ectasy when it should
put him on action, or if it break out into immodest reuellings, and not into
praises, thy joy is not good: grief is stirred up to ease the soul of pain;
now, if it hinder a man from enduring that he should endure, it becomes
inordinate. The Israelites in Egypt could not hearken to Moses, because of the
anguish of their hearts, and worldly sorrow causes death, that is, it causes
distempers; and when it thus dries up the bones, it eats up the vigor of the
soul, and makes a man out of frame, then it is amiss: though Christ's grief
exceeded anymans upon the Cross, yet he committed all to God without any
distempers.

The second effect is, when they indispose us to Effect. 2.
any holy duty, as we judge of in distempers of the body, if there be no
appetite to meat or drink; so affections are inordinate, when they indispose
us to pray, to do good, or to speak good, 1 Pet. 3. 7. the Apostle exhorts
husbands to dwell with their wives 1 Pet. 3. 7.
as men of knowledge; that is, in such a manner, as you may moderate affections
with knowledge; that your prayers (says the Apostle) be not hindered; that is,
if there be any disorder in your affections one toward another, it will hinder
your prayers. By your affection you may judge, and as you may judge of your
affection, by your duties, so of your duties you may judge by this rule, how
you are disposed to holy duties; if there be any interruption, or
indisposition, it is a sign there is some distemper in the affections; all
things are not straight in the inward man.

The third effect to discover the immoderatenesse of affections, is, when they
produce evil actions, Effect. 3.
which ordinarily they do, when they exceed the measure and the manner: Anger
is an affection set in the soul, to stir up man to remove impediments; and
thus you may be angry for sin, and other things too; now, if it be kept in
its own limits anger is a desire to remove impediments, and not a desire to
revenge, that is the inordinatenesse of it; to be angry for sin, because it
dishonors God, is good: To be angry for other things redounding on our
selves is not evil, so our anger extend but so far, as to remove the
impediments, not to revenge them: as for example, if a man takes away ones
reputation, and brings disgrace upon him; now, to desire to hurt such a man,
the affection is amiss, because the carriage of other men toward us, must not
be our rule toward others; but we are to make this use of it, to be diligent
in keeping off the blow off our selves, but not to hurt another man, this is
inordinate. Be angry, but sin not, you Ephesians. 4. 20.
may be angry, so as it bring forth no evil actions, or evil effects; so a
man may be angry with the insensible creatures, desiring to remove the
impediment, and put out of the way that which hinders the actions.

The last effect, is, when affections draw us from God, then they are
inordinate, because they should draw us near to him. But, when they make us to
Effect. 4.
forget God, there is their inordinatenesse; for example: we are commanded,
Deuteronomy. 12. 18. To rejoice in the good things of God, but when we shall rejoice
in an Epicurean manner, and forget God, it is amiss; for we should so
rejoice, that we should raise up our souls to love and praise, and give
thanks to him; so also for fear and grief, if we fear any thing more then
God, and grieve for any thing more then for sin, for crosses, and losses,
more then for displeasing God, these make us forget God, and so become
inordinate.

Now follows what it is to mortify them, which we have formerly spoken of at
large; in a word, it What it is to mortify affections.
is nothing else but a turning of carnal affections into spiritual, and
natural affections to a higher and more noble end; that is, to eat, and to
drink, not only for natures benefit, but for God, to do him honor, that is
the right end; for to mortify, is to rectify, and to bring things that are
out of compass to rule, to see where they are inordinate, and so to turn
carnal and natural affections all into spitituall.

In the next place we will see some reasons why 3 Why they are to be mortified.
they are to be mortified, for reasons do wonderfully persuade, and necessity
of mortifying once apprehended, makes men go about it; Let us but consider of
what moment it is to have them mortified, what ill if we do not, what good if
we do.

The first reason is, because affections are actions of the greatest efficacy
and command in the soul, Reason. 1.
they are exceeding powerful, they are the wheels or sails which carry the
soul this way or that way; in that regard, because they are so effectual and
prevalent, therefore it concerns us the more to take care that we rectify
them. Time was, when affections did obey the will, and the will the Spirit of
God, (in the time of Innocence) but now that subordination is taken away, and
that union dissolved, and now the affections move the heart as the wind the
Sea, whether it will or no; therefore it stands you upon to keep them under. A
metled horse is a delight to the rider, if he be kept under Simil.
the bridle; so the affections, if they be good, the stronger the better, but
the Devil has no better factors the^ the affections are, if they be ill, they
are the best opportunities for him to do mischief by.

The second reason why they are to be mortified, is, because they are those
that make us either good Reas. 2.
or evil men. It is not the understanding of truth, or falsehood that makes us
good or evil men, that is but one opinion and judgment; but as the affections
are, and as the inclination of the will is, so is a man good or bad. Job was
called a perfect man, because he feared God; and blessed is the man that
delights in God; and all things work together for good to them that love God.
It is the common phrase of Scripture to judge of man by his affections, when
his love is right, his fear is right, and his sorrow right; therefore look to
thy affections which are the motions of thy will; so as the affections are, so
is the man, if men's actions are weighed by their affections: in other Arts
indeed, the work commends the Artificer, but here, though the action be good,
yet it is not good, except the affections be good, because the will commands
the whole man, so the goodness or badnesse of a man are seen in the
affections.

The third reason is, because inordinate affection Reas. 3.
makes much for Satan to take possession of the soul, therefore it stands you
upon to keep them right and straight, Ephesians. 4. 20. Be angry, but sin not,
that is, if anger exceed its measure, it opens a Ephesians. 4. 20.
way for Satan to come in, and take place in the soul. The example of Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 10. will illustrate this, when the women sang, Saul's thousand, 1 Samuel
18, 10.
and David's ten thousand, the Text says, Saul was exceeding wroth, and after
that time had an eye upon David; that made way for Satan, he was exceeding
wroth, and the next morning, Satan, the evil spirit came upon him: so that you
see, strong affections open the door for Satan. Judas, when the affections
came to the height, the devil entered into him. He was angry at the expense of
the ointment upon Jesus feet, and upon that he harbored the first conceit of
betraying him, 14 Mark 4 compared with the 10. Witches, you know, exceed in
malice, and this makes way for the devil to possess them; and so worldly
sorrow, if it come to the height, it exposes the heart to be possessed by
Satan: so by strange lusts Satan slides into the hearts of men, and they see it
not; and therefore labor to mortify them. 1 Pet. 5. 8. be sober and watch,
etc. that is, if there be any excess in any affection, if you keep them not
in, Satan will enter; therefore be so ber and watch, for if ye admit 1 Pet. 5.
8;
any distemper he will enter.

The fourth reason is, because affections are the Reas. 4.
first petitioners of evil, though they do not devise it, yet they set the
understanding on work; now he that is only a worker of ill, has not his hand
so deep in the act, as he that is the first mover: Simile.
if men are exhorted to abstain from evil actions and evil speeches, men
think that there is some reason for it, but for evil affections they see no
such necessity: but consider you, evil affections produce evil actions; evil
affections communicate evil to a man, as fire heats water, and yet has more
heat in it self; so affections make speeches and actions evil: And therefore
God judges by affections; we indeed judge affections by actions, we cannot
know them perfectly, yet do we judge by the same rule as far as we can; let a
man have an injury done him, he looks to the affections, that is, to the man,
whether it came out of anger and malice; if a man has a good turn done him,
he looks to the affections, if he sees greater good in them, than in the
action; for in a good action, the will is more than the deed, the willingness
of doing it, is of a rarer rank than the doing the thing it self: so an evil
affection is more than an evil speech or an evil action. In this regard,
therefore, labor to mortify them, because they are instigators of evil.

If affection be of so great a moment as you have Use.
heard, then do that which is the maine scope of all, take pains with your
hearts to mortify them, when they are unruly, to bring them under; if strong
affections solicit us, give them a peremptory denial; hearken to the
Physician rather then to the disease; the disease calls for one thing, the
Physician for another; if men yield to the disease, they kill themselves. Here
is the true trial of grace; to do some thing good, when there is no ill to
oppose it, that is a small matter; but when strong lusts hail them to the
contrary, then to resist them, this obedience is better then sacrifice: In the
old Law, they sacrificed their sheep and their oxen, but in this obedience a
man slaies himself; this will is the best part and strength of a man; for,
when he subdues his lusts, and brings them in obedience to Christ, he
sacrifices the vigor of the will: Man is as his affections are; affections are
to the soul as members are to the body; crookedness in the members, hinders a
man's going, so crookedness in the affections hinders the soul: those that
keep Clocks, if they would have them go true, then every Simile.
thing must be kept in order: so in affections, keep them straight, because
they have such a hand, in the will; one has an affection to filthiness,
another to covetousness, another to good fellowship, according to these so are
they carried, and such are their actions; let their affections be straight, and
they turn the rudder of the soul another way, they cast us into another
mould: therefore labor to subdue them, and so much the rather, because they
make a man not only good, but abundant in good or evil; good does prescribe
to a man exactly what he shall do, but yet leaves some free will offerings on
purpose, to try our love, to try our affections; the rule of duty is left
partly to the rule of affections, that we may abound in good: a man may do
much in resolution, but the affection makes it acceptable. Paul might have
taken for his labor of the Corinthians, but the fullness of his love would not
suffer him, that is, God and they set him on work. Thus affections make a man
abound in good; it was David's love to God, that made him build a Temple to God:
In short, affections make a man beautiful unto God and man. Now, if affections
are so rare, and yet so subject to be inordinate, it is wisdom to know how
they may be helped; if any thing does want means of help, this does, because
it is a hard thing to keep down unruly affections; therefore we will come to
lay down some means to help you to keep them down. Means to mortify
inordinate affections.


The first means is, that we labor to see the disease; for no man will seek
for cure, except he see Means. 1.
the disease, the sight of the disease is half the cure of it; labor to see
your inordinate affections, and to be persuaded and convinced of them. This is
a hard thing, a man does not see his evil inclinations, because those very
inclinations blind his eyes, and darken his understanding, and cast a mist
before him; notwithstanding which, we must labor to do that what we can; as
there are diverse sorts of affections, so there are diverse sorts of distempers,
as the affection of anger has its distemper, and this is more visible; when
anger is gone, it is daily seen, and therefore is of no great difficulty to be
discerned: there are other kind of affections which do continue in a man, when
his heart is habitually carried to an inordinate lust; as to pride,
vainglory, love of the world: no such affection can be well discerned, whilst
that continues in a man; take a man that has a continued affection, it is hard
for him to discern it; because, it does with its continuance habitually
corrupt the Judgment, and blind the reason, and yet you are to labor to
discern it: And that you may two ways.

First, bring your affections to the rule and touchstone. Two ways how to
discern a continued inordinate lust.
Secondly, That you may better know their aberration from the rule, consider,
whether the affection have any stop; an affection is like a river, if you let
it run without any stop or resistance, it 1.
runs quietly, but if you hinder its course, it runs more violently; so it is
with your affections, if you do not observe to know the stops and lets of
them, you shall not observe the violence of them so well. So then, the first
way for a man to come to know his affections, is to observe them in any
extraordinary accident; if any loss come to a man in his estate, or if he be
crossed in his sports, or hindered of his purpose, let him consider how he does
bear it, that is, try how you carry yourselves toward it; this will be a good
means to discover our affections, when they come to these stops and lets, they
are best discerned by us.

Secondly, in this case it is good we make use of 2.
others eyes; a man sees not that in himself which a stander by does, he is
free from the affection which another is bent unto, and therefore another can
better judge of it; as a man that is sick of a fever, he cannot judge aright
of tastes, because he has lost the sense of tasting, that which is sweet may
seem bitter unto him; but he that is in health Simile.
can judge of tastes as they are: therefore, it is good to make use of friends,
and if we have no friends, it is wisdom in this case to make use of an enemy;
that is, to observe what inordinatnesse has been in them, and what has
happened unto them thereby, and so to judge of our own.

And this is the first thing that I will commend unto you, to labor to see your
affections, and to be convinced of them; when this is done, in the next place
we will come to see the causes of inordinate affections; and seeing we are
applying medicines, as we shall see the causes of inordinate affections, so to
each of them we shall add their remedies.

The first cause of inordinate affection, is, mis-apprehension; Causes and
remedies of inordinate affections. Cause 1.
that is, when we do not apprehend things aright, our affections follow our
apprehensions, as we see in a sensible appetite, if a thing be beautiful, we
are apt to love it, and like of it; but if it be deformed, we are apt to hate
it; for as things do represent themselves to the will, so we are apt to
conceive of them; the will turns a man's actions this way or that way,
notwithstanding the understanding is the pilot that turns the will; so that
our apprehension is the first cause of inordinat affections, by this we
overvalue things that are evil, and undervalue things that are good. Rectify
therefore the apprehension, and heal the disease, labor to have the Judgment
informed, and you shall see things as they are. Affections (as I said before)
are of two sorts, one sensual, arising from fancy, the other rational,
arising from judgment: all that we can say for the former affections, is this,
men might do much to weaken those affections in them (if they would take
pains) by removing the objects, that is, by withdrawing the fuel, and
turning the attentions another way; if we cannot subdue any sensual affections
in us, let us be subdued unto it, and be as any dead man; In case that we are
surprised by such vanities, yet let us not hasten to action or execution. All
that in this case a man can do, is as a pilot, whose ship is in great danger
to be cast away by reason of a great tempest, all that he can do, is to look
to the Simil.
safety of the ship, that waters come not into it at any place, that it be not
overthrown: so these evil affections that are in our rational appetite, are
these evil inclinations of the will, that are lent either to riches, pleasure,
vainglory, or the like objects of reason.

Now to rectify your mis-apprehension of them, Remedy 1.
first get strong reasons for to do it; read the Scriptures, furnish your
self with spiritual arguments, be acquainted with such places, as ye may see
thereby the sinfulness of such affections: it is great wisdom in a man,
first, to find out the thing he is inordinately affected to, and never to
rest, till he find the things that are sinful in him: therefore, the applying
of reason will make us able to do it; and if we can do so, we shall be able
to go through the things of this world rightly: You are inordinately affected
to wealth; Apply reason and Scripture here, as thus; It is a wisemans part to
use earthen vessels, as silver; and silver vessels, as earthen; the one will
serve for use as well as the other: so in the things of the world, he that is
strong in reason and wise, were they represented to him as they are; he would
use a great estate without setting his heart upon it, more then if it were a
mean one; and in the condition of this life he would would so carry himself,
as if he used them not: this the Apostle have us to do, to use the world, as
though we used it not: and then we should think the best things of the world to
be of no moment, and that we have no cause to rejoice in them. We are to use
the world with a weaned affection, not be inordinately carried with love
thereupon in worldly things; there is a usefulness to be looked at, but to
seek to find baits in them, and to set our hearts upon them, that will hurt
us exceedingly; if we look for excellency in worldly things, and touch them
too familiarly, they will burn and scorch us; but if we use them for our
necessity, and so use them as if we did not, we shall find great benefit and
comfort by them. This is the difference between earthly and spiritual things,
you must have knowledge of these, and this knowledge must be affective, the
more love you have the better it is; but in earthly things, the less love we
have, the better it is: for in earthly things, if our love exceed our
knowledge, they are subject to hurt us. What is the reason, a man takes to
heart the death of his friend, or the like accident? for a while he grieves
exceedingly, but within a month, or short time after, his grief is past; and
then he sees that the death of his friend is no such thing as he took it for,
and thought it to be; had he then seen that which now he does, he would not
have grieved so much.

The second way to rectify misapprehension, is by faith; for, by faith we are
to believe the vanity of Remedy 2.
these earthly things, and we are to believe the power of God, who is able to
blow upon them, and to cause them to wither; so that faith is a great cause to
rectify the apprehension, as well as reason: Paul counted the best things of
the world, but dross and dung; and Moses cared not for the pleasures of Egypt;
it was their faith that caused them to do so, they did believe the true
privilege they had in Christ: this does raise up the heart, and cause us more
and more to see the things that are earthly, how slippery and flitting they are.

The third way to rectify mis-apprehension is experience; we are not so much
as to touch us of Remedy 3.
that thing we have found to be true by experience: let a soldier be told of
dangerous effects in the wars, persuade him what you will, and tell him how
terrible it is, he will not believe, till by experience he has felt the smart
of it: so when a man is entered upon the doing of any difficult thing, which he
has been accustomed to do, the experience he has of often being in such
dangers, and having felt no harm, that does rectify his affections.
Experience is a special means to tame them; let a beast be brought to a man's
hand that is fearful at the first, but by experience and daily using of it,
so you tame the beast: so our affections are unruly things, like untamed
beasts, but when experience has discovered them, it is a good means to
rectify them: therefore it is profitable for us to call to mind things that
are past: If we would but call to mind how such a thing we joyed in, and yet
it staid not with us; our joy would not be so inordinate in other things: If
we would remember how such a cross we survived, our grief would not be so
inordinate in future events.

The fourth way to rectify mis apprehension, is Remedy. 4.
by the example of others, that is, to see how others have been affected with
the inordinate affections that we have been in our selves; and examples do
r^nne more into the senses than rules do; therefore think of examples to
stir up affections, either to cross them, or subdue them. We see by the
reading of histories, as of the valiant acts of some of the worthies, as of
Julius Caesar, and others, some, by reading of the great exployts that they
themselves had done, have been stirred up as much as in them lied, to do the
like, so that examples of others are very effectual in this kind. If a man
would consider Paul, how he carried himself in the things of this life, and
how David, Abraham, and Moses were affected to these outward things, what they
had, and what they might have had; their examples, and such as we have heard
of, to be holy and righteous men, or such as we now know to be such, is a great
help to rectify the affections, and to set the Judgment straight.

The second cause of inordinate affection, is weakness Cause. 2.
and impotency, which does stick in a man ever since the fall of Adam, and
makes him subject to passion; and therefore ye see, the weaker sex, as they
are weaker in understanding, so they are stronger in passion; let a man be
weak, he is so much the more strong in passions; and as his strength is more,
so has he more strength to resist them. The way to remedy Remedy.
this, is, to gather strength; the more strength we have, the more able we are
to resist temptations, and as a man is weak, so he is the more subject unto
them, (as when he is young) but strength overmasters them. Affections are in a
man as humors are Simile.
in a body, when the body is in health, it keeps in these humors that it does
not feel them; but when a man is sick, then these humors stir up and
trouble a man: So, when the soul is in health, these ill humors of the soul,
inordinate affections are kept in by maine strength: but let the soul grow
weak, and the passions get strength. Now, the means to get strength against
passions, is to get a greater measure of the Spirit, the more spirit, the more
strength, Ephesians. 3. 16. Pray, that you may be Ephesians 3. 16.
strengthened by the Spirit of the inward man: the more flesh we have in us,
the more weakness we have; the spirit that is in us does lust after envy, and
pride, and the world. Now, how shall we help it, but by the Spirit that is
without us, that is, by the Spirit of God: let a man be in such a temper, that
the Spirit of God may rule and possess his heart; while he is in this temper,
his ordinate affections will not stir, but when the Spirit is away, then
there is a hundred ways to cause them to be unruly: that which seasons a man
is prudence, wisdom, and grace; the more a man has of these, the more able
he is to subdue them.

The third cause of inordinate affections, is, the Cause. 3.
lightness of the mind, when it has not a right object to pitch it self
upon, which when that wants, the affection being left to uncertainties, they
must needs fall upon wrong objects: when a man in his course wants an object
for his aim, the ways of his error are a thousad; so when a man does miss
the right object in affection, they have a thousand ways to draw to
inordinatenesse: men run up and down with their affections upon uncertainty,
and they never cast how to shun them afterward, till the end of their days be
run out. Now, to remedy this, Remedy.
our way is, to find out the right object whereon the affections should be
pitched, and this object is God, The right object of our affection, God.
that is, the affections must all look toward God, and have them fixed upon
him; you are never able to subdue your affections and to keep them under, till
you pitch them upon God: whilst our affections are loose, they are unsteddy
and unconstant; every man, till his heart be set upon God, his affections are
wandering up and down; but when a man has God to set his affections on, and
they are once settled in him, then he seeks another kind of excellency, and
frames his life after another fashion, he sets his affections upon other
excellencies: As when a man has a palace for to build, if his mind Simil^.
be to have it done with excellent worke-manship, then he will take none but
principal stones, hewne and squared fit for his purpose to build withal, but
if a man be to build a mud wall, any rubbish and trash will serve the turn to
make it up: So, when our affections are on high matters, such as God and
Christ, they look upon things that are noble, and not upon the rubbish and
trash of the world, we will choose the principallest stones for our spiritual
building: but if otherwise, we strive to find contentment in the creatures, we
care not how we come by them, that is, any rubbish will serve the turn to get
riches withal, and honor and preferment in the world; but, if ever you will
set your affections straight, pitch them upon God.

The fourth cause of inordinate affections, is, that Cause. 4.
confusion that rises in the heart at the first rising of them; and they are
the vapors and mists that blind the reason, and make a man unable to resist
them, because the putting out of the eye of reason, must needs trouble a man
exceedingly; even as a moate in a man's eye troubles him, that he cannot see as
he Simile.
should do; And therefore these mists that are cast upon the eye of reason,
do make a man unable to resist them. In such a case, the way to help them is
this, to make up the banks when the river is at Remedy.
the lowest ebb, that is, to make up the banks of our affections, before the
tide of inordinate affections do come in; we are not at first, able to rule
these inordinate affections, but yet if the banks be made up aforehand, we may
mortify them. A man is to consider before, how he is able to be affected, and
for this, let him look into the former ways, and see how he has been
affected, and how he is apt to be affected again; and when he is in such
circumstances, let him take a good resolution, never to return to such
inordinate affections, as he did before: When a man is sick of an Ague, to give
him physic when he is in a sore fit, is not the fittest Simile.
way, it is not then in season; but it were best to be done in his good days,
before his fit: so we are to make up the bank of our affections, before the
tide of inordinate affections do come, to have a strong resolution, we will
not be led by such an affection as before. And if this prevail not, then we
are to suspend the execution of our passions, that is, to do nothing for a
time: If a man find any passion in himself, let him abstain for that time,
(if it be possible) from the doing of that which it moves him unto; because,
that he is then most subject to do amiss: You see, a barrel of Beer, if it
Simile.
be stirred at the bottom, draw it presently, and it will run muddy, but if
you let it rest a while, and then draw it, it will run clear: so a man in
his passion, his reason is muddy, and his actions will not come off clear;
therefore it is good to suspend the execution, howsoever: For the suspending of
the action in time of passion, is very profitable, though a man think for the
present, whilst the passion is upon him, that he does not err, yet because
then we are most subject to err, suspend for a while. Passion is a hindrance
to the faculty, as jogging is to the arm when it is a shooting, or unto Simil.
the hand when it is a writing therefore, when a man does find that passion is
on him let him do nothing: A drunken man's wisest courseis to go home and do
nothing that night, unless the good work of repentance; our passion is a kind
of drunkenness; the one is almost as subject to mis-take an error, as the other.

The fifth cause of inordinate affections, is the corruption of Nature, which
is in every man since Cause. 5.
the fall of Adam. Will you know the reason, why Bears and Wolves, and Lions,
carry themselves so cruelly? It is, because their nature is to do so; Will you
know why a sinful man is subject to affect things inordinately? the reason is,
because he has a bad nature; it is natural to him to do it, and as ready to
him as sparkles of fire to fly upwards; We see some men are apt to be taken
with such a disease, that is bred and borne with them, they cannot escape it.
Now the remedy to remove the evilnesse Remedy.
of nature, is, to get new natures, that is, to get another nature, a holy,
regenerate disposition, until then, men shall never be able to do it; many
labor to mortify their affections, but yet cannot, because they are busy
about the particulars, and never regard the general; they can never make the
branch good, except they make the tree good, therefore, the way to mortify, is
to get a new nature: Consider whether your nature be renewed, whether that be
cast into a new mould, if it be, this is the way to mortify inordinate
affection, this is the way for the general: So also it should be our care for
any particular affection, that we find our selves most prone to by nature,
labor to thwart nature in that particular: Are you given to wrath by nature?
endeavor to be humbler and meeker then other men; Is your nature more inclined
to desire of gain? Labor to be established with a more free spirit; and this
will be a means to mortify you; otherwise, you shall never waine your hearts
from earthly things, till you have a taste of such spiritual things, that is,
you shall never win your hearts from joys, except you have joy and delight in
Christ, you shall never overcome the grief of losses and crosses, except you
turn your affections to see the loathsomeness of sin: Contraries in nature
do expel one another; cold is expelled with heat, darkness with light; so
you must expel carnal affections with spiritual.

The 6ht cause of inordinate affections, is carelessness and remissness, that
is, want of spiritual watchfulnes Cause. 6.
over the heart, when men rather give occasion unto the affections to be
inordinate, than prevent the occasions of it. For the cure of this, take heed,
not of Remedy
sin only, but of the occasions of sin; for a man to hate sin, and not
to hate the occasions of it, is to deceive himself, that is all one, as for a
man to walk upon Ice, that is afraid of falling: Iron will Simili.
move, if the loadstone be near: so the affections will stir up, if there be
any alluring sinful object. And therefore, if sin knock at the door of your
hearts, you must not let it in presently, but ask his errand, plead the cause
with it, and consider the hindrances and inconveniences that come by it. For a
man to say, I will give over my lusts, and yet will keep such company as he
did before, and use his old haunts, he does but deceive himself, Prove. 22, 19.
Make no freindship with an angry man, and with a furious Prove. 22. 19. and 23.
20.
man thou shall not go, Prove. 23. 30 Benot amongst winebibbers, that is, if
thou have used this company, and usest it still, thou fleest not occasions of
sin; and therefore we must watch over our souls, the heart is deceitful above
al things; take heed to the beginning of your affections, and look to the
beginning of inordinate lusts, when you see it rising, if you perceive but a
glimpse of it, quench and resist it, else it will cost you a great deal of
more pains afterward: the affections by little and little giving way to them,
will soon get strength, if you let them alone, you set your hearts and minds
on fire: A man that is full of anger, or any passion, knows not how to help
himself, so dangerous is it to give way to affections, that they carry a man
unawares to inordinatenesse; the best way therefore is to quench it at first;
if you cannot quench it when it is a spark, how will you do when it is a
flame? As you are to look to the beginning, so take heed of making false truces
with them; for inordinate affections do more hurt by ambushes and secret
invasions, then by open war, therefore look to them on every side, lest they
rob you of grace before you are aware.

The seventh cause of inordinate affections, is, the Cause 1.
root whereon they grow, labor to see the root, and remove it: if one affection
do distemper the mind, it draws on another distemper, and you cannot lessen
that latter inordinatenesse, unless you weaken the former, which was the root
of it. As for example; Anger grows upon pride, you shall never lessen or cure
that affection of anger, except you weaken pride: Now pride causes anger and
contention, Jonah was angry, whence came it but from his pride? when a man
through pride knows not himself, he forgets God; And this man that forgets
God, will be violent in his grief, in his complaints, in his fears, in his
desires, and will never be healed, till he be humbled; and brought to a base
estimation of himself.

Lastly, I would have you to know, that God is the only Agent in this work of
mortification: and therefore have dependence upon God, for it is Gods Spirit
that must cause a man to mortify: man is not able of himself, except God
persuade him, Psalm. 33. 13, 14. Except the Lord speak once and twice to us, we
will not regard it: Paul was Psalm. 33. 13, 14.
troubled with a strong affection, what does he? he goes to God, and prays to
him to take away that strong mist; and so must we do, pray to God in Faith,
do but believe, and we shall have our requests granted: continue in prayer,
and hold out without weariness, and be your affections what they will be,
yea, never so strong; such as you thought would never be mortified, yet you
shall overcome them.

The last use that is drawn from hence, is this; ^^e.
if inordinate affections are to be mortified, then is any excess in any
desire sinful, and for which we ought sharply to reprove our selves: many
grieve for some or other temporal things, this is moderate, when they can yet
joy in other things; so we qualify our griefs with joys, and our joys with
griefs; we are not inordinate: but we are to take heed of excess in them, for
that makes them sinful; as our over-grieving at losses and crosses, our
over-loving of earthly things, too much delight in sports; These are turned
into sin to us, affections are set in the heart for the safeguard of the
soul; a fool indeed, for want of skill may hurt himself with them, but he
that is skillful, knows how to use them without prejudice to himself; and if
they be thus well used, they are very serviceable to the soul; but if they be
once strong headed, that is, get the bridle between their teeth, so as they
will not be ruled; then they prove hurtful unto us. Mark what the Wiseman
says of the lust of uncleanness; and it is true of all such lusts, the strong
man is slain by them: therefore, fight against the lusts of unclean and
inordinate affections. And that you may do it, and be willing to part with
them, mark these motives following.

The first motive I take out of 1 Timothy 6. 10. The Motives to conquer and master
inordinate affecti.

Motive. 1.


Apostle speaking of covetousness, calls it; the root of all evil, etc. and
what may be said of this, may be said of any other sin very truly; this is
one motive: inordinate affections promise profit and contentment, and yet will
pierce you through with many sorrows, that is, it takes away the health
Simile.
and tranquillity of the soul; even as the worm does eat the same tree, that
does breed it. And look, as the inward heat of an ague is worse than the
outward heat; so these inward ulcers of the soul and affections do trouble
us, and pierce us more than any outward grievance, whatsover, that can assault
the body: let a man have houses in the City, goodly gardens, orchards, lands
and all contentments on every side; yet, his inordinate affections do not
suffer him to enjoy any one of these, nay, not to enjoy himself, he cannot
converse, talk or meditate with himself, it makes a man to be wearisome to
himself, it hinders a man altogether from doing that which is good: Simile.
one disease of the body is enough to take away all comforts outwardly, that a
man has; and one inordinate affection of the soul takes away all pleasure and
contentment within; let a man be sick, neither rich clothes, nor a fair
chamber, can comfort him; so let a man have but one inordinate passion, all
other things are nothing to him; he takes no pleasure in them.

The second motive is taken from that of Solomon, A man's spirit will bear his
infirmities, but a wounded Motive 2. Prove. 18. 14.
spirit, who can bear? that is, this does make a man unable to bear any thing
else: for example, a strong love set upon the things of this life, wounds the
soul; and so makes it unable to bear the least loss of any of them, it deads
the heart within a man: So immoderate grief adds affliction to affliction;
Immoderate fears are worse than the thing feared, whereas otherwise,
afflictions are nothing grievous, if they be rightly used: Paul was in prison,
and so were Ioseph's Brethren, yet you see the difference; the one full of Joy,
the other full of grief and sorrow, because they had sinned; their consciences
were not whole, they could not bear their burden: therefore, look to your
affections, that you may pass through the changes of this life with more
comfort, if you cannot bring your mind to the doing of this, then bring those
things to your mind, labor to mortify them, and that is the best way to bring
your minds to the things; my meaning is, if you cannot bring your mind to
love worldly pleasure and contentments less, mortify them to your mind, that
is, look not at them, as pleasures or contentments; if you must love them, let
them seem less lovely to you: dye to them in affection, or else, let them dye
to you in apprehension; True indeed, without Gods overruling Power, we can do
nothing; yet we must use the means, as we see in the casting of a dye, it is
not in us to win as we please, but yet the playing of the cast is requisite; so
the mortifying of the affections, it is not in us, yet we must use the means
for to do it; let us not give satisfaction to any lust, but hinder it to our
powers: it is a shame for us to have our hearts affected with any sinful
lusts, were we more careful of our souls, these inordinate affections would
be more broken and kept down by us. Believe it, strong affections breed
strong afflictions, and say, thou should have riches and contenment in
Simile.
earthly things, and yet have inordinate affections, this is no help for thee,
it is but an applying Simile.
of an outward plaster to an inward sore, that will do it no good.

The third motive is taken from 1 Timothy 6. 9. the Apostle speaks there of
the desire of riches, Motive 3.

1 Timothy 6. 9.


he says, that it breeds many foolish and hurtful lusts, in that regard,
we should mortify them, because they are foolish lusts, and foolish, because
hurtful; when a man hurts himself out of some mistake, or by his own
heedlessenesse, he is properly said to be a fool: It is properly folly, when
a man hurts himself, whilst he seeks to do himself most good; we seek to
do our selves good, when we give satisfaction to every lust, but yet we hurt
our selves; strange affections invite us to sin, and sin brings to misery;
and thus they are hurtful. Shun them therefore, seeing God has appointed them
to be mortified, let us mortify them; whatsoever God has appointed to be
mortified, and we will not do, it is as hurtful for us, as Achans wedge was
to Achan; which is called a cursed thing: And so every unmortified lust is a
cursed thing. Take Judge. 6. 14.
we heed of it.

The fourth motive is this, because inordinatenesse Motive. 4.
of affections hinders us in the doing of the good actions, wherein our
happiness does consist, they make the faculties of the soul unfit to do the
things they should do: as James 1. 20. Iam. 1. 20.
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God; that is, it disableth
a man to work that righteousness, he should do; and what may be said of
wrath, may be said of any other affection; As of malice, 1 Pet. 2. 1. wherefore
laying aside all malice, 1 Pet. 2. 1
etc: that is, while these are in you, you cannot hear the Word as ye ought;
So for inordinate desire of gain, Ezekiel. 31. the reason why the people heard
without profit, was, because their hearts Ezekiel 31.
went after their covetousness: mortify these lusts, and then you shall go
with ease and safety in the way of godliness, yea, we shall be carried to it,
as a boat is with wind, with all facility and expeditenesse.

The fifth motive is, because of the shame and Motive 5.
dishonor they do bring men into; men are afraid of shame in other things, it
were to be wished, they were so afraid of shame in this: Every inordinate
affection is a short drunkenness, and it brings the drunkards shame to a man;
drunkenness discloseth all, and so, if there be any corruption in the heart,
inordinate affection draws it forth. Every man is ashamed of indiscreetnesse
in his carriage, now, what is the cause of indiscreetnesse? it is the defect of
wisdom, either the forgetfulness or not heeding of the time, place or action
we are about; and what makes this forgetfulness? It is the drunkenness of
passion. When the Apostle James would show, who was a wise man, he says, he
will show out a good conversation in his works; James 3. 13.
there will be meekenes and gentleness in his carriage and behavior; but, if
there be any envy or strife in the heart, this shows a man to be but a weak
creature: whereas on the contrary, it is an honor in a man to pass by an
infirmity; That is a sign of a strong man, that is able to overcome himself.

The sixth motive is, because they blind the Motive 6.
reason and Judgment, which should be the guide of all our actions in the
course of this life; that which is said of bribery, that it blinds men; and
that the affection to the bribe makes the sin a great deal more; The like
may be said of other sins; As long as passion rages, thou can neither judge
of thine own nor of others faults: if thou would judge of another man's
fault, take away the beam that is in thine own eye; And so if thou would
judge of thine own faults, these affections must not blind the mind and the
reason, for so they will hinder us in discerning good, and in doing any thing
that is good; for, when the mind is corrupted, the will is corrupted; and then,
instead of walking in the ways of God, we walk in the paths of sin:
therefore, in regard of the safety and security of our lives and actions, we
should mortify these our affections.

HOW TO MORTIFY COVETOVSNESSE.
COLOSS. 3. 5. And Covetousness which is Idolatry.
Covetousness which is Idolatry, that must be mortified as well as the other
earthly members. Now this Covetousness is nothing else but an inordinate and
sinful desire, either of getting or keeping wealth or money. The inordinate
lusting after honors that is called Ambition, too much affecting of beauty, is
called lustfulnesse. And Lust is an inordinate affection, which when it
propounds riches for its object, it is called Covetousness, which is
Idolatry. Now Idolatry consists in one of these three things.

First, in worshipping the true God in a wrong manner, apprehending him as a
Creature, giving that to himthat agrees not with him.

Secondly, when as we make the Creature a God, by conceiving it under the
Notion of a God, so did they who worshipped Jove, Mars, and those Heathens that
worshipped the creatures as Gods.

Thirdly, when we attribute that unto it which belongs unto God: as to trust
in it, to delight in it, to put all our trust and confidence in it; when as we
think it can perform that unto us, which God only can. Now that Covetousness
is Idolatry, is meant, when as we think that riches can do that which God
only can do, as that they can do us good or evil. Esaias. 41. 23.
If they are Gods (says God) Let them do good or evil. God only does good
and evil, therefore he is distinguished from Idols, because they cannot do it,
affections follow opinions, and practice follows affections. Heb. 11. 6.
Hebr. 11. 6. He that will come to God, must believe in him None will worship
God, unless they believe that God can comfort and relieve them in all their
distresses; So when men have an opinion, that riches and wealth will yield them
comfort, be a strong tower of defense, to free them from inconveniences, this
makes them to trust in them, and this thought is Idolatry.

There are two points of Doctrine that arise from Doct.
these words.

The first is this: That to seek help and comfort, 1
from any creature, or from Riches, and not from God alone, is vain, and
sinful.

The second is this: That Covetousness which is 2
Idolatry, is to be mortified.

For the first, for to seek any help or comfort from any Creature, and not
from God alone, is vain and sinful, and it must needs be so, because it
is Idolatry. Now in Idolatry, there are three things,

First, vanity and emptiness, 1. Cor. 8. 4. An Idol is nothing in the world.
Here is vanity.

Secondly, sinnefulnes: There is no greater Sin then it is, and it is an
extreme vain, because we attribute that to it, which does only belong to God,
to think if that I am well, and strong in friends, have a well bottomed
estate, that my mountain is strong on every side, I shall not be moved, This
is sinf^ll and vain; you shall not live a whit the better, or happier for it;
A strange Paradoxe contrary to the opinion and practice of most men. When we
consult with our treasures, do not we think that if we have such wealth, and
such friends, that we should live more comfortablie and happily? There is no
man but will answer, that he thinks so. But yet my brethren, we are deceived,
it is not so: it belongs to God only to dispense of his Prerogatives, goodor
evil. A horse is but a vain thing (says the Psalmist) to get a victory,
that is, though it be a thing as fit as can be in it self, yet if it be left
to it self without God, it is but vain, and can do nothing. So I may say of
riches, and other outward things; Riches are vain, and honors, and friends
are vain to procure happiness of themselves: So Physic of it self is vain
to procure health without God, they are nothing worth, he that thinks
otherwise erreth. It was the folly of the Rich man, that he thought so, and
therefore sung a Requiem unto his soul. Eat Luke 12. 19.
drink, and be merry, O my soul, thou have goods laid up for thee for many
years. He did not think himself happy, because he had any interest in God
and his favor, but because he had abundance of outward things, and therefore
you see the end of all his happiness, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul
be taken from thee, and then what is become of all thy happiness, Yet such is
our folly, that most of us reflect on the means and on the creatures, and
expect happiness from them. But Christ tells us, they will not do the deed;
This night shall they take away thy soul, and then al thy happiness is gone.
The rich man thought before, he had been sure as long as his wealth continued
with him, that he needed not to expect any calamity, but now he sees that he
built on a sandic foundation. David, though a Holy man, being established in
his Kingdom, having subdued all his Enemies and furnished himself with
wealth, he thought that his Mountain was then made so strong, that it could
not be moved, that to morrow should be as yesterday, and much more abundant.
But no sooner did God hide his face from him, but he Psalm. 307.
was troubled. To show that it was not his riches and outward prosperity that
made him happy, but God only. So Dan. 5. 28. Belshazzer when as he thought
himself happy, being environed with his wives, Princes, and servants, when as
he praised the gods of silver, and the gods of gold, abounded with all outward
prosperity, and reposed his happiness in it, is accounted but a fool by
Daniel, because he glorified not God, in whose hands his wealth and all his
ways were, and therefore he was destroyed. These things of themselves will not
continue our lives, nor yet make us happy of themselves; we take not one step
of prosperity, or adversity, but Gods hand does lead us. My brethren that
hear me this day, that have heretofore thought, that if you had such an
estate, such learning, such ornaments, and such friends, that then you were
happy. To persuade you that it is not so, it would change your hopes and
fears, your grief and joy, and make you labor to be rich in faith, and in
good works. It will be very hard to persuade you to this, yet we will do what
we can to persuade you, and add certain reasons, which may persuade you to
believe it to be so; if God shall add a blessing to them that join the
operation of his Spirit with them to persuade you. First 1 Reason.
this must needs be so, in regard of Gods all-sufficiencie, he alone is able
to comfort without the Creatures help, else there were an insufficiency, and
narrowness in him, and so then he should not be God, if he could not fill our
desires every way, even as the Sun should be defective, if it needed the
help of Torches to give light. God is blessed not only in himself, but makes
us all blessed: It is the ground of all the commandments. Thou shall love and
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. We must love him
with all our hearts, with all our souls; Let not the Creature have any jot of
them, because all comfort is from God, Gen 17. 1. I am God all sufficient,
walk before me, and be perfect, that is, love me altogether, set your
affection on none but me, ye need not go unto the Creature, al is in me. If
the Creature could do any thing to make us happy and not God, then we might
step out to it, but the Creature can do nothing to it, God only is al
sufficient to make you perfect every way; though that the Creatures be used by
God, yet it is only God that makes you happy and gives you comfort and not the
Creature.

Secondly, it must needs be so, because of the vanity 2 Reason.
and emptiness of the Creature, it can do nothing but as it is commanded by
God, he is the Lord of hosts which commands all the Creatures, as the
General does his army; A man having the Creature to help him, it is by virtue
of Gods commandment; it is the vanity of the Creature, that it can do nothing
of it self, except there be an influence from God: Look not then unto the
creature it self, but to the influence, action, and application which it has
from Gods secret concurrence with it, what it is to have this concurrence and
influence from the Creature, you may see it expressed in this Similitude. Take
the hand it moves, because there is an imperceptible from the will that stirs
it, so the Creature moving, and giving influence and comfort to us, it is Gods
will it should do so, and so it is applied to this, or that action. The
artificer using a hatchet to make a stool, or the like, there is an influence
from his Art, that guides his hand and it; So the Creatures working, is by a
secret concourse from God, doing thus and thus. And to know that it is from
God, you find a mutabilitie in the Creature, it works not always one way:
Physic and all other things are inconstant, sometimes it helps,
sometimesnot, yea many times when you have all the means, then they fail, to
show that there is an influence from God, and that the creatures are vanishing,
perishing, and inconstant.

Thirdly, it must be so, because it is sinful to look for comfort from any
thing but from God, because 3 Reason
by this we attribute that to the Creature, which only belongs to God, which is
Idolatry. The Creature steals away the heart in an imperceptible manner. As
Absalom stole away the peoples hearts from David, or as the Adulterer steals
away the love of the wife from her husband; It makes you serve the Creature, It
makes you settle your affection upon the creatures, if they fail, you sorrow,
if they come, ye joy, and ye do this with all joy, all delight, all pleasure,
and desire, this is a great sin, nay, it is the greatest sin; As adultery
is the greatest sin, because it severs, and dissolves the marriage: so it is
the greatest, because it severs us from God, and makes us cleave to the
Creature.

The maine consectory and use from this, is to keep you from lusting after
worldly things; Men are never weary of seeking of them, but spend their whole
time in getting of them, and this is the reason why the things that belong to
salvation, are so much neglected, Men spend so much time in a thousand other
things and trifles, and have no time at all to serve God in; They are busy
about riches, honor, credit, or the things whereon their fancies do pitch, but
if this be digested, it will teach you to seek all from God, who disposes all
things, and to whom the issues of life and death, of good or bad belong.

Consider with your selves and you shall find, that the reason wherefore you
do seek for outward content or comfort, is because you do think it will do
you good if you have it, or hurt if you have it not, but herein you err,
giving that to the Creature which only belongs to God. Esaias 1. 23. If the
Idols be Gods, let them do good or evil, says the Lord. The scope of this
place, is to cast off the whorish and adulterish affection of those that have
an eager and unwearied desire after earthly things, by showing that they cannot
do us any good or hurt. Therefore God punished David exceedingly for numbering
of the people, because he thought that they could strengthen him against his
enemies without Gods help, therefore Ierem. 23. 24. Thus says the Lord. Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his might, nor the rich man glory in his riches. But let him that glories,
glory in this, that he understands and knows, that I am the Lord that
executes loving kindness, Judgment, and righteousness in the earth. As if
he should have said, if these things could do you good or hurt, there were
some reason that you might seek them, but there is nothing in them that you
should desire them, for it is I only that execute judgment, and mercy, all
good and evil is from me, therefore Psalm. 62. we have this caveat given us,
If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them, magnify not your selves for
them and in them, for all comfort is from God only, else you might set your
hearts on them, but now all power and kindness is from him, therefore your
wealth cannot do it.

But it may be objected, that God does comfort us, and make us happy in this
life by means, and that Ob:
riches are the means, wherefore then may we not seek to them to get this
comfort?

To this I answer, that God does reward every man according to his works, not
according to his Ans.
wealth, yea, he can comfort us without these, for he is the God of all
consolation, 2. Cor. 1. 3. and that has inclusive and exclusively all comfort
in him and from him, none without him; If we think to have it from honor,
wealth, or friends, we deceive our selves, for they are vain and profit not,
1. Sam. 12. 25. Turn ye not aside, for then should you go after vain
things, which cannot profit you, or deliver you, for they are vain. All these
things without God will profit you nothing.

But will not wealth and friends profit us? Ob:


No not at all, they are vanity, they are empty in Ans.
themselves, they cannot do it, they are in themselves but vanity; having the
creature, you have but the husk without the grain, the shell without the
kernel, the creature is but empty of it self, except God put into it a
fitness to comfort you, all is vanity and nothing worth, and this vanity is
nothing but emptiness. And this serves to correct the thoughts of men, who
think, that if they had such an estate, and all their debts paid, If they had
such and such friends, that then all would be well with them, and who is it
that thinks not thus? But let those that entertain such thoughts, consider the
vanity of the creature; All our Sins proceed from the over-valuing of the
creature, for Sin is nothing but an aversion of the Soul from the immutable
God to the creature. Labor then to conceive of the creature aright, that it is
vain; this will keep you aright, and hinder you from going from God, and
cleaving to the creature.

To press this further, consider these four things.

First, if you go another way to work, all you see and seek comfort in the
creature shall be labor lost, for it is not in the power of the creature to
yield you any comfort, If you busy your selves with seeking of comfort from
it, you will walk in a vain shadow, Psalm. 39. 6. Surely every man walks in
a vain shadow, Surely they are disquieted in vain, He heapeth up riches, and
knows not who shall gather them; If we look for comfort from riches, we
look it but from a shadow, all our labor is in vain.

There is a shadow of the Almighty wherein some men walk, where they shall be
sure to find this comfort, others there are that walk in the shadow of the
creatures in the vanity of their minds, seeking comfort from it: Those who thus
walk shall be deceived. A shadow though it seem to be something, yet it is
nothing, ye may seem to have the lineaments of a man, or some other creature,
yet it is nothing: So these outward things may seem to have something in them,
but yet indeed they have nothing, those that seek for comfort in them commit
two evils, Ier. 2. 14. They forsake God the fountain of living water, and
dig unto themselves pitts that will hold no water, God having all comforts in
him comforts never failing, because there is a Spring of comfort in him, yet
we forsake him and dig pitts, which if they have any water, it is but
borrowed, and not continuing, and that water which they have is none of the
best, it is muddy, and will not always continue: Wherefore pitch your
affections upon the true substantial good, not on vanities. If we see a man
come to an Orchard full of goodly fruits, and he should only catch at the
shadow of them, netling his hands, and spending his labor in vain, we would
account him either a fool or a mad man; yet we in the clear Sunshine of the
Gospel (such is our madness) catch and seek after shadows, with trouble of
mind, and sorrow of heart, neglecting the substance.

Secondly, consider that you seek your happiness 2
the wrong way, that is, you seek it in wordly things, they are not able to
help you, because they reach not to the inward man, the body is but the sheath
and case, our happiness lies not in it; So in the Creatures, their happiness
consists not in themselves, but in something else, It lies in observing the
rule which God has appointed for them. The fire observing the rule which God
has given it, is sure; so of water, and so of all creatures animate and
inanimate, their happiness consists in observing the rules which God has
prescribed to them. The law of God is a rule that we must walk by, following
it as a rule we are happy, that doing well, and observing the Commandments,
makes us happy; He that keeps the Commandments, shall live in them; He that
departs from them is dead. Every motion of the fish out of the water is
toward death, but every motion of it in the water is to life: So let man's
motions be toward God, and then they are motions to life; but let him move
after outward things, and it is a motion toward death and misery, and
therefore if you seek this comfort from outward things, you go the wrong way
to get it.

Thirdly, consider that you make a wrong choice, 3
you seek not that which will do it, if you seek for this comfort in God,
all is in one place; but if you seek for it in the creatures, you must have a
multitude of them to comfort you; If that they could comfort you, you must have
health, wealth, honor, friends, and many other things, but there is one thing
only will do it, if you go the right way to get it, you shall find it only
in God; Martha she was troubled about many things, when as one thing only was
necessary. If you look for comfort in earthly things; you must have a thousand
things to help to it, But godliness which has the promises of this life, and of
the life to come does yield this comfort of it self if you seek it in it.

It is a great advantage for us to have all the comforts in one thing,
Godliness only has all these comforts, therefore seek them in it.

Fourthly, consider that that comfort and happiness which you have from the
creature, is but a dependant 4.
felicity, and it is so much the worse, because it depends on the creature
which is mutable and uncertain; how much better is it to depend on God, in
whom is no shadow of variety or change. Every creature is weaker, by how much
it has dependence on another, and so are you weaker, by how much the more you
depend on outward things; If you depend on friends, they may change their
affections and become your enemies, or death may take them away, and then your
happiness is gone: If you depend on riches, Pro. 23. 5. Will thou set thine
eye on that which is not? for riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly
away as an Eagle toward heaven, and then your happiness is gone: but if you
seek for, and place your happiness in God, in whom is no change or
alteration, then it is perpetual. A dependencie on things that are mutable,
will yield no comfort, because GOD will have all to depend on himself.
Therefore the 1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, that no flesh might rejoice
in it selse, but that he that glories might glory in the Lord: for this end,
God has convayed Christ unto us, that he might make us believe that we fare
not the better for any Creature, and that so we might rejoice only in the
Lord; Therefore he has made Christ redemption from all evil, that he might
furnish us with all good, Christ has redeemed us from hell and misery, and
from want of good things, seek not then a dependencie on the Creature, think
not that it will better you, and this will make you to depend on Christ;
Therefore for these regards, correct your opinion of worldly and outward
things, and judge of them with righteous judgment, depend only on God, if you
will have him to be your portion as he was the Levites, refuse him not as the
Israelites did, depend upon him in good earnest, A little you say with Gods
blessing will do much; Labor not therefore, neither toil you to leave great
portions to your children, the common pretense that men have for their
covetousness, for though you leave them never so much, if Gods blessing be not
on it, it is nothing, it can yield them no comfort, yea many times it is an
occasion of their hurt. If then Gods blessing be all in all, if that only can
administer comfort, and make us happy, I would ask you this question? What if
you did leave your children only Gods blessing, would it not be sufficient
though you left them little or nothing else, you think not so, and yet
whatsoever you can leave them without Gods blessing, is nothing worth;
Preachers labor much in this to draw you from worldly things, and all to
little purpose; It must be Gods teaching, that persuades within which must
effect it; you must therefore take pains with your hearts, the generality of
the disease shows that it is hard to be cured, labor therefore to find out
the deceites which hinder your practice of these things, which are these.

One deceit that deceives them, is that they are Deceit 1.
ready to say, that those things are the blessings of God. Why should we not
rejoice in them; so afflictions Quest.
they are crosses, and therefore grieve for them; If these then did not add to
our blessedness, why count we them blessings, and account poverty as a cross?

To this I answer, that if you take them as blessings, you may rejoice in them
as the instruments Ans.
by which God does you good; blessings are relative words, they have reference
unto God, if you consider them without reference to him, they cease to be
blessings; Therefore if you consider them merely as blessings, you may rejoice
in them. Now ye receive them as blessings.

First, if you depend upon God for the disposing, continuing, and want of them,
if you think you shall 1
enjoy them no longer then God will; If you think thus with your selves, we
have wives, children, friends, and riches, it is true we have them, but yet they
shall not continue with us an hour or minute longer; then God will: If you
think so in good earnest, then ye rejoice in them as blessings. A man that is
releeved when he is in danger, looks more to the will, then to the hand of him
that helps him; We look more to the good will of our friends, then to their
gifts: So we should look more on Gods will and pleasure, the^ to the benefit
she bestows upon us; The consideration of these things as blessings, must
raise up your thoughts to heavenly things, to consider that whatsoever is done
on earth, is first acted in heaven: The Sun is first eclipsed there, and then
here; So that your estates are first eclipsed there before that they are here;
look therefore on God, and on these as merely depending on Gods will, and
then you enjoy them only as blessings.

Secondly, you look on them as blessings, if you 2
look upon them, so as to know that you may have them in abundance without
any comfort; Instruments have nothing of themselves, whatsoever they have is
put into them.

A man may have friends, and all other outward things, his mountain may seem
to be strong, yet without Gods blessing on them he may want comfort in them;
When as you think thus, that you may have those things without comfort, it is
a sign that your eye is on God, that you look on them only as the Vehiculars
or conduct pipes to convay comfort. The air yields light as an instrument,
though it have no light of it is own, the water may heat but not of it self,
but by that heat which is infused into it by the fire; so if a man drink a
Potion in Beer, the Beer of it self does not work, but the Potion works by
the Beer: So it is with all outward blessings, they of themselves can yield
you no comfort at all, but if they would yield you any, it is by reason of that
comfort which God puts into them.

Thirdly, you do then enjoy them as blessings, if you think you may have
comfort without them; 3
The ebbing and flowing of outward things, does not augment your comfort, or
diminish it. Those that have not any outward blessings, may have more gladness
and comforts in their hearts, then those whose corn and wine are increased,
Psalm. 4. 7. Those who have but a small Cottage and a bed in it, are many times
more happy, more healthy, and sleep more quietly, then these rich men whose
wealth will not suffer him to sleep, Eccle. 5. 12. Many there are that seem
to want all outward blessings and comforts, yet are full of inward comforts and
delights. Many there are who like Paul and the Apostles, seem to have nothing,
and yet possess all things. As it is all one with God, to help with few or
with many, so he can comfort with few friends and external blessings as well
as with many; yea, he can make a little which the righteous have, more
comfortable then all the revenewes of the ungodly, be they never so great.

That which has been said of blessings, the like also may be said of crosses,
you may greeve for them if you take them as crosses, but withal take heed
that ye account not those things crosses, which indeed are no crosses: want
was no cross to Paul, nor yet imprisonment, for in the one he abounded, in the
other he sung, it is advantage unto us sometimes, to have outward blessings
taken from us. It is advantage for us to have blood taken away in a plurisie,
It is good sometimes to loppe trees, that so they may bring forth more fruit,
so it is good for us many times to have crosses, for to humble us, and to bring
us near unto God, yet we may sorrow for the loss of those things, and take it
as a cross. If you can say this from your hearts, that ye are not afflicted,
because ye are made poor, because your Wealth is taken from you, but because
it is Gods pleasure to take it away from you, either for the abuse of it, or
else to punish you for some other sin. So that if you be cast into some
sickness, you may not grieve for it as a cross merely, as it is a Sickness,
but as you conceive the hand of God in it, laying it on you, as a punishment
foryour Sin.

The second Let, and Deceit is, the present sense 2 Deceit.
and feeling which we have of the comfort that comes from abundance of
outward things, therefore whatsoever is said to the contrary, is but
speculations and fantasies: Men are guided by sense which cannot be deceived;
We find and feel comfort in those things by experience, we see a Realtie in
these things, and therefore whatsoever you say to the contrary, is but in
vain and to no purpose.

To this I answer, that you must not judge of things according to Sense, for
Sense was never made Ans.
a judge of God to judge of these things, butjudge of them according to faith
and rectified reason, which judges of all things that are to come, that are
past, and present altogether, and so can best judge of these things as they are.

Now for to help your judgment in these things.

First, consider what the Scripture does say of them, what it does say of
pleasures, friends and Riches, the Scripture presents things as they are, and
that tells you that they are but vanity of vanities, all is but vanity.

Secondly, consider the judgments of others concerning them, who have bin on
the stage of afflictions, 2
and have abounded in good works whilst they lived but are now gone.

Thirdly, consider what you will judge of them at the day of death, then men
are awaked and see 3
these things as they are indeed, and then they bemoane themselves that they
have spent so much time in seeking after those things that will not profit
them, and spent so little time in looking after salvation.

Judge not of them as you find them for the present, but likewise as you shall
find them, for the time 4
to come judge of al together.

Now for Sense, you must understand its double.

First, there is a Sense and feeling of the comfort of 1
the Creature, as a man that is benumbed with cold, is refreshed with fire, or
a man that is faint and feeble in heart, is refreshed with Wine.

Secondly, there is a super-eminent comfort, proceeding 2
from an apprehension of Gods favor toward us in giving these blessings to us.

There may be an inward distemper which may make our joys to be hollow and
counterfeit. There may be sadness of heart, when there is outward joy, because
there is an inward and Supereminent Sense, which affects the heart another way,
and therefore Eccl. 2. 2. It is called, made Joy, because we mind it not. It is
the Joy of Joys, and life of comfort, that is from within, that proceeds from
the inward man; As the soul is strong in health, so it findes-more comfort
both in external and Supereminent comfort. Graces are to the soul, as health
is to the body, the more and the greater they are, the more comfort they
administer.

But ye may say, that the creature can administer O^.
its own comfort, and of it self.

To this I answer, that there is an aptness and Ans.
fitness in the Creature to comfort us, but yet it can yield no comfort
without God, wherefore keep your affections in square, have so much joy and
delight in the Creature, as the Creature requires, and no more; If your
affections hold a right proportion with their objects they are aright,
therefore thus far you may joy in the Creature and no further.

First, you may joy in it, with a remiss joy, ye may 1
also sorrow with a remiss sorrow, ye may joy in it as if ye joyed not, and
sorrow in it, as if ye sorrowed not.

Secondly, you may joy in them with a loose joy, 2
and affection, as they sit loose to you, so you may sit loose to them, 1. Cor.
7. 29. 30. 31. Brethren the time is short, it remains therefore that those
which have wives be as if they had none, that those that weep, be as if they
wept not, that those that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not, and those that buy,
as though they possessed not, and those that use this World, as not abusing it,
that is, Let your affections be loose to these things. Take any of these
outward things, you may cast your affection on them in a a loose manner, go no
further then this, the fashion of the World passes away, ye may be taken away
from it, and it from you, therefore affect it no otherwise then a transitory
thing, and with a loose and transeunt affection, willing to depart from it,
whenever it shall please God to take it from you.

Thirdly, you may love them with a dependant affection, they are things of a
dependant 3
nature, they have no bottom of their own to stand upon, they only depend on
God, and so you may love them as depending on him, eying the fountain, and not
the Cesterne from whence they flow, take not light from the Air, but look to
the Sun from whence it comes.

The third deceit is a false reasoning. We findit 3 ^eipt.
otherwise by experience: We see that a diligent hand makes rich, and brings
comfort, we see that labor brings learning, and for the labor which we
take to get it, in recompense of it, it makes us happy. Ans.


To this I answer, that this clay me does not always hold, God breaks it
many times, Riches come not always by labor, nor comfort by riches, the
labor profits nothing, Psalm. 12. 71. Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it. Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman
watches but in vain. It is in vain to rise up early, to go to bed late,
and to eat the bread of carfulness, ye shall not reap the fruit ye
expect, unless God be with your labor. If Christ be absent, the Disciples
may labor all night and catch nothing; but if he be present with them, then
their labor prospers, then they enclose a multitude of fishes; So when we
labor and take pains, and think to be strong in our own strength, without
Gods help, we go to work with a wrong key which will not open, but if Gods
hand be in the business, we do it with great facility and ease, which God
has appointed we should do. You may see this in Joseph, God purposed to make
him a great man; see with what facility he was made the governor of Egypt,
next to Pharaoh, without his own seeking, and beyond his expectation: So it
was with Mordecai, so with David; God appointed to make them great, and
therefore they became great, notwithstanding all oppositions. On the contrary,
let man go on in his own strength, and he shall labor without any profit at
all: hence it is, that many times we see a concurrencie of all causes, so that
we would think that the effect must needs follow, and yet it follows not,
and if it do follow, yet we have no comfort in it.

First, because God makes an insutablenesse and disproportion, betwixt the man
and the blessing, as between Judas and his Apostleship: a man may have tables
well furnished, riches in abundance, a wife fit for him, and yet have no
comfort in them, because God puts a secret disproportion betwixt him and them.

Secondly, though there be a concurrence of 2
things, yet God may hinder the effect, sometimes for good, and sometimes for
evil, as Elishas servant was ready in the nicke, when the Shunamite came to
beg her possessions and lands of the King, 2. Kings 8. 5. 6. He was then
telling the King, how Elisha had restored her son to life: So Abraham when he
was to offer up his son Isaac, in the instant God sent the ram to be tied
in the bush: So Saul when he had purposed to kill David, God called him away
to Genesis 22. ^^.
fight with the Philistines, and as God hinders the effect for good, so he does
for evil.

Thirdly, God does it sometimes by denying success unto the causes. The
battle is not always to 3
the strong. When there are causes, and the 'ffect follows not, it is because
God does dispose of things at his pleasure, and can turn them a contrary way,
health and comfort, joy and delight follow not outward blessings, except God
put it into them.

The fourth deceit is this, These things are certain and present, but other
things are doub^full and 4 Deceit.
uncertain, we know not whether we shall have them or no. Ob.


To this I answer, it is not so, future, spiritual and Ans.
eternal things are not incertaine, but th^se things which we enjoy here are;
those things we here enjoy, and we also our selves, are subject to changes
and alterations. We are as men on the Sea, having storms as well as calmes:
Wealth and all outward blessings are but transitory things, but faith and
spiritual things are certain, and endure for ever. We have an Almighty and
unchangeable God, and immortal, incorruptible inheritance, which fades not
away, reserved for us in the highest Heavens. In temporal things, who knows
what shall be to morrow? In them thou can not boast of to morrow, but as for
spiritual things, they are certain, they have no ambiguity in them; But the
maine answer that I give, is that here we must use our faith. Consider the
grounds on which faith relies, and then the conclusions and consequences that
arise from them: take heed to them, and be not deceived; If ye believe God to
be the rewarder of all those that trust in him, as you say he is, why rest
you not on him, why are ye not contented with him for your portions, why
think you not him sufficient? If the Creature be God, then follow it, but if
God be God, then follow him, and be satisfied with him; Labor therefore for
faith unfaigned, and walk according to it.

If then it be vain and sinful to seek help and comfort from any
Creature, or from Riches, and to think that they can make us live more
comfortablie; Hence then consider the sinnefulnesse of it, and put it into the
Catalogue of your other Sins, that formerly you have had such thoughts. Every
one is guilty of this Sin, more or less: and this is a Sin not small, but
of an high nature, it is Idolatry.

In the times of ignorance, Satan drew many men to gross Idolatry, to worship
stocks and stones, but now he draws them to another Idolatry, less
perceptible, and yet as dangerous in Gods sight as the other, who is a Spirit,
and can discern, and pry into it; Let us therefore examine our hearts, and
consider how much we have trusted the Creatures; Let us condemn our selves,
and rectify our judgments to judge of things as they are; Let us not think
our selves happy for them; Let us not think our selves blessed in them, but
only in Christ, because it is not in their power to make us happy.

If we have so joyed in these, or loved them so, as to love God less, it is
an adulterous love and joy. We have no better rule to judge of adulterous
love, then this, when as our love to the Creature, does lessen our love to God.

Now, least we be deceived in our love to the Creature, I will give you these
Signs, to know Signs.
whether your love be right to it or no.

First, if your affection to the Creature cause you 1
to withdraw your hearts from God. Ier. 17. 5. Cursed be the man which makes
flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. It is a sign we make
flesh our arm, when we withdraw our hearts from God, we make the Creatures
our aim, when they withdraw us from God. 1. Tim. 5. 5. She that is a widow
indeed trusts in God, and continues in supplications night and day, this is
a Sign that they trust in God because they pray unto him. Consider what your
conversation is, whether it be in heaven or no, Phil. 3. 20. Our conversation
is in Heaven. The neglecting and not minding earthly things, in the former
verse shows him not to be of an earthly conversation, the more our hearts
are drawn from God, the more are they set and fixed on earthly things.

Secondly, consider what earthly choice you 2 Sign.
make, when as these things come in competition with God, and Spiritual
things, what bills of exchange do you make, do you make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, not caring for the things of this World, when they come in
competition with a good conscience, or do you forsake God, and stick to them?

Thirdly, consider what your obedience is to God, 3 Sign.
whether his fear be always before your eyes, or whether Riches set you on
work or no: what man's obedience is, such is his trust, if ye obey God, then ye
trust in him, and if ye obey Riches, then ye trust in them, and not in God.

Fourthly, consider what your affections are, nothing troubles an holy man, but
Sin, the which makes 4 Figure.
him seek help at Gods hands, and not in these. On the contrary, nothing
troubles a worldly man, but losses and crosses, Sin troubles him not at all,
by this judge of your love to Riches, whether it be right or no.

Thus much for the first general Doctrine.

We come now to the second, which is this.

That Covetousness is to be Mortified, That Covetousness is unlawful, all
know it, the things therefore Doct.
that will be useful in the handling of this point, will 2
be to show you what Covetousness is, and why it is to be Mortified.

Now to show you what it is.

Covetousness may be defined to be a sinful desire of getting, or keeping
money, or wealth inordinately.

First, it is a sinful desire, because it is a lust, as lusting after
pleasure, is called Voluptuousness; It is also inordinate, the principle being
amiss, and likewise the object. The principle is amiss, when we overvalue
riches, set a greater beauty on them then they have, and seeing them with a
wrong eye, we lust after them, by reason that we overvalue them, and thus to
overvalue them, is to lust after them, and to think that they can make us
happy, is Idolatry. The object of it is as bad as the principle, when as
the end is either to raise us to a higher condition, or to fare deliciously
every day, or else to spend them on some Lust, as well as to keep them.

Secondly, it is of keeping, or getting money, getting it inordinately, seeking
it by wrong means, or 2
of keeping it, First in not bestowing of it on our selves as we ought, there
is Tenacitie of this sort amongst men. Eecle. 5. 15 There is a sore evil under
the Sun, namely, Riches kept by the owners thereof, to their hurt, when as it
is comely for a man to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his
labors that he has taken under the Sun, all the days of his life which
God gives him, for this is his portion, and thus to rejoice in his labor, is
the gift of God. Eccl. 5. 18. 19.

Secondly, thou in not giving to others, art too strait handed, having goods
and seeing others to want.

The last and chief thing in the definition is, inordinately, that is, which
is besides the rule. A thing 3
is said to be inordinate, when as it is besides the square that a man does,
and in doing thus, we do amiss.

Now this affection is said to be inordinate in these four respects.

First, when we seek it by measure more then we should. 1


Secondly, when we seek it by means that we should not. 2


Thirdly, when we seek it for wrong ends. 3


Fourthly, when we seek it in a wrong manner. 4


For the first, we offend in the measure, when as we seek for more then God
gives us; that which God 1
gives every man, that is his portion here, Eccle 5. 18. and he that desires,
and withholdeth more then his portion, is he that offends in the measure.
Pro. 11. 24.

But how shall I know Gods will, and what my Ob.
portion is.

I answer by the event, See in what estate and condition Ans.
God has set you; See what estate he has given you, that is your portion, and
with it you must be content, God has a Soveraigntie over us, we are but his
subjects, and must be contented with what he gives us, you are contented with
that your fathers or your Prince gives you, therefore you must receive that
which God bestows on you, with all humility, and thankfulness; If we be
soundly humbled, we will confess our selves worthy to be destroyed, Eze. 36.
32. we will confess with Jacob. Genesis 32. 10. That we are unworthy of the least
of Gods mercies, that the least portion is more then we deserve. The Prodigal
being humbled, was content with the least place in his fathers house, to be as
one of his household servants, and so we ought to be content with that
portion which God has given us, be it never so small, because it is more then
we deserve, and if we desire and seek for more, this desire is Sinful.

Secondly, as we ought not to seek wealth, more then is our due. So we ought
not to seek it by unlawful 2
means, not by Usury, Gaming, Oppression, Fraud, Deceit, or any other
unlawful means. I add this of Gaming, because it is unlawful, though it be
little considered, for it is no means that God has appointed, or sanctified
to get money by, because it is neigher a gift, nor a bargain; I dispute not
now whether playing for triflles to put life into the Game be lawful, but of
gaming with an intent to get and gain money or wealth. This I say is unlawful
means, and such as have gotten money by such means, are bound to make
restitution.

Thirdly, when the end of our seeking after money is wrong, then our affection
is Sinful, as if we seek 3
it only for it self, that we may be rich, or to bestow it on our lusts, and
make it our ends, and not for necessaries only, and so much as shall serve our
turns, when we seek it thus, we seek it in excess; He that desires
money for a journey, desires no more then will serve to defraie his costs, and
expenses in his journey; So if a man desires money for any other end, he
desires so much as will serve for that purpose and no more; So in other things:
He that is sick, desires so much Physic as will cure him, and no more. So
we ought to desire as much as will serve our necessities, and no more. Bt if
we desire it for our ambition, pleasure, or any other by respect, this desire
is Sinn^full and inordinate.

Lastly, it is inordinate, when we seek in a vvrong manner, which consistes
in these five particulars. 4


First, when we seek it out of love unto it, and 1
and this manner of seeking it is spiritual adultery, James 4, 4. Ye
adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is
enmity with God, and whosoever is a friend to the world, is an enemy to
God; If we be in love with it for its own beauty, it is Sinful, it is
spiritual adultery.

Secondly, when as we seek it to trust in it, when 2
as we think we shall be the safer by it, and make it our strong Tower, Yet
he that trusts in riches shall fall, Pro. 11. 28. And therefore if we have
food and raiment, we ought therewith to be content, 1. Tim. 6. 8. and not to
trust in uncertain riches.

Thirdly, when as we be high minded, and think our selves to be the better men
for it, when as they 3
make us look bigger then we did before, as commonly those that be rich do;
Therefore 1. Tim. 6. 17. Paul bids Timothy charge those that are rich in this
world, that they be not high minded.

Fourthly, when as we seek it to glory in it, as 4
David, he would number the people to glory and trust in them; this is
sinful, for he that glories, must glory in the Lord, and not in them, 1.
Cor. 1. 31.

When as we seek it with too much have and eagernesle, when as all our days
are sorrows, travail, and grief, that our hearts take no rest in the night,
Eccle. 2. 23. When as we seek it, not staying Gods leisure, such a desire is
inordinate, importunate, and sinful, 1. Tim. 6. 9. 10. Those that will be
rich, that is, such as make too much have to be rich, fall into temp^ation, and
a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which draw men into
perdition and destruction, and pierce them through with many sorrows.

But now you will say, that riches are the blessing of God, and will demand of
me whether we may not desire riches as they are blessings.

I answer, that it is true, that they are blessings, and reward of the fear
of God, Pro. 22. 4. By humillity and the fear of the Lord, are riches and
honor. Therefore it is said of David, that he died full of riches. Abraham's
servants reckoned them as blessings, Genesis 24. 35. The Lord has blessed my
Master greatly, and he is become great, and he has given him flocks and
herds, silver and gold, men servants and maid servants, Cammels, and Asses.
Jacob counts them as blessings, Genesis 32. 10. And Christ himself says, that it
is more blessed to lend then to borrowe, to give then to receive, may we not
then desire them? To answer this, we must know that there is a twofold will
or desire; First, a remiss will, which is rather an inclination then a will:
secondly, there is a peremptory will, which is mature ripe and peremptory; with
this latter will we may not desire them, but with the former we may, 1. Tim.
6. 8. If we have food and raiment, Let us be therewith content; If any man
has a desire to be rich, yet having food and raiment, Let him not so desire
more riches, but that he may be content with it.

Now there is a double content, The first is, as 1
when a man is sick (to express it by a similitude) he must be content, yet
he may pray for health, and use means to get it with a full and perfect will,
yet with a depending on Gods will. So we being in want, may desire riches and
wealth with a full will, sitting in the mean time quietly under Gods hand, and
referring and submitting our will to his will.

Secondly, there is a content, wherein having sufficient for food and raiment,
we suffer not our 2
wills to go actually beyond the limits which God has set us; Therefore God
has promised outward blessings as a reward of his service, and propounds
them as so many arguments and motives to stir us up to fear him, and we may
desire them as his blessings, with such a desire as this, when as we set
bounds and limits to the Sea of our desires, which are in themselves turbulent,
and to submit them wholly to Gods will. Christ being to die, had a will to
live, yet not a full and resolute will, but a will subordinate to Gods will,
Father if thou will, let this cup pass from me, yet not my will, but thy will
be done. This will was but an inclination, and not a will; So we may will
riches with a remiss will and inclination, but not with a full perfect will,
that is, we may not go about to get them, with a full desire and resolution.

But how far may a man desire wealth, where Ob.
must he set limits to his desires, where must they be restrained?

I answer, that he may desire food and raiment, Ans.
he may desire that which is necessary for nature, without which he cannot
live and subsist; As a man may desire a ship to pass over the Sea from one
Country to another, because he cannot pass over without it; so a man may
desire food and raiment in the Sea of this life, because without it we cannot
finish that course which God has prescribed unto us.

Now there is a threefold necessity.

First, there is a necessity of expedience, as if a 1
man has a journey to go, It Is true he may go on foot, yet he may desire
an horse to ride, because it will be more expedient for him; so you may desire
with a remiss desire, so much as is expedient for your vocation and calling.

Secondly, there is a necessity in respect of your 2
condition and place, as men in higher rank and calling need more then men of
an inferior degree, to maintain their place and dignity; so they may desire
to have more then they, so as they desire no more then will be sufficient to
maintain them in that rank and degree wherein they are placed.

Thirdly, there is a necessity of refreshment, and you may desire as much as is
needful for your necessary 3
refreshment, as much as hospitality requires, so that you do not go beyond
it. And in these three respects, you may desire God to give you as much as
shall be expedient for you, because it is no more then nature requires.

Now besides this desire of things necessary, there is a desire of superfluity
and excess; this desire proceeds not from nature, but from lust, because that
we defire such wealth and to raise our estates, that we may bestow it on our
lusts. The end of this desire, is only to satisfy our lusts and pleasure,
that like the rich glutton, Luke 16. We might be well clad, and fare
deliciously every day. Many men's lives are nothing but playing and eating, and
eating and playing, and are led always in this circle.

To desire wealth to this or any other superfluous end, is very sinful, and it
must needs be so for these reasons.

First, because man's life stands not in abundance 1
of excess. Therefore in Luke 12. 13. 14. 15. When as a certain man spoke to
Christ to speak to his Reason.
brother to divide the inheritance with him, He said unto him, Man who made me
a Judge or a divider over you, and then bad the company beware of
Covetousness, because that a man's life consists not in the abundance of the
things that he possesses; That is, though you have never so much wealth, yet
ye shall not live the longer for it. Your life consists not in it, no more
does you^ comfort, for they will but please the sight of your eyes, they will
not make you more happy then you are; Seek not therefore superfluity, for your
life consists not in abundance. He is but a fool that thinks that these
things will make him happy, that these will make him rich, all that are not
rich in God, are poor, and if they think themselves happy and rich in these
things, they are but fools.

Secondly, the desire of superfluity is sinful, because Reason?
it proceeds from an evil root, but this desire proceeds from an evil
root and a bitter, that is, from lust. It comes not from Gods Spirit, which
bids every man to be contented with food and raiment, nor yet from nature which
seeks not superfluities, therefore proceeding from lust, it must needs be
sinful,

Thirdly, what you may not pray for, that you 3
may not desire nor seek after; But we may not pray for superfluities, Pro.
30. 8. Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for
me, not wi^h superfluities, etc. And in the Lords prayer we are taught not to
pray for superfluities, Give us this day our daily bread, that is as much as is
necessary for us and no more, therefore we may not desire it. The seeking of
more then is necessary, does hinder us, as a show that is too big, is as
unfit to travail as well as one that is too little.

Fourthly, it is dangerous, for it does choke the word, and drown men in
perdition; Therefore it is 4
Agurs prayer. Pro. 30. 8. 9. Give me neither poverty nor Riches, feed me
with food convenient for me, least I be full and deny thee, and say, who is
the Lord. Fullness and excess is always dangerous, Full tables do cause
surfets, full cups make a strong brain giddie: The strongest Saints have been
shaken with prosperity and excess, as David, Ezcchias, Solomon, they sinned
by reason of excess in outward things, It is dangerous to be rich. Therefore
it is David's counsel, Psalm 62. 10. Ifriches increase, set not your hearts
upon them; A rich man cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven, it is easier
for a Cammell to go through the eye of a needle, then for him to enter into
heaven. For if a man be Rich, it is a thousand to one but that he trusts in
his riches, and it is impossible that he who trusts in his riches, shall
enter into heaven.

Lastly, to desire superfluity, must needs be sinful, because that we
have an express command 5
to the contrary, 1. Tim. 8. If we have food and raiment, let us therewith
be content; this is the bounds which God has set us, we must not go beyond
it.

If that it were lawful for any man to have and to desire abundance, then it
were lawful for Kings, yet God has set limits to them, Deuteronomy. 17. 17 He shall
not multiply horses, nor wives to himself, that his heart turn not away,
neither shall he greatly multiply to himself, silver and gold, that his
heart be not lifted up above his brethren. God has set us down limits and
bounds, how far we shall go, therefore to pass beyond them is sinful,
but we pass beyond them when we desire superfluities, therefore the desire of
superfluity is sinful.

But may not a man use his calling to increase his Quaest.
Wealth.

I answer, that the end of men's callings, are not to gather riches, if men make
this their end, it is a wrong Ans.
end, but the end of our calling is to serve God and men, the ground hereof is
this. Every man is a member of the common Wealth; every man has some gifts or
other, which may not lie idle, every man has some Talents, and must use them
to his masters advantage, and how can that be, except ye do good to men: Every
one is a servant to Christ, and must do Gods work, no man is free, every one
is Christ's servant, and must be diligent to serve Christ, and to do good to
men. He that has an office, must be diligent and attend it, every man must
attend his calling, and be diligent in it.

If riches come in by your callings, that is, the wages, not the end of our
callings; for that looks only to God, we must not make gain the end of our
callings: There are many that make gain their godliness, and the end of their
callings, Some preach only for gain, others use other callings only for
gain, but if any man will makegaine the end of his calling, though he may
conceal and hide his end from men, yet let him be sure, that he shall
answer God, the searcher of the heart for it. On the other side, if a man by
diligence in his calling have riches following him, he may take them as a
blessing of God bestowed on him, and as a reward for his calling. The diligent
hand makes rich. God will so reward it, not that we must eye riches, and make
them our end. God makes a man rich, and man makes himself rich. God makes us
rich by being diligent in our callings, and using them to h^s glory and man's
good; he does cast riches on us: man makes himself rich, when he makes riches
the end of his calling, and does not expect them as a reward that comes from
God. I express it by Jacob; Jacob, he s^rved Laban faithfully, and God blessed
him, so that he did grow rich, he went not out of his compass and Sphere, he
took the wages that was given, and because that Gods end was to make him rich,
God enriched him by his wages, as a reward of his service. The more diligent a
man is in his calling, the more sincere and upright, the more does God bless
him, and increase his riches; God makes men rich, when he gives them riches
without sorrows and troubles, when as they come in with ease, and without
expectation and disquiet. Man makes himself rich, when as there is great
troble in getting, keeping, and enjoying them, when as he uses his calling to
get riches, or when as he uses unlawful means. The method God uses to enrich
men is this; He first bids them Seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and then all these things shall be administered unto
them as wages: We must look to our duty, and let God alone to provide, and pay
us our wages.

He that takes a servant, bids him only look to his duty, and let him alone to
provide him meat, drink, and wages, we are servants, God is our Master, let us
look to our duty, and leave the wages to him.

But whether may not a man take care to get wealth, Quest.
is not a man to care for his estate, to increase it, and to settle it?

I answer, he may lawfully take care of it, observing Ans.
the right Rules in doing it, which are these.

First, he mu^t not go out of his compass, but walk Rule. 1
within his own pale, he must not step out of his own calling into other men's,
and in his own calling he must not trouble himself with so much business,
as that he cannot attend, or that may hinder him in his private service unto
God: If he do fill himself with too much business in his own calling, or
step into others callings, this is sinful and inordinate: If a man in his
own calling fill himself with so much business, that he cannot attend the
things of salvation, that he is so much tired with them, that he has no
leisure, or spare time to search his own heart, and to do the particular
duties necessary to salvation, he then fails in this, and sins in his
calling.

Secondly, his end must not be amiss, he must not Rule, 2
aim at riches, Abraham was poor, and so was Jacob, yet God made them rich
and mighty, they were diligent in their callings, and God brought in wealth;
God calls not a man to trust in himself, to make riches his aim and end, to
seek excess, superfluity and abundance, to live deliciously, to satisfy our
lusts and pleasures, our aim must be Gods glory, and the public good, and
then God will cast riches upon us as our wages.

Thirdly, let it be a right care, and not an inordinate Rule, 3.
care, there is an inordinate care which checks the word, you may know whether
your care be such an immoderate care or no by these three signs.

First, if you be troubled in the business you go about, consisting either in
desire, fear, or grief, Sign 1.
when as we either desire such a blessing exceedingly, or fear that we shall
not have it, or greeve much for the loss of it.

Secondly, when we fear we shall not bring our Sign 2.
enterprise to pass, or attain to that which we desire.

When we are troubled at it, if it be not accomplished, and greeve when we
foresee any thing that Sign 3.
may prevent it, care being aright, sets head and hand on work; but when the
affections are just and right, there is no tumult or turbulencie in them.

When is a man covetous? Quest.


I answer, that then a man is a covetous man, when Ans.
as he has desires arising in him, which are contrary on the former rules, and
he resists them not, or else resists them so weakly and feebly, that he gets
no ground of them; He sees no reason why he should resist them, and therefore
gives way unto them. A man is not a covetous man, nor an ambitious man which
has covetous and ambitious thoughts, for these the holiest men have, but he
that has such thoughts, and strives not at all against them, or else strives
but weakly, he is a covetous and ambitious man. A godly man may have these
thoughts and desires, but he strives strongly against them, gets ground of
them, and gives them a deaths wound, but the covetous man he yields unto
them, the godly man he gets the victory over them.

Now this covetousness is evil in it self; for first of all, it is Idolatry
and spiritual Adultery, and then it is an evil and bitter root, having many
stalks on it; he that does do any thing to hold correspondencie with it, he
that does belong unto it, to him it is the root of all evil, Luke 16. It
keeps men from salvation, It chokes the good seeds sown in men's hearts.
Secondly, it must be mortified, for the vanity of the object is not worth the
seeking, therefore in the 16 Luke 9. It is set down in a comparison with the
true treasure, and expressed in these four circumstances.

First, it is called the Mammon of unrighteousness Circum. 1.
and wicked riches; because it makes men wicked, opposed to spiritual
blessings which are the best.

Secondly, it is least, because it does least good, Circum. 2.
it preserves us not from evil, it does the Soul no good.

Thirdly, it is but false Treasure, it has but the shadow of the true, it
shines as if it were true, but Circum. 3.
yet it is but false and counterfeit.

Lastly, it is not our own, it is another man's, riches are the goods of others
not our own, Luke 16. 12. Circum. 4.
and 10. 41. 42.

There are four attributes given to riches. First, 1
they are many things, and require much labor, Martha was troubled about many
things.

Secondly, they are unnecessary, one thing is necessary. 2
Thirdly, They will be taken from us; Fourthly, 3
they are not the best, and therefore our desire after 4
them should be mortified.

From hence be ye exhorted to mortify this Use.
earthly member, covetousness, which is Idolatry, a sin unto which all men
are subject: young men though they want experience of riches, are
notwithstanding subject to this vice; but old men are most subject unto it,
though they have least cause and reason for it. Professors of religion are
subject to it, many times it grows up with the Corn and chokes it, therefore
use effectual means to root it out of your hearts.

First of all, pray to GOD not to incline your hearts to covetousness, it is
impossible for man, but Means 1.
easy for God to do it.

Secondly, be humbled for Sin, we are so covetous Means 2.
and desirous for money, because we were never humbled for Sin so much as we
should be, and this is the reason why many would rather let Christ go then
their wealth and riches.

Thirdly, use them to better purpose then heretofore ye have done, make
friends with them, and Means 3.
find some better thing to set your hearts upon. Except you have a better
Treasure, you will not vilify and depart with these; Labor therefore for true
Godliness with content, which is great gains, 1. Timoth. 6. 6. which heales
this malady, and takes away the false pretenses of gathering, having, and
affecting great riches.

FINIS.

