THE DOCTRINE OF SVPERIOritie, and of Subjection, contained in the fifth
Commandment of the holy Law of Almighty God.

WHICH IS THE FOVNdamentall ground, both of all Christian Subjection: and also
of like Christian Government, as well in Church, and Commonwealth, as in every
School and private Family.

A PRETIOVS MEMORIAL OF the substance of many godly Sermons, preached by the
learned and faithful servant of God, Ma. ROBERT PRICK, Minister of the word,
at Denham in Suffolk.

The memorial of the righteous shall be blessed. Prou. 10.7. Though he fall, he
shall not be cast off, for the Lord puts under his hand. Psalm. 37.37.24.
LONDON, Printed for Ephraim Dawson, and Thomas Dow^e, and are to be sold at
their shop in Fleete-streete, at the Inner Temple gate. 1609.

THE INSCRIPTION DEDICATORIE.
To the right worshipful S. Ed. Lewkenor knights. S. To. Lewkenor knights. S.
To. Quarles, knights.
And to the worshipful Gentlem. M. Rodes, And the posterity of them all. M.
Gourny, And the posterity of them all. M. Caestill, And the posterity of them
all. M. Steward And the posterity of them all.

ANd to the people of the Church of God in Denham. For a memorial of the
piety and love of Master Robert Prick, their very faithful and dear
Pastor, a most careful and vigilant Watchman over their souls: and for a
remembrance of the holy instructions which he gave them, while be executed his
holy Ministry among them: Robert Allen, their hearty welwiller, and a
bounde^ friend unto them all, has (according to the mind and will of the same
their late deceased good Pastor, by the best diligence and means, and with the
best speed he could attain unto) dedicated this small portion of his many and
great labors, to them, and to the neighbor Churches of God, both Ministers
and People, to their benefit, but chiefly to the honor and praise of God in
Christ Jesus: craving to that end, the most gracious blessing of his holy
spirit upon the same.

Amen. Yours in the Lord: R. A.

TO THE CHRISTIan and wel-disposed Reader, S. Egerton wishes grace, mercy,
and peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
THe variety and vanity of idle Phamphlettes, which the love of gain or
glory, for the most part begets, and the Press daily brings forth in our
English tongue: made me the more willing to further the printing of this
explanation of the fifth Commandment. For though the most part delight to read
the unsavory inventions of men's brains, and that such also as desire to read
good books, have such plenty before them, that they are doubtful, for want
of good direction, which they should pitch upon: yet I thought with my self,
that the rare and singular piety of this Author, a holy man, and most faithful
Minister, powerful in prayer, and diligent in preaching to his flock many
years together, with the perspicuitie of the order, and the choisnesse of the
matter, might the rather by my testimony, stir up the minds of Godly
Christians, to read this Treatise, though being otherwise streighted of time,
or distracted in their choice, they might perhaps neglect the reading of so
fruitful a Treatise upon this Commandment, as has not hitherto (so far as
I can learn) been printed and published in our mother tongue.

Sundry learned and godly men have labored very fruitfully, in opening the
sense, and laying forth the duties of every Commandment, and more
particularly of the 4. wherein the practice both of the duties of Piety, set
down in the first Table, and of the duties of Mercy* set down in the second
Table, is required at our hands, to be performed upon a set day, and in a more
solemn and serious manner: but none to my knowledge, has published any
several Treatise upon the fifth Commandment, which being truly understood,
unfeignedly believed, and faithfully practiced, will direct a christian in a holy
practice of all the duties of Mercy and Love, which he is to perform, either
to himself or to any other. For whosoever does walk carefully in the
obedience of this Commandment, maintaining that honor which is due to
himself, and every other man, in respect of their different and several
years, gifts, and qualities, callings and degrees, in the family, Church, and
Commonwealth: he cannot easily be carried to exercise any cruelty against
himself, or any other contrary to the sixth Commandment: or to defile either
his own body, or his neighbors, against the seventh Commandment: or to
deal unjustly, or unfaithfully about his own, or other men's goods, credit,
and reputation, contrary to the eight and ninth Commandments: yea, or to give
place to the least spice of repining, coffeehouse, or wandering motion,
forbidden in the last Commandment of the law of God.

There was never any disorder and outrage, in any family, Church, or
Commonwealth, from the beginning of the world to this day, neither can be: but
it proceeded from the breach of the 5. Commandment. For how is it possible
that there should be any disorder in the family, if the wife honor her husband
as she ought, and he her? if children give due honor to their parents, and
they also deal honorably with them? if servants do honor their Masters as
they ought, and they their servants? and if children and servants do mutually
respect and honor one the other as becomes them?

Could any trouble and confusion arise in Churches and congregations, if the
people would remember such as have the oversight of them, and do declare unto
them the word of God, and in giving honor unto them would submit themselves,
because they watch for their souls, for which they must give an account before
the chief Shepherd? And on the other side, if the Pastors and Elders would
feed the flock of God which depends upon them, caring for it not by
constraint but willingly? etc.

Is it possible, that ever any treason, sedition or disloyalty could break
forth in cities or kingdoms, if people would honor their Princes, and every
soul be subject to the higher powers, being obedient and ready to every good
work? and if Magistrates in their places would govern their Subjects as dear
children?

Finally, if every one that is an inferior any manner of way, would carry
the affection of a dutiful child to his Superior: and every Superior, the
affection of a wise and tender Parent to his inferior, according to the plain
scope, and maine drift of this commandment?

But what should I need to demonstrate the truth of this point in many
particulars? Search the Scriptures, turn over al humane stories, call to mind
what thou have seen and observed in thine own time, in the family,
congregation, or any corporatio^ whereof thou art or have been a member: and
thou shall evidently perceive that the troubles and offenses which have broken
out in them, have always proceeded and sprung from this bitter root, I mean
from the disobedience and breach of the 5. Commandment. In which respect it is
said, that this is the only commandment of all the ten, that has a
peculiar promise of a long and comfortable life, yea, and the only
Commandment of all the six of the second Table, that has any promise at all
annexed unto it.

O therefore, that there were in men, professing that they will hear and do
the will of God, the like heart to fear him, and to keep all (and among all of
the second Table, specially this his commandment) always, that it might go
well with them, and with their children for ever.

But to conclude, seeing God by his good providence has stirred up this
vigilant Pastor and holy man of God, while he yet lived, to take such pains in
writing this Explanation which he had often gone over in his public
Ministry: neglect not, I pray thee, the reading of such a sound and fruitful
Treatise, which will teach thee to retain and increase thine own honor and
dignity, and to give to every sex, age, calling and condition of men, the
honor and dignity which is due to them.

Now, the Lord give a gracious blessing hereunto, and to all other thy holy
exercises, and meditations: even for his only begotten Sons sake Christ
Jesus, our only Mediator and Advocate, who together with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be blessed and praised for evermore.

S. Egerton.

THE DOCTRINE of Superiority and Subjection: contained in the fifth
Commandment of Almighty God.
WE have by the grace of God passed through the first Table of the
Commandments of God, and now are we come to the second Table.

Q. What special difference do you see between the one and the other?

The special difference between the two Tables of the law of God.
Answ. In the first Table, the Lord as a most wise and holy Householder, and
Lord of his Church, does first of all provide for all duties concerning
himself.

Who are to be accounted Superiors.
In the second, he does prescribe what duties his people are to perform one
toward another: Wherein appears his singular wisdom and goodness, in that
he is not content alone to have a care of his own glory: but also takes
order for the welfare and good estate of his people.

Q. How many sorts of duties are contained in the second Table?

Two sorts of duties contained in the 2. Table of the law of God.
A. Two: Namely, special duties, pertaining to some special persons; And
general, which all men in general are to perform one toward another.

Q. Where are the special duties contained?

A. In the fifth Commandment.

Q. What are the words?

A. Honor thy father and thy mother, that they may prolong thy days in the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee. Two things to be observed in the 5.
commandment.


Q. How many things do you observe therein?

A. Two. 1. The Precept.
First of all, the precept it self. Who are to be accounted Superiors.


2. A reason. Two things show the dignity of this commandment.
Secondly, A reason adjoined to persuade to the practice thereof.

Q. Why is this Commandment placed foremost in the second Table, and has a
promise, which the rest of the Commandments contained therein have not? 1.
Because it has the first place in the 2. Table.


A. To show the excellency and necessity thereof.

Q. By what reasons may we further be persuaded of this? 2. Because it has a
promise annexed unto it.


A. First of all, it does in certain infe riour persons, train men up as it
were in a certain inferior School, The dignity of the 5. commandment, may
be further discerned by 3. reasons. The first reason.
to rise up to the knowledge of the sovereign Lord, and to give unto him the
reverence and honor due to his divine Majesty.

Secondly, it vpholdeth, and continues all those estates, degrees, and orders,
whereby the society, The second reason.
or fellowship of man, is as it were, by certain joints and sinews, joined
and knit together, and without which it would by a certain pernicious
confusion, be clean dissolved, and utterly perish.

Who are to be accounted Superiors.
Thirdly, if the duties of this Commandment be not performed, the general
duties of the other Commandments must needs fail: The third reason.
For he that will not perform a duty toward him to whom he is bound by a
cartaine straight, and peculiar band: much less will he perform duties to
them that are further removed.

Q In what words is the Precept contained?

The words of the precept.
A. In these: Honor thy Father, and thy Mother.

Q. How many things are we to note herein? Two things to be noted in the
precept. 1. Person. 2. Things due unto them.



A. Two: First of all, certain persons: Secondly, the thing due to those
persons.

Q. Which are the persons?

A. Father and Mother.

Al superiors are comprehended under the titles of Father and Mother. 1.
Natural parents.
Q. What mean you by Father and Mother?

A. They are to speak properly, only those which God in his singular wisdom
does use as instruments and means to give men life and being in this world:
Who are to be accounted Superiors.
for who is so ignorant which knows not that the Father begets, and the
Mother conceiueth, and brings forth?

Q. Why are these two joined together, in regard of honor and duty?

The mother is copertner with the father, in honor, for two causes.
A. First, because they meet together in the work of procreation.

Secondly, to prevent and meet with the corruption and partiality of
children, who otherwise would either contemn the Mother, and yield all honor
and duty to the Father, by reason of his principality: or else because the
Mother does bear them, nourish them, and is most te^derly affected toward
them, would be wholly addicted unto her, excluding and making no account of the
Father.

Q. How may it appear that this is the reason?

A. By many clear places of the word, as, Leuit. 19.3. Prou. 13.12. and chap.
10. verse. 1. Ephesians. 6.1, 2. Col. 3.10.

Q. Are no other persons contained under these?

A. Yes, all such as are in stead of Parents, not only in regard of
superiority, but also for that they are to provide for the good, and benefit
of their inferiors, both in soul and body. For so wise and merciful is the
Lord, that are he has appointed natural Parents to begette and bring forth
children, and thereby to give them simply a being in this life: so has he
ordained other persons (as it were Parents) to tender and give them a well and
happy being. 2. Kings and all civil magistrates under them.


Q. Who are those persons which you mean? 3. Ministers of the word.


A. Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, Ministers of the word of GOD, 4.
Householders.
Householders, Schoole-maisters, and Teachers. 5. Schoole-maisters.


6. They that excel in any virtue.
Those that are endued with any excellent grace and gift above others.

7. They that exceed other in age.
Lastly, the aged and gray headed.

Q. How can you prove that these are contained under the titles of Parents?
That all Superiors are to be comprehended under the title of Father and mother,
it is proved by 3. reasons. The first reason. The second reason. The third
reason.


A. First, for that as in all the rest of the Commandments under one
general, are contained all special things of the same nature, so it is in
this Commandment.

Secondly, if these persons be not here understood, they are contained
properly in no Commandment: which were a great defect and disgrace to the
perfection of the Law.

Thirdly, these persons are termed by the name of Father, and Mother, in
diverse places of the holy Scripture: as Kings, Queens, and Magistrates, are
called by the name of Nursing Fathers, and Nurses. Isai. Chap. 49. ver. 23. In
regard hereof, some of the Heathen called their Kings Abimelech, which
signifies, My Father the King.

Ministers of the word of God, are called by the name of Fathers. 2. Cor. Chap.
4. ver. 15.2. King: Why Superiors are called Father and Mother.
Chap. 13. ver. 14.

Masters are so called. 2. King. 5.15 and Chap. 2. ver. 12.

Q. Why is the name of Father and Mother given to Superiors?

The titles of Father and Mother are given to all Superiors, to allure all
inferiors to give al meet and convenient honor unto them.
A. To draw and allure men to the willing obedience and practice of this
Commandment: and that not without cause. For first, as we are untoward by
nature to the practice of any Commandment, so especially of this; because it
so greatly imports the glory of God, and the benefit of man.

Again, the crooked heart of man will hardly stoop unto superiority.

First, by reason of a certain natural pride whereby all men do desire to be
aloft and under none other. Or the which also there are many causes.


Secondly, for that Superiors in this corrupt and miserable world do oftentimes
abuse their authority to the hurt of others: therefore to subdue men to the
ordinance of God, he has set upon all Superiors the sweet and amiable name of
Father and Mother. Honor is due to al Superiors, and the reasons why it is so.


Q. We have spoken of the Persons the first thing noted in the Precept: what is
the thing due to those Persons?

What is meant by Honor in the general signification of it.
A. Honor. Under which are contained all means and effects whereby the
pre-eminence of the Superiors is acknowledged, vpheld, and graced:

Q. What reason or equity is there that this should be yielded unto Superiors?

Honor is due to al Superiors for 2. reasons.
A. First of all, for that many, and the same very excellent benefits and
commodities, do flow and proceed from them, as from some plentiful fountain,
unto their inferiors.

Secondly, the Lord has set and as it were engraven upon them, lively marks
and resemblances of his own Majesty.

Q. How is that?

An illustration of the 2. reasons. Kings and Inferior Magistrates.
A. In Kings, Princes and Magistrates, appears not only the greatness and
sovereign authority of God, but also that he is the high and supreme Judge
of the world.

Ministers of the word.
In Ministers of the word, is shadowed out, that God is the original teacher
and instructor of his Church.

In Householders, that he is the great Lord and Master that provides for the
welfare and benefit of all creatures. Householders.


In Husbands, Husbands.
that he has joined to himself, and as it were married in a special covenant
of mercy and compassion, all the faithful and elect ones; so that he is the
head and husband of his people.

In those that are able to instruct others in Arts, Artizans.
Learning and Sciences, it is evident that God is the fountain, not only of
wisdom, but also of every other excellent and necessary grace.

Aged persons: all resemble the divine Majesty of God.
In the Aged and Gray Headed, we may descrie the eternity of God, whereby we
may gather, that Superiors by certain sparks of glory which they have
received from the Lord, do shine as it were bright stars, in the midst of
mankind.

Q. What is the effect thereof?

A. That inferiors do depend upon them, as upon those that are to guide them,
and to provide for their welfare. By which means the society of man is vpheld
in a comely and profitable order.

Q. Let us now come from the words of the Precept to the general reason, which
is annexed to it, to persuade to the performance and practice of all the duties
contained in the Precept: what are the words of the reason?

The Lord persuades to the obedience of this 5.
A. That they may prolong thy days in the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee.

Q. How can it be truly said, that Parents do prolong the life of the child,
Com. by the great benefit which comes by it.
seeing that life, much more long life, is the gift of God?

A. They may be said to prolong the obedient child his life three ways.
Parents prolong the lives of their children, 3. ways.


First of all, in bringing them up in piety and godliness, which has the
promises of this life and of the life to come.

Secondly, in praying for, and blessing, that is, wishing all good unto the
child that is dutiful unto them: according to the example of the ancient
Fathers and servants of God.

Thirdly, the Parents being decked, and as it were crowned with the dutifulnes
of a godly and holy child: they are occasions to move the Lord to remember the
child, and to bestow upon him the blessing promised in this fifth Commandment.

Q. It seems that the reason is not very strong and forcible, seeing it is
grounded upon the promise of a thing which seems every way so miserable. For
natural life it self; much more the continuance thereof, is fraught with
manifold miseries and calamities, Three reasons to prove long life to be a
singular great benefit.
and therefore it is doubtful whether it should be refused or desired?

What say you hereunto?

A. Long life (take it at the worst) is a singular treasure: for why? it is a
mean or occasion of many excellent blessings: The. 1. reason.
As first, men thereby do know, understand and enjoy the manifold works and
graces of God, to their great comfort and admiration, which they who do die
untimely do want.

Secondly, thereby they may in using good means, make themselves fit for
eternal life.

Lastly, The. 2. The. 3.
they may more plentifully serve and glorify God, in this long extent of time,
then they can which are cut off in their tender years: In regard whereof the
holy servants of God which otherwise feared not death, yet when death was
presented to them, they desired earnestly longer continuance of life: as we may
see in David Psalm. 6. Hezekiah. Isa. 38. And doubtless, as in every place of
the Scripture, long life is accounted a blessing: so short life a curse.

Q. Does God bestow this blessing upon all good and obedient children, simply
and without exception?

God does sometimes make short life a great blessing to obedient children.
A. No: he bestows it no further then may make for their good: for when he
sees that it may hurt them, he takes away some of them in their young years:
that is, when he knows that by their frailty and weakness they may be carried
away with the general corruption of the time wherein they live, or else will
show his tender love toward them in taking them up unto himself before evil
days do come. Examples hereof we have in the son of Ieroboham 1. Kings. 14.
In Josiah, Enoch, and such like.

Q. Is God then true in his word and Promise?

A. Yea no doubt, because God gives more then he promises: to wit, not only
an happy life for a miserable life, and eternal life, for a short and
uncertain life, but also takes away his children betimes that they may the
longer enjoy his presence.

Q But evil and disobedient children do enjoy long life as well as the
obedient?

Whenever God gives long life to wicked children (they so continuing without
repentance) it is a woeful curse and no blessing.
A. Seldom: and although they do, yet is their long life so replenished with
miseries, plagues, and the judgments of God, that it seems rather to be a
death drawn out at length, then long life here promised.

Q. What do you conclude from all this?

Two sorts of Superiors.
A. Two things. First of all, that undoubtedly all those that perform the
duties of this Commandment, shall have a long, and a blessed life, as is
proved and confirmed, both by the word of God: and continued experience of all
ages.

Secondly, that evil and disobedient children, shall either live a short life,
or in great misery here: and after in the extreme torments of helfire, with
the rebellious devils, and the damned reprobates.

Q. Thus having obened the meaning of the Commandment, and as it were laid
the ground, let us now come to the things that arise out of the same. What are
they?

A. They are all particular duties of Superiors to their inferiors, and of
inferiors to their Superiors.

Q. How many sorts are there of Superiors?

A. Two sorts: namely, public, and private.

Q. What mean you by public Superiors?

A. Such as have a more large and greater care and charge committed to them by
the Lord. Public Superiors.


Q. What by private Superiors?

A. Such whose care and charge is contained within narower and straighter
bounds. Private Superiors.


There are also two sorts of Public Superious.
Q. What say you of the first sort?

A. Some of them have respect and are especially occupied about the outward,
civil, 1. Civil Magistrates.
civil, and political estate of the Church: and these are, Kings, Princes,
and Magistrates.

Others do especially watch and have regard to the spiritual estate of men,
not so much procuring worldly peace and commodity, as the eternal salvation
and happiness of them who are committed to their charge: and these are Ministers
and Preachers of the word. 2. Ministers of the word.


Q. But because that Magistrates are in the highest degree of pre-eminence next
unto God, above all other persons; order requires that we first speak of them
and of the things perteining unto them: And are not all men to give diligent
care to the Doctrine concerning the Magistracy? It is a doctrine to be
diligently hearkened unto.


A. Yes no doubt, and first of all, The doctrine of Superiority is to be
diligently hearkened unto of all inferiors for three causes.
Magistrates themselves, that they may thereby learn what duties they are to
perform themselves: and to look for at the hands of others. But besides
these, inferiors have special cause to be acquainted with this kind of
doctrine.

The first cause.
First of all, to stir up their hearts, to be thankful to God, for that he
has so mercifully and graciously every way provided for their safety and
comfort by means of the sacred ordinance of Magistracy.

The second cause.
Secondly, that they may learn what just and great cause they have daily and
continually to pray unto God, for the good and prosperous estate of
Magistrates, as it is commanded, 1. Tim. 2.

The third cause.
Thirdly, to allure and persuade them to yield themselves in obedience, and to
perform all willing duties to their sovereign Governors and Superiors.

God is the author of al Magistracy.
Q. Let us then proceed to the Treatise it self, which is, to go forward in
this order.

It is proved two ways that God is the author of Magistracy.
A. First of all we will inquire who is the author and principal cause of
magistracy.

Secondly, what special qualities and graces, 1. By the law of Nature.
and gifts, are required in Magistrates themselves, and in such persons as do
belong to them.

2. By the word of God.
Thirdly, what duties they are to perfor me.

Q. Who is the undoubted Author and efficient cause of Magistracy?

A. No other but God himself, as may appear: It may three ways, as it were
by an increase of certain steps and degrees appear, that magistracy is
acknowledged to be of God, eue^ by the law and light of Nature.
First of all by the law of Nature, but more effectually and evidently by the
word of God.

Q. Make the first argument more clear and manifest?

A. There is no doubt but that God has planted naturally in the heart of man,
a certain sense and knowledge of Magistracy and the commondities thereof: as
may appear; First of all, in that there was never people or Nation so
barbarous and savage: The 1. way or mean, and step.
never assembly of men so void of the light and knowledge of God, which has
not only desired, but also set over them some Prince or Superior, to the end
that they might not only be governed and directed by him as their head, but
yield duty and homage to him. A matter clear by the experience of all times.

The 2. way, or mean, and step.
Again, the wise and best learned amongst the heathen, have expressly affirmed
in their writings, that kings, Princes and Magistrates, do proceed from God.

The 3. way or mean, and step.
Lastly, they do greatly commend magistracy, and do bewail and condemn the
state of them that are without that benefit: and in conclusion, some of them
have set down rules and orders for civil government.

The same is most surely and plentifully proved by holy Scriptures.
Q. What testimonies besides have you out of the Scripture to prove this point?

A. Very many both in the old and new Testament.

Q. What remember you out of the old Testament? 1. Of the old Testament.


Virtues required to be in a magistrate.
A. Pro. 8. v. 15.16. Job. 12. v. 18. Isai. 22. v. 20.21.22.23.24. Hos. 13. v.
11. Dan. 2. v. 37. and 47. chapter 5. v. 18.1 Sam. 10. v. 1. and 24. chapter 16 v. 1.
chapter 24. v. 7.

Q. What out of the new Testament?

2. Of the new Testament.
A. Ioh. 19 ve. 11. Romans 13. ver. 1.2. 1. Pet. 2. v. 13.14.

We are come now to the second thing to be considered in the Treatise of the
Magistracy.

Q. What properties or virtues are required in the person of the Magistrate?

The virtues necessary to be in a Magistrate, are many.
A. They are diverse and sundry: the first whereof is wisdom, and
understanding, as appears, Deuteronomy. 1.13. With this agrees, Psalm. 2. v. 10. Be
wise now therefore ye Kings, 1. Wisdom.
be learned ye Judges of the earth.

The reasons also why a Magistrate is to be wise are many.
Q. Why is this virtue required of Magistrates?

A. Because that it were an unworthy thing, that a body endued with light and
understanding (such as the Commonwealth is) should be ruled and guided by a
head, blind and void of right judgment and reason. And doubtless, without
this virtue, the Magistrate cannot possibly discern between good and evil,
right and wrong, lawful and unlawful. He can not understand the Positive
laws of his own Dominion; much less, the law of God, the true ground and
foundation of all good laws. He can not exhort and encourage his subjects to
that which is good, nor dissuade and dehort them from evil. Lastly, Solomon in
exceeding great wise ^n dome prayed most earnestly for wisdom, seeing God had
appointed him to be the governor of his people.
he can determine nothing according to equity. In regard whereof, Solomon asked
at the hands of GOD, above all things in the world, wisdom, and
understanding, whereby he might be enabled to go in and out before his
people: as appears, 2. King. 3.9. and the Lord granted his request: as
follows to the end of the Chapter.

The 2. virtue to be in a Magistrate is Courage.
Q. What is the second property required in the Magistrate? Exodus 1.8.21.

A. Courage: He must be a man of courage.

Q. How many things are contained under Courage?

A. Two things: namely, Strength, Vallure, Unto the courage of the mind is
required valor, and strength of the body, that the Magistrate may be the more
thoroughly courageous. The reasons why.
and good plight of body.

Secondly, Couragiousnesse, and boldness of heart.

Q. Why is this state of body required?

A. Because otherwise the Magistrate can never bear and go through the
labors and travails which belong unto his place.

The labors and duties which belong unto the Magistrate, are great and
manifold, 1. touching the body.
and therefore he had need to have a body fit and answerable thereunto. In
regard whereof, we read in many places of the word, that God did always give
to those whom he stirred up for the good of the Church, able bodies, and
endued with natural strength, force and lustiness, as appears in Moses,
Joshua, Caleb, Sampson, Samuel, and David.

Q. Why is Couragiousnes, and Boldness of mind required?

2 Touching the mind.
A. Because that without that virtue the Magistrate can take no great and
weighty thing in hand, much less continue therein, especially if it be
joined with danger: nay, he cannot constantly perform any duty, but through
fear and weakness of courage will be carried too and fro upon every
occasion: for which cause the Lord exhorts Joshua twice in the first chapter
of his Book to this virtue: and the people also do encourage him unto it. And
the like we may read in many places of the Scriptures, in regard of the
Magistrate.

The 3. virtue to be in a Magistrate, is the true fear of god The reason of it
Q. What is the third property or virtue?

A. The true fear of God.

Q. Is this necessary in a Magistrate?

A. Yea very necessary: for as it is the fountain and root of all good
things generally in all men: so in a Magistrate more specially, it does
restrain him from evil: and enforce and cause him to perform all duties. For
he that truly fears God, dares not but fly from the things that do
displease him, and practice the duties which he has commanded. So that this
excellent virtue, it is that which does season, and make good use of all
graces wherewith the Magistrate is endued. In regard hereof, Ichosaphat
exhorts Magistrates, and public persons to the fear of God. 2. Chron. 19.
Chapter, verse 7. and 9.

The 4. virtue to be in a Magistate, is, that he deal truly what it is to
deal truly.
Q. What fourthly is required?

A. Dealing truly.

Q. What mean you thereby?

A. Not only a certain truth and uprightness generally in words and
actions, but a faithful execution of Justice and Judgment to all sorts,
Estates and conditions of men, without partiality and respect of persons. This
virtue and uprightness is commanded by the Lord in diverse places. Leuit.
Chapter 19. verse 15. Deuteronomy. Chapter 1. verse 17. and Chapter 10. verse 17.
Prou. Chapter 18. verse 5.

Q. Why is this property required in the Magistrate?

The reason why this ve^tue is necessary.
A. Because that without it, common wealths must needs go to wrack and
confusion for want of equity and justice.

Q. What is the fifth property?

The 5. virtue to be in a Magistrate i^, that he hate covetousness.
A. The Magistrate must hate covetousness: that is, he must not only be void of
covetousness, but hate and detest it as a vice most abominable.

Q. Why so?

The reason of it.
A. Because if the Magistrate be covetous, he will receive bribes: bribes will
blind his judgment, and pervert his words and affections: whereupon will
follow, that men shall never receive right sentence and judgment according to
their present cause and desert: but oftentimes the innocent shall be punished, or
at the least not have their causes righted and relieved, and the wicked shall
escape scot-free: whereof must needs follow an horrible confusion. For which
cause, covetousness and receiving of bribes is severely forbidden in many places
of the word of God, as Exodus Chap. 13. ver. 8. Number. chap. 22. ver. 7.8. Deuteronomy.
chap. 16. ver. 19. Psalm. 15. ver. 5. Pro. chap. 15. ver. 27. and chap. 17. ver.
23.

Of this foul vice does Samuel purge himself. 1. Sam. chap. 12. ver. 3.
saying, Behold, here I am: bear record of me before the Lord, and before his
anointed. Whose ox have I taken? Or whose ass have I taken? Or whom have I
done wrong too? Or whom have I hurt? Or of whose hands have I received any
bribe? to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you.

Q What further is required of the Magistrate?

The 6 virtue to be in a Magistrate is, that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren. What it is to have the heart lifted up.
A. That his heart be not lifted up above his brethren: as appears, Deuteronomy.
Chap. 17. ver. 18. and 20. The meaning is, that the Magistrate (in what degree
soever) may not be proud and haughty, but behave himself in a lowly, sweet,
and loving manner toward his subjects, as a father toward his children.

Q. What should be the reason hereof, seeing they are advanced into so high a
place?

The virtues required to be in a Magistrate. The reasons of it.
A. First of all, if Magistrates be proud, they will easily degenerate into
cruelty and tyranny.

Secondly, their subjects being hindered through fear, will hardly without
great constraint, resort to them for justice, and make their cases known.

Thirdly, the cheerful countenance of a Magistrate, and his loving and kind
behavior, causes the subjects to love and reverence him. And there is no
doubt but that in the love and loyal affection of the subject, stands the
safety of the Magistrate. All this was not unknown to Absalom, and therefore
(being heir apparent as he thought) to allure and steal the hearts of his
fathers subjects to himself; he deals lovingly, courteously, The 7. virtue
required to be in a Magistrate, is, that he have care ^o give good example to
his Subjects.
and friendly to every one, as appears, 2. Sam. chap. 15. ver. 5.

Q. What is lastly required in the person of the Magistrate?

A. That in his whole behavior he give a good example to his subjects.

Q. Is this necessary?

A. Yea no doubt. For seeing God has set up Magistrates as it were Loadstarres
and directers to others both in word and deed, their subjects will follow
their example whether it be good or evil: according to the Proverb, n="*"
Regis ad exemplar totus conponitur orbis.
All the world does follow the example of the King. Wherefore the evil
example of the Magistrate must needs be the overthrow and infection of many.
Besides this, without a good conversation, the Magistrate shall never have
weight and authority in the hearts of his subjects: and therefore whatsoever
he speaks or does shall be of less regard or account with them. Moreover it
is required that the Magistrates court and family be of godly and virtuous
conversation.


Q. What say you of the family of the Prince or Magistrate, and such as do
attend more nearely upon his person?

A. They are to walk in a holy and virtuous conversation.

Q. What reason have you so to say?

The reasons why it ought so to be.
A. There be diverse reasons why this is required. And first of all, that the
Magistrate may be furthered in reforming the disorders of his subjects, The
duties of the magistrate in regard of religion.
which otherwise will hardly be brought to pass, seeing many exceptions will
be conceived.

Secondly, that grace and authority may be given to all his words and actions.

Thirdly, for that above all other, the court and household of the Prince must
be a certain Church, and holy assemble wherein God is sincerely served and
obeyed; not only that the blessing of God may be upon his own person, and all
that he takes in hand; but also that out of his house may shine forth worthy
examples, as it were certain lights into his whole dominion, to direct and
encourage others in a right course.

Q. Now let us come unto the duty or office of the Magistrate: To what has
that respect: or whereabout is it occupied?

A. It is occupied either about religion and godliness, or about the civil
estate and good order of his subjects.

Q. What is first of all required of the Magistrate in regard of religion?

A. That he do cause it to be planted and advanced in his dominion: for so did
the most excellent and worthy Princes and servants of God: The first duty of
the Magistrate in regard of religion, is to plant and advance that only which
God has commanded. The reasons of it.
as Joshua, David, Solomon, Azah, Iehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and such like,
whose principal care and endeavor was to bring in and promote Gods true
Religion: the examples whereof all Magistrates are bound to follow. First of
all, because they are propounded in the holy Scripture to that end.

Secondly, for other reasons of great importance.

Q. What are those Reasons?

A. First, the Magistrate is bound to see that all his subjects be brought to
the true knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ the great King and Prince of glory.

Secondly, that they may learn how to avoid the wrath of God, and their own
extreme misery, and attain unto eternal life and happiness.

Thirdly, that they may know how to serve the Lord according to his word,
which is the principal end of man's creation and redemption.

Q. You say well: for God has not set and appointed Magistrates over brute
beasts, but over his own people and inheritance; for whose estate and welfare
they are to render an account unto him. The Magistrate is bound to use all good
means which may serve to that purpose. The 1. means.
But what duties is he to perform for the establisting and furthering of Gods
true religion?

A. First, he is to cause the holy Scriptures to be brought forth and published
in such a tongue or language as the people may hear, read, and understand the
will of God, according as the Lord himself has commanded, and holy Kings
and Princes have duly practiced.

The 2. means.
Secondly, he is to call and cause to be chosen, learned, and fit Ministers, not
only to open and interpret the Scriptures, and gather and apply the doctrine
contained therein to the uses of the people: but also to execute the discipline
and Ecclesiastical government which Christ has appointed for the well ordering
of his spiritual kingdom.

The 3. means to advance and further the true religion of God. The right ves
and ends of Counsels and Synods.
Lastly, he is by his authority to call and assemble Ecclesiastical Counsels
and Synods.

Q. To what end?

A. First to redress and correct notorious corruptions both in doctrine and
manners.

Secondly, by good decrees, rules, and ordinances concluded from the word of
God, to provide for the peace, order, decency, and edification of the Church.

Q. Where does the practice hereof appear?

A In diverse worthy Princes and Kings, before the incarnation of our Savior
Christ and in many Christian Emperors and Magistrates, since his ascension
into Heaven.

Q. What further duties are required of the Magistrate in regard hereof?

The 4. means.
A. First, he is by his authority to enforce and compel Ecclesiastical
Ministers to the faithful performance of their duty.

Again, he is to defend, protect, and encourage such as be faithful.

Lastly, he must correct, yea, if need be, depose all such as are unfaithful,
The 5. means.
and fail in their duty: as appears by Solomon, Josiah, The 6. means to
advance true religion.
and such like godly and zealous Princes.

Q. Why then the immunitie of Popish Priesthood is utterly overthrown? The
lawelesse immunitie of the popish priesthood is contrary to the word of god


A. Yea, and that not without cause: for why? it was a cursed devise of
Antichrist, whereby he labored not only to streighten and pend up the
authority and jurisdiction of Magistrates into too narrow limits or bounds;
but also to lay open a way for himself, and his shauelings, to commit all
manner of abominations without controlment.

Q. Does the duty of the Magistrate stretch no further in regard of
themaintenance of Religion, but to the Ministers?

The 7. means for the advancing of true religion.
A. Yes: they are to enforce and compel the people: First of all, to resort to
the ministry of the word of God; yea, to give ear thereunto with reverence
and attention, The duties of the Magistrate in respect of civil policy.
and therewithal to perform all duries concerning the outward worship of God:
as did King As^. 2. Chron. 4.

The 8. meane^*
Again, they are not only to be careful, that all the duties of the first and
second Tables be practiced, but also that the breach of any commandment
therein contained be punished and revenged, according to the nature, quality,
and measure thereof.

Q. We have heard of the duty of the Prince, or Magistrate in regard of
Religion. What say you of his duty concerning the civil and political estate
of his subjects?

The 1. durie of the magistrate in respect of civil policy.
A. His duty consists in two things. For first he is to procure the outward
commodity, welfare, and comfort of his people.

The 2. duty in the same respect.
Secondly, he is to defend and protect them from all enemies and dangers, that
would overthrow or hinder their peace and safety.

Q. How may the first be brought to pass

A. Two ways, as namely, by making of wise, good, and healthful laws.

And again, by due and careful execution thereof. The magistrate is 2. ways
to procure the good of the Commonwealth. The 1. is, by making good laws. The
2. is by the due execution of them.



Q. May a Prince or Magistrate make laws?

A. Yea no doubt; so that they be consonant and agreeable to the word of God:
from which if they swerve, be they never so glorious and plausible in the eyes
of men, yet will the Lord never bless, nor give success to them: as is
ple^tifully proved both by examples in the word of God, and by continual
experience.

Q. What is the Magistrate to respect in inacting and publishing of the laws
you spoke of.

The scope or aiming point of all good civil laws, consists in two things.
A. The good order and behavior of the subjects one toward another; that so
they may live together sweetly and honestly, to the mutual help and benefit
one of an other.

Secondly, the stay and restraint of the contrary.

Q. What laws is to be provided in these respects?

A. The laws are manifold, and almost infinite, according to the diversity of
persons, places, state and dispositio^s of the people, together with manifold
changes, accidents, and necessary occurrents.

Q. You spoke of the exccution of such laws, is that necessary?

A. Yea doubtless: for without that, good laws are as a body without a soul,
or life: or a good medicine without application.

Two things are required to the execution of laws.
Q. What means or ways are there to further the execution of those laws?

A. First of all, encouragements or rewards will prevail very much with man's
proud and rebellious nature, to cause him to yield unto, and to practice that
which otherwise he does hate and would resist: as we may see by continual
experience.

Q. What if this will not serve?

A. The Magistrate is then to use severity, and inflict punishments in wisdom
and discretion, according to the nature and quality of the offense.

Q. Why add you those last words?

A. That so by wise circumspection, cruelty, and injustice may be avoided.

Five things are required to the right proceeding in iudgememe^t against the
violaters of good laws.
Q. What cautions must the Magistrate use to carry his hand aright, and
accoraing to justice in punishing of evil doers?

A. First, no man is to be condemned and punished before his fault by lawful
means be brought to light, and he convicted thereof, according unto the
course of justice, and all equity and reason: for it were an unjust thing for
a man to be punished for a crime, which cannot be proved against him.

Secondly, the greatness of nature of the fault is to be discovered out of the
word of God, and applied to the conscience of the guilty person, that so he
may be brought to repentance.

Thirdly, the rigor and extremity of the law is not to be sollowed, and
pursued at all times: and therefore the Magistrate may either pardon the fault
in discretion, or defer the punishment thereof unto a fitter time.

Furthermore, the punishment must be proportioned according to the nature and
quality of the fault: so that to a great offense is due a great punishment:
and a less is to be revenged with a punishment agreeable.

Lastly, the Magistrate is not to punish in revenge or satisfying of his own
corrupt and malicious affections, but first, to stay the wrath of God.

Three ends to be propounded in the punishing of offenders.
Secondly, to amend the party offending.

Thirdly, to restrain and give warning to others ye they commit not the like.

Q. Is it sufficient for a Magistrate to make good laws, and then to execute
the^?

The Magistrate is to protect his good and faithful subjects.
A. No: for he is to defend and protect his subjects against the extreme and
violent assaults and invasions of al manner of enemies, foreign or domestical:
and that by battails and wars executed in his own person, or others, at his
commandment.

Q Is it lawful then for a Christian Magistrate to make war?

A. War is a good and holy ordinance of God, especially pertaining to the
care and duty of the Magistrate.

Q. How is that proved?

By five reasons it may appear that it is lawful for the magistrate to make
war for the just and necessary defense of his people and state.
A. By many reasons and examples out of the word of God.

Q. What are the reasons?

A. First, God has prescribed rules and laws for the right ordering of his
people in war; which he would not do if it were unlawful to make if war.

Secondly, it is he that teaches the hands of his servants to fight, and their
fingers to make battle.

Furthermore, he gives good success in battle: which could not be, if war
were ill and condemned.

Besides this, when certain soldiers being touched with repentance, at the
doctrine of John Baptist, demanded of him what they should do in time to come,
to please God: he willed them not to forsake their callings: but teaches them
how to behave themselves therein: which argues their estate not to be
unlawful.

Lastly, war cannot be unlawful, seeing it is an especial end why the
Christian Magistrate bears the sword of authority: The 5 reason.
as the Apostle testifies. Romans 13.

Q. What say you of examples?

Examples do show the same.
A. The most excellent and holy Magistrates of God, have valia^tly fought the
Lords battles; and are renew med and commended for the same by the spirit of
God, as Abraham, Moses, Ioshuah, David, and such like.

Q. Is it sufficient that wars be generally warranted by the word of God?

A. No, they must also be just.

Two things required that wars may be justly made.
Q. What mean you by just wars?

A. Such as are not taked in hand for ambition or any other wicked or sinister
respect: but upon just and necessary causes, and to right and and lawful ends.

And besides, when they are waged and executed in a due order and manner
according to the will of God.

Q. Thus far have we spoken of the duties of Magistrates, The duties of the
Subject to the magistrate.
both concerning the religion of God, and the salvation of his people: as also
their prosperous and good estate outwardly: what do you now conclude from all
this?

A. That Magistrates are as necessary for the Church of God, as the Sun in
Heaven to all inferior creatures.

OF THE DVTIE OF Subjects to their Princes and Magistrates.
Q. WE have heard already the Treatise concerning Princes and Magistrates: Now
let us come to the duties of subjects toward them: what is first of all
required in that respect?

A. That their minds and hearts be fitly framed and prepared thereunto.

Two helps to frame the Subject to yield obedience to his magistrate.
Q. How may that be brought to pass?

A. Two ways. First, if they duly consider the highness and pre-eminence of
the Prince or Magistrate, which consists herein, not only that God has put
as it were his own person upon them, but set them in his own seat or throne,
so that they carry the majesty of God liuey engraven in their persons, and
his Regal scepter in their hands. A thing well known to the very heathen by
the light of nature; for why, so me of them called the King, A visible image of
God. But most plainly revealed in the word of God, where Magistrates are
called Gods: Sons of the most high: and that they occupy the seat of God.

Q. what are they furthermore to eo^sider?

The 2. help.
A. The innumerable and manifold benefits of God that flow Magistracy, as
from a sacred fountain upon the Church and common wealth: and that both Spirit
all and corporal, concerning this life, and the life to come.

Q. How may a subject be persuaded hereof? Two very great and grievous evils
follow upon the want of magistracy.


A. Very easily; for take away the Magistrate, and there would remain no
outward worship of God, or if it did, it would easily degenerate into Idolatry
and Superstition.

Again, take away the Magistrate and the public ministry of the word, and
all other means of man's salvation do utterly cease.

Three singular great benefits do accompany magistracis.
Besides, by the Magistrate the people of God are defended against the rage of
Satan and his limbs.

By the Magistrate, men possess and enjoy their lives, goods and good name,
their wives, children, riches, lands, possessions, and such like.

Lastly, by the Magistrate, men which otherwise would be separated, are knit
together by the straight bond of society, in such wise and order, that every
one does serve for the mutual help and comfort of an other.

Q. How may all this be proved?

3 Proofs of the former assertions.
A. First by many express places of Scripture, as, Romans 13. 1. Tim. 2.2. Sam.
1.24. Isa. 32.1.2.3.4. and chap. 49.23. Lament. 4.20. Dan. 4.17.18.19.

Secondly, by the states of the kingdoms of Judah and Israel, when they
enjoyed good Magistrates, as David, Solomon, and such like: for then all things
flourished that concerned the glory of God, and the benefit and comfort of
mankind, for soul and body.

Lastly, by continual experience of all times.

Hereupon the holy Ghost, Ecclesiast. chap. 10. ver. 16.17. affirms that that
land is happy, that has good Princes and Magistrates: but contrariwise, most
miserable and unhappy.

Q. It cannot be (as you have said) but that these meditations must needs frame
and allure the heart of a good subject to the willing performance of duty:
what are the duties which the subject is to yield to the Prince or Magistrate?
The duties of the Subject to the magistrate, are of two sorts. The 1. inward,
the 2. outward. The inward duties are 3. The. 1. love.


A. The duties are of two sorts. Inward, and outward.

Q. What are the inward duties?

A. They are three in number.

Q. What are they?

A. They are first of all love, which arises not only of the tender care which
the Magistrate bears over his subjects, as one that is given and set over a
people by the love and favor of God: but besides this, in regard of the
manifold benefits that proceed from him as was said before.

Q. What is the second inward duty?

The 2. fear
A. Fear: which arises partly of the greatness and Majesty of the Prince: and
partly for that he carries in his hand the sword of vengeance.

Q. What say you of the third?

A. That is, Reverence or Honor.

The 3. honor.
A virtue tempered, and as it were compounded of the two former, and being not
only not opposite to the^, but a mean to stay them from extremity. So that
wheresoever it is, love cannot degenerate into contempt, nor fear into hatred.
Yea, it does so affect and dispose the heart of a man toward his Superiors,
that he would not offend or disgrace them although there were neither reward or
punishment.

Q. What are the outward duties?

A. They are of two sorts.

The first sort are such as are to be performed in the presence of the
Magistrate. The outward duties are of 2. sorts. The 1. sort is of such as are
to be performed in presence. Outward reverence before the magistrate consists
in 3. things. The 1. in gesture.


Q. What outward reverence is to be performed before the Magistrate?

A. It consists in three things, namely, in Gesture of body, Speech and
Silence.

Q. What mean you by gesture of body?

A. That, whereby the reverend and humble affection and disposition of the
heart is expressed or signified. And this is not all one, but of diverse sorts,
according to the manner of the country where the Magistrate lives: and the
diverse degrees of his estate and authority: some great, some less, and yet
the least sign of honor is not arbritarie or indifferent, but to be performed,
and in no wise to be neglected, according to the commandment of God, and
examples of his best servants.

The 2. in speech, and that in two things.
Q. What say you of the second, namely, Reverence in speech?

A. It consists in two things; First, in giving to the Magistrate such
honorable and magnifice^t titles or nams as do agree unto his present estate.

Secondly, to speak to him in such a phrase or form of speech as beseems
his presence and hearing.

Q. What say you of reverence in silence?

The 3. in Silence, and this also in two things.
A. A man in the company of the Magistrate, is not to prevent him in speech,
but to tarry till he has spoken and offered occasion.

Again, standing before the judgment seat as guilty, he is not to speak
without permission. Acts. 26.1.

Q. What duty is the subject to perform when he is absent from the Magistrate?
Four duties are to be performed toward the magistrate in his absence. The 1.


A. He is neither to think, speak, nor do any thing, to the dishonor,
disgrace, or reproach of the Magistrate, but rather the quite contrary.
Hitherto pertains that which is written. Eccles. 10.20.

Q. What other duty?

A. Willingly obedience to all his decrees and commandments, The 2.
without respect ease or commodity. So do the children of Israel offer
themselves to Joshua, Joshua, 1.

Q. Is a man bound to this simply and without exception?

A. In no wise, but so far as his commandments are consonant and agreeable
with the word of God.

Q. What further duty is required of the subject?

The 3. duty in the abfecce of the magistrate.
A. Not only to cover and wisely to interpret the infirmities of the
Magistrate; but also patie^tly to bear and undergo all such punishments and
chastisementes as shall be inflicted upon him by his authority and commandment.

Q. This is a very hard case: how shall he in this sort bear that which is so
shameful and grievous to flesh and blood?

A. Very well, if he consider his own deserts; and the manifold benefits
which he is to reap thereby.

Q. What are they?

A. First of all, the evil doer shall be stayed and restrained from running
further into sin: and be moved to repentance.

Again, by his punishment, the wrath and judgments of God shall be removed.

And lastly, others shall be admonished and forewarned not to fall into the
like offense.

Q. But what if a man do suffer punishment unjustly, and without desert?

A. He is in no wise to resist authority, nor to use evil means to relieve
his cause: but for redress, he is either to appeal to a higher Magistrate
here upon earth, according to the example of the Apostle Paul, Act. 25.13. Or
if that remedy fail, he must commit his cause to the highest Judge, the Lord
of heaven and earth: as the holy Ghost does counsel, 1. Pet. 3. Which the
best of the servants of God have practiced from time to time.

The 4. duty to be performed toward the Magistrate, though he be absent from
him: is Thankefulnes.
Q. What is the last duty?

A, Thankfulness.

Q. Is that due?

A. Yea, no doubt, in regard of the manifold benefits which the subject
receives from the Magistrate. For where benefits are received, there
thankfulness is due: and the greater the benefits are, the more
thankfulness is required. And therefore the subject is not to be thankful
in a general manner, but to manifest his thankfulness by particular duties,
as fruits of the same.

Thankfulness is to be declared by five fruits or effects thereof. 1. Fruit of
thankfulness.
Q. What is the first fruit?

A. That the subject be tender and charie over the life and person of his
Sovereign, and therefore he is not only to prevent all perils, and dangers,
but also to persuade to all such means as whereby the life and good estate of
his sacred Majesty may be preserved and continued.

Q. There is good reason hereof, seeing that the lives and safety of so many,
do depend upon his life and safety: but by whom has this been practiced?

A. By the subjects of David, as appears, 2. Sam. 21.17. 1. Kin. 1.2.3.

2. Fruit of thankfulness.
Q. What is the second fruit or duty?

A. The subject is to venture and hazard himself, and all that he has, for the
benefit, comfort, and relief of the Magistrate, as may be seen in the
Nobles and worthy servants of David. 2. Sam. 23.

And there is good reason, seeing the Magistrate does venture himself and all
that he has for the good of his subjects.

Q. What furthermore?

The 3. fruit of thankfulness.
A. The subject is to bring and offer to the Magistrate gifts and presents, not
only as tokens of love and affection toward him, but also in acknowledgement
of the great benefits they receive by his means, and so consequently to
encourage him to go on in the cheerful performance of his duty. This is
practiced by the people of God, as is evident in many places.

Q. What besides all this, is to be performed?

The 4. fruit of thankfulness.
A. The subject is to play and willingly yield all such taxes, customs,
subsidies, and other such paiments as are levied, commanded, and imposed for
the maintenance of the Magistrate, and common benefit of the land. Romans 13.

Q. What lastly and principally?

A. Lastly, he is to make prayers, and intercessions for the Magistrate; as is
commanded by the holy Ghost. The 5. fruit of thankfulness to the Magistrate,
Three great and weighty reasons why the subject is to pray for the magistrate.
Reason. 1. Reason. 2. Reason. 3.

1. Tim. 2.

Q. What reasons are there why a man should obey this Commandment?

A. Very great: for why? First of all the Magistrate by reason of the spite
and malice of the devil and his lims, as also in regard of other occasions, is
continually in greater hazard then private persons.

Again, greater gifts are required in Magistrates then in others.

Lastly, whatsoever they take in hand, the success thereof depends upon the
blessing of God, which must be obtained by prayer. Therefore we are not only
to pray for Princes and Magistrates, but in greater measure, and more fervently
then other common persons: and that not only for Christian Magistrates, but
for Heathens and Pagans, and such as are aliens from the true religion of God.

Q. What will be the fruit of practicing all these duties?

A. Comfort to our own consciences, and many other blessings of God in this
life. There is much comfort and manifold fruit arising to the good subject
from his obedience to the magistrate. There is much and great evil growing to
the evil Subject from his disobedience. In treating of the Minister of the word
we are to consider. 1. His qualities. 2. His duties Many excellent qual^ties
ought to be in a Minister of the Word for diverse ends and purposes, as they
follow expressed.



Q. What will the omitting hereof, or practicing the clean contrary bring?

A. Many grievous plagues in this life, and the eternal wrath and vengeance of
God in the life to come.

Q. Having spoken before of Princes and Magistrates, together with the duty of
subjects toward the^: now are we to speak of the Ministers of the word, who
are also contained under these titles, Father and Mother. What order are we to
observe in the Treatise thereof?

A. We are first of all to speak of the qualities or properties required in
the person of the Minister.

Secondly, of the duties which he has to perform.

Q. What are the properties?

A. They are diverse: all which do redownd or serve to these especial ends.

First* to sanctify, frame and dispose his mind fit for divine and heavenly
things. The qualities required to be in a Minister of the word.


Secondly, for the comeliness of his body, in attire and gesture.

Thirdly, to commend his authority, and to give him weight and grace in the
hearts of the people of God.

Fourthly, to remove offense and occasion of speaking evil of the Ministry.

Fifthly, to give good example unto the hearers.

Furthermore, for the trial of his wisdom, skill and faithfulness in the
government of the Church.

Lastly, for the drawing and alluring of men to the liking and embracing of his
Ministry.

The qualities or properties peculiar to a minister of the word, are two. The
1. is calling. The 2. is aptnes to teach.

Q. What are those properties, that are proper and peculier to the Ministers?

A. They are such essential or formal graces and qualities, as without which
(have a man never so excellent gifts) he cannot be a fit dispe^ser of the word.

And these are two.

First, he must be called.

Secondly, he must be called (...) or apt to teach.

Q. How manifold is the calling of a Minister?

A. It is extraordinary, or ordinary. Extraordinary, Calling is of 2.
sorts. 1. Extraordinary, and immediately from God alone.
is that which is immediately from God, without the means or callings of men.
Of this kind of calling we read, Gal. 1 1. And by this calling were the
Prophets called: as Isaiah, Amos, and others.

As likewise the Apostles and Evangelists. Ephesians. 4. Gal. 1. stirred up of the
Lord, upon extraordinary causes and ends, for the good of his church. And upon
like causes may the Lord stir and raise up excellent instruments at sundry
times to the end of the world as he did Luther, and such like.

But this is a rare case, and therefore we are not so much to stay herevpo^: but
look to the ordinary callings.

Q. What is the ordinary calling of the Minister? 2. Ordinary from God also,
but by men. as the honorable instruments of God.


A. It is both from God and men. From God furnishing the heart with fit gifts
and graces, and giving willingness and disposition to serve his Majesty in that
calling: 1. Tim. 3.

From men, by trial, election, ordination, and imposition of hands, with
fasting and prayer, whereof it is spoken, Act. 14. and other where.

No man ought to take upon him to be a Minister of the word without a calling.
A calling is such a principal part of the form and being of a Minister, that
without it he may not take upon him the office, Heb. 5. Romans 10. Ier. 29. Isai.
1. and 6.

And if any man should thrust in himself, he has no warrant that the Lord
will be with him to prosper and defend him, or to bless his labors. Ier. 1.
and 17. And if he should prosper, yet can he have no comfort in his own
conscience, seeing he does run before he is sent.

Beside, the people are not bound to hear him, which if they should do, they
are not sure to receive a blessing

Q. What say you of the second, namely, apt to teach? No man ought to be
c^lled* who is not first apt to teach.


A. It is another essential quality which must be in a Minister lawfully
called, above all other men: without which his calling profits not. Which
contains under it, these graces following.

First, that he be well acquainted and experienced in the holy Scriptures, That
a man may be apt to teach, 4. Graces are necessary.
and thereby know and understand the counsel and religion of God: without
which he cannot truly expound the Scriptures, nor open to the people all
things necessary to salvation. 1. Grace.


Secondly, his tongue and utterance must be void of any notorious vice, 2.
Grace.
and he be able with a plain and heavenly liberty to express his mind to
the people of God. Exodus 4.10.11.12.13.14.15.16.

Thirdly, 3. Grace.
he must be able to teach in a plain and clear method and order agreeable to
the capacity of the auditors, avoiding obscurity and confusion.

Fourthly, 4. Grace.
he must discreetly and wisely cut and apply the word to the several
necessities and uses of his hearers.

Q. We have heard before of the qualities and properties required in a good and
lawful minister of God: The duties of a Minister of the word.
Now what are the duties which he is to perform?

The duties of a minister of the word, are of 2. sorts 1. Concerning himself.
2. Concerning others.

A. They are of two sorts: the first whereof does concern himself.

The second has respect to the benefit of others.

Q. How many duties are contained in the first?

A. Three.

Three duties belong to the minister of the word, concerning himself. 1.
Reading.
First, he is to give himself to reading; that is, to read diligently and
continually, not only the holy Scriptures, but other writings which serve to
further his judgment and knowledge in the word of God, which is a duty
commanded by the spirit of God: 1. Tim. 4. and practiced by his best servants,
Dan. 9. and by the Apostle Paul, 2. Tim. 4. The reason whereof is, for that a
great measure of knowledge is required in the Minister to build up the Lords
people to their full perfection. But this cannot be obtained ordinarily,
without labor and diligence, which the Lord has appointed thereunto.

Secondly, 2. Prayer.
he must pray much and continually, privately, and by himself, both for
increase of graces in himself, and for a blessing upon the means which he
uses for that end; as also for success in his ministry. Examples hereof we
have in the Prophets, our Savior Christ himself, and his Apostles, as
appears every where in the holy Scriptures.

n="3" 3. Labor after a good conscience.
3. He must labor for a good heart and conscience, with a true sanctification,
that so he may not only have the more familiarity with the spirit of God: but
also from his own experience, The duties to be performed of the Minister toward
others: they are like wise of 2. sorts. 1. Public 2. sort Private.

speak the more zealously, plainly, and blessedly, to the consciences of
others.

Q. Let us now come to the second sort of duties which the Minister is to
execute for the good and benefit of others?

A. They are public and private.

Q What say you of the first?

A. His Public duties are: first of all preaching of the word, The Public
duties of the minister are four.
with application thereof by admonition and exhortation. 1. Tim. 4. and the 2.
Epist. 4

Secondly, 1. Preaching
the public administration of the Sacraments. 2. Administr. of the Sacra.


n="3" 3. He must pray in the public assembly: 3. Prayer.
for this is a special duty pertaining to his calling Genesis 20. Act. 6. and
practiced in all times by wise and faithful Ministers.

4. Execution of the church centures.
Fourthly, he must execute the sentence of suspention and excommunication in the
presence of the whole Church gathered together; against such as are lawfully
convicted in the consistory,

The^r priua^e duty of the Minister is, that he be resident and live among his
people. Where unto belong many other, to the number of 10. as they are
hereafter set down.
Q. We are now come to private duites: what is the first and ^s it were the way
and entrance unto the rest?

A. He must live and continually lie (as it were in his watch tower) among his
people.

Q. What reasons are to persuade him thereunto?

A. Not only the weakness, corruption and deceitfulnes of m^^s heart, whereby
he is ready upon every occasion to forsake and depart from the truth: but
also the inumerable and the same most malicious enemies both spiritual and
corporal, which continually lie in wait for to overthrow the Church of
Christ, and every member thereof.

And besides this, no Minister can fulfill his office, if he be absent from his
charge, neither ought he to be absent, except necessity or some great and
weighty cause do enforce the same.

Q. But is he to content himself with his residences?

A. No: he is to perform diverse duties; and not to abuse his watch tower, to
sleeping and idleness.

Q What are those duties?

A. Diverse and manifold, whereof we will rehearse some principal.

The 1. private duty.
First, he is to instruct and catechize them of his people, whose ignorances are
manifest to him: and who cannot sufficiently profit by public teaching. Act.
20.

Secondly, 2.
he is to prepare and fit them; for the holy Sacraments, by trying their
knowledge, and admonishing them of any fault which may disable them. Ezech 22.

Thirdly, 3.
he is to know and have good experience of the state and disposition of his
people, that so he may preach and apply his doctrine the more fitly to their
use.

Fourthly, 4.
he is to defend and preserve them against all Heretics and corrupt men, who
(as ravening wolves) would prey upon and devour his flock. And this he is to
do by the evidence and power of the word of God.

Fifthly, 5.
he is to comfort the feeble minded, and to rebuke the unruly person, and the
evil doer. 1. These. 5.14.

Sixthly, 6.
he is to provoke and stir up them that are cold and sloathfull in duties: as
also contrariwise to restrain and call back them that run on too fast in a
rash zeal without knowledge.

Seventhly, 7.
he is to end dissentions, variances and discords, and labor to maintain
peace amongst his people. Mat. 5. Cen. 14.

Besides, 8.
he must visit the sick, both to instruct and prepare them by heavenly
doctrines and exhortations for death: and if they live, to profit by their
visitations: as also pray for the^ publicly and privately. Isa. 38.1. King. 1.
James 5.

Q. What furthermore?

A. 9.
He must in the time of persecution not forsake his flock, but stick to them,
to encourage and comfort them, and if need be to seal up the truth of his
doctrine, with the loss of his own life blood.

Q. What lastly?

10. Private duty of the Minister.
A. He must by a holy and godly example commend his doctrine and whole
ministry unto the people.

Q. Is it to any purpose that the people should know these duties of the
Minister?

These duties belonging to Ministers, are to be known of the people: whereof
there are 3. Reasons.
A. Yea doubtless to great purpose. For, first of all they are a part of the
counsel of God, and therefore all people ought to know and learn them: and
that to special use: for first they shall thereby discern a good and faithful
Minister, from one that is wicked and unfaithful.

Secondly, 1. Reason.
they shall learn how to make choice for themselves, 2. Reason.
when occasion requires.

The duties of people to their ministers.
Lastly, they shall see great cause not only to pray fervently for the
Ministers of the word: 3. Reason.
but to be thankful to God for so heavenly and gracious an ordinance.

Q. In our last Treatise we spoke of the duties belonging to the Minister or
preacher of the word: may we not now likewise speak of the duties of the
people or flock toward their Minister?

The duties of the ministers to the people, do bind the people to be dutiful
unto them.
A. Yes, and that not without good reason, for why? one does follow of an
other, and is the cause of an other in equity and relation: for as the
Minister is to perform duties to the people; so the people owe duty to their
Minister or Pastor.

The duties of the people to their ministers, are of two series. 1. Inward. 2.
Outward.

Q. Of how many sorts are these duties?

A. Of two sorts, Inward and outward.

Q. What are the inward duties or virtues?

A. They are such as are hidden and do rest in the heart or soul, as the
proper subject.

Q. Why do you begin first with that part?

A. Because if that being the foun^aine of all actions, be not first well
framed, and disposed: either men will perform no actions at all; The inward
duties are the principal, and grounds of the outward
or if they do, it will be in hypocrisy, that is, without a right and sincere
affec^ion.

Q. How many duties do you consider in the soul?

A. Two. The first whereof is Love: The inward duties are 2.1. Love.
the people must love their Minister or Pastor.

Q Where is that commanded?

A. In the first epist. to the These. 5.13.

Q. How must they love him?

A. Not coldly, nor feebly, but most fervently and abundantly: This Love must
be an earnest love.
as the Greek word (...) there used, does signify.

Q. What should move men hereunto?

A. The work of the Ministry, committed unto them by the Lord.

Q. The fruits and benefits of that work are not expressed in that place, to
persuade them to love:

A. True, they are left there in general: but particularly specified in other
places of the Scripture.

Q. As how?

A. First, they are called Spiritual Fathers, There are 4. great reasons to
move people to love their ministers. 1. Reason.
because they begette and change men anewe by the effectual preaching of the
Gospel, to be the sons of God, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven, as
appears, 1. Cor. 4 1. Tim. 1.2.

Again, they are said, ( Heb. chap. 13. ver. 17.) to watch over the souls of
the people, 2. Reason.
as those that must give account thereof: that is, God has appointed them over
his people and inheritance, not only to procure all things for their good, but
also to defend and preserve them from all spiritual enemies and dangers.

Thirdly, the Lord has set them as it were in a watch tower: 3. Reason. Ezekiel.
33.
and delivered as it were an heavenly Trumpet into their hands: not only to
give the people warning of the plagues and judgments of God to come: but also
to advise and direct them how to prevent and avoid them.

And lastly, 4. Reason.
they are to stand up in the gap, and to pray and make intercession to God for
the people, over which he has set them. By means whereof, God has oftentimes
granted great graces and deliverances unto whole nations and people; as not
only the Prophet Elisha does testify, 2. Kin. chapter 2. But eue^ that wicked king
Ioash does confess it, as we may see in the 13 chap of the same book.

Q. These are indeed great reasons and motives, to persuade the people to love
their Ministers. We have many special examples of such as have dearly loved
their ministers, recorded in the holy Scripture, to move us to the imitation
of them therein David. Solomon. Hezekias. Obadiah. The noble Shunamit^
But with whom have they prevailed?

A. With diverse and sundry of the servants of God: as for example: how
lovingly and sweetly did David, Solomon, Hezekias, and other holy Kings of
Judah, deal with the priests, Leuits, and Ministers of God. Great was the love
of Obadiah toward the Prophets in the persecution of Iesabel, who with the
hazard of his own life, provided for the maintenance and safety of the Lords
Prophets.

How lovingly and bountifully did ye noble woman the Shunamite entertain the
Prophet Eliah. The like affection we may see in Ebedmelech the black Moore:
in Lidia the Purpurisse, Ebed-melech. The Galatians.
Act. 16. and in many other, mentioned in the new Testament: but especially in
the Galatians: of whom the Apostle Paul reports, that they received him, not
only as an Angel of God, and as Jesus Christ, but also that they would have
pulled their eyes out of their heads to have done him good. 2. Inward duty of
people to their ministers, is Reverence. The necessity of this grace: because
men are naturally exceedingly ready to despise their ministers, and that in
many respects: of which 5. are set down as they follow in order.


Q. What is the next inward virtue of duty?

A. The people are to fear and reverence their Minister: which affection is
not to be separated from the former.

Q. What is your reason?

A. Because that as reverence without Love will grow into hatred: so love
without reverence, will grow into contempt.

Q. Are not men ready and prove to contemn and despise their Ministers?

A. Yes no doubt, and that for many causes.

Q. How, and in what respect?

A. Not only for that all men naturally do abhor and loath the ministry;
but also for diverse other reasons and respects.

1. Cause why people are ready to despise their ministers.
Q. What are they?

A. First, Ministers by the singular wisdom and goodness of God, are not
Angels, but mortal men, and subject to the same natural infirmities that
other are. Act. 14.

Secondly, 2. Cause.
(for the most part) they want such outward ornaments, and garnishings,
wherein natural and carnal men do delight: as Nobility of birth, Beauty,
Gorgious attire, and such like.

Again, 3. Cause.
they are subject to poverty, affliction, reproach, disgrace, injuries, and
manifold temptations, above other callings.

Furthermore, 4. Cause.
through infirmity, they oftentimes slip and fall into sin and offense.

Lastly, 5. Cause.
the devil in this latter time of the world, not abiding the light of
Gospel, which God of his infinite mercy has restored, does labor by all
means and ways to bring the Ministers into hatred, contempt, and vile
estimation.

Q. How may this mischief be remedied and provided against?

A. By these reasons following, if they be seriously weighed. Against the
former contempt, there are other 5. most weighty reasons he^re set down in
the next place. 1. Reason helping against contempt of the minister.
First, that whosoever does contemn the Minister his person, is in hazard to
contemn his Ministry and doctrine: and that to his own destruction and
condemnation, in that he despises the means of his salvation.

Secondly, that whosoever does despise the Minister (which is the Ambassador of
God) despises and co^temneth God himself, and Jesus Christ: which is a fearful
and execrable thing.

Thirdly, a man is to consider the fearful judgment that God has powered out
upon such as have conte^ned, 3. Reason.
despised, or laughed to scorn the Ministers of the word.

Furthermore, that although Ministers be in themselves base and co^temptible:
4. Reason.
yet does they carry upon them the person of the Lord Jesus Christ. Lastly,
they have in readiness (as the Apostle says) vengeance against all such as do
resist and rebel against the truth. 5. Reason. The outward duties to be
performed of the people to their ministers, are generally 41 but under every
of them sundry more particular duties are comprehended. 1. Of them is bodily
reverence. The right manner of bodily gesture, is to be observed.


Q. We spoke the last day of the inward duies which the people are to perform
to their lawful minister: what are the outward duties?

A. They are diverse: the first whereof is bodily reverence or honor.

Q. Wherein does that consist?

A. In 2. things, namely, Gesture, and Speech.


Q. What mean you by the first?

A. The people are so to frame their bodies and behauior in the presence of
their minister, as may declare and manifest the inward reverence of their hearts
toward his ministry and calling: wherein notwithstanding two extremities are
to be avoided. 2. Extremities are to be avoided. 1. Is defect.


Q. What are those?

A. The effect, and the excess.

Q. What mean you by the first?

A. When either no reverence at all is given: or that which is unseemly, and
agreeable to the baser sort of persons.

Q. What mean you by the other?

A. When that reverence is given to ministers, 2. Excess.
which is either due to God himself, or to the Kings, Princes of the world, as
kneeling, etc.

Q. What examples have you hereof?

A. In that worthy man Cornelius, toward the Apostle Peter. But most clearly
in the vassals of that Antichrist of Rome.

Q. Let us now speak of the outward reverence in words or speech of the
people toward the Minister of the word: How is that performed? The right
manner of reverence in speech is likewise to be observed and it consists in
three things. 1. In yielding to them their due Titles.


A. In diverse respects. And first of all, by giving to them their just Titles.

Q. What Titles?

A. Such as serve not only to express and set forth the excellency of their
calling: but also the nature of the duties which they are to perform.

Q. What examples have you hereof?

A. Very many in the word of God: for there we may see that Obadiah and the
Shunamite calls the Prophets, Elah, and Elisah, by the name of Lords. The
Prophets are every where called Seers, and men of God.

The Ministers of the word are both in the Old and new Testament, not only
called Pastors and Feeders* but Masters, Ambassadors, and such like.

Q. What is to be avoided herein?

Yet herein also as well excess as defect is carefully to be avoided. The 2.
duty concerning reverence in speech, is, that the people give a true testimony
of the graces of their ministers.
A. Both Defect and Eccesse, as was said before in the gesture or outward
behavior of the body.

Q. What is the second respect you spoke of? of how many things does that
consist?

A. Of two things: for first of al they are not to rail, nor speak
contemptuously and slanderously of the person or office of the Minister, in his
absence.

Secondly, they are to speak reverently of him: and in all truth and
faithfulness to defend his cause. The first whereof is a grievous fault,
condemned in the word of God, even in regard of private men. This is the very
property of hypocrites and malicious enemies against the truth: The contrary
is a note of hypocrites and malicious wicked men. Ahab. Priests. Scribes.
Pharisees. Good men speak well of their good ministers. Ichoshaphat. Nicodemus.
3. Duty in respect of reverence, concerning speech, that they do charitablie
rather lessen then ouerhardly to censure their infirmities.
as appears in Ahab toward Michaiah: and in the high Priests, Scribes and
Pharisees with their adherents, against John Bahtist, Christ Jesus, and his
Apostles.

The other is a duty practiced by them that had felt sweetness, and profited by
the Ministry of the word: as by Ichosaphat, Nicodemus, and diverse others
specified in the Evangelists.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. The people are not by speech to discover, blase abroad, or publish unto
others (especially enemies of the truth) the fault and infirmities of their
Teachers.

Q. Why not?

A. Because first of all it were to play the part of cursed Cham, who
discovered the nakedness and shame of his father: as also of those helhounds
(the young children of Bethel) who vpbraideth the Prophet by his baldnes. Yea it
were devilish ingratitude for any to lay open the faults and offenses of him,
who desires with all endeavor to heal and cover their sins and
transgressions, both before God and men.

Q. What is the second general duty of the people to their Minister?

The 2. general du^ie of people to be performed to their m^nisters, it is
Obedience. Whereunto 3 things are required. 1. Thing is, that they be willing
to suffer just reproof.
A. They are to obey and submit themselves to him: according as it is
commanded by the Holy Ghost. Heb. 13.

Q. What is required herein?

A. First, they are willingly to yield themselves to be governed and ruled:
yea to be admonished, reproved, and censured by him. And that not without good
reason and equity: for, seeing God requires those duties at the hands of the
Minister, it is good reason that the people should yield thereunto.

Q. Who has done so?

A. The best and greatest persons amongst the servants of God: as David,
Ichosaphat, and diverse other.

Q. What is the second thing required?

A. The people must be content with their own places and duties, 2. They must
not presume to intermeddle with any public duty, proper to the minister: such
as are preaching of the word. etc
and not usurp and incroach upon the office and duties proper and peculiar to
the public Ministers of the word.

Q. What are these duties?

A. First of all the Preaching, opening and Interpreting of the holy Scriptures.

Secondly, Public Prayer.

Thirdly, the Administration of the holy Sacraments.

3 Reasons why the people may not intermeddle with the duties of the minisers
office.
Q. Why may not the people meddle with these things?

A. First, because God in his wisdom has distinguished every calling with
the duties thereof, from all other: containing them so within their limits,
that one is not to incroach upon another. 1. Reason.


Secondly, 2. Reason.
the Ministry of the word is so holy a thing, and does import the Lord
himself so nigh, that no man may take it upon him, except he be called of God.

Lastly, 3. Reason.
if every man might usurp the duties of the Minister, it would open a way for
a number of mischiefs, and that to the ruin and overthrow of the salvation of
man: in regard whereof, the Lord from time to time has bin most severely
revenged upon the persons of them that have intruded themselves into the office
of the Minister: as it is manifest in Saul, and King Vzziah.

Touching Obedience, the people are in the 3. place dutifully to hear and
embrace the truth of all their holy doctrine.
Q. What is the third thing required as belonging to the submission of the
people to the Minister?

A. The people are humbly, readily and chearefully, without pride and
contradiction, to hear, embrace and practice the doctrine which the Ministers
do deliver: according to the example of the Bereans, Thessalonians, and such
like among the servants of God.

Q. Is this simply to be performed, and without exception?

A. No: for the people are to examine the Ministers doctrine, whether it be
agreeable with the word of God or no: a thing not only commanded by the Holy
Ghost, as appears, 1. Thessa. 5. 1. Ioh. 4.1. but also practiced by the
servants of God.

Q. What is the third general duty which the people owe to their Minister?

A. They are to maintain and sustain him and his family with all
necessaries, 3. General duty to be performed of people to their ministers: it
is maintenance of them and their families. The proofs of it, are sundry
testimonies of holy scripture.
according to their ability.

Q. Where is this warranted and commanded?

A. In many places, both of the old and new Testament.

Q. What reason should move men to the practice hereof?

A. First of all, natural equity, that is, The labourer is worthy of his
hire.

Secondly, the excellency of the things which the people reap at the hands
of the Minister: 3. Reasons drawn from the same.
according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your carnal things?

Thirdly, the sweet promises of God made to the performance of this duty: and
his heavy judgments threatened against the contrary.

Many examples recorded therein.
Lastly, the examples of the worthy servants of God, who have bin very
careful for the provision and maintenance of the Ministers: as may appear, 2.
Chron. 31. from verse. 3. to the end. And in many other places.

Q. What is the last general duty?

A. The people are to pray earnestly for their Minister.

4. General duty to be performed of people to their ministers: it is prayer
to God for the^.
Q. Where is that required?

A. By the Apostle Paul in diverse of his Epistles. And practiced by the Prophet
David, Psalm. 132.9. And good reason thereof, for without this duty, the
studies and labors of the Ministers shall have small success.

The duties of Parents toward their children. We have a threefolde proof that
the natural Parents are to perform duties toward their children. 1. Proof
is, from the light of nature. 2. Is, from the equity of it. 3. Is, by the word
of God.
The duties of Parents toward their children, are generally 8. and these also
have their several particulars contained in the^. 1. General duty is love.
We are now come to the duties of Parents toward their children: and after
that, to the duties of children toward their Parents.

Q. Do Parents owe duty to their children?

A. Yea in nature, equity, and by the word of God.

Q. What are the duties which Parents are to perform toward their children?

A. They are diverse. The first whereof is Love.

Q. Are Parents to love their children?

A. Yea no doubt.

Q. Where is that proved?

A. Titus. chap. 2. ver. 4.

Q. Yea but that is spoken only of the Mother?

A. I grant, but in all equity, and by just proportion, it extends also unto
the father.

Q. What should cause you to think so?

A. Because God has planted in the hearts of both Parents, as well the man as
the woman, certain seeds and sparks of love and tender affection toward
their children, which were in vain, and to no purpose, if Parents should not
actually love their children.

Q. What think you therefore if parents love not their children?

A. They are worse then bruit beasts: who by a certain blind instinct and
affinity of Nature, do so tender and love their young ones, as that they will
hazard their bodies, and loose their lives, to deliver them from danger.

There are 2. sorts of reasons, to move Parents to love their children. 1.
Sort common to the heathen with us. 2. Sort peculiar to us Christians. Of the
1. sort of Reasons there are 3.
Q. What reasons should move Parents to love their children?

A. Diverse reasons, and that of two sorts.

The First whereof are common with the heathen, and mere natural men.

The second, are particular to Christians, and such as are borne in the Church
of God.

A. Speak of these in order?

A. The heathen, and mere natural men, do love their children for three
causes.

engendered of their own nature and substance, and so consequently flesh of
their flesh, and bone of their bone: now none are so outrageous and monstrous
to hate their own flesh, but rather to love and to cherish it.





Q. But what special reasons have Christians to love their children?

Of the 2. sort of Reasons, there are also 3. 1. Reason.
A. Not only the former, but also other of greater weight.

And first of all, their children are borne within the covenant of God: and
therefore his sons and daughters. Eze. 16.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
their children are parts and members of the mystical body of Christ (as
appears, for that the Sacrament of Baptism belongs to them) and so
consequently they are free denisons and heirs of the kingdom of God.

Thirdly, 3.
they are appointed and sanctified even in their birth to glorify and worship
the Lord: as also to profit and do good to the Church.

Q. If Parents would look upon their children in this glass, they could not
but be moved to love them: but what if they be not moved?

A. It is a fearful sign, which does declare yt they are become unnatural,
and given up unto a reprobat mind.

Q. But may not the love of Parents degenerate and grow so far out of square,
by reason of the corruption and disorder of their affections: as of a good and
lawful thing, to become wicked and pernicious?

A. Yes no doubt.

Q. What means or cautions are to be observed to keep it in the right form
or temper?

A. Three cautions are required thereunto.

First, Parents are not to love the bodies of their children better then their
souls: 3. Cautions are required to the moderating and well ordering of the love
of parents toward their children. 1. Caution.
nor to make more careful provision for their estate in this life, then for
their happiness in the life to come: which is the common course of the world,
as we may see daily by woeful experience.

Secondly, they are to love and prefer their children, 2. Caution.
neither above God, and his glory: neither yet before their own bodies and
souls. This was the great fault of Ely, as appears, 1. Sam. 2.

Thirdly, 3. Caution.
they are to discover their love to their children, neither too much, nor too
little. For the first thereof, does give children encouragement to contemn and
loathe their Parents, as also to take the raines to run forth into all
dissoluteness, to their utter destruction.

The other does discourage children, and is the cause of many mischiefs, and
therefore justly condemned by the holy Ghost, Ephe. 6.4. Col. 3.21.

Q. What is the second general duty of parents toward their children?

The 2. general duty of parents toward their children, is that they teach and
instruct them. 1. In the knowledge of God and his word 2. In good manners. 3.
In good Arts and trades of living.
A. They are to teach and instruct the^.

Q. In how many things?

A. In three things?

Namely, in the knowledge of God, and of his word.

Secondly, in civility and good manners.

Thirdly, in good Arts, trades, and professions: whereby they may maintain
themselves, and do good to others.

Q. Where is the first commanded?

A. In many places both of the old and new Testament: as namely, Exodus 12. and
13. Deuteronomy. 4.11. Josh. 4. Ephe. 6.

Q. What Parents have practiced these commandments?

A. The best and most notable amongst the servants of God.

Q. Who are they?

Examples of parents careful to instruct their children.
A. Abraham, Genesis 18. David and Bathsheba. Pro. 4. chapter v. 3. and 4. and ca. 31.
the parents of Timothy. 2. Tim. 1. and 3.

Q. Are all Christians bound to follow these examples?

A. Yea, for to that end are they recorded in in the holy Scriptures.

Q. What reasons should move them thereunto?

There are 7. important reasons to move parents to teach their children the
true knowledge and fear of god. 1. Reason.
A. Diverse, both in regard of their children, and of themselves.

Q. What is the first?

A. Their children are not borne without reason, but capable of knowledge and
understanding; and theefore are parents to enlighten them, as with humane
knowledge: so especially with the knowledge of God, and his will, that so they
may excel the children of Pagans.

Secondly, Parents are to be especially careful, 2. Reason.
that their children may be delivered from the wrath of God, and brought into
his favor: but this cannot be without teaching and instructing: for faith
comes by hearing of the word of God: and how shall men hear without teaching
and instruction?

3. Reason.
Thirdly, if Parents instruct their children, it is a way or means for the Lord
to teach them, and to increase their knowledge: and that by the free grace and
promise of God: see Genesis 18.

Fourthly, as the Lord does enlighten the hearts of parents by the ministry
of the word, 4. Reason.
and other good means: so are they to impart of the same grace unto others:
and to whom, if not to their children?

Fifthly, the fruit which comes of teaching children in their youth, 5. Reason.
is great and excellent, which is set down, Prou. 22.6. Teach a child in the
trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart from it. Which is a
very true sentence: for why? A child is as a new vessel, which not only
does easily receive good liquor, but does a long time retain and keep the
savor thereof: If men grow old before they be taught, instructed and called,
by reason of their dulnes and hardness of heart, they will hardly ever attain
to any great measure of knowledge and repentance.

6. Reason.
Furthermore, it will be a woeful and fearful thing for Parents to see their
Children beaten down to hell, by the flaming fire of Jesus Christ coming to
judgment: but this shall be the case of all both old and young, that are the^
found ignorant of God and of his truth.

7. Reason.
Lastly, if the children of Christians perish for want of teaching, their blood
shall be required at the hands of their parents.

Q. The reasons which you have brought forth, do seem to be of weight, to
prove that parents are bound to train up their children in the knowledge of
God, and of his will. But many Parents do think themselves discharged, if
they send their children to the public Ministry, where all sorts and ages are
to learn the will of God? No diligence of others can exempt or discharge
natural parents from their holy endeavor to teach their children the knowledge
and fear of god. There are 4. reasons of it.


A. All this does not exempt parents from doing that duty which the Lord has
so plainly commanded and laid upon them in his holy word: especially seeing
they have so many opportunities, occasions, and furtherances, to allure and
encourage them thereunto.

Q. What are they?

with their children, they have more time and occasion to teach them then
others.







Q. How long are Parents to teach, instruct, and advise their children?

Parents are constantly to teach and exhort their children to the true
knowledge, fear, and obedience of God.
A. Not only in the minority and tender age of their children, but so long as
they have need to be taught, admonished and instructed, and as the Parents may,
and are able to do their duty therein. For age, and process of time, does
neither dissolve the bonds of nature: nor defeat the duties which are laid
upon men by the law of God. And therefore the wisest of the servants of God
continued the practice of exhorting and instructing their children, to the true
fear and obedience of God, even then, when they were come unto the ripenes of
their years: 2. Instruction which parents are to acquainte their children
withal, is concerning civility, and mannerly or comely behavior. This kind
of the Parents instruction is of no small weight in many respects. 1. Respect,
which makes it of great moment.
yea so long as they enjoyed life together.

Q Wherein are Parents next to instruct their children?

A. In civility and good manners or behavior.

Q. This seems not to be a matter of so great weight, seeing it does
concern but the body, and outward estate of man.

A. Yea, but for all that, it is not to be neglected, being of great moment and
consequence, and that in diverse respects.

Q. What are those respects which move you to say so?

A. First, it were an heavy case that ye body and limbs of a child which are
created comely and beautiful, should by the negligence and retchlesnes of the
Parents be deformed, and the use and motion thereof utterly perverted: which is
nothing else, but an inuirie and disgrace cast upon the workmanship of God.

Secondly, evil manners and behavior, do cause religion it self to be basely
accounted of in the hearts of many: 2. Respect.
as we may see by experience in diverse, otherwise, good professors, who yet are
of an uncomely and rude behavior.

3. Respect.
Besides, evil bringing up does corrupt the mind and heart of children, and
bring them to an evil disposition: as to be proud, churlish, hard hearted:
without compassion toward others, and such like. And therefore one by the light
of nature, says very well, That good and liberal education, does mollify
the manners, and not suffer them to be cruel and savage.

4. Respect.
Again, good bringing up and behavior, is as the foundation, and ornament of
all duties, trades and professions, giving them their due grace and
commendation.

Lastly, comely and good behavior is pleasant and acceptable in the eyes of
God and men: 5. Respect.
as it is clear, 1. Kings 10. where it is recorded, that when the Queen of
the South did behold the comely and gracious behavior of the servants of
Solomon, she was greatly ravished therewith. And this also does the Holy Ghost
commend as an excellent virtue.

Q. It cannot otherwise be, for why? the Lord God is not the author of
confusion, vncomelines, and disorder. But what say you of them that bring up
their children (I will not say as wild and savage people) but little differing
from brute beasts, Is is a great sin for Parents to neglect to teach their
children good manners.
as may appear in all their actions, and gesture?

A. They do that which is unpleasant in the eyes of God and his Angels: 3.
Instruction which parents are to give their children is: concerning some honest
science or profitable trade of life.
offensive to men: and to the undoing of them whom they should frame in the
most comely manner.

Q. What is the third thing wherein Parents are to instruct their children?

A. In good Arts, Sciences, and occupations.

Q. What are the reasons to persuade them hereunto?

5. Good reasons alleged to this purpose. 1. Reason.
A. First, Arts and Sciences were in vain invented and brought to light by
the Lord, if so be they be not vpheld and continued from the father to the
child.

2. Reason.
Again, God does command that all men that are able and fit thereunto, should
maintain and uphold themselves by the sweat of their brows. Genesis 3. But this
cannot be, without some trade or calling.

3. Reason.
Besides, whosoever will be accounted a true member of Christ, and partaker of
the fellowship of Saints, he must by some gift and calling (as it were an holy
mean) convey unto others, some grace or benefit.

4. Reason.
Furthermore, as the Lord has promised to bless, defend and comfort, both by
himself and his Angels, such as are in their ways, to wit, walking in some
lawful calling or duty: so contrariwise, such as live idely and without a
lawful trade, he has laid open as a prey to the devil, and to manifold
plagues and judgments.

Q. What say you further in the last place for the reason hereof?

5. Reason.
A. That when men do want lawful means and Sciences to maintain their lives
withal, they are driven through necessity to evil shifts and devises, and
that oftentimes to their open shame and destruction.

Q. Your reasons are good, and duly to be regarded. We have also sundry no
table examples hereof recorded in the holy, scriptures of God.
But who have bin moved to do their duties herein?

A. Diverse of the ancient Fathers, who brought up their children, not simple in
Trades and Sciences, but in such as were lawful and profitable. As appears
in the sons of Adam and the Patriarchs, in Moses. Yea even in the children of
wicked Caine.

Q. What is the third general duty of Parents toward their children?

3. General duty to be performed of parents toward their children, it is
Correction, or Chastisement.
A. Parents are to correct and chastise them.

Q. Where is that warranted and commanded?

A. In many places of the holy Scripture: but most plentifully and earnestly in
the Proverbs of Solomon, as appears, Prou. chap. 13.24. and chap. 19.18. and
22.15. and 23.13.14. and 29.15.17.19.

Q. This is an hard thing for Parents to perform by reason of their excessive
affection, and tenderness toward their children: with what reasons therefore are
they to overcome themselves?

A. The reasons are of two sorts.

The First is, in respect of their children.

The second is in regard of themselves.

Q. What say you of the first?

It is good for the children themselves, that their parents do give the^
discreet and due chastisement or correction: and that for 3. Causes. 1. Cause.
A. That is many ways.

The first is taken from Pro. 22.6. Foolishnes is bound up in the heart of the
child, which the rod of correction, will drive away.

The meaning is, that there lies in the heart of the child such a bundell or
sea of naughtines, as will bring him to utter destruction, if it be not
diminished: or at the leastwise restrained. Now there is no other mean to bring
that to pass then correction. Therefore if Parents love their children, they
will not deny, or keep from them so excellent a remedy.

Again, without correction, all teaching, instruction, and admonition, is
altogether in vain: 3. Cause, why parents are to correct their children, even
in respect of the children themselves.
for why? children will contemn and abuse the words of their Parents be they
never so excellent, if correction and discipline be not added to make them
effectual: as we may see daily by woeful experience.

There are likewise 3. Reasons to move parents wisely to correct their children
in respect of their own selves, even because of 3. special commodities which
come to them thereby.
Lastly, correction and due chastisement will keep and save the child from open
shame, reproach and manifold miseries, into which he will run and cast
himself willingly, if he be let alone, and suffered to live as he list in
dissolutenes, and impunitie. Example hereof in the sons of Ely.

Q. What say you now in respect of parents?

A. They shall reap diverse commodities by performing their duty, in using
dissipline over their children.

1. Commodity
For first of all, when by instruction and chastisement they have prevailed with
their children, they shall see daily matter of comfort and rejoicing in their
beholding of the good behavior and conversation of their sons and daughters,
and the blessing of God as a consequent thereof.

Again, 2. Commodity
they shall avoid the displeasure and inudgements of God due for the neglect of
their duty, and for suffering their children by means thereof to run headlong
to ruin and destruction.

Lastly, 3. commodity.
if they cannot prevail by this means with their children: yet shall they
have the peace of a good conscience for doing their duty, and the approbation
and testimony of GOD, and of his Church.

Q. You affirmed of late that Parents ought to correct their children: and
proved the same by diverse good reasons and authorities out of the word of
God. Now because that men through blindness of mind, and corrupt affection,
may abuse so excellent a mean, and turn it to the hurt of their children: let
us enquire wherein the right practice or use of the same does consist?

To the end Parents may correct their children in the right mannner: 5. things
are to be observed. The 1. thing to be observed.
A. To the right manner of correction of children, diverse things are required

For first of all, they are not to correct them without just cause: otherwise
it were injury, and iniquity, which the Lord does abhor.

Secondly, they are to make their fault known unto them, by laying forth the
greatness thereof, out of the word of God: that so they may the better be
humbled for their offense: 2. Thing.
and bear their punishment the more patiently and quietly.

Furthermore, 3. Thing.
Parents are not to correct their children in wrath, and revenge, but in love,
and with a desire to do them good; if they look for the blessing of God upon
the chastisement which they inflict.

Q. What is further required?

A. 4. Thing.
They are to correct their children in equity and proportion: and that is,
when their correction is neither too little, nor too much, but according to the
quality and measure of the offense. For if they fall into any extremity, it
is a mean to harden the heart of the child, and cause him to contemn and make
no account of correction.

Q. What are Parents yet to do in this respect?

5. Things to be observed of parents, in their correcting of their children.
A. They are wisely to consider the age, the strength, the capacity, quality,
and nature of their children: for why, they are not to correct the^ being
infants, and very small, in the measure which agrees to the^ when they are
further grown: nor deal so severely with them that are ignorant, as with such
as know their duty: nor with them that are weak, and sickely, as with them
that are healthful and strong: nor with timorous and mild natures, as with
those that are bold and stubborn.

Q. If Parents would observe and use this discretion, in correcting their
children, they should reap better fruits then commonly they do. But let us
proceed to the next duty. What is that?

A. Parents must carry before their children, a good example of life and
conversation.

4. General duty which parents are to perform toward their children: is, that
they go before them in a good course and godly example of life.
Q. What reason have you for it?

A. First, children are naturally given to follow, imitate, or counterterfeite
the behavior and actions of their Parents; especially if they be evil, by
reason of the general corruption, and perverseness of man, whereby he is prone
to evil, and untoward to all things that are good.

Q. But can the evil behavior of Christians hurt their children?

The evil example of Parents is exceedingly dangerous to corrupt their children
There are 2. special Reasons thereof. 1. Reason.
A. Yea, a great deal more then of any other, by reason that their children
think, that whatsoever they do is good and lawful.

Q. What is your second reason?

A. If Parents instruct their children never so well and diligently: and
correct as severely as may be: yet all this labor is lost, except they
conform themselves to the word and will of God. For otherwise they shall cast
down with their evil and Iewde exemple, as they build up by their godly
doctrine and severity. Lamentable exper^ence hereof we have in diverse
Families and houses: 5. General duty to be performed of parents toward their
children: is, a tender care of noursing and bringing them up in their younger
and more tender years. 6. General duty to be performed of parents to ward
their children: is, moderate provision for relief of their necesties, against
the future hardness and difficulties of this world.
which though they profess the word of God, yet for want of the practice
thereof by the Parents and Governors; as evil, or worse children, proceed
from thence, as from the houses that never heard or knew what Christian
Religion meant.

Q. What is the fifth duty?

A. Parents are to yield to their children in their minority, and while they
are not able to provide for themselves, all things necessary for their nursing
and bringing up, otherwise they should be worse then bruit and unreasonable
creatures, who have a certain care and regard to provide for the necessity
of their young ones, till they be able to support and maintain themselves.

Q. What is the sixth duty?

A. They are to provide, and lay up for their children, even when they are come
to ripe age and years, such goods and possessions, as may maintain them in
good estate, not only in their life time, but when they are departed from them.

Q. What warrant have you for this?

A. Nor only express doctrines, 1. Tim. 5. and 2. Cor. 12. But also the
example of Abraham, the father of the faithful. Genesis 25. Who before his end
provided for the welfare and comfort of his children after his death.

Q. But may Parents gather and lay up for their Children, what they think good?

Parents in laying up goods in store for their children must observe 3.
Cautions.
A. In no wise: for the goods which they lay up for their children, must be
obtained and gathered. First of all, by lawful means.

Secondly, without hindering of themselves, in the obtaining and following of
heavenly things pertaining to their own salvation. 1.
2.


Lastly, 3. Caution.
that in providing for their children, they do not withdraw such duties as
the Lord has commanded them to perform and bestow out of their goods, to the
upholding and comforting of others.

Q. What is the seventh duty?

7. Duty of parents toward their children, is that they have meet care to see
them well bestowed in marriage.
A. Parents must have a great and especial care to provide for the comfort,
holiness, and chastity of their children, by the honorable estate of
marriage.

Q. Where is that approved and commended?

A. In very many places of the holy Scripture, and namely in these, Genesis 24.
and 26. Deuteronomy. 7. Judge. 14. Genesis 29.19. Cor. 7. and such like.

Q. Why may not children provide and make choice for themselves in Marriage,
but that their parents must have a stroke therein?

There are 3. good and just Reason, why parents are to have a chief stroke in
the marriages of their children. 1. Reason.
A. There be very good and just reasons thereof.

For first of all, children are a part of their Parents, and the chiefest
treasures they have amongst other worldly goods: and therefore not to be
bestowed and conveyed away without their free consent.

2. Reason.
Again, parents do carry a more sincere and upright affection to the welfare
and benefit of their children, then they themselves do: being blinded and
misled with corrupt and headie respects.

Lastly, they can see and discern by reason of their knowledge and long
experience, 3. Reason.
what is good and meet for the benefit and comfort of their children, far
better then they themselves can.

Q. But may Parents do what they list in bestowing their children in marriage?

Nevertheless the authority of parents is limited in 3. cases. 1. Limitatio^.
A. No, for they have their limitation from the word of God: and therefore they
are not to enforce their children to marry whom they list against their wills.

Again, they are not to cause their children to marry before they know what
marriage means, and the duties thereof: as many give their children in
marriage almost before the time they know their right hand from their left:
which is the cause afterward of many mischiefs and inormities.

Lastly, they are not to defer or put off the marriage of their children too
long a time: which was the fault of Judah toward his daughter in law Thamar,
which in the end brought upon him great hearts smarte and confusion, as
appears, Genesis 38.18.

Q. What is the last duty of Parents?

A. They are earnestly and with all feruencie of Spirit to pray to God for
their children, 8. Duty of parents toward their children, is that they do
pray earnestly and constantly to God for his all-sufficient blessings upon
them.
as Abraham, David, and the rest of the holy servants of God have done. And
that not without great cause: for hereby they do obtain not only a blessing
upon all the duties which they performance toward their children, but also all
other graces they stand in need of, both in regard of this life, and of the
life to come.

OF THE DVTIES of children toward their Parents.
Q. ARe children to perform duties toward their Parents? Children are by the
commandment of the Lord to perform 4. special duties to their parents.


A. Yea no doubt: for why? the Lord has commanded in the fifth Commandment,
that children should Honor their Father and Mother: under which word Honor,
are contained all duties which children are to yield to their Parents.

Q. What are those duties?

The first of them is love.
A. They are diverse: the first whereof is Love.

Q. Are children then to love their Parents?

And it is a most necessary duty
A. Yea, love is so necessary a virtue in the hearts of children, that without
it, they will never yield other duties unto Parents: or if they do, yet can
they not please God: for why? the Lord does abhor all duties be they never
so excellent, that proceed not of love. There is no doubt but that all
children generally are backward to this duty.

Q. What reasons therefore may persuade them thereunto?

A. Diverse and those effectual.

6. Reasons are alleged to move children to love their parents.
For, first of all, the Lord has commanded children to love all men, how far
removed so ever they be, in regard of any band or conjunction: therefore much
more their Parents, 1. Reason.
to whom they are so near linked in nature.

2. Reason.
Again, God has put his own person upon Parents, and given them his own
amiable titles, which originally and directly are proper to himself: whereupon
it follows, that if children have any spark of goodness and piety to God,
they cannot but bear a tender affection toward their Parents.

3. Reason.
Thirdly, God has planted in them a certain natural affection and inclination
toward their Parents: which if they do labor to extinguish and suppress, they
are worse the^ bruit beasts who being moved with nothing else but a certain
instinct of nature, do depend wholly upon those that engendered them, and seem
to prefer them before all other.

4. Reason.
Besides, Parents are the authors and causes of the life and being of their
children: and therefore are they unworthy of life and being, that carry not a
loving heart toward their Parents.

Furthermore, Parents are the causes, and as it were fountains, 5. Reason.
whereby al good graces and gifts are conveyed unto children, bodily and
spiritual, concerning this life and the life to come: and therefore what
horrible unthankfulness were it, if children should not love such excellent
instruments. 6. Reason moving children to love their parents It may be
perceived by 4. Reasons, that the love of Parents is great toward their
children.


Lastly, Parents do love their children, and therefore are children to yield
the like unto their Parents: for love does deserve and ought to procure love.

Q. But how is it manifested that Parents love their children?

A. Diverse ways. And first, in that they do so tenderly nurse and bring them
up.

Again, for that they do so carefully and diligently watch over them against
all dangers.



Furthermore, they do often, even with cheerfulnes defraud themselves of many
necessaries,

Q. By all that you have said, I see it is great reason that children should
love their Parents, and that even of conscience: But have you any examples that
any have so done?

The examples of loving children may be a 7. Reason to move us to love our
parents.
A. Yea, many of the dear children of God in times past: and many also at this
day, as may appear by diverse signs and effects: whose worthy examples all
other ought to imitate and follow.

Q. What if Parents be churlish and unnatural?

A. They are tenderly to love their Parents for all that.

Q. What is your reason?

Children are to love their Parents though they be churlish to them. The Reason
of it.
A. Because that a vice or fault in the person of the Parents, cannot dissolve
that natural bond wherewith children are knit unto them: much less abolish
the duty that God has laid upon children.

Q. What other autie do children owe to their Parents?

A. Reverence: or an honorable estimation of them. 2. Duty which children
stand bound to perform to their Parents, is a reverend and honorable
estimation of them.


Q. Must this needs be joined with Love?

A. Yea, that it may well govern and temper it, least it degenerate into
contempt.

Q. What reasons have you to prove that children are to reverence their
Parents?

There are 2. reasons why it should be so.
A. First of all Parents do after a sort carry the image of God: and therefore
it cannot be avoided, but that if children contemn their Parents, 1. Reason.
they contemn God himself.

2. Reason.
Again, Parents are Superiors unto their children, both in years and tract of
time: as also in authority and government: for why? God has subjected
children under the hand and direction of their Parents. The inward Reverence of
children to their parents, is outwardly to be expressed 2. ways. 1. In speech.
2. In gesture Inward reverence is outwardly to be expressed, 2. ways. 1. In
presence 2. In absence




Q Are children only to retain reverence to their Parents inwardly in their
hearts?

A. No, they are outwardly to utter and practice it: and that two ways: in
Speech, and Gesture.

Q. How in Speech?

A. Two ways.

First, in the presence of their Parents.

Secondly, in their absence.

Q. What rules are to be observed for the first?

A. First, they are to give to their Parents such terms, 3. Rules are to be
observed of children in speaking to or in the presence of their parents 1.
Rule. 2. Rule.

titles and phrases of speech, as may declare the reverence of their affections.

Secondly, they are not to prevent their Parents in speech, without some great
and weighty cause: but to speak when they have leave and fit occasion.

Thirdly, they are not to be excessive in speech before their Parents: but
sparing and continent, as those that desire rather to hear then to speak
themselves.

Q. What are they to do in the absence of their Parents?

Children are to speak reverently of their parents in their absence, or out of
their hearing. Children are to behave themselves reue^rentlie also in their
outward gesture toward their parents This is expressed 3. ways. 1. 2. 3. Way.
Examples hereof, Joseph.
A. They are to speak reverently of them: but above all things to take heed
that they do not hinder or impair the good name, estimation, or authority of
their Parents: by uttering and blazing abroad their faults and infirmities. For
which, two wicked caytifes are condemned in the word of God: namely Cham. Genesis
9.22. and Absalom. 2. Sam. 15.4 5.6.

Q. How must children behave themselves toward their Parents in gesture?

A. First, they are to rise up to them.

Secondly, they must bow their bodies, uncover their heads, bend their knees,
and such like.

Thirdly, they must yield the chief place unto their Parents. Two notable
examples hereof we have in the word of God: to wit, Joseph, as appears, Genesis
48.12. and Solomon, 1. Kin. 2. chap. 19. ver.

Q. But what shall we say, Solomon.
if children be so far off from performance of these duties, that
contrariwise they will not stick to curse and revile their Parents with their
mouths: strike them with their hands: laugh them to scorn to their faces: and
shamefully abuse them otherwise?

They are very wicked children who are contemptuous against their parents
A. The devil has strongly possessed such, and because they deface the image
of God in their Parents: show themselves unthankful for so great benefits,
and fight against the principles of nature engraven in their hearts: they are
cursed Monsters, who should not be suffered to live and breath under heaven:
according as the Lord God has commanded, that they should be put to death by
the sword of his own lieutenant the Magistrate.

Q What say you generally of such children, as contemn and despise their
parents?

They are in a most woeful and miserable estate
A. Their case is fearful: for why? although they escape the hand of man, yet
will the Lord either pursue them from heaven with some notable judgment; or
else requite them with ye like in their graceles posterity

3. General duty to be performed of children to their parents is Obedience.
Q. What is the third duty?

A. Obedience, and Subjection?

Q. How prove you that children are to obey their Parents?

A. By the word of God: and namely, Ephesians. 6.1. Col. 4.20.

Q. What reason is there that children should practice these Commandments?
There are 4. Reasons to move them hereunto.


A. Great reason: for why? The Lord has given parents authority to command:
and therefore it is the duty of children to obey:



The first is, that it is just: therefore unless children will commit injustice
and iniquity,

Again, Obedience is said to be well pleasing to the Lord, and therefore if
children will delight and please the Lord, they must perform this duty.

Lastly, the examples of diverse holy servants of God,

Q. Does the stubbornness and obedience of children displease the Lord? This
also may be an other special reason, from the contrary disobedience.


A. Yea, so greatly, that he has awarded no less punishment then death,
against the stubborn and disobedient child.

Q. What if the hand of the Magistrate cease?

A. Yet will the Lord be revenged: as we may see in the sons of Eli.

Q. In what manner are children to obey and practice the commandments of their
Parents? The right manner of childrens obedience to their parents consists in
2. things. 1. In willing nes. 2. In truth.



H. First of all willingly, and from their hearts.

Secondly, in deed and truth, not in outward countenance and promise.

Q. You have said and proved well, that children are to obey the commandments
of their Parents. But are they to perform that duty absolutely, and without
exception?

A. No, for the obedience of Children has a limitation, Childrens obedience as
well as parents authority is limited by God.
as appears, Ephesians. 6.1. So that if Parents do command or enjoin their
children any thing contrary to the word of God, expressed in the holy
Scripture, they are not to obey them. And there is good reason, There are 3.
reasons of it.
for although the authority of Parents be great:



Mat. 10. He that loves Father, or Mother, more then me, is not worthy of me.

Q Has any godly child, moved with these reasons, denied obedience to
parents, when they have commanded things unlawful?

And hereof is Jonathan a notable example.
A. Yea, for good Jonathan would not execute the will and pleasure of his
wicked Father Saul, against innocent David: as appears, 1. Sam. 19.1. etc.

Q. But now what say you in the conclusion of this point?

A. I say, that even if wicked Parents command any thing not contrary to the
word of God, although it be not only difficult, 4. General duty which God
commands children to yield to their parents is Thankefulnes. This general
thank^^lnes does vtt^r it self in 4. ^^^cial ^^^^^s or duties of it. 1. Fruit.
but also joined with some blemish or absurdity: yet is the child bound
without contradiction or resistance to obey them.

Q. What is the fourth duty that children are to yield to their Parents?

A. Thankfulness.

Q. In what fruits or duties is this thankfulness to show it self?

A. In diverse.

And first of all, children are to comfort, cheer, and solace the hearts of
their parents when they are wounded, and cast down with any great sorrow,
heaviness, or anguish.

Q. This is indeed a duty very natural and requisite: But who has performed
it at any time?

A. The sons and daughters of Jacob toward their father: Examples of it
as we may read, Genesis 37.^5.

Q. What is the second fruit or duty? 2. Fruit.


A. When children do know their Parents to be so ignorant, as that they
understand not how to be saved: nor to serve God according to his will: they
are to teach and inform them so far as they may, and necessity does require.

Q. What examples have you hereof?

A. Faithful Abraham, who reported to his father Terah, Examples of it Abraham.
what he had learned, not only concerning the will of God, for his departure
out of his Country, etc: but also touching the everlasting salvation and
happiness of them both.

So Joseph instructed his father Jacob, Joseph.
in those things which concern the preservation of the Church of God in Egypt:
whereof he was ignorant before, Genesis 37. and chapter 45.

Our Savior Christ.
Our Savior Jesus Christ, although he were subject in all things to Joseph, and
Marie (as to his parents, as appears, Luke 2.51.) yet did he reform them
both, in things wherein they erred. v. 49.

Q. What are children furthermore to yield?

3. Fruit of childrens thankfulness to their parents.
A. They are to visit their Parents, in their sickness, and procure all good
means for their health and recovery.

Q. What say you lastly in this respect?

A. Children are to succor, relieve, 4. Fruit.
and help their Parents in their poverty, want and necessity.

Q. You say well, for this is a duty which both nature and equity do require?

A. Yea, and therefore the servants of the Lord have been most ready to
perform this duty: as for example, Examples of it.
how tenderly and carefully did Joseph nourish and provide for his Father,
Joseph.
and all his Family, in the time of dearth and scarcity.

David was more careful to procure the maintenance and safety of his Parents,
then of himself, although he were then in great distress: as we may read,
1. Sam. 22.1.3.4.

Our Savior Christ.
But how full of heavenly piety was our Savior Christ toward his mother? who
hanging upon the Cross, had even in the midst of the torments, and sorrows
of death, a care of the good estate of his mother Mary, after his death. Ioh.
19.

Q. What general reasons should move children to yield all these duties to
their Parents, There are 4. Reasons to move children to be thankful to their
parents
whereof you have spoken?

A. First, for that Parents have yielded them all, or the most part thereof
before to their children: and therefore children are to requite the like to
their Parents. 1. Reason.


Again, the very Heathen by the light of nature, 2. Reason.
performed the most of them.

What shall we say, 3. Reason.
that even diverse bruit and unreasonable creatures, The duties mutually
pertaining to husbands and their wives.
have answered in their kind, the benefits which they have received of such as
engendered them: as it is recorded of the Storke, and such like.

But the greatest reason of all is, the gracious blessing of God, 4. Reason the
chief of all the rest.
promised to all dutiful children: and contrariwise his curse and vengeance
thundered out against the contrary.

WE ARE NOW TO speak of the duties of Husbands toward their Wives: and of
Wives toward their Husbands.
Q. WHat heard you the last time, thereof?

A. That the duties, are either general, and common: The duties of husbands
and wives are of 2. sorts* 1. General: of the which there are 7. 2 Particular.

or particular and proper.

Q. What call you general duties?

A. Those which both parties are indifferently to perform, both one to
another, and in diverse respects.

Q What is the first duty?

A. Love.

1. General duty which the husband owes to the wife, and the wife again to
the husband, it is love
Q. Is this a common duty between man and wife?

A. Yea, for as the husband is to love his wife, so is the wife to love her
husband.

Q. Where is the first commanded?

A. Ephe. 5.25.

Q. Where the Second?

A. Titus. 2.4.

Q. Is love necessary between man and wife?

It is a duty necessary to be mutuallie performed.
A. Yea, for it is not only the fountain and cause: but also the director,
and life of all duties. For where it is wanting, either no duties will be
performed, or untowardly and from the teeth outward: or not continually.

There are 4. Reasons to move husband and wife to this mutual love. 1 Reason.
Q. What reasons be there to move Husband and Wife to love one another?

A. First of all their conjunction in marriage.

Q. But there be many conjunctions in the world amongst men?

A. True, but yet none so excellent: for why? the Lord God did not only knit
and join man and woman together in paradise: but with so nigh and straight a
bond, that of two they are made one flesh: Mat. 19.5. whereupon the man and the
woman are called by one self same name, to wit, Adam, to note the nigh and
straight conjunction between them. Hereupon the Holy Ghost does conclude two
things.

First, that although the child be nearly knit by flesh and nature unto his
Parents, yet must he forsake them both and cleave unto his wife.

Secondly, unless he will hate his own flesh, he must love his wife.

Q. What is your second reason?

A. The wife and the husband are yoke fellows in one estate: 2. Reason.
whether it be adversity or prosperity: whereby the grief and tediousnes of
the one is allaied: and the joy and comfort of the other is increased.

Q. What say you thirdly?

A. They are joint companions in many works and duties which serve to the
glory of God, and to the benefit of the Church in diverse respects, 3. Reason.
as in the exercises of religion* bringing up of children: and in d^ing good to
others that have of need relief and compassion. This heavenly companion-ship
cannot but move them to love one another.

Q. What say you in the last place?

A. The virtues which one do see to be in another, 4. Reason.
being well and duly considered, will cause the husband to love the wife: and
the wife the husband: for virtue and the graces of God, have in them a certain
nature and virtue of alluring, and drawing to themselves.

Q. Do these reasons only serve to persuade married folks to begin to love
one another?

Love ought (...) be constant
A. No: for they are also (being unchangeable and constant) a sure and unshaken
foundation of love: whereas if it be built upon Beauty, Riches, Wealth, and
such like vanishing and changeable things, it cannot endure; but fails when
the foundation is taken away.

Q. What is the second general duty?

2. General and mutual duty is the joint care each of others salvation.
A. Man and wife must have a mutual care and regard to the salvation one of
another.

Q. How is that proved?

A. It is certain that God did not join man and woman together in marriage to
please the eye, The proof of it.
or serve the lust one of another: or to procure the worldly commodity and
welfare one of another: for this end were partly brutish, and partly
heathenish: but the special end that the Lord respected in this estate, was,
that one might further another in the true knowledge and fear of God, that so
they might jointly attain unto eternal happiness. For it were a miserable and
woeful case, that of two lying in one bed, the one should be chosen and the
other refused: the one should inherit the kingdom of God, the other should
lie in the eternal torment of hell fire. To avoid which misery, the Holy
Ghost in diverse places does exhort married folks to win and draw one another
unto salvation. 1. Cor. 7.16. 1. Pet. 3.1.

Q. What is the third general duty of man and wife? 3. General and mutual
duty betwixt man and wife, is the iointe care each of others co^iugal chastity.


A. They must be means, or helps, to keep and preserve the bodies and minds
one of another, from the filthiness of whoredom and uncleanness.

Q. Where is this duty warranted?

The proof of it.
A. In the four first verses of the vii. chap. of the 1. Epist. to the
Corinthians: where it is by the Apostle Paul, very largely handled and
enforced.

Q. What if married folks will not yield unto this Commandment?

It is very dangerous to neglect this duty on either part. 4. General and
mutual duty, is a iointe assistance in their household government.
A. They overthrow an especial end of marriage: and are the cause of many
grievous and fearful mischiefs: as Adultery, Murder, excessive Jealousy,
and such like.

Q. What is the fourth general duty?

A. They must join together, and assist one another in household government;
for the government, and beweelding of a family is a principal matter and
subject, whereabout the care and endeavor of man and wife is to be occupied,
and that in diverse respects.

This duty is mutuallie to be performed in 3. Respects.
First, to ouersee the behavior of their servants and children, that nothing be
done to the dishonor of God, and contrary to duty.



The proof of it. It is dangerous for either part to neglect this duty. 5.
G^neral and mutual duty is a joint assistance for the natural welfare of their
estate and persons.


Q. Where is this required and approved?

A. For the husband, Pro. 10.2.3.4.5 and 26. Chap. 13 14.15. verses: for the
wife. Prou. 14.1. and 37. almost the whole Chapter.

Q. What if either of the parties neglect their duty?

A. All will to havoc, and poverty comes like an armed man.

Q. What is the fifth general duty?

A. The husband and wife, must assist and comfort one another, not only in
sickness, but in all miseries, sorrows and calamities.

Q. What is the reason?

The reason of it.
A. It is a special end of marriage, that the husband and wife should be
mutual helps and comforts one to another: and where can this appear so well
as in adversity? according to that of the holy Ghost, A friend is borne for
adversity. Wherefore the holy servants of God living in marriage, have in all
estates stuck one to another, and cheerfully performed al duties of help and
comfort. Whereas Jobs wife is greatly condemned by the holy Ghost as a wicked
woman, who for that when her husband was in misery, she did not only increase
the anguish of his soul, Job. 2.9. and 19.7.
but also left and for sooke him.

Q. What furthermore are married folks to perform jointly together?

6. General and mutual duty, is a iointe care of peace and
A. They are to maintain peace and agreement amongst themselves: and to remove
all disagreement and dissension.

Q. What reasons move you thus to say?

A. Very good reasons, and of weight and importance.

For first of all, where discord and dissension does bear sway, 3. Weighty
Reasons move hereunto.
there the Lord God of peace is not present: but rather Satan the Devil, the
father of all discord and mischief, 1. Reason.
has there his seat and abode.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
where the man and wife are rent asunder, there prayer and other exercises of
Religion can have no place: at the leastwise, no success and blessing. 1.
Pet. 3.7.

Thirdly, 3. Reason.
where discord and dissension between married folks do take place, there
nothing does prosper: for the Lord withdrawing his blessing, all things go
backward: yea, waste and consume away as snow, or wax against the heat of
the Sun: therefore there is great reason that the husband should live in
peace and unity with his wife: and the wife with her husband.

Q. What is the last general duty!

A. Husbands and wives are to pray one for another.

7. Which is the last general and mutual duty, is most earnest and continual
prayer one for and with another. There are 5. special duties to be performed of
the husband to the wife. 1. Special duty of the husband toward the wife, is
the loving applying of all his gifts and graces to the comfort and benefit of
his wife Such as are these 4. gifts following.
Q. You say well, for this is warranted by examples in the holy Scripture. But
what are they to ask?

A. Not only for the graces of Gods spirit, and the increase thereof, one upon
another: but that their married estate may be blessed, and comforble unto them
both.

Q. We have already spoken of the general or common duties between man and
wife. Now let us come to the special and proper duties of the one toward the
other. And first of all, what duties is the husband to perform to his wife?

A. They are diverse: and in the first place it is to be considered, that as
the husband is the wives head: so has GOD endued him with excellent gifts and
graces, which he is in tender love to bestow for the comfort and benefit of
the wife.

Q. And what first?

The duties of the husband to his wife.
A. He is to employ that courage and authority which he has, in greater
measure then the woman, 1. Courage.
upon her safety and defense, against all evils and dangers of soul and
body, against all outward violence that might hurt her person, or impair her
life. Of soul, against al wicked persons, who might allure and draw her to
commit any sin to the dishonor of GOD, and her own destruction. This was
well known unto the very Heathen: as appears in Abimelech, speaking to
Sarah, Genes. 20.16. in these words, Behold, he (meaning Abraham) is the
veil of thine eyes to all that are with thee, and to all others. So when the
man is joined to the woman in marriage, he is said to spread the wing of his
garment over her, Ruth. 3.9. By which phrase it is meant, that the Husband must
be to the Wife, as it were a tower or wall of defense against all evil.

Q. What secondly is required?

A. As the Husband is endued with greater strength, and every way more fit for
labor and all means to get and obtain riches and wealth: 2. Strength.
so is he to bestow that his gift in all lawful labors and trades, not
only for the maintenance, but for the use and employment of the care and
faithfulness of his wife.

Q. But has he no further to do?

A. Yes, 3. Wisdom
as GOD has bestowed upon him more sharpness and quickenesse of wit: with
greater insight and forecast then the woman: so is he to use it, to govern,
and to order her in all things.

Q. What if so be the husband does enjoy worldly wealth and riches?

A. He is to impart, 4. Riches.
and make them common to the use of his wife.

The proof of it by 3. Reasons.
Q. How is that proved?

A. First, marriage makes all things common between the man and the wife. 1.
Reason.


Again, 2. Reason.
the wife must as well exercise and confirm her faith in showing mercy, and
doing good works: that so she may hear that sweet voice of Christ at the day
of judgment: (Come ye blessed of my Father: When I was an hungered ye gave
me meat, etc.) even as well as the husband. But this cannot be, if outward
means be denied, and withdrawn.

Lastly, 3. Reason.
examples in the holy Scripture are clear in this point, Pro. 31.20. Luke 8.3.

Q. What if so be that the husband will not perform these things that you have
spoken of?

The husbands neglect of the employing of the former gifts to the benefit of
his wife, is dishonorable and displeasing in the sight of God.
A. He does not only despise and make light of the example of our Savior
Christ, who has bestowed his wisdom, strength, riches, and even his heart
blood upon his Church: but also shows that he is no true and natururall
head: but rather an Image: yea, a block void of life and sense.

Q. What is the second special duty of husbands toward their wives?

A. They must dwell with them as the holy Ghost commands, 1. Pet. 3.7. As
men of knowledge, giving honor to the woman, 2. Special duty of the husband
toward the wife, is, that he dwell with her, as a man of knowledge, etc. To the
end a man may live with his wife as a man of knowledge: two things are to be
practiced. 1. That he is to avoid all occasions and offenses. And of these
there are 6. rehearsed as they follow. 1. Occasion.
as the weaker vessel.

Q. What is the Husband to do, that he may rightly practice this commandment?

A. Two things: For first he is to avoid all occasions and offenses, which may
stir up and provoke the woman to pass her bounds, and commit some sin.

Q. What are those occasions you speak of?

A. First, when the Husband does spend his time in idleness: and unthriftily
does waste and consume his substance. This will greatly pierce and wound the
heart of the wife.



fierce countenance, cast upon the wife: will greatly terrify and provoke her.

But will not reuiling, bitter and reproachful words do the like?

A. Yes, and therefore the husband is forbidden to use them, Colos. 3.19. in
these words: Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them.

Q. Proceed?

A. Besides all this, unjust and excessive jealousy is to be avoided: for
why? It causes the woman not only to contemn her husband as no true
Christian: 6 Occasion of offense. 2. Thing that the husband is to do that he
may live with his wife as a man of knowledge, is that he do bear with
manifold infirmities which he finds to be in her.


Lastly, when the husband medleth with the duties that are peculiar unto the
wife, he seems to doubt either of her wisdom: or of her faithfulness,
which cannot be, but a great disquieting to a Christian woman.

Q. What is the second general thing that the husband is to do, that he may
dwell with his wife as a man of knowledge?

A. When the wife does behave her self undutifully: the husband is not to
wrack and revenge himself upon her by intemperate speeches, or violent
actions: but he is patiently to bear, and put up at her hands many injuries
and abuses: as also labor by all good means to maintain peace, and to reap
that comfort and benefit, by her, whereunto she was given him of God.

Q. What reasons should move the husband to behave himself in this manner to
his wife?

The Reasons why he ought to do so, are 4.
A. Diverse. And first of all, God has not joined the man and the wife
together, to the end that the man should oppress and tyrannize over the
woman, 1. Reason.
whereby she may be made worse: but rather by wise and mild ways to make her
better: and so fit her for his comfort.

Again, 2.
albeeit she be a weak and frail vessel: yet is she an excellent gift of
God, serving for many excellent ends and purposes: and therefore men are to
deal with them in a tender and charie manner: as men deal with glasses, and
with tender vessels that are brittle.

Furthermore, 3
the wife is a fellow heir, (as says the Apostle) with him of the kingdom of
God, and therefore the husband is not to abuse her, who is equal in dignity
and glory with him.

Lastly, 4.
where the husband and wife are divided and at dissension, there prayer and
religion is greatly hindered: therefore the husband is to bear many things:
yea to deny himself, to give way and free passage to so precious a thing. 3.
Special duty of the husband toward the wife, is to to rule and govern her 6.
Things are required that the husband may rule his wife as he ought.


Q. But to come to the third duty, seeing that the Husband is the ^i^es head:
may he not govern and order her?

A. Yes, he may and ought; and besides that, admonish and rebuke her for her
faults.

Q. But may he do that simply and without respect?

A. No, but diverse things are to be observed in the performance of that duty.

And first of all, he must be more forward and earnest in reproving faults
committed directly against God, then such as are committed against himself, or
any other, according to the example of Jacob. Genesis 32. and Job. chap. 2.10.
Whereby is condemned the contrary practice of a great number.

Secondly, 2.
the husband is not to admonish and rebuke his wife in bitterness and revenge:
but with a signification of love, and good will: for otherwise he does utterly
loose all his labor.

Thirdly, 3.
he is herewithall to remove the stumbling block, or cause whereat the wife is
either grieved, or falls into any sin: this did Abraham, Genesis 21.12.13.14.

Fourthly, 4.
he is not to rebuke his wife of the same sin whereof he himself is guilty:
but rather practice the contrary virtue: that so he may win and draw her
from sin: otherwise it will be said, Physician heal thy self: and his
admonition will be ridiculous.

Furthermore, in reproof, 5.
the husband is to have a tender regard to the honor and good name of his
wife, and therefore he is not willingly to accuse and blame his wife in the
presence of others: otherwise it will be very offensive and unpleasant unto
her.

Lastly, 6.
as the husband is to condemn vices and sins amiffe, so is he to commend and
praise such virtues and good things, as he sees in her.

This is a course not only warranted by God, but sauoureth of love, and may
serve to encourage her in good, and to turn her away from that which is evil.

4. Special duty of the husband to his wire is, that he do deal honorably
with her in all things.
Q. What is the fourth duty of the husband to the wife?

A. Although the Husband be the Wives head and superior: yet is he not to
contemn her, or deal with her as a base person or vassal. But because God
has created her out of a principal part of himself, and ^oyned her so near
unto him: he is to honor her, and in all things to govern her in a reverend
manner: preferring her before all others: even his own children, and them that
are most nearly allied unto him: remembering always that as she is not the
head, so is she not the foot, but an excellent creature partaker with him of
many graces and prerogatives pertaining to this life, and to the life to come:
and therefore he is not only to carry a reverend estimation of her in his
heart, 5. Special duty of the husband toward the wife is, that he is to be
cheerful with her, not withstanding any in combrances that the married
esta^e may bring with it
but to deal with her after the same manner that the soul being a principal
part of man does use in governing the body.

Q. What is a man lastly to do?

A. If any trouble, evil, or incomberance falls out in marriage, he is not
to blame the holy institution of marriage for the same: or to ascribe or impute
it to the wife: but rather to accuse his own sins as the cause thereof: The
duties of the wife to her husband.
and therefore he is not only to humble himself to God by true repentance:
but to labor that the image of God may be restored to him, that so marriage
may be sweet and comfortable to him, as it was to Adam before the
transgression.

Q. Having said somewhat of the duties of the Husband to the wife: Let us pass
over to the duties of the wife: which are they?

A. They are diverse. And first of all, it is the duty of the wife to bear and
bring forth children: according to the ordinance of God. Genesis 1.28.

Q. If the woman had not transgressed, The duties to be performed of the wife
to the husband are 7. as they are henceforth set down.
this duty would have been performed with ease and comfort; but now the Lord
has decreed as a punishment, that woman should be are and bring forth children
in sorrow and pain. Genesis 3.16.

Q. What is to be said to this?

A. She must notwithstanding, this, patie^tly bear al trials: 1. Duty is to
bear and bring forth children.
and submit her self to the ordinance of God, which he has appointed for the
increasing, upholding, and continuance of mankind unto the end of the world.

Q. What reasons may encourage her hereunto? There are 3. Reasons whence the
wife may be encouraged to bear children to her husband 1. Reason.


A. First of all, for that it is no reproach for a married woman to bear
children: but rather a crown and honor.

Again, God might have pursued the sin of the woman with a greater
punishment in her self, and in all her sex and posterity. 2. Reason.


Lastly, it is no means to hinder women from salvation and the kingdom of
God: 3. Reason.
but rather to further them: as appears, 1. Tim. 1.15.

2. Duty of the wife toward her husband, is to nurse and bring up her children.
Q. What is secondly required in the woman?

A. She must nurse and bring up her children.

Q. How is it warranted that Mothers must nurse their children?

A. First, by the example of many holy women in the holy Scripture: There are
5. Reasons to move Mothers to nurse their own children 1. Reason.
as Sarah, Genesis 22.7. Hannah the Mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. 1.23. and such like,
who performed this duty, and are commended for the same by the Holy Ghost.

Besides, the nursing of children is set down as the note of a faithful
woman, 2.
1. Tim. 5.

Furthermore, 3.
natural equity does require it: for is it not reason that the woman should
nurse that creature, which is a part of her self? and were it reason, that
seeing she did give the child nourishment when it was in her womb, she should
now forsake it, when it is brought forth and committed to her care and tuition.

Fourthly, 4.
to what end does the providence of God yield unto the woman two Pappes, as it
were fountains, and that in the most comely and fit place of her body? and
besides that, filled them with most sweet and precious liquor: is it that these
excellent things should be dried up and destroyed? and not rather that they
should minister fit nourishment unto the infant, and so set forth the glory of
God, 4. Reason moving mothers to nurse their own children.
the great and most wise Creator?

Lastly, the holy ghost does co^de^ne certain unreasonable creatures, as
unnatural and monstrous, for that they will not tender and nourish their young
ones: as appears, Job. 39.17.18. 19. much more monstrous and unnatural in a
mother endued with reason, if she cast off her young one, who does wholly
depend upon her.

If the mother have any necessary hinderance that she cannot nourse her
child, God will of his goodness spare her therein. The mothers duty is to be
as careful to bring up children un to God, in his nourture and fear, as
willing to bring them forth into the world. The proof of it.
Q. But what if the woman through defect or any other great and weighty cause
cannot perform this duty?

A. Then is she dispensed withal: for why? necessity has no law: But this
does not discharge them that are able to do their duty.

Q. Is there no further thing required of the woman in this respect?

A. Yes, she must bring up her children in the knowledge of God, and good
manners.

Q. Why? that is a duty belonging to the Husband.

A. Yea, and to the wife also: and especially to her, so long as the children
remain under her hand, power, and disposition: which was well known to the
Mother of Solomon: and to the Mother and grandmother of Solomon: and to the
mother and grandmother of Timothy: as appears by their practice, set down,
Pro. 4.31. 1. Tim. chapter. 1. and 3.

Q. Have you nothing else for confirmation?

A. Yes, Kings are usually set down in the holy history with their mothers,
to the praise of the mother if the child were virtuous: and to the reproof of
her carelessness and negligence, if he were vicious and naughty.

Q. You speak of a troublesome and painful duty?

A. True: but if the woman will endeavor to perform it, she shall not only
have the peace of a good conscience, but also the hand of the Lord ready to
assist and further her.

Q. What is the third duty of the married woman? The third duty of the wite
to her husband, is Subjection.


A. Subjection. The woman must be subject unto her husband, as unto her head.

Q. Where is this warranted and commanded? The proof of it.


A. Genesis 3.16. Ephe. 5.22. and. 24. 1. Pet. 3.1.

Q. What mean you by subjection?

A. When the woman depends upon, and yields her self unto the will, What
is meant by the subjection of the wife.
direction and discretion of her husband: and therefore does presume neither
to ouermaister him: neither to control and make vile account of his speeches
and actions: neither appoint and command him what he should do, or leave
undone: neither yet render check for check, The holy women of ancient time are
paterns of such subjection to their husbands.
rebuke for rebuke, reproach, for reproach: from which and the like, the holy
women of God have ever been far of: as may appear, 1. Pet. 3.6.

Q. What reason had they to do so?

A. They knew very well, that it is as monstrous and unnatural a thing for the
woman to usurp over the man: No wisdom or any other excellent gift in the
wife ought to imbolden her to shake off subjection, and so to break the
ordinance of God.
as the feet to direct the eye: or the loins to rise up and set themselves in
place of the head.

Q. But sometimes the wife is wiser, more discreet, and provident then the
Husband?

A. It is true: but yet this does not overthrow the superiority of the man:
and therefore if occasion be offered to admonish and advise her husband, she is
to perform this duty with humility and reverence; showing her self more
willing to hear, then to speak: to be ruled, the^ to rule and govern her
husband.

4 Duty of the wife to the husband, is obedience.
Q. What is the fourth duty of the wife toward the Husband?

A. Obedience?

Q. Is the wife to obey her Husband?

A. Yea no doubt: it is a virtue commended by the Holy Ghost in Sarah Abraham's
wife, 1. Pet. 3.6.

What is meant by obedience.
Q. What mean you by obeying?

A. It is to do and practice the commandments of the husband.

Q. Must she perform all his commandments without exception and limitation?

The wives obedience to her husband is limited by the word of God.
A. Not so: but so far forth as they are consonant and agreeable with the
word of God: and therefore if he does command any thing contrary unto the
will of God, she is not to obey him.

Q. Why? Sarah did twice dissemble at the request of her Husband?

A. It is true, but that was her great fault, which was rebuked and condemned,
even by an heathen man. Genesis 25.

Q What say you for a fifth duty?

The 5. duty of the wife to her husband, is to frame her self to be like
affected with him.
A. She is to frame and dispose her self, to the affection, desire and
disposition of her husband.

Q. How is that?

A. She is to practice that excellent precept of the holy Ghost, Romans 12.15
whereunto al Christians are bound, as namely, Rejoice with her hasba^d when he
rejoices, and weep with him when he weepeth: and therefore she is not
frowardly to cross him in any lawful and indifferent thing or action, as the
manner of some is, who love to lowre when their husband is cheerful; and to
be merry, when he is heavy: and to draw back when he is forward to any good
thing: which behauior as it proceeds from a cankred nature: so it agrees not
with the holy consent of marriage, and is the cause of many mischiefs.

Q. What is the sixth duty of the wife?

A. She must keep at home, or in her house.

Q. Where is this warranted?

The 6. duty of the wife toward her husband, is to keep at home, to ouersee
his family. The proof of it There are three causes which move unto it.
A. First of all by the light of nature: experience hereof we have among the
heathen.

Secondly, more effectually by the word of God. Tit. 2. chap. 5. ver.

Q. To what end is this required?

A. For sundry causes: first of all, not only for the preservation of goods
and substance: but also for keeping the household in good order in the absence
of her husband.

Again, by that means to take occasion to do good for the glory of God,
Iael, the wife of Hebr. Judge. 5 24.25.

The wife is not to be in her house as in a prison without all liberty of
going abroad.


Q. But is the wife so bound to her house, as she is to live therein as in a
perpetual prison?

A. That is not the mind of the Holy Ghost, but rather an abuse of an holy
precept: for why? there be diverse reasons or causes why the wife should depart
out of her house and go abroad.

The wife is to have her liberty to go abroad to three ends and purposes. 1.
End. Examples of such holy liberty.
Q. What are those reasons or ends?

A. The first is, to provide for her soul and eternal good, by the public
Ministry of the word, and by christian conversation amongst ye faithful.

Q. What examples have you hereof?

A. In ye noble woman, whereof mention is made, 1. Kings. 4.22. as also in
diverse holy and noble women, Luke 8. and diverse other places.

Q. What is your second reason?

2. End.
A. Secondly, that the wife may perform the duties of love, and mercy and
compassion, which are enjoined by the Lord to every Christian.

Q. What lastly?

3. End.
A. She may and ought to go abroad, sometime for the health of her body, and
solace of her mind, that so she may be the better able to perform all other
duties; so that place Titus. 25. rightly understood, makes nothing for the
imperiours husband, or the slothful and sluggish wife.

The duties of the Masters toward their Servants.
Q. What is she to consider in the last place?

A. The wife must be contented to be attired and maintained according to the
proportion of her husbands ability and estate. The 7. duty of the husband
toward the wife.


Q. What if she labor to exceed it?

A. She does not only give cause to her husband to suspect that she labors
to please the eye of another, rather then his own: but also indeed wastes and
consumes his goods, to his great impouerishment and decay: whereof will arise
many troubles and mischiefs.

WE HAVE HItherto spoken of diverse Persons contained in the fist Commandment:
and now let us speak of the duties of Masters and servants. Three reasons do
show that Masters of families, owe duty toward their Servants.

Q. DO Masters owe duties to their servants: how may that be proved?

A. By the order that God has appointed between Masters and servants: for
why? The Master is set in a Superior degree over the servant: 1. reason.
and therefore as in a natural body, the principal members have a special
care over the base and inferior: so ought the master over the servant.

Besides, The 2. reason.
servants are helpful and beneficial unto their Masters: for why? they serve
not only for their comfort and defense, but also for their honor, game and
commodity: and therefore in all equity they are bound in some sort to requite
their servants. The 3. reason.


Lastly, the duties of Masters are as clearly and fully described and set
down in the word of God (as appears in the old and new Testament, and
namely, Prou. Exodus 21. Deuteronomy. 15. Ephesians. 6. Col. 4.) as the duties of servants:
all which were to no purpose, if Christian householders ought nothing unto their
servants.

Q. what are the duties that they do owe?

A. Diverse. And First of al, householders are to care and bring up their
servants in the true knowledge of God, and his sincere religion: that so they
may not only worship the Lord aright: The 1. duty of the Master is, to bring
up his servants in the true knowledge and religion of God. There are 4. reasons
moving hereunto.
but also attain unto eternal happiness in heaven: which is the chief end of
the life of man, and of all the graces of God bestowed upon him.

Q. What reasons have you to prove that this ought to be performed by
Householders to their servants?

A. First, if every Christian ought to have a care of the salvation one of
another, 1.
and to that end to employ all good means that they can, both by themselves
and by others: then are Masters more to do the same to their servants,
because there is a more straight bond between the Master and the servant, then
between Christians one toward another: for why? in the Fifth Commandment, as
Householders are contained under the name of Parents: so under the title of
children, are servants comprehended.

Again, there is no doubt, 2.
but that when the Lord commanded his people, that they should whet his word
and law continually upon their children: as appeareh, 2
Deuteronomy. 6. and. 11. under the name of children, he also contains servants.

Furthermore, 3
Abraham was not ignorant of his duty in this respect: for why? the Holy Ghost
does commend him: Genesis 18. for that he both did and would teach and instruct
his household in the knowledge and obedience of the will of God.

Lastly, 4. Reason.
al yt faithful servants of God continually followed his example: as may
appear that many in the Scripture are not only commended for that they
themselves did know, serve and fear the Lord: but for that their household, by
their means, did the same; and were in ye like happy estate.

Examples of Masters careful to train up their servants in the true fear
and religion of God.
Q. Where does this appear?

A. Acts. 10. in Cornelius. Romans 16. in the household of Aquila and Priscilla;
the like we read of the Iaylor and his family. Act 16. and of diverse others:
amongst which Joshua says confidently: I and mine household will serve the Lord.

Q. You have said very well: but what if all these reasons will not prevail
with Masters and Householders?

A. Then let their own gain and commodity move them. This may be a 5. reason
to the former purpose. The religious servant is the most profitable servant. It
is proved to be so, by 3. reasons.


Q. What mean you by this?

A. Doubtless they can never have good and faithful servants, serving for
their commodity, without religion and the true fear of God.

Q. How can you make that manifest?

A. First, a religious servant that fears God, does tremble and is afraid to
do any thing, that may hurt or indamage his Master; 1.
yea to do so much as offend him.

Again, 2.
he will be as dilligent to procure the comfort and commodity of his Master, as
his own; and therefore is as faithful in the abse^ce of his Master, as when
he is present: example whereof we have in ye servant of Abraham. Genesis 24

Lastly, 3. Reason.
the Lord will bless the house where such a servant is: and will prosper and
give success to all that he takes in hand.

Q. You speak the truth: for this appears in Joseph, Jacob, David, and such
like. But what is the Master to do, to bring his servant to that pass and
estate you speak of?

It is the duty of Masters toward their servants, to use all means that they
may to bring them to the true knowledge and fear of God. 1. means.
A. Although he is not to usurp and take upon him the functions and duties
proper to the public Minister of the word of God (for that were to bring woe
and confusion upon himself: yet may he lawfully and with the blessing of God,
perform diverse duties: and yet keep within his own limits and compass.

Q. What are they?

A. He is to exhort and enforce his servants to resort to the public
Ministry of the word.

Secondly, 2
he is to read himself, or cause to be read in his house continually the holy
Scriptures.

Thirdly, 3
he may impart to his servants the things which he has learned, either by
reading or hearing.

Fourthly, 4
he must examine and make trial how they profit by the public exercises of
religion.

Furthermore, 5
he is daily to pray with and for his servants, that God may give them
knowledge and faith in his holy word.

Lastly, by his holy and Christian example and conversation, he is to bring
them to a love and delight in the knowledge and practice of true religion.

Q. But what if servants will not profit but contemn the word of God, and all
good admonitions: continuing still unfaithful to their Masters, and rebellious
against God: 2. duty of Masters toward their Servants, is correction if they
deserve it.
what is the Master then to do as a further duty?

A. He is to use correction and discipline.

Q. But may a Master correct his servant?

A. Yea no doubt: for it is a thing warranted both by the word of God, and
light of nature, as also by the consent of all nations.

To the using of the correction of servants arigh^* four rules are to be
observed. 1. Rule.
Q That he may perform that duty in the right manner: what rules are to be
observed therein?

A. He is to put a difference amongst his servants in regard of their age,
sex, disposition, and other properties: for one sort is not to be dealt
withal as another.

Secondly, he is to dispense and proportion correction, 2. Rule.
according to the nature and measure of the offense: and therefore he is not
egerly to pursue small faults, and over pass great: nor extremely to revenge
offenses against himself, and to make light account of sins committed
against God, and the salvation of the servant.

Thirdly, 3. Rule.
he is not to correct and trouble himself, about every fault, but lightly to
pass over small offenses and infirmities.

Lastly, 4. Rule.
he is not to chastise his servant in bitterness and revenge: but in love and
co^passio^: that the servant may plainly see, that it is done for his benefit
and welfare.

Q. What kinds of punishment or correction is he to use?

A. Diverse, according to the nature of offenses; as words and admonition,
sometime more mild, sometime more vehement: now and the^ stripes and correction
of the hand, and if all this will not serve, as a desperate and infectious
member, he is to be removed and expelled out of the family. All this is
warranted from the word of God; and example of his best servants.

3. Duty of Masters toward their Servants, that they deal equally and justly
with them. To the end Masters may deal equally and well with their servants,
4. things must be practiced. 1. Duty belonging to the Masters equal dealing
with his Servant.
Q. What is the third general thing that the Master is to perform toward his
servant?

A. That which is commanded by the Holy Ghost. Col. 4.1. in these words: Ye
Masters do, or offer to servants that which is good and equal.

Q. What particular duties does this general Commandment contain?

A. Diverse. And first of all they are not to keep away their servants hire and
wages: (as wicked Laban did from Jacob. Ge. 29.23.) but pay and discharge that
which was agreed upon: which is required by the Lord of Masters.

And there is great reason thereof: for why? by the very light of nature, the
labourer is worthy of his hire. Mat. 10.1. Tim. 5.18. therefore to keep away
the servants or hirelings wages, is in many places condemned as a grievous
sin in the sight of God.

2. Duty belonging to equal dealing with the Servant.
Secondly, they are to teach and instruct their servants and apprentises in the
knowledge and skill of those Arts, Trades, and Mysteries, for the obtaining
whereof, they willingly bound themselves with them: and therefore to disappoint
and deceive them when they have received their money, and employed their time
and labor about their own commodity, it is plain, and unnatural falsehood:
and even contrary to equity and reason, whatsoever color and pretense they
may set upon the matter.

Q. What say you thirdly?

3. duty belonging to equal dealing with the servant.
A. Masters, when they command their servants any thing, they are to make
their whole mind and purpose fully known unto them: and not to speak unto
them (either through negligence, and pride: or disdain and impatience)
imperfectly, and as it were in a riddle or dark speech: whereby the servant
hanging in suspense, knows not what to do, and what to avoid: according to
the example of Abraham, Cen. 24. whose wisdom and equity, all Masters are
to follow: for why? it were unreasonable, and tyrannical, to deal heardly
with servants for not doing that thing which they knew not.

4. Thing belonging to good and equal dealing with Servants.
Fourthly, masters are to command nothing that is hurtful and dangerous
either to the body or to the soul of their servants. As for example, to lie
and speak untruths: to pick or steal: to commit whoredom or uncleanness:
to fight desperate fraies: to murder and shed blood in the unjust and
devilish quarrel of their Master, and such like: in which respect diverse
persons are condemned, and noted with infamy in the holy Scrptures: As
Putiphers wife alluring Joseph to uncleanness. Absalom commanding his
servants to murder his brother Amnon: the like is to be seen in Saul, 1. Sam.
21. In the high priest, Act. 24. and many other. For doubtless it is a most
unjust and cruel thing, that whereas the master ought to have a special care
of the good estate of their servants, both in respect of their souls and
bodies, to command any thing that should endanger either of both, which the
Prophet David knew right well, and therefore would not drink the water that
was brought to him with the danger of his servants.

5. Duty of the Master, toward the Servant, to the end he may deal equally
with him.
Q. What is the fifth duty?

A. The master is to command those things which the servant is able to beweeld,
perform, and bring to pass: and not the things that do exceed his ability
and strength: according to the example of cruel Pharaoh, who laid such heavy
burdens, and charges upon his poor servants the Israelites, that they were
enforced to groan and be weary of their lives. This is to deal worse with a
reasonable creature, and one that carries the Image of God: the^ a good man
will deal with a bruit beast: For (as the holy Ghost says) Pro. 12.10. A good
man pittieth his beast

Q. Now proceed?

6. Duty belonging to equal dealing with the Servant.
A. Although a servant is not irreverently, and at all times to answer his
master, admonishing and rebuking him: yet is he in some weighty causes and
respects, to give his servant leave to answer for himself: according to the
example of Job, chapter 31. for otherwise the most innocent should be condemned as
guilty: which were a most unjust and unreasonable thing: and therefore the
servant must be suffered to make his just and lawful defense.

Q. What further have you to say?

7. Duty belonging to equal dealing with the Servant.
A. Seventhly, the Masters are not always to wear and consume their servants
about their own commodity and profit: but at the last, and that in due time,
to give the^ leave to provide for themselves by some honest and lawful means.
Which thing Jacob in all reason does require of Laban, Genesis 20. and
herewithall when servants have consumed their strength, and continued many
years in faithful service, they are not to be sent away with empty hands, but
the master is to requite them in some sort according to his abilility. These
things are commanded by the Lord, as things just and equal: Deuteronomy. 15. and in
other places of the law. How greatly, unjust and cruel dealing with servants,
displeases the Lord, we may read, Ier. 34.

Q. What yet further?

A. The master is to tender and maintain his servant when he is sick, and
unable to provide for himself: as also to use all good means for the
recovery of his health: 8. Duty of equal dealing with the Servant.
for it were unjust to use the health of the servant, and then to forsake him
in his sickness: in conscience whereof the Centurian, (as appears, Mat. 8.)
resorteth to our Savior Christ to obtain recovery and health for his
servant, who the^ lay in extremity of sickness. And a certain Philistim, is
noted of cruelty, 1. Sam. 30.11.12.13. for that he forsook his servant, and
left him destitute of al necessaries, being now sick and unable to attend upon
him.

9. Duty of equal dealing with the servant.
Q. What say you in the last place?

A. When the servant dies, the master is to see him committed to the earth,
by honest and comely burial. This is a duty, which one Christian owes to
another: and therefore is a Christian master to perform it, much more to his
servant, which has finished his life in his service: of this was Isaac
mindful, as appears in the burial of Deborah, his wives nurse and servant.

OF THE DVTIES of servants toward their Masters. 1. Duty of Servants to
their Masters is love.

Q. WE heard before of the duties of masters toward their servants: let us now
come to the duties of servants toward their masters. What is the first duty?

A. Love. Theseruant must love his master.

Q. You say well: for without this, the servant can do no duty in the right
manner, or acceptable to God. But can the servant easily perform this duty?

It is a hard thing for Servants to love their Masters.
A. No: It is an hard matter in this corruption of man's Nature to perform it
to any man: but especially for servants toward their masters.

Q. How comes that to pass?

The reason of the difficulty.
A. By reason of the inward pride, whereby every man has a desire to be
advance laboue others: as also for that by the light of nature, we all love
liberty, and hate bondage and servitude as a punishment for sin.

Q. By what reasons may servants be induced to love their masters?

By 3. reasons servants may induce their, hearts to love their Masiers. 1.
Reason.
A. First of all, if they will be accounted true Christians, and the servants of
God, they are to love all men in general: yea even their very enemies:
therefore much more their masters, to whom they are nearly bound.

Again, 2.
masters do bear and represent the person of Jesus Christ, the great master
and Lord of the whole world: and therefore if they love Jesus Christ, they must
needs love their earthly masters.

Lastly, 3.
masters are instruments and means whereby the Lord co^ueyeth many graces and
benefits unto servants.

Q. What are those?

Servants receive diverse sorts of benefits from their Masters
A. An house, an habitation, together with a lawful calling to attend upon,
which is not every man's case.

Secondly, masters do free their servants, and defend them from many disgraces,
1. Sort. 2. Sort.
injuries and oppressions, which otherwise they should suffer at the hands of
them, who are mightier then themselves.

Furthermore, masters direct their servants in a course serving to their
comfort and benefit: 3. Sort.
who of themselves, would run hedlong into a number of miseries and
destructions.

Lastly, if they be Christian masters, 4. Sort.
they have not only a care for the outward estate of their servants, in
ministering to them such things as are necessary, but principally they have
care of ye eternal salvation of their souls

Q. Your reasons are essectual to persuade: and have prevailed with such, who
were endued with any grace of Gods spirit, which thing they have declared, not
only by a tender care of the good estate of their Masters, but also by amiable
countenances, and sweet behavior, as appears by diverse in the holy
scripture. But now what is the second duty of servants to their Masters? 2.
Duty of Servants to their Masters, is reverence and subjection. The preofe of
it.


A. Reverence, and Subjection.

Q. Where is that warra^ted and required?

A. Ephesians. 6.5. 1. Pet. 2.18. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tit. 2.9. In all which places
reverence and submission is required, at the hands of servants toward their
Masters.

Q. But what should move them to perform this duty?

There are 3. Reasons moving to this duty. 1. Reason.
A. Diverse reasons. And first, the Master is advanced and lifted up into an
higher degree of prehemiuence then the servant: and therefore it is his duty to
stoop down to him, as his superior.

Again, 2. Reason.
the state and condition of the master is better then that of the servant in
the outward respect: therefore he must honor him as his better

Lastly, the master takes his authority over the servant, 3 Reason.
from no creature in heaven or earth, but only from God himself. Romans 13.
Pro. 8. and therefore the servant cannot resist his Master, The Servant is to
reverence his Master. 1. In heart inwardly. 2 outwardly And that also diverse
waves
or contemn him: but he must needs resist God, and despise his majesty.

Q. Is the servant only to reverence the master inwardly in his heart?

A. No: he is to express it outwardly, and that diverse ways.

First of all, in his countenance: for why? he is not to look upon his
Master, with a light, stubborn, 1. In countenance.
proud and disdainful countenance.

2. In Speech and words. And that 5. ways.
Q. Is he not to show reverence and subjection in his very speech and words?

A. Yes, and that diverse ways. And first he is to yield to his Master titles
of reverence, 1. Way.
and honor, according to his place and estate. 2. King. 2. and. 5.

Secondly, 2.
he is not to gainsay and contend with his Master, except it be in a matter
of great importance and necessity; and yet the same with reverence and
submission.

Thirdly, 3.
he must not answer again, when he is admonished or rebuked. Tit. 2.9. this
is a sign of a rebellious heart, and an occasion of much evil. Prou. 15.1.

Furthermore, 4.
he is not to speak irreverently or scoffingly of his governors behind their
back, as is the manner of some wicked servants.

Q. What say you lastly?

A. The servant is not to murmr, grudge, or repine at his estate: namely,
that he is a servant and in subjection: 5. Way, of showing reverence.
but willingly submit himself to his estate: 2. Cor. 7.20. Ephesians. 6.7. And
there is great reason thereof; for if the Lord (who can as easily make a Master
as a servant) did not see it good for his own glory, and the benefit of the
servant, he would never have called him thereunto.

Q. But is it not a great temptation for a servant to yield all this that has
bin spoken of, to a crooked, churlish, and a wicked Master?

A. It is so: but yet a servant is to comfort and arm himself out of the word
of God, by these considerations. There are 4. Reasons of great force to move
Servants to love, reverence, and obey, even wicked and churlish masters. 1.
Reason.


First, that albeit the Master does abuse his place and estate: yet it is the
Lords, and from the Lord: and therefore in yielding service to an evil and
cruel Master, he does it to the Lord, who will show himself good and
gracious unto him.

Secondly, 2.
hereby servants shall by patience be conformed to Christ Jesus their Lord and
Master. 2. Pet. 2. Chap. ver. 18.19.20.21.

Thirdly, 3.
they shall by their patience and willing suffering, adorn and bring credit to
the Gospel. 1. Tim. 6. Chap. 1.2. ver.

Lastly, 4.
the worst estate of servants amongst such as are reputed Christians: is better
and more tolerable, then the state of servants amongst many nations: where
servants have bin and are subject to all manner of disgraces, cruelty and
tyranny: as appears both in the Scripture, and in profane Histories.

OF THE DVTIES of Schoole-maisters to their Scholiers, and Scholars to their
Schoole-maisters.
Q. Remain there yet no other duties belonging to the fifth Commandment?

A. Yes, and that of two other sorts, respecting one another; to wit, of
Schoole-maisters to their Scholars, of Scholars to their Schoole-maisters: of
aged and graie-headed, to the younger sort: and of the younger sort, toward
their auntients.

Q. But do Schoole-maisters and scholars belong to this Commandment?

A. I no doubt, not only by reason of that relation which is between them,
but for that the duties of them both, are of great and profitable consequent to
the Church and common wealth, as all men know by experience, and cannot fitly
be referred to any other commandment but to the fifth.

Q. Then let us speak of them both apart: and first of all, what duties are
Schoole-maisters to perform to their scholars?

3. Duties belong to the Schoolmaster in respect of his Scholars. 1.
Instruction. 2. Correction 3 G^od example, or conversation. Schoolemaisters a^e
to instruct their Scholars in 2. things. 1. In divine knowledge. 2. In humane
learning. What divine knowledge is.


A. First of all, teaching, and instruction.

Secondly, discipline or correction.

Thirdly, Example or couersation.

Q. Wherein is the Schoole-maister to train and instruct his scholars?

A. First of all and principally in divine knowledge.

Secondly, in humane learning, or literature.

Q. What mean you by the first?

A. The knowledge and understanding of the will of God contained in the holy
Scriptures, concerning faith and salvation: the true worship of God, and all
duties toward man. For the attaining whereof, he is to train up his scholar
at fit and convenient times, in some catechism skilfully penned, co^prising
the sum of Christian Religion. And after what manner it is to be taught.
In the delivery whereof, he is to behave himself with great wisdom,
reverence and holiness.

Q. To what purpose is all this? does not humane learning suffice for the
adorning and commending of a man?

A. No: for without religion, humane learning is a profane thing, Humane
knowledge insufficient without divine.
serving for nothing but to puff up a man's heart with pride, to take away
excuse from him before God, and to arm him with boldness to oppose himself
against the word of God, and the holy truth contained therein, as may appear
in the heretics, Atheists, and profane contemners of Religion in all ages.

Q. What mean you by humane Learning?

Humane learning what it is.
A. Reading, Writing, Grammar, with the rest of good Arts and Sciences.

Q. In what manner is the Schoole-maister to train the child to the knowledge
of these things?

A. Hereunto, are required diverse things. And after what manner it is to be
taught. 1. With good skill and understanding.
First of all, skill and knowledge: that is, he must know and understand the
things that he teaches to another, least through ignorance he conueieth into
the mind of his hearer, many errors and untruths, which will easily take
impression in tender hearts, and hardly be removed, when they attain to
further age.

The second is diligence and painfulnes; which consists in often reading to
his Scholar, 2. With diligence and painefulnes.
often hearing and examining him; with calling over things before heard: and
lastly, invring him to dispute and confer with his fellows and equals: by
all which, memory is confirmed, the wit sharpened, and the mind furnished
with matter and knowledge fit for every purpose. Without this, a long time is
spent, and little or no fruit does ensue, although the scholar be of a good
capacity.

Thirdly, he must use all allurements to draw his scholars to hearken unto
him, 3. With all good allurements and encouragement to his Scholars.
and to love learning; as gentleness, mildness, patience, commendation of
Learning, with gifts and rewards upon occasion. And on the contrary part, he
is to avoid hastines, and boisterousnes of affections; a sharp and severe
countenance, with impatience, and such like. All which serve to harden the
heart of the scholar, to cause him to hate and fly learning: to dull and
astonish his wit, so that either he cannot conceive and understand that which
is delivered; or is made unable to repeat that again, which was before
conceived. All which is plain by common experience.

4. With discretion.
The fourth thing is discretion: which consists in discerning and considering
the nature and disposition of the scholar, together with his wit and
capacity, to the end that he may rightly and skilfully let loose or hold in
the raines of his government; as also measure and proportion the precepts which
he gives; to the end that he neither oppresses his wit and capacity with too
much, or suffers them to languish and impair with too little. This was wisely
considered of the very heathen, as may appear in their books of the trayning
up of youth.

Q. But what say you of the second general thing required of a Schoolmaster,
namely, Discipline, and Correction?

2. Duty of the Schoolmasters toward his Scholar, is due Correction.
A. I say, it is most necessary to be used, for without this, the scholar
will cotemne the master, cast off all care of learning, and corrupt his heart
with all manner of vices; insomuch that he will prove, not only void of
learning, and all commendable virtues, but a monster in life and conversation.

Q But how is he to use Discipline, and Correction?

2. Things required to the right use of the Schoolmasters correcti^n.
A. First of all, he is not so much to correct him for learning, and want of
wit and capacity, or any natural defect, as for evil manners, stubbornes,
idleness, negligence, and such like.



Q. It may be gathered out of your words, that a scholar is to be brought up,
not only in learning, but in good manners?

A. There is no doubt of that, for without good manners, learning, and wit (be
they never so excellent) are not only disgraced and deformed, but utterly
fruitelesse, and like a ring of gold (as the Prophet in another sense speaks)
in a swines snout.

Q. For the furtherance whereof, how is the Schoole-maister to behave himself,
which is the third general thing you spoke of?

3. Duty of the Schoolmasters toward his Scholar, is good example of life,
and conversation. The reason of it. A 4. duty of the Schoolmasters, is to
pray often, both with and for his Scholars.
A. He is to walk before the eyes of his scholar, in a wise, holy sober and
comely behavior. The reason whereof is, for that the scholars are ready to
follow the example of their Masters in all things, whether good or evil as we
may see in the scholars of Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, and such like.

Q. Is not the Schoole-maister to pray often with, and for his scholars?

A. Yes, for without that, small or no success is to be looked for.

The duties of Scholars to their Schoolemasters.
OF THE DVTIES of Scholars to their Schoole-maisters and Teachers.
Q. Having spoken of the duties of Schoole-maisters, equity and order does
require to speak of the things that Scholars ought to perform: what say you
to that?

3. Sorts of duties to be performed of Scholars to their Schoolemasters.
A. The things which they are to perform are diverse.

The first concerns themselves.

The second, has respect to their Masters.

The third contains their behavior to all men in general.

Q. What say you of the first, which concern themselves?

1. Sort, of the which there are 2.
A. That which they are to perform in regard of themselves, and their own
good, is twofold.

For first of all, they are to give diligent care, attention,

they may profit therein.

Q. Why is the first required?

A. Because that without diligent hearing and attention, The Reason of the
first duty.
teaching and instruction, be it never so plain, wholesome, and excellent, it
is in vain: like as if a man should sing unto a d^afe ear; for hearing ^oeth
naturally, and in order, before understanding, whereupon Scholars in all
languages are termed by the name of hearers.

Q. But how shall Scholars profit and increase by that which they hear?

How the 2. Autie is to be performed that the Scoller may profit. Things to be
iuoyded which hinder profiting
A. They are to avoid some things, and perform some other.

Q. What are the things they are to avoid?

A. Idleness, excessive eating, drinking, sleeping, recreations, the company
of idle and vain persons, amourous, and such like. By all which means a man
does fruitlesly mispend his time: blunt and dull his wits, and weaken his
memory.

Things to be practiced, for the profit (...) the Scholar.
Q What is he to perform?

A. To call to mind things heard, often and seriously to meditate thereof,
confer thereof with others, and be ready to teach them the things he
himself has ^earned.

2 Sort of duties. Of the which, there are 3.
Q What say you of his duty toward his Master?

A. His duty contains three things.

1. Love.
For first of all, he is to love his Ma ster* as an other parent, yea and in
some respects more then his natural Parent.

2 Reverence
Secondly, he is to reverence, and honor him

1. In heart.
First of all, in his heart and affections.

2. In speech, present, or absent.
Secondly, in his speech, both in the presence, and absence of his Master.

3. In gesture
Thirdly, in outward gesture and behavior.

By all which outward effects, is laid open the inward reverence and honor of
the heart.

Q. What is the third duty?

A. Thankfulness, which contains all means which serve to requite the love,
3. Duty is Thankfulness.
care, labor, and travail of his Master, with all fruits and benefits
ensuing thereof: in which regard many are renowned and commended, even in
profane Hystories, as Alexander the great, to Aristotle his Master.

Unthankfulness is a great sin in Scholars, and highly displeasing to God.
Contrariwise, all such have been condemned as unnatural monsters, which have
showed themselves unthankful or unkind toward their Schoole-maisters, and
Fathers in learning: as that Mo^ster of Nature Nero, toward his Master
Seneca: So certain young Scholars (as appears in Prudentius) who with their
styles and penkniues bereaved their Christian master of his life: upon all
which hellish Vipers, afterward came the horrible vengeance and judgments of
God. And not without cause, seeing they did in a hellish manner violate and
transgress this fifth commandment.

Q. Say somewhat of the third and last thing, namely the behavior of Scholars
before all men in general. 3. Sort of the duties of Scholars.


A. As their bringing up is more excellent then others, so are they to excel
others in behavior.

Q. How to excel?

They are to excel others that want good education, in their whole carriage,
and behauing of themselves toward all men.
A. In Religion, courtesy, humility, humanity, comelines, and order in
eating and drinking, talking, recreations, entertainments, salutations, and
such like. According to the rules and precepts which they have learned, not
only out of the Scripture and word of God, but out of the writings of civil and
political men. And therefore in this respect, are condemned al which professing
learning, are yet in their ma^ners and behauior proud, profane noisome,
inciuil, and uncomely, whereby they are so far off from adorning, and
commending good learning, yt they do most notably deface it, and cool the
affections of many toward it.

OF THE DVTIES OF the elder and younger sort.
Q. WE are now come to the other sorts, whereof we spoke before: and first of
all, we are to begin with the elder sort, The duties of the Elder toward the
younger. 1. Things to be considered concerning the elder persons. 1. The virtues
wherewith they are to be endued 2. The duties which they are to perform toward
the younger in years The virtues which ought to be in the Elder are many, as
the Apostle sets them down ^^t. chap. 2. verse. 1.2.3.
what say you of them?

A. For the better handling of that which concerns them, we are to consider
what virtues and properties are required in their persons.

Secondly, what they are to perform, being thus qualified to the younger sort.

Q. What are the virtues or properties required in the persons of ancient men
and women?

A. The most of them are set down in the first, second, and third verses of
the 2. chap. of the Epist. to Titus. The words are these. But speak thou the
things which become wholesome doctrine.

That the elder men be watchful, grave, temperate, sound in the faith, in
love, and in patience.

The elder women likewise, that they be in such behavior as becomes
holiness, not false accusers, nor subject to much wine, but teachers of honest
things.

Q. What duties are ancient men to perform? The duties of the Elder, are 4.


A. They are to instruct and inform young men in the knowledge of God, and of
his most holy will.

Again, they are to exhort and encourage them to all good and virtuous duties
to God and man.





Q. What will follow of all this?

The fruit following both virtues and duties of the Elder sort.
A. Great fruit and benefit to the younger sort: and their graie hairs shall be a
crown of glory to themselves.

OF THE DVTIES Of the younger sort unto their Elders.
The duties of the younger to the Elder, are of 2. sorts.
Q. LEt us proceed unto the duties of the younger sort unto their Elders?

A. Those duties do consist first of all in the inward affection. The duties
of the younger to the Elder.


Secondly, in outward behavior.

Q. What mean you by the first?

A. That young men and women, 1. Sort. 1. Love. 2. Reverence. Of this there are
3. Reasons.
should in their hearts and affections, love, honor and reverence their
elders. And there is great reason thereof.

For first of all they do represent part of the image of God, 1.
to wit, continuance of days and eternity.

Again, 2.
by reason of long life, they are furnished with wisdom, knowledge, virtue
and graces, far above the younger sort, who cannot attain thereunto for want
of long continuance in this life.

3. Reason, why the younger should reverence their Elders.
Lastly, God has appointed them, to be as Fathers and Mothers in care, in love,
and in tenderness toward the younger sort, which cannot well provide for
themselves.

2. Sort of the duties of the younger to the Elder. They are 3.1.
Q. What outward duties do you require?

A. Diverse. First of all, they are to hear with attention and reverence, the
counsel and instruction, which upon occasion they shall deliver to them: and
therefore they are not boldly to speak in their presence, 2.
much less to usurp ye first place of speech. 3.
A worthy example thereof we have in Elihu. Job. 32.11.12.

Secondly, they are not to contemn or deride the persons of the aged, least
that the hoate vengeance of God fall upon them, as it did upon the evil
brought up children of Bethel, that mocked the Prophet Elisha, in regard of one
effect or property of old age, namely baldness. 2. King. 2.23.24.

Thirdly, instead hereof, they are to yield unto their ancients all outward
signs and tokens of n="*" An example whereof we may see eue^ amongst the
Heathen: for when the Lacedemonia^s being present at a solemn show, upon the
Theater at Athens, an old man being near to them, they all stood up in token
of reverence; and one of their company yielding his seat to him, himself
standing by him. Whereby they did correct the vnreuerent behavior of the
Athenians toward the Aged: one of them saying, that the Athenians may know
what is fit to be done, but that they will not do it. Cicer. in Lib. de Senect.
reverence and honor: as uncovering their heads, bending their knee, and such
like, according to the manner of the country where they live: according as the
Lord has commanded, Leuit, 19.32. Thou shall rise up before the horehead, and
honor the person of the old man, and dread thy God: I am the Lord. Q. What if
so be the younger sort, are driven to admonish or rebuke the Elder sort?

A. They are to perform that duty in a most loving and reverent manner, as
appears, 1. Tim. 5.1.

Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father, and the younger men as
brethren.

The Elder women as Mothers, the younger as sisters, with all pureness.

Lastly, as old persons have bin comforters and supporters of the younger sort,
in the weakness and infirmity of their infancy and childhood: so are they to
help and relieve the weak and decrepit old age of their ancients.

Q. What say you of that time when as youth for the most part do contemn and
make light account of old age?

A. I say, first of all, that is a sign of a notable confusion, which commonly
springs out of evil and ungodly education.

Secondly, that it does foretell some notable Judgment of God to come upon
that land, where this evil is practiced.

FINIS.

