THE LAVER OF THE HEART; OR BATH OF SANCTIFICATION. Preached at Paul's Cross
the first of September last, 1615.

By GABRIEL PRICE Minister and Preacher of Gods Word.

ISAY. 1.16. Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from
before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Thomas Man. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS Very good Lord and Patron, ROBERT Lord RICH, Baron
of Leez: GABRIEL PRICE wishes all grace, peace, and joy in believing, with
increase of Honor in this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.
I Have presumed (which I have long purposed) to offer unto your Honor: some
poor token of that duty, which binds me unto your Lordship, while life
lasts: having gotten some fit occasion to express my love, I thought not to
pretermit the same; but therein to show my mind and poor ability, wherein I
may do your Honor any service. Therefore after I had yielded to publish this
Sermon, I remembered the blessed and holy Evangelist Saint Luke, penning and
publishing the heavenly story and blessed Gospel of Jesus Christ, did dedicate
the same to one Theophilus, a noble man of singular credit and authority;
which moved me to make choice of your Honor, to become a Patron and refuge
unto my poor and simple meditations, in a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross (as
the title shows): and is a Treatise tending to sanctification: which,
according to the time, I have, amongst others, brought my present; and (as I
hope) contrary to Mithridates sword, is more precious and richer within, then
it is without: and which, with the New year, as a New-yeeres gift, I humbly
present unto your Lordship, that under the shadow of your Honorable acceptance,
it may find some rest and relief. To whom being diligently read, and often
meditated upon, I doubt not, but it will be fruitful to inflame a zeal of
Gods glory, and furtherance of his religion.

Wherefore my humble desire is, your Honor would vouchsafe the patronage
hereof, and then (I doubt not but) more learned then my self will accept my
good will; and good men will help me with their prayers to God, for the
increase of his grace, to the further inlo^ging of the kingdom of his holy
son Jesus.

Now the very God of peace sanctify your Honor throughout, and in the
perusing hereof, to measure the commendation, to the glory of God, by the
liking and feeling of your own heart: so shall I have what I desire, and my
pains shall be more then sufficiently recompe^ced. Praying unto God that you
may live long, to the benefit of your Country, the advancement of your Honor,
the comfort of learning; and above all, that your whole spirit, and soul and
body may be kept blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
his glory, who shall glorify you in the Heavens.

Amen.
TO THE GODLY and well disposed Reader.
Having taken in hand to entreat of this place of Scripture (according to my
poor talent, wherewith God has enabled me) at the sundry motions and earnest
requests of some of my friends (such as fear God) I was earnestly desired to
put the same in print, for the benefit (as they said) of others, whose
christian desire, I take in this case, as a sufficient calling hereunto;
neither do I yet see, how I could have made them a denial, without some
prejudice to their souls, and some check unto mine own conscience. For the
matter it self containing (The Lauar of the heart, or the Bath of
Sanctification) I confess is of that excellency, that it requires both large
and deep discourses, wherein both learned and godly have not bin wanting. In
this corruption of nature it is not possible to do any thing so exactly well,
but will be carped at, depraved and slandered; so that who offers any thing
to the sight of the world, must make ready his back for the deep surrowes of
every biting censurer. Psa 1.9 3.
Therefore who am I? that I should take upon me to set forth and publish any
thing; the unworthiest I confess of many hundreds, and the vnablest of many
thousands: yet seeing many things more simple, less needful, and profitable,
are not only suffered, but allowed to come abroad: I am ^^t altogether
discouraged, neither has any man just cause to accuse me in this my honest
enterprise. And so much the less because my care has been to be sound and
plain, for the benefit of the simplier sort, and especially for the satisfying
of such honest and good hearts, as desired to peruse that with their eyes,
(which they heard with their ears) that so better meditating and remembering
that, which otherwise they forget, they might make their hearts as rich in
grace, as Sermons (according to the truth of God) are full of goodness: If
thou (gentle Reader) meet with any thing in any part of the Sermon, that thou
shall judge worthy the censuring, as me right in understanding me, as I
expressly spoke it; and let me before (a^ uncharitable opinion be settled) I pray
thee, have some brotherly signification thereof, and I shall be most ready (God
willing) to satisfy thee therein: or to alter, or to better my judgment, if
any man out of the word of God shall offer to instruct me for as I desire to
teach what I know without grudging; so I disdain not to learn that, wherein I
am ignorant without blushing: we know nothing yet, as we ought to know (says
the Apostle) therefore I do not presume of perfection, I confess much
imperfection every way; and in this do wholly and humbly submit my self to the
judgment of the Church; as I do for my sinful life, in Christ crave mercy of
God. The Lord inform us all, with all profitable and convenient truth, and
frame all our affections thereafter. And the Lord give us all grace, to turn
our hearts from the world unto God, our contentions into the peace of the
Church: and our minds into loyal obedience unto Sovereign authority, and our
prayers and thanksgiuings for our gracious and dread Sovereign King JAMES.
Amen, Amen.

THE LAVER OF THE HEART: OR THE Bath of Sanctification.
IEREM. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may
be saved. (or helped, or kept.)


THe blessed Apostle S. Paul, Hebr. 5.13.14. co^pareth the Scripture to the
Storehouse of a rich and plentiful housekeeper, wherein is laid up variety of
victuals, fit for all persons and estates; both milk for babes, that are
inexpert in the word of righteousness, and stronger meat for them that are of
riper age, which (through long custom) have their wits exercised to discern
both good and evil. And our Saurou^ Christ, Matthew. 13.52. compares it to a
treasury; wherein are things both new and old, so that every one may receive
hence, what is convenient for him: new garments, and new vessels, may be
filled with new wine, and new cloth; and old garments, and old vessels, may be
filled with old wine, and old cloth, that so both may be preserved together.
And to the same effect Hasile in the first Psalm likeneth the Scripture to a
well furnished Apothecaries shop, that is stored with variety of medecines, for
all diseases. And to this end S. Paul requires of Timothy. 2.2.15. and of
every Minister of the Word, that they show themselves good worke-men, that need
not to be ashamed* (...), dividing the word of God aright; not to broach every
truth in every time and place, lest so they loose both their labor, and their
Auditors, while they give them that, which is good in it s^lfo, but not good
for them ^putting new cloth to old garments, and make the rent worse then it
was; unto whom I tying my self (for counsel) commend this portion of
Scripture to your Honorable and Christian considerations; knowing well that
there are none, that shall hear me this day, high, or low; young, or old;
learned, or unlearned; rich, or poor, of what state and condition soever, but
ought to cause his heart to be exercised in the duties of Sanctification. Unto
which this Scripture read, summoneth us unto, even to walk in, as before God,
in this present world.

In the Chapters before going, is laid down the voluntary, and causeless
apostasy of the Jews, who would not be kept in the straight ways of God;
but fell to Idolatry with false gods. And as error in judgment breeds sin
in the conversation: so from Idolatry they turned aside to the lusts of the
Gentiles, as may appear from the 16. verse. of the first chapter; where the
holy Ghost expostulating the case with Israel, to the beginning of this 4.
chapter, presses upon their consciences the sense of their sins, and of the
ensuing plague and coming punishment, unto the twelfth verse. From whence as a
Judge, he passes to a final and full sentence, even the execution of his full
wrath to be inflicted upon the^ for their wickedness; After which, in this
verse read, as in a Psalm of mercy, having sundry times formerly pronounced
them guilty; the Almighty, here in the words read, puts on the affection
of a loving Father, in an exhortatiue speech, showing both how they may reform
their lives, and fly from the anger and judgments to come. Which Scripture
(being an inference depending on the former words, yet a whole sentence in it
self) in a word contains, a commandment, with an argument (backing and
seconding the precept) pressing sanctification and holiness of life, with the
profession of religion.

Purposing then (by the Lords assistance, and your godly patience) to say
something of this matter, let the order, in method, for me to speak, and you
to hear, be the self same, which the holy Ghost directs us unto in the
text. If you please to read the whole verse, you shall see three markable
points, punctually to offer themselves to your deep considerations.

First, the Commandment.

Secondly, the Argument, which expresses the end, wherefore they ought to
sanctify.

Thirdly, the Exprobration, vpb^^iding the Jews with their continuance in
sin, notwithstanding the great and continual pains of the Lords Prophets.

But the words that I have made choice of, containing more matter in them, if a
skillful workman had them in hand, then the time allotted will give me leave
to utter (as you have heard) contain two special points.

1. First, a Commandment. 2. Secondly, an Argument, enforcing the precept.
In the first, (^ight Honorable, Right Worshipful, men and brethren in the
Lord beloved;) not I, but the text it self presents into your view, 1.2.3.
three respectfull coseruations of weighty consideration.

1. In the Commandment, by way of acclamation, we are to observe the persons
calling, commanding and exhorting to sanctification. Which is God, and the
Prophet ^^remiah.

For the Comm^ndement was by the hand of the Lord, 2. Chr. 29.25. 1. San. 15.24.
and by the hand of his Prophets.

2. The persons exhorted, were the people of Jerusalem.

3. The third is the subject and matter, whereunto they are called. O
Jerusalem, wash, etc.

Where five things show themselves to be thought upon.

1. The affection, expressed in the Interiection, (O.) 2. The voice, in which
God calls unto them, which is in the Imperative and commanding voice. 3. The
third is the matter, whereunto they are commanded, which is, to wash, etc. 4.
The fourth is the subject it self, about what they most be exercised, which
i^ the heart. 5. The fifth is the object, from what they must wash, (viz.) from
wickedness. 6. In the second p^rt laying down the reason, whereof one they
ought to sanctify.
The end of our sanctification is no less, then our preservation in this life,
and our salvation in the life to come.

The content and ^^here ^^ce to this portion of Scripture, may be read in the
words which our Prophet uses, chap. 4.1. (saying) O Israel, if thou return;
return unto me, says the Lord: and if thou put away thine abomination out of
my sight, then shall thou not remove. Or that of Moses, Deuter. 10.16.
Circumcise therefore the fore-skinne of your hearts, and harden your necks no
more. Or with Isay, chap. 1. v. 16. Wash you, make you clean, take away the
evil of your works from before mine eyes: cease to do evil, learn to do
well: for if you consent and obey, you shall eat the good things of the land.
Like unto this, is that which the holy Apostle S. Paul gives for doctrine,
saying, 2. Cor. 7.1. Seeing then we have those promises, dearly beloved, let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and grow up
unto full holiness in the fear of God. And if you please to take notice of
the scope and meaning of the word themselves: in a word, they may thus be
read: O Jerusalem, of all people in the world most beloved; the joy of my
desires, whom I would neither punish, nor hear of your plagues: yet because
Heb. 4.13. (...) all things lie open and naked to the eyes of God, with whom no
unclean person can stand justified; I beseech you in the Lords behalf: nay
the Lord, that in respect of thy sin should be thy Judge, is become thy
Remembrancer in the affection of a loving father: and that you should not be
amazed with the excellency of his glory, nor confounded with the might of his
Majesty; he has been pleased, in men like to your selves, to deliver unto you
the wonderful things of God: for if God did not send his word, none would ask
for it. It it not I therefore that speak unto you of my own head: for what am
I, but a messenger of my self? It is the Lord that created thee (O Jerusalem,)
that calls forth of heaven by me, whom he has called, anointed, and
assigned to be a Prophet unto you: for none may take this office* upon him, but
he that is called, as Aaron was. And so much the rather ought you to heed my
words, because I speak not of my self, nor from man, but from God; of whom I
have received, both my commission and lesson, what, and how to speak, and how
far to proceed against you. That you may the rather hearken and give your
attention unto the words; know the exceeding love and affection the Lord has
toward you; he is so far from des^ring your destruction, or delighting and
pleasing himself in your ponishment, as that he be month your misery, and
lamenteth your loss: yea as a compassionate father he pitieth you, and has
compassion on all those, of whose return there is any hope. And that you
should believe it, his will is, that his messengers should have the same tender
affection, and compassionate care over the Church; that Iaph^^^ may be allured
to dwell in the ^ems of Sam. And that none may stand up to excuse himself, my
words do not point to the Assyrions, Idume^ns, nor Mo^bites; but they do
concern thee (O Jerusalem, that take your selves to be a purified people,)
There be none so holy, but need farther information, and reformation; and it is
the Ministers duty to speak the word and rebuke sin, and exhort every kind
of profession, unto religion; and that you the hearers might nor think it an
Indifferent thing to hear, or not to he are; because men like your selves
speak it: It is not a counsel, but a commandment, enforcing the estimation
of the authority of the Prophet, no less the Gods own authority. Wherefore in
the Lords behalf, survey your waits in your he^re^ by the glass of Gods law:
and you that think your selves to be a sanctified people, shall behold great
(...) of washing, not only the seet, but the head also; not the out side alone,
but the very insul^ is defiled. For I must tell you, you are no better within,
then you be without. But albeit thou art commanded to sanctify thy heart,
beware of assuming any power unto your selves; for as sanctification is an
action, and not words; so it is not man's, but Gods work, yet so, that God
works not upon man, as upon stocks, but as upon reasonable creatures, who by
Gods preventing grace, work together with him the works of God. For in this
action, the hand is the whole Trinity; the water is the tears of repentance;
1. These. 5.23.
the soape is the grace of God through Christ; and the sun that dries us,
and makes us accepted, is the applying and justifying faith, through Christ
Jesus. And in this work be sure, that thou thy self be exercised therein;
for God will not be served and worshipped by atturneyes, and another for thee:
for thou must serve God for thy self; because the just man must live by his
own faith. And here, O Jerusalem, you must understand, although the Lord has
made you the Prince of the Provinces, seating you in the high places, to
cleanse and reform others; yet the Lord requires, that you first cleanse your
selves, and wash your own hearts; before you sit upon others, first sit upon
your selves. And herein be not hypocrites, for outward holiness, without the
heart go with it, is abominable before God: but sanctify the heart, and all
will be clean. Therefore let the object, wherabout you must be busied, be your
sins and wickedness; for the readiest way to bring you back from
profaneness, is to convince your selves of sin: And so doing, the gain is
your own; for thereby you shall not profit the Lord with your righteousness,
but your selves. For so shall you in this life be preserved, when others
perish; and in the life to come saved, when other shall be damned.

The God of all grace so sanctify us in the understanding hereof generally,
that we so apply the doctrines particularly to our hearts, that all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit may so be cleansed, that we may grow up
unto full holiness in the fear of God.

Jeremy, and the Prophet in the name of the Lord. 2. Chr. ^9.25.


And this is of great force to enforce the commandment.

The world is become so captious, that it is more ready to question, by what
authority the Preacher preaches, then with obedience to obey the preaching.
Therefore to remove all lets, that may hinder the acceptance of his doctrine,
he first of all pleads his commission.

by God and his Church.

This the Prophet proves, speaking not in his own, but in the Lords name. As
(if he should have said,) I do not of my self command you, for the^ you might
think me too busy; but I have authority and commission divine, and am set a
work by the Lord, whose will I must obey; and therefore you ought to hear me
with patience.

For I am none of those who run, and God has not sent; my calling is from God.
And for this cause received I the anointing, 1. Ioh. 2.21.
which is nothing else but the assignement, vocation, and ordination of any, to
^n office in Church or Commonwealth, with a promise of bestowing sit gifts for
the discharge thereof. To this end, Kings, Prophets, and Priests in the old
Testament were ^nnointed; signifying the spiritual oil of Gods grace, fitting
us to our calling: this is that Chrysma, that will teach us all things.

Here I mind not with Ire^ans, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
to show you, that Alia vocatio est extraordinaria, and alia ordinaria: that
the one is without the suffrage of men, by the only voice of God, as was
Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets under the Law; and as John the Baptist, and
the Apostles in the time of the Gospel: and that the other was by the suffrage
of the Church, Precibus and impositione manuum; as now in the time of the
Gospel the Lord sends laborers into his vineyard: But my purpose is briefly
to show you, that none without a lawful calling from the Church (by whose
hands the Lord sends forth fit men into the Ministry) ought to be heard of
the Lords people.



Then none (without a lawful calling) may take upon them the ministry, not
be heard of the Lords people.

But the proposition is true, Exodus 28.1. Numb. 16.32.35. 1. Sam.
13.9.10.11.13. 2. Reg. 9.7.31. 2. Sam. 6.6.7. 2. Reg. 15.5.

Aaron was, Then, etc.

But, Hebr. 5.4.

If the Lord from heaven complains of such, that run before they be sent;
then such ought not to be heard of the Lords people. But the Lord complains,
let. 23.21. saying: I have not sent these Prophets, yet they run: I have not
spoken unto them, and yet they prophecy.

If Christ Jesus in the new Testament approves this; then such ought not to
be heard, that have not the same approbation.

But Christ Jesus from heaven in the chosen vessel Saint Paul, Acts 9.12.
sending him to Ananias, that he might lay his hands upon him, and receive
sight: Vrim and Thummim, science and good conscience: knowledge, and holiness
to bear his name before the Gentiles, which makes the proposition. If in
nature, order do sound against such irregular persons; then it cannot be well
pleasing to God, that any in the Lords name, without the Lords appointment,
should meddle with the Ephod, or deal with the sacred things of God.

But Peter Martyr upon the 1. of Sam. 14. says, Spectanda est in
ecclesiasticis Eutaxia, in politicis autem parendum est. In Ecclesiastical
laws, good order must be considered; but in political, we must obey. And to
thrust in a man's self without an assignement, is against order, which is
engraven in every man's person, even from the head to the foot. For is not the
head a tower; the eyes watchmen, the eyelids windows for light; the mouth a
door to let in provision; the tongue a speaker, to call for that which is
needful, and to examine that which is doubtful: be not the cares spies to
listen; the hands seruitors; the feet messengers, to carry, and recarrie; ^1.
^^al
the teeth grinders of natures provision? is not the p^llat a taster, and the
stomach a kitchen, wherein all things be prepared for the benefit of nature;
that so the whole body be preserved as the closet of the soul. All which
being held in that order, that God has set them, do cry against the
disordered fury of men in the ministe^ie, that run before they are son^.
Yea, not only Divinity, reason, and nature, but Christian policy,
proclaims, that if Iudget, and Iestic^^ in their Sessions, suting for
correction of vice, in the Kings name first plead their commission; then ought
no man in the name of the King of heaven preach, without his assignement.

all meekness. Such Ministers and messengers of the Lord, that have received
their calling from the Church, which is that which Saint James gives for
doctrine; Iom. 1.21.
We being called, be the Lords servants, therefore we must do our masters
message: and he that does but his masters message and no more, ought not to be
blamed; nay ought to be believed. For whatsoever the Lord by his messengers
says, must be believed; and being commanded by them, who are first commanded
by the Lord, they must be obeyed. Therefore the Lord in this our text
commanding high and low, rich and poor, to sanctify themselves, speaks unto
us here present. Wherefore this day we ought to obey this commandment, as we
will answer it at our uttermost peril.

and of the Sacraments. For the right of those orders, whereby they were
ordained to sacrifice for the quick and the dead, undermining the sacrifice of
our Savior, we deny to be one and the same with the most just and equal
laws, which the Lord made touching the necessity of vocation.

The third use; what profit may he bring unto the people, himself not brought
up, nor sent of God? even as much as Saint Peter, that fished on the wrong side
of the ship al night, and caught nothing: so much good, and no more may we
look to come by their ministry, that in contempt of the Churches ordination,
and imposition of hands, run up and down, gathering unto themselves a heap
of hearers, who are not taught (as you have heard) from God, by Jeremy; but
from Jeremy; by Jeremy, and so do, Toto coelo, errare a coelo; feed upon man's
inventions, in stead of the immortal food of Gods word. Hence it comes, that
divines turn religion into disputation, and stand more upon science then good
conscience, to get themselves a name, by leading the poor people into a
thousand pitiful opinions.

In the first and best days of the Church it was far otherwife, unto which
glorious days the Lord Jesus brings us, and that soon, lest Christians turn
Jews, and Christianity be turned into Atheism; and let every good Christian
say, Amen.

Now a word,

Jeremiah speaks from the Lord; Therefore of God he must learn his duty.

From whence, I beseech you, Fathers and brethren, let us confirm our
judgments, that the Ministers of God are not before hand to be taught their
lessons of men; but they must first learn both matter and manner, what to
speak, and how to speak from God, before they teach men. The truth of this,
our example leads us to. For Jeremy speaks from God, and not from man.

This doctrine runs with the current and stream of the lively waters, Exodus
3.12. The Lord said to Moses, I will be with thee: Exodus 4.12.
and I will be with thy mouth, and will teach thee what thou shall say. Of the
Judges of Israel it was said, Judge. 3.10.
And the spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Israel.

It is the Lords appointment, Isa. 6.6.
with a coal from his Altar, to inflame the tongue of his messenger.

Because to whom a Minister is to perform his duty, of him he is to learn
his duty. Ephesians. 6.17.
But in teaching of men, a Minister is to perform his duty to God. 1. Cor.
4.1. and 3.10.

Therefore we must not speak what we will, nor how we list; but all must be
both for matter and manner, as God will. So says the Prophet, 1. Reg. 22.14.
Whatsoever the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. Yea so says the false
Prophet, Numb. 23.3. Whatsoever the Lord shows unto me, I will tell thee. And
this is that which the Prophet Isay prophesied of our blessed Savior, that
before he should be sent forth of the Father to preach; it was said, Luke 4.18.
that the spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the Lordannointed
me, he has sent me to preach good tidings, etc.

To conclude this: If some Magistrates will scorn to learn of the Divine, to
pronounce judgment at the bar, why should the Divine, by man's directions,
be taught to speak in the Pulpit? If the Captain must not sight, when the
mean soldier will appoint him; nor the soldier fight with such weapons as
his enemies will appoint him; then Gods Ministers ought not to teach, what the
best man in the parish will appoint him. But the proposition is true: Ergo,
woeful it is to hear, how the gold of the Sanctuary is changed, Ierem. Lam.
4.1.2.
and become dim; and how the Noble men of Sion, comparable to fine gold, are
become earthen pitchers, waiting on the humor of men, to be filled with wind,
that they may fill others with vanity: that the Lord may say now, as this
Prophet said of Judah, and Israel, Lam. 2.14. Thy Prophets have looked out
vain and foolish things for thee, and they have not discovered thine
iniquity, to turn away thy captivity, but have looked out for false
prophecies, and causes of banishment.

The use is both for reprehension, and for instruction: first, for
reprehension, it reproves, first such Ministers, that be slaves and vassals
to men's affections. Such were the four hundred, (1. Reg. 22.6.) Prophets, to
please Ahab. And would to God there were not among the Prophets, that will
speak, as the best man of the parish will have him speak; and that will speak
man's inuentious in painted eloquence, to set forth themselves; and that there
were not, that because they may not speak what they will, speak not at all,
making a divorce between the tongue, and the heart, lest their Popery be
seen. 1. Cor. 7.23. Galath. 1.10. 1. Thessal. 2.4.

Secondly, it reproves such that teach for the doctrines of Gods
commandments; (...). Man's precepts, setting forth their own inventions, and
their (Traditiones sancta Romana) with more authority and commendation, then
the word of God. Maith. 15.9. because if men or Angels proach otherwise, then
we have received from Christ and his Apostles, they be accursed. Anathama
marah natha. According to which doctrine of the Apostle Saint Paul, Galath.
1.9. Cyp. ad Powp. p. 228. faith: Nihil innonetur nisi quod tradit^^n est: vnde
est istae traditio, vtrum de dominica and Euangelica authoritate descond^^s, an
de Apostolorum mand^^ is at ques Epistolis veniens; ca eni^^ fa^^^da ^sse qua
scripta sunt, etc. and proposed unto Iosuah, saying. Let not the book of the
Law depart from thy mouth. Until I deeply weighed this, I was drowned in the
opinion of learning, resolved that where learning is, there is the light of
true understanding; till together with this (I say) I called to mind, that the
Scribes and Pharisees, chief Doctors, experienced in the Scriptures,
understood not the Law, nor Christ's parables aright, because to them it was not
given, Matthew. 13.1. Luke 10.21. but was given to babes. Whereupon I am now
moved to say, it is not the wise dome of flesh and blood, that can judge of the
spirit; not learning, but God enlightening, that directs the understanding to
the right object. Wherefore I praise that illustrious Scaliger, exere, 359. who
says, Nostra hac in literarum studijs peregrinatio, sine suprema Luce,
miserabilia quadam erratio est. This our painful peregrination in studies, if
it be destitute of that supreme light, in nothing else but a miserable kind
of wandering. Yet in giving this glory to God, I commend not certain
speculatiue spirits, that run in the other extreme, who think God will make
known his mysteries to them, whether they take pains or no. For if the
provision of this baser life cannot be gotten without the sweat of our brows;
much less can the food of that better life be gained without the sweat, and
industrious searching of our souls. But to return to humane traditions, from
whence we have digressed: In speaking of humane learning, I beseech you to
understand me, and that with distinction; For when I name humane inventions,
and traditions, whether of doctrines, or of ceremonies, I pray rightly to be
understood. For concerning doctrine, I mean not, that it is utterly unlawful
to mention men, and men's writings in the place of God in preaching: for it is
lawful to allege in Sermons the authority of men, making for the truth of
God, as it was lawful for David to kill Goliath with his own sword. For an
arrow out of a man's own quiver against himself, does more fester the wound,
and wound him to death, then the sword of his enemy.

And concerning humane learning, I say with Saint Basil Ad^^potes, that both
the knowledge and use of natural learning in a Minister is lawful, and
sometimes necessary: and this does the very example of the Apostle reach us,
Act. 17.28. Saint Paul to convince the ignorant and idolatrous Athenians of
great blockishnes, and profaneness, alleges the saying of Aratus the Poet, to
prove the true God; who said, 1. Cor. 15.33.
that in God we had our living, our moving, and being. And in the question of
the resurrection, reproving the Epicures, who as if there were no resurrection,
nor life to come, gave themselves to all pleasure, and riotousneste of life, S.
Paul condemned by a sentence out of Menander the Poet, saying; Evil speech
corrupt good manners. The like he alleged out of Epimenides, Tit. 1.12.
saying, the Cretians are always liars. Thus we see not only humane, but
profane learning may serve Diuinicy: as hand-maidens, being purified and
cleansed from the Idolatry, and impiety of the Heathen. Thus far I dare go,
albeit I dare not speak with the spirit of Atheism, and blasphemy, that
Plinies Philosophy equalleth the books of Moses: not that Aristotle's
Ethickes, and Politickes, equal the Proverbs of Solomon: nor that Mareus
Aurelius, equalleth Mark the Evangelist: nor that Merlius prophecy be one with
the Prophecy of Isay: nor the eloquence of Cicero, and Demesthenes, equal the
cloque noe of the holy Ghost: nor any Doctors or Fathers, before the doctrine
or Christ: much less the Pope and his decrees, to be before, or equal with,
the decrees of God in the Bible. Neither do I mean of traditions concerning
ceremonies, that it is utterly unlawful to use any in the Church-apparell and
service, being commanded by the Christian Magistrate. For as religion can stand
without Popish trash from Rome, and Rhemes: yet ^ru^ religion never was without
certain ceremonies; even as a learned Lecturer of Geneua has said, Bucer in
Mat 18.
that Cerep^oniae enim testes religiouis sunt: Ceremonies are witnesses of
religion; for there are religious, as well as irreligious ceremonies. Can
Baptism be without water, and the Lords Supper without bread and wine? be
not prayers performed with kneeling; and what lets the Sacrament to be
received kneeling, when the words (delivering the same into the hands of the
people) it nothing else but a prayer; and the precisest (I hope) will not deny
kneeling at prayer. The Scripture sounds as forth of a Trumpet, that
indifferent things, and ceremonies of time, place and persons be not utterly
unlawful. Wherefore, dear brethren, stand not upon titles; for they which
labor well, are worthy of double honor: regard not garments, for Justin the
Martyr would put on a heathenish garment, rather then he would leave preaching
of Christ. Yea S. Paul himself, rather then there should be any let to the
preaching of the Gospel, he would make bald the head, and shave the hair.
Act. 18.18.
And therefore woe unto us, that live in these degenerate days, that for
black and white, round and square, will suffer our selves (the Elders of the
daughters of Sion) to sit upon the ground, and keep silence; that leave our
preaching, our maintenance, and care of our families, wanting more the supply
of our wants, then the people want us.

Deuteronomy. 4.2.
or diminishing. 1. Corinthians. 2.4. Neither stood my preaching in the enticeing
speech of man's wisdom, but in plain evidence of the spirit (says Saint
Paul.) 2. Cor. 2.17. We are not as those many, that make merchandise of the
word of God. Micah. 3.8. For the Minister of God ought to be full of the power
of the spirit of the Lord, and of judgment, and of strength, to declare unto
Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. Much might be said in this
point; but I fear I have dwelt too long upon the first branch; I mean the
persons speaking, so that time will not tarry for me. Therefore (with your
patience) I pass to the persons exhorted or called upon.

The second branch in the first part.
The persons spoken to, is the daughter of Judah, the Prince of the Provinces;
and of Cities, Jerusalem, the most glorious of all the world?

The former Chapter exhorted Israel, and the ten Tribes to repent, who for
their sins were carried into Assyria, in the ninth year of Hosea, King of
the ten Tribes.

So in this Chapter, Judah is called upon to cleanse his ways, and amend his
life, lest the like evil befall him, that ouertooke his brother Israel.

Now concerning Judah, which was the only people of God, and so instructed by
his Prophets, as none were more, nor so much as the people of Jerusalem: yet
here they needed further to be called upon.

religious: as the Zaphire for shining, yet need to be cleansed. Therefore in
this life is no perfection; but a growth in godliness is here continually
looked for of God at our hands. 1. Pet. 2.2. As newborn babes desire (...).
Deuteronomy. 6.7. Number. 15.38. Deuteronomy. 11.18.
the sincere milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby: For this cause the
Prophet David knew it was necessary for us to chew the cud, and to whet Gods
word upon our hearts, to give an edge to that which has been taught us, Psalm.
12. Therefore he says: The blessed man will meditate upon the Law of the Lord
day and night. And to this end Saint Peter, 2.1.4.5. calls upon the well
taught Jews, to ioyn virtue with virtue, etc. And S. Jude, verse. 5. tells
us, it is needful to be better instructed, and to be put in mind of that
which we do know.



eclipse and straiten Gods graces in us, Isa. 59.2. Ierem. 5.25.
so that the spirit is not as in former times.

He that stands, take heed lest he fall. Romans 11.20. Thoustandest by faith,
be not high minded, but fear.

2. Cor. 7.1.
and spirit. For what is he among the sons of Adam. Prou. 20.9. that can say,
his heart is clean from sin. Job 9.30.
The very clothes we put on (says Job) make us filthy. Know (Right Honorable)
that our perfection, is to know our imperfections. Yet I am not ignorant, that
there is a generation that are pure in their own conceit, Pro. 30.12.
and yet are not washed from their filthiness. But I say with the ancient,
Aug. conf. l. 9. c. 13
Vae etiam laudabile vitae hominum, siremota misericordia discutias eam. Woe to
our very prayers and preachings, if they be examined without mercy.

The second use serves to reprove such, that think, if they have heard Gods
word, for some small time, and from thence have attained unto some civil
carriage, and a varnished profession; that then they have learned enough. But
this is false; for we must increase: for it is not enough that the corn be a
blade, but that it be an care, and that it be cone full flowred: and Christians
must never give over, till our righteousness break forth as the perfect day.

The third use directs us unto watchfulness over our conversation; and
shows, that we cannot be too forward, as profane Atheists say: because th^^
life is but a growing age; and therefore non progrede, is, regredi, not to go
forward, is to go backward. Wherefore I beseech you, take the Apostles
counsel, and work forth your salvation in fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.
Prou. 28 1^.1. Pet. 1.17.
For blessed is the man that fears always. And let us that call God Father,
pass our time in fear and trembling. 1. Ioh. 4.14. 1. Cor. 4.34.

But here with Heraclitus, we have lust cause to weep; and with Ier^^^y, to
let tears run down night and day, for the sins of our conversation, which
makes joy in bell, and rejoicing among the wicked in earth. Which is that, that
Berden says, caused Tacitus so to rail against Christians, that the
Christians committed those crimes that the Heathens abhorred. Were Taritus
alive at this day, he should see some (called Christians) outdare the devils
themselves, in wickedness. For the devils believe that there is a God, and
tremble at it: but we may hear some, that name themselves Christians, avouch,
that there is no God, and laugh at it. I beseech you (Right Honorable) open
your eyes, and look about you, and you shall see sins invented as fast as
fashions. I warn you of these things, and beseech you, to take fall hold of
judgment, which is Jacobs staff, and our Sovereigns Scepter, by which, you
that are Judges, bear rule under him; that so both the judicial, and
iniudiciall of you, in this honorable City, may live better, and walk with
your God. So shall your names flourish on earth, and your souls reign in
heaven; while others rot in the grave, and live in torment in hell.

Thus (beloved) from the examples of the fall of Jerusalem, (Gods dear
children) and of the chiefest in place; let us, first, humble our selves before
God, and not wax proud of any thing. For he that stands, may fall.

And since the most excellent be subject to infirmity, let us be admunished
of the many fraikies, that lie hid in us, and which, through hypocrisy, we
cannot see. And from benee be more charitable, and not so censorious of other;
but to be more temperate, considering whereunto we our selves are subject to
be tempted.



It serves to teach us, that the duty of the Minister is, to speak the word
to all, and to rebuke sin in all, and to exhort every kind of profession
unto religion: the Princes, the Nobles; the rich, the pooke, the Artificers,
Seruing-men, Gentlemen, Merchants, Tradesmen* as well the shopkeeper, as the
Vintner; as well the Master, as the Apprentice, must be spoken unto, exhorted,
and rebuked by the Peeacher. Which is that the Apostle sets down for
doctrine, Act. 20.3.
saying: I ceased not to warn every one.



But it belongs to all sorts of people. 1. Tim. 2.4. Act. 20.31.


for his masters money; the scholar for his learning: and shall not the Pastor
answer for the sin of the people? If our commussion must stretch it self as
far as Christ's redemption; then our ministry must be to all: 1. Tim. 2.4.
but the proposition is true. Therefore to all in general, and to every sort,
and condition, and se^e. For we must make our ministry to be like Christ's
net, etc. Mat. 13.1.


1. The use teaches, that since all must be spoken unto, the Ministers must not
flatter the people, nor conceal the judgment of God from their sins. For,
Pro^. 24.24. Ezech. 13.4.5. 10.11.1. Cor. 14.24.
He that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse,
and the multitude shall abhor him. But if we tell every man of his sin,
then he that believes, as well as he that believes not; and the learned, as
well as the unlearned, is rebuked of all men, and judged of all. Here let me
exhort, and be exhorted. For what is any, that we should fear? they be but
men in nature, and so are we; and they be but mortal, as well as we; and they
shall come to judgment, as well as we. Let therefore both Preacher, and hearer
judge themselves, that they be not judged of the Lord.

Use 2. But here is offered just cause to reprove those, that reprove the
Reprouer. For nothing more cutteth the throat of reprehension, then to rebuke
him that reproves. Which moved Hosea, 4.4. to say, Let none rebuke nor reprove
another: for the people are as they, that rebuke the Priest.

This is the sin (I am sure) of the country: blessed is this City, if it be
not guilty hereof. But are there not among us, that will teach wise men,
themselves being fools; that will control learned men, themselves being
ignorant; that will school Preachers, and yet themselves will not hear; that
will rule Magistrates, themselves being subjects, and will not obey; that will
seem to do all things, themselves not able to do any thing, but that which
is evil: Ierem. 9.3. For they are strong to evil: but they have no courage
for the truth. But I must be brief: for time calls to the Subject in hand,
and to press the point expressing the matter, whereunto they are commanded.

The third part.
In the matter laying down the third general point, five things may be
observed.

First, the affection, expressed in the interiection (O)

Secondly, the voice in which God calls unto them, which is Imperative, and
not obsecratiue.

Thirdly, the matter it self whereunto they are commanded, which is to wash.

Fourthly, the fourth is the subject, which they must wash, which is the heart.

Fifthly, the fifth is the object, about which they must be busied, or from
what they must wash their hearts, which is, from wickedness.

First concerning the affection, O Jerusalem; which both concerns God and the
Prophet. And first as it concerns God, it is a word of great affection: and a
word of most evident demonstration, and testimony of Gods unwillingness to
punish, and of his ready inclination to show mercy.

From whence the instruction to us is, 1
that God takes no delight in punishing the sons of men, proved here in the
voice of pity and compassion, Psalm 81 13. Ierem. Lamen. 3.33.
as it were, bewailing their estate fallen into, by sin. If parents have no
delight, but grief, in punishing their children; then God takes no delight in
punishing the sons of men.

But, 2. Sam. 18.33. and the Lord himself says, Ezekiel. 18.23. he has no
desire that the wicked should dye: 32. neither does he delight in the death of
the sinner. If God wills our repentance; then he takes no delight in
punishing.

But, Ezekiel. 18.21. and 33.11. Luke 13.34. Therefore, etc.

If in God, to be angry and punish sinners be not a proper work of Gods
nature, but an improper and strange work of God; Then God takes no delight in
punishing the sons of men.

But, Exodus 34.6. Isai. 28.21. For the Lord shall stand as in mount Perazim: he
shall be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his
strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act. Thus you may see,
it is the proper work of Gods nature to show mercy: but his improper work to
punish: It is natural to God to be gracious, but to him it is a strange and an
unnatural work to delight in punishing, if I may so say. God punishes, as
Carpenters pull down ruinous houses, that is, to build them up better then
they were before; so does the Lord take us of there, and down here, that he may
build us on high.

Luke 15.4.
He is to far from sporting himself at our misery, that contrarily, as a
careful father, he seeks us up, he goes after us till he has found us; he
staieth not till we return, but preuenteth us with his grace: and albeit
grace in us is imperfect, and moves a far off, Luke 15.10.
verse. 10. God in compassion seeks us, till he has found us; and then
leads us with the cords of a man, Osca 11 4.
even with the bands of love: for he calls us by his Preachers; draws us by
his spirit; 2. Cor. 5.19.
wooeth us by his benefits, that he may pardon us in his mercy, and in love
receive us to glory. Psalm. 103.9.13. For our God is an ^lluring God. Cant. 5.2.
Genesis 9.27. he shall allure I^pheth to dwell in the tents of Sh^^^.

But here me thinks, I he^^e some politic Protestant of estate (...) Papist in
heart) say: If the (...) b^e thus full of compassion, to ^^^i^e by all mean a
sinners, and such a^ go astray from him; on where is that compassion, and when
will this alluring course: be taken with the Papists, that they might hear of
the same? To whom I answer, as S. Paul does in the like case, Romans 10.18. I
demand, have they not heard? yea they have been mercifully deal with by our
late Queen of s^mo^^ memory: and they have been lo^^^gly entreated by his
Majesty; and courteously persuaded by their brethren; to tread in the Kings
high way. But all in vaine^ which shows (...) an union of religious (...)
harder^hing to effect; ^h^^a^^n union of kingdoms. F^^^ I ^pea^^^ it upon my
souls altar, that thee man would merit eternity, that could reconcile the
long severed Papists and Protestants. But it is in vain to assaie it: for the
Ancients have concluded, that, null^^ f^^^t as fidei, Cyp. ep. 55. 2. Cor. 6
14.15.
and perfidia potest, God and B^lial can never agree. Yet if I might obtain my
request at the hands of God, my prayer for my Country should be: that
religion may be once purged from the lees of the Roman grape, that so every
thirsting soul might drink out of the fountain of the written word of God.

3. The third use confirms our judgments for our comfort, that the Lord will
not deal with us according to our deserts, but according to his mercies in
Jesus Christ. For Christ Jesus alone fulfilled the Law for us, Isai. 73.4.5.
and suffered our punishment: for he did be are our infirmities, and carried
our sorrows: he was wounded for our transgressio^s, broken for our
iniquities: the ch^stisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes
we are healed. And this is the Christians triumph, that the partition wall is
broken down, and the handwriting fastened to the Cross, and all our sins
shall not be able to rar^pier up the gate of Gods mercies against them that
believe.

4. The fourth use from this, readiness to mercy in God, checketh the
uncharitable practices of three sorts of persons.

First the Papists, whose hearts be infected with ye blood-crying and heaven
pearcing sin, Occide, imo manduca hareticum; that tip their fingers of a
sanguine color in the blood of those men, who do but transgress the
unwritten untruths of their scarlet Pope: and in the mean time, cry out of
the want of charity amongst Protestants.

Secondly, it reproves the rash and inconsiderate course, as far from
charity, as from wisdom; delivering the members of Christ to Satan, and that
for a trifle; when as those that are spiritual, Gal. 6.1
ought to raise such that fall, with the spirit of meekness, considering
themselves, lest they also be tempted.

And lastly, it reproves the furious spirits of the Brownists, who for
blemishes, (when themselves are most filthy) cast out our whole Church, for no
apparent Church of God; yet who is he, that in many things sins not?

The God of heaven clear our eyes, Leuit. 19 17. Prou. 27 6. Gal. 6.1
and rectify our judgments; that in censuring sin in all men, we may judge
charitably of all, till we see the end of all.

5. The fifth use. And now glue me leave to speak to you (right honorable and
reverend Fathers) for Gods example here, speaks aloud to you my Lord, and
lies at the doors of the Magistracy, who are to execute justice in the gate:
yea the fatherless, the widow, and the orphant does cry: the Master and the
apprentice do call upon you: rich and the poor do call: you the prisons, and
those that are bound in chains and iron, do cry unto you that be in
authority, to imit^te the Lord of heaven and earth: be merciful, as he is
merciful put on the bowels of compassion in judgment: censure and judge your
brethren, the Lords people, with all remorce and pity: take no pleasure in
punishing taunt not those whom the Lord has brought before you: delight not to
defame not disgrace those, whom God Almighty has put in your hands to
correct: be not like the Philistims, laugh not at the sorrows of Samson; show
mercy in justice to those, that are appointed to dye. It is enough that their
bodies do dye for the sins of their souls: be not cruel toward them:
neither suffer your executioners to play the parts of tormentors, delighting
themselves to add sorrow to the sorrowful; moving a stout spirit to cast away
their souls together with their bodies. Be pleased to know, as no Ancient
faith: that, Ambros. ad Var. c^ll. Epise. su^^ Luc. lib. 5.
Mans^^^tus homo cordis est medi^us. And again, Beatus qui soueritat^^ and man
s^^tudi^^^ t^^o^, vt alt^r^ dise ipl^^^d seruetur, al^er^ i^^o^^^nt (...)
^pprimatur. But here (right Honorable) I weep with the Prophet, 2. King.
8.12.13. to remember, what some in places of office have down: and to think,
what some ^her^ would do, if the Lord restrained them not: how in color of
office and pretense of law, justice is wre^ied, and the Lords people abused;
which makes me to think, that if they had Prince, and Pre^^^^^, and law, and
all, to back them, no raging cruelty would be left undone. Well, God
Almighty bless^ us, and keep us in his holy fear (...) make us
vpright-harted, and constant in the profession of religion; and meek and mild
bearted to such as are subject to our censures; that all may see, we seek the
Lord, and not our selves; the conversion of others, and not the satisfying of
on^ own passion.

And lastly, as the Lord cries over Jerusalem, so let us learn, Ier. 9.1.2.
Matthew. 23.37. Luke 19.42.
when we s^^ the froward and wicked disposition of the world, that will not be
reclaimed by any warning, or any mercy of God: let us (I say) do, as God, and
Christ has (...): let us (...) and weep for the sins of the land. I^ was
Da^^ds compassion, Psalm. 119.53.136.
whose eyes gushed forth (...), because men kept not the Law. It is said, that
sharp vinegar will soften the stony Alps: but brinish tears of the
Magistrate, will mollify the hardest heart, if (it be not without grace) for
lamenting ever the ^^^rable, is a strong inducement to draw tears, if it be
b^^ for company.

It is the custom of some vain professors, (for so I may call them) to rail
odiously as them, that will not be ruled by their words. And so it is, of some
choleric and unwise preachers, whose fashion it is in the pulpit to rail on
them, that will not at the first come, and lay their hands under their f^et. O
that they would learn of God, how to be affected ^. And as many among you as
fear God, when your people, or your children, (...) your se^ua^ts, or your
friends, or your neighbors, will not be governed, rail not; but weepe^ and
lament; for the hardness of their hearts: i^ may be the Lord will give them
repentance: Luke 19.42.
so did Christ. For hardness of heart is a sickness sent of God, and lies
not in the power of man to cure. Therefore cast not off thy people, nor
children, nor thy servants, nor thy neighbors, when they be sick; but vis^
them; and pray for them. But if they despise and neglect the sorrows, cares,
and (as it were) the tears, which Gods Angels, and men do make for their
rebellion; then they are desperately sinful; and unto such swine cast not your
pearls.

Now a word of the affection, as it is from the Prophet, O^^r^^^^^. ^. This
piti^^ll mournful, and under affection in the Prophet cacheth, that the
Ministers of Christ ought to bear a under affection, and to have a
compassion^^^ cor^ (...) the member^ of the Church, Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
p^oued here. Because the Ministers are, or should be, their spiritual
fathers, to beget them by the word of the Gospel, 1. Pet. 2.2. and 3.4. 1.
Cor. 4.4.15.
or a^lea^^ to no^^ish them by the word of truth. For the tenders affection,
love, and a^^iu^ ^f the Pastor toward the people, and the people toward their
Pasto^^^ is (...) singular means of enlarging Christ's kingdom, and to
increase the Church of God in earth; because it greatly gains a^^^otion and
was Saint Paul's wisdom: Is was Christ's care to leave it: Romans 12.1. Ioh.
13.14. Ioh. ^0.34.
as a charge, before he ascended. 1. Job, 3.11.14.18.23. and 4.16. When the
people perceive the doctrines and reprehensions to proceed from love, then do
they delight to hear the word of God from their mouths; then do their
affections enlighten their understandings, and their understanding incline
their wills to obedience. So long as this affection was between Paul, and the
people in Galaria; Galat. 4.14.
so long the Church increased, it flourished, their faith was glorious, their
religion famous, their lives godly; and if they had so continued, their ends
had been happy.

famous, your ^^oes godly, and your ends happy; labor to nourish unity and
love, in affection, between Pastor and people, and live together to futhers
and children: otherwise heresies will disquiet you, divisions molest you,
ignorance will con^^^^ne you, and the wrath of God will consume you.

Cant. 5.7.


And so ^^ich be said for the affection in the Acclamation.

O Jerusalem, wasb.

God speaks to Jerusalem, (bet^^ the Prince of the Provinces) not in a
beseeching, but in a commanding voice; not obsecratiue, but imperative.

have his Church the less to estem^^ of his word, because men, like ous selves
speak it; nor that we should think it an indifferent thing, whether we obey
it or no, for that men like our selves pronounce it: but it is Gods will, that
his people do este^^^e of the authority of his. Ministers, as of Gods own
authority; regar^ling their sermons and commandments, 2 Chr. 29.25. 1. Sam.
15.24.
as God, own word.

For it is the duty of the Church to be pe^swaded, when she he truth the
Minister preach according to Gods word, that she h^^rrth God himself speak
unto her. To this purpose says our Prophet, in the person of the Lord; Ierem.
29.20.
Hear ye the word of the Lord, all ye of the captivity. And this does the
Apostle give for doctrine, 1. These. 4.2. Ye know what commandments we guae
you by the Lord Jesus: and therefore in the 8 verse. he says: He that despises
their sermons, does not despise man, (...) but God: and to the same effect
Saint Peter says, 2. Pet. 1.21. The prophr^i^ came not in old time by the will
of man; but holy men of God spoke as they were moved (...) by the spirit of
God: therefore our Savior says, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me,
etc. The reason is, because by them the power of God ought to be made known,
whose seruant^ they are.

Savior had not bold this point, a point of importance, he would not thus
have enforced this historical faith upon their consciences. Oh my beloved,
know it for certain* that the want of giving, credit (...) Gods word, is no
little cause of many of the sins we commit. For could people live as they
do, if they believed our preaching? we may well therefore say with the
Prophet, To whom is the arms of the Lord revealed? Fearful is it to see some
men to make no more of the Sermons of the Lords Prophets, and servants, then of
a fullers song. Ezech. 33.31.32. Then art unto them as a jesting song, of one
that has a pleasant voice, and can sing well: for they hear^ thy words, but
they do them not.

this is worthy (in these our evil days) the enforcing. For Ministers
preachings (with too many) is not so much respected, as a winters tale, nor the
Church of so much esteem, as an Alehouse. But I hope better things of you,
that you will not lightly regard their authority, of whom Christ has
witnessed. Mat. 16.18. (...) against which the gates of hell shall not prevail.
And for their Commission, it is very large, Ier. 11.10. Behold, I have set you
over nations, and king domes, to pluck up, and to (...) out, to destroy, and
to throw downs, to build, and to plant.

Therefore believe it, Iere^^. 27.2.
(as the Prophet says:) but not to excommunicate Kings, as the Papists say.



The Minister has authority, (...) Christ's name to pronounce ^^^giuenesse of
sins to all that believe, (as Saint John says; 20.150) but not to curse and
absolve whom he will, (as the Pope says.



So that establishing, or removing of Princes belongs to God only; and
forgiveness of sins to God only; and the g^bernation of Church and
Commonwealth, belongs to Princes only: built he reproving of sins in all,
belongs to Ministers also.

And this is the Innocence of the Dove, and the wisdom of the Se^pent, that
ought to be done in love, in order, (...) in place, with discretion and circum
spectious: (...) soul for soul, if we do no^ (...) this.

Here I become in the Lords behalf an humble suitor unto you, that as the Lord
has honored your Honor with authority; so you would bring all your honor
and authority, to honor Jesus Christ in his Ministers. They are but servants,
be not angry with them; they must deliver their Lords message, it is nothing
to them; agree with their Lord and Master, and they will be content.



John the Apostle sell down; and should we spurn them with our feet? They
are the Fathers, and Stewards of our Country, to provide the food of our
souls; and should we deny them the food of their bodies? They are the
strength of the land, even the Chariots and Horsemen of England; and should we
not defend them? But here I stand amazed, desiring tears, rather then words,
to lament the contempt of the Lords servants. Time was, when their feet were
beautiful, that brought the glad tidings of the Gospel: but O quantum mutatus
ab illo. Now their persons are rejected. Time was, yea time is, that the face
of a smoakie Kemarius, a silly Friar, has been, and is, more regarded, then
the person of a Reucrend Bishop: yet Chrysostom called them Heretics, that
speaking with a Bishop, or of a Bishop, and would not call him Bishop, not
Archbishop, not most religions, nor most holy: yea grave Pastors, and poinfull
Preachers, are (with some) not so much respected, as all the make-bates, and
tale-bearers of the world. O tempora, o mores! Is our God of less honor, our
religion of less worth, our souls of less account with us, then with them?
farte be it from us. Once an Ancient said; Tutior est diso^^tis, quam docentis
conditio: It is better to learn, then to teach. But we may say: Tutior est
peccantis, quam argaintis conditio: It is more safer to commit sin, then to
reprove frone. For to tell any of their vncloannesse, is to make himself a
prey. For do we not live to see the Preachers mocked, as Elisha was; the
Sabboths polluted, and the Princes^^ of all professions, (I mean Divinity) the
preaching of the word become vile in respect, the poorest in practice, and the
meanest in show? What shall I say unto you, or how shall I confuit you, ye
seeuants of the Lord? are we not disdained? are we not made a ^co^ing stock,
a table-talke, and accounted as the filth of the street, and of scouring of all
things, unto this day: and like still to continue, to exercise your patience,
and to make trial of your humility. Yet this I am bold to speak (for your
comfort) that he or she that despises you, despises the Lord Jesus. Matthew.
10.40. Luke 10.16. Exodus 16.8. 1. Sam. 8.7.

The third part.
Now I entreat your patience to speak of the matter it self: O Jerusalem,
wash.

Sanctification is exercised about sin, and holiness: for we must wash, and
cleanse away sin and wickeducsse; and embrace true holiness, and
righteousness: which is partly a detestation of former sins, in which we have
taken pleasure; and partly a delight, and a hearty love of righteousness,
commanded in the royal law.

Looking upon the monstrous and horrid uncleanness of this age, I stand
amazed; whether I should behold it with the eyes of Timo^, to hate it; or of
Heraclitus, to lament for it; and whether I should more hate, or lament the
sins of ye time; after a short pause, I resolve to entreat you to join your
tears, with hearty prayers, to wash away the ingrained dye of sin.

And coming to the points, pointed for instruction: I beseech you observe with
me, that virtue is a task, a work, a thing, and not worden. Woeful it is to
see, how we turn, not only it, but the word of God into words; holding
religion, and sanctification, but a tablediscourse, to touch the ear, not to
pierce the heart; and hold our selves busied in cold controversies, which (in
the unlearned) rather extinguish then kindle zeal. But know (Right Honorable)
that sanctification and repentance is (an action) pressed upon us, and that
from God. For it is his commandment, we must wash, therefore we are vncleance.



Sin is called rottenness and corruption: and is that which we have drawn,
either by propagation from our parents in original sin, which has defiled
and corrupted the whole nature of man, that he is blinded in understanding:
froward in will, and rebelling in all his actions, against the will and word of
God: or else it is the increase of this uncleanness, which we have greatly
augmented by our own evil practice, and wicked conversation: and is that
which the Apostle calls old leaven to be purged, 1. Cor. 5.7
that it may be a new lump. This uncleanness of sin was prefigured in the
ancient washings of Aaron, and his sons with water at the door of the
Tabernacle, Exodus 29.4. And in the typical and signifying washings of the old
Testament, foreshewing the cleansing and purifying of our hearts in the
Gospel. Mat. 5.8.
For Gods Altar and service must be compassed with innocence: the Lord will
be sanctified in those that come near him. Leu. 10
The purification of the soul and body, is the fruit of saving hope, 1. Ioh.
3.3. For every one that has this hope in him, purges himself, as he is pure.

This uncleanness is deciphered in Ezekiel. 16.6. for ye Lord, unto whose eyes all
things are naked, Heb. 13 4.
sees every one polluted in his own blood. Luke 10.30.
It is the spiritual pitch, that who so touches, is defiled therewith. Sin
does mortify us, and makes us dead to grace and goodness. And in the old
Testament, he* that touched a dead cark^se, was unclean, and might not come
into the Sanctuary, till he was cleansed.

with our own hearts to hate and abhor sin in all; but specially in our
selves, and that with a perfect hatred, even more then the devil of hell:

but for sin the Lord has punished. The Angels that kept not their first
estate, Jude epist.
they are reserved in chains of darkness for ever to be punished. Adam for
sin thrown out of Paradise. The Canaanites, with their six bordering
nations, disinherited, and cast forth of their country. The first world
drowned: Sodom and Gomer burned: Kings vnthroaned: Judges and Magistrates
struck down from the bench, and the Mighty cast from their seats. Yea the
Lord forsook his own inheritance, even mount Sion which he loved, because
they sinned against him: that so the saying of his Prophet might be true.
Psalm 5.4. Thou art not a God that loves wickedness: neither shall evil
dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all
them that work iniquity. Isai. 1.16. Wash you, make you clean, put away the
evil of your works: cease to do evil, learn to do well: and then come and
let us reason together. For we must wash our hands in innocence, before we
may come to compass the Lords Altar.

Unto the clean^ are all things clean: but unto them that are defiled, and
unbelieving. Is nothing clean, but even their minds and consciences are
defiled. Should not this (dear Christians) enforce upon our consciences this
doctrine of sanctification, and cleansing of our flesh and spirits from
wickedness; suh it defiles all things it comes near? Let Gods word come to
a sinful he are, it is defiled, as pure water in a foul vessel. What is there
in man, or without man, that sin has not defiled? It has made our tongues
become Adders spears: our lips, instruments of guile: our hands to work
iniquity; and our feet to run to evil, and to shed blood. But what speak
I of the defilement of the members? the Spirit says, sin defiles the very
minds and consciences of men. And how should it be otherwise? for if sin so
abuse the natural parts, what will it do with the mind? It grieueth me to
tell you: but I will tell you, that it may warn you. It turns prayers into
cursing: it uses knowledge to beguile: the Scriptures to cover profaneness:
it uses. their wits to cavil, which brings Lawyers much gold and silver: it
uses wealth to oppress: strength to steal, to wine and to women. It uses
natural wisdom to maintain unnatural blasphemy: It uses hunger to
gluttony: thirst to drunk ^^ues: garments to pride: honor to disdome:
marriage to lust: offices to briberie: the Minssterie to contention: saw to
delay. It uses the day to open evil, and the night to secret shame. Shall I
cease here? I weep to speak it: It either despises, or wresteth damnably the
holy and sacred word of God, and the ordinances of God it prophaneth wickedly.
For have we not in this our age, to fill up the measure of uncleanness? have
we not Ribaldrie, as in Plays and the like, committed to the press, to be
commended in print; lest posterity should want patterns of impiety?
Whoredom with some is good physic; honesty is but foolerie; knauerie is
commodity; dissembling is discretion, and idleness is gentry. If this be
not cleansed with the wind of the law; or cut down by your sword of justice,
or purged with the Lords fan; to what height of sin shall we grow unto? But
the thing which I admire, is this: that God Almighty for all this, does suffer
us still to live. It may be he does it, that his long patience might lead us
to repentance; or, that we should fulfill the measure of sin, in defying the
grace of God, as we have defiled the nature of man: that so at last we may
abuse death, as we have abused life: for sildome does he dye well, that lives
evil.

O, my soul, come not in to their habitation: woe be unto them, for they
follow the way of Caine; and are cast away with the deceit of Balams wages.

And now I turn unto you, the servants of the Lord, that have as great care to
keep sin from their souls, as sickness from your bodies: I beseech you in
the fear of God, and in the weighty consideration of your own sins, even
for the Lords sake, for your poor souls sake, and for Jesus Christ's sake,
that was made sin for us; 2 Cor. 5.20.
hearken to the counsel of our Prophet, crying aloud in the audience of you
all: O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, detest and abhor thy
former sins, forsake thy old way, walk in newness of life, cast away the
works of darkness, and put on the Armor of light. Romans 13.12. Prou. 24.16.
Hate all sin past, care to prevent sin to come, and entertain it not,
offering it self again. For the just falls, and rises again: but the
wicked fall into mischief. And this endeavoring, the blessed spirit will
help our infirmities, and our heavenly Father make us white in the blood of
the Lamb, Apoc. 7.14. For this is not the work of flesh and blood, although
man be spoken unto (as though he had power to do it) but it is the action and
work of the whole Trinity; and yet it is commanded, as it were our work;
Ephesians. 1.10.
because God works in us, not as in stocks and stones, but as in reasonable
creatures: for we, (by the work of his grace) work together with him, yet
still so, as that sanctification is still wholly from God.

For first, 1. These. 5.23. ^^t. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.26.
God the Father sanctifies, by giving his Son; God the Son sanctifies, by
mortifying our sins by his blood; and the holy Ghost sanctifies, by applying
the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection unto us. Ioh. 3.5
And we may be said to sanctify our selves, when we apply our will, desire
and endeavor, in the use of the means ordained of God. And thus much be said
for the general.

Now let us in Gods fear, fall upon the particulars. And first, sanctification
is an action, teaching us, that true religion, and undefiled, consists not in
a speculatiue, or contemplative profession, but in an active, and practiue
conversation in holiness: for knowledge without obedience, increases
punishment, Luke 12, 47. Mat. 7.22 24. Luke 11.28. Iam. 1.23 25.27.
For not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom, but he
that does the will of the Father. For pure religion, and undefiled before God
the Father, is this, to visit the fatherless and widows, in their
adversity. Mary and Martha will do well, so they be both in one house: so
will Christian profession and practice, if they meet both in one soul. Let a
Christian take it a shame to be like an Athenian, (that is) to know what
appertains unto virtue, but not to practice it. And the God of heaven make us
all, not only knowers, speakers, Preachers, and professors of Gods word, but
doers thereof, that we may be saved.

Wash thy, etc.

From whence the doctrine is, that God requires of every Christian, that he
perform the parts of Gods worship, and the duties of charity, actually
himself unto God and men, before he depart hence, for himself, and not by
others for him.

Our learned adversaries bear the world in hand, that as we come to earthly
Princes, by mediators, and solicitors; so Christians ought to come to the
Prince of Princes. For they hold it presumption to prease into the presence of
the King of heaven, without the mediation of many.

If our God did fear the treasons of any, or did not know, or remember the
wants of all his children himself; or if he could not hear all the suits of
all the world at one instant; and if he had not appointed his only Son, to
be the only means, in whom we have promised access: then their persuasion
might have passed for doctrine.

But the contrary on Gods part to us is true.

Therefore let us know, that other men's good works shall do no good for us;
nor others prayers for us, without our own works, and prayers for our selves.
For nothing more (beloved brethren) has spoiled Church and Commonwealth, then
doing duties, non per se, sed per alium. It has brought ignorance into the
Church, and briberie into the Commonwealth; which moved our renouned
Soueralgue, King James, in his Basili^on Doro^, l. 2. p.

35. to give this charge to the Prince his Son, that be spare not any pains
in his own person, to see justice executed; giving for instance, his most
worthy Grandfather, of famous memory, whose honor was to be styled, and
called, the poor man's King: And in the 55. page, his Majesty counsels the
Prince, once a year to visit the principal parts of the kingdom, not
referring to Vice-royes; but to hear the complaints himself, and to decide
the principal matter^, in his own person.

And here you see the exercises of religion, and parts of Gods worship, must
be done actually, and personally of every one of the Lords servants, for
themselves.

This you call for at our hands, the Preacher must be resident, (say you) and
must preach for himself; and must not the hearer hear for himself also? why
say you one to another, go you to day to Church, and serve God for me; and I
will serve God for you to morrow. This conceit moves certain to prepare
Bead-men to pray, while they themselves play. But learn of our Prophet, the
parts of Gods worship must be performed of every one of us for our selves: for
another faith can not save us; we must pray for our selves; for our requests
are g^a^eed according to our own faith, Be is unto thee, as thou be le^^^st.
Therefore repent for thy selft, confess thine own sin, rather then another
shall declare it: do good works for thy self; for to give blackes, and large
alms is good; but one penny with thine own hand, is a precious sacrifice in
the eyes of God. Remember the saying. Gala^b. 6.10. While we have time ^^e us
(we our selves) d^^ good unto all men.

Prophet gives it for doctrine, Habac. 2.4. For the just shall live by his
own faith: mark the word (his)*







And this does confute the Superirrogate works of the Papists, who make us
believe, though our own lamps be without oil, we may borrow plentifully of
the Saints: For the Saints (say they) have not only kept all Gods
commandments, but have done more then God has commanded, and so the
surplussage of their good works, hang up upon the Popes tallie, for such as
want, and will pay most for them. But this untruth so long hanged upon the pin
of popish traditions, Christ Jesus cutteth down, Luke 17.10. When you have
done all that is commanded you, say, that you are unprofitable servants.

Psalm. 95.7.
that in this life only, by the grace of God in Christ, we procute mercy and
salvation at the hands of God. Heb. 37 and 4.7. 1. Cor. 6.2.
So that in this life only, heaven is to be obtained, or lost for evermore:
after this life there is no time to work. Here we win and lose life
eternal. Cyprian. in ser. d^ mortal. circ. med. Hortamur d^^ facult as adest,
dum ad huc aliquid de saculo superest, we exhort you to serve God while you
may; while we are in the world, let us come from the depth of dark
superstition, to the bright light of true religion. For, Q^um istinc excessum
fucrit, nullus ^a^^ locus poenit^ntiae, nullus satisfactionis effectus. For
after this life, there is no place of repentance, nor any satisfaction. Ambrase
is one with this* Qui (...) his non accipit remissionem pecc^tor^m, etc. He
that receives not remission of sins here, shall not come there, that is, in
heaven. Not only friends, but our adversaries are confidene with us in this
truth. Aquinas, their Angelical Doctor. ^2.9.13. ar. 4. ad. 2. and. ^. p.
9.62. ar. 9. corpor. says: Dicendum, quod mereri and d^merer^ p^rti^^^^ ad
slas (...) vi^. We must say, th^^to merit, or demerit, pertain to the state
of the way, that is, to this life. And thus the learned Papist has lent us his
hand to butie Purgatory for ever. For if here we obtain, what do souls
there? And so much be said for the matter, what must be done.

The fourth Circumstance.
I now pass to the fourth Branch, expressing the Subject that must be washed,
which is, the heart. For, O Jerusalem, wash thy heart.

Christ Jesus washed others, John, 13.5.
because he himselse was the Lamb without slain. But Jerusalem, that washed
others in the poole of Beth^sd^, Ioh. 5.^7*
must wash her self.

It is the desire of corrupt flesh and blood, to fish in other men's wat^rs* But
the well taught Christian will content himself with the water of his own well.

If we would open an impartial eye, when we be at home^ as we do when we go
abroad; we should see more be^mes in our own eye^. th^n (...) in our
neighbou^^^ and more stains and sins in our own lives, then in others. But
we that are quick sighted in other men's faults, and blind in our own, be
here taken to task, and commanded, first to find out our own filthiness,
and wash away our own wickedness, before we meddle with others. O Jerusalem,
wash thy heart.

Absalon would deceive his fathers people, 1. Sam. 15.3.
he said, every man's cause was good: so Satan to deceive the world, makes
every man think another man to be evil, and himself to be good. But the
holy Ghost charge every one, not to be too favorable to himself, but to
survey our own manners, our own wits, our own senses, our own members, our
own hearts must first be set upon, and we must cleanse our own consciences
from dead works: we must wash our own moates, and pull out our own beams,
Matthew. 7.3. Jeremy commaudeth, to search our ways, Lamen. 3.40.
and to examine our own lives, to judge our own sins; keep Sessions at home
first, before we go abroad, and cleanse first our own houses, our own
City, our own streets. For love and good works should begin at home.

For how can a master reprove a servant, for lying, and deceiving, and make a
trade of it himself?

With what heart can a parent correct his child for swearing; and swear
continually himself?

How faintly will a Minister preach against usury, and against drunkenness,
and against pride, and profaneness; and be spotted with all these himself?

What zeal may we look for in some officers to punish swearing, and
blasphemy, and the profanation of the Sabbath; when they themselves let faith
and truth pass daily from between their lips? can they with any zeal
punish the^ in others, when they have so little conscience of these sins
themselves? O, I beseech you, look to these things, you that be the Cedars of
London. For your fall is not your own alone: but you crash in pieces all that
are under you. Do are brethren, take the word of the Lord to heart, saying: O
man who soever thou art that iudgest, Romans 2.1.2.3.4.
thou condemnest thy self: for thou that iudgest another, do the same things
thou that say a man should not steal, not lie, nor swear, not deceive, not
drink to be drunken; do thou steal, do thou lie? etc.

The God of heaven and earth give us power to judge our selves, even in the
same things we judge and punish others; and to cleanse our selves of the sins
we condemn in others. And ever give us grace, O Lord, first to sit judge in yt
court of our own conscience, 1. Cor. 11.28.
before we sit as judge in the soul of our neighbor.

Vnne quisque proximus sibi: for he that loves not himself, will not love any:
Potesne alium malius noscere quam to ipsum: Can thou know another better then
thy self? It being so, let me become a suter, for your own gain: be
straighter in all things to your selves then to others: and be more liberal in
some things to others, then to your selves: merkely be^^t with that, in
another, which you will not do in your self.

A worthy observation: For many Magistrates and masters take liberty to do yt,
which if their servants do, they must sharply be rebuked, if not punished; as
though peco^tum, were only sin in the inferior: No, no, whatsoever is sin
in any one, in omnibus est peccatum: otherwise it works straightness to
others, and liberty to our selves. As it is in certain that profess
irregularitie, and think it lawful, themselves to do any thing; and yet
censure and find fault with other men's virtues, themselves flowing full of all
vice. These be such, that when they get between the pot and the wall, despise
government, and speak evil of those that be in authority. Some you shall
see, who being unwilling to use a Ceremony themselves, judge straightly all
others (as heinous offenders) that use it: and other, that use it themselves,
yet find fault with such, that do but so.

But touching these things indifferent, To. 14.3.14. and 15.12. 1. Cor. 8.8 and
9.10. and 10.23.
I pray you learn not to judge that in others, which you refuse your selves:
for albeit our religion be but one, yet our consciences, through the ignorance
that is in them, may be diverse. This being practiced of us, will move us to
cast the first stone at our selves. Ioh. 8.7.
Remember how that the Lord Jesus was angry with S. Peter, Ioh. 21.22.
for being a busie-bodie in John's matters. Therefore plow up your own fallow,
and sow your own ground: wash your own hearts, pull first the beams out of
your own cies, least the Lord reprove thee, as he did Saint Peter, with what is
that to thee?

Lastly, this doctrine speaks to you (my Lord) and to your brethren, the
Magistrates of this honorable City; whom God has made as an eye to see, as
the mouth to reprove, and as the hands to correct sin. The Lord above
requires at your hands, that especially you look to your selves, that you sin
not, especially in such sins you censure in others; and that you bear with
others, in that wherein you are tempted your selves. For the sins of the
heads endanger all the members. For what is more absurd, the^ if they (I say)
that should cleanse and wash Jerusalem, the City, the Church, and
Commonwealth of blemishes and wickedness, should happen to be full of spots
themselves. Without the eye no other member can do his office: neither hand
nor foot can do his function without sight. It has been said of old, that
the religion and sanctity of the people, is in the religion of the Prince.
Wherefore reverend Fathers, and Judges of others, I humbly pray you, for your
own sakes, for the Churches sake, for the Co^mon-wealths sake, and for the
Lords sake, take knowledge of your own hearts: and know, that when you have
moates in your eyes, they breed beams in others. And I beseech you look to it,
that they grow not to be beams. For you fall not alone, but your current is as
the maine Ocean, that drowneth other in perdition.

But I haste to the substance.

The Prophet does not here command Jerusalem to wash her feet only, with the
Disciples: nor her hands with the double minded: nor her head only with 8.
Peter, but her hears* not the outside only, but the inside also.

Ioh. 11.
is like Mary without Martha, and like Lazarus without Christ. For coming unto
the Sanctuary of the Lord; praying and receiving of Sacraments; hearing of
Sermons, fetching many a fained sigh, and speaking many an ignorant Amen; the
thinking that the sanctifying of the Sabbath lies in the putting on of their
best apparel, and such like: when as in the mean while with the Jews, Isai.
57.8. it may be said, behind the doors and posts thou have set remembrances,
of deep hypocrisy, and open idolatry. If we come with such hearts before
the Lord, the same reproof is for us, that I say speaks, cap. 1.11. What
have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, says the Lord? I am full
of the burnt offerings of rams and the fat of the beasts: and I desire not
the blood of bullocks, nor of lambs, nor of goats. For the outward exercises
of religion, without the cleannes and sincerity of the heart, is abominable
unto ye Lord. Ioh. 1.16
Therefore says the Lord, Wash you, make you clean, etc. And to this end our
Savior gives a caveat: Take heed of the leven of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Luke 12 1.
which is external worship. For the Lord is weary of our knee-prayers, our
lip-labours without the heart, Esaias. 29 13.
our time-seruing hearers: who draw near the Lord with their mouth, and honor
him with their lips; but their heart is far from him, as he says himself.
And yet not so far, Pro. 16.2.
but the Lord sees well enough where they be: for he pondereth the spirits. Oh
consider this you that pray and preach, and give and forgive to be seen of
me^: there be but too many that confess their faults, and weep for their sins
too, and but for show only; many come through Cathedral Churches, and kneel
down by a pillar, as though they prayed, but their hearts be not clean, nor
upright with God.

This humor waits upon us all: Ro^. 14.17. Luke 17.20.
happy is he that entertaineth it not. For it makes all that we do,
fruitless before God.

Therefore (I beseech you) in all the exercises of religion, let us pray with
David: Not unto us, O Lord, Psalm. 115.1.
not unto us, but to thy name give the praise.

deceive our brethren with shadows, offend our God with shows, and our selves
with sins* we deprive our hears of knowledge, our lives of holin^^, and our
selves of salvation. Galath. 6.7. But God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also ^eape.

1. Cor. 14.15. Match. 6.1.^.
except the heart go with it. Take head (s^ith Christ) ye give not your alm^^
before men, to be seem of them. 1. Reg. 8.47. If they turn againd unto their
heart, in the land to the which they be carried away a (...), etc. Let us
therefore (dear brothren) cleanse out hearts, and in our external works of
Gods worship, send them up, together with the work, without hypocrifie, in the
service of God. For of all sicknesses, the falling evil is the worst, because
it makes one seem with out life. And of all evils, hypocrifie is the worst,
for is makes one seem that he is not. Some seem to pray, when they curse;
some to pretend friendship, when (with I^das) treason is in their heart: some
pretend discharge of office, to pinch the poor, and kiss their hand: but let
the sudden ends, and fearful deaths of Ananias and Saphira, work sincerity in
our hearts, and holiness in our lives.

But yet I have not done with the heart.

The Lord says, Ier. 17.9. that the heart is deceitful and wicked above all
things, who can know it? That which the Lord questioneth, makes any
understanding to fail, and my tongue to cleave to the roof of my mouth,
rather then to show you what is meant by the heart. Nevertheless Gods word
bids me to say, that the heart is taken in the language of Canaan, for the
corrupted, and depraved qualities of the heart; and not for the lump of flesh,
and material heart in man, which is the good creature of God: and sometimes it
is taken for the whole inward man, 1. Pet. 3.4. Let the hid man of the heart be
vncorrupt, with a meek and quiet spirit, which is before God, a thing much set
by: And sometimes it is understood for the thoughts and affections corrupted,
and so it is in this place.

The heart is the first liver, and the last dier; let the heart be cleansed,
and sanctified, and thou will begin well, and end well; live well, and die well.

Match. 15.19.
Therefore (says our Prophet) O Jerusalem, wash thy heart. For out of the
heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornicatio^s, thefts, false
testimonies, and slanders. Make the tree good, Mat. 12.33.
and his fruit will be good. For the heart is as a King, and fi^^ in (capsula
cordis) his throne and state, with his animales vi^t^tutes, his attendants;
understanding, reason, memory, will and affections about him; and all the
other members of the body bow at his beck. If he be joyful, all will rejoice
with him; if he fear, they all treable; if the heart be a sinful and an
unclean heart, all the members are unclean.

For when within be lodged in the breasts of Jesuits and Iesuited Papists,
mischievous imaginations, foul affections, malice, murder, and what not? then
the eyes roll to wantonness, the tongue raueth, in railing upon Prince and
people: the care bearkeneth to rebellion, and false tales, to set whole Cities
and Countries on fire with contention: the hands embrew themselves in the blood
of their betters: Hence comes the king-killing doctrine, treasons, and
massacres abroad in the world; and hence is it, that subjects set against
Magistrates, people against Pastors, children against their parents, servants
against their masters, and homebred people against the mother and nation that
conceived them, brought them forth, and nourished them.

The Antichrist of Rome
And here I dare boldly say of him, that would be the souls Lord, and the
chiefest Bishop of the Churches compass; that his heart is not right with God,
nor cleansed from wickedness, so long as his hands be died in the blood of
the Saints.

But to return to our selves; clear your fountains, before you sweep your
channelles; and search the bottom of your wounds, before you plaster the
sore; cleanse your hearts, and all shall be well. For if the ^^rt be good, the
tongue will utter forth good matter, Psalm. 45.1.
and speak^ for the King; and not rail upon Rulers, nor speak evil of those
that are in authority.

Psalm. 14.1.
there is no God, then he corrupts all his ways, and does abominable.

The common argument for excuse is, to cry out upon others, as the cause of
their wickedness. Adam laid the fault upon his wife; Eua upon the Serpent; the
Serpent upon God: and to this day, one man lays the fault upon another; like
ye thieves at the gallows, that there exclaim against their parents, and evil
companions. But if I may be thought worthy to give advise, lay the blame where
blame is worthy; even upon thy unclean and corrupted heart. For not iniected
sins by Satan, and the wicked by temptation; but ascondent sins, arising
from thy heart, and from thine own evil lusts, has schooled thee to
wickedness. Therefore cry not out of others without thee; woe worth such an
one, that brought me to this: Psalm. 55.11.
But with David cry out, Woe worth my wicked and unclean heart. Surely,
surely, such an one did not cause (...) to do this evil; but it was thou, O
my unclean heart; even my companion, that I could not put away, whom I made my
guide and familiar. Thus make thy self to know thy misery: And the God of
heaven wash all our hearts from wickedness. Wherefore heal us (O Lord) and we
shall be whole; save us (O Lord) and we shall be saved: do thou (O King of
heaven) purge us, and we shall be clean: and do thou (O heavenly Father) in
the precious blood of Christ Jesus, wash us, and we shall be whiter then snow.

And so I haste, 5. Circ.
(because time hastes away) unto the last point in the first branch, laying
forth the object, showing, from what the heart must be cleansed: O Jerusalem,
wash thy heart from wickedness, (or from evil) as some translations have it.

I will not stand here to define, or distinguish sin. 1. Ioh. 3.4.
What the tongue of Canaan calls, Au^n, and Catth^^h, or Paschaah, iniquity
and wickedness; that the Grecians call (...) sin; and the holy Ghost says;
that (...) the transgression of the law. Which way soever it be understood, it
conuinceth the people of Jerusalem, of their sins against God. Pointing forth
unto us this truth.

That the best, and readiest way, Do. 1.
to bring people from their prophannesse, unto repentance is, first, that the
Minister do labor to convince them of their sine, they have committed, before
either he exhort them to holy life, or comfort them with the glad tidings of
the Gospel. This course is here taken by our Prophet; it is my text; it is my
example to follow. Ezech. 16 2. and 13 4.11.18. 1 Reg. 18.18. Matthew. 3.7.
It was that which God incharged Exachael with, this course did Elias take with
Aliab; and which John the Baptist took with the rebellious Jews. Many speak
and preach (placentia) mercy, and merry (...) some cry (...), repent and amend
and other thunder forth like Bo^^arges, the judgments of God, as the sons of
thunder; all which ought to be done. But first (says our Prophes) show them
what they have done, and what is amiss, or all is in vain, and done amiss,
that is done.

We live in a captious age, where if people be generally reproved for sin;
Malac. 3.13.
they will answer, as the people in Malachy did, What have we spoken against
there? But if we say you are sinners, and show you wherein you have sinned;
the^ we shall cause you to blush with shame, and move you with David, to say,
peecam.

For Cain must be told of his ^urther; Genesis 4. 1. Sam 15. and 2.12.7. Ioh. 4.
Act. 9.
Saul of his disobodience, David of his adultery; the woman of Samaria, of her
vncloane lift; and Paul must be plainly told of his persecution, or our heater
will never return vuto us, Ioh. 4.19.
(Sir) I see that you are a Prophet. For then may the Preacher hope to profit
by his public doctrine, and the brother, by his private counsel; where first
they shall prove to their consciences, that of this and that sin, they are
guiltle.

For if the doctrine be only general, men will mis-apply it, and always turn
it upon others; soylog, he touched such a man, and such a m^n to day, etc.

From this wisdom I mind not to speak of sin in generals the original
corruption, and de f^rme^t of nature, which is an Fuhiop^^^ skin, that all
the water of the ses cannot wash away. But I desire to entreat particularly of
wickedness, which is damnable to our selves, and hurtful to others. And
albeit here I might marshall up innumerable troops of transgressions, I
entreat your godly patience, that I may touch the sores of our own time. In
which, (if you will but a little open your eyes) you shall see, Qui impia agent,
ne^ intelligent^ that will do wickedly, and will not understand. And although
I cannot touch all the flying sins of Judah, which make too loud a cryin the
cares of God; yet some of them I purpose but to name: I beseech you lend me
your hearts to consider of them, and tears of repentance, to wash them away.

Here I mean not to make rehearsal of the secret reuoltings from the truth
of God; nor the general embracing in corners, of the wilful will worship, in
stead of the service of God; nor the shameful idolatry, in trucking to Mass
in the corners of the streets, by seditious Papists, because they are yet
unknown: neither do I mind to show you, how impudently the knowledge of Gods
mercy and truth is abused, wrested, and trampled under feet, to the neglect of
the poor, and overthrow of the helpelesse: neither is it my purpose to
remember you of the cruelty, and covetousness of the rich; nor of the
irrefragable incorrigibility of the poor; nor of the incredulity, and contempt
of Gods word amongst all. Because these be covertly carried in the midst of
us, which, with the blood of Abel, cry to God, (as they appear) for vengeance
to reform; and which the late inundations of water, the strange and sharp
winter, with the dry and scorching summer, causing the land to mourn, and the
herbs of every field to wither, Ierem. 12.4
for the wickedness of them that dwell therein, (not yet a year old) may move
us to repentance. But my purpose is, to bring into your presence such crying
sins, and such a disorderly order of Roarers, within this your City, that
partly the amendment, and partly the reformation to you (my Lord) does belong.

It has pleased God to make you Magistrates, and Fathers of this City; not
only rosee that common equity and quietness be keps among the people; but also
that God may have his due honor and glory, both from you and them.

Now among Superiors, for you to amend, the sins and wickednesses that the
world takes notice of, are especially three. And in these the Prophet cries
upon you, whose scats be on high, to wash your hearts from wickedness.

And here by name, to show you what sins they be.







Against these the Prophet cries, O Jerusalem, wash thy heart, from these
heauen-crying sins: remove these beams out of your own eyes, that you may
see the clearer to correct and reform others.

And here pardon me, if I be bold with my betters. For it is the Ministers
duty to discover sin, and to convince the conscience of this and that
wickedness, before he can profit them that he are him. This is the counsel that
Jeremy received from the Lord, and delivers unto us; O City, wash thy heart
from wickedness, that thou may be saved. I desire not here to sit in any
man's conscience, for I have learned no^ to judge of any, till I see what shall
become of my self. Yet as we may not reveal all sins, and discover our
fathers nakedness, lest the uncircumcised rejoice: so we may not cover some
sins, lest the uncircumcised increase. But if I may be bold to show you,
what the Lord says concerning these sins; then I beseech you to harken, and
it shall not be long, nor tedious to hear. The evil of the sin of
Carelessness, too much Lenity, and neglect of Justice; which brings in all
manner of sin, not masked, but with open face, into the Church, and
Commonwealth; and the same to be committed with a high hand. For where have
you disobedience to Magistrates, to Parents, to Masters; where have you
drunkenness, etc. but where the Magistrate is careless of his office, or too
mild in his office? When read you, or heard you, of the unheard off sin, of
deflouring of Virgins, of killing of old men, of braining of children, and of
forcing of women, even unto death; but when, and where there is no magistrate;
Judge. 4.1 and 17.6. and. 21.25.
as the holy Ghost says, Judge. 2.19. there was then no King in Israel. When
hear you superiors, to be punished for the sins of inferiors; but when
Superiors wax careless of the execution of justice? For when magistrates wax
careless of those, that are committed to their charge, and neglect justice to
punish offenders; it is all one, as if there were no law, and no King in
Israel. For then men become beasts, and like Daniels flying Eagles with the
wings of wickedness, breaking into houses, Dan 7.


Therefore give me leave here to become the poor man's advocate; nay the rich
man's advocate: yea all men's advocates, but theirs, who are indeed beasts; yea
for the fear of God I entreat, that ye of the Magistracy, who bear the sword
of justice, would cut the wings of these lion-like beasts: and shorten the
horns of these yokelesse Belials, that they may be set upon their feet like
men: and that from your grave and dispensing hand of justice, men's hearts may
be given them, that there be no more complaining, and that you may be free of
their blood, over who^ the Lord has set you. But does this rest with you only;
or do these evils shake the Commonwealth alone; and does it not touch
ecclesiastical officers, and shake the Church also? Yea Priests and Jesuits
do disadvantage the truth, increasing daily, in writing and witnessing to the
disgrace of true Christianity. For this also I humbly pray (in ye Lords
behalf) that you put ye good laws in execution, against the favorites of the
Jesuitical brood: and so doing, there will be found as few Priests in England,
as Snakes in Ireland.

Isay, Isai. 1.23.
that Rulers be; because I have learned, not to have as much as a disre^ere
(...) thought of them; so I desire you, that be se^ted amongst the stars, and
be above others, to remember the fearful judgment, yt the sons of Ely
brought upon Judah; and to think upon the punishment that Ca^^bises ( Cyrus
his son) caused to be inflicted upon a bribing Magistrate, whose skin
pulled over his cares, was hanged over the judgment seat for an example.

I beseech you, let the fear of God, and the light of grace prevail at least
(so far) with all that be in authority, as the light of nature did with
Lucius Valerius; who being Consul of Rome, and dying whilst he was Consul,
having in his life time the custody of the treasury of Rome, was so free from
enriching himself, by unlawful means, that he was found so poor at his
death, that the charge of his burial was paid by the common people: so shall
God, the world, and your own consciences testify for you; that you have washed
your hearts from wickedness, and your fingers from bribes.

sex, state and condition be not ashamed to commit. Fearful it is to see and
hear Patrons to deal with the Church-liuings, as Polymnestor did with
Polydor; turn their patronage into pillage, taking that which they never gave,
and reaping that which they never sowed. For what the Palmer-worme has left,
Joel. 1.4
that has the Grasshopper eaten; and the residue of the Grasshopper, has the
Canker-worme eaten; and the residue of the Canker-worme, has the Catterpiller
eaten. That which Impropriations have left, that have greedy Patrons eaten;
and that which Patrons have left, that have evil customs devoured; and that
which customs have left, that have the covetous and wrangling parishioners, as
with the teeth of a lion, greedily gained. And unless people grow kinder to
the Ministry, they with their handful of meal, and little oil in the
cruse, 1. King. 17.12.
may mourning like, go with the widow of Zareptha; and gather a few sticks,
for (a few sticks will serve a little) to make a cake, and cate it, and dye.
Oh that these taking hands might once see the hand against them, that wrote
against Balzazzar, Dan. 5 ^ 24
to take away from the^, as they have taken from the Lord. The Iusts of their
unclean hearts, have defiled their hands, with the sacrilege of Achan, to
take gold and silver and Babylonish garments, Joshua. 7 21.
of the spoils of Jericho, Psalm 74.7.8.
consecrated to God.

But some may think it lawful, for them to take their own; which (they say)
their parents in a blind zeal gave to the Church. It is fearful to see
children to sit upon their furthers, and to judge the dead in the Lord.

If any be so past grace; let him know, that whatsoever is once lawfully given
to the maintenance of religion, may not be taken away again, under the pain
of mortal sin. The text is evident: The field shall be holy to the Lord,
Leu. 27.21.
as a field separate from common uses: the possession thereof shall be the
Priests. And the Lord by Iool complains: Ye have taken my silver and gold,
and have carried into your temples my goodly and pleasant things, Joel. 3.5.
etc. Therefore it is sacrilege to transfer lands, houses, privileges, or
money, violently, or couetously, or craftily to any other uses, that has been
given to the Church. And worse, if worse may be, is the maintaining of
feathers, borders, chains of gold, silk and velvet, with that, which did
maintain many poor; and with alms did feed and clothe many a fatherless.
Yet say some, what needs all this a do for the maintenance of the Ministry;
cannot Ministers live as the Apostles lived? To whom I answer, we can^ if you
will lay down, not your goods, but our own goods at our feet, as the people
did at the Apostles feet. O (dear brethren) will you have us shine like
lamp, and take away our oil? will you cry for preaching, as children do for
bread; and will you muzzle the mouth of the Preacher? You will say to us, that
the world was never better, then when Peter said, Silver and gold have I none:
and will you not give us leave to say, with the Ancient, that it is not
indecent, to desire, Aug. de cra. D. o proba.
sufficientia vitae? Yea (with your leave) we say more, that Sublatis studiorum
pramijs, etiam studia pereunt: That lack of living, makes lack of learning;
and lack of learning causes Gods people to wander upon the mountains, as
sheep without able shepherds. But yet me thinks, I hear some to say, that
Church-liuings be too large, and Church-mens houses too great; for their
revenues (say some clawbacke) will suffice a good Knight. I cannot fitter
compare these then to Dionysius the tyrant, who took the golden garment from
Jupiter Oly^pian in Peloponnesus, saying: That it was too heavy for summer,
and too cold for winter: and therefore the God must be stripped, to clothe
him: and lest the God stand clean naked, he shall be clothed with a woolle^^
rugge, light for summer, and warm for winter: for you must know that gold is
too heavy for any, but for the beasts of the earth to carry. Nevertheless, in
humility be it spoken, since Moses and Aaron by Gods ordinance went hand in
hand, I see nothing from God to the contrary, but we ought to have an
honorable Ministry, as well as an honorable Magistracy: and that a good
Minister be as well allowed, as a good Magistrate.

Look to it, my beloved, the contempt of Ministers and Preachers, has already
wrought bad effects amongst us. Men, brethren and fathers, have weeping eyes,
and a king hearts, to see this in the flourishing time of the Gospel, lest the
Lord punish the land for the contempt of his servants. For believe it, this
sin makes a way for Atheists, and Papists, and Vters, and Newters, for
Solifidian^, and Nullifidians: and to make this good, I might bring a cloud of
Fathers, to provoke you to cleanse your hearts from this wickedness. But I
fear, if these sins be not reformed, God will enter into judgment with the^,
that have taken the Lords houses from him, into their possessions.

And so much may suffice concerning Superiors, to be amended in themselves.

Sins in Iuseriours.
Now that God may have his due honor (by your means) from the people, I
should name to you the wickedness that rote in our streets, and call to you
(in the magistracy) for reformation, as to you the redress thereof (of right)
belongs.











These be the Roters, that grudge if they be not satisfied; they cause the land
to mourn, and the grass of the earth to wither away; they will hasten the
Lords vengeance, if speedily they be not reformed.

cry shame of us for this; but the very Papists make more of the Satterday,
and Saints days, then we do of the Lords solemn feasts.



Here I stand amazed, to consider that the laws of nations, have taken order
for the vain and idle taking of the names of Princes in men's mouths; so as
none dare, but such as are sold to treason, speak of their Kings, and States,
but reverently, and with an uncovered head; and yet no law made against vain
swearing, and common blaspheming of the most sacred name of the King of Kings.
In men's ordinary talk, lamentable it is to hear, in every house, in every
shop, yea in every street, how in ordinary talk every one mingle words, and
fill up their sentences with needless oaths; as if that, which is of al sins,
a most notorious d^shonor to God, were but a small sin, but much more
horrible and odious is that blasphemous and furious, and outrageous swearing of
many men; that if they be never so little offended, and their mind displeased;
then they fall to disgorge their filthy stomach, upon the glorious name of
their Creator. It is recorded by Herodot. lib. 6. that Nicanus pitched a field
on the Sabbath day against the Jews; but for his blasphemy, lost both the
battle, and his life; and his head, his hands, and blasphemous tongue was cut
off, and hanged on the pinnacles of the Temple at Jerusalem. And well worthy
of greatest shame, because this vice of all other, carries with it the most
detestation, for that it brings least delight of a^^ other sins. For all
other vices a man may wring out some excuse from nature, to lessen the
greatness; but this admits no veil at all. Is it not a desperate case, for
a man in mirth to swear by that blood, the remembrance of which, should strike
sorrow to the most obdurate hearts: that blood (I say) the loss of which
gained redemption to the whole world. Me thinks relenting thoughts should
wound the heart of a Christian, to name the wounds of Christ. But where
reverence is laid aside, there devotion is cold. But to heat your zeal, and
to put an edge upon your devotion, remember what God says, Mat. 23.23. I am
bold to tell you in the Lords behalf, that our tithing of Min^, and Commin,
and leaving the waightier parts of the Law unlooked unto, is to be feared,
will draw the Lords wrath down upon us; and bring into our Cities, towns,
Zach. 5.4.
and houses, Zacharies flying book, to consume them with the timber and stones
thereof. For it is decreed in heaven, that if thou will not keep and do all
the words of this Law (that are written in this book) and fear this glorious
and fearful name, Deuteronomy. 28.58.
(the Lord thy God) the^ the Lord will make thy plain wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance; and sore
diseases, and of long durance. For if it be true that Hosea prophecieth; Hosea,
4.8.
then long since, because of swearing, the Lord has a controversy with the
land. For who sees not, that for oaths the land mourns, Ierem. 23.10.
and the inhabitants are smitten, and they feel it not?

But the houre-glasse calls me to the pride of the Land.

The prophet Zephaniah, 1.8. says: It shall be in the day of the Lords
wrath, that the Lord will visit all such, as are clothed with strange apparel.
Pride has so many feathers added to her wings, that she covers all the
earth with her shadow. If we look to men, who should be both wisest, and
strongest, they are grown so effeminate; and our women so manlike, that if it
might be, they would exchange kinds. What modest eye, can with patience
behold the immodest gestures, and attires of our time: no sooner is infancy
put of, but impudency is put on. Many seems to imitate Nero in prodigality of
apparel, Cap. 30
and to verify that in themselves, which was said of him, by Suetonius, In
Nerone, nullam ves^ ^us bis indust. Many there be amongst us, that put not on
one apparel, nor one fashion twice, till at length they come to have no
apparel to put on. Many invent fashions to please the world; but the secret
judgment of God crosses their desires; for they displease, more then they
please: but if their bravery condemn them before men, in what case shall they
stand before the Almighty? Prou. 16.5.
The Wise man says, All that are proud in heart, are an abomination to the
Lord. The Lord resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Worthy was
the speech of a Reverend Bishop of our time, Doctor Babington.
that said: If it be a shame to wear a paper on the hat at Westminster hal, to
declare what was done; it is as reproachful to wear a vain garment on the
back, to pull all men's eyes upon thee. O that the God of heaven) would move you
(in the Magistracy) to revive and put life into the many and good laws
concerning apparel; that men and women, in their distinct callings, might be
known what manner of persons they be; that so honor (as she is of her self
bright and glorious) might have her like raiment to her splendour; that so she
might be discerned from the base vulgars.



The evil of Contention cries for the rod of your correction. For this sin
is the daughter of Pride. Only through pride man causes contention, Prou.
13.10.
and by contention the land is divided. O Lord heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes. But contention is a coal, too hot for my cooling: I entreat you (in
the Magistracy, that your fountains of discipline may flow forth, to wash
away this sin out of the Church and Common wealth. For it we akeneth both
Commonwealth, and Church of God; yea it hinders good proceedings; it
troubles the best subjects (that may be) that Papists, and Atheists (in mean
time) may do what they list.

The division between Protestant, and Protestant; the alienation of affection,
between Minister, and Minister; that will neither vouchsafe to seem to
consent, not join together against the common adversary, gives aduant age to
the Papists. But as the blessed Apostle says to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.4.
so say I, There is but one body, one spirit, one hope of our calling, one
Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God, and one Father of all. If there be any
consolation in Christ, even for his sake that made us, and for his blood that
died for us, let all these Ones, make us one in ye truth; and while we live, to
keep the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace.

Romans 13.1.^.
i^ the contempt of God himself. But the Papists will say, they may in some
things disobey Casar, and make no breach of their alleagiance to Almighty God^
But they that so say, ((...) Job says) tells a lie for the Almighty. The
contrary I do protest, that subiect^^ to Princes stands with, and is
commanded in religion, by God himself. For that which is Cas^^^, ought to be
given to Casar, Matthew. 22.21.
if we will keep our allegiance to God; and the contempt of government, is a
sin by Saint Iud^ bound up, in the bundle of death. Where you may read, that
none but filthy persons, that need to be washed, cut and ke^^ned, do despise
government* whom Saint Peter calls bruit beasts, lead by sensu^lltie, which
have no ground but ignorance: which if they plead not, you shall do well, to
let them have no mercy, but justice.

There be 2. poison some worms that gaster at the root of government; and two
beasts amongst us, with Ants bellies, and M^l^^hes hands, like the horseleach
that will never be satisfied. And if you would know them by name; the one is,
has wasted all; the other, longs to waste all.

Has wasted all, are the male-contented prodigals, that in every degree have
consumed their own estates: and now houer over other men's, and their eye
watches for the twy-light: and of these some lie couchant and dormant.

Concerning would waste all, or longs to waste all, who have treasured up
wrath and revenge in their minds, against Prince and people. These (forsooth)
cry out, that every man must not be subject to all, that be in office, or
superiority over him, by that he is a Superior, and that only in matters of
peace and policy; but not in matters of religion, or regiment of souls. Rhem.
annot. in Romans 13.
These be the counterfeit Catholics, that have taken liberty, to change their
civil Superior, for a spiritual Father, and religion for policy, and
policy for religion.

The Lord Almighty look down upon them, and in his wrath grant to as many among
them as be impenitent, the day that Zachari^ prophecieth, unto them, even a
day, Zach. 14.12.
that their eyes shall sink in their holes, and their tongue confume in their
mouth, and that their flesh may consume away, though they stand upon their
feet, because they fight against Jerusalem. In mean time (right Honorable)
it lies upon you, for the safety of the Kings person, of the State, and your
selves, to look unto them. For the cause of the contempt of the Magistrate, is
the incorrigiblenes of the evil disposed. Wherefore since laws be the sinews
of a Commonwealth; Plato.
since they be a divine gift; since they be the bands of Cities; Demost. Cicero.
Plutar.
since they are the very life of the Commonwealth; and since the Magistrate is
the life of the law: let me prevail with you, in the Lords behalf, to take
the zeal of Phineas, and the courage of Moses and Iosuh; and go through your
City, search, and see, and you shall behold sin to be grown to a head; and
therefore high time that you make head against it. You have the sword of
justice, you have the law: who does warrant the sword of justice, but the law?
who defends the law, but the sword of justice? Let the sword of justice by the
law be warranted, and spare it not, lest your selves be neglected: you are our
Fathers, we are your children: spart your rod, and spill us. The first
commandment that was given to man, after the creation, was the Law, and upon
breach of the Law, was the sword given to revenge justice. If you that be in
authority suffer it rust in the sheath; you will be contemned, justice
despised, the poor oppressed, and the whole Commonwealth confounded.

I might here lead you to more abominations, then these: where, in
drunkenness, men become beasts: and yet at this day, he is not counted a man,
that will not take away the image of man, and defile himself therewith. Oh,
the height of profaneness, that man should offer more sacrifice to Bacchus,
then to Jehovah!

I might show you the wickedness of whoring, even in this city; where many
men prostrate their bodies to uncleanness. Let me perish, if more souls of our
youth perish any other way, then this.

From hence it is (right Honorable) that the city, the town, and the
country is filled with beggars, and sturdie vngabonds, that have more busied
the Magistracy to set forth good orders, both for the relieuing of the one,
and punishment of the other, then at this day are executed. For do they not
loyter in every corner of your streets, as though there were neither laws,
nor officers to punish them: or as though there were more fear to displease
them, then God? But time bids me tell you, that by this time, there be few
that hear me, whose hearts be not convinced. And therefore I haste to the use
we are to make of this doctrine, which is threefold.

of the Gospel, that lives in any known sin; has fellowship with Christ.

If any be in Christ, let him be a new creature. 2. Cor. 5 17. Psalm. 16 6
And let every one that calls upon the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. Either leave your sins, or leave calling of God Father. Leave
dissimulation and hypocrisy; or leave carrying of Bibles, running to
preachings, and talking of Sermons. Leave off saying. Our Father which art in
heaven, unless you will live as his children in earth. For if ye call him
Father, which, without respect of persons, 1. Pet. 1 17
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here
in fear. I humbly therefore beseech you, in the fear of God, look into the
unclean corners of your hearts; and watch over your souls, that a false
heart, and a wicked heart, be not shrouded under a civil behavior. For the
Lord will judge us, 1. Sam. 16.7.
according to that which is in our hearts. Iere. 17.10.
The Lord beholds well enough, the rottenness of these golden apples of
Sodom; and in due time will cause them to fall to their everlasting shame and
confusions. Let Recusants, Church-papists, and politic Protestants, leave off
their Iudaslike countenances, habits and gestures, in their many Ceremonies and
complements of hypocrisy, like Balam with his seven Altars, and his seven
Rams: for God sees, for all that, much treachery against King and Country,
lurking in their hearts; because most of the are better bred, and better read
in Machianell, then in the Bible. They are outwardly men in print: yet for all
that, to covetousness, sacrilege, prophana^ion of the Sabbath, swearing
vainly, and swearing falsely; to pride, and contention, yea drunkenness, and
whoring, to oppress the true honest Protestants, to hoarding up of money,
corn, and the necessariest things of the land; they are like Aman sick for
Thamar, though it cost them their lives. These be varnished Protestant^ to
sanctity, like Judas to Christ. They plot against the Commonwealth, and
parishes where they dwell, as Ahab did against Naboth. Oh, my soul, keep thee
from the way of these men: Search, try and cleanse thy ways, and purge thy
heart from such wickedness. And this for the first part. I should speak of the
Argument, which is the second part, but the time is spent. Therefore let us
pray, that God would bless, that which time has taught.

Thou God of heaven and earth, give this that has been spoken thy blessing,
that it may be a savor of life unto life, to every one of us, if it be thy
good will; and with the blood of our Lord Jesus, cleanse us, and take us out of
this our uncleanness; and bring us to thy kingdom of holiness, where thine
honor dwells: and that for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee, O
blessed Father, and the eternal Spirit, be all honor, glory, power,
dominion, might, and Majesty, both now, and from henceforth for ever. Amen,
Amen.

This second part was not uttered, for lack of time; yet thought fit by the
Author to be annexed in the Print.
NOw follows the second part of the Text, of Judah: preservation in this
life, and of his salvation in the life to come: in these words; That thou
may be saved, (or may be helped, or may be kept, etc.)

Which in effect is as much, as if he should have said: If you will obey the
voice of the Lord, and wash your hearts from wickedness then the Lord will
defend you, and preserve you alive in this life, and will watch over you, with
a revenging hand, to anoy and destroy all those, that rise against you in this
world, and will give you everlasting life and salvation, in the life to come.

This being the meaning of the words; let us not here dream of salvation by
works. For all whatsoever we can do, cannot deserve any thing at Gods hands;
because all our works are imperfect: Isa. 64.6
and it must be perfect obedience, that meriteth any thing in this life, much
more that deserves the immeasurable weight of glory.



That reformation of manners, and sanctification of life, makes us fit and
capable, though not worthy of the mercies of God: I say, although
sanctification makes us not worthy of the mercies of God, yet it makes us
capable, both of saving grace, and of all the mercies and benefits of God
whatsoever. For we are not fit to receive mercy from God, Job 11.14.15.16.
till we have repented.

This is one with the Prophets counsel to Naaman: Wash and be clean: So
here, cleanse your hearts from wickedness and be saved. If our sins do
separate Gods mercies from us; then sanctification and holiness, makes us fit
and capable of the mercies of God, both for this, and a better life. Isa. 59.2
Ier. 5.25.
But the first is true; therefore the second. If repentance keeps us from
perishing and destruction; then holiness makes us at least capable of Gods
mercy; but the proposition the holy Ghost gives for doctrine: Luke 13.3.
For unless you repent, ye shall all likewise perish. If without
sanctification, and regeneration, we cannot see the kingdom of God; then
without sanctification we are not, nor cannot be capable of the mercies of
God. But the former Christ makes good, Ioh. 3.3. Therefore, etc. I beseech you
deeply consider this, and remember it well, that which no money, nor gold can
do, repentance and sanctity may do. As the ground is for so^d, when it is
ploughed; so a heart is for the Lord, when it is cleansed. Act. 11.28.
For sanctity and holiness is the way to eternal life, trouble much more to
all other mercies of God whatsoever.

Jeremy, saying: Ierom. 25.5.
Turn again now every one from his evil way, and from the wickedness of
your inventions; and you shall dwell in the land, that the Lord has given unto
you, and to your fathers for ever and ever. That is, as we desire to be the
matter whereon Gods mercy shall work; and as we desire to live every one
quietly under his own vine; and if we would continue in this land, which the
Lord our God has given us; then we must every one forsake his evil ways,
amend our lives, and sanctify our selves, that we may be holy. Has any of us
endured misery, suffered want; has the plague threatened us, famine pinched
us, thieves and robbers spoiled our goods; have any of us been rich, and now
poor; have we been underset with friends, and their savor turned into
disfavor? consider deeply the matter (O my brethren) and let us at length
learn the true way to remedy our evil, to procure our safety, Psalm. 14^.12
13.
and increase again what we have lost; let us leave off to do evil, learn
to do well, that we may be saved: let us cast off sin, Hos. 5.15.
and all shall be amended and restored. Then shall the earth yield her
increase, and God, even our God shall give us his blessing.

Zach. 1.3.
and amendeth his life. For the Lord has promised it. Turn you unto me.
(says the Lord of Hoast^) and I will turn unto you, (says the Lord of
Hosts). Fear not the assistance of God in any trouble, or trial, or death, or
affliction, Psalm. 89.4.24.28.33.
if thou have repented; for then thou shall hold out to the end. For albeit
thou may slip and fall again; Ioh. 10.28.
yet thou, can not finally perish: Ioh. 17.23.
for all thy sins committed, after thy true and found repentance, 1. Ioh. 3.6.
shall not be thought upon. Which is that, 1. Ioh. 2.8.
which the blessed Apostle gives for comfort: If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. For Jesus is not to be
tied only to such sins, as never were committed before, but is also to sins
often fallen into: So that frailty, and not looseness be the cause thereof.
And an Article of our faith it is, to believe the forgiveness of sins; shall
we gloss upon it thus, that is, of such sins as I never committed but once?
Surely if we do, it must be said, cursed be the gloss that corrupts the
Text. For that Article compriseth all sin, before Baptism, and after
Baptism; before repentance, and after repentance; for ever throughout the
course of our lives, etc.

their lands, goods, and dwellings. For the seven nations, Leuit. 18. 24.
which the Lord cast out before Israel, were cast out, because they had defiled
themselves with sin. verse. 25
The land (says the Lord) is defiled; therefore I will visit the wickedness
thereof upon it, and the land shall vomit out her inhabitants. verse. 28.
For shall not the land spew you out, if ye defile it, as it spewed out the
people, that were before you? and it is a commandment, saying: Leuit. 20.22.
Ye shall keep therefore all mine ordinances, and all my judgments, and do
them, that the land whether I bring you to dwell therein, spew you not out. But
me thinks I hear some object, and say; If such an one for his sins be cast
out of his house, land and living; how comes it to pass, that he to whom
the Lord has given it, is as wicked as he that was cast forth: I answer, It
may so come to pass in the justice of God, that the rod, which the Lord uses
to correct one for sin, may afterward it self be throwee Isa. 10.5.12.
into the fire. Wherefore (I beseech you) in the fear of God, even as you
would be preserved alive, and after this life, saved for ever, lay away
Atheism, Heathenisme, Papisme, and Brownisme, with all sin and wickedness;
and continue in the profession of the Gospel, that you may dwell in the Lords
favor, and inherit the land of the living for ever.

that thou may be helped.

It may serve to teach us, that all our righteousness, and all that we do in
the service of God, brings no advantage nor profit unto God; but the end why
God requires obedience of us, is for our own good and welfare, proved here;
sanctity is required of us, but for our own good, that we may be saved. If
a man should be an earnest suitor to his neighbor, and importune his neighbor,
not for any thing for himself, but for his neighbors own good; would not
every man condemn that man of great folly, if he should reject his requests:
yet the Lord of heaven and earth daily importuneth us, and that for our own
everlasting gain (which is godliness) to bring us to eternal bliss; and we
turn the back, and give him the left ear; like graceless children, upon
who^ their parents bestow many means, and much money, in schooling; and
otherwise, to have them thrive in learning, and trading; but all in vain. Know
(dear Christians) that your coming to Church, and giving your presence at a
Sermon, is not to countenance the Preacher, nor to the glory of God only, but
it is for thine own gain, not only the gain of spiritual graces, but of
temporal good things also. For as Job says: Job 22.3.
Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous? is it profitable to
him, that thou make thy ways upright: therefore acquaint thy self (I pray
thee) with him, and make peace, verse. 21.
thereby thou shall have prosperity. For if thou return to the Almighty,
verse. 23.
thou shall be built up; thou shall lay up gold for dust, verse. 24.
and the gold of Ophir, as the fliuts of the rivers. Yea the Almighty shall be
thy defense, verse. 25.
and thou shall have plenty of silver. Deuteronomy. 5.29.
Who can deny, and read this, but that all, Job 35.7.
that the Lord commands, Psalm. 16.2. and 50.12 and 116.12.
is for our welfare, unless we will deny God himself?

The reason of this truth is, because God is Almighty, and able to glorify
himself without us.

But here a question may arise, Mat. 3.9.
which is this; If our service do not profit God, why does the Lord require
it, it seems he has some respect to himself?

No such matter. But when he requires us to abstain from evil, and do
good, he only considers, what is good for us, and necessary for our
salvation. Let us do well then, and the same shall return to our selves for
good: if we do evil, it shall return to our loss. And this is that, which
God gives for doctrine to Cain, Genesis 4.7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well,
sin lies at the door. For it cannot be said, that we can diminish any thing
of God, or that we can rob him of any thing he has. Therefore a man (by all
the sins that he commits) shall hurt none so much as himself; and
likewise the profit that comes of righteousness, returns to his own
person.



O consider (dear brethren) if any of you should so serve your neighbor,
without respect of your own profit, and be so careful of another man's
benefit, that you should go and solicit him, saying: You must do this and
that, etc. and so should continue every day to stir him forward, and to set
him in order unto the business, whereof no profit should redound unto
himself: were not this a token of a rare and singular love? And even so does
our God deal with us; he calls us by his word, wooeth us by his Prophets,
draws us by his Spirit, that he may pardon us by his mercy, and save us in
his son, according to his promises.

respect of God, for he never has done us any evil. Neither let us presume in
respect of our selves, for there is nothing in us, to move us to presume of
Gods mercy: for in us, that is, in our nature dwells no good: for we cannot
think a good thought as of our selves. If we had done God any good; or done
more good, the^ by the law we are bound to do; or if God had done us any evil,
then we might have presumed, by the law of right and reason, and by the law
written, that, God being bound to reward, or recompense, we ought not to be
sent empty away: But being with us now, as it is, there is not any thing in
flesh and blood, that may cause us to presume. Therefore let us confirm our
judgments, that in the day of our account before God, we must fly from our
own merits and deseruings, be our works never so many, or so glorious: for we
bring no gain nor profit to God by our righteousness. From whence (me
thinks) I hear some object and say: If God do not gain by our
righteousness; then we cannot hurt him, nor diminish his Majesty and glory
by our sinfulnes. And then it is no matter how we live: nor any reason or
justice, that God should condemn and cast away the work of his own hands, for
doing such things, that neither do him good nor hurt.



I answer, that our sins cannot diminish the glory of God. For God knows
how to bring light out of darkness, and to turn our sins to the glory of
his Majesty, Exo. 9.16.
as he did the sin of Pharaoh, Romans 9.17
against the Israelites.



I say, we do much dishonor the sacred word of God, which as it is holy, so
in every page, line and lease calls upon us (as for a matter of weight, and
of importance) to be rich in good works: which though our holiness profit not
God, yet, nevertheless, God declares that he accepts our doings, and
makes account of them, as though they were of some value. For which cause God
likeneth himself to a husbandman that has a vineyard, who causes it to be
dressed; Mat. 21 33. and 13.4.
and has a field, and reapeth corn of it: In which similitudes, God
declares, Mar. 12 1.
that he does account our works, Ioh. 15.1
as sweet and pleasant sacrifices in his sight: And to encourage us to the
works of charity, he says, that when we do good to the poor, Mat. 25.40.
it is as if we did it even to him, it is as if we did it even to him, and he
accepts it as done unto himself. Thus you see, that our God, to encourage us
to do well, will accept things whereby he takes no profit. And therefore does
require it, as though he were the better by it, and also promises that we
shall not leese our labor thereby, neither that it shall be a thing
unprofitable for us. Therefore that we lead a good and a godly life, is a
matter of great necessity.

Concerning the third part of the objection, saying, that it is against reason
and justice, that God should condemn and cast away the work of his own
hands, for such things that neither do him good nor hurt.

I answer, that reason requires sin to be punished; and justice commands
that the evil be corrected, and the righteous rewarded. And the word of God
sounds in infinite places, that Gods glory cannot be lessened, Mat. 3.9.
nor his royal service diminished, by inflicting condign punishment in the
condemnation of the ungodly. For God is able of stones to raise up children to
Abraham. Wherefore let us in the fear of God every one endeavor to be
religious, if it be but to, make the Commonwealth peaceable, and the kingdom
happy, 1. Sam. 12.14.15. For the cause why Ahabs government was not so good as
David's; nor Rehoboamt so peaceable as Salomons; surely it was, because the one
was established in the law of God, and the other was mingled with filthy
Idolatry. The one was governed in wickedness, and the other in the fear of
God. For the Lord says. For the transgression of the land* Pro. 28.2.
there are many Princes; but by a man of understanding and knowledge, a realm
likewise endures long.

Lastly, it serves, to reprove Atheists, carnal Gospellers and Protestants at
large, that think God is bound and beholding unto them, if they do but come
to Church, to grace the Ministry with their presence. But know for a
certain, whatsoever he be, that walks after the lusts of his eyes, and the
wickedness of his own heart, when others shall be preserved, he shall
perish; and when others shall be saved, he shall be damned. For the Lord Jesus
shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance unto them, 2. These. 1.8.
that do not know God, and which obey not unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And this our example, our Prophet and our text, cries loud in our
ears, O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved.
Even so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

