THREE SERMONS UPON THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER.

By the late Faithful and Worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON, Dr.
in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuel College
in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, for Michael Spark, and are to be sold at the
blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1631.

I John 5. 14. And this is the assurance which we have in him, that if we ask
any thing according to his will, he hears us.
THe scope of the holy Apostle in this chapter, is to set forth some of those
principal privileges we have by Jesus Christ. One maine and principal (which
is the greatest of all the rest) is that through him we have eternal life; And
therefore (says he) know this, that when you have the Son once, you have
life: in the 12. ver. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not
the Son has not life. Therefore (says he) have I written this Epistle to
you for this purpose, that you might consider well what gain you have by
Christ Jesus: These things have I written, (says he) in the verses before
this that I have now read unto you, to you that believe in the Name of the
Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life. After this he
names another great privilege, that we have by Christ; mentioned in this
verse, that I have now read unto you. This (says he) is the assurance we have
in him, that whatsoever we ask according to his will, he hears us. This is
the second great privilege we have by Christ, we shall be heard in all our
requests: it is no more but ask and have, put up what petition you will, if
you be in Christ once, you have this assurance, that he hears you: but he
delivers it with this condition, you must first be in him: We have this
assurance in him (says he) that if we ask any thing, according to his will,
he hears us. So that you see, here are two plain points lying evidently
before us.

1 That except a man be in Christ, Doct. 1.
he must not, he ought not to apply to himself any of these spiritual
privileges, that we have by him: if we be in Christ, this and all other are
ours; if you be in Christ (says he) then you have this assurance, for we have
that assurance in him. The second point that the verse affords us, is,

2 That whosoever is in Christ, Doct. 2.
whatsoever he asks he shall have it. Now my full intention was, only to have
handled that which is mainely aimed at in the verse (for the other you see is
but touched by the way) which is this great privilege that belongs to all
Christians, that whatsoever they ask in prayer according to the will of God,
they shall be heard in it: But because I understand you had a Sacrament
appointed for this day, I have altered a little that course; the hearing of
that has somewhat diverted me, and caused me at this time to pitch upon the
other point which I named to you; That except a man be in Christ, be ought not
to apply any privilege to himself; if he be, I say, all belongs to him.

When you come to receive the Sacrament, it is a very great privilege to
meddle with those holy mysteries, to have those simboles given to you of the
love and favor of God in Christ; but yet you must remember this, that except
you be in Christ, you have nothing to do with him, and therefore it is a fit
and necessary point for this season. For when the Apostle would give directions
to the Corinth. what they should do, to prepare themselves to the Sacrament,
that they may be worthy receivers; he gives it in this short precept: 1 Cor.
11. 28.
Let every man (says he) examine himself, and so let him eat this bread and
drink this cup. Now what is a man to examine himself of? Surely every one
that comes to the Lords Table, is to examine himself concerning these two
things.

1 Whether he be in Christ, and so whether

2 Though he be in Christ, yet he must examine heart be put into such a trance
of grace, or fashioned so as it ought to be, when he comes to the immediate
performance of such a duty as that is. Now because I handle this point, but
only for this particular occasion, I will not enter into such a manner of
handling of it, as I was wont to do at other times, but only take up so much
of it as may serve for the present occasion; Therefore because I say this to
you: That except a man be in Christ, he ought not to take any privilege to
himself: we will, First exhort every man to consider whether he be in
Christ: for this is the present question which any man's heart would ask, when
he hears this propounded; Why, if all the privileges be suspended upon my
being in Christ, my maine business is to examine whether I be in Christ or no.
Now because a man may be in Christ and yet be suspended by some interveniall
sin, by some indisposition of mind and heart, that may grow on him, from the
actual enjoying of the present fruit and benefit of that privilege which
belongs to him Therefore we will first give you rules to examine your selves
whether you be in Christ or no. It is very useful to all that now are to
receive, or at any other time; its useful you know too, not only upon such an
occasion as this, but upon all occasions; and therefore a point, (though
peculiarly belonging to this time being taken up for preparation for the
Sacrament) which we may the more boldly venture upon, and you ought to attend
it more diligently. I will give you but these two maine notes or rules by which
you shall try it.

Whosoever is in Christ, there must pass a double act: one on our part,
another on Christ's part, Cant. 2. 16.
My beloved is mine, and I am his; we take Christ and Christ takes us;
wheresoever you find these two acts, such a man is in Christ: There must be an
act of our part, something the heart and mind of a man must do to take Christ.
Secondly the Lord sends and puts forth something of his, he does put forth an
act of the Holy Spirit, whereby he comprehends and takes us. Now if thou find
in thy self these two things; First, that thy heart has exercised that act of
taking the Lord Jesus; Secondly, that he has sent forth a virtue and put forth
an act of his to take and to comprehend thee; then certainly thou art in
Christ; and if it be so, all the privileges belong to thee; if not, thou have
nothing to do with this holy Sacrament. Now for the clear discerning of that
act which is on our part, you must consider these things.

1 Whether you make Christ your chiefest Excellency. 2 Whether you make him
your chiefest Treasure. 3 Whether you make him you chiefest Joy and Delight. 4
Whether he be your chiefest Refuge to whom your hearts retire on all
occasions. Commander.
My Beloved, if you find all this done by you, then out of doubt, Christ
belongs to you; They are all several, but they meet in one center, and serve
together to make up one rule of trial, to know whether you have took Christ
to you or no; and I will handle them all distinctly as I have named them to you.

Excellency; for it is natural to every man to seek some excellency or other.
Indeed beasts, so they may have that which is necessary for the life and
service of nature, it is enough for them; and it may be it is enough for all
brutish men, whose souls are buried in their bodies that are but sepulchers of
men, in whom that spectacle of excellency which is rational, belonging to a
man, is quenched in sensuality. These men, it may be, seek no excellency at
all, but so they may live in pleasures, so they may have that which belongs to
their bodies, and to this present life, it is enough for them. But a man who
has any thing of a man in him, as he is a man, considered in these higher
parts of his soul, his mind and his will; he seeks another excellency
suitable to these parts: he serves a higher, a more spiritual immateriall
substance, such as the soul is; and according as men's minds are of diverse
fashions, so they are in a way of seeking several excellencies for themselves,
yet according to their different ages. Children delight in childish things, and
so do men likewise, from whom this childishness is worn; yet according to
their several fashion and understanding, so they seek a several excellency.
Some seek learning, knowledge and excellency in their profession; this is the
excellency they would have* Some seek great places of authority and command,
and if they had their wish, that is, the excellency they would have; Some seek
the favor of the Prince: Some to have a great estate, that men may say, he is
worth so much, he has such Lordships, such fair houses, and lands belonging
to him; if he had the excellency he desires, these he would have. Every man in
his own kind, according as men's understandings are stronger or weaker;
according to their different education, as it has been more noble, and
ingenious; according to the several companyes they keep, where they find
such and such things magnified; according to the several ages they live in;
(As we say something is in request is one age, in one company, something in
another) I say according to these several occasions, so every man seeks a
several excellency to himself. Now consider what is the excellency thy heart
desires, above all thing else, whether it be Jesus Christ; to be in him; to
excel in grace; to have a new draught of Gods Image in thy soul; or whether
some such thing as I have named: Consider what is the proper virtue thou
would have thy soul to excel in, for there are several virtues; every
thing has some virtue or other which is proper to it; as the virtue of a knife
is to cut well; the virtue of a horse to go well; the virtue of a soldier to
fight well; and the virtue of a Christian to be a holy man; to be holy,
gracious, and unblameable in his conversation. Now what is the proper
excellency thy heart aims at: what is that thou esteemest thy virtue, that if
thou were put to thy choice that thou might have a wish granted thee, thou
would most desire? whether would thou desire this; to excel in grace and
holiness, to have thy sinful lusts mortifyed, to have thy heart put into a
holy frame of grace? or whether, (if thou would deal impartially with thy
self) is it not some other excellency that thy heart runs upon? that thy
thoughts and affections are most set upon? Consider when thou look upon
others, what seems most gracious in thy sight, by what thou do most value
the excellency of another man; for it is likely thou so esteemest thy self
also: Consider therefore I say what thou measurest thy self and others by; A
man that is in Christ, sets so much by himself, and by every man as he is in
Gods book: as you see, men are rated, and their wealth esteemed according as
they are in the Kings books. See what thy heart says to this, whether thou
set so much by thy self and by every man else, as he is in Gods favor; as
he has the eminency of grace and holiness above others; or whether it be
something else by which thou ratest thy self and others: Consider what is that
outward Badge, that Livery, that Cognizance thou desire to wear, which thou
would boast of among men: you shall see it in Paul, (says he) When I come
amongst you, I do 1 Cor. 2. 1. 2.
not regard the excellency of natural wisdom; I care not to come with that;
The time was when I prized it, as you prize it now; but now (says he) it is
another excellency which I seek, which I desire to wear (as it were) When I
come amongst you, to preach the Gospel, (says he) I care for nothing else, I
care not to be thought to know any else, than Christ crucified: Consider with
thy self now what thou would have most eminent in thee, in the eyes and
ears of men, that which thou would wear in the view of all the world;
whether it be the Livery of Christ; to profess the fear of God, to excel in
grace and holiness, though the world disgrace, despise and hate thee for it; Is
this that thy heart desires? If so, its a sign thou seek Christ for thy
excellency. Consider likewise what it is that thou esteemest thy chiefest
wisdom; for it is the disposition of men before they be in Christ, before
they have experience of the ways of God, before they be regenerate, when they
look upon those ways in others, they reckon them folly, they are 1 Cor. 2, 14.
foolishness to every natural man: but when they are once in Christ, then
they are wisdom unto them, that is, they reckon him the wisest man that excels
most in these foolish courses, as before they deemed them. It is the Lords
expression, Deu. 4. 6. Deuteronomy. 4, 6.
This shall be your wisdom before all people, to keep my Laws and
Commandments. Consider now what is that thou reckonest thy chiefest wisdom,
before all people; whether that which before thou thinkedst folly and
weakness, and hadd'st a disposition in thy heart to contemn and scorn?
whether now set thou it at a higher price, and do in truth think it thy
wisdom, and art willing that all the world should know that thou think so?
By this you shall find whether you make Christ your excellency by considering
whether your hearts go this way or no, to seek a virtue in the excellencies
of Jesus Christ, and so show them forth to others; by examining whether this be
thy chiefest wish, that thou may be a Christian; that thou may be found
in Christ; that thou may be able to say as Paul said, Phil. 3. 7. 8.
I reckon all other things as dross, as base and vile things; only to be
found in Christ, to be clothed in his righteousness, to excel in the graces
of his Spirit; this only I prize as most excellent, and most worthy: And this
is the first.

2 Secondly, consider what is thy chiefest Treasure, for you see Math. 13. 44.
He that had gotten the field, he gave all that heehad for it, and went away
rejoicing, for he reckoned it his greatest treasure, and worth all the rest.
It is certain, whosoever has taken Christ, does so esteem of him, he
reckons him to be his chief treasure.

You will say, How shall I know it? Quest.


Why, consider what men do with their treasure, Answer.
for it is certain (as I said before, of excellency, so) every man has some
treasure or other; The poorest man that is, has a treasure, something that he
esteems of, which he makes account of. I ask not what thou art possessed of,
but what thou most esteemest? for treasures are as they are most esteemed of.
As we say of jewels, the worth of them is according to men's fancies, according
as they are esteemed, so it is with every man's treasure; One makes this thing
his treasure, another that. Now (I say) consider what thou make thy treasure,
and you shall know what your treasure is, by these marks.

1 A man lays up his treasure in the safest place. Then if Christ be thy
treasure, thou will lay him up in the innermost parts of thy heart, he shall
not dwell in thy tongue, he shall be laid up in the closer of thy heart; he
shall not dwell in thy outward man, in thy understanding only, but he shall
be laid up in thy inward part; (that is) he shall be pitched upon the very
bottom of thy heart, and there he shall rest, there thou will entertain him.

2 Again, what a man's treasure is that he keeps with his greatest care, with
the greatest wariness and solicitude. So will thou the Lord Jesus, when once
thou layst him up in thy heart; thou will not be careful for any thing, so
much as to keep him safe; that is, to keep the assurance of his favor safe,
to keep him near thee, and thy self near unto him; thy mind will be more
careful of this, more than of all things else: Thou will then take heed of
all things that may cause a distance between thee and him; thou will then take
heed of whatsoever may loose him, of whatsoever may make a separation between
the Lord and thee; thou will be more careful for this, than any man is to
keep his wealth, or to keep whatsoever it is that he makes his Treasure.

3 Again, whatsoever is thy treasure that thou will most esteem, thou will
set it at the highest rate above all things else. Before a man is in Christ
there are many other things, which in truth, (howsoever he pretend something
else) he prizeth at a higher rate than Christ; Worldly vanities before he is
in Christ, seem great things to him; but when he is in him once, he looks
upon them with another eye. My beloved, you know there was a time when Genesis 1.
31.
God looked upon the creatures, and they were exceeding good, even all that are
in the world; those things that men magnify so much, I say, there was a time
when they were exceeding good: but sin has blowed upon them, it has blasted
the beauty and vigor of them, so that now when the Lord looks upon them, this
is the sentence that is pronounced of them, you know, in Eccl. 2. They are all
vanity and vexation of spirit. Consider if thou be able to look on all these
things (even the best things the world has) as things being but mere vanity;
things wherein the Lord sowed not men's happiness, and therefore thou can not
think to reap it there. If you mark but the expression the wise man uses in
1. Eccles. says he; All things under the Sun are but vanity: now there is a
reason contained in these words why they are but vanity, for waters you know
they ascend not higher than the fountain, and they carry not any thing higher
than their own ascent; so all the creatures that be in the world, they be but
under the Sun, therefore they cannot ascend to that happiness which is above
the Sun, nor carry you to that condition which is above; for happiness is
above the Sun, laid up in Heaven. Therefore says he, all things under the
Sun if they be considered to make a man happy, they are but vanity: Now
consider whether thy judgment be so of them or no, whether it be conformable
to the holy Ghost, whether thou have this conceit of all other things, but the
quite contrary conceit of Jesus Christ; whether thou can think of him, as of
one that is most excellent and thy chiefest treasure, as one that is far
beyond all these, as one upon whom thy heart is pitched, as one in whom thy
happiness is contained.

4 Again, a man's treasure is that which he will be at any cost to get, he
will be at any pains to attain it. It is that, on which his heart is
bestowed, and his affections are occupied about. Is it so with thee when thou
come to Christ Jesus? art thou willing to be at more cost and pains to get
him, than any thing besides? Is thy heart and affections more bestowed upon
him? Math. 6. 21.
For where a man's treasureis, there his heart is. I do not ask whether thou
bestowest more time upon the matters of grace, than the duties of thy calling;
but, whether thou do them with more intention, whether thou bestowest thy
time and pains upon them, as upon that which thou reckonest thy treasure,
far exceeding all other?

5 Fifthly, consider whether thou art willing to part with any thing rather than
with Christ Jesus: for whatsoever is a man's treasure, you know a man will part
with any thing rather than it. Is it so with thee? had thou rather part with
any thing than with Christ? than to part with a good conscience; with the
graces of the Spirit, or with any thing that tends to holiness to build thee
up further in the work of Gods grace? I say, consider whether thy heart be
willing to part with any thing rather than with Christ; for you shall find
this, that Satan and the world will cheapen Christ, and when they come to
bidding, they will bid well. Consider whether thy heart can give a peremptory
answer to the world, and say thus; I will not sell Christ, I will not sell a
good conscience for any thing; yea when Satan and the world bid highest, and
tell thee as he did Christ, Math. 4. 8. 9.
that he will give thee all the riches, and all the glory in the world, if you
will part with Christ; consider whether thy heart be ready to deny whatsoever
he offers to thee, (as he will be sure to offer that which will be most
suitable to thy disposition) whether thy heart has taken this resolution to it
self; Christ is my chiefest treasure, I will part with all therefore, I will
part with liberty, with life, with goods, with credit, with pleasures, with
profits, with whatsoever is near and dear unto me, rather than I will part
with the Lord Jesus. If this be thy hearts resolution and mind, then Christ is
thy chief treasure, that is the second thing.

3 Thirdly, consider what is thy chief joy and delight, what is thy life; (I
put them together, for that which is a man's chief joy indeed, is his life.)
For we know life is nothing else but that joy that the heart has, whereby it
is nourished and fed as it were; for life is not to have body and soul joined
together, to be a living man, in that sense we usually take life; for if that
were life, then those in hell should not be said to dye the death, for you
know in hell there is a conjunction of soul and body, and yet men are not said
to live there; for it is death which is the punishment of sin; and indeed you
shall find that there is something a man's heart cleaves unto, wherein he
rejoices, which is the same with his life. Therefore look as the Soul
enlivens the body, so the conjunction of the present things which he reckons
his joy, that is, his life, enliven his soul, he cannot live without them. Now
if Christ be thy chief joy, thou will find this, that thou can not live
without him, as men are wont to say of their delights; Such a man cannot live
without such a thing; so it is true of every man that has taken Christ, he is
not able to live without him. This life is no life, and therefore if there be
but a separation between thee and Christ, if a man's conscience be as it were
clouded for a time, he finds no rest, he does as the Spouse in the
Canticles; Cant. 5. 6.
She seeks from one place to another, and gives her self no rest, till she
find him; and why? because it was he whom her soul loved. So you shall find,
Beloved, whatsoever it is that your souls love, whatsoever you make your
chief joy, you will take no rest, but as far as you love and enjoy it.
Therefore for the finding of this, whether Christ be thy life and thy chief
joy, consider what it is that thy thoughts feed upon; every wicked man, every
man that is out of Christ, there is something that his thoughts feed upon, some
things there are in contemplation of which the soul so laceth it self; some
pleasures that are past, present, or to come; the very thinking of these are
the greatest joy of his heart, he roules them under his tongue; even as a
Servant that has got some dainty bit out of his Masters presence, and eats it
in a corner, so the soul of a man has out of Christ some secret, some stolen,
some unlawful delights, that it feeds upon and delights in: Consider therefore
well with thy self, what breakfast thy morning thoughs have (that I may so
say) what breakefast they have every morning, what is that Pabulum, that food
of thy soul, wherewith thy thoughts and affections are nourished and refreshed
from day to day; whether it be some carnal pleasure, some reflecting on thy
state, upon thy wealth, upon thy friends, or whether it be on Christ. See (as
David exercised it) whether be they thy Psalm. 42. 8.
songs in the night time? All carnal men have something past whereby they
comfort themselves, something present whereby they cheer up their hearts,
something to come, something in hope. So every man that is in Christ, he has
the comforts of the spirit, the meditation of the privileges that he has in
Christ, the hope of Gods favor; These are his appointed food, these are the
things that his soul feeds on in secret; yea the very works that he does,
that seems to be the hardest part of a Christians life, the very works that
he does in serving the Lord from day to day, even that is his meat and his
drink; that is, it is as sweet and acceptable to his soul, as meat and
drink is to the hunger and thirst of his body: Now consider with thy self
whether it be so with thee; whether that which is thy continual feast, without
which thou can not live, be Christ; or the assurance thou have, that he is
thine and thou art his; whether it be the privileges thou have in him; and
the things that belong to the kingdom of God; See whether these be thy life,
the things without which thou could not live; or whether it be some thing
else, some stolen delights, some unlawful pleasures, some thing else that thy
soul and affections are set upon. This is the next thing by which thou may
try thy self whether thou belong to Christ or no, to consider whether he be
thy chief joy, whether thy soul be most filled and satisfied with him. And
this is the third thing.

4 The fourth is; to know whether he be thy chief Refuge; If thou be one that
has took him and received him, I say, he is thy chief refuge. For every man
has some refuge, some castle or other to which his soul retires in all
difficult and doubtful cases, by reason of that indigency; that insufficiency
to which the nature of man is subject. There is something that he must have to
lean unto, (mark it) for mankind is like that generation which the Wiseman
speaks of: You know it is said of the Connyes, Prove. 30. 26.
they are a generation not strong, and what then, and therefore they have their
burrowes to hide themselves in. I say such is the generation of mankind, he is
a weak creature, a generation not strong, therefore there is something that he
must lean to, something out of himself, some sufficiency besides himself,
some strong hold, some refuge every man has; I say every man has some refuge
or other, whither he thinks his soul may go, and there he may have succor
in cases dangerous and in troubles. Now consider what is thy refuge, whither
thy heart runs in all such cases, to what wing, to what strong hold: In
dangerous cases, you see every creature has some refuge or other, The Child
runs to his Mother. The Chickens run to the hen, The Fox to his earth,
the Connyes to their burrowes; so every creature to their several corners and
receptacles proper to them: I say so it is with every man, so has every one of
you to whom I speak, there is somewhat that is a secret refuge to which your
hearts fly. Now consider whether that be Christ or somewhat else. A covetous
man (or rather a man of this word) he has wealth for his strong hold, in which
his heart comforts it self; well, says he, what change of time soever come,
yet I have an estate to hold me up; and when he is ill spoken of abroad, yet
he applaudes himself with that he has at home; The Courtiers, they have the
Princes favor, that is their refuge wherein they comfort themselves; Those
that are given to Company they have good fellows, such as they, that are their
companions, and so long as they speak well of them, they care not who speak
ill of them; Some have a refuge of this kind, some of another, every man has
his refuge. If you will look into the Scriptures, you shall see David's refuge,
in any distress, upon any occasion; At 1 Samuel 30. 6.
Ziglag he comfort himself in the Lord, his heart did fly to him, as the
chickens fly to the hen, there he comforted himself, there he shrouded
himself, there he encouraged himself in the Lord. When he fled from his son
Absolon, was not the Lord his refuge? Yet (says he) He is my buckler and my
strong hold, Psalm 3, which was made upon that occasion. What was Jacobs refuge
when he fled from his brother Esau? Did not he go to the Lord, and seek to
him by Prayer? Genesis 32. 12.
Lord thou have said thou will do me good, now I fly unto thee, I beseech thee
perform thy promise, thou art my refuge. Consider others now, what was their
refuge: Judas, when he had betrayed his Master Christ, and his conscience was
upon him for it, he goes to the high priests and brings the silver to them,
why, says he, you set me a work, you are the authors of it, and I hope to
find some comfort from you; you see he found little comfort in his mind, yet
that was his refuge. The Kings of Israel and Judah when they were distressed,
they fled to Egypt and to Ashur, to this or that help, which (the Lord said)
were broken reeds to them, but yet that was their refuge: This is the manner of
every man being out of Christ, of every unregenerate man, that is in his
natural estate, some refuge he has; friends, or wealth, or credit, or the
favor of the Prince, something or other it is: and if he be destitute and
have no refuge (as sometimes it so falls out) then his heart is shaken as the
leaves of the forest; Their Isaiah 7. 2.
hearts were shaken even for fear of the king of Aram, as the leaves are
shaken in the forest; and why? because they knew not how to defend themselves:
they had no refuge to fly to: So you see it was with Belshazars heart; so
Achitophel, and so Saul, when he sees that he must dye the next day, and that
there was no refuge for him: then I say their hearts sanke and dyed within
them: And now consider how it is with thee, what is the refuge to which thy
heart flies, and which thy heart makes most account of, (for every man thinks
with himself, change of time may come, and what shall be my comfort, what
shall be my strong hold at that time.) Do thou fly to Jesus Christ? is he
thy succor when thy heart is dejected at any time and faints within thee? from
which fountain do thou fetch thy comfort? Do thou fly to Christ, to
comfort thy self in him, when thou art in a doubtful case, that concerns
thee as much as thy life? whither do thou go for counsel and direction? is
it to Christ, to beseech him to guide thee, and direct thee, when thou art
pressed hard? whither does thy heart go for succor and for help to keep thy
self safe? Is it to Christ, or to somewhat else? My beloved, I assure you
this, that a carnal man that is not in Christ, in these times of distress
knows not whither to go, he dares not go to Christ, for he fears that it
shall be asked him, upon what acquaintance? for he has been a stranger to the
Lord, he was never acquainted with him: but a carnal man that is out of
Christ, he goes to his muses, he goes to his farms, he goes to his bushes, as
the hunted hare was wont to do, to go to the places that she used when she
lived quiet, thither she flies when she knows not how to escape: so in that
fashion it is with men, look what things they were wont, to which their hearts
had recourse in time of prosperity, and what their haunts have been; to those
bushes they fly: But alas! they are but bushes, such as will not defend them.
But now the Christian on the other side, the muse, the farm as it were (it is
but to express it to you) that his soul is acquainted with, the strong hold
that he was wont to fly unto, upon every several evil, upon every ordinary
doubt, upon every deiection, discouragement and fainting of heart; he was wont
to fly to Christ, and there he was wont to find comfort, and thither he goes
in time of greatest difficulty in the day of death, and there he finds
comfort. Consider if he be thy chief refuge, for if thy heart has taken him
as he is thy chief excellency, thy chief joy, thy chief treasure; so he will
be thy chiefest refuge, yea when all things else are taken away, yet that cover
remains safe: suppose thou be in prison, suppose thy credit be taken away, (I
mean) thy worldly credit, (for the other credit cannot be taken away from any
man that has Christ,) suppose thy life be taken away, suppose thou be stripped
of all that thou have; yet thou have Christ for thy chief refuge, and thou
think so, and thy heart is satisfied with it. As Paul says, when he was a
prisoner, when he was naked, when he was destitute, when he was stripped of all,
yet (says he 2 Timothy 2. 12.
I know whom I have trusted; As if he should say, yet I have him safe, yet my
cover is over my head, yet I am safe in my castle, I have chosen him, I have
him in death, yea then Christ he is advantage, he is a cover, a castle, and a
refuge.

5 Last of all: consider whom thou set up for thy chiefest Commander, who
it is to whom thou give the chief command in thine heart. You will say how
shall I know that? Why (my beloved) he whom a man fears most, Quest.
and loves most, Answ.
that is, he whose friendship above all others he would least loose, and whose
dislike and separation he does most fear, certainly he will be most obedient
to him, he will be most observant of him. Art thou so to Christ? take all the
things in the world, if thou set up him, as him whom thou most fear and
love, thou will most obey him: So again, he whom thou think can do thee
the greatest good, and the greatest hurt, him thou will most obey; if thou
think in good earnest that Christ is able to do it, certainly then thou will most obey him. As for example, if thou look to any man in the world, a
man that is out of Christ, he thinks that the favor or the wealth of the
King, can do him more good and more hurt, than the favor, or the loss of the
favor of Christ; He thinks that wealth, or credit, or something else, (many
things there are that he thinks) can do him more good and more hurt;
therefore he more respects their command, than the command of Christ; but a
man that sets up him for his chief Commander, he regards nothing else when it
comes to cross it, when it comes to thwart any command of Christ, because he
says thus to himself in his heart in secret: It is the Lord that can do the
greatest good, and the greatest hurt, therefore I care for no more. So Naboth
he cared not for Ahabs wrath. So Hest. 3. 2.
Mordecay cared not for Hamans displeasure: so did the Apostles, they cared not
for the High Priests, nor what they could do, Acts 4. So did the 3 children
(as you call them) they Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18.
cared not for the fiery furnace of Nabucadnezar, nor for all that he was able
to do; and why? because they thought that Christ, that God was able to do
them more hurt, and more good. Now take any Commander in the world, when you
regard not the punishment, nor the reward that he is able to inflict or to give
you, his authority is gone; now when you set up Christ, and think so of
Christ, you are ready to obey him, and obey him rather than any other.
Therefore consider with thy self this, and consider seriously; ask thy heart
the question, what is that thou set up to be thy chiefest Commander? For
there are three great Commanders in the world, that divide all mankind
between them almost. And that is wealth, and estate; worldly credit and
honor, to live in esteem; pleasures, and delight; Now think with thy self
when any of these three great Commanders come with any command, contrary to
that which Christ commands, think with thy self what thou will do in such a
case, what wast thou wont to do, look to past experience: look back to thy
former ways, see what thou wast wont to do: think with thy self when such a
Command comes, what thy heart reasons upon; if concupiscence, if a strong lust,
if a strong impetuous desire come, and bid thee to do something, which is
contrary to that which Christ would have thee to do, what art thou ready to do
in such a case? If thy profit, the maintenance of thy estate, thy liberty, thy
wealth, thy convenience in this world come and command thee to do one thing,
and thy conscience (which is Christ's vicegerent) come in his stead, and command
thee another thing, what art thou ready to do in that case? for when thy
credit, thy honor, and reputation, thy vain glory shall come and bid thee do
one thing, and Christ shall bid thee do another, what is thy resolution, what
art thou wont to do? By this thou shall know whether thou set up Christ,
as the chief Commander in thy heart or no, whether thou give him thy chief
throne, whether thou exaltest him for God in thy heart; you know when you exalt
him for God, every thing then yields, if in truth he be set up for God in thy
heart: Therefore consider what it is that thy heart sets highest, whether thou
exaltest him most, whether (when any of these threatening, crying commands come)
thou can give them an absolute deayall, and say with thy self, I will not
obey you; and if they threaten imprisonment, or disgrace, and loss of life,
and if I do not obey such a lust, I shall be wrung and pincht for it, I shall
lose such delights: well, I am resolved to bear all this: on the other side,
when they shall come with fair proffers, you shall have this honor, and this
advancement, and this convenience. If thy heart can say now, I will have none
of you, for I see it is a command contrary to his that is above, whom I have
set up for my chief Commander, whom I resolve to obey whom I take to be
greater than all the friendship in the world, than all the profits, pleasures,
and credits in the world; I say thus examine the self what thy heart is toward
Christ, what it is to his command; and (let me touch that by the way) thou
must also show thy obedience to Christ, in thy obedience to others; My beloved
there are indifferent things, that are in themselves not of moment one way or
other whether we do them or not do them, and though the omission of them in
themselves be nothing, yet when it shall be of contempt and neglect of those
that are set in superior place over you, in such a case you ought not to do
it: this is a rule, and a true rule in divinity, that indifferent things may be
omitted except in two cases, in case of scandal, and in case of neglect, and
contempt of authority: therefore when there is neglect, when men show contempt,
for that case it is to be done, though for the other it is not to be done. This
I touch but by the way, that you may consider it in your particular occasion.

Now my beloved, you see these five things, by which you may know if you have
took Christ, or no: ye know when a man comes to examine himself whether he
be a fit man, a man that has any right to come to the Lords table, he must
consider whether he be in Christ, otherwise he has nothing to do either
with this privilege, or with any other. Now to be in Christ, there must (as I
said) go a double act, there must be one on thy own side, there must be one
act on thy part to take him; and there must be an act on his part, there goes
out a strength and a virtue from him by which he takes thee and comprehends
thee: The time is past, and I cannot proced further, only remember this that
has been said to you, and examine your selves by it whether you be in the
truth, whether you make Christ your chief Excellency, your chief Treasure,
your chief Joy, your chief Refuge, your chief Commander; if thou find that
thou have done this, if thou find thy heart wrought to such an act as this, to
take Christ in such a manner, then thou have Christ, thou art in him, then thou
have a right in him, and may come with comfort: but if thou have it not, then
I must charge every one of you in the name of Christ Jesus (in whose authority
we come) that you meddle not with such holy mysteries* My Beloved you know what
I have often told you, there is a necessity laid on men to come to the
Sacrament: you know he that neglected the Levit. 23. 29.
Passover was to be cut off from the people. It was a very great sin: so it
was to omit the Sacrament: you have diverse Sacraments every Term, and if
your business hinder you from one, you may come to another; yea there is a
necessity lies upon you to come, but yet we must give you a double charge, one
that you omit it not, and another that you come not hither unless you be in
Christ; what have thou to do that art a profane person, thou have nothing to
do with Christ thou that art yet a stranger to him, that thou should thrust
in to the Lords table; thou ought not to do it, if thou do, 1 Cor. 11. 29.
thou eatest and drinkest thy own damnation, instead of thy salvation.

The Second Sermon.
AND so now we come to the Use, Use.
and that is, that there is an Act of Christ to make an union betwixt us, that
we may be his, and he ours: there is an act of his, that is, there is a
certain power or virtue comes from him, even as there does from the Lodestone
to the iron, that draws thee to him; there goes out a virtue and power from
him as to the woman that touched the hemme of his garment, that healed her
bloody issue, such a power goes out from Christ to every man, that is in him.
And as you must examine it by your own act, so in the second place you are to
examine it by this; consider whether there has gone out any such power from
Christ to take and comprehend thee: For you must know this, that when once we
are in Christ, then there goes forth an effectual almighty power from him,
which does not make a little light alteration on the superficies of the heart,
but it alters the very frame of it, it turns the very rudder of the heart, so
that a man's course is to a quite contrary point of the compass; it is such an
alteration as does breed in us, not some good conception only of purposes and
desires which many have, which when they come to the birth, there is no
strength to bring them forth: but he gives to us a power and strength to
perform them: That is, he does not put upon us a washy color of profession,
but he dies us in grain with grace and holiness. And therefore consider
whether thou have found any experience of such a power going out from Christ to
thy heart; This my beloved, differs from common graces, from the common form
of godliness which is in the world, as much as the life differs from the
picture, or the substance from the shadow; as a through performance differs
from a proffer, or an offer: or as that which has sinews and vigor, differs
from that which is weak and powerles. Therefore this power of Christ which he
puts forth and diffuseth into the heart of every man that is in him, is called
the Kingdom. And the 1 Cor. 4. 20.
Kingdom of Christ is not in word, but in power: That is, when once he rules
but as a King, he exercises a kingdom there, and he says not only to us; I
will have such a thing done, they are not weak and powerless commands that he
gives to the heart of a man that he dwells in; but says he, The Kingdom of God
is not in word but in power; that is, there goes an efficacy with those
commands, there goes a great strength with them, that brings every thought, and
every rebellious affection into subjection to it; and therefore consider I say,
if thou would have these virtues, whether thou be in Christ, whether any
such power has gone out from Christ to thy heart.

But you will say, what is this power and virtue, Quest.
and in what manner is it infused into the heart of man, for this seems to be
a narration of a thing a far off?

My beloved, we will explain it as well as we Answer.
can to you; even as you see an Artificer working with his instrument, there
goes a certain virtue out from that art which is in his mind, and guides the
instrument to make this or that, the which without it could not be done, when
he makes any artificial thing, as a knife, or a sword; or when the Potter
fashions the port, his hand is set on work, and there is a certain invisible
passage, a certain secret influence of the art that goes along with his hand,
that brings forth such an artificial thing; or even as you see the members
move; a man moving his arm, or his hand, or any part of his body, there goes a
certain virtue from his will, a certain secret power, efficacy, and command
that stirs them this way or that way; the thing we see not, yet we see it in
effect, or as you see it in the creature, you see the creatures that God has
made, they have all the several instincts, by which they are instigated to do
this or that; you see the birds are instigated to make their nests of such a
fashion, at such a season; so every creature according to his several kind.
There goes out from God who is the author of nature to these works of nature,
a certain virtue that puts them on, and instigates them to this or that: and
as you see an arrow that is shot by the Archer, there goes a virtue together
with it, that directs it just to such a mark, so far, and no further. So
after this manner there comes a power from Christ to his members; as soon as a
man is in him, there comes such a secret divine, unexpressable efficacy that
works upon the heart of him in whom he dwells. And therefore the conjunction
between him and us, is compared to that which is between the soul and the
body, that acts and stirs us to and fro, according to its will and pleasure:
such an efficacy shall thou find, if thou belong unto him, and therefore
consider if there be such a thing in thee or no.

But you will say, to what purpose is this efficacy, Quest.
and what does it in my heart when it comes there?

Why, I will tell thee what it does; it is expressed Answer.
in plain terms 2. Cor. 5. 17. Whosoever is in Christ is made a new creature;
That is the work it effects; it is such a power and efficacy as makes thee a
new creature; That is, It breaks in pieces the old building, it quite takes
away the first print; As when a man comes to make a new stamp, the first must
be removed. So that this efficacy that goes out from Christ, it has a double
virtue in thy soul, to wear out the old stamp, to breed a death of the old
nature, of the old man, to ruin and break down the old building, and to set
up a new one; and that the scripture calls a new creature: and therefore
consider with thy self, whether thou find such a virtue as has put thy heart
into such a new frame, as has molded it all together, and has put it into
another fashion than it was, consider whether all in thee be new.

You will say, this is strange, must all be new? Quest.


My beloved, Answ.
you know the words they are clear; 2 Cor. 5. 17.
old things are passed away, all things are become new. (In the same place which
I quoted before) that as the command was in the offering of the Passover, not a
jot of old leaven, but we must part with it; Now this is the nature of leaven,
It is always purging out, and it will be purging out while we are here, only
the efficacy and strength thereof remains not; Then think with thy self, is
all new in me? look what natural disposition I have had: look what natural
lusts and desires I have had, see what acts I was wont to do, what old haunts
and customs I have had, look what old company I kept, what old courses I
took, what my tract has been; is all this altered and every thing become
new? (for, says he, it must be 2 Cor. 5. 17.
a new creature, a new nature:) That is, it is not enough for a man to have a
new course for a fit, to have new purposes and a new change that comes like
flashes, I say, that is not enough; you may have many new things in you, that
may be in old hearts, Math. 9. 16, 17.
like pieces of new cloth in old garments, that will do thee no good at all;
the Lord regards not that: like new wine in old vessels, so it is where there
are some new things, that are good things in themselves; in a carnal and old
heart, they are not fit for the heart, and therefore they never stay long
there: So says the text, Put a new piece into an old garment, and it makes the
rent greater.

Therefore all must be new; I say there must be a new nature, that these new
things may be there: even as the several creatures are in their several
elements, as the elements are in their own place, as the plants are in their
proper soil, as the branches are upon their own root. For then they flourish,
then they hold out, then they continue; Therefore see whether this vigor, this
efficacy, this virtue has gone out from Christ into thy heart; whether it has
not only renewed all in thee, but also has given thee a new nature; That is,
whether it has wrought such a change in thee, that all the ways of godliness
and new obedience, become in a measure natural to thee, so that thou can do
them cheerfully, even as we hear, and see, and do natural actions, and that
thou do them without weariness: for you know, things that are natural we
are not weary of them; And so thou will do them constantly, for what is
natural, stays and abides by us, that it outgrowes and out-wearies what ever
is in us beside; Now has there a virtue gone out from Christ, that has
wrought all this in you, that has made all new, has not only done so, but
has made it natural to thee? But you will say, Quest.
must it needs be so, cannot Christ take and comprehend me, but there must be
this wonderful change wrought, who can be saved then? I have then but little
hope, when I am upon my death bed, and then shall look upon my old nature, and
find no such work as this wrought upon me. Beloved, I beseech you consider
this, Answ.
that there is a necessity of it: It is so, and it must be so, and except you
have it, you cannot be saved; you see the words in the Scriptures are most
clear, 2 Cor. 5.
Whosoever is in Christ is a new creature: Do but consider whether it be so or
no, there must be withal 2 Pet. 3. 13.
a new heaven and a new earth; You see that was the great promise that was to
be fulfilled in our times of the Gospel: was it not a new preisthood, was it
not a new covenant, has not the Lord said, there must be a new heaven and a
new earth, That is, new graces from heaven, and a new company of men wrought
on, and changed by those graces? Shall old Adam, those that are borne of him,
shall they receive a power from him, to make them like to him, to carry his
Image, to be corrupt, and carnal, and sinful as he is: And do you not
think that the New Adam, the Second Adam, shall have as much efficacy in him
to make those new creatures, that are in him, that come to him? Certainly there
is as much power, life, and vigor in the new Adam, to change every man that is
in him, that comes to him, and to make the^ new creatures, as in the old Adam,
to make them like him: Besides, has not Christ said plainly, I came not into
the world to save souls only, that is not my business alone (though that was a
great part of the business and errand for which he came into the world) but
(says he) Tit. 2. 14.
I came to purify a people to my self, zealous of good works: in the 2 Tit.
Now if that were the end of Christ's coming, do thou think that he will
loose his end? And therefore its impossible, that any man should be saved, or
have part in Christ, and that he should be in Christ and Christ in him, except
his heart be purified so, as to be zealous of good works. If Christ dwell in
thy heart, thou may easily know it; for do thou think, that Christ will
dwell in a foul and unclean place? has he not Hab. 1. 13.
pure eyes? And therefore it is certain wheresoever he dwells, that place must
be a fit Temple for him to dwell in; Wherefore of necessity he must cleanse thy
heart, he must fashion it, and keep it pure, and clean, and sweet, so as it
may be a fit Temple for him and his Spirit to dwell and delight in. Besides,
does he not look to his glory in all those that belong to him? he has many
eyes to look upon them as it were, there are 1 Cor. 4. 9.
many spectators men and Angels, to see what they are, and how they behave
themselves: If he should have a company of men to belong unto him that are
carnal, perverse, and worldly minded, that have crooked ways like other men,
would this be for his honor? would it not be said, Like men, like Master?
would it not reflect upon him? Certainly it would; and therefore the Lord so
orders it, that those whom he has redeemed, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16.
should be holy in all manner of conversation: Says he, you must be as I am,
else it will be for my dishonor, As I am holy, so every one of you must be
holy, in all manner of conversation; Therefore let no man deceive himself, to
think he can go away and yet be in Christ, and be saved through Christ and
the mercies of God in Christ, when there goes out no such virtue and power from
Christ to change him, to work on him, to alter him, to make him another
creature; And therefore I beseech you in the examining of this, (for its a
matter of great moment) to consider with your selves, if this be wrought in you
or no; whether you find any experiment and effect of this mighty power,
efficacy, and virtue: and let me bring you a little to particulars. Has there
gone out a virtue from him to enable thee to believe? There is a faith required
in the Deity, there is a faith required in the Deity, there is a faith required
in the promises of God, there is a faith required in the providence of God, to
think that every particular thing is ordered by it; There is also a faith in
all the threatenings of God: Now for the manner of propounding; when the
Scripture comes to propound any thing, it propounds it thus, and no more: as
you see in Moses, he writes nothing, but Genesis 1. 1.
In the beginning God made heaven and earth, etc. And so the Apostles write;
Such a thing was done, Math. 1. Luke 1. 2.
Jesus Christ was borne of the Virgin Mary; Thus and thus he did: Now when the
naked object is propounded, other writers what they deliver or write is
rational; They use Reasons and arguments to convince men of those things which
they deliver; But when the Scripture sets down any propositions of faith, it
does but barely propound them, for there is the Majesty of God and authority of
God in them, to confirm them.

But now here you will demand, Quest.
(the proposition being but nakedly laid down in the Scriptures) what will
enable a man to believe it?

I answer: Answ.
that certainly there is a mighty power that goes out from God and from Christ,
that enables thee to believe with this efficacy, that where the object is set
before thee, there goes out a power from him to work faith in thy heart,
whereby thou truly beleevest it, and so it appears in thy life: we think we
believe those things, but our lives do manifest the contrary; namely, That
there is not a powerful faith wrought in us; for all the errors of our lives
(though we observe them not) arise from hence, that these Principles are not
thoroughly believed: if they were, it could not be, that there should be such
inconveniences in the lives of men; Therefore consider if this faith be wrought
in thee, whether such a power has gone out, to work such a faith, that has
changed thy whole course, as it will do, if it be once wrought in thee, by
the power of Christ: So also consider, whether there has a virtue gone out
from him to work love in thy heart to the Lord; for otherwise it is certain
that there is no man in the world that is able to love God, or to come near
him, for all love rises from Similitude, there must be an agreement and
similitude between those two that love: Now every man by nature is as contrary
to Gods pure nature, as fire is to water, and without an almighty power to
change his nature, and to work a particular affection of love in him, he can
never be able to love God: therefore its the baptism of the holy Ghost; Math.
3. 11.
I will baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, that is, with the holy
Ghost which is fire. Genesis 3. 16.
I will multiply thy sorrows and thy conceptions, That is, the sorrows of thy
conceptions. Now love is as fire in the heart, and one fire must beget another;
And therefore you have it in the common proverb, Love is a thing that cannot
be bought with mountains of gold and silver; yet if thou be in Christ, there
goes out a virtue from him, that stampes upon thy heart this holy affection,
that breeds in thee this holy fire of love, so that thy heart cleaves to him,
thou love him with as true, with as genuine, as natural, and as sensible
love, as thou love any friend; as thou love any creature in the world.
Consider if this be wrought in thee or no. And so for thy knowledge; there is
also a power in it, consider whether any such virtue has gone out from Christ,
to make the knowledge which thou have, powerful.

You will say, Quest.
what is that?

That is, Answ.
to bring on these truths which thy heart assents unto, to bring them with that
evidence, and fullness of demonstration, that thou shall yield unto them, and
practice them according to thy knowledge. Beloved, there is much knowledge
among us, but who practices according to his knowledge? Romans 1. 21.
We know God, but we glorify him not as God; and the reason is, because there
has not gone a power with that knowledge, to make it lively and effectual, to
pass through all the faculties of the soul, and to overrule them; for if
there were such knowledge, it would always draw affection and practice with
it. So likewise consider, whether there has gone a power from him to mortify
thy lusts? Gal. 5. 24
Whosoever is in Christ has crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts,
not to lay them asleep only, but to mortify and subdue them. See likewise
whether there has a power gone out from Christ, to help thee to overcome the
world, 1 John 2. 16.
The lusts of thine eyes, the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of life; for
whosoever is in Christ overcomes the world, and all that is in the world. The
world has many things to work upon us, and to resist and oppose us: It has
persecutions, it has disgraces, it has slanders and reproaches, which it casts
upon holy men, and upon the holy ways of God. And the men that are actours in
this, are the devils factours, though they think not so, as the Apostle James
expresses it; James 3. 6.
Their tongues are set on fire of hell, to devise slanders and false reports,
and to fasten them upon holy men, especially upon the Ministers of the Gospel,
and so upon all the ways of God: I say they are the devils factours, though
they think not so: and those that believe them are the devils receivers; the
one has the devil in his tongue, the other in his ear. But the Lord has
appointed this. This is one thing whereby the world fights against the ways of
God, to discourage men and to hinder them, that they might be stumbling blocks
to them. So it was with Christ, he Luke 2. 34.
was the falling of many in Israel by reason of this; so was Paul, as a
deceiver, and yet true, etc. Consider if thou have this efficacy put into thy
heart, that thou art able to overcome this, that thou art able to overcome all
the offenses, and persecutions, all the slanders and reproaches that are cast
upon the ways of God; and notwithstanding that, to think well of them, and to
walk in them, and practice them. Likewise, as it has these things on the one
hand, so it has pleasures, preferments, glory, riches, credit, and all things
of that nature on the other; art thou able to overcome all these? So to shut up
this point and prosecute it no further, thus you shall know whether you be in
Christ: for that is the point; We have assurance in him, that if we ask any
thing, we shall be heard, but first we must be in him; now to know whether we
be in him (as you have heard) there must be an act of ours, and secondly an act
of his, which is this power that goes out from him, to change, to take and
comprehend us. So much for the first thing.

Now for the second; if a man will apply or take to himself the privileges we
have by Christ, as this particular privilege of being heard in our prayers, of
coming to the Sacrament, or any other; know this, that it is not enough to be
in Christ only, but there must be a certain qualification, a certain
immediate fashioning, and preparation of the heart, or else though thou have a
right to the privileges, though they belong to thee* yet thou art suspended
from the use, benefit, and comfort of them. And this is considered in these
Five things. (I is come to do some other duties, but moreover there must be
this also; those graces thou have, this change, this new creature that is
wrought in thee, which is but a heap of particular graces, these must be acted
and stirred up upon such an occasion: It is true, no man ought to come except
he have the graces of Gods Spirit wrought in his heart, that they may lie
there in the habits, that they may be in the heart as fire raked in the ashes.
But if a man will come to receive the Sacrament, and suffer these habits, these
graces he has to lie still there, he comes not as a worthy receiver; (there
are indeed degrees of unworthiness) he comes not as a worthy receiuet except
he stir them up, except they be acted at that very time: As for example;
when we come to receive the Sacrament, we ought then to have an especial
humiliation and sorrow for our sins; we ought then to have an especial love
to Jesus Christ; we ought then to have a spciall rejoicing in him, and in all
the Privileges we have by him; we ought then to have a special love to our
brethern, the men with whom we converse, and among whom we live: now if a man
come and receive, and do not stir up and act these graces, he receives
unworthily, and my ground for it, is this; you see in the feast of
Reconciliation, the Tenth day of the Seventh month, the Lord tells them there,
you shall come, and you shall keep it, and you shall not do work, etc. But
is this enough? no, he that does not actually afflict his soul (says he) that
day, he shall be cut off from his people, Levit. 23. 27. That is, though they
Levit. 23. 27, 28, 29, 30.
had a habitual disposition, and their hearts were prepared to sorrow for
their sins, and to take them to heart and bewail them, this is not enough,
(says he) at this time you must afflict your souls, that is, there must be a
stirring up of that sorrow: So likewise you find this in the feasts, in more
places than one, that when they come to keep the feasts, at that time they
shall eat and drink, and refresh themselves, but in any case rejoice, Deuteronomy.
12. and Deuteronomy. 16. I will not stand to repeat the places: That is, it is not
enough for you to have thankful hearts, to have hearts prepared for these
things in the habit, but you must then rejoice, for it is the season of it,
(for every Eccles. 3. 11.
thing is good in it is season) and the Lord reqvires it at such a time.
Therefore thus think with thy self, whenever thou come to receive the
Sacrament, this is the time that the graces I have, the habitual graces, must
be new pointed as it were, they must be new whetted, new scowred, that they may
be bright and shining upon such an occasion, when the Lord calls for it, you
must then qvicken them, and stir them up, that they may be all acted in your
hearts.

And this is one thing, that it is not enough for a man to be in Christ, to take
the privileges that belong to him, but there is a certain qvalification
reqvired that must be done at that time, when the Covenant is renewed And this
is one, to have the graces thus acted.

Secondly, there must be a new Reconciliation. David: Nathan would not have
said when he came to him, 2 Samuel 12. 13.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, if there had not been a new thing, if there had
not been a thing done at that time; and therefore it intimates so much, that
before his sin was not forgiven: that is, the Lord was angry with him. You
must know therefore this, that when a regenerate man sins, there is only a
particular guilt; the universal guilt of sins returns not, (for that would
cut him quite off, that would put him absolutely into the state of damnation,)
but it is a particular guilt, for every particular sin; that is, even as a
father is pleased well with his son, and knows him to be his son, he is
affected to him as to his son, yet he has done such a particular action
that has offended him, and for that particular offense, he withdrawes himself
from him, he carries not himself to him as he was wont to do, being offended
with him for such a fault; now till the son has reconciled and humbled
himself for that particular action, though the father have an hundred gifts to
bestow on him, yet he shall have none of them, till he has reconciled
himself; So think with thy self (if any sin lie in the way) when thou
come to partake of this privilege to receive the Sacrament, or when thou
come to call on God for any particular mercy, or to have any request
granted; think then with thy self, such a sin I committed, I must humble my
self for it, I must labor to make reconciliation, labor to have this taken
away, that my Father may be reconcilied to me; then come and take the
privilege, for now it belongs unto me; therefore there is a necessity of
renewing our repentance and reconciliation most exactly, and to take a very
particular examination of our ways when we come to receive the Sacrament, or
when we draw near to God upon such special occasions, least our Father,
(though he be a Father to us) have some particular quarrel against us; for
even he whom we call Father, 1 Pet. 1. 17, judges every man (even his own
sons) without respect of persons; that is, he will not bear any ill in them:
thus you see did he with Moses, with David, and others, and the like he does
with all the Saints. This is the second qualification that is required before
you can have any part in any of the privileges, before you can attain unto
this assurance, to ask and have; therefore it is not without use, and that not
in the Sacrament only, but also in that which we have to deliver.

Thirdly, suppose there be no particular sin, what distance is grown
between the Lord and him ever since the time, that he has in a more
particular manner been reconciled to him. This is another thing than what we
named before, to consider what rust has grown upon his soul, what soil his
heart has contracted, by conversing in the world, and by meddling with worldly
and earthly things; for the soul gathers soil with meddling with them, even as
the hands do; now thou must think with thy self, when thou come to the
Lord, and drawest near to him in this, or any other duty, thou must recover
that distance again, and bring thy heart nearer to the Lord, thou must draw
nearer to him, thou must get thy heart to a more close, and near, and inward
conjunction with him; thou must labor to have that hardness that thou have
contracted (as it will be in a little continuance of time) thou must labor I
say, to have that took away and remooved; to have thy heart softened, to have
the rust rubbed off; thou must labor to have all these things done; For thou
must know this, That though there be not a particular sin committed, yet as
we see, the outward man is subject to a wasting, though there be no wounds,
though there be no sickness; though a man be in perfect health, and all is
well with him, and he observe all the rules of diet, yet (I say) you see the
outward man is subject to wasting, to fainting, to weakness, and decay; and
therefore there must be a renewing of diet, and of strength, or else it cannot
be able to hold out: So it is with the inward man; though there be no
particular sin, though a man did keep some good course in the ways of
godliness, without running out emenently or evidently, yet he is subject to a
secret decay, so that sometimes he must have some special meat, some
special feast, which the Lord has appointed for that purpose, (for he does
nothing in vain:) And if this Sacrament could be spared, that a man might
keep the strength of the inward man without it, the Lord would not have put
you to this trouble; but he sees it necessary and therefore he has appointed
it to be received, and that often, that you might feed upon the body and blood
of Christ, that you might eat his flesh and drink his blood, and gather new
strength from it, that when there is a decay of grace in your hearts, you may
go to this Fountain, and fill the Cisternes again to recover strength; For
when a man comes to the Sacrament as he ought, he gathers a new strength, as
a man does from a feast; his heart is cheered up as it is with Flagons of wine,
he is refreshed, his hunger and thirst is satisfied; That is, the desires of
his soul that long after Christ, after righteousness, and assurance, are
quickened and refreshed. And this is the third thing.

Fourthly, besides all this; First the stirring up Intention, a particular
increase of thy will, in taking Christ, of thy desire to Christ, and of every
grace that knits thee and Christ together; For there are certain sementing
graces, certain glewing graces, that join Christ and thy soul together, as
Faith and Love; these are the two maine graces; there are a great train of
graces that follow them, but these are the chief, and these I say must be
intended: For what is the end of the Sacrament? Is it not to knit the knot
stronger between Christ and us, to make the union more full and perfect? is it
not to increase our willingness to take and receive Christ? for you know all
the acts of the soul may be intended. Put the case there be a resolved act in
the heart and soul of any man, whereby he says thus with himself: I am
resolved to take Christ, and to serve and love him for the time of my life, yet
this resolution of his, though it be perfect and sincere, may receive
intention; when a man is willing to do to a thing truly, there may be degrees
added to that will; when there is light in a room (when thou bring in more
candles) that light may be increased. so it may in this, so may your faith and
love; (by faith I mean nothing, but the resolution of the heart to take Christ;
I mean not the believing part, but the taking part, the act of the will taking
Christ, or receiving him, which is nothing else but the choice of the will that
resolves to take him.) I do but touch this by the way, because it is a point I
have handled already at large; the thing I aim at is this; I say the glewing
graces are these two; Faith and love, whereby you thus take Christ for your
Lord and Savior; Faith is like the part of the compass that goes about and
does the work; and love is that cementing grace whereby we are more knit unto
the Lord; They have both their office and their place; You know love is an
uniting affection, therefore this is the definition of it, It is a desire of
union with that it loves; Now when thou come to receive the Sacrament, or to
pray, or put up any special request, when thou come to have to do with God,
to make use of any privilege thou have in Christ, thy chief business is to
intend this faith and love, at such a time to draw thee nearer, to make the
union perfect.

You will say, how is this increased and how is it intended? Quest.


I answer; Answ.
Two ways in the Sacrament, one way is the very repetition, the very renewing
the covenant, the very doing it over again, the resolution of taking him, (for
there is a mutual covenant, you know between Christ and us,) it is confirmed
to us in the Sacrament, he confirms his, and we confirm ours, as the
freindship between Jonathan and David was increased by the renewing of the
covenant, or else why was it repeated? They very repetition of the act intends
the habit, the habit is increased by the repetition of the act, though it were
no more; so the renewing of the covenant exercises thy faith, it sets a work
thy faith and thy love, when thou come to receive the Sacrament, the very
intention is increased: but this is not all, There is another thing in the
Sacrament that much increases it, and that is a thing I would have you
chiefly to take notice of; That is the very Sacrament it self, the elements
of bread and wine delivered to thee, with the very words of the minister, 1
Cor. 11. 24, 25.
Take and eat, this is my body, that was broken for thee; Take and drink,
this is my blood, that was shed, etc. For when these words are spoken to us, if
we did consider well of them, and think thus with our selves; These words
that the Lord him himself has appointed the Minister to speak (for therein
is the force of them that they are of the Lords own institution) therefore the
strength of every Sacrament lies in the institution; That is a rule in
Dininity; the Papists themselves, who have added five other Sacraments, cannot
deny, but that every Sacrament must have an immediate institution from Christ
himself, even from his own mouth, or else there is no strength in it; so that
even as it is with all things that are symbolls of other things, (as take
marks in feilds that stand for the division of several men's rights; take
counters that stand for Thousands and Hundreds, the very essence of these
things stands in the very institution of them;) So in the Sacrament, except
these words were from the Lords own mouth that delivered it, this very
delivering of the bread and wine, being a sign to you of the forgiveness of
your sins, except the Lord had thus instituted it, there had been no force
in it. I say consider, they are words that the Minister speaks not in an
ordinary course, but he is appointed by the Lord himself to speak them; and
now when these words make a new impression upon thy heart, it adds an
intention to thy faith and love. For example, (to make it a little more clear
to you, that you may understand it distinctly.) The Lord has said this, he
will forgive the sins of all those that come unto him, he will forgive them
that forsake their sins, and take Christ Jesus, and love and fear him for
the time to come; The Lord might have suffered it to go thus in general, that
he has delivered it unto you and no more; But he thought good to go further
and say thus to mankind: Its true, I have said it, but I will not content my
self with that, but will add certain seals and symbolls, certain external
signs, that thou shall see and look on; and I say to thee, this covenant have
I made with thee, and when thou see the bread and wine delivered by the
Minister, know this, that the thing that thou see is a witness between thee
and me: That as it was said by Laban and Jacob when they made a covenant, Genesis
31. 48.
This stone be witness between us: And God said to Genesis 9. 13, 14, 15.
Noah, when I look upon the rainebowe, it shall be a sign that I will
destroy the earth no more after this manner; when the Lord has said it and
has appointed this outward Symboll that thine eyes look upon, I remember the
covenant, and this is a sign between us, this shall bind me to it and him
likewise; Now when this is done anew, (it may be every month) this is a
wondrous great mercy, this is a mavelous great help (if it be rightly
understood) to strengthen our faith. Does it not help us, when we see the
Rainebowe which the Lord has appointed to put him in mind of his covenant?
Genesis 9. 14, 15.
I will remember my covenant, when I look on the Bow in the Cloud it shall
confirm me, and I will not break my covenant to destroy the world with a
flood; So this administration of the Sacrament, when the Lord looks upon it,
he cannot but remember his promise and his covenant, of pardoning our sins;
And when thou look on it, thou art assured of it, for he has said it; it
shall be a sign and a witness between us; Now I say that new impression
that these words, (thus contrived and understood, and delivered by the
minister) make upon the heart, intends our faith and love; as indeed it is a
great matter to have it spoken to us by a Minister of the Gospel, sent from
Christ, from his own mouth; 1 Cor. 11 24, 25.
Take and eat, this is my body that was broken for you: and this is my blood
that was shed for you and for many, for the remission of sins. This is the
fourth qvalification that is reqvired, that our faith and love be intended,
and our union increased; that the will, resolution, and purpose of taking
Christ for our Lord, receive more degrees; that so we may be more fast and
firmly united and knit to him; which I say is done partly by the repetition on
both sides (for the very repetition does it;) and partly by a new impression
that these words ( take, eat etc) make on the soul. Now I add the last thing
which is required, (still remember the maine thing we are upon, that it is not
enough for thee to be in Christ, but if thou will be a worthy receiver, thou
must have these four qualifications in thee, that I have named already; Thou
must reconcile thy self anew, thou must rub off the rust from thy soul which
it has gathered, Thou must recover the distance that is grown between God
and thee; Thou must add an intending and an increase, Thou must add more
degrees to thy faith and love, and after all these.)

Fifthly and lastly, this is also required (which

You will say, what is the Covenant?

It Is a Covenant that consists of these three things or points; Justification,
Ier. 31. 34.
I will forgive thy sins; Sanctification, Ezech. 36. 26. 1 Cor. 3.
I will make you new hearts, and new spirits; and the third, all things are
ours; that is, I have made you heirs of the world, heirs of all things, you
have all the promises belonging to you, that belong to this life, and that
which is to come; this is the Covenant which the Lord has made. Now thou art
bound when thou come to receive the Sacrament, not only to remember this
Covenant, Do this (says he) in remembrance of Me, and not barely of me,
and of my being crucified for thee, and of all the love that I have showed unto
thee, but also in remembrance of the Covenant, and of those gracious promises,
which are the particulars of which that Covenant is the sum: and therefore,
thus a man is to do. What? has the Lord vouchsafed me this favor, that I may
come to his Table, I may come and renew the nuptials and my covenant with him?
Surely, then I will look about and consider what I want, what request I shall
put up unto him; for there is nothing that is wanting, but it is within this
Covenant; and thou art to put up thy request in a special manner, whatsoever
it be, be it concerning things belonging to thy soul, to have a strong lust
mortified, to have thy hard heart softened, to have some sin that lies upon thy
conscience forgiven, and to have that forgiveness assured to thee: be it any
thing that concerns thy particular estate, if it be to be delivered from a
potent enemy, or whatsoever it be, put up thy request, and that largely, open
thy mouth wide, that is, make thy request full, fear it not. Put the case
(again) it be somewhat that does not concern thee, but that it concerns the
Church abroad, or the Church at home, it is a case that much concerns any of
these in the Church, put it up to him, and put it up with confidence. For this
is a marriage day (as it were) it is the time when he reaches out his scepter
(as you know the things I allude to) and thou may come to his presence: you
know, when Ester. 5. 3.
Hester was admitted to the presence of the King, then said he, What request
have thou? when you are admitted to the familiarity and presence of the Lord,
he looks for it, he asks what request you have to put up to him? and the
promises are large enough: I will give it, whatsoever it be, if you ask
according to my will; and therefore, do in this case as Moses used to do: you
shall find when Moses drew near unto the Lord, when he was admitted into his
presence, and saw him face to face (for that was the great privilege Moses
had) when there was any special apparition of the Lord to him, Moses makes
this argument: (says he) It is a great mercy that thou would show me
this, that such a poor man as I am, should have this privilege, and give me
leave to make use of it: Exodus, 33. 13.
Lord, if I have found favor in thy sight, that is, since thou have vouchsafed
me such a favor in thy sight, do thus and thus for me: you see he made this
request for the whole Church of God and saved them, or else they had been
destroyed. If thou have not any particular argument in this case, say, If I
have found favor in thy sight, do this: so I say, when thou have this promise
confirmed, that Christ has given himself to thee, and the symbol of that
promise is the bread and wine, which he has given to thee, put up thy request:
O Lord, if thou have vouchsafed to give me Christ, Romans 8. 32.
will thou not with him give me all things else? Lord, if I have found favor
in thy sight, to do so great a thing for me, deny me not this particular
request. Thus we ought to do, especially when we come to things that are
beyond nature: when we come, let us consider with our selves; Indeed I have a
natural disposition that carries me strongly to evil, I shall never be able
to overcome it, there are such duties to do, I shall never be able to perform
them: In such a case thou must do it the more earnestly, thou must sigh and
groan to the Lord. 2 King. 4. 34.
Elishah when he comes to do a thing so much above the course of nature, as
to raise a dead child to life, he sighed unto the Lord, that is, he prayed
earnestly. Iam. 5. 15.
Eliah, when he would have Rain, he cried, he took much pains, he prayed:
So must thou do in this case: and know this for thy comfort, that though thou
think thou shall never be able to do these things, to overcome such lusts,
such hereditary diseases, yet the Lord is able to help thee: though these are
past natural help, yet they are not past the help of grace; though the
spirit in us lust after envy; yet as the Apostle James says, Iam. 4. 6.
The Scriptures offer more grace, that is, the Scriptures offer grace and
ability, to do more than nature can do; nature cannot heal a spirit, that
lusts after envy, or any other thing; a spirit that lusts after credit, after
money, after the sin of uncleanenesse, or whatsoever is presented: now the
Scriptures offer that grace, that will overcome any of these sins, bt they
never so strong, or so old; Christ healed hereditary diseases, he healed those
that were borne lame and blind: so though thou be borne with such lusts,
Christ is able to heal thee; you see a Prophet could heal Naaman of his
Leprosy, when there was no other that could do it; so says Christ; Math. 11.
28.
Come unto me all ye, and I will heal you. So that you see we must put up
our requests to God.

The third Sermon.
WE have already made some entrance upon the words: I told you what the
Apostles scope is in them, which is to make known to all Christians to whom he
wrote, another great privilege, besides that which he named before: that is,
That he that has the Son, has life; this (says he) is another
privilege, that whatsoever you ask, you shall have; only remember that you
have this assurance in him, that is, in Christ Jesus: That point, (what it is
to be in him, that it may be the ground of all the benefits and privileges we
enjoy) we handled the last day. Now we come to the privilege it self, If we
ask any thing according to his will be hears us. The words are so plain, I
shall not need to spend any time in opening of them, but deliver you the point
that lies so evidently before us: which is this, Doct.
[ That all the prayers of the Saints made upon earth, are assuredly heard in
heaven] whatsoever we ask, (says he) according to his will he hears us,
only the conditions must be observed. When you hear such a general as this,
it must be limited, there are certain bounds set to it, 1. Cond.
which we will name unto you: which are these four conditions. First, all the
prayers that are made upon earth shall be heard in heaven; if they be the
prayers of a righteous man, and are faithful and fervent. The person must be
righteous, that must first be remembered: because, although the prayer be never
so good, yet except the person be accepted from whom it comes, the Lord regards
it not: you know in the old Law, Esaias 66. 3.
the blood of Swine was reckoned an abominable Sacrifice, yet if you take the
blood of sheep, and compare them together, you shall find no difference; It
may be the Swines blood is the better: then what is the reason the Swines blood
is not accepted? even because of the subject of it, it was the blood of Swine,
and therefore you see it was put down, that it was an abominable Sacrifice. So
it is with prayer; Take the prayer of a Saint, and the prayer of a wicked man;
it may be, if you look upon the petitions, or whatsoever is in the prayer it
self, you shall find some times the prayer of a godly man more cold, and
less fervent: the petitions are not so well framed as the wicked man's: yet
because this comes from such a person, the Lord regards it not, you know the
condition is mentioned James fifth: The prayer of the righteous man avails
much, if it be fervent. Now as this is required in the person, so there is
somewhat required in the prayer also, that is, that it be fervent and
faithful; that it be fervent, you have it in the same place, The prayer of a
righteous man avails much if it be fervent; that is, it must be a prayer made
from the sense of the misery that is in us, and from the mercy of God, when a
man takes a thing to heart, that he prays for, and comes with confidence to be
heard, for that makes him fervent. This the Lord will have, and also he will
have it faithful: James the first, when the Apostle exhorts them to prayer,
James 1. 5. 6
if any man want wisdom (says he) let him ask it of God: but then mark, he
carefully puts in this condition, see that He pray in faith, that is, believe
that it shall be done unto him: now this faith includes repentance, for no man
can believe that he shall be heard, except he make his heart perfect with God:
If he allow any sin in himself, he cannot believe upon any good ground:
therefore when I say it must be faithful, that also is included, we must Psalm.
66. 18.
regard no wickedness in our hearts, for in such a case, the Lord hears not,
John 9. 31.
he hears not sinners. So that this you must remember; First, the person must
be righteous, and the prayer must be fervent and faithful.

Secondly, 2. Cond.
the other Condition you shall hear in the Text, it must be according to his
will; you must not think, whatsoever you ask, if you ask it loosely at Gods
hands, that it shall presently be granted you: No (says he) it must be
according to his will, if you ask Luke 9. 54, 55.
fire from heaven, that is not according to his will, and therefore you see,
they that ask it, were denied it, with this reason, you know not what you
ask. Mat. 20. 21 22.
Likewise to sit at his right hand, and at his left in heaven, which was
another request of the Disciples, he puts them by with this; You understand not
what you ask of the Father, and therefore it must be according to his will.
And that is the second.

Thirdly, we must ask it in time, in due season: 3. Cond.
so the promise is true, Knock and it shall be opened to you; but you know the
foolish Virgins knocked and it was not opened to them; what was the reason of
it? because they asked when the time was past: for there is a certain 2 Cor. 6.
2.
acceptable time when the Lord will be found: and when that opportunity is
past, he is found no more. It is true, that this life is the time of grace, but
God in his secret counsel has appointed a certain time to every man, which
is the acceptable time, the day of grace, therefore he says unto them, This
day if you will hear: this day if you will come and seek unto me, if you
will pray unto me, I will hear you: when it is past, the Lord suffers not the
doors to stand open always, his ears are not always open: therefore that
condition must be carefully remembered, you must ask in time; It is a
condition that should be carefully thought on by us. For, for the most part, we
fly to prayer as Ioab did to the Altar, he went not to it for devotion (for
then he would have done it before) but when he was in distress, when he was
in extremity, then he fled to it, and therefore you know what success he had
by it, it saved not his life: So we go not to prayer for devotion, that is,
out of love to God, to do him that service; but (for the most part) we do it
out of self love, when we are in extremity or distress, we pass the
acceptable times he requires, and we go to him in a time of our own: For
there is Gods time, and there is our own time; Gods time is to come to him
when we may do him service, in our youth, in our strength, in the flower of
our graces: Our time is to go to him when we need him: Will not a friend say
(when we never come to him, but when we have extreme need of him) why do you
come now? you were not wont to visit me before, this is not out of love to me:
Even the very same answer the Lord gives; Judge. 10. 14.
Go to your Idols (says he) those that you served in the time of peace, and
see if they can help you.

The fourth and last condition is, 4. Cond.
That we refer the time, the manner, the measure of granting our petitions
to the Lord. That is, we must not think to be our own carvers, to think if
it be not granted in such a manner, such a measure, or such a time, presently
the Lord has rejected our petitions; No, Esaias 28. 16.
he that believes makes no have: That is, he waits upon God, he stays
himself upon God, he is content to have it in that time, in that manner and
measure, as best pleases the Lord: For the truth is, we know not our selves
what is meet for us; we are unto the Lord just as the Patient is to the
physician. The patient is importunate with him, for such things to refresh and
ease him; But the physician knows what best belongs to him, and when to give
him such things, in what manner, and in what measure: So the Lord knows best
what to do: Many times he does the same things that we desire, though he do
it not in the same manner: Even as the physician he quenches often the thirst
with Barberries, or with such kind of conserves; what though it be not with
drink, is it not all one so the thirst be quenched? Is it not all one whether
a man be hindered from striking me, or if I have a helmet to defend the blow?
Sometimes the Lord keeps not off the enemy; but then he gives us a helmet to
keep off those blows, to bear those injuries and evils that are done to us:
he is a wise physician, he knows what manner, what measure, and what time is
best, therefore that must be referred to him: Now these conditions being
observed, you must know that this great privilege belongs to every Christian,
That whatsoever prayers he makes on earth, he is sure to be heard in heaven;
It is a wondrous privilege, that which we have all cause to stand amazed at,
that the Lord should so far regard the sons of men, to grant them such a
Charter as this; no more but ask and have, and whatsoever you pray for, it
shall be done to you. But a man is ready to say secretly in his heart when he
hears it, This is too good to be true, That whatsoever I ask, I shall have.
My Beloved, I confess, it is a hard thing to believe it as we ought to do:
and therefore before we come to apply this, we will spend a little time in
endeavoring to convince you of the truth of it, that you may not doubt of it
that what prayers you make to the Lord, he is ready to hear them.

First, consider that whatsoever prayer you make, he takes notice of it, he
observes every petition, Ephesians. 6. He is in all, and through all, and over all,
That is, the Lord is in every man, he passes through every thing, 2. Chron.
16, 9.
his eyes run through the earth, and he is over all, looking what Psalm 44, 21.
secrets are in man's heart, what thoughts; yea Psalm. 139, 23.
before he thinks them he knows them, because he sees them in their causes:
He that is in a man, that looks in all the secret corners of the heart, he
must needs see what thoughts he has, what petitions he puts up secretly,
even then when his mouth speaks not. And lest that should not be enough, says
he, He is over all; you know one that stands on high, and looks over all
that is below, he easily can see whatsoever is done; So the Lord, he is in
all, he is through all, he is over all. But this is enough for that, only I
would have you remember, that he takes notice of all, he knows thy prayers.

But you will say; Quest.
I doubt not of that, I make no qvestion but he hears me, and understands me
well enough: But how shall I know that he is willing to grant the thing I pray
for?

You shall see these 2 Reasons, Answ.
in the 7. Math. where our Savior urges this very point, that we have now in
hand, from the 7. verse downward; Ask (says he) and you shall have; seek,
and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; here is the
promise, For (he backs it with these 2. Reasons) Every one that asks
receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be
opened unto him: As if he should say; ye have this reason for it, why you
should believe it, that it is no more but ask and have; for (says he) all
that ever asked have obtained; all that ever have sought, have found; all that
ever have knocked, it has been opened unto them. That is, look through the
whole book of God, and see what prayers ever have been made to him, and you
shall find, that there is not a prayer mentioned in all the Scriptures, but it
has been heard. Now when we have such a cloud of witnesses, it is a strong
reason, when it is said to us that there were never any prayed but were heard.

Why, you will say, Quest.
There were many prayed that were not heard; Did not David pray for his Child,
and was not heard? Did not Paul pray to be delivered from such a temptation,
and was not heard?

My Beloved, Its true, they were not heard for the particular, but yet I dare
be bold to say, that David was heard at that time, though (I say) not in the
particular; for though his Child was taken away, yet you may see the Lord gave
him a Child of the same woman, with much more advantage; he gave him a Child
that was legitimate, which this was not: he gave him a Child that exceeded
for wisdom, Solomon was the Child that he had: So that the Lord did hear
him, and gave him this answer, as if he had said to him, David I have heard
thee, I know that thou art exceeding importunate; thou shall not have this, but
thou shall have another Child which shall be better. And so he says unto
Paul 2. Cor 12. Christ reveals this to him; Paul (says he) though I grant
thee not this particular request, in the manner that thou would have me, (
To take away the prick of the flesh which thou art troubled with) thou shall
be a grater gainer by it, thou had better have it than want it; when Paul
understood that it was a medicine, and not a poison as he took it to be, he
was content and resolved in it; And a man resolves not except he be a gainer.
He saw that Gods power was manifest in his weakness, and he saw himself
humbled by it; and when he saw that God gained glory, and himself humiliation
by it, he was content to be denied in it; So I say whosoever asks finds,
you shall never find any example but that whosoever sought to the Lord as he
ought, he was certainly heard, or else he had somewhat that was better
granted to him instead of it. And this is the first reason that is used hear.
The second reason is this; Math 7. 9, 10, 11.
what man among you, if his Son ask bread, will give him a stone; or if be
ask a fish, will give him a serpent? if you then that are evil, know how to
give good things to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give good things to them which ask him? (says he) you be not able to persuade
your selves of this truth, because you know not the Father, for the dwells in
light inaccessable, you are not acquainted with him, says our Savior, I will
help you out with an argument that you better understand; even upon earth
(says he) take but a father here, a father that is ill (but the Lord is full
of goodness, fathers have but a drop, but a spark of mercy in them, whereas the
Lord is full of mercy, as the Lord is full of light, he is the God of all
comfort;) Yet, (says he) this father (when his son comes to ask him bread)
he is ready to give it him, he is full of compassion and tenderness toward him;
do you not think that our heavenly Father is as true a father as he, that he
loves you as well as he whose compassion and pity is much greater? do you not
think he is ready to hear his Children when they call upon him? O this is a
strong and unanswerable Reason, and this you see is backed in 16 John, 27. you
see there the love of the Father how it is expressed to us; I say not unto you
that I will ask the father (says he) the father himself loves you; Mark, as
if he should have said, let this be one ground to you to think your petitions
shall be granted, and that they are not only granted for my sake, for (says
he) the Father himself loves you, and has a great affection to you, that is
in natural parents, there is a natural affection to their Children; So if I
were not immediately to present your petitions (though that be not excluded)
yet (says he) the father has such an affection to you, that he cannot choose
but hear you; I say not (says he) that I will ask the father, for the father
himself loves you. So that this is the second reason which this promise is
there backed with, the love of the father, That he cannot find in his heart to
deny us, even for that affection that he bears to us. We will add a third
Reason that we meet here in the same Chap. 16. John, 23. In that day you shall
ask in my name: verily, verily, I say unto you, ye shall ask the father in
my name, and he will give it you; It is brought in upon this occasion: when our
Savior Christ was to go from his Disciples, they were ready to complain, as
we see in the verses before, they were ready to say with themselves, alas, what
shall we do when our Master shall be took from our head? Our Savior answers
them, you shall do well enough, doubt you not, for though I be not with you;
yet (says he) go to the father in my name, and whatsoever you ask of him,
you shall have it: So that he answers that objection, when a man is ready to
say:

Its true, Quest.
I know that a father is exceeding loving to his Children: But it may be, my
carriage has not been such, I am full of infirmities, I have much in me that
may turn the love and affection of my Father from me.

Put the case you have, Answ.
yet Christ adds this for your comfort; If (says he) the Father will not do
it for your sake, yet doubt you not, if you ask in my name, he will do it;
do we not see it usual among men, That one that is a mere stranger to
another, if he get a letter from a friend, he thinks to prevail; and he
does so, because though it be not done for his sake (it may be he is a
stranger, one that deserved nothing at his hands) yet such a friend may deserve
much: And when we go to God in the name of Christ, this answers all the
objections whatsoever you can say against your selves, it is all satisfied in
this: I go in his name, I am sure he has supply, I am sure he is no stranger,
I know he has deserved it, etc. Last of all, as he loves us, and because we
ask in the name of Christ, is ready to hear us: we will add this, that he is
ready to hear us for his own sake, he is Psalm. 65, 2.
a God hearing prayer, says the Psalmist, that all flesh might come to him,
even for this cause he hears, that men might be encoraged to come and seek to
him; for if the Lord should not hear, then no flesh would come unto him; that
is, men would have no encouragement, no help; therefore he says, he is a God
hearing prayer, doubt ye not, he will do it for this purpose, that he might
have men to worship him, that men might come and seek unto him. Besides that,
he shall be glorified, Psalm. 50. 15
Thou shall call upon me in the day of trouble, I will hear the, and thou
shall glorify me; now the Lord is desirous of glory; it was the end for which
he made the world: But in not heareing our prayer, he loses this glory, by
heareing our requests, the more we are heard, the more glory and praise we
render unto him. Likewise he does it for the Spectators sake; Moses often
presents that Reason, Exodus 32, 12, 13.
Lord do it, What will the Heathen say? and left thy name be polluted among
them, they will say thou have brought out a people, and wast not able to
deliver them. So David often, there are many instances in that; I say, for the
lookers on sake he is ready to do it. All this is enough to perswaide our
hearts, that he is ready to hear us, that when prayers are made to him on
earth, (So the conditions be observed) they are surely heard in heaven.

Now to apply this. Use 1.
First, if the Lord be so ready to hear, then this should teach us to be more
servent in this duty of prayer than commonly we are; for to what end are such
promises as this, but to encourage us to do our duties? when we hear that
prayer is of so much efficacy, that it prevails with the Lord for any thing,
shall we suffer it to lay by (as it were) and not make use of it? If a drug, or
a precious balm were commended to us, and it were told us, that if we made use
of it, it would heal any wound, it will heal any sickness, and this and this
virtue it has: Will a wise man suffer it to lay by him, will he not use it,
and see what virtue it has? And when it is said unto us, that prayer is thus
prevalent with the Lord, that it is thus potent, that it is thus able to
prevail with him for any thing, shall we not make use of it, when we are in
any distress, when we need any thing: when we have any disease, either of
souleor body to heal? Let us fly to this refuge that himself has appointed.
If a King of the earth should say to a man, I will be ready to do thee a good
turn, make use of me when thou have occasion; he would be ready enough to do
it. Now when the Lord of heaven says, ask what you will at my hands, and I
will do it; shall we not seek to him, and make use of such a promise as
this? Beloved we are too backward in this; we should be more abundant in this
duty than we are, we should make more account of it. For whatsoever the case be
if, you do but seek to the Lord, if thou do but set down thy resolution
with thy self: Well I see it is a thing (if I look upon the creature and the
means) I have little hope of, but the Lord is able to do it; and therefore I
will go to him, I will weary him, and I will not give him over, I will not
give him, nor my self any rest, till I have obtained it: I say it is
impossible thou should fail in such a case. Only remember to be
importunate, for an importunate suitor he cannot deny. You know the Luke 18. 2,
3, 4.
parable of the unjust Judge. You know also the Luke 11. 7.
parable of the man that is in bed with his children; when the widow was
importunate, when she knocked and would give him no rest, he gives her
redress; the other rises and gives his friend as many loves as he will,
says the Text; yea though she were not his friend; (for this is the meaning of
it:) If, says he, the Lord had not much love to you, if he had not such an
affection, if you did not come to him in the name of Christ whom he loves, in
whom he is ready to grant whatsoever you ask, if he were not a friend to you;
yet for your very importunity, he is ready to do it. As the unjust Judge (for
that is the scope of the parable) he had no mind to grant the widows
request, he had no Justice in him to move him, he had no mercy nor compassion,
yet for very importunity he granted it. Remember and observe the condition,
for this is commonly a fault among us; when we go to prayer, we think that
the very putting up of the prayer will do it. No, there is more required than
so. As it is the error of the Country people, when they hear say, that such an
herb is good for such a disease, they are ready to think, that (howsoever it
be took or applied) it will heal the disease; no, it must be applied in such
a manner, it must be used in such a fashion. So it is with prayer, you must not
only do the duty (and therefore when we exhort you to it, not only to call
upon God, for men are ready enough to do that, especially in the time of
distress,) but with these conditions I have named. You know 2 King. 4. 29. 31.
Gehazi when he had got the staff of Elisha, he went to the Child, but it was
not the staff that could raise the child from death to life, there was
something more required. So in prayer, it is not mere prayer that will do it,
there is something else, there must be other conditions that must be observed.
For we are wont to do with it, as those Conjurers were wont to do with the name
of Jesus; they thought if they used the name of Jesus, it was enough: but ye
know what answer the Spirit gives them, Act. 19. 15.
Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? so I say, we are wont to
do in this case, we think it is enough to make our request, and that is all.
No, there is somewhat more required, you must make your request in such a
manner as ye ought. Then I add this further, that when thou make them in
such a manner, yet thou must not think to be heard for thy prayers sake: that
is another thing we are apt to fail in. When we have made fervent prayers,
and have been importunate with the Lord, we think now surely we shall not
fail. No, you must know this, the promise is not made to the prayer, but to
the person praying. You shall not find throughout the whole scripture, that
any promise is made thus, because we pray fervently we shall be heard: but it
is made to the person praying, the prayer is but the instrument: but the means
by which the blessing is conveyed to us, is a means without which the Lord
will not do it, for the promise is made to the party. A cold prayer (so there
be no neglect in it, so a man seek the Lord, and pray as well as he can,) it
will prevail sometimes as well, as a fervent prayer: Who indites the petition,
who makes the prayer fervent? surely not thy self, but the Romans 8. 26, 17.
Holy Ghost: he makes request in us, sometimes he makes thee more fervent, he
enlarges the heart more: sometimes again the heart is more straightened in the
performance of this duty: but both may come from the same Spirit. Not but that
we have cause of much comfort, when we are able to pray fervently, for this is
a ground of our comfort, that when we pray fervently, it is an argument that
the Holy Ghost dwells in our hearts, and that our prayers are dictated by him;
it is an argument, that our prayers come from a holy fire within. And therefore
fervent prayer may give us hope of being heard, but yet it is not merely the
prayer, but because it is an evidence that it comes from a right principle,
that it comes from the regenerate part, and is made by the assistance of the
Holy Ghost: it is not the very fervencie that prevails. And therefore when you
hear this, that the Lord is ready to hear, I say make that use of it, be
fervent in this duty, remember the conditions: and yet withal know, that you
are not heard for the very prayers sake, but for Jesus Christ his sake. He
makes every prayer acceptable, he mingles them with his sweet odours.

And if you object, Object.
O but I am a man full of infirmities.

You know how it is answered in the Fifth of Answ.
James, (says he) Iam. 5. 17.
Eliah when he was heard, he was a man, and a man subject to passions, and to
the like passions that we are: As if he should say, do not think that Eliah
was therefore heard, because he was an extraordinary Prophet, for it was
because the Lord had made a promise to him, and he comes and urges that
promise to the Lord, and therefore the Lord heard him. So (says he) should
every one of you, if you have the promise, you may go and urge it, as well as
Eliah did: though you be subject to many infirmities, Eliah was even so. You
know there are infirmities and passions expressed in the Scriptures that he
was subject to. And this is the first use we are to make of it, to be freqvent
and fervent in this duty, since we have such a promise.

Secondly, Use 2.
if we have such a promise, then we should learn hence (when we have put up
our prayers at any time) to make more account of them than we do: for the
truth is, that we pray for the most part for fashion sake, many a man says
thus with himself: I will seek the Lord, if it do me no good, it will do
no hurt; but if we made that account of our prayers as we should, we would
perform this duty in another manner; but we do not make that account of them
as we ought. We think not with our selves that the prayers that we make are
surely heard: there be many evidences of it; what is the reason, that when we
seek the Lord, we do it so remisly that we have scarce leisure to make an end
of our prayers: we are so ready to hasten and go about other business, we
are ready to turn every stone, to use all means to seek the creatures with
all diligence: but who prays to the Lord as he ought, to work his heart to
such afervent performance of that duty as he should? men have scarcely leisure,
for it is usual with them when they have business to do, and enterprises to
bring to pass, they are exceeding diligent to use all means; and yet are
remiss in the chief: what is the reason else, that we see the doors of
Princes and great men so full of suitors, though there be porters set on
purpose to drive them away; but the gates of heaven are so empty? It is indeed
because we do not believe our prayers are heard, we do but make our prayers
for fashion. What is the reason likewise, that we use prayer in the time of
distress (if it will be an effectual means to help us, when all other
means fail,) why use we it not before? But that is an argument that we trust
not to it, seeing we use it, only in the time of extremity: for if it be not
effectual, why do we use it then? If it be effectual, why do not we use it
till that accident? Therefore this use we must further make, when we heat
that the Lord hears our prayers, to make more account of them than we do, to
think that our prayers when they are put up to the Lord shall be heard. Say
thus with thy self, Well, now I have prayed, and I expect that the thing
should be granted that I have prayed for, when I seek to the Lord: It Is true,
I deny not but we must use the means too, we must lay the hands upon the
plough, and yet pray; both ought to be done, as sometimes we use two friends,
but we trust one; we use two Physicians, but we put confidence in one of them:
In like manner we must both pray and use the means, but so as we put our
chief trust in prayer, it is not means that will do it. But the truth is, we
do the quite contrary: It may be, we pray and use the means, but we trust
the means, and not the prayer: that is a common and a great fault among us, it
is a piece of Atheism, for men to think the Lord regards their prayers, no
more than he regards the bleating of sheep or the lowing of oxen, to think he
heeds them not. And its a great part of faith to think that the Lord harkens
to them and regards them, as certainly he does.

But you will say, I have prayed, Object.
and am not heard, and have sought to the Lord and have found no answer.

Well, Answ.
it may be thou have not for the present, but have thou stayed the Lords
leisure? (for that is to be considered in this case,) sometimes the Lord comes
quickly, he gives a quick answer to our requests; sometimes he stays longer:
But this is our comfort, that when the return is longer, the gain is the
greater. As we se in trades, some trades have their return very quick, it may
be the tradesmens money is returned every week, but then their gain is so
much the lighter; but when their return is slower, as is your great merchants,
when it stays three or four years, we see the ships come home laden,
bringing so much the more: So (for the most part) when our prayers do stay
long, they return with the greater blessings, they return laden with rich
commodities. Let this be an encoragement to us; Though I stay, the Lord will
grant it; and think not with thy self, I made such a prayer long ago, I
found no fruit of it; for be sure, the Lord remembers thy prayer, though thou
have forgotten it, the prayers that thou made a good many years ago, may
do thee good many years hence. May not a man pray to have his Child
sanctified, to have him brought to better order? It may be he lives many
years, and sees no such thing, yet in the end, the prayer may be effectual:
So likewise it may be in many cases, you see there are many examples for it:
Abraham prayed, he stayed long; but you see it was a great blessing that he
had, when he prayed for a Son, you know what a Son he was, he was a Son
of the promise, in whom all the nations of the earth were blessed. So David
when the Lord promised him a kingdom, he stayed long for it: Many such
examples there are. Therefore comfort thy self with this: though I stay long,
this is my hope, this is my encouragement, that sustaines me, If I seek the
Lord, and wait upon him, He will come with a great blessing, the gain shall
be heavier and greater, though the return be not so quick and sudden.

Last of all, when you hear such a promise as this, Use 3.
That whatsoever you ask you shall be heard in it; you should hence learn, to
spend some time in the meditation of this great privilege that the Saints
have, and none but they; This I propound to every man's consideration; that
those that are not Christians, that is, those that are not regenerate, may know
what they lose by it; and those that are, may understand the happiness of their
condition, that they may learn to magnify it, and to bless themselves in that
condition, that they have such a great privilege as this: It is no more but
ask and have, therefore that which in the third place I exhort you to, is
this, namely to spend time in the meditation of it, to consider what a great
advantage it is: David cannot satisfy himself enough in it: In 18. and 116.
Psalms: Lord I love thee dearly: he cannot praise enough, and why? I sought
to thee in distress, and thou heardest me; I called upon thee, and thou
inclinedst thine ear to my prayer. I say consider this mercy as you ought to
do, it is part of the thanks we owe to the Lord for so an exceeding
privilege, That whatsoever our case be, it is no more, but put up our
requests, and we shall be heard: When there was a speech among some holy men
(as you know that man that was named in the story:) what was the best trade, he
answered beggerie; It is the hardest, and it is the richest trade. Now he
understands it not, of common beggary (for that is the poorest and easiest
trade, that condition he puts in) but (says he) I understand it of a prayer to
God, that kind of beggerie I mean; which as it is the hardest, nothing more
hard than to pray to God as we ought, so withal there is this comfort in it,
it is the richest trade of all others; there is no way to enrich our selves so
much, with all the promises that belong either to this life, or to that which
is to come. Even as you se among men, a Courtier, a Favorite in the Court, gets
more by one suite, (it may be,) than a Tradesman, or Merchant, or husbandman
gets with twenty years labor, though he takes much pains; for one request
may bring more profit, may make a Courtier, richer than so many years labor
and pains: So in like case a faithful prayer, put up to God, may more
prevail with him, we may obtain more at his hands by it, than by many years
labor, or using many means; and therefore it is a rich trade, and great
privilege, a privilege that we cannot think enough of, that we cannot
esteem enough. You have heard of a noble man in this Kingdom, that had a Ring
given him by the Queen, with this promise: that if he sent that Ring to her,
at any time when he was in distress, she would remember him and deliver him;
This was a great privilege from a Prince, and yet you see, what that was
subject unto; he might be in such a distress, when neither King nor Queen
could be able to help him; or though they were able, (as she was in that case)
yet it might be sent, and not delivered: Now then consider what the Lord does
to us, He has given us this privilege, he has given us prayer, as it were
this Ring, he has given us that to use, and tells us whatsoever our case is,
whatsoever we are, whatsoever we stand in need of, whatsoever distress we
are in, do but send this up to me, (says he) do but deliver that message up
to me of prayer, and I will be sure to relieve you: Now certainly what case
soever we are in, when we send up this, it is sure to be conveyed, wheresoever
we are: Again, whatsoever our case is, we send it to one that is able to
help us, with a Prince many times is not able to do. This benefit we have by
prayer: That whatsoever we ask at the Lords hands, we shall have it: Now
consider this great advantage which you have* It is expressed 4 Phil. in these
words, Be in nothing careful (says the Apostle:) And that you may see we
have ground for this generality, In nothing be careful, but in all things
make your requests known unto God. That is, whatsoever your case be, I make
no exception at all, but whatsoever you stand in need of, whether it concerns
your souls or your bodies, your name or your estate; yet be in nothing
careful. This is a great matter: There is none amongst you that hears me now,
but sometime or other he is careful for something or other, for which he is
solicitous: Now when a man hears such avoyce from heaven, that the Lord
himself says to us, Be careful for nothing, do no more but make your
request known, it is well enough, I will surely hear in heaven and grant it;
It is a great comfort. Beloved, comfort your selves with these words, and
think this with your selves, that this is that Charter, and great Grant that
the Lord has given you, and to none but you, that what prayers you make to
him, he hears you.

But it will be objected, Quest.
why is this said so generally? That we must in nothing be careful, but in all
things make our request known? For then if a man were but a poor man, it is
but going to the Lord, and asking riches, and he shall have them; If a man
were sick of an incurable disease, it were no more but going to the Lord, and
he should be sure to be recovered; If a man has an enterprise to bring to
pass, it is no more but go to him, and it shall be done: what is the reason
then, that godly and holy men have not these things granted to them?

To this I answer, Answ.
you must understand it with this condition, even as it is with a Father (I
will prove it to you by that,) suppose he should say to his son, I will deny
thee nothing, whatsoever I have, I will deny thee nothing but thou shall have
part in it; Though he say no more, yet we understand it with these conditions.

may be excused, that he might be freed from it; In this Case, the father will
not hear him, for he knows the Child is but mistaken: On the other side; if
the Child ask something that is very hurtful, if he ask for wine in a
fever, the Father denies it him; No, (says he) you are mistaken, I know your
desire is that you might have health and recover, and this I know will hurt
you, though you know it not; This the Father understands, and therefore he puts
in that condition: So when the Lord says, In nothing be careful, but in all
things make your requests known: If you mistake the matter at any time, and
your prayer shall not be the dictate of the Spirit, (so that ye always make
request according to his will) but the dictate of your own hearts, and shall
be the expression of your natural Spirit, and not the Lords Spirit: In this
case there is no promise of being heard, and yet the Lord makes his word good;
Be in nothing careful, but in all things make your request known.

Secondly, a Father when he says to his Child, I will deny you nothing, but
you shall Father withholds the blessing that he will bestow upon his Child;
not because he is unwilling to bestow it, but because he would thus nurture his
Child, he uses it as a means to bring him to order: So the Lord says to
Numb 20 12.
Moses, That because he had spoken unadvisedly, because he had not honored him
before the people, Psalm. 106. 32, 33.
at those waters, the waters of strife, therefore the Lord tells him by the
Prophet, he should not go into the good land: And so he tells 2 Samuel 12. 14.
David, that because he had sinned against him, he would not give him the life
of the Child: So the Lord says to us sometimes; I will not grant you this
request; for though I be willing to grant it, yet this is one part of the
discipline and nurture that I use to my Children, That such a particular
request, I will deny you for such an offense; as worshipping of Idols etc.
Beloved this is not a general denial, and this is not for our disadvantage,
but it is a help to us, it makes us better, that sometime we should be denied;
knowing hereby that it is denied to us for our sin, that we may learn to
come to the Lord, and renew our repentance, and to take that away, that we may
come to prevail in our prayers with him.

and come in an unreverent manner, in such a case the Lord hears not.) Or
again, he will say to his child; I am ready to hear you, but you must not
ask in a negligent manner, as if you cared not whether you had it or no: So
the Lord says to us; I will have you to pray fervently, you shall ask it, as
that which you prize. Again he will say to his child: I am willing to bestow
this upon you, but I do not give you this money, to spend it amiss, to play it
away, to spend it in trifles, and geugawes, that will do you no good: So says
the Lord, I am willing to give you riches, Iam. 4. 3.
but not to bestow upon your lusts. Thus speaks the father to his child, when
he comes to ask, he tells him he must come in such a manner as becomes a
child, he must speak to him as to a Father, he must speak with confidence to
receive it: So also the Lord tells us, Iam 1. 6.
we must come in faith; So that (in a word) this is to be remembered; That
though the Lord promise, that he will give whatsoever we ask, and bids us, in
nothing be careful, but make our requests known; yet notwithstanding this, he
would have us to understand that our requests be made in such a manner as they
ought to be. Last of all, it may be the Father is willing to do it; but he
makes a little pause, he will not give it presently, and suddenly to his child,
though he purpose to bestow it upon him, that he may come by it with
difficulty: So the Lord uses to withold his blessings many times, that his
child might be exercised in prayer, and seek him the more, and likewise that
he might come the hardlier by the blessing, that so he might learn to prize
it more; or else he will be ready to do as young heirs: As it is with some when
they never know the getting of it, they spend it easily; but he that has known
what it is, he takes more care to his estate, he looks more diligently to it:
so it would be with us in any blessing, if we had it with such facility as we
would, we would not make much account of it; but when it comes with some
hardness, with some difficulty, it teaches us to set a higher price on it,
and so it makes us more thankful, it teaches us to give more praise and
glory to the Lord. There are many that have had a sickness long, and have
obtained health with much prayer, and much contention, and therefore they
learn to prize it more, than another that obtaines it easily. And thus it is
in every like case. So when you hear this great privilege: that it is no
more, but, ask and have: and, be in nothing careful, but in every thing make
your requests known: yet (I say) these conditions must needs be inserted,
these are such as must be included. But these considered, remember this
privilege, rejoice in it, let the Lord have the praise of it, that Whatsoever
we ask according to his will, he hears us.

FINIS.

