Strange and wonderful news of a woman which Lived near unto the Famous City
of London, who had her head torn off from her Body by the Devil; and her lymbs
rent in pieces and scattered about in the room where the mischief was done,
which may serve to forewarn all proud and disloyal men and women, to have a
care how they behave themselves, whilst they live in this sinful world, that
they fall not into the like temptations. The manner how she made her bargain
with the Divil, she confessed to some of her Neighbors before her death.
The Tune is Summer time.


DEar Lord what sad and sorrowful times,
are those the which we now live in
When men and women takes a pride,
presumptuously to run in sin.
The Divill does like a Lion go,
and strives with all his might and power,
Of us to get the victory,
our Souls and Bodies to devour
And where that he can overcome,
and bring the people to his lure,
They are sure in process of time,
much miseries for to endure.
As this Relation shall make known.
which now I am prepared to tell,
Concerning a proud woman which,
did near the City of London dwell.
Which woman's husband he is gone,
beyond the Seas as it is said,
And left his wife in England here,
who long time lived without a guide.
Her Husband when he went from her,
left means and money to maintain,
As he supposed sufficiently
his Wife till he returned again.
But she being wild and wilful given,
and also of a haughty mind.
To Malice, Hatred Lust and Pride,
and wantonness she was inclyn'd.
And in short time she wasted had,
the best part of her means away.
Her money was spent and all her state,
was like to go unto decay.
Where at she fell into despair,
and vexed her self most grievously,
And walking by her self one day,
unseen of any company.
The Divil himself to her appeared*
in the likeness of a tall black man,
And afterward with tempting words,
to talk to her he thus began.
The second part, to the same Tune.


IF thou quoth he wilt yield to me,
and do as I would have thee do,
Thou shall have all things at command,
As Riches Gold and Silver too.
Now to be brief the Devil and Her,
a bargin made at that same time,
The like was never done on earth,
Since Docter Faustus cursed crime.
The Woman being then with child,
made bargin that the Divill should have,
Her Soul when thee was brought to bed,
so she might at her pleasure live.
What things soever she desired,
to which the feind full soon agreed,
So he might Soul and body have,
after she was delivered.
The Covenant was between them made,
the Woman sea^'d it with her blood,
And afterward she had her will*
and did whatever she thought good.
She eat, she drank, and merry was,
and had of gold and silver store,
She company was for the rich,
and dealt her alms unto the poor.
At last her painful hour drew nigh
that she must needs delivered be,
She sent for women with all speed,
to help her in her misery.
The Devil then straight came to the door
like to a tall man all in black,
The servant maid came near to him,
and asked him what he did lack.
It Is with your Mistress I must speak.
the Divil again to her replied,
Go tell her again it must be so,
I can nor will not be denyd.
By the time that the Maid came up,
her Mistress was delivered,
And of a man Child in the room.
she was most safely brought to bed.
O now good women then quoth she,
my sorrows do a fresh begin,
Wherefore I pray you to depart,
the room the which you now are in.
Then from the room the women went,
forthwith from her imediatly,
And went into another place,
whereas they heard a doleful cry.
Her head was from her body torn,
her lymbs about the room did ly,
The blood run all about the place,
as many folks can testify.
It seems the Devil his bargin had,
wherefore I with that one and all.
To have a care of what they do,
and to take warning by her fall.
Finis
LP.

London Printed for Fran. Grove on Snow-hill.


