PRINCE HENRY HIS FIRST ANNIVERSARY.

HEB. 11.38. Of whom the world was not worthy. BY DANIEL PRICE Doctor in
Divinity, one of his Highness Chaplains.

AC: OX

printer's device of Joseph Barnes

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, his Honorable Diocesan, the Bishop of
EXETER, and Visitor of Exeter College.
RIght Reverend Father, my duty has often incited me to perform some due
observance to your Lordship. Your honorable care of our flourishing College,
has been my remembrancer, and pleaded with me as the Elders did with our
Savior, for the Ce^turion. He is worthy that thou should do this to him,
he loves us, Luke 7.5.
and his predecessor built our synagogue. Your LP. has been long, a
painful, careful father, to the Church, to our tribe, to our College, and
God has extraordinarily blessed you, that before your eyes, your two eyes,
your two learned, worthy sons, in your days, and in your Church, serve at
the Altar.

The reason, that I presume to present this to your Honor, is, because you
truly honored him, whom it concerns, that was the excellent ornament of his
age present, and true mirror to posterity. Your especial observance of him,
in his life, being made known to his Highness, by the worthy Gentleman, my
ever honored friend, Mr Richard Connock, had been as truly rewarded, as it
was graciously received, h^d he lived. But he is translated, and now reigns
in heaven, not for a day as Adontah, or for a week, as Zimri, for a month as
Shallum, for six months as Zachary, for two years as Elah, for three years as
Asa, for forty years as David, or fifty five as Manasses, but forever and
ever, where in time, you shall meet him, to remain with him without all time.

My self, with my best devotions shall ever rest, at your honorable disposal,
while I am

DANIEL PRICE.
Exeter Coll. December. 7. The fatal day of Prince Henry's funeral.
PRINCE HENRY'S FIRST ANNIVERSARY.
WHeresoever the Gospel shall be preached, mention shall be made of Mary
Magdalen, Mark. 14.9.
not only, for loving her Lord in life, when she came to weep, to wash, to
wipe his blessed feet, but also for that when he by whom she lived, was dead,
and she, for whom he died, enforcedly left alive, she provided her ointments,
for his dead bodies ornaments, to pay him the last tribute of external duties,
of sepulchral obsequies. Her former action in the house, perfumed the house
only, her later affection, manifested at the grave, has persumed her memory
through the world. Chris^^.
A sinner to anoint her Savior? It is strange: often does the heaven, bath
the earth, but never did the earth bath the heaven, til Magdalens tears, yet
more strange, that though the life, yet the love of her Master could not
languish, in her cold breast, though she missed his heave^ly word, to kindle
it, and his bodily presence to cherish it, yet she follows through the
shadow of death, at the cross, and passes to the chambers of death at the
grave, post funera funus, after Nichodemus and Joseph's odors, Ioh. 19.38.
prepared by art, and applied by devotion, she casts into the rich treasury,
her two mites of love and lamentation, and gives the world a check, who
performs duties of love only in life, and makes eye Service, the most hearty
observance.

A meditation, that since I conceived, has labored so far with me that I
presume to bring forth, this hasty but hearty manifestation of my boundless
desires, and endless duties to the memory of that late gracious, now glorious
Prince, beyond all titles in his worth, all sorrows for his death, whom no eye
with judgment, ever beheld, without ravishment; lest therefore the remembrance
decay, with the loss, or the mothe of neglect, infest the Princely vesture of
great HENRY'S memory, seeing Pharaoh had his Pyramid, Joseph. 2. Sam. 18.18.
and Absolon his pillar, and that, in the bad made, worse kept vow of Ieptha,
the daughters of Israel, went yearly, to lament the daughters of Ieptha. Judge.
11.29.
Why should PRINCE HENRYES Anniversarie, be an eye sore to any, that are
pleased with worse objects? Why should not the remembrance of our Josias be
like the perfume made by the art of the Apothecary, Ecclas. 49.1.
sweet in all mouths, pleasing in all minds. In favors done, our memories
ought to be frail, but in benefits received eternal, Right dear in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints, Psalm.
how much more in the eyes of his Saints* the death of this Prince, ought to be
precious, who living was virtues child, Religions friend, the Churches
advocate, Commonwealths hope, the poores Master, and Gods dear servant.

2 Hune tantum terris fata ostendere, Honorable, and renowned plant as the
first flower of the fig tree, in the prime, and bloming of his age, he was
translated into heaven, and why did not heaven and earth remove their stations,
sun and moon loose their motions, and summer and winter period their seasons
at this cause of sorrow? What in the world shall make show to sense of
stabilitie, what creature is a fixed star, if such a Prince must die, whom
besides the by and earthly healps of drugges and amulets, the divine hopes of
virtues, prayers, tears, and plaints, could not keep alive: yet he is alive on
earth in all good men's thoughts, in heaven in all Gods joys, and though our
eyes cannot now hehold him, because HE is to bright a sun, for our weak
sight, our looks must be limited to a meaner light, and we must rather humble
our selves to the twilight of inferior things then celestial spirits. To
follow him in the pace that nature lent him, his life or to the place where
nature left him, his death, deserves a various and curious tract, and were
rather an Annall the^ an Annual remembrance, to think hereby, to add to him
reputation, that smoking vapor, drawn from earthly honor of popular
admiration, were frivolous, neither profit to him dead, or approved of the wise
alive. To excuse the cause of doing this, were to accuse the manner of doing
it, and therefore without Apollogie, let this testify that I am a perpetual
votarie, to the honored memory of blessed PRINCE HENRY, that whatsoever any
other wants be, I may not be censured for want of duty, that so while I shall
run the race of my sinful days, and continue the passage of my fleeting
pilgrimage, higher powers not otherwise disposing or displeasing hereat, Judge.
11.
I may as the daughters of Israel once a year, bestow some odors or ointments
upon my Princely Masters monument, and burn some incense to his memories
excellence.

3 All the world were sat, to see, and harken, how his Highness hopeful,
youthful age should be employed, for in HIM, a glimmering light of the Golden
times appeared, all lines of expectation met in this Center, all spirits of
virtue, scattered into others were extracted into him, Pliny. Epi. Xenoph. Cy.
rop. Fox. Acts and monuments 2. Vol.
so that if either Pliny his testimony of Traian, or Xenophons description of
Cyrus, or Polidor of K. Edward the 6. had been applied to HIM, these all, and
all whatsoever had been but scannings and kennings of those high borne,
highly-blessed virtues in Prince HENRY: His Magnetique virtue drew all the
eyes, and hearts, of the Protestant world, upon him who in their strictest
observation, found how HE hated sin, more for the indignity thereof, then
for the te^porall danger, how he stood like a Center, vnmoved, the
circumference of his estate, being drawn above, beneath, about him, how he
lived without the compass of an adversary, his Person being as a Saint, his
Court as a Temple, there was nothing, but he desired to know but most and
first himself, and not so much, his own strength as his own weakness, al
ingredients of beauty, Nine hundred sixty and nine years. Genesis 5.27.
concurred to the making up of his body, in which, a soul might have contented
it self to live an age, yea, were it Methusulahs: and for his soul, as if the
tincture and tainture of original sin, had not much infected it, it was the
Tabernacle of all virtue, in which Piety had her Oratory, Religion her
Sanctuary, Prayer her Censor, all Acts of devotion their alter, and his altar,
the plentiful daily offering, of Almes-giuing. Future ages declining, as well
in their being, as understanding will stand amassed, at his story, whosoever
shall build it, that a Prince so noble and so humble, so valiant, and so
patient so Heroical in his exercise, and so Angelical in his prayers, so
abundantly liberal in his bestowing, and so honorably frugall in managing his
estate, so like to live, and so content to die, so faithful to his God,
dutiful to his royal parents, merciful to poor, grateful and graceful to
all, either should have been so soon, so good, or be so soon, so forgot.
There is no honest subject that ever saw him, but will forever care to carry
the resemblance of his Princely feature in their best composed memory, his
piercing eye, gracious smile, grave frown, and divine face composed of modesty
and majesty. How slow he was to anger, quick to apprehend, how speedy to
pardon, how magnificent in building, munificent in entertaining, how constant
in his studies, and paramou^t in all rare inventions.

Learn then from hence all ye wandering Drones, whose life is a continual
sleep, or worse a sleeping death, of whom no memory or monument shall remain
but as that of beasts, fuerunt, ye whose sole knowledge is only the Philosophy
of Epicurisme, Plut.
ye whose memory shall rot among the posterities, ye who are entised by the
subtlety, and entrapped in the snares of Satan, who uses every of you for
some end, and leads all of you in the end to final destruction. How apparent
is it to all, that the Drunkard is his butler, the Glutton his Cook, the
Adulterer his Chamberlain, the Slanderer his Lawyer, the Usurer his Treasurer,
the Jesuit his Chaplain, and shall the same inticements, beguile you? Be there
so few good, as that, when but 4 in the world a Caine, when that number
doubled, and eight were in the Arc, a Cham, when that number trebled in twelve
Apostles a Judas, seeing the Devil knowing his time short, has provided his
factors, in all places for all occasions, Popish traitors, and apish
flatterers often about Court, Hypocrites and Loiterers about the City, buyers
and sellers of the Temple in the Temple, every where swarming Locusts, and the
children of darkness, so wise in their generation, so busily employed, and
taking such pains to go to hell. How should these thoughts, draw and drive
ye out of that as hateful, as harmefull neglect of doing well, and stir ye
to strive to do some good acceptable to God, profitable to man, available to
your own souls, that not only in the day of retribution, a recompense, but in
this world, there may be a remembrance of you, as in every place there now is,
of this wonder of his time and mirror of Princes.

4 Whose Religious soul, did so truly entertain the Patronage and protection
of religion, that as HE hated Popery with a perfect hate, so his love unto
truth and learning, as it shined outwardly, so did it burn inwardly in his
own practice, in which, besides his unfeigned zeal to God, and love to good
men, he was ever careful of Moses and David's lesson to number his days,
never desiring to live long, nay, Psalm 90.
often using contemptible speeches of the world, of life, of bravery, of
beauty, accounting long life not only vanity but misery, and on the
contrary, many, and holy, and heavenly were his frequent meditations upon the
certainty of salvation, immortality of the soul, resurrection of the dead,
and joy of the blessed, as those near about his Highness can testify, by
those his wise, and divine Apothegmes, which will never be razed out of their
most and best reserved memories. Wherein, I cannot omit his especial regard of
honest Sermons, for that was the title he attributed to sharp, and sound
sermons which neither favored of flattery or Popery, among which, as none ever
passed without his reverent attention, and remarkable observation, so
especially in two preached before his Highness, though some years in
distance, yet in the same month of his final and fatal sickness. The first
at Richmond, in October 1608. upon that text which afterward, Psalm. 82. v. 6.7.
was as a box of spikenard to anoint his body at the burial, chosen by the
most Reverend father, the L. Archb. his grace at the funeral: Psalm. 82.6.7. I
have said ye are Gods and ye are all children of the most high, But ye shall
die like men, and fall like one of the Princes, which Text being entreated on,
at Richmond by one of his highness Chaplains, the^ waiting, and the Text
called the Fall of the leaf, howsoever the Chaplain, were one of the meanest
and youngest of that name and number, yet it pleased his highness to require a
copy, thereof, and as with Princely patience to hear, so with godly diligence
to recall some passages therein that Cedars of Libanon, Roses of the field,
Lillies of the Vallyes, Princes, stars and Angels had fallen, that humanity
and mortallity were twins, that all flesh was as a flower, and the grace
thereof as the grass of the field, etc. The other Sermon, as if it were
provided, against the day of his preparation by that all guiding eye of
providence, M Wilkinso^ upon October. 25. 1612.
was learnedly and powerfully delivered in S. James chapel by a Reverend
divine, Chaplain to the kings Majesty upon the Sabbath day of his highness
sickning the Text being taken from Job. 14.1. Job. 14.1.
Man that is borne of a woman, is short of days and full of troubles, wherein,
by the miserable entry, of man into the world his miserable and speedy passage,
out of the world, and his miserable pilgrimage and indurance while, he is in
the world he stirred all, of all estates to the consideration of their states,
and did much affect his highness, as appeared both by his great attention and
commendation thereof. Blessed Prince by this, Esaias. 38 1.
preparing as Hesekias was warned to set his house in order, because he must
die.

Learn hence, ye Courtly Gallants, ye, that prorogue the term of your
life's and as the Prophet spoke, Zephany.
ye that put far from you the day of the Lord, set your houses in order, you
must die, an account must be made, did ye but know what hour the thief
Death, will come, ye would watch, if at that time, the house be not built by
faith, or built and not prepared by hope, or prepared and not swept by
repentance or swept for a time, and not daily, set in order by meditation of
mortality. If there be no care of the spiritual Economy at that day, at that
hour, ye shall drink the bitter cup of the dregs of destruction. O then
al of ye, that eat, as if ye did not care to live, and yet build, as if ye
did not think to die, ye that prefer Hagar before Sara, Bern. Genesis 16 3.
Genesis 30.4.
and neglect Rahel in regard of Bilha, ye, that respect not, that poor,
pining, fainting Inmate the soul, stand in your watchtowers, look toward the
west to the setting of the sun, dispose of your bodies and your souls, that
your eyes may see your salvation. One put his barnes in order, and that night
they took away his soul; Achitophel put his house in order, and that day, he
went and hanged himself; Esaias 38.1.
but Hesekias set his house in order, set his soul in order, and so recovered
health to body, and soul. Princes do partake of a kind of omnipotency, their
brave followers, potentate friends, Beaux.
maiesticke roabes, treasured up riches, delicate fare, fair Palaces,
pleasures, as if Paradise were recovered, and their delights, as if heaven were
come to dwell on earth, as the nation of the Jews, carry with them a Savor of
their stained stem, and murtherous progeny, so all these vanities carry a sent
and show of earthly and perishing mortality. Sorrow, sickness, death, be
Courtiers, and of great command, they have their grooms in every office of the
house. To say no more, If Solomon in all his royalty did remember his Creator
in the days of his youth, before the evil days came, Eccles. 12.1.
before the yea s drew nigh, wherein he might say, I had no pleasure therein;
then linger no longer, whosoever thou art, in the morning sow thy seed, work
while it is day, provide with Joseph the barnes before the famine, Genesis 41.
Genesis 6.13. Luke 15.11. Luke 16.1.
and with Noah the Arc before the flood. Let the prodigal child, unjust
steward, unwise virgin, serve thee, as examples to terrify thee. But, to
incite thee, and to rowse up that panting fainting breath, of thy soul;
Remember the careful resolution of this rare Prince, whose mintadge may lend
character to all the world.

5 When the sun of his Highness life, was ascending to the meridian, his,
and our Eclipse began, and before the noone-tide of nature, the night of death
set upon him. When all the worlds Echo of him was that, which Antigonus spoke
of Pyrrhus, maximum futurum si senesceret, Pluz.
then did that great Tyrant death first beat, then batter all the natural
forces, all the principal parts of his bodily fortress. The besiege was not
long, but cruel, when HE forecasting the worst of events and encountering
them before they came, carried this character of the valiant, D. Hall Char. of
val.
often to look death in the face, and with a religious constancy, to pass by
it with a smile, at once, showing both his content, and contempt of death.

O you vain froathy fondlings of the world, who are enemies to God, because
strangers to goodness, in whom custom of sin has left no sense of shame,
and desire of life, no fear of death; learn hence, and tremble at the lesson,
what it is, to walk early, and daily, with your maker, and learn, what it is
to provide deaths payment, before the day. Shall he that was Natures mirror,
the delight and delicacy of mankind, being as dear to the world, as heaven
dear to him, shall HE so ballace himself with holy wisdom, that he provides
to floate steddily in the midst of his tempestuous shipwreck? shall he, in the
strength of nature, heat of blood, beauty of youth, and glory of his time,
prepare so timely, at once, both to welcome and contemn death? And will ye,
ye earthly Glowormes, neglect so certain uncertain a point of state, as the
prevention of death, by provision for death? your daily surfets, nightly riots,
hourly quarrels are attended, not only with surquedry but mortality. If ever
place, or age, time, or person, had had a privilege or immunitie from death,
then ye might continue to flatter your selves, and to betray your souls: but
whenas all that soiourne upon the face of the earth must return into the womb
and tomb of the earth, that the Arkes of your bodies, be full of holes, and
ye take water at a thousand breaches; when that art of offense, the duel
whereof the devil is the Master, is so frequent, that beyond the ancient (but
abhorrent) manner of humane murders, as the infants of Bethlehem in the
cradles, Eglon in the parlour, Saul in the mountain, Mat. 2.16. Judge. 3.12. 1.
Sam. 26. 2. Chr. 32.21.
Ishbosheth on his bed, Zenaeherib in the Temple, all other places whatsoever,
foreign and domesticke, stream with the blood of single combat, of which
bloody issue, your selves be the Authors, the actors, the abettors; To which,
add the namelesse and helpless infirmities, by outrages and sicknesses,
whereunto ye are subject. And upon this consideration, turn your eyes
inwardes into your own Anatomies, observe whether ye need Cautions in this
kind, that seeing examples move not, precepts may prevail.

6 But whither go I? Blessed Prince! he was both an apt scholar and an
excellent Master, his understanding was illumined with the beams of divine
truth, God acquainted him with his word, and in his word with his will. He
made sure for his soul, and accounted it no safety, to be unsettled in the
foreknowledge of his final estate. How were the devout and frequent
observations of his morning religious offices, without intercession, privately
continued, as if with David he had vowed, Psalm. 5.3.
My voice shall thou hear in the morning O Lord, in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee. This our morning star, preventing the morning watch in
his morning offering, as if to him, Omnis dies esset vltimus dies, Job. 1. Ps.
55.18. Rupertus, Vitriacus. Bon avent. Aust. in Psalm. Vespere Dominus in cruce,
mane in resurrectione meridie in ascensione: enarrabo vespere patientia^
morientis annuntiabo mane vitam resurgentis, orabo vt exaudiat meridie sedens
ad dextram Patris. Sanctuary of soul.
so did he season and sanctify himself, and as Job sacrificed to sanctify
his sons, so did he pray, against his sins, and commune with his own heart
in his chamber and was still; and thought not this enough, but that with David,
more fervently, more frequently, he would praise the Lord in the Congregation,
and that, as that holy prophet professes, insta^tly, yea and continually,
vespere, mane, meridie, in the morning, evening, and at noone, did he praise
the Lord, not only, as some interpreters judge, because these three parts of
the day, were consecrated by those three prime acts of our redemption, the
evening by Christ's passion, the morning by his resurrection, and the noone by
his blessed Ascension, but also because these times have always by the
faithful of all ages been hallowed by divine orisons, and therefore in
chamber and closet, our Solomon observed these, knowing, that actions both of
difficulty and weight, are drawn to perfection by often use. And therefore
seeing it is a very hardmatter, either to pray, or to die, either willingly,
or well, all ought both timely and diligently to exercise themselves, that by
praying often, and so consequently, by dying often, in the end, men may both
pray, and die, easily and willingly.

O then all ye drowsy Night-birds! arise from your beds of sloth, Rev. 6.8.
carry the watch of prayer be vigilant over your own souls, look upon the
pale horse, and him that sits thereon, whose name is death. Provide, that
ye be not suddenly surprised, and die before ye begin to live. It is
weakness to be unwilling, to that which is necessary to be done, it is
necessary to die, and it is necessary for dying well, often to pray, often to
meditate upon thy death. A day will come, when thy evening shall be shut up, be
thou mighty, thou can not resist, be thou rich, thou can not corrupt, be
thou never so wise, thou can neither appease nor avoid DEATH. Which in the
principal strength, and beauty of age, plungeth the thoughts of the worldly,
interrupteth the enterprises of the worthy, breaks the studies of the
learned, and croppeth of the flowrishing hopes of the fairest, the same God
tells Princes, ye are Gods, et homines coelestibus aequat, and yet they
shall die like men, sceptra ligonibus aequat.

7 Which meditation extracted by the Limbique of contemplation into virtuous
action, endued and endowed our PRINCE, with an humble holy patience in all the
stormy invasions of his sickness, having so conquered himself, as sorrows
could not conquer him, his experiments, sage for their truth, though young for
their time, had drawn out rules of confidence, and patience, which he did
oppose, against all the fears of distrust: he knew whom he trusted, and how
far death could lead him, his shield was of a metal, not so hard, as
flexible, and, as it was never missed, so never pierced, he both saw, and
endured a divine hand invisibly striking, and in those sensible scourges he did
not murmur. His hopes were so strong, that they insult over the greatest
discouragements, his apprehensions so deep that when he once fastened, he
sooner left his life the^ his hold, his holy patience invincible, as full of
faith, as void of fury, being the^ above nature when below himself, his
pains, faintings, heats, tossings, and co^vulsio^s not able to distract his
person, or disturb his patience. when after a lingering, growing increasing
possession of some pestilent humor, sickness had surprised his head, Laur.
Anat.
Sacram Palladis arcem, the watchtower of the whole body, domicilium and
sensuum propugnaculum, as Laurentius calls it; yet his patience increased
with his disease, and with a tongue calmlie free, a forhead Socrates-like
resolute and firm, and with a settled countenance, he consults the Pilots of
his bodily vessel, and in their distraction, while he suffers and is silent,
and beholders pity him, and his torments cannot disease him, he refers all
peaceably, patiently, to the will of his maker, Zanch.
as if he had learned that lesson of Zanchius, Oramus Domine fiat volu^tas
tua, facta est, feramus. In all this, when not master of his health, yet master
of himself, subduing passion to reason, and bowing to bear the burden, Bern.
he verified that of Bernard, Submittitur sensus, non amittitur, nec deest
dolor, sed superatur, sed contemnitur.

Learn hence ye impatient and passionate whirlewinds, ye, who hoise up
sails in your tempests, whose words be wounds, and breath blood, behold (but
not without amazement) a Princely souls calm, in the midst of a bodily
storm, whose resolution was, as that sometimes of Tertullian, Totum licet
seculum pereat, Tertul.
dum patientiam lucrifaciam, rather would he, that the world should perish
unto him, then his patience perish. Learn if ye are not as far past the
bounds of nature, as grace, ye fiery monsters, who as if ye were borne under
the torrid zone, whose spleneticall, phreneticall passions, like the surges of
the sea, break the vessels of your understanding and reason; who are stirred
with less then a word, and are more turbulent then a torrent, who in the least
disasters are ready to blaspheme God and die, whose proceedings are as heady,
as your words hasty, and looks peremptory, who never look how innocent, but
how strong ye are, and will rather usher, then smother an injury, making your
sword the first of trials, and murder the fruit of the sword, whose society
admits no safety, nor acquaintance any tra^quillitie. O ye bloodhounds, is
the life of man no more precious, or the justice of God for blood no more
rigorous, that without respect, I say not of Christian, but Pagan patience, ye
familiarly destroy your brethren, for who^ Christ has died? Ye posterity and
tribe of Cain, when any small disgrace, nay the least distaste, a tale, a toy, a
breath, a word, a syllable, The lie.
will edge to revengefull impatience, behold him, holy soul, from whom al his
pains, redoubling of his pangs, the violence and virulence of humors, in his
troubled heart, tormented head, parched tongue, schortched throat, inflamed
body, and fired blood, could not extort any sparks of impatient passion.

8 Thus, in him never was divorce between devotion and patience. Holy soul!
how prevalent was devotion in him, by which he cast so often sweet wood into
his bitter waters! how did Gods spirit by this subdue his reason, regenerate
his will, purify his nature, how by this, in his extremity hourly did he
walk with his maker, and talk with him familiarly, celestial spirits
affording him company and service, all the rooms of his holy heart set a part
for holiness! Which habit was obtained by the former acquisition of it, in
those many virtuous actions of his tender age, when in the 14 year of his
time, he approved himself to be a religious hearer, judicious observer, and
obsequious obeyer of the word of his maker, his graceful gravitie, giving much
life to those sermons, which were heard by him, but his practice much more.
Among many others this one remarkable monument shall rest with renown upon his
memory, he abhorred an oath, laying, besides the Obeliske of imputation, a
pecuniary mulct upon those his followers and family, who were found faulty in
swearing, which moneys were duly distributed, to the poor. Neither can I here
omit his religious answer made unto one, that wondered, at his sports, to
observe his highness freedom from oaths, he answers, I never knew any
sport worth an oath. This holiness so early began, ended not, sickness
diseased it not, sorrow disordred it not. He showed his own care of serving
God then, in his daily calling upon him, commanding in the entrance of his
sickness, that the ordinary hours and prayers in his Closet should be duly
observed, as if he had derived piety, as well as royalty from Ioshuah his
example, whose speech was, Josh. 24.15.
I and my house will serve the Lord; besides the prayers which often he desired
to be used at his highness bedside, wherein a learned and Reverend n="*" D
Milborn Deane of Rochester.
Deane then assisting, fearing to distemper his pained head, with any loud
voice, his highness earnestly calls and wills him to speak more openly,
such was his happy and hearty respect to his religious prayers. As also his
desire and delight to receive those heavenly plentiful instructions, and to
partake in those holy powerful devotions of the most Reverend Archb. who daily
did both visit, and perfect that good work in him, so that neither the
dullness of the disease, drowsinesse of his head, dimnesse of his eyes, or
disturbances of his whole afflicted body, could hinder the divine part from her
great solace in so great sorrow.

Learn hence ye profane, unseasoned souls, who never name God but in oaths,
never think upon him, but in extremity, ye senseless graceless Gallants,
to whom will is a law, appetite a Lord, reason a servant, and religion a
drudge: a time will come, when you shall not know how to think upon God,
because ye begin to learn but then; the Apostle questioneth you, how can
ye call upon him, in whom ye have not believed? Romans 8.
Think you to live with him, whom ye have rejected from living with you,
because, this is the end of all knowledge, entertain ye this knowledge only,
in the end of your lives? How many great ones have slept their sleep and found
nothing, when lying upon the altar of their death beds, to sacrifice their
bodies for the sin of their souls, the heart like a piece of dead flesh, has
been without sense of love, of fear, of care, of pain, from the deaf
strokes of a wrath revenging conscience? These hearts surbated with cares, and
surfeted with riots, as they have no natural traduction of goodness, so no
celestial infusion of grace, Mercury has governed their brain, Jupiter their
liver, Mars their gall, Saturn their spleen, Laur. Anat.
but Sol the sun of righteousness had never any power over, never any place in
their hearts. O stony, steely hardness of hearts, which no blows can break, to
whom nothing shall be granted, though it may be required, because nothing was
performed which was commanded. O loathsome soul, poor and bare, and naked,
can al thy compassing friends infuse no one tear into thine eyes, one drop of
comfort into thy heart, one repentant sighe from thy soul, one grain of faith
into thy spirit, one mite of mercy, one jot of joy into thy conscience? O dumb
dumpe, shall the world Echo thy sins, hell echo thy sorrows? Art thou in
thy passage, and know that no sooner is thy candle out, but the large
history of thy life, shall be openly read? Is the impostume of thy lies, lusts,
oaths, oppressions, now breaking, the veil of hypocrisy, now to be removed,
and thy memory to become as odious to all men, as thy life was tedious to good
men, have thou been unhappy in thy birth, ungodly in thy being, and must thou
be ungracious in thy end. Consider this, o all ye that forget God, least he
suddenly take ye away, when there shall be none to help you, strike of all
delays, which have already devoured too much of the good time. Cast anchor, see
if you may shun the dangers, as eminent, as immine^t, shake of the viper, avoid
the enemy and the ave^ger, fly from the indignation like to fall upon you,
least that time, which yet ye may take, overtake ye, and then, ye have
neither power to resist, nor patience to bear, nor place to avoid.

Let not hoary sins, bring home heavy horrors, season your selves, bath and
embalme your souls, least your bodies be their sepulchers, and you, their
murderers: begin early, if the sixth hour be past, overslip not the ninth, if
the ninth be past, foreslow not the eleventh, stay not til the last hour, for
he that does sometimes, does not all times give a days wages for an hours
work; Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit omni peccanti poenitentiam.
Look upon that Princely pattern of goodness, who in young years, being holy
and devout, steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, rooted in charity, has
passed the waves of this troublesome world, and is finally come to the land of
everlasting life.

9 And sweet Prince! how willingly did HE submit himself, both to his
visitation, and to the end thereof, his death! when, lifting up his mind to
heaven, he discovered, that so bright, and beautiful glory, and contemned al
things on earth, enfolded in a mistie darkness. Divine Eagle! piercing beyond
the orb of the sun, when neglecting in pains the body, which was to be a nest
of worms, he desires in ioies to satisfy his soul, which was to be a
Companion of Angels. Heroical spirit! who, willingly entered the Combat with
the last enemy, that is to be destroyed, Death, when, upon the Vigil of his
departure, being visited by that most Reverend Prelate the Archb. his Grace,
and religiously, questioned by his Grace, whether, he could willingly submit
himself, to the will of God, so far, as the stroke of death, his highness
replied, yes willingly, with all my heart, and though not with so great liberty
of tongue, as love in heart, manifested hereby, that he was not so sure to die,
as to be restored, and so outfaced his death, with his resurrection, with his
ever-living love of ever-lasting life. O heroical! nay more, O Angelical
spirit! fined and polished in this furnace of his affliction, that so freely,
so faithfully is ready to forsake all, and to follow the Lamb whither soever
he goes, Rev. 7.
who with white hands and a clean soul was fit to serve and to attend his
Savior, yea even then, to sing with Simeon, Luke 2.28.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Then, I say, when the earth
partaked so much of the beauty of heaven, so many delights, so many pleasures,
so many Triumphant, magnificent Tropheys, for the joining of those two royal
Virgin rivers, Thames and Rhene, when the Gracious, virtuous Princess, Psalm.
45.
his highness sister was al glorious, her clothing of wrought gold, when she
was to be brought to her Illustrious Palatine, in rayments of needle work, the
Virgins, that were her fellows, to bear her Company, when with all joy and
gladness she was to be brought to enter into her Princes Palace, that in
steed of her Parents, she might have children, whom she might make Princes in
foreign lands. Then, when righteousness looked down from heaven, and all the
Christian world, resulted with joyful acclamation, some few Curs of
Antichrist excepted. Then, that even then, this blessed Prince, to be willing
to leave the world, and his happy soul to be contented, to be loosed from the
fetters of the flesh? How should it amaze those subterranean Moles, who desire
to have their portion still in this life, crying faciamus his tabernacula! Who
when Death serves the execution upon them are most unwillingly drawn, Math.
17.
and pulled from worldly delights, as beasts from their dens, with
malevolence and violence, roaring out as lamentable a farewell to their souls
as Adrianus the Roman Emperor, who cried out Animula, vagula, blandula, etc.
That his fondling and darling soul was now fleeting, and he knew not unto what
darkness and danger it should pass, where now should be hits lodging, now,
that it was to loose hits former delight, and sporting, he knew not the pace,
the place, the passage, the entertainment, how far was he from him, whose
motto was, Nec pudet viuere, nec piget mori, from all the Saints of God, that
know they are but translated, dissolved, gathered to their fathers, fallen a
sleep, their life is hid for a time, that they lay down their tabernacles,
lie down in peace, sleep in the Lord, rest in hope, wait their change; that
death, is only a ferry, a boat, a bridge to convay them into another place, or
as a Groom, that lights a taper into another room.

But o humane witchcraft! that so enchanteth those two divinely polished tables
of the soul, the will and understanding, cheating the affections in the one,
checking the meditations of the other. Why, do not the gallant walking Ghosts,
of this godlesse-age provide more willingly to entertain the divorce and
dissolution of their earthly frame? why, so daily do they incur, the death of
both parts, when as their defluxion, and consuming course is daily manifested?
every minute they live, being a step unto death, every action pulling away
some part of their beloved life, when like a candle continually burning, they
are howrely dying, and yet, as unwilling to die, as weak to resist death; the
head a skull, the breath smoke, the eye water, the brain dirt, the heart dust,
the body a house of clay, Scal. Exer. 148.
and men themselves are not men, but pieces and fragments of men, as Scaliger
told Carda^, and no ways to pass to life but by the gate of death as the
Israelits could not pass to Caanan but by the dead sea; and as an ancient
compares our body disposed into the four humors unto the veil of the Temple,
composed of the 4. Colors, as, this veil must be removed, before the entrance
can be obtained, into the Sanctu^ Sa^ctorum, so, must the body put of
mortality, to indue it self with immortality. But the fleeting Meteors, of
this fond age, neglect the Contemplation hereof, and being no more able to
abide death, then quiet in thinking on the fear of death, they wish, to fly
even from themselves, and to be discharged, from being guided by so ill a
guest, as their own soul, they wish their portion to continue in this life,
they can be content, to stay here for ever. The base wealth, false pleasures,
vain hopes, lying promises, fained friendship, short glory, fading beauty of
this dull and dungeon-like life, yields them sufficient satisfaction; otherwise
to be sequestered from these itching toies, bewitching ioies, and to leave the
world, they are most loathsomly loath, they answer, they know, where they are,
whither they shall go they know not, and hereupon in the instant of their
tra^smigration they are so unwilling to leave the world, hence is it that they
begin to feel the flames of Hell before they go down to the grave, before
them horror, behind them terror, on the one side sin, on the other shame,
fire in the hand, a serpent at the heart, terrors of the night, sting of
conscience, fear of hell, torture them, and, their unwillingness to die is most
willing to torment them. But I proceed, my subject is sorrow, whom I follow.

10 How sorrowful a day, was this Vigil of his death? How watery, that day, the
5. of November, which should have been the day of fear and fire and fury, if
that Tragedy, which Antichrist and hell plotted, had been acted! How was this
day, the day of Joy and Iubile for deliverance! I say how was the glory and
beauty thereof changed by this Eclipse of the Princely sun! The Lord even
then visiting us, Lament, 2.22.
as Jeremy complains in the Lamentations, Lord, thou have called us in a
solemn day, and now terrors are round about us. A day that at the institution
thereof did occasion more cause of joy, to us, the^ any ordinary day of
deliverance to the Jews, our deliverance greater, our enemies more cruel,
their snares more fearful, the mischief more miserable, the misery more
general, and the project more horrid, and terrible then ever any, we read of
among Jews, or Gentiles, Graecians or Barbarians, or the history of any estate
has read, heard, or registered in times Chronology. A day, wherein they cried
of Zion, down with it, down with it even to the ground. Wherein the Oracles
of our wisdom, the Chariots of our Israel, the sacred Reverence of our Clergy
had been devoured, the learned Guardians of our Justice, the whole estate of
our weale-publike, by a public woe, had been blasted and blemished, and
consumed. A day that should have been mother to the fowlest monster, and
monstrous plot, that ever was purposed or performed, facinus tale quod nec
Poeta fingere, nec Histrio sonare, nec mimus imitari poterat, even in that day,
wherein we were freed and delivered by a miraculous hand, from this hell-borne
horror intended against us. O how was this day altered, by the public sorrow
for virtues sickness! This fifth day fear possessed City and Court; a day,
that though Pythagoras and Hesiod, count to be most unfortunate, yet was never
ominous or inauspitious to us; witness the gracious preservation of the Lords
Anointed on the 5 of August and this 5 of November. Now many and hearty
prayers were in fiery Chariots sent up to heaven, to implore divine majesty,
that this day we might not be led into the temptation of such a tempestuous
shipwreck as the loss of our Prince.

Hesiod. Virgil.
(...), says Hesiod; and Quintam fuge is Virgils caution; and Rhodiginus gives
the reason, Coel. Rodig. lib. 8. cap. 9.
that upon the fifth day the furies do govern, it being the day of their
birth. The fifth day, the Giants began their wars against heaven, shipwracks,
earthquakes, tempests, devastations, being even proper to this day; and the
Brumalia being kept in the same month of Nove^ber, and about the 5 day, had the
dedication, a sonitu tonitrus and fulminis. Yet neither this month, nor this
day, Hosp. de origin Fest. November.
were ever yet unhappy to us, til now; and now began we to tremble, though we
had escaped the fifth days furies, and the Brumalia, the Winters feast, which
was intended, yet now the Joy of our heart was humbled, Lam 5.15.
and fear was on every side. But Thou continuest holy O thou worship of
Israel. O Lord, let it never be forgotten, that thou did please to spare and
forbear the great judgment of this day, and this day did not so overshadowe
us, with sorrow, as to take away our Josias, in the celebritie of our
preservation, to extinguish our joy utterly, by Hadadrimmons lamentation.

A meditation, that should stir up al those unfaithful unthankful souls
among us, who neglect the Lords favor, and the remembrance of his holiness,
in the deliverance of this day. It was his infinite mercy that this day he let
not our enemies laugh us to scorn or to triumph over us, but deferred Prince
HENRYES death one day further. Yet certainly he suffered this heavy judgment
to fall upon us so near to this time, because we are so forgetful of his
marvailous deliverance from the dangerous engines prepared against that time. It
is not unworthy the observation, Joseph.
that most of the great judgments fell upon Israel upon the days of their
solemn feasts, surely for the profaneness and unthankfulness of them, for
those blessings received, which occasioned the institution of those feasts. And
why should we not forever hereafter stand in awe, trembling, and fearing, how
the Lord has afflicted us so near our solemn feast day. And though he had
delivered us from the violence and malevolence of me^ and Devils, yet, if we
turn not, he ca^ whet his sword and bend his bow, as he did by that arrow that
struck Isreal's Josiah.

12 It is as true as terrible, judgment may be prolonged, but when the mouth
of the Lord has spoken, by no power it can be avoided. The sixth day ensued,
which as if it had had a divine dispensation to break the sixth commandment,
slew our PRINCE. A day, that has been Principibus infesta and infausta;
witness the death of Richard the first, the sixth of April; 1199
Henry the second, the 6 of July; 1189
Edward the first, the 6 of July; 1307
and our last Edward, blessed K. Edward the 6. on the 6 of July; 1553
as also this 6 day of November, wherein our, Iulium sydus, Prince HENRYES
sun did set.

Divine soul! how readily did it move to its Center, and how constantly! all
the storms could not shipwreck the arc of his faith, all the surges could not
sink his precious soul. He continued victoriously Constant, and is assured,
to see the Lord in the land of the living. The beams of his faith did reflect
upon him, and kept life beyond life in him, when the last symptoms, the
harbingers of death appeared, in that dismal period, of that fatal day, the
violence of convulsions, and fury, and extremity of the disease appearing then
most terribly, because it was never to appear again. In that spark of life,
his last and best Physician, the most Religious, most Reverend Archb. his
Grace, being his highness heave^ly remembrancer by many hearty, and holy
exhortations to assure him with assured Constancy, of Gods mercy, to lift up
his heart to prepare him to meet the Lord; and calling more earnestly and
lowdly, because the organs of speech and hearing were deprived of use, his
highness being earnestly moved to manifest by signs his apprehension of these
divine exhortations and his assent hereunto, he lifted up his holy hands
united, and afterward his eyes bent to heaven, from whence not long after
appeared, in his deliverance, his salvation.

Learn hence all ye unmindful, unfaithful, unconstant, weather-beaten
worldlings, who, like reeds tossed of the wind, never continue in one stay,
whom the least blast of affliction does so amate and amaze, as that God is
forgotten, and being unbelieving Scepticks, believe no more then ye see, and
fear no more then ye feel, and therefore are sure to want the Continuance of
Constancy at your deaths, because you were never acquainted with it in your
life. When all your members and faculties are surprised, all pains and
perplexities enlarged, when the sorrows of death compass ye about, and the
floods of wickedness make ye afraid; then how horrid will it be, that out of
all your former life's extraction no one drop, either of Comfort, or Co^stance,
may be distild! When the aching head, panting heart, faultring tongue, shortning
breath, beating veins, crazed mind, and cracked memory shall disturb, and
distract all your facult^es, and not only your heavenly, but even earthly
cogitations; when the dumb mouth, numbed hands, stiff ioints, pale lips,
vanishing strength, and expiring life, be the forerunners of a doleful
fearful death; and the want of a religious settled constant memory, shall
then bring the woe of a wanton mind, and ye shall by a scourge of Conscience
receive a beginning in this life of your full torments in the flames of hell,
the eternal justice making you executioners of your own faults: the heart and
hope, of life being but a bubble, a smoke, a lie, a fury, W^sd 5. Esaias. 28.
Prove. 11. Job. 11.
as Solomon, Esaias, and Job, have described it, wanting the sweet solace of the
soul, and that assurance, which the Saints have in all your anguishes and
extremities, neither obtaining acceptance with God nor repentance from God, a
Graue-stone lying upon your hearts, sealed with the sense of Gods judgments,
pressed down with the rubbish and ruins of the decayed monuments of ancient
transgressions* your foundation laid not upon the rock, but on the sands, and
in the sea, where waves and winds beat on every side, when all those old
friends, but new enemies lie in ambush, the corrupters of judgment, seducers
of will, Traitors of virtue, flatterers of vice, Pyoners of Courage, murderers
of Comfort, and the extinguishers of all peace in conscience or joy in spirit.
Whereas to, a resolved soul, to a Constant Christian, even in the pangs of
death he then chiefly, seems to be the lively and lovely image of his maker,
having his reason and understanding clear, his will and affections ordinate,
his sensual faculties not only restrained from evil, but constrained to be
serviceable to do good: and howsoever his corporal state be in an Eclipse,
and wants as much in sense, as it abounds in sorrow, yet his soul is
triumphing, and rejoicing in God his Savior, and ready to sing his Nunc
dimittis, as this Princely Saint.

12 And now death Natures midwife, began her final act of dissolution, and this
fatal day, friday, (a day, which long before, his highness accounted dismal)
proved to be the day of blackness and darkness, a day of clouds and
gloomishnes, there never was since the time of Christ the like; and Lord, let
never be the like any more, after it, even to the years of many generations!
Now the infallible signs of vnsatisfiable death approaching, the disiointing
Co^vulsions, and trembling agonies came upon him, Nature wasting like a dying
Lamp, and in that day, his stars begin to be darkened, the keepers of his
house to tremble, the strong men to bow themselves, the grinders to cease, they
that look out of the window to be darkened. Now the silver Cord is ready to be
loosed, the golden pitcher breaking at the fountain, and the wheel breaking
at the Cesterne. Now, now HE is going to his long home, and the mourners go
about in the street. O miseram faciem orbis! O woeful countenance of a Court,
that now appeared! the Echo and reclamation of sighs, sobs, the throws of
sorrow, of outcryes, and unspeakable Lamentation, sounded not only in that
woeful house, and therein in the Chambers of death, but in all the Court, all
the city, men passing along by each other, as if they had bin come out of the
graves. Tears groans, heavy looks, dissheveld locks, and lamentations
filling all places; speech, and life, seeming to be strangers to men, the
saddest time, and sablest world, that ever our Country knew. It exceeds
invention to imagine it, and is able to cast a perpetual dampe upon the
understanding, that shall conceive it: my hand, pen, heart, all my faculties
sink under this burden, I lack Agamemnons veil. The delight of mankind, and
expectation of nations is expiring, where, how, whence is Comfort, to be had?
I shall never forget ever to pity those poor souls, with wringing hands and
breaking hearts, whose shrikes, and outcries are able to pearce Adama^t: Are
sins more prevailing, then prayers? Where is the power and violence of prayer?
which opened, and shut, and sealed up heaven, brought down fire, and stayed
the sun in the firmament. No hope, no help, all miracles ceased? No balm in
Gilead, nothing in the strength and extracts of nature, no Elixir in Art to
recover, to repair this irrecoverable consumption? It was providence, that
disposed it, and does silence question. But was the charge so strict, as that
the great Tyrant Death would smite, neither small, nor great, but Isreal's
Prince, the Joshua, Josiah, Majesty's first borne, Religions second? Must the
Rose be blemished, before it was fully bloomed? or the fig tree blasted, before
it was time to bring forth fruit? O cruelty of that savage monster Death! O
Death, thou child of sin, and father of confusion! have thou not already
triumphed enough, in funeral solemnities? thy applause in the cries of
widows, and orphans, by the disorder and desolation of thy universal
dominion; that as many ages, as have been since the world was created, so many
conquests, have thou obtained, and yet thy all devouring throat, the grave
unsatisfied? But again I see the finger of providence imposing silence,
forbidding question. Yet my ears tingle with the doleful tune of that woeful
time. The bell now calls him to the triumphant Church; by day Death durst not
approach, by night he undertakes this deed of darkness. The redoubled sound of
that solemn, but sorrowful knell struck all hearts, with a chilling, killing
fear; now, hope was without help; the air was troubled with the scriching
outcries, and all knees bowed, all faces plentifully bedewed, the world in an
ecstasy, as if some especial part of nature were dissoluing. Now were the last
prayers of the family, who without intercession were all that day assisted by
many honorable, and infinite lamentably sobbing souls; whereof the Chapel,
vestry, entry, and whole Court were full, all joining with strong cries, weeping
eyes, and bleeding hearts did commend his blessed soul, to be bathed in the
precious blood of his Savior. And so not long after quietly, patiently,
blessedly he expired, and yielded his spirit into the hands of his immortal
maker. Even then, when that inauspicious aspect of the planets did porte^d some
ominous disaster, when only Saturn and Jupiter appeared above, and Sol, Mars,
Mercury, Venus, and Luna lay hid below, not daring to be witnesses of that
heavy and horrid effect of that horrible conjunction.

Learn hence all ye fur trees, that Cedars may fall, and Princes the Gods of
the earth may die. They are men, helpless men, mortal men, corruptible men,
in the frames of their bodies, and in the cogitations of their minds. Happy
therefore is he, that has the God of Jacob for his refuge! Happy is he, whose
hope is in the Lord his God! And blessed be our God, who in the vnconceavable
wisdom of his divine will, has freed blessed Prince HENRY from the fetters of
the flesh! Who when he had showed him the world, to loath the world,
enfranchised him from this earthly prison and dungeon, and possessed him now
with greater liberty. Where being exalted in greatest glory, he is now in
his presence, where there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasure
for evermore. Where there is an immortal, immarcessible crown, wherewith
already he is adorned, in that kingdom of continuance, where sorrow shall
never be felt, sickness never be feared; where joy cannot be touched with
sadness, nor health tainted with sickness; where there is all good, without
any evil, and all trouble, all punishment, and all fear is done away.

And finally, blessed be that God, who has out of his fountain of goodness
once again opened the windows of the mornings mercy and restored a new light
to those sorrowful souls, who sat in darkness and in the shadow of death;
and has restored the voice of joy, and gladness unto our most gracious K.
JAMES, and the family of St JAMES, by the settling of that house and the happy
shining of our day star CHARLEMAINE, the apparent heir of his blessed
Brothers virtues and titles, the Parallel of former, and absolute pattern of
future Princes, whose stem and stock long may it flourish under the branches
of those Royal Cedars, his renowned Parents; that so with much happiness, his
Highness may bring forth his fruit in due season, to all good men's good, and
Gods great glory. Amen.


