The second ORATION OF MAster Theodore de Beze, Minister of the holy Gospel,
made and pronounced at Poyssy, in the open assemblye of ye Prelates of France,
in the presence of the Queen, mother, and Princes of the blood ryal. The.xxvi.
day of September. Anno.1561.

Imprynted at London, by Ihon Tysdale, and are to be sold at his shop, in
the upper end of Lombarde street, in Alhallowes churchyeard, nere unto grace
church.

Oration.
MAdame, the last time that it pleased you too give us audience, we made
declaration as God gave us grace, of the article, which was propounde, as
touching the church, the marks, tokens and authorities of the same: wherein
we followed, so the word of God, that every man, as we think, had occasion too
be content with our au^swer. But in stead of approving, that which we spoke or
reproving that, which deserved correction, it was asked us, by what power we
did minister the word of God, and the holy sacraments. And thereupon nothing
was spared to make our cause more odious. We know not to what intent that was
moved and set forward. For first we have not presented our selves hear to
minister the word of God, nor the holy sacraments, wherefore it neded nothing
at al to ask us by what power or authority we would do it. If they say unto us
that it is to make us render, a reason or cause of that which we have done in
time paste, it behooved then too consider that the state of our company is of
two manner of men: the one serves for minysters out of this realm, and in
place where there vocation is received. Of those it can not be asked why
they are ministers. There are other that preach in this realm, whom you have
not called too give a reason of that is past, as concerning their vocation,
but only to confer of their doctrine otherwise it should be a beginning of
their process, whereupon we are assured, Madame, that you never thought nor
meant. If it be by a manner of conference, under correction it were to no great
purpose and could not serve but to make us enter so far into this matter that
we should noteasely come out without offendinge my Lords the prelates, which
thing we mente not, neither will we give occasion to any man to interrupte
this holy and Christian work now begone. And to thyntente men may know that
we speak not without great reason at every time that two parties come
together too enter in to conference if one ask by what power or authority do
you this or that, the other will ask him the like, and so it shall be a hard
thing if upon these questions there rise not some discention.

Now leauinge my Lords the prelates of this realm whom we will not offend:
let us admit that a bishop should ask us, under what title preach and
administer you the holy sacraments? We would ask him whether he were chosen
of the auncientes of the church to whom he is appointed for a bishop, whether
he have been required by the people: If their were any information before, of
his life, manners, and doctrine, he would say, yea, but men know the contrary:
and we remitte it to the conscience of the heart of those that hear us, which
know how the matter goes. Now if he said unto us. You are no ministers
because ye have not the imposition of hands we should answer them. Ye are
not ministers because that in institutinge you, are left out the substantial
points commanded in the canon law which can not be dispensed with all. And if
the disputation should wax hoter, we would go further, and might use such
words. You have but one of the three points requisite in the institution,
which is the layinge on of hands. If the lack of that same deprive us from
being ministers: for the lack of the other two you shall be no more minister
than we.

The councyle of Calcedone, which is one of the four generalles, ordayneth
that: irrita sit ordinatio: of that priest which was not appointed specially
for the service of some church, irrita, sayethe it, in iniuriam ordinantis: By
a stronger reasonne we may say to the bishop that thus would dyspute with
us, when the two essentyall points be away against the ordinance of the
Apostell.1. Timoth.3. ^ Tit. 1.6. yet here is an other point which greueth us
sore to speak, and yet we are constrained to it, to the intent to show unto all
this company, that if this disputinge of vocation were ones opened, it should
be very dangerous. If we should of the said bishop, demand who gave him
this laying on of hands, he would say the bishops by the authority that was
given them. And if we should ask him, for how much have you boughte this
authority? He would say that he boughte it not, but yet that he gave so
many thousand crowns, that is to say I boughte not the bread, but I bought
the corn. Now this disputacion, if we would go about to decyde it by the
concylles, and canons of the church, would make an infinite number of bishops
blushe and as many curates. Wherinto, Madame, we would not enter, because we
would offend no man. And touching the article of the holy supper of ye Lord
we would not speak she last time any further, having respect to many of
this company, which have not ben accostomed to hear speak of it so far, that
they should not easily be offended wha^ they hear any thing yt seems new and
strange unto the^, And we had rather that they should understand the language
of the ancient doctors of the church then ours, seeing specially that my
Lord Cardynall of Lorrain was bound by open promise, to instruct and teach
us, namely upon this article by the words of the doctors which have written the
first five hundredth years: in such wise that we prepared our selves both
with God and with our selves for to receive the light, if it were showed us,
that hitherto it had been hydden from us. Now for to satisfy our
expectation, and of a great part of Christendom they have proponed unto us the
article of the holy sacrament, cut and diminished of the most principal and
necessary points and they have said unto us, sign and subscribe unto this, if
not, we will go no further. If we were presented unto you as prisoners, for to
have judgment given upon us, yet you would not say, sign this, if not we
condempe you. Your estate my Lords byndeth you to speak otherwise and
commands you to show us our erroures, if their be any in us and wills you
to be: Potentes exhortari in doctrina sana, those that have need of doctrine
which are ready too give a reason of their faith by the scripture: and if the
manner of condempninge us be new, the mean which men would use, would seem
yet more strange as we will declare a none.

Madame* We are hear presented unto you, for two principal ends and
purposes: the one is to render a reason, both to God, to you and to the world,
of our faith. The other for to serve God, the king and you, by all means to
us possible forto appease the troubles that are raised in the matter of
religion. If you send us a way, and not appoyntinge us with whom we may
freendly confer, there shall be nothing done unto us but it will be published
through out all Christendom: and so it should not be a mean to quiet and
apease the troubles: and those that would it so, know it well enough. If you
had not to do with other than with us hear present, there were no great
danger too use the matter according to the world, as a man list: but it
shall please you to consider that we are hear in the behalf of a myllion of
men which are in this realm, in Swysserlande, in Polonia, in Germanye, in
England, and in Scotland, which look all for some good resolution of this
assemblye, and will understand that in stead of conference, as it was
promised, men give us the tenth part of an article, and say, sign this, if
not, we will wade no further. And if we did sign that, what should they win:
They that have sent us hither will know if we were constrained by force or else
vainquished by good or certain arguments. Wherefore we humblye beseech you
(Madame) not to break of or interrupt this good work, but give us men, that
will not make any conscience to confer with us: other wise your majesty
might judge of it your self what great occasion of offense this manner of
proceadinge, that they would set foreward, will bring with it. And yet because
they shall not remain without an answer to that which has been proponed unto
us, we declare and show, that we approve and allow all that has been spoken
by. M. despense, in the book, that he has given us, without any other
conference.

And as concerning the article that my Lord Cardinal has given us, it is but
an extracte and declaration of the confession of Auspurge, wherein there are
many things to consider and way: that is that he should have given us the
whole co^nfessio^. For it is no reason to give us one line of an article and
leave out all the rest. Moreover, we should have known if my Lord Cardinal
did present it of him self (which nevertheless we do not presume: but
desire to know it) or if it be by the autoritye of My Lords the prelates that
men lay before us the confession Auspurge, and to assure us so thereof that
we may freelye confer togeyther, for that way at the least (whereof we
thank God) my Lord Cardinal of Lorrayn and the others will pass and allow
the condemnation of transubstantiation, which is reproved and rejected by the
common assent of all the reformed churches as well in Germanye as else where.
And if they will that we shall sign any thing, it is reason that my Lord
Cardinal of Lorrayne sign also that which he gives us in the name of the
company, to the intent that our churches and congregations which have sent
us hither, may see and know, that we confer not in vain. But if my Lord
Cardinal of Lorrayne continue in this mind to come near unto the confession
of the Allemayns, I trust that God will bring us nere and Join us together to
so good a point and effect that you shall therewyth be content and that his
name shall thereby be gloryfied throughoute all the world. And in the mean
while Madame, we say that our Lord Jesus Christ, is in the holy supper
wherein he presents, gives and exhibiteth unto us truly his body and blood
by the working of his holy spirit. We receive and eat spirituallye and by
faith, that very blood which was shed for us, for to make us bones of his
bones and flesh of his flesh, to the end to be quickend thereby and to receive
all that which is requisite for our salvation. And if this content you not,
Madame, but needs a greater declaration (as in deed it is daungerouse and
hard too speak of so great a mysterye with few words) if it please my
Lord Cardinal of Lorrayn to perform that he has promyssed, which is that we
search together the holy scriptures, and the aunciente doctors of the
church, so far as they be conformable unto Gods word. And also if it
please your majesty to establishe (as you may do) a good form and manner
of conference, and certain deputies, disputinge in order, having the books
in presence with Secretaryes to collecte and write all in a good and auctentike
form. We will give you to understand and know that we are not come hither for
to truth world: But for to agree upon a sound doctrine, for having first
clothed again this holy sacrament with that of the which it was spoiled, and
having taken from it so many things as were added unto it, we pretend no
other thing, nor desire any more effectuouslye than that it may be established
again in his own perfe^^ion. And to come to this end, Madame, we give and
offer, in all humilitye to God, and to your majesty, and to the rest and
quietness of Christendom, and namely of this realm, our souls and our own
lives. Praised be God.

The thursday last of september.
WE do believe that in the holy supper our savior Jesus Christ does give,
present, and offer unto us the substance of his body and blood by the
operation and workinge of the holy ghost, that we eat and receive,
sacramentallye, and spirituallye by faith, the same body which is deadde for
us, for to be a bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, too the end that
we may be viuified and receive all that is requisite to our salvation. And
because that the word of God, whereupon our faith is stayed does present and set
forth unto us his true and natural body by the holy ghost. In this respect,
we do rekognise and acknowledge, that the body and blood of our savior Jesus
Christ is the supper. By these words (being taken in this sense) being in the
end of ye said article we do understand yt we do aprehend this great and
excellent mystery by faith, which is of such, virtue and efficacy, that it
makes the things that are absent present unto us.

FINIS.

