Mary's memorial. A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S SPITTLE on Monday in Easter
week being April 1. 1616.

By DANIEL PRICE Doctor in Divinity, and Chaplain unto the KINGS Majesty.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin. 1617.

TO MY DEAR FATHER Mr. THOMAS PRICE Preacher of Gods word in SHREWSBVRY.
SIR,
AS Love descends, so duty ascends, Illi debes quod ^abes, cui debes quod
es. Amb. in L^^c.
which freeth me from all suspicion of flattery, in that I dedicate some part
of that to you, of whom I have received all. Saint Augustine attributes his
happiness to the prayers of his mother Monica, as the chiefest means under
GOD of his conversion: and S. Ambrose upon that of the Apostle Ep. 6. Ep: 6.2.
Honor thy father and mother (which is the first commandment with promise)
prefers that blessing which good Parents leave their children by prayer
before all worldly revenues which they can bequeath them. Cyr: Al. l. 4. in Genesis
Parents bear the image of GOD: whom they bless upon good grounds, such shall
be blessed, with a long life upon earth, In co^lis reposita est mayor
compensatio call.
or they shall have a greater reward in heaven. It was a blessing for which
Esau and Iaakob stood in competition: You have more blessings then one, or one
by GODS effectual working, may work effectually in more then one, which is
the subject of his prayer, who ever rests

Your dutiful son at command, DANIEL PRICE.

O HOLY SPIRIT OF truth direct me.
MATH. 26.13. Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world,
there, shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a memorial of
her.


IN Jerusalem there was a poole, which in Hebrew is called Bethesda, having
five porches Ioh. 5.2.
, many glorious things are spoken of that city of God, Psalm. 87.3.
Bethesdas poole is not the meanst of her monuments; Tertullian Tertull.
out of the Chalde calls it Bethsetha the house of sheep, and the text says
it was near to the sheep market: Euthymius Euthym.
Beth-hesda, the house of mercy: and so Tremellius out of the Syriacke, the
house of benignity, giving this reason of the name, because the Lord did here
heal all infirmities: for as Saint Ioh. 5.3.
John testifies in these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind,
lame, withered waiting for the moving of the water: Hither came our Savior,
Expectabant Angeli descensum, and ecce Iesum noni testamenti angelum, says
Beda Beda.
, they expected the Angel at a certain time, our Savior came thither at the
solemn time, the time of the Ioh. 5.1.
feast. (...).
Cyrth thinks this feast to be Pentecost, but (...).
Iren^^^ and (...)
Rupertus tell us, this feast was the Passover, not only because by the name
of the feast the Passover is commonly understood in the Gospel, but also
because every year of his preaching heed d some special work, against the
time of the Passover, at the Passover he drove out the buyers and sellers out
of the temple. At the Passover, he fed five thousand, with the five loaves and
two fishes, at the Passover he suffered, and at the Be^^. (...). H^rm. tom. 2.
p. 165. (...) Ir^^. and Rup.
Passover, he came to the poole of Bethesda, where the blind, and lame, and
withered, and diseased lay: Blessed Savior, in the Synagogue was thy seat,
thou wast wont to teach in the temple, Bir.
the ship, the mount, the desert, were thy places of abode, o thou fairest of
the sons of men, what do thou in the houses of the sick! in the Hospitalls
of the diseased! O thou redeemer of mankind thou knew the whole head was
sick, and the whole heart was heavy, therefore came thou from the mountain
of spices to this valley of tears: All the world, was as this poole in all
parts whereof as in these porches, lay the lame, and diseased, our Savior
took notice of the infirmities, nay tulit, nay more sustulit, he took on him,
and took from us, all our infirmities (...), as Damascen
Damascen speaks; he took on him all our miserable, he took from us all our
damnable infirmities, left no place unlooked for to find us, sought the lost
groate in the house, lost sheep in the wilderness, lost son in the world, and
left no place either unsought or unsanctified, sanctified the house in his
conception, the stable in his incarnation, the fields by the message of his
birth, the river by the blessing of his baptism, the seashore by his
teaching, the valley by his healing, the garden by his praying, the Temple when
he was offered, and the mount when he suffered, he has consecrated and
hallowed hospitalls as holy places by Bethesdaes poole, and her porches,
whether at the Passover, the great feast he entered and cured the man impotent
for many years Ioh. 5.9.


Blessed and beloved, this day is that scripture fulfilled in our ears, this
honorable City is as Jerusalem, this spittle as that poole, your hospitalls
as those porches, this Easter as that Passover, here are the lame, blind,
maimed, and the diseased: shall we now pray that the Angel may descend to move
the waters? No, the Angel has descended, the blessed Angels of the Lord are
witnesses to you, that the waters are stird, that you have cast your bread upon
the waters, and the blessed spirit of God has promised Eccles. 11.1.
that after many days you shall find it. Our Savior himself has assured
you, that when two or three Math. 18.20.
are gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them, how much
more is he now present, in the great congregation, he never saw the multitude
but he had compassion on them, either he fed Mark 6.34.
the multitude, or taught Ioh. 6.5.
the multitude, or Math. 4.24.
healed the multitude, or blessed Math. 5.3.
the multitude. In the fifth of Matthew, when he had healed them in the valley,
he taught them after in the mount, and beginning to teach them he first
blesses them, that is his first Sermon, we read of, Math. 4.24. Math. 5.3.
the first word of that first Sermon is blessing, and the first blessing a
blessing for the poor Math. 5.3.
The cause of the meeting of this multitude, at this solemn Passover, is that
this honorable City an ancient mother in Israel may receive a blessing for
her blessing poured out upon the poor: Domine ex ore infantium perfecisti
laudem, as we may say with the Psalmist Psalm ^. 2.
, Lord we have heard and seen that out of the mouths of these babes and
little ones thou have ordained strength, Ioh 11.5.
and perfitted thy praise, Lord we have heard, and seen, the blind see, the
lame walk, the vlcerated cleansed, the dease hear, and to the poor the
Gospel is preached. O Lord holy and reverend is thy name Psalm. 111.9.
blessed be thy name for ever and ever. Leuit. 21.18.
There was a time that some sort of people were by proscription banished the
temple, Cacus and Claudus non intrabunt in templum, an order among the Jews
neither the halt nor blind must enter into the Temple, which Law seems
strange, not only seeing that Caeci and Claudi among the Romans as Plutarch
Plut. in vita Coriolam.
notes were the surnames of chief families of note, but also because the
Jews themselves, descended originally from the blind and lame, for Isaac the
son Genesis 27.1.
of the father of the faith full was blind, Genesis 32.31.
and Jacob the son of Isaac himself the father o the Patriarchs was lame:
But this custom is antiquited, and now not only, the door of the Temple is
open, but the vetle of the Temple is broken and the master of the fea^th wh^en^
his servants into the streets and lanes of the Cu^, to bring in (...), the
beggars, and maimed, and halt, and blind, our Churches are op^n to receive the
poor, Luke 14.21.
unto the poor the Gospel is preached, they are not only cured in Bethesdae?
poole, but councelled in this place as in Salomons porch, they are not only
cured in the soars of Adames body, but prepared for the company of their
brother Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, Math. 5.3.
and therefore I say with our Savior blessed be the poor, Psalm. 41.1.
and with the Psalmist blessed be they that consider the poor, Deuteronomy. 33.1.
a blessing as ample as ever Moses wished Israel, the good will and blessing of
him that dwelt in the Bush, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
be upon you all, the Lord bless you with the blessings of heaven above, the
blessings of the deep beneath, the blessings of the fields and fruits, the
blessing of the barnes and baskets, the blessing of City and Country, and the
blessings of both testaments, of both life's, of both worlds, be upon you all
from this day forth for evermore.

I am not yet you see entered into the tent of my Text, my meditations are yet
as the affring betwixt the porch and the altar, or rather yet we be in atrio
the entry, I must not go thorough the Temple, and neither must I stay at the
kings pillar, nor the Priests altar, the holy ointment in this history is
neither belonging to the Coronation of the King, nor Consecration of the
Priest, nor Dedication of the holy place. This story tells us of the anointing
of our Savior, and his unction was rather (says Jerome) spiritualis then
ritualis: Ierom. in Isay.
he was a Priest never anointed as a Priest, and a King never anointed as a
King. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, says S. Peter; Acts
8.38.
God even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows, says the Psalmist. Saul was anointed but with a vial of oil, Psalm
45.7. 1 Samuel 10.1. 1 Samuel 16.1.
David with a full horn of oil, but he is anointed above hi fellows, with
the oil of gladness, from the crown of his head, to the skirt of his
garment. Verse. 8.
Therefore says Judas, (...), To what purpose is this waste? Anointed by the
Father, anointed by the Holy Ghost, anointed with oil of gladness? Vnctio
spiritualis, says Innocentius, agit and auget proculdubio quod designat. Im.
oc. de sacr. vncti. nu.
What needs this anointing, especially from a woman a woman weak by hersex,
wicked by her sin; a woman, if the most, and best, and ancientest
Interpreters be not deceived, sinful for her life, hateful for her lust: a
notorious enormous public Publican, City sinner. Magdalena lena, Magdalen
possessed formerly with seven Devils, Luke 7.37.
she of all others, she to be so bold, to power her oil upon the head of her
Savior. Modest was that miserable woman, that trembled when she touched, and
durst not touch him, but the hemme of his garment. This sorrowful solitary
soul in the spring of her repentance, washed his feet with her tears, no more
but his feet, stood behind him, kneeling, weeping, washing, wiping his feet,
kissing his feet, anointing his feet with a box of ointment, and behold the dew
of her devotion falls not, the Sun of righteousness draws it up. Aarons
oil was derived from the head to the feet, Luk 7.47.
Magdalens oil from the feet to the head: Dilexit multum, was her first
reward, She loved much; and Love is not ruled with reason, but with love: it
neither regards what can be, nor what should be done, but only what it self
desires to do. No difficulty can stay it, no impossibility appall it. Greg.
de Mar. Magd.
Gregory speaks of her, Amanti semel aspicere non sufficit, vis amoris
intentionem multiplicat vnctionis; Love doubled this duties, for Love is title
just enough, and armor strong enough for all assaults, it self a reward of
all labors. Affection like a fiery Cherubin flies from anointing his feet to
his head. Judas, ask no other reason, Dilexit multum, she loved much. There
was no Disciple Satan could fasten on to betray our Savior but Judas: the
bag was a curse to Judas, as well as the soppe at the supper. Judas that
carried the bag, was he (as Ioh. 12.4.
S. John tells us) that repined at the bounty of the love and labor of this
woman: Judas censures it, our Savior commends it: Judas murmureth: Let her
alone, Why trouble ye the woman, says our Savior: Wherefore is this waste?
says Judas. It is a good work, says our Savior; it might have been given
to the poor says Judas: The poor ye have always, but me ye have not,
says our Savior. It might have been sold for much, says Judas: In that she
has powered this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial, says our
Savior; and adds this for a Corollarie, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be
preached through the whole world, there shall this that this woman has done be
told for a memorial of her. Our Saui^ur gave many gracious testimonies of many
in the Gospel: Job. 1.17.
of Nathaniel, Behold a true Israelite; of the Centurion, I have not found such
faith in Israel; of the b Canaanite, O woman, great is thy faith; of the
sinful woman Magdalen, Much is forgiven her, because Luke 7.47.
she loved much: But all these are far short of Mary's sweet smelling
memorial. A time there was that our Savior commended Luke 10.42.
Mary for her hearing him, above Martha for entertaining him, Mary has chos^n
the better part, which shall not be taken from her. Non opus repreh^ndit, sed
munus aistinxit, says Aug. de verl is Dom^^i, ser. 27.
Austine: But now Mary takes upon her Marthaes duty, and is as much honorable
in entertaining as Martha, as she was in hearing as Mary: she has chosen our
Saviors head to anoint, she has chosen the better part, which shall not be
taken from her. For wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached, etc.

I find good works ranked into two files, the offices of Devotion, as Alms,
and such like, which be opera misericordit; and the duties of Religion, as
Prayers, Repentance, sanctity of the heart, mortifying of the members,
clearing of the conscience from dead works to serve the living God, furthering
by all our endeavors the glory of God; these be opera iustitiae: The former be
manuum sacrificia, the latter cordium sacrificia: In the first the withered
hand is only healed, but in the second the dead is raised: the first seedeth
Christ in the members of his manhood, the second yields Christ the honor of
his Godhead: the first is (...), the second (...): the first is the washing of
Christ's feet, the latter the anointing of his head: Magdalen a sinner may
anoint his feet, but Mary a Convert only may anoint his head* The first is as
the Widows mite, a good work, and not unrewarded; but the second is Salomons
offering, honored and proclaimed: the first as the dawning of the day, the
second as the snining of the Sun. Both these have gloriously appeared in this
your City, and the former the anointing of Christ's feet, the feeding,
clothing, healing of his hungry, naked, sick and weak servants, has been
often urged in this place; and well it is, that so it is: for far be it but
we anoint Christ's feet, seeing he washed his servants feet Ioh. 13.5.
: far be it but Alms should ever have their honor. Paul was Collector for
the poor 1 Cor. 16.1.
, and our Savior was Ouer-seer for the poor Luke 21.4.
: Alms are the fruit of the Saints Romans 15.28.
, and an odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing unto God
Phil. 4.10.
: These ought you to have done, and not to leave the other undone; Matthew. 23.23.
for as Peter said to Christ, so Christ says to us, not my feet only, Ioh
13.9. Chrysost^m. Augustine. Ambr^s. Orige^. Chriso^.
but my head: for as the star of my Interpreters leads me, though by
diverse lines, yet in all of them there is but one and the same light, the
anointing of Christ's head is veneranda meditatio diuinitatis, and deuota
contemplatio passionis and resurrectionis, a reverend awful meditation of
Christ his divinity, and a devout contemplation of Christ his blessed, yet
bloody Passion, and of his great and glorious Resurrection. Aarons head was
anointed with blood and oil Leuit. 8.30.
; we must anoint our Saviors head with our oil, seeing he has anointed our
heads with his blood, for the blessing of his blood is upon us and upon our
seed for ever. It is Christ's speech to the Church in the Canticles, Dul^iora
vnguenta quam aromata, Cant. 4.10.
Thy ointments are sweeter then thy spices. Of all the ointments in the whole
Book of God, none so sweet as this: The holy ointment appointed by God,
continued but till the Captivity; then the holy fire went out, the holy Arc
was spoiled, and the holy oil spilt. Nihil tam diffusivum, Beru.
ac oleum, nothing of so spreading a diffusiue nature as oil, no oil ever so
diffusiue, as this. Aarons ointment was odoriferous and diffisiue, but from the
head to the beard, and so to the body, as it was used, so it wasted. Elias oil
diffusiue and miraculous was spent and wasted not, spread over all the house,
for the sustenance of a Prophet, Kings 17.15.
a Widow, a child, a whole family, a whole year, so long continued, but then
confined. Elishaes oil was diffusiue and precious, and the more powered out,
the more increased: it filled all the widows vessels, all her neighbors
vessels, filled all the vessels she could borrow, and paid all the debt that
her husband had borrowed; but when it had supplied the widows want, the
fountain failed. But neither Aarons holy vessel of oil, nor Samuels vial,
nor David's horn, nor the widow of Zareptas cruise, nor the Prophets Widows
Pot of oil, nor the Alablaster box of the sinful woman's ointment, so
precious, so permanent, so odoriferous as this Saints ointment, which as the
Orient Sun is ever in the full. S. John tells us, John 12.5.
that the house was filled with the odor of the ointment: but our Savior tells
us, the whole world shall be filled with the odor hereof, for wheresoever
this Gospel is preached through the whole world, etc. It is sweet in all
nostrils, not in Bethany only, or Galilie, but (...), wheresoever; nor as a
Story, or Parable, but (...), a Gospel; nor as a Rubricke or title of a
Gospel, but (...), a Gospel of it self, this Gospel; nor a Gospel as the
talent hid in the bank, or the candle under the bushel, but (...), a preached
Gospel; nor a Gospel preached only in Canaan, or on the other side Jordan,
but (...), throughout the whole world; nor so preached, as that the Act shall
be remembered, and the Author neglected, but (...), this that this woman has
done; nor so preached, as that the memory of this that she has done should
ever be forgotten; (...), shall be told for a memorial of her. This were
enough. The oil was precious, but the box of ointment could not be so precious
as now it is famous; a stranger increase then the growth of a grain of mustard
seed, that is least of all seeds, Matthew. 13.32.
yet greatest of all herbs: but this miraculous ointment far beyond that, it
shall spread so far as the Gospel shall be preached, through the world, and
shall be preached as long as the world shall be continued. Ecce Prophetiam and
Prophetam, Euangelistam and Euangelium; it is a Prophecy and a Gospel, spoken
by a Prophet and an Evangelist. All the Prophets prophesied of Christ, and
behold Christ prophecieth of Mary: All the Evangelists wrote the Gospel of
Christ, Christ preach^th, and prophecieth, and proclaims thi^ Gospel of
Mary* and seals his prophecy and preaching with an oath, (...), Verily I say
to you, Wheresoever, etc.

She brought a box of Alablaster, her box not empty, not mustie. Boxes of
Alablaster may be like the Pharisees Sepulchers, carrying fair titles without,
corrupt carcases within. The box might be precious, the ointment poisonous: but
as her box was no stained Alablaster, for the box was pure; so the ointment
precious: As the oil was enough in that little box to anoint her Saviors head
and body; so the Alablaster was enough to build a monument for her body and
memory. Babylon thought to be famous for a Tower, the R^ubenites for their
monument built an Altar, Absalon for his memorial set up a Pillar, Hercules
upon two Promontories erected for a perpetual remembrance two Pillars, 1
Machh. 1^.27
Simon Macchabeus set up seven pillars for a Sepulcher of the Macchabees,
Artemisia for her husband made a Royal Tomb, one of the wonders of the world,
with 36. pillars. But all, all the Statues, Tombs, and Obelisks, and Piles,
and Pillars, and Piramides, and Ornaments, and Monuments, in the whole world,
are nothing to Mary's memorial, built out of this small box of Alablaster.

I have yet but showed you the box, at most but opened it: now as the Spouse
speaks, Cant. 1.3:
because of the savor of the good ointment, her ointment must be powered out.

In this box of ointment there is the Prophecy of a Gospel: The whole Bible
is but Prophecy and Gospel, they be both in this box. Beautiful is the box,
odoriferous is this of all other ointments: Sacred is the Prophecy, glorious
is this of all Gospels: never any prophecy so inlayed or invellopd with a
Gospel, every word the Gospel, every word the Prophecy: in which Prophecy,
or Gospel, or Prophecy of the Gospel, observe two general parts, The two
great lights of heaven, the Sun and Moon, for as God gives light to the
Sun, and the Sun to the Moon, so Christ gives light to this Gospel, and
this Gospel life to Mary's memorial. 1. The Promulgation of the Gospel, This
Gospel shall be preached, etc. 2. The Proclamation of Mary's memorial,
Mention shall be made of this, etc.

In the first general part, observe first the subject, the Gospel, not a
Story, or Parable, but a Gospel, Euangelium Regni Matthew. 4.23.
, Euangelium Dei Romans 1.1.
, Euangelium Christ's Phil. 1.5.
, Euangelium salutis Ephesians. 1.13.18.
, Euangelium mortis and resurrectionis Christ's, as my Interpreters tell me,
the Gospel of the passion and resurrection of our Lord and Savior. 2. The
publishing of this Gospel, the Gospel shall be preached, not written only,
and laid up, as the Tables in the Arc; not read and repeated only, as Moses
Law in the Synagogue; not endorsed on the doors, as the Prophecies were on the
Temple; not inscribed or embrodered on the Philacteries, as the Pharisees did
the Decalogue; not tied up in the napkin of silence, or buried in the bank of
negligence, but proclaimed and preached; This Gospel shall be preached. 3. The
extent of this preaching, This Gospel shall be preached in the whole world,
not in some Cantons or Corners of the world; not on the Mount only, as Moses
gave his Law; not in the valley only, as Iehoshaphat gave his thanks; or in
the wilderness, as John Baptist gave his warning; but in the whole world, from
one Sea unto another, from the River unto the worlds end: This Gospel is gone
throughout all the earth, and this sound unto the end of the world. This
Gospel shall be preached in the whole world.

In the second general part observe first a particular act which must follow
the general preaching of this Gospel; this expressed by the words, This done,
in the seventh verse, (...), precious ointment, in the tenth, (...), a good
work, verse 11. preferred before other good works, as before giving to the
poor, The poor ye have always, me ye have not always; verse 12. commended
not only for the excellency of the act, but the opportunity of the time, In
that she powered this ointment on my body, she did it for my burial. Our
Savior joins, This Gospel shall be preached, and this. Secondly, the
Author or Actor of this deed, Math. 16.7.
this woman, Matthew says no more, I here came unto him a woman having an
Alablaster box, Mark says no more Mark. 14.4.
then Matthew, Saint Ioh. 12.3.
John ^ames this woman. Mary took a pound of ointment; A blessed woman, as
blessed as ever any, but only she whom all generations shall call blessed.
This woman, honor of her name, ornament of her Tribe, the glory of her sex,
admitted to annoint the head of our Savior: John Baptist the greatest of the
sons of women, not admitted to perform so much a^ this woman, he baptized
with water, she annoints with oil, baptism common to the common people,
unction anointing of the head, proper to the King the head of the people, this
woman did this, she anointed the King of Kings, therefore our Savior took so
gracious notice of it, this that this woman. Thirdly, the memorial hereof,
this that this woman has done, shall be told in memorial of her. Mary's
memory is continued by Christ, by the Church, by the Disciples, by the Saints
in all ages, sooner heaven and earth loose their stations, sun and moon
their motions, winter and summer their seasons, all the world shall sooner
vanish, and the frame of nature perish then this memorial fail to remain
among the posterities, this that this woman has done, shall be told for a
memorial of her. Lastly, it shall be wheresoever, in every place where the
Gospel is read, or heard, or preached, Mary's memory follows our Savior as
the marigold the sun: Mary that followed Christ to the feast of the Pharisie,
to the house of the Leper, to the grave of Lazarus, to the Cross, to the
Sepulcher, to the Garden, to Galile, now follows our Savior over all the
world, for wheresoever the Gospel is preached. You see here be no less then
seven particulers, a whole weeks work, nay more a journey over all the whole
world. This is only the comfort, as the wisemen were lead by the light of a
star, so we shall go by the light of the Gospel. And to settle your
attentions, I began at the mark of my meditations, beginning as S. Mark
begins his first chapter, The Gospel of Jesus Christ, wheresoever this
Gospel.

Nomen Euangelij nomen gaudij, says the gloss, the name of Gospel is a name
of gladness, 1 Gloss.
sweet is this name, and the Saints love it well. The name of Law was strange,
a name not so much as known to the Grecians in the time of Homer, as Josephus
Joseph. contra Appion. lib. ^.
against Appion observes that the word (...) is not so much as once used in
all the writings of Homer, Scapula page 10.
but the name (...) as Budeus observes is found in Homer, Euripides, and
Aristophanes, and Atheneus, and Plutarch, wherein we see as neither the Jews
Law, no nor the name of it, was known a long time to the Gretians, so the name
of Gospel before the Gospel was known to the Gentiles, and a name used for
glad-tidings among the Gentiles, as if it were most properly the light of the
Gentiles: the 70. Interpreters use it as often as they meet with Basar or Besora
which signify to deliver a message, or be a Messenger. Saint Luke 1.1.
Luke tells us (...), many took in hand to write this Gospel. And Theophilact
upon those words Theoph. in 1. Luke.
says attentarunt quidem Pset^doapostols, non perfecerunt: Clemens
Alexandrinus tells us the Tatiani had a Gospel secundum Egiptios: and
Epiphanius that some had a Gospel secundum Hebraeos. Gnostickes had the
Gospel of Philip, and the Maniches the Gospel of Thomas, and others the
Gospel of Matthias: But Basilides of all others as Saint Hierome observes was
the most bold and blasphemous, that durst write a book and entitle it his
Gospel. But as all the Fathers confuted those heresies, and stopped the
mouths of these blasphemies, so especially Irenaeus by the four winds, Saint
Hierome out of Zacharies vision Zach. 6.1.
by the four Chariots, and Saint Austin out of Ezekiels vision Ezekiel. 1.6.
by the four Cherubins, show there be no more but four Evangelists, and these
four to concur to one quatuor Euangelia esse vnum Euangelium, et si aliud
atque aliud ob personaru^ differentiam, vnum tamen ob eorum quae loquuntur
consonantiam, says Chrysostom: the Gospel is therefore the glad-tidings of
God to salvation, Chrysostom. tom. 4. in Epist. ad Gal.
bringing the joyful message that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners: the Law was (...), 2 Cor. 3.7.
but the Gospel (...), The Law of death was turned into the Gospel of life,
and therefore was Moses in the transfiguration with Christ, because the Law of
Moses was transfigured by the Gospel of Christ Now the Gospel does consider
Christ especially either as he was corpus carnis in his incarnation, in the
veil of flesh or as corpus mortis, in his Passion as he was in the shadow of
death, or as primitiae resurrectionis, in his resurrection, and triumph over
death, and as in all other of Christ his passages, so especially in these the
Gospel is the glad-tidings: it was glad-tiding in his birth, when the
Messenger was an Angel, the message a Gospel, but when the Savior of men and
Angels delivers a Gospel much more it is glad-tidings. So is it here where
our Savior the Author of the Gospel delivers a Gospel. This Gospel: and
what this Gospel is is expressed in the second verse, it is the crucifying of
Christ, in the twelfth verse the burial and resurrection of Christ and indeed
these of all other, are the glad-tidings of the Gospel, for the Passion and
resurrection of Christ are the lines, that the Patriarchs and Prophets beheld
by the perspectiue of faith in the beautiful pieces of Gods promises, these
above all, be the glad-tidings, even this Gospel of Christ's death and triumph
over death: the Angels in Christ's resurrection told the women Luke 20.6.
Remember how he spoke unto you in Galile, the son of man shall be delivered
into the hands of sinful men, Luke 24.6.
and be crucified, and the third day rise again. Indeed this was the Gospel,
and this Gospel he especially taught his Disciples, and he taught his Gospel
especially in Galile, when he came into Galile he taught his Disciples the
son of man shall be delivered and killed, and rise the third day, Mark.
9.31. Math. 9.31.
while they abode in Galile he taught his Disciples the son of man, shall be
betrayed into the hands of men, they shall kill him and be shall be raised
again the third day, Math. 17.22.
Math. 17.22. when he came toward Jerusalem from Galile, he taught them this,
the Savior of man shall be delivered to the Gentiles, shall be crucified and
the third day shall rise again, Math. 20.19. going to Galile, Math. 20.19.
in Galile, throughout Galile, coming out of Galile he taught his Disciples
his Passion and resurrection. Galile as Jerome and others, signifies
transmigrationem, Ierom. interp. Nom. Heb.
a departure a transmigration. It was the Gospel of Galile, of his
transmigration, he did teach this Gospel of transmigration, in the Land of
transmigration, it was transmigration from life to death by his Passion, from
death to life by his resurrection. The whole Gospel is an Epistle sent from
God says Austin, Euangelium Dei, epistola de caelo missa: Austin.
And it represents Christ unto us spirantem, docentem, mira patrantem dira
patientem, preaching, teaching, accomplishing wonderful suffering sorrowful
things, Basil.
as Basil speaks this death the ministry of our life, the life of man, but
death of sin, death of Satan, in the death of our Savior. This is a Gospel
of glad-tidings, and is it glad tidings? to hear that such a person as the
son of God, Math. 13.99.
Mark. 15.39 suffered such a Passion as the curse of the Law, Gal. 3.15. by so
great a compassion, as to do it for his enemies. Romans 5.
That in his birth he was placed among beasts, then tempted by Devils, then
persecuted by Tyrants, then condemned by murderers, then crucified among
thieves, and thus he did live, thus he did die. To hear him contemned for his
progeny, a Carpenters son; for his Province, a Galilean; for his profession,
a Samaritan; his Disciples Law breakers, his doctrine treason, seducing the
people, his miracles impostures, casting out Devils by Beelsebub, his company
Publicans and sinners, for his whole life breaking the Sabbath, a bibber of
wine, working by the Devil, possessed with the Devil: Therefore he must die.
If it be glad-tidings? to hear of (...), Nazianz.
as Nazianzene collects, them of the stripes, and scoffings, and spittings, and
thorns, and cross, and nails, and spear, and sweat, and blood, and wounds,
and distresfull cry, and horrid death: to hear and see this prodigious
Tragedy, in a theater of dead men's bones, covered over with ruthful
darkness, Angels, Devils, rocks, graves, the whole universe and Creature
concurring to this spectacle, only the sun absenting, abhorring to see such
a death, Alle^tus.
Supplicium quo nullum maius, opprobrium quo nullu^ vilius, the grave and hell,
yelling out their grief, for the wonder of our redemption, by this woeful
passion.

If this be (...) glad tidings? as who dare deny it to be, for if Appian
writing of the murder of Tully endorsed his letter, (...), Carrying good news
to Anthory: then how glad, how good, those tidings of the death of Christ; If
it be glad-tidings, as who can deny it to be? unless they be enemies to the
cross of Christ, and seek to euacuate the cross of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.17.
whereas Christ has reconciled all things by his cross, Coloss 1.20. and shine
enmity by his body on the cross, Ephesians. 2.16. and the power of God is the
preaching of the cross, 1 Cor. 1.18. The cross being non patibutum Patientis,
sed tribunal Trium phantiss, as Jerome calls it: If in the stormy winter of
his death, Hi^^on^.
such life, then what luster, what glory, what beauty, what life of life, in
the spring of life. The cross of Christ is the only knowledge of a Christ an,
1 Cor 2.2. The excellency of his knowledge, Phil. 3.8. The glory of his
knowledge, Gal. 6.14. Which made the Apostle cry out God forbid, that I should
glory in any thing but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ. But look how
far life surpasses death, so far is the joy of the Resurrection above the
Passion, no tongue can express this noble act of the Lord his blessed and
triumphant Resurrection, Mori dignatus est ex voluntate, Tertull.
sed resurrexit ex potestate, says Tertullian; when neither bowels of the
earth, nor ligament of the grave, nor sorrows of death, nor power of hell,
able to contain him, but that Christ is risen again, Christ is risen from the
dead, a^ ^he best time of the whole year, the time of the great Passover,
first day of the week, best day of the year, first hour of the day, at
dawning of the dawnie day, Math. 28.1. rising of the sun, Mark. 16.1. early
in the morning, Luke 24.1. early while it was dark, John 20.1. Oritus ex alto,
oriens ex imo, he that was the resurrection and life, rose by his resurrection
unto life, and became the first fruits of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.20. first
begotten of the dead, Revel. 1.5. first borne of the dead, Coloss. 1.18. first
of those that did arise from the dead, Acts 26.23. Here is glory, and joy, and
gladtidings, and if ever the souls of the Saints and servants of God, were
transported out of their bodily senses, it should be at this Gospel that I
bring unto you of gladtidings, of great joy that shall be to all people, that
Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep;
Christ is risen from the dead, and now dies no more, Christ is risen from the
dead, death where is thy sting? grave where is thy victory? thanks be given
unto God, who has given us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ. It may seem to
be collected, that this Gospel, is the Gospel of the resurrection not only in
32. verse. when I am risen, I will go before you into Galile: but more
manifestly out of the 12. verse. In that she poured this ointment on my body,
she did it for my burial: why was the body anointed for the burial, but in
respect of the resurrection of the body? Saint Paul asks the question, why
are they baptized for the dead, 1 Cor. 15.
if no resurrection of the dead? why an anointing of Christ's body, unless
because of the resurrection of his body? Resurrectio Christi complementum
omnium promissionum, says Aquinas, Aquia.
without which, no promise performed, no prophecy fulfilled, no mystery
revealed, no body redeemed from the power of death, no soul could receive the
Gospel of life; Christ took upon him the name of the resurrection, Ioh. 11.25.
Job. 11.25. gave no sign but of the resurrection, Math. 12 39.
Math. 12.39. showed his power, wrought our righteousness, by no means so
evidently as by the resurrection, Rom 4.25.
Romans 4.25. taught his Disciples, no doctrine so frequently, in 6. Chapters in
Matthew, in 5. Mark, in 4. in Luke often in John, mention of his resurrection:
so that especially this Gospel is the Gospel of Christ's resurrection from
which root arises this fruitful branch of doctune: Doct.
The resurrection of Christ is the most glad-tiding, of the Gospel, and
contains in it the sum of the whole Gospel. So S. Austin, Resurrectio
Christ's tota fides Christianorum. Austin.
The resurrection of Christ is the whole faith of Christians: So Bernard, Bern.
vis Euangelij Epitomen, en resurrectionem, will thou have an Epitome of all
the Gospel, behold the resurrection: Hilary.
So Hilary, Resurrectionis testimonium proprium munus Apostolorum, The
testimony of the resurrection is the chief office of the Apostles. The
reasons of this doctrine are many, without this all the mysteries of our
redemption were vain: Please but to walk into the spring Garden of the
resurrection the 15. of the 1. Cor. where the Apostle shows that if it were
not for the resurrection of Christ that are already a sleep are perished, 1.
Cor. 15.
they that are alive, are in their sins, and therefore dead, twice tells
them your faith vain, our preaching vain, and we and you of all men most
miserable, Hearers and Preachers, and living, and dead, and all miserable.
Death should wound us unto death, the grave shut her mouth upon us, the
devouring throat of an open Sepulcher close her jaws upon us: our portion
only in this life, and we no better then the life of beasts, temples, and
Bibles, and faith, and hope, and heaven, and all in vain, were it not for the
resurrection of Christ from the dead. Again the resurrection of Christ in that
one act comprehends all the acts of the Gospel; here is Christ's incarnation,
he took flesh again upon him, here is his conception as before a virgin
mother, so here a virgin sepulcher, here is his baptism, as he came out of
the waters, so now he comes out of the earth, as in the temptation after
forty days he came from the wilderness, so hereafter forty hours he
comes into the world, here is his transmigration, whereby he is translated
from death to life. In his resurrection the confluence of all his miracles, he
that gave sight to the blind, opens his own eyes, and ears to the deaf,
opens his own ears, and speech to the dumb, opens his own mouth, he
that badde the lame man arise and walk, arises from death and walks, and
herein works the greatest miracle that ever he did: Non suscitauit alterum
sed se seipsum, Bern.
nec suscitatiosed resurrectio, says Bernard, He raised not up another but
himself, and it was not passiuely to be raised by another power, but actiuely
by his own, not a raising but a rising. So that this of all others is the
sum of the Gospel, never glad-tidings till now, never so glad, so
good-tidings as now, Bona:
In nascendo contulit consortium naturae, in patiendo beneficium gratiae, in
resurgendo complementum gloriae: In his birth he conferred the fellowship of
nature, in death, the benefit of grace, in rising, complement of glory, says
Bonauenture. Herein, only herein he brought defunctis vitam, peccatoribus
veniam, Sanctis gloriam: Life to the dead, pardon to sinners, glory to Saints,
as Bernard speaks. Therefore we rejoice, and hereby our joy shall be full:
Surrexit Christus exultet vniuersus mundus, The joy of this time, like that of
the Spouse in the Canticles, which may be applied to Christ's resurrection;
Arise my Love, my fair one, the winter is past, the rain is oner and gone,
the flowers appear in the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, the
voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land, the Fig Tree puts forth her
green figs, and the Vines with their tender grapes yield a good smell:
Arise, my Love, my Dove, my Fair one, Austin.
and come away Exultet vniuersus mundus, Let the world rejoice and all that are
therein. The righteous branch of the root of Iesse has reflourished, the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah is awakened, our Phoenix is risen from his own ashes, our
Eagle renewed his bill, our Joseph is brought out of prison, our Sampson has
carried away the gates of Assah, our Mordecai is exalted, our Daniel delivered
from the den, our Jonas is cast up by the whale, our Lazarus restored to
life, our Glory, our Gospel, our Glad tidings, our Christ is risen from the
dead.

Let us then above all other meditations rejoice in the knowledge of the
Gospel of Christ, Use.
and especially in the remembrance of the resurrection of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, seeing that as the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, so
the resurrection, of all other parts, has manifested the power of our
redemption, from the grave, from sin, from death, from the Devil. Let us
rejoice in the resurrection of our Lord and Sauiur, seeing by this he shall
raise our vile bodies, to be like his glorious body. Let us with all care
embrace this faith, seeing the bright morning star which was darkened by
death, has recovered light, let us be sure he will bring us out of darkness
into the light of his countenance. Abraham saw the day of Christ's birth, G^eg.
Mor.
Esaias fore saw the day of Christ's death, Job saw the day his dunghill. Let us
begin the first resurrection from sin to grace, that we may be raised from
nature to glory. Of all the Feasts of the whole Church in the whole year, we
have none like this: the Church inioyneth the rest, Scripture commands this: S.
Paul gives an iniunction for celebrating of Easter; (...) Christ our Passover
is offered for us, 1 Cor. 5.7.
let us keep the Feast, our Passover, for us let us, Nostrum, Nobis, Nos.
Christ the Passover indeed, as he was offered, and our Passover as he was
raised, passing from death to life: Let us then keep this Feast. Paul's
iniunction is an Epistle for this Gospel, of this Feast. All the Saints on
earth through the Christian world, keep this Feast, as their joy and Iubile:
All the Angels in heaven (says Cyprian) observe the same; Cyprian.
Ipsi Angeli eius gaudia Paschata agunt in coelestibus. Let us then observe
these solemnities, in the meditation of this Gospel, with all reverence to
this glad tidings of Christ's resurrection. Let us keep the feast, not with old
leaven, not with the old leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Let the dead bury their dead; let us
bring forth some fruits of the Gospel, to arise from dead works, to serve the
living God. Epicures, Basilidians, Sadduces, Saturnians, deny the truth of
Christ's resurrection: let not us deny the power. Which we do if we bring not
forth the fruits of the Gospel, if we cast not off the works of death and
darkness. Christ appeared first to Mary Magdalen, and sent her to be the first
messenger to Peter; Christ to Magdalen, Magdalen to Peter, Magdalen the
greatest sinner among women, Peter the greatest sinner among men; Magdalen to
Peter, Magdalen cleansed of seven Devils, sent to Peter pardoned of three
denials. Let Magdalen and Peter preach this to you, or rather Christ himself,
and this day if ye will hear his voice, Psalm 95.7.
harden not your hearts. Beloved, he that is risen from the grave, is not
risen in all your hearts; with the Pharisees ye have laid a stone, and the
Devil he has laid the watch, and that heavy grave stone of sin sealed
down, presses down souls: few will be raised, few shall be saved. The
hypocrite dares not rise, he has so many shapes, he fears God will not know
him, if he meet him. The harlot cannot rise, she is a dead soul in a painted
Sepulcher. The drunkard would rise, but has neither hand nor foot to help
himself, the earths monster, and his own murderer. The Gallant like Lazarus
in the grave, is fast bound, is close prisoner to his own clothes. The Usurer
is Iaylor to other men's bonds, and bondslaue to his own money. The Courtier of
all other is most careful to rise, yet no man sleeps longer, either fettered
with hopes, or ensnared by fancy, or bewitched by fau^ur, but beginning with
false footing, falls, and lies by it. The plain Country man rises up early,
goes late to bed, eats the bread of carfulness, observes how dearth
arises, but for other rising, he believes it is enough if he shall rise at
the last day. The Citizen, of all other is most likely to arise, the City
being the Sea into which all the fresh rivers run, though many ships here
suffer shipwreck. The Citizen is willing to rise, for it is impossible how he
should sleep, and as worthy to rise as any; he is the States Treasurer, and
the Lands Pillar, and sure the Citizens rising would be blessed if hi^ stairs
were not crooked. We our selves that preach the resurrection, cannot rise,
because we will not hear our selves. The Church as well as Churchyard is full
of dead bodies: willingly would many of us rise, though by Simon Magus
acquaintance: others would rise, but they have no Angels to put them into the
Poole: others are risen, and worse then Magdalen, never preached since their
resurrection. Beloved, these are not the fruits of the Gospel, not the fruits
of the resurrection. I am no Satyr, nor this place a Pasquill: I acknowledge
many, and many blessed servants of God, to be fruitful in this doctrine, in
Church, Court, City, Country: yet be there not in this Auditorie, that would
be more heartily inflamed with some other Gospel then this Gospel, some other
doctrine then this of the Resurrection? Some (...) Ca^iz (...) would willingly
hear this Tex^ pra^^ised, Owe noth^^^ to any man but love: and some poo^e
Creditors this T^x^ urged, The good man is m^rcifull, and lends. Some great
Lawyers desire to hear this Text pressed, The Law is good, if a man use it
lawfully, 1. Tim. 1.8. but some poor Clients this Text opened, Brethren, there
is utterly a fault among you, that ye go to law one with another, 1. Cor 6.7.
The Glutton would no Text but this, Go eat of the fat, and drink of the
sweet, Nehemiah 8.10. The I surer none but this Text, A wise man put out his
Talents to use, Mat. 25.14. The Country man would hear the City and Country
compared to Pharaohs fat and lean kine, the one devouring the other. The
Citizen and Country man would hear that Christ was first persecuted by the
Court, at his birth by Herod and his Court, at his death by P^late and his
Court. Of all Texts, there is one tedious to all in Country and City. Yet in
the mean time the poor Minister has found the Text, and preached it, though
it takes no success, and it is a Text to be taught all, and his Text is Deuteronomy.
14.22. Deuteronomy. 14 22.
Thou shall truly tithe of all thy increase. And he is bound to preach this,
for how can he preach unless he be maintained? and bound because he hears
God curse where man denies tithe. Read when you come home, with horror, Mal.
3.8:
Mal. 3.8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me, says the Lord. But ye
say, Wherein have we robbed thee? His answer is, In tithes and offerings,
therefore ye are cursed with a curse. But I forget my self. Christ's
salutation in the resurrection was Peace be unto you, and I bring to you a
Gospel of peace. Arise therefore thou that sleep, if Christ shall give thee
life, let not Adams apple, Achans wedge, Esaus broth, Babylons cup, Judas
soppe, betray thee; the snares of Satan, fetters of the flesh, chambers of
death, works of darkness, chains of hell, enthrall thee; arise by Christ, to
Christ, with Christ, as if ye had embraced this Gospel of Christ, seeing this
Gospel is a preached Gospel. My second passage.

Preaching is the ordinary means to work believing. It is the Trumpet of
Esaias, the Cymball of David, the sound of Aarons bells in the Sanctuary, the
savor of life unto life unto them that believe. It is a speech to men to
edification, exhortation, 1 Cor 14.3.
comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. Preaching is the cesterne to convey life and belief to
the soul, the knife to divide the Scripture, the key of the Kingdom of
heaven, Ier 23.29. Romans 1.16. Ier. 23.29. Esaias 55.11. Eph^s. 6.17. Heb. 4.12.
a fire, Ier. 23.29. a power, Romans 1.16. a hammer, Ier. 23.29. a shower, Esaias
55.11. a sword, even the sword of the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. A sword sharper then
a two-edged sword, Heb. 4.12. The Proclamation which the Lord has used by the
mouth of all his holy Prophets since the world began, whereby God has ever
selected a vocation of men, to deal betwixt God and man, whose preaching in
their ministry is above all other Oratorie, as the Schools observe, Aquin.
All^rt.
Dicere infra, Docere circa, Predicare supra: We speak of things beneath us,
our teaching is of those things about us, but preaching is of things above us.
In the Primitive world the first borne was the Priest and Preacher to the
family. Before the Flood, Enoch a Preacher of Righteousness, Jude 14. At the
Flood, Noah a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. Before the Law,
Melchisedecke a King and Priest, Genesis 14.18. In the Law, Solomon a King, a
Preacher, Eccles. 1.1. The Lord never intended his word should be laid up only
as the Tables of Moses, or the sword of Godliah, or the Kings Treasury in the
Temple, but ordained an Eccl^siasticall Hierarchy for his Church by a Tribe of
his choosing, to break the bread of life to his chosen. Aaron so honored with
the Miter, Censor, Altar, Crown, royal roabes, Deuteronomy 33.10.
and miraculous rod, he and his Tribe were enjoined by God to teach Jacob his
judgments, and Israel his Laws, Deuteronomy. 33.10. The very form of our preaching
was practiced by the Levites under the Law, Nehemiah 8. verse 2. The meeting of
the Congregation, verse 3. Place in the street near the water gate, 4. Esra
the Priest stood in a Pulpit made of wood, 6. His Prayer before Sermon, the
Prophets Amen, 5. His opening the book, 8. His reading the Text, opening the
meaning, giving the sense, causing them to understand. Thus preaching under the
Law. Under the Gospel it was the ministry of reconciliation, the
promulgation of the glad tidings of the Gospel, and the employing of the
Talent God bestows, Talentum quod creditum, non quod inuentum, says
Lirinensis; A Talent received, not devised: Lirinens.
Then by preaching hearing, by hearing faith obtained. Never was there so large
a Commission granted, as the Commission of preaching, Go into all Nations
Matt. 28.19. And as large was the execution, for they preached in every City,
Acts 15.21. in every Church, Acts 19.23. in every place, Mark, 16.20. at every
time, in season, out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. to every creature under heaven,
Mark. 16.15. The Gospel was thus generally preached, and to the end of the
world must be preached. From which word preached, as out of a fountain,
arises this stream of Doctrine: The preaching of the Gospel is both the
especial ordinance, and great blessing of God. The reason, because it is a
light to them that sit in darkness, and a light that God has appointed to be
carried before his people. A light indeed, to them that sat in darkness,
where the Prince of darkness, and power of darkness, and works of darkness,
and shadow of death, did ouerwhelme them. There never was so great misery in
Israel, as when no Prophet to teach them. Three especial remarkable wants, all
harbingers of woe to Israel: No Smith in Israel, 1 Samuel 13.19. No King in
Israel, Judges 18.1. No Priest in Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. the last of all the
rest most miserable. As doleful, as fearful, is David's complaint of that
time, We see no tokens, there is no Prophet more, no man of God in the Land,
no man that understands any more, no teaching, no Law, no peace, no God among
them, because no Priest among them. (...): H^mer. Ili^ l. ^.
All things overthwart, declining, crooked, nay cursed. The word therefore is a
light unto our feet, and a lamp to our paths, and the preaching of this word
so necessary, that as without hearing no believing, Rom 10.14.
so no hearing without preaching, Romans 10 14. And where no preaching, the
people perish, Pro. 29.18. I deny not that reading is a blessed exercise, Reu.
1.3.
and blessed is he that reads, Revel. 1.3. A great part of S. Austins
conversion is imputed to his reading of a place of Scripture: but sure I am,
that the Promise is annexed to preaching; and S. Austin confesses, A^stin
C^^f^s
that by S. Ambrose preaching he was especially converted. So in his confession
to God may be collected: Ad cum Deus per te ducebar nescius, vt ad te per cum
sciens ducerer. Austin.
It was preaching rather then baptizing, wherein our Savior was exercised,
John 4.2. Fecit mira, dixit multa, says Bernard; he wrought miracles, he
spoke Oracles. Bern.
But as if he had only come to the world to preach, he proclaims himself,
Luke 4.18.19. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, Luke 4.18.
and has anointed me to preach, to preach the Gospel to the poor, to preach
deliverance to the captives, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. In the
Primitive Church they traueld, and thirsted, and hungered, and labored, and
sweat, and bled, and died, and compassed sea and land, for the obtaining of
this Jewel; and in that Infancy of the Church, having found preaching, though
as the Wise men Christ in the cratch, they adored it. The Ecclesiastical
Story is plentiful herein, not to bring forth in this Sunshine the sacred
Lamps burning in those golden candlestickes, Polycarpus, Ignatius, and
Clemens, and those many Disciples of the Disciples of the Lord. Justin Martyr
records in his time holy meetings, reading, preaching, an hour every Sabbath.
Tertullian testifies, Tertull.
that all the meetings of Christians were celebrated with holy Sermons. The
Council of Mentz ordained that every day of the Lord the word of the Lord
should be preached, and at the length great was the multitude of the Preachers,
the Gospel delivered every where by preaching, as by the only means to bring
salvation. And sure if any part of the Gospel might have been delivered
sufficiently without preaching, (...), this Gospel, the Gospel of the
resurrection might; for after our Savior had showed himself alive by
infallible proofs, Act. 1.3.
as Luke speaks, Acts 1.3. such as Aristotle calls (...), proving his
resurrection to all the senses; by the sight, he showed, and they saw his
wounds; by hearing, he spoke, they heard, Peace be unto you; by tasting, they
ministered, and he tasted broiled fish; by the touch, Thomas doubted, and the
Lord constrained him to touch his wounds; by the smell, the Lord breathed on
them, and they received the holy Ghost. Nature seeks but to sense, the five
senses five porches of Natures Palace. In every sense the Resurrection of
Christ proclaimed, that (...), this Gospel must be preached. When no
circumstance of time, or place, or person, vnmanifested, appearing the day of
his resurrection early in the morning, late at night, both times of day; to the
Disciples abroad and in the house, both places; to Soldiers and Apostles, both
conditions; Jews and Gentiles, both religions; men and women, both sexes;
living and dead, both estates; when friends, fo^^, Disciples, strangers,
Angels, Devils, bare witness, and graves opened their mouths to proclaim
this point, yet (...), after the horror of the Earthquake, rolling the stone,
seeing the clothes, hearing the Angel, witness of the women, satisfying
Thomas, eating, speaking, walking, breathing on them, breaking bread with them,
bodily presence 40. days among them, having been seen to more then 500. at
once, 11. Disciples being witnesses of this, another must be added to be
witness to preach the resurrection, Act. 1.22.
not caeterorum tantum, sed resurrectionis testem, Chrysostom.
says Chrysostom. So necessary is preaching the Gospel, no Gospel without
preaching.

Let us then embrace the preaching of the Gospel with gladness, Use.
as that which is able to save our souls at the great day, the kingdom of
God, by the preaching of the Gospel is among us, let him that has an ear
hear what the Spirit says, Hos. 8.12.
Were the things of the Law honorable? Hos. 8.12. How much more should the
gracious word brought unto us, by the preaching of the Gospel: Was the second
person of the Trinity called the Word, and that Word made flesh; and the third
person the holy Ghost came down in tongues of fire, and those tongues only
given to preach that word, how then should our hearts burn within us, to
inflame us to the desire of these spiritual things? It is much that Enoch and
Elias both Preachers, of all other were taken up to heaven, that Lot and Noah
both Preachers, of all other were saved from the double deluge of fire and
water, that Moses and Elias both Preachers of all sorts of men under the Law,
were chose to be with Christ in his transmigration, that kings have been
Preachers Melehisedech a King Priest, David a King Prophet, Solomon a King
Preacher. But that which is above all, is that Christ Jesus that came into the
world to save sinners, that came to enrich it with his grace, to confirm it by
his example, to redeem it with his blood, came to instruct it with his
doctrine, and to preach this Gospel. For his sake, we therefore as Pilgrims,
and strangers, beseech you that ye receive not the word of God this grace of
God in vain: By the tender mercy of God we beseech you, though ye deny the
dignity of preaching, yet acknowledge the power that has called you to this
inestimable light. Saint Peter tells us of (...), 1 Pet. 2.13.
subjection of the people to the Pastor; and Saint Paul of (...), the
authority of the Pastor over the people, I press neither, but I call for the
acknowledgment of the power of preaching: Paul warns frequently that they
despise not Timothy, obey them over you, they are worthy of double honor that
are over you have them in singular love, and esteem them highly that are our
you in the Lord, by authority this may be exacted, but better by charity to
be expected. Miserable men! worms and no men, what are we? clods of earth,
clothed with infirmity, and mortality as ye are, pieces of clay hewn out of
the same pit as ye are, we are but fragments of men, tinkling cimballs,
broken cesternes, corruption equally acquainted with us as you: yet we are the
Ambassadors of Christ, his strength is in our weakness, and he that has said
despise not prophecy, has enjoined not to despise Timothy. Beloved, it ye
desire salvation, despise not Preachers, nor preaching, I need not urge this
in this City, where the Lord has as many acres of good Christians, as in any
such quantity of earth in Christendom, yet if as in Job, so in this assembly
now the sons of God are come to present themselves before the Lord there be a
Satan here, so here, any son of perdition that is a scorner of Preachers,
into whose loathsome body Rabshekah is stolen from hell, filling his mouth with
blasphemy, against Gods ministry. Let him know that Jeroboam a kings hand
was withered, when he only would lay hold on a Prophet: that 2. Captains, 1
King. 13.4.
2. fifties fired from heaven when they only would apprehend a Prophet: 42.
children torn in pieces, 2 King. 1.10.
by wild bears, who only as children mocked a Prophet: 2 King. 2.24.
250. devoured by fire, Corah and all his accomplices, the men, houses, goods,
all devoured by the earth, Numb. 16.35.
who only rebelled againsta Prophet: Nay Miriam a holy women, stricken with a
loathsome leprosy only for a murmr against a Prophet. Neither King, nor
Priest, neither Judge, nor Military man, neither Captain, not Soldier,
neither man, not woman, neither women, nor children, have escaped vengeance fot
wronging Prophets: and as if all Gods creatures were ready nor only to assist
them, but rel^eue them, even the most savage creatures. Crooping Ravens fed
Elias a Prophet, raging Lions preserved Damelia Prophet: Chr^s^st.
Aues pascunt ferae parcunt, homines seuint, faith Chrysostom. Beloved, I
only cast this, dart, at the desperate Atheist, who contemnes preaching, and
is only witty in this kind of wickedness. Let it be your care, ye
watchful Senators of this great City to give all encouragement to this holy
exercise, when it was threatened by some popish Courtiers, in the siry reign of
Queen Mary that the Court should be removed from the City, which would cause
the Cities poverty, it was nobly and resolutely answered by the Lord-maior,
they feared not, unless they could also remove the current of the Thames.
Beloved, so long as the current of the Gospel shall engirt your City, well
are ye, and happy shall ye be. Give all Christian encouragement that the sound
of preaching may be heard in your streets; it were a blessed suite that in
your plantation of IRELAND that Land of IRE, where Gods wrath has abounded for
the want of the Gospel, ye endeavored by those reverend Bishops that his
sacred Majesty places there tosettle faithful, painful Preachers, in your
new Cities: The Londiner may plant, the Courtier may water, the Preacher only
by Gods assistance must bring soorth the increase. Plat.
There were sometimes no Physicians in Athens, one wondered at it, and
questioned it, but received this answer, because no reward for Physicians: Ye
have Preachers as plentifully as any City of the world, you may bless God for
this: They have in some places among you, as bountiful rewards as men of any
vocation in the world, they may blosse God for this: Lawyers may watch over and
devour your states; Physicians watch over and destroy your healths: Only
preaching is able to save your souls. All have need of this: Many worthy
consecrate their sons to this; some good souls I hope take comfort in this.
Beloved, if there be any consolution in Christ Jesus, if any comfort of love,
if any fellowshippe of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies open your hands,
and at length bring forth fruits of such plentisull preaching. Sit ye idle in
the market, idle in the vineyard, idle in the Temple? The trumpe of an
Archangell will terrisie you, the song of mercy shall be silenced, the voice of
the Turtle shall cease: Athens was Matter studiorum, nouerca virtutu^: Shall
London abound in preaching, and abound in sinning, what is this, but to kill
the Prophets, and build their Sepulchers It was Dives charity, to send out
from the dead, to preach to his brethren; But now it is our Saviors mercy he
is risen from the dead, and is come to preach the resurrection, and the life,
and you partake those things, which the Angels desire to look into, and are
never satisfied with looking therein, 1 Pet. 1.2. wherefore I beseech you,
Blessed and Beloved, by the care ye have of your own souls, by your hope of
salvation, by all the mercies of God, by all the merits of Christ Jesus, by his
agony and bloody sweat, by his cross and passion, by his precious death and
burial, by his glorious resurrection, and ascension, let not your preaching of
life, be the savor of death. Let at length preaching, purge your streets of
vnlawfull-gaine, cleanse your shoppes of deceit, melt your salse balances,
quench your lust, cool your lusts, abate your pride, assuage your malice,
confound your covetous vicious devises; that you may be restored to
righteousness, and holiness, to the Image of him that has called you: I should
not end this point till you begin the practice, but the star leads me, I
must follow further, for this Gospel goes further, this Gospel shall be
preached through the whole world. My third part.

There was light in Goshen, when darkness in all Egypt: 3
that was strange, but there was darkness in the Temple, when all the earth
was full of glory. Esaias 6.3.4.
Glory in the earth, in the whole earth, the whole earth full of glory, and the
Temple full of smoke, it is more strange then that in Sodom, a just man was
found, when in Jerusalem there was not one good man. Darkness in the Temple,
when light in all the world? If the eye be dark how great is that darkness?
Origin. in Esa. 6.
Origin tells us, this was a manifestation of the preaching of the Gospel, to
the Gentiles, and a blinding of the eyes of the Jews. But our Savior was sent
rather to the Jews then Gentiles, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, go not into the Gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel, here is that light as in the Temple, and darkness over all the
earth, and cruel habitation? How shall this Gospel be preached throughout
the world, when the Gentiles the greatest part of the world were denied the
Gospel? Saint Hierome answers that the Lord would not partake the Gospel to
the Gentiles, Hierom.
before it had been offered the Jews; It was Paul and Barnabas speech, Act.
13.46. It was necessary that the word of God, should be first spoken to you,
but seeing ye put it from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles: Here the Temple
was full of smoke, and all the world full of glory. The Jews indeed had a
light and whether this light were the seat of the Church, or scepter of the
Kingdom, or Law of Moses proper it was to the Jews. It was but lucerna a
lamp, and at length extinguished: But when the light was conveyed to the
Gentiles, it was Lucifer the day star sprung in their hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19.
Saint Peter so distinguishes, 2 Pet. 1.19. the Law was (...) a law shining in
a dark place, the Gospel (...) the day star in the dawning of the day, well
might our Savior be called the light of the Gentiles, Ch^^s st m
for he appeared by a star to the Gentiles: Quare per stellam, quare magis per
stellam, says Chrysostom, as the mother of Sisera answers her self so does
he, the star was as fit a sign for the Magi as the lamb for the Shepherds,
the lamb was borne, Shepherds are first told, of the lamb among the Jews:
the light of Israel appeared, men in the stars are directed by this star,
Christ Jesus is the bright morning star, Reu. 22.16. he must be the light of
the Gentiles, Lucerna Moses, Lucifer Christus, Johannes vox, Christus verlu^:
Moses was enough for Jerusalem, the Church of the Jews the daystar must be the
light of the Gentiles, John Baptist the voice enough for the wilderness,
Chrysostom.
Christ the Word preached through the world. Ante resurrectionem, ne abteritis
post resurrectionem, ite predicate, before the resurrection, this commandment
go not into the way of the Gentiles, after, go teach all nations: This text is
then the prophecy of the general preaching of the Gospel after the
resurrection. Our Savior being driven out of the Temple, presently healed a
man blind from his birth: Theoph. Nazianz. Bid. Aquin.
the Greek Fathers, and of the latin, Bid, Aquinas, and others, expound this
of Christ being driven from the Jews, he healed the Gentiles blind from their
birth. Many collections to this purpose the destroying Angel in the pestilence
in David's time, sheathed his sword, not over the house of a Jew, but over the
house of Araumah a Iebusite, a Gentile: The Arc was brought home, not to
David's house, but to the house of Obed Edom, a Gittite, a Gentile: Before,
Abraham's burial place, was purchased of a stranger, a Gentile; the place to
build the Temple bought of a stranger a Gentile, the field on which the Jews
bestowed Judas 30. pieces, was bought to bury strangers Gentiles, Job from Hus,
Ruth from Moab, Rahab from Jericho, Salomons wife from Egypt, the famous Queen
from Sheba, first fruits of the Gentiles; the Wisemen that came to Christ, the
Centurion the honorable Soldier, Zacheus the great Usurer, Stephen the first
Martyr, Cornelius the Captain, Simon the Tanner, Queen of Candaces Eunuch,
were all Gentiles. I deny not but some parts of the Gospel were known, to the
heathen before they were preached, that Christ should be borne, the Sibills
foretold it, that he should be the Redeemer, Tully de diuinatione: Of his
miracle, Tacitus is not silent in his 5. book: Of the Wise-mens star, Pliny
in his 2. book: Of the Innocents, Macrobius in his Saturnals: that Christ was
the word, Plato in Timaeo: that by this word all things were made, Amitius the
Platonist acknowledges: that Christ suffered, Dionisius the Atheist: But this
was not enough, our Savior that would have all men saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth, would have all the ends of the world to hear of the
salvation of our God. He sent the Apostles to all nations: Peter into
Antiochia, John into Asia, James to Syria, Andrew to Scithia, Phillip into
Gallia, Thomas into Parthia, Bartholomew into Armenia, Matthew in Ethiopia, and
Simon Zelotes into Mesopotamia, and unto this Land, (...), either Saint Paul as
Theodoret affirms, or Saint Peter as Baronius, or Joseph of Arimathea as most
deliver: So that it is not only as the Psalmist sang, Praise the Lord ye house
of Leui, praise ye house of Aaron, praise the Lord ye house of Israel, but
praise the Lord all ye Nations, praise him all ye Gentiles, all they that
fear the Lord praise the Lord in all places of his Dominion, praise the Lord,
Psalm. 117.1.
for the sound of the Gospel is gone out into all the earth, and the preaching
thereof unto the ends of the world, from which light of the Gentiles, we gather
this light of Doctrine, Doct.
That all the world shall see the salvation of our God; the Reason, because he
will have all inexcusable, send to al, come to all, preach to all, in all
places of his Dominions: It was his Law in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 10.
10. that no City should be destroyed before he offered Peace unto it, and
though he always have his judgment ready, his bow bent, his arrows
prepared, his sword sheathed, his cup mingled, his weapons burnished, yet
before his storm of judgment, he sends a shower of mercy, warning before woe:
Even Nineveh, and Tyrus, and Babylon, and Sodom had warning; before he will
judge the world with righteousness, he will show them the light of his
countenance, his way shall be known upon earth, his saving health among all
nations: But is this fulfilled, it was David's prophecy, their sound is gone
into all Lands, Psalm. 19.5.
Psalm. 19.5. Esayes proclamation, Hearken o ye Isles, hear ye people that
dwell from far. Esaias. 49.1. Math. 28.20.
Esaias 49.1. Christ's iniunction, Go teach all nations, Math. 28.20. Remission of
sins shall be preached to all nations, Luke 24.47. Mark. 16.20.
Luke 24.47 they preached every where, Mark. 16.20 It is true, Quoad ad vitam
creauit, ad veniamre dimere voluit. I will pour my Spirit (says God) upon all
flesh, and again, all flesh shall see the salvation of God, and all the ends
of the world have seen the salvation of our God. Chrysostom, Euthimius,
Theophilact, Euscbius, Anselme affirm this general publication, and
Chrysostom upon Math, thinks it was accomplished before Jerusalem was
demolished. But Origin, and Jerome, and Ambrose, and Austin. and Gregory, and
Bid, and the Author of the imperfect work upon Matthew, and most of the
Modern, think that this Gospel was not then, or is now so generally known,
because this is the last sign of the last days: Cyrill, Damascene, Cyrill
Damascen. Theodoret. Austin in hunc locum.
Theodoret, expound those places, non adhuc esse vniuersalitatem
praedicationis, sed esse implenda^ hanc vaticinatione^ successione temporis:
Austin to this purpose, verba Matthei non adhuc completa, sed esse complenda,
Aquinas, to the same purpose, Vera sunt Mathei verba, Revel.
non respectu generalis praedicationis, sed propter certitudinem diuinae
praeordinationis. It is Saint Ambrose observation, that the Elders spoke to the
Lamb, Redimisti nos, ex omni tribu, lingua, populo, natione, non dixit omnem
tribum, omnem populum, omnemlinguam, herein incomplete generis distributio, as
in this go teach all nations, that is some of all. But this auswere is not
full: The best answer of the former Authors is Thomas, vtitur praeterito pro
futuro, or this Euangelis fama in omnibus gentibus praedicatur, at Ecclesia in
omnibus Gentibus non adhuc aedificatur: Aust. ad Hesich.
And Zanchius concludes all, Certum est Euangelium ad omnes gentes pertinere,
non adhuc ad omnes pernenire; for in the time of Saint Austin there were as he
witnesses some Nations quos nec acceperant, neque andiuerant. For the Gospel
in the primitive Church was Orbis ludibrium, and opprobrium. And long after in
the time of Prudentius, Prudent.
Nunc dogmanobis Christianum nascitur post euocatos demum inde consules. It was
a Prophecy, every age fulfilleth a piece of it, the nearer the world to the
consummation, the more general should be the Gospells publication. Minut. Fell.
Ingratinos, says Min: Faelix, we are unthankful, the Gospel grows more
ripe in our time, Copern.
some think the sun every year descends so much nearer the earth, certainly
the Gospel in every age, shines more plentifully in the world. The Gospel
shall be preached through the world, blessed are they that have a hand to help
such a work. That it is by Scripture said to have been preached to all
nations, that speech is to be referred, either to Prophecy, or to be
understood by the Synecdoche, or Hyperbole. Certain it is, that yet it is not
so preached, and as certain that this Gospel shall be preached. Lyra upon the
words of Christ go teach all nations, Lyra.
Hic diuulgatio Dominicae resurrectionis, behold by this Commislion a
diuulgation of Christ's resurrection, and of all the parts of the Gospel, that
ever have been published, none more generally then this. The Scribes asked a
sign, Christ gives them no sign, but of the Prophet Jonas: Math. 12.39.
the Pharisees they asked a sign, Christ answers, no sign, but the sign of
the Prophet Jonas: Mark. 8.11.
At the same time Saduces came, and have the same answer, Math. 16.4.
no sign, but of the Prophet Jonas: Jews, Scribes, Pharisees, Saduces, no
sign, but of the resurrection. Above all other duties, Act. 1.8.
he required his Apostles should in Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria, and unto the
uttermost parts of the earth be witnesses to him: of all other points,
witnesses of his resurrection. Therefore Peter first, Act. 1.22. Act. 2.32.
in his first Sermon in Jerusalem witnesses that God has raised up Jesus:
Peter and John preach this to the Sadduces, The resurrection of Jesus, Acts
4.2. Paul and Silas testify this to the devout Greeks, Christ that has
suffered is risen, Acts 17.3. And of all other Apostles, Paul as if he had
been the Apostle of the resurrection, is most plentiful. No Prophet, no
Apoctle ever more abundant in any point, then he in the resurrection. To the
Romans, Christ rose again for our righteousness, Romans 4.25. To the
Corinthians, Christ died and rose again, 2 Cor. 5.15. To the Thessalonians,
Christ died and rose again, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14. To the Philippians, The power of
Christ's resurrection, Phil. 3.10. To Timothy, The resurrection of Christ who
abolished death, 2 Timothy 1. In a word, he preached no other Doctrine to the
Grecians of Thessalonica, to the Stoics at Athens, to the Scribes and Pharisees
in Jerusalem, to Festus and Agrippa at Caesarea: In every Court where he was
questioned, he cries out, I stand for the resurrection of the dead, as if
ready to preach through the world that this Gospel is to be preached to all
Nations.

The use of which point, Use.
of the general preaching of the resurrection of Christ through the world,
should stir us up to a thankful acknowledgement of the plentiful enjoying
of this mercy. It is the manifold grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. The exceeding
grace of God, Romans 5.15. 1 Pet. 4.10. Romans 5.15. 1 Timothy 1.14. Psalm. 130.7.
The superabundant grace of God, 1 Timothy 1.14. The plenteous Redemption of the
Lord, Psalm. 130.7. That we that sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death,
have seen this great light: that we have even from the beginning of the faith
received this faith. I know our Adversaries do claim the honor of converting
our Nation: Were it so, we might complain that the Evil man has sown Tares.
But as the field was sown with seed by the husbandman before the Adversary
sowed Tares, so we had Religion before they knew Superstition. They attribute
much to Austine their Monk, who was as far from the steps as time of blessed
S. Austine. For which Monk, it is upon record, that neither his pride could
stoop to such a labor, Gildes. B^de. Genesis 22.14. I^ B^nger in Wal^s one and
twenty hundred Monks, 1. Archbishop, and 7. ^eac^^^d ^^^^ops in those parts of
(...) Saxon Chron of Peterborough Au^^in the black bloody proud an^ l^ng Monk
in his spleen to (...), d^ew infinite blood, and d^stroyed more b^d^^s then
ever Popery saved souls.
nor his learning deserved any such honor. Gildas and Bid, and our own
Chronicles tell us, that the ancient and noble Britains first received the
faith among us, as if Dominus i^ monte, the Lord would be worshipped first in
the mountain. Then Britain was the fleece with the deaw, and all the
surrounding Countries as Gedeons fleece dry; though now this, as Gedeons
fleece full of deaw, and the mountainous parts as Gedeons floor now dry, by
the desolation of the Church there, and by the negligence, or ignorance, or
indulgence, or all, of those that should ouersee it. But for that Mountebanke
Austine the Monk, he supplanted Religion there, never planted it here. Beda
mentions his prodigious insufferable pride, which made the reverend British
Bishops refuse him. If he were our Apostle, or Evangelist, as Hierome said to
Iouinian, Si Apostolus, If he were our Apostle, where did he preach? If our
Evangelist, what did he write? As Varus spoke of Valerius, He entered the Land
poor, and left our Church poor; he caused the death of many bodies, and it
is doubt he never gained souls. It has been our Adversaries general claim,
as that mad man in Athenaeus, who claimed all the ships came into the
harbor; or as the Devil on the Pinnacle, All the Kingdoms of the earth: so
they claim to be the only conuerters of Nations, and they the general
Preachers of the Gospel. Whereas they never yet preached wheresoever they came
but upon one especial Text; and in all parts of the world where they have
been, they have preached that so powerfully, that their hearers have wept, and
bled, and died for learning that Doctrine. Their Text is, Matthew. 10.34. I came
not to send peace, but a sword. Look but upon the estate of India, which as
Vesputius testifies was converted by S. Thomas, where ye may find more
cursed Prodigies then ever the Sun beheld in any Map of misery: where the
Romish Apostles did exceed Cain, or if possibly Judas; where they ravished, and
then murdered Queens, tore infants in pieces, cast men to mastiues, cut
children in collops to feed dogs: Happy was his invention most bloody. Men
never did the like, Devils could do no more, Vessus.
Religion was there (as Vesputius justifies) long before the Gold-hungry,
bloodthirsty Portugal or Pope, was heard of; Churches erected, Bishops
established, whole Countries baptized. Orosius and Lummius, and Iunius, and
Baronius, tell us, that S. Thomas who converted the Country, lies buried
there, and that from his time they have had Patriarchs, and Bishops, and married
Priests, and Sacraments among them. The Romans descended from Edom, say the
Jews, Edom had a name of blood, Mount Seyr was their possession, the Hill of
blood, and Acheldama their purchase, the Field of blood: The name of blood, and
possession of blood, is in the Romish Religion. Our English when once they grow
Romish, against the Nature of our Nation, become bloody, which I impute to the
The Vineyards and some parts of the English College in Rome are seated in
bloody Neroes ruins.
situation of the English College in Rome, which is founded on the ruins of
Neroes house. But of all the stories of Christians or Heathens, of all the
Tragedies plotted in hell, acted under heaven, never any so horrid, as the
bloody Baptism of India by the vmbragious Jesuits. They have long intended
the second part of that Tragedy to be acted here. God grant their rods and
scourges provided in 88. be not growing Serpents and Scorpions to bring on Gods
bitter severity to plague our base security. The Gospel is not further gone
into all the world, then their cruelty is known. Nulla posterit as taceat,
sed nulla probet. Beloved, Seneca.
we enjoy the Gospel in a more gracious manner then any part of the world:
we enjoyed it with the soonest, yea and before many parts of the world. When
Brithwald the Monk, before the Conquest, was careful about succession of the
Crown, he had a vision, and heard a voice, That the Kingdom of England was
Gods own Kingdom, and for it God himself would provide. Boniface writing to
Edward the first, gives testimony, Anglicanam Nationem non esse subalternam,
that this was one of the principal Nations of Christendom. And in the days
of Henry the seventh, the Spaniard challenging the chief place in a
Provincial above the English, Julius the second sentenced it for England
before Spain. I speak not this as if the Popes favor could do us honor.
For both that Testimony, and the Title Defensor Fidei, we are no more beholden
to the Pope, then to his elder brother Caiaphas the High Priest for his
Expedit. God has not dealt so with other Nations: we can fetch our Testimonies
from better Authors. About the 400. year, Chrysos^^homil. quod Christus Deus.
Hilar. de Synodis. Athanas. Apolog. secund.
Chrysostom witnesses, Insulae Britannicae in ipso Oceano positae, senserunt
virtutem Dei. Before this, in the 360. Hilary writes, Prouinciarum Britanicarum
Episcopis. Yet before this, in the 300. Athanasius, Episcopi Britanniarum sese
ad Concilium contulerunt, speaking of the Council of Sardis. Yet a Century
before this, in the 200. year Tertussian witnessed, Britannorum inaccessa
Romany loca subduntur Christo. Yet in the very first Century, in the very
beginning of that Century, Nicephorus records it, Nicephorus.
Simon Zelotes doctrinam Euangely ad Insulas Britannicas profert. More then all
this, who could sooner have this doctrine of the resurrection, then we? Who
could teach it surer then Joseph of Arimathea, whom the most affirm to preach,
and live, and die with us? God has not done so with all Nations. Shall it be
said of us, that is observed of the first borne in the Old Testament, Priores
peiores, the first borne, worst bred? Had we the Gospel sooner then others,
and have brought forth less fruit then others? In Jury was God known, his
name was great in Israel: At Salem in his Tabernacle, and his dwelling in Zion.
But the holy City became a harlot, a cage, a cane, a den, a dungeon of
desolation, because she embraced not those things belonging to her peace.
Beloved, our Saviors words be thunderbolts, Luke 13.3. twice repeated, Luk
13.3.
Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Let them not be as bruta
fulmina, as lightnings falling on beasts, not coming to observation. Pli^^^.
When Xauerius came to preach to them of laponia, and the people were strangely
affected, accusing God to be neither merciful nor just, if none could be
saved without this Gospel, expostulating why had so many regions not known
it, how miserable their parents, friends, neighbors were, who were dead
without this Gospel, the poor Indians with wounded hearts, and streaming
eyes, were answered, that the more carefully they should receive this light,
because it was denied to others, though offered to them. God was the Answer,
though a Jesuit the Author. Beloved, the Gospel that be preached through the
whole world, but God has not dealt so with all Nations as with us. Our Land is
Paradise, here is the tree of knowledge: that tree of alltrees was Adams curse.
If our knowledge swell, and our conscience pine, if we conceive in the ear,
and be barren in the heart, if we grow rash in censuring, peremptory in
talking, fastidious in hearing, hard-hearted in obeying, hypocritical in
professing, let us not deceive our selves, our faith is a vain presuming, our
holiness hypocrisy, our zeal fury. and better were it not to have known
the way of truth. But I hope better things of you all, and therefore I cast
Anko^ for my first part, and make more haste with that that follows. The time
is precious, and my ointment is very precious. Wheresoever this Gospel, etc. I
now begin with the universal promulgation of this ointment. This that this
woman has done, etc. First of the Act, This.

This.] And what was this? 2. Part.
They that take this woman to be Mary Magdalen, observe that she never came to
Christ, but fell at his feet. In the house of the Le^per, Luke 7.38. When she
besought him for Lazarus, John 11.31 When she heard him preach, Luke 10.34.
After his resurrection, Matthew. 28 9 When she anointed him, John 12.3. A thing
most commendable. But this is not the This that is so commended. There is one
strange circumstance in this act of her anointing, neue done to any but our
Savior, and never to our Savior but by this woman, She wiped his feet with
the hair of her head, the greatest humility that might be: The more humble,
the more happy. Hierome
Nunquid decrat isti mulier^ sudarium, v^l linteolum aliquod, says S. Hierome:
Was her cintment so precious, and she so poor, that she could not bring a
Napkin, or cloth, or handkerchiefe? Nihil dignius capillis, nihil proprium
magis: What more dainty? What more worthy? She wiped her Saviors feet with
the hair of her head. If it were our Saviors promise to the just, The hairs
of your head are numbered, and, Not so much as a hair of your head shall
perish; then happy of all the Just was Mary, happy the hairs of her head,
which wiping her tears from the feet of our Savior, wiped away the faults of
her own soul. This was honorable, but this is not the This that is so
commended. The ointment was choice, and her choice of the ointment is
commended. It was Spikenard. India is not honored for Gold, Babylon for Corn,
Tyrus for Purple, Libanus for Cedars, Arabia for Spices, Persia for Oiles, more
then this ointment above all ointments is honored. Every Evangelist has a
several attribute to honor this ointment: (...), Mark. 14 3. very sumptuous
ointment, so Plutarch uses the word (...); S. John (...), very honorable
oil, John 12.3. so Athenaeus uses the word (...); our Evangelist (...),
ointment of greater honor, and dearer price, Matthew. 26.7. so Suidas uses the
word (...). Nay Judas gives the ointment praise enough, though he condemn the
act, though he murmur out, To what purpose is this waste? which was a strange
question, that the son of perdition should ask Quorsum perditio haec? when
never any thing was lost by our Savior, but this son of perdition, whose
damned murdering murmur this was, Quorsum perditio? Peraitio tua exte Judah,
Judas, thou son of perdition, thou art thy own perdition. But Judas (I say)
did praise this ointment, nay praise it more then any other, esteemed it far
more worth then he esteemed his Master, for he sold his Master for 30. pieces,
in the 15. verse of this chapter, and val^ed this ointment at 300. pence, John
12.5. The ointment was Spik^nard, precious, very precious, yet it is not the
ointment that is so praised. This is not the This: What then was this This?
Sure though not the ointment, yet the anointing might be so commended. It was
indeed much that she bought, and brought, and used the ointment, employed her
endeavor, and her earnest labor, in the anointing of Christ. We never read
that our Savior had any gifts given him, but Gold, and Spices, and Ointments:
The Wise men offered Gold, as to a King; and Spices for Incense, as to a God;
and this woman ointments twice, as to a Man: Royalty is noted in the Gold,
Divinity by the Incense, Mortality by the Ointment. So Christ applies it in
the 12. verse, In that she powered this ointment on my body, she did it for my
burial. Never was he otherwise anointed: He was anointed (says Damascene)
spiritually. Damase.
Corpus diuinit ate sua vngens vt Deus, vnctus vt homo, quandoquidem and hoc
and illud est. Otherwise corporally he was not anointed, he needed not, he
used no other ointment, yet fit it was this woman should so anoint him, though
not fit to anoint him as Aaron the Priest was anointed, Leuit. 3. or David the
King, 1. Sam. 10. or Elisha the Prophet, 1 Kings 19. for we have received
anointing from him, says S. John, 1 John 2.27. yet I say fit it was, for it
was a Prophecy, that Christ should be so anointed, Psalm. 23 5. anointed so at
the Table, Psalm. 23.5.
Thou preparest a Table before me, says the Psalmist, thou anointest my head
with oil. This is somewhat, yet this is not the This that is so commended:
somewhat it is, yet, what it is we know not. It was our Saviors speech, When
thou fastest, Matt. 6.17. Lyra.
anoint thy head, Matthew. 6.17. Palestinis mos erat in Festis caput vngendi,
says Lyra; In Palestine they used in their Feasts to anoint their heads. But
our Savior alters that custom, When thou fastest, anoint thy head. In this
act the command of our Savior, and the custom of the Country, though
contrary one to the other, are fulfilled. Christ at the feast is anointed, this
was the custom of the Country; Mary fasteth and anointeth her head, her head
was Christ, here is the command of Christ: this is the This, She anointed her
head Christ, in the 7. verse she anointed the head of her head Christ. Not the
^ile, though precious; nor the endeavor, though laborious; nor the action,
though religious; but the manner of the action made the ointment odoriferous.
God (say the Canonists) loves Aduerbes better then Adjectives: Non quam bonum,
sed quam been; Not the matter, but the manner receives the commendation. It is
Origens note, Luke 7.37.
that the ointment of the sinful woman in Luke has no commendation: A woman
that was a sinner in the City, brought an Alablaster box of ointment, she
brought ointment, but Mary very precious ointment; she anointed his feet, but
Mary anointeth his head: Mary has chosen the better part. Chrisolog.
At quaenam haec huius capitis vnctio? says Chrisologus: What meant this
anointing of his head? For it may seem rash, and rude, that a woman how good
soever, should suddenly when our Sauiur sat at meat, power ointment, how
precious soever, upon his head, and face: Either there is some mystery in it,
or it had never been so commended. Some tell us that herein was Agnitio
Diuinitatis, others Contemplatio Resurrectionis, to which the Text gives
warrant, others Confessio Maiestatis and Gloriae Christi. Origin on this place,
Opus bonum quod fecimus propter Deum, Origin.
and secundum Deum, and ad gloriam Dei, est vnguentum super caput Christi
effusum. And Chrysostom applies it so; Chrysostom st.
Caput Christi vngas, si omnia in Christi gloriam referas. S. Bernard the same
words; Gloria quae ex bonis actionibus proficiscitur, Bern.
ad Deum referenda. Contrition by repentance does wash Christ's feet, Devotion
by faith anointeth his head, Alms do anoint his feet, Prayer powers the
ointment on his head, Works of mercy may wash his feet, but yielding him due
glory does anoint his head: This is the This receives this reward, She gave
glory to God by this action; by this unction, her light did shine before men,
and she did glorify her Father which is in heaven. And now her sweet sauouring
ointment yields us this assured sacred Doctrine: Good works be not accepted by
God, Doct.
unless such as are directed to the glory of God. The reason, Where the end is
wanting, the action is halting, and God will receive no lame or blind
sacrifice. If I seek to please men, says Paul, I should not be the servant
of Christ, Gal. 1 10. If we receive the witness of men, if we seek glory,
by any good work among men, we anoint our selves, not Christ, not his head,
not his feet, but our selves. In such a case, Fumus flammam suffocat, Seneca.
says Seneca, the smoke choaketh the fire, and the froth of ostentation
rises no sooner, but falls to the depth: There is the worm in the gourd,
rust in the gold, a fire comes out of the bramble to devour the Cedar. Tully
calls Demosthenes, Teniculum Demosthenem, because it pleased him going in the
street to hear even women and water-bearers whisper, Hic est ille Demosthenes.
A wise man will not, a good man cannot entertain thoughts of vainglory,
which do strangle all worthy holy actions. In such a case, the work (though
never so seemingly good) is but a fools wonder, and the Author but a wise man's
fool. Vainglory cannot swell so high, but vengeance will sit above it; nor
lift up it self so lofty but God will ever ouer-looke it. Our Savior neither
desired, nor accepted the glory of the world, looking with no other eye
thereon, then Physicians on the diseases of their Patients, his profession was
I seek not my own glory, Ioh. 8.50. They that think, that they possess all
things have nothing, 2 Cor. 6.10. They that are proud of knowledge know
nothing, 1 Timothy 6.3. He that thinks himself to be something, is nothing,
Gal. 6.3. S. Paul in nothing beyond the chief Apostles, confesses himself
nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. Our blessed Savior concludes this point, if I honor
my self my honor is nothing, Ioh. 8.54. and therefore our aim of our
actions, should be as this of Mary, to the honor of our Master, that all
things may be done to the glory of God the Father.

The Use whereof, Use.
as it should ever be welcome, so especially most wholesome now to purge all
Pharisaicall leaven of hypocrisy and vainglory, in the blessed occasion of
our meeting which is as the anncinting of Christ, and I doubt not intended to
the glory of our gracious God, yet seeing Satan is ever busiest in the best
actions, let every man stand in fear, that he deceive not his own soul: The
temptations of vainglory of all other are most full of danger, most full of
doubt, hardest to be known, not as the insinuations of other vices, open and
plain, but privy and crafty, creeping upon a man, with a Spanish low
complement, binding the eyes with a cobwebbe veil of vanity, and then with a
false key of self-love opening the heart to draw in that Spirit which turns
Angels into Devils. Beloved, your alabaster box is fair, see your ointment
be sweet, Hierem.
In hoc genere Marmoris vnguenta seruantur illibata, says Jerome; far be it
that in an alabaster box there should be poison, or in the censor of your
incense, an unsavory persume, ye have anointed the feet of Christ, and I hope
great is your reward in heaven; yet the sinner did so much, Faemina peccatrix
in ciuirate, shall I say? the sinful City has done no more, then that
infamous sinner in the City, I will not, I must not, I hope I may say the holy
City, the City of God has anointed the head and feet of her Savior to
the glory of God, this work that ye have done is (...), a good work, these
little ones are the Lords feet, let not the best here, despise one of these
little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven the Angels do always behold
the face of the Father which is in heaven: Let other places be honored for
other blessings in them, Venice for riches, Bononia for fruits, Naples for
nobility, Millane for beauty, Rauenna for antiquity, Florence for policy,
but of all Christian Cities, This of yours, for this Nurserie of your Insants
and Orphans has excelied. I deny not but besides this, many other Porches of
Bethesdas poole, are blessed by you, when I come to the memorial which is as
the Mart, ye shall have the Catalogue; But this is the best and most blessed of
all your good works. It was a lamentable cry in Jerusalem, Parvuli panem
petunt, and nemo est qui frangit illis, The children cry for bread, and there
is none to give it them, the children, the younglings, sucklings, babes,
Lament. 4.
and latter births, they that could neither stir to get it, nor labor to gain
it. Parvuli panem petunt, the weak sick, infant innocent tenderlings, not
able to continue fasting, nor to succor themselves by feeding, in Jerusalem
they perished, nothing in the Lamentation more lamentable: But here they are
nourished, blessed be the Lord, our Ierusalems breasts be not dry, dearth has
not threatened death, plenty, bounty, mercy, had fed these poor children,
Gods promise, grace, and glory, will reward it. I will not press you, that are
so graciously forward, nor tell you that somewhat is wanting yet, that
Jerusalem was plagued, for not building of her decayed Temple, which was the
glory of her City, nor encite by any arguments further then Haggai inciteth
you, Hagg. 1.9. I will not tell you that Christendom has not a more glorious
foundation then you have to work upon, for you are sure to build upon faith
Paul's Church.
: All that I move is this, that this unclean, leprous, idolatrous place may be
cleansed, no time so fit as the Passover, the first time that Christ came into
the Temple, Christ drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, and Rupertus
tells us it was at the Pass^uer. It is questioned, why Mary Magdalen, in Luke,
came to Christ being such a sinner, Pupertus lib. 5. in Johan.
with a box of oin^ment, and answered vnguenta attulit quis nouit quod peccata
ante Deu^ fatt^la, ideo adducit vnguenta oderifera, Beloved ye had need, to
present your selves to God, the many sinkes of sins in this City, they
only bring the plague Gods anger and your danger, come not without your
ointments, kiss the son, least he be angry, and ye perish from the
right-way, offer sweet ointments, and in a sweet place, sanctify your
selves, and your ointments, and place, ye present it in; A woman perfumed a
Lepers house once, and the house has smelt of the savor ever since, at length
persume this place, and do this and whatsoever you do, to the glory of God:
This is the this that receives the commendation, for this act, the Author a
woman is honored: which is my next part: This that this woman has done.

This woman, A s^^n.
Euae a Diabolo mutuarit peccatum, Eve the first woman, took up sin from
Satan upon her bare word, Adam by consenting v^aduisedly subscribed to the
bond, vsura creuit posteritati says Austen, but the burden of the interest,
ever since lay heavy on their posterity: the woman was first in the
transgr^ssion, but no wonder, for if Lucifer an Angel, first fell in heaven,
it is not strange that a woman fell in earth, in Paradise was the quarrel,
ever since was the battle, the Serpent lost the field, though the won an lost
the garden, God gave the woman the honor and the victory in the day of
battle: Semen mulieris, the seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head,
all the quarrel since is for the broken head. Draw thy sword, and slay me,
Judge 9.54.
says Abimelech to his Armor-bearer, when a woman had wounded him, that they
say not, A woman slew him, Judge. 9.54. Satan was as Abimelech wounded by a
woman. In all the Scripture ye have scarce any example of any woman that
wounded a man, but still she aimed at the head. When Iael slew Sisera, she
nailed his head to the ground, Judge. 4.21.
Judge. 4 21. When Sheba rebelled, and Ioab besieged him, a woman cries to the
Captain, The head of Sheba shall be cast over to thee, 2 Samuel 20.21. 2 Samuel
20.21. Judge. 13.8.
When Judith slew Holofernes, she smote away his head from him, Judge. 13.8.
When the woman slew Abimelech, she cast a piece of a millstone on his head, Judge
9.53. Judge 9.53.
I am neither friend nor stranger to strange Allegories. These be semblances of
the woman's breaking the Serpents head. But the woman in my Text is anointing
her Saviors head, a work that no woman did but she, and therefore she to be
honored among women. Yet who this woman was, we may sooner question, then
know. Nec sieve ex curiositate, sieve ex praesumptione, disquirere cupiamus,
says Kemnitius: and his counsel is good, Kemnitius hanu. Euang. in bunc locum.
presumption and curiosity in questions are to be avoided; yet the Truth is so
to be embraced, as that negligently to refuse knowledge, is a dull
superstition. The wise should neither be Scepticks, nor Guosticks: Curiosity
is dangerous, Ignorance is odious. Oculos habemus Talparum, non Aquilarum: It
is true, and it is our misery; yet to have no eyes, or having, to stop our
eyes, is base blindfolded Idolatry. Mary's face is not as Moses face, it has
no veil, we may look upon it, and ask, Magdalen, art thou Lazarus sister,
or shall we look for another? Vnlgatissima opinio, Kemnitius.
says Kemnitius, ipsam fuisse peccatricem illam: It was the most commonly
known opinion, that this woman was the sinner in Lukes Gospel. And howsoever
some think that the thrice anointing of Christ was performed by three women,
Roffens. de tribus Magdalenis.
which Roffensis (the Beau-clarke of his time) confuteth in three books, yet
the general stream of all antiquity, and the opinion of the Church, (as
Roffensis by impregnable arguments proves) is this, vnicam esse Magdalenam,
candemque bis vnxisse Christum. It is a confused and perplexed question, I
confess, and plus subtilitatis quam vtilitatis habens, as Erasmus spoke: and
howsoeue it be none of those Cobwebs, wherein some Monkish flies have been
caught by their cunning, yet may it seem as intorteled and entangled a
question, as any in the Harmony of the Gospel. Only I wonder that they that
are so opposite in the denial of it, take not Archidamus counsel, to bring
more strength, and less sting in their argunents; this were more courage, and
less rage. Faber St^pulensis calls it a lie: Faber ^^ay.
Roffensis answers, Simendacium, profecto solenne mendacium and celebre, imo
nihil celebrius; for in the Greek Church many believed (as Origin confesses
in his 33. Homily on Matthew) that the woman that anointed our Saviors feet
in Luke, Orige^.
is the same that anointed his head here: and howsoever Origin himself may
seem doubting herein, yet in his first Homily on the Canticles he is resolute
for it, and so are many other of the Greek Church. Theophiles, Seuerianus,
Eusebius, Ammonius, Gregory Nazianzene, and Chrysostom, whom though they vouch
as the chiefest of the Western Church against, Chrysostom.
yet acknowledges it in his Homily on the treason of Judas. All the four
Latin Fathers affirm this; Hierome in his Proeme upon Osea, Ambrose in his
Comment upon Luke, Gregory in his Morals, and S Austine reconciling the
Evangelists, thus; Ego quidem nihil aliud intelligendum arbitror, nisi quod non
aliam fuisse muliere in quae peccatrix tum accessit ad pedes Jesus, sed candem
Mariam bis hoc fecisse. Beda and Leo, and many others, all the Schoolmen,
especially Albertus and Aquinas, most confident in it. Albertus upon the 7. of
Luke, having repeated the opposite Authors, concludes, Et sic procerto Deus
fecit duo luminariamagna, duas Marias, matrem scilicet Domini, and sororem
Lazari, quam and peccatricem fuisse constat. Aquinas on the 12. of John
recites and confuteth the contrary arguments, and therein and in other places
concludes this woman to be that Mary the sinner, that anointed his feet in
Luke as a Sinner, and now anointeth his head as a Saint. To these I might add
a cloud of witnesses, which if they were not thought cloudie, might clear the
point. But I know this time and place is unfit for Paradox. To affirm rashly,
were peremptory; to deny resolutely, were folly. This is a wanton Age, and
we rather bring the ears of curiosity, then the hearts of obedience: With the
Athenians, we ask for news; but with the Bereans, we should search the
Scriptures. The most probable argument that is brought to confirm this doubt
in question, Ioh. 11.2.
is out of John 11.2. where the act of anointing Christ, and the name of her
person is mentioned. It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment,
and wiped his feet with her hairs, whose brother Lazarus was sick. Here is
one anointing of Christ. Ioh. 12.3.
In John 12.3. there is another mention of anointing, Then took Mary a pound
of ointment, of Spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and
wiped his feet with her hair. Faber and others answer, both these are one, the
first related by anticipation, usual in the Gospel, when a thing is spoken of
as done, before it be done. Roffensis answers, Roffens. de tribus Magdalenis.
that in all S. John's Gospel there is not one anticipation, howsoever in other
Evangelists some few, yet in John none, nothing related by the tense of the
time past, that was to be future, at that time not finished. John 12.4. he
speaks of Judas, Judas qui traditurus, non qui tradidit: Again, John 6.71.
Judas qui traditurus, non qui tradidit. John 7.39. Hoc dixit de Spiritu quem
essent accepturi, non quem accepissent: whereas John 11.2. he speaks of Mary
in the Participle of the time past, (...), which Beza renders, Vnxit, extersit,
she had anointed, she had wiped, as done already, and after in John 12.2.
mentions that other anointing. Ioh. 12.2.
Arguments of probability there may be many: She that in Luke anointed
Christ, was Mary Magdalen, so our last Interpreters in the contents of the
seventh chapter tell us, the fire of her affection strangely inflamed her heart
in her love to her Lord. Christ gives her this testimony, She loved much; and
whose love to Christ was ever so registered as the love of Lazarus sister? Is it
probable, I say is it possible, that she that so loved the Lord in his life,
should neither at his passion, nor after his passion, nor in his resurrection,
afford any token in her weeping, having lost whom she loved, or by watching to
find whom she lost? In all the four Evangelists, no word of Mary, Lazarus
sister, at the passion, or after the passion, or in his resurrection, unless
it be by the name of Mary Magdalen. Lazarus sister was frequent in weeping,
went to Lazarus grave weeping, came and fell down before Christ, John 11.33.
weeping, and who more abounded in tears then Mary Magdalen? not only in the
house of Simon, where she not only wet, but washed Christ's feet with tears, but
her tears at the Cross, at grave, at garden, her eyes seeming to be the
Cymbals of her sorrow, all things inuiting her to the woeful exercise of
weeping. Add hereunto, that whenever Mary, Lazarus sister, came to Christ,
she fell at his feet: so did Mary Magdalen. Lazarus sister usually called
Christ Master; The Master is come, says Martha to Mary, John 11.28. Mary
Magdalen coming to seek her Savior at the Sepulcher, Christ calling her
Mary, she answers by the former word Master: both followed him, both
frequently heard him, both anointed him in the house of Simon, as the Gospel
testifies both in the house of the same Simon, in the same place, at Bethany,
as Ambrose collecteth, both brought boxes of Alablaster, both wiped with their
hair, both actions commended; and therefore it is most probable, that both
were performed by the same woman, otherwise it should seem strange, that this
Gospel, should make this mention of this act of this woman, with this solemn
memorial, and we should be uncertain who this woman is. I submit these
collections to the Reverend, and learned: The Cynicke will not be satisfied,
the Skeptic cannot, and for the Curious querulous Pioner that only brings
his ears, not his heart, I desire neither to please, nor easily to displease
him. All I say is this, there be blessed servants of God of both opinions,
opinion is no determination, it is no article of our faith, flesh and blood is
blind in the best things: we see but in part, we prophecy but in part. Only
I wonder that this loud sounding solemn Prophecy of this Gospel, and this
work and this woman should be so stifled, and strangled, by the crooked lines
of contrary Interpreters. This woman says my Text, from whom as from the womb
of my Text we receive this Doctrine, Doct.
the Lord gives much honor to the woman as to the weaker vessel, in that his
spirit records the least holy duties performed by women: the Reason, is to
manifest that as the woman was the occasion of sin and death, so by Christ
she is made together coheire of the grace of life. Sure Gods Spirit has some
especial end in it, to give comfort and encouragement to that weak sex, by
taking an Inuentory of the particular acts in Scripture, performed by women,
not only the chamber provided by the Sunamite for the Prophet, 2 King. 4.10.
but a nights lodging afforded Ioshuas spies, 2 King 4.10.
by the Inne-keeper Rahab, Josh. 2.1.
Josh. 2.1. and a small measure of oil and meal, by the widow to Elias, 1
Kings 17.14. these are upon record and loose not their reward, Magdalens box,
Mary's choice, 1 King. 17.14.
Marthaes cheerful entertainment, the Sulamite, Sunamite, Caananite, the woman
of Samariahs pitcher, the poor widows mite, are not forgotten, which is
enough to put the life of religion into the hearts of women, to see every
little duty of theirs so well accepted. And sure many of them, have been both
partakers of great mercy, and instruments of Gods glory, as in their own
life's, which as lamps gave light to their unbelieving Husbands, so in governing
their family, and in instructing their children, so was Bathsheba a blessed
mother to Solomon, Loys to Timothy, Maxima to Basil, Monica to Austin,
Pulcheria to Theodosius, Helena to Constantine: in the sex where sin has
abounded, Grace has superabounded: But none of all that sex, the blessed
Virgin only excepted, hitherto ever received such an honor as this woman;
many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all. Pro. 31.
I deny not but Satan that blasted Paradise, has much blemished the honor of
this sex, he made choice of a woman, to be the first engine, and in Paradise
by this wheel he turned about the world, and since Dalila was the trappe for
Sampson, the daughter of Pharaoh for Solomon, Iesabell for Ahab, almost all the
heresies, though fathered by men, yet furthered by women's wit, Helena furthers
Simon Magus stratagem, Phioumena her Apelles, Montanus has his Prisca, Donatus
his Lucilla, Priscillinus his Galla, Arius assisted by Constantines sister, and
Nicholas the Deacon has a consort of such Companions; and of all Creatures
that ever GOD created, there be no such ensnaring attractiue loadstones and
loadstarres to Superstition and Idolatry as women. Yet as Jeremy spoke of the
figs, the good figs were very good, I^r. 24.3.
and the evil were very evil, Ier. 24.3. So the good women are very good, and
such were those holy women in old time, who trusted in God. And as the Devil
never found of such an engine as the woman, so never such an enemy against him
as the woman: Piumsane, faithful and pitiful, ^u^^n.
and sanctified is this sex, says Austen, and the honor done by our Savior
unto them, has much exalted the humble and meek; for besides that the Virgin
concceiued him, and Elizabeth in the house prophesied of him, every passage of
his life had some women to attend him. Hanna in the Temple rejoiced to see him,
and Magdalen at the table washed and anointed him, and Martha with a great
feast entertained him, and Mary her Sister poured ointment on him, and Iohanna
and Susanna and many women ministered of their substance to him: the Daughters
of Jerusalem wept for him, sundry women with infinite sorrow, attended him at
the cross when his Disciples fled from him, and women came to the grave,
though Joseph and Nichodemus had bestowed a hundred pound of Mirrh and Aloes,
as well applied as Art or Devotion could devise, yet women came to embalme his
body, and whom they found wanting to anoint, they sought weeping to lament.
This honorable testimony, of this holy woman, gives full assurance of our
Saviors acceptance of the service of that sex, if they be sanctified, seeing
he ioynes with this Gospel, this woman, and this work.

The Use whereof, should incite all Christian women to serve the Lord, that in
the day of retribution, Use.
they may receive reward from the Lord. S. Austen makes this Use; Quum foenum
eruerit, slos deciderit, Austin.
verbua^ Domini manebit, when the grass and grace of beauty, and the flower of
mortal frailty shall fall, the word of the Lord shall endure for ever.
Christian Matrones be ye ambitious of the beauty of the daughter of Zyon, and
remember ye that supercilious sails of vanity and vain glory, as they are
the unfitting fashion of the Court so the worst infection of the City. Much
ornament is no good sign, painting of the face argues an ill complexion of
body, a worse mind: Truth has a face both honest and comely, and looks best
in her wone colors. The Lord threatens in Esaias to ransacke the women's
wardrope, and to take away the tinkling ornaments, and their caules and round
tires, Esaias 3.
and chains, and bracelets, and musters, and bonnets, and headbands, and
tablets, and earnings, and mantles, and wimples, and Jewels, and hoods, and
vailes, and crisping pinnes and threatens, A^sten.
lamentation and mourning, and desolation to those dainty Creatures that sat
at ease in Sion: God is the same your sins the same, your warning the same.
Nuptae Susannam, Anna vidus, virgins Mariam cogitent, says Austen: I might
remember you how hateful the memory of some women are, a Diblaim or Dido,
Infaelix Dido, nulls been nupta, marito: Such are the sexes curse, and the
earths dregs of corruption. I might remember you, of our Debora, blessed
Elizabeth a woman after Gods own heart, the glory of the Christian, and envy
of the Infidel world, who was such a nursing mother to our Land and Church,
that the cause of Religion, does owe more to that one Queen, then to many
Kings that were before her. But the time as well as the feast keeps Passover,
and I follow. All women must needs confess that they can never honor him
enough who has honored them so far, as to make them the first witnesses of
his resurrection, Hugo.
and has as Hugo observes principally deserved the love of women in that he
vouchsafed to be borne of a woman, that when it was granted to no man, to be
the father, it was performed to a woman, to be the mother of Christ: wherefore
ye Ladies, which like the lyllies of the field, toil not, nor spinne not, and
yet Solomon in all his royalty not arraied as one of these. If ever ye had
pity on the fruit of your wombes, take pity on your souls, pamper not your
bodies to murder your souls. Cloth not Hagar with the color of the
Rainebow, and let Sara, the soul, the Kings daughter sterue. Flatter not your
selue, worms made your clothes, worms eat your bodies. Alas wantons, and
wormes-meate, what be ye? what shall become of ye, if ye neglect the message
of salvation? No oil for your lamps! no ointment for your heads; Holiness
should become the house of God for ever, if ye are his, ye are his houses, to
dwell in, and nothing can better become ye then holiness. Beauty natures
frailty, affections fancy cannot better become ye. Apparel, nakedness
garment, follies garnish, Adams fig-leaues, and beasts leauings, cannot better
become ye: Gold and silver, the Wise-mans dross, but the Miserables darling,
the earths gifts, and mineralls garbage, cannot better become ye; Wit, virtues
wanton, fools wonder, vices friend, and the worlds favorite, cannot better
become ye. Embrace, anoint, kiss, love, solace, only in the contemplation of
your savior. No snake in this garden, no worm in that gourd, be ye amiable as
Rahell, wise as Rebecca, obedient as Sara, diligent as Martha, but withal
religious as Mary who received this Testimony, wheresoever. I am at length
come to her memorial: my third circumstance of the second part.

Saint Chrysostom makes mention, In 1 Cor. 4. hom. 14.
of the women of Corinth, who had a custom to set up lights or tapers at the
birth of every child, with proper names, and look what name the taper bare
which lasted longest in the burning, they transferred that name to the child:
our Lord has put up a burning lamp for a perpetual monument of Mary, her
name, and her ointment shall never have an end, Quanto huius seminis benedictio
satio parca, messis abundans Augusta vena, spatiosi maris, quantum pretium
praetiosae meris. No Iustes, nor Olympiads, nor Iubiles, nor ages, nor Plato
his longest year, nor the long lived motion of the ninth sphere, shall
terminate, or antiquate, this memorial. In this Gospel I should look for a
monument upon Christ's sepulcher: Esaias
It was Esaies Prophecy gloriosum erit eius sepulchru^; Alexander may have
Europe and Asia, and all the world represented on his Tomb, Cyrus on his, Hic
Persaru^ Domitor, Themistocles on his, En memoranda facta Themistocles, yet
neither Alexander against Barbarians, Themistocles against the Persians,
Emilius against the Macedonians, Marcellus against the Scithians, or Scipio
against the Carthaginians had ever the like victory in the field, as Christ had
in the grave, nor does this victory want a memory ever upon the monument of
his Sepulcher. For as Alphonsus had this, Alphonsus iacet hic, so Christ's
Sepulcher this inscription, Luk 24.6. Surrexit Christus, nonest hic. That
memorial is by an Angel, but Christ's memorial is by Christ himself: A more
ample memorial then ever Christ gave any, neither Peter first called, nor John
best beloved, nor James his near kinsman, none of these pillars as Paul
calls them had such a Pillar erected as Mary's memorial, Christ builds a
memorial out of Mary's box, because she poured her oil on his body, and this
is a memorial, not of him, but of her: Erasmus observes that (...) is a
solemn monument, an honorable memorial: Chrysostom on Matthew wonders at the
eternity of this memorial, nec insignis persona, nec multitudine testium
celebrata, nec in Templo, nec in Theatro, sed in domo, and in domo leprosi
confecta, No noble personage, not done in the Temple or Theater, or before a
multitude of witnesses, but in a private house, in the house of a Leper, when
the Disciples were only present, and yet says Chrysostom, the famous deeds
of Kings and Emperors is silenced, they which built cities, erected walls,
fought battles, attained Trophies, subdued nations, though they erected
statues, and made ordinances, for celebrating their memorialls, yet their
memorial is perished with them, when as this act of this woman, is recorded,
and this is the woman whose praise is in the Gospel. A private woman, in a
private manner, in the private house of a Leper to pour out a small box of
ointment on Christ's head. Say her love was great, and her act was good, and her
ointment were precious, notwithstanding that of Claudian, in greater acts has
been true, Minuit presentia famam quanto magis illam minuit notitia: Fame is
an infection, acts reported are either portentious, beyond truth, and by
bigness they break, or else so cankered with the rust of untruth, as being
lessened they live not. It is true many have sought honor by building, wherein
they have thought to leave perpetual monuments, and what are all these, but
M^^^mons ryots, and times ruins, making the earth to groan under the burden
it bears. Where is Neroes house of gold, or Dioclesians hot bathes, or
Anthonies water works, or Augustus forum, or Cornelius Theater, or the
Amphitheatre of Statilius, or Dianas Temple, or the Mansolian Tomb, or
Octanias gate, or Liuias gally, or Apolloes Church, or Jupiters Capitol? It is
a very poor monument, how immense, how sound that lime, and stone, and wood,
and timber, and dust, and ashes, must pile for a memorial to posterity, when
time, and storm, and wind, and weather, and moath, and rust, and ruin do
corrupt it. There was a monument bestowed on a Viceroy of Spain, Propter nos
and nostram salutem, descendit ad inferos: and many such great ones, to the
shame of their posterity deserve no better memory. When as Mary's ointment
smells sweet over all the world, whose memorial yields this Doctrine, The good
works of Gods Saints, shall be had in everlasting remembrance. The reason,
Doct.
because they shall be exemplary to posterity, and incitements to Gods glory.
In Nehemiah 3. there is a list of the Benefactours that built the wall of
Jerusalem, Neh. 3.
not only their families and their Tribes, but their trades, the Merchants,
and the Goldsmiths are twice named, the whole trade and company are named, and
one, in the 8. verse, and Apothe earies son is named, and after several men,
and every man's several work. The righteous says David shall be had in
everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112.6 (...), blessed and long lived says
Chrysostom. Blessings are on the head of the Just, the memory of the just is
blessed, Pro. 10.7. the remembrance of Josias as the composition of a perfume,
Eccles. 49.1. The heathen thought for ever to be remembered, for their famous
inventions, Cadmus for letters, Pithagoras for numbers, Sidonius for measures,
Aesculapius for medicines, Lycurgus for Laws, Art for arts, Hercules for
games, but how few take notice of this fame, when that the godly neglected on
earth are registered in heaven, and emblasond by Gods sentence and sanction. Non
sic impij, non sic, the ungodly are not so, they perish, and stink, and rot,
the countenance of the Lord is against them, to root out their remembrance
from the earth, Psalm. 34.15. vt puluis platearum, lutum patearum, lanugo
plantarum, vt limus, fumus, festuca, patea, spuma, as chafe of the sloore,
dust of the street, moss of the trees, dross of the silver, foame of the
sea, froath, smoke, vapors, meteors, and most momentany things, whereas the
godly are ever honored, their gracious actions honored, their glorious
examples imitated. It were honor enough for good men, if they were only
admired, for Gods blessing and bounty upon them in this life, that they are,
as signets on his finger, stars in his hand, apples of his eye, that they
shall slourish as the Bay Tree, the Olive, the Myrh, the Palm, the Cedar of
Lebanus; that their names be in heaven, Luke 10.20. their members in his
book, Psalm. 139.19. their meat comes from his hand, Psalm. 145.15. their
bones kept by him Psalm. 34.21. Their hairs numbered by him, Math. 10.30. Their
tears reserved with him, Psalm. 50.7. But that no good work, shall pass
unrewarded by him, not a little meat to his Prophet, or a nights-lodging to a
spy, or a little ointment, or a cup of cold water, or a mite miss a reward,
or monument; for we had not heard of the poores treasury in the Temple, had
not the poor widow cast in her mite into the treasury, which mite is
treasured up, and has a mention, as is this work of this woman in this
Gospel.

The use whereof should confound, Use.
at least confute the miserable mucke-wormes and penurious money-mongers, who
never did any good, arrestable to God, available to their soul, profitable to
their neighbor, that came naked into the world, and will go naked out of the
world, whose only godliness is gain, who do base homage to that which should
be the basest drudge, who are so far from being guilty of doing good, that
for small advantage they will be content to lose all friends, to pine their
bodies, and damn their souls. Is it possible (had not Satan possessed these
servile slaves) that a humane soul should live in a body so base, which makes
a liuelesse piece of earth his God? Cultor Mammonae, seruus pecuniae, sectator
auaritiae; pro pecunia Hypocrita, in pecunia Apostolus, ex pecunia Idololatra;
who like a true Chemist, turns every thing into silver, both what he should
eat, and what he should wear; and that he keeps, is to look upon, not to
use, which he fears to keep, and abhorres to lose, who as he lives without
love, so dies without tears, without pity, save that they say it was pity he
died no sooner. What shall become of these that protect what they worship, and
want what they abound in? They shall perish, their memorial shall perish, and
well were it, if as their bodies perish, so their souls might so perish as to
be no more. But how truly should it possess your souls with joy, blessed and
beloved, who have fed, and clothed, and cured, and visited, the weak sick
members of Christ Jesus? Your alms is come up before God, and as the smoke of
the Incense, from the Censor of the Angel, or the Golden Altar, before the
Throne. Ye faithful Deputies of your Master, blessed are ye, great is your
reward in heaven, you that are the trusty Treasurers of the poor and needy,
and all ye the approved Governors of the Hospitals of this City, ye are the
executors of Christ's Legacy, which was only this, The poor ye shall have
always with you: for when he bequeathed his Church to his Disciples, and his
garments to his Soldiers, his mother to John, and his body to Joseph, but the
poor he commended to his Church, and you are some of his executors, and have
the poor always with you. It is the speech of Bonauerture, Hoc piarum mentium
est, vt nihil sibi tribuant: It is the property of holy minds, that they
attribute nothing to themselves, but only to the grace of God. I would not
blast you with an infectious breath of flattery, or with this precious balm
break your heads; nor would I be sparing to give your memorial what God has
allowed you, seeing you are so free in paying those Legacies that Christ has
appointed you. It is no small honor to be one of the Masters of an Hospital:
Stephen (...), Stephen the first Martyr, and first Deacon, was no other then
Treasurer for the poor: Paul was Collector for the poor, and Christ himself
Ouerseer for the poor; for our Savior ever coming into the Temple, cast his
eye to see what was cast into the Treasury for the poor. It should be no
small joy to your souls, to consider that God vouchsafes the name of
righteousness to Almsdeeds: (...) Iustus. Misericors. Hier.
(...), Psalm. 112.9. He has dispersed and given to the poor, his
righteousness endures for ever. So S. Paul rehearses it, 2 Cor 9.9. where
the fruit of righteousness is esteemed righteousness, and is assured of an
eternal memorial. You, and your Almsdeeds, and your Almesmen, and your
Almes-houses, shall be had in everlasting remembrance. He that has left this
woman for this work this memorial, I doubt not but his gracious presence is
with us, his blessed eyes over us, his sacred ears open unto us, this morning
to hear this memorial of your bounty and mercy, and to receive this account
of the Talents that this year he has trusted you with.

CHildren kept at this present at charges in Christ's Hospital, in the house,
diverse places in the City, and with sundry nurses in the Country -- 736
Children put forth Apprentises, discharged and dead this year out of Christ's
Hospital. -- 59 There has bin cured this year past in St Bartholmewes
Hospital, of Soldiers and other diseased people. -- 512 There is in the said
Hospital under cure at this present. -- 235 There has been cured this year
past in St Thomas Hospital, of Soldiers and other diseased people. -- 826
There is in the said Hospital under cure at this present -- 236
A report for Bridewell.
THere has been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell within the space of one
year last past, of wandering soldiers and other vagrant people, which have
been passed thence into their native Countries by pasports (according to the
Law in that case provided) to the number of 1810. of whom many have been
chargeable to the said Hospital in their diet, for the time of their being in
the same, some more, some less, as they might thence be conveniently removed,
besides other helps there ministered unto many of them, as cause required: viz.
in hose, shoes, shirts, bands, money, and such like, which cannot be avoided
by reason of their misery, nor they thence passed without charge to the said
Hospital, in respect they are to be examined, and considered of, to what
Country to be transported. Also there is in the said Hospital maintained and
kept in Arts and occupations, and other servile works and labors, at the
charges of the said Hospital, of men, women, and children, to the number of
100 persons, whereof 60 and upwards are poor boys taken out of diverse Parishes
and streets of this City, and now bound Apprentises in the said Hospital to
be made freemen of this City at the end of their several Terms.

I have but one word more, my last part, but one word, Wheresoever, of which
but a word. Wheresoever, the place unlimited, infinite, (...), wheresoever.
Salomons fame never went further, the circuit of the Sun is not greater,
(...) is (...), vbicunque, vbique. The Church was as Noah's Arc, Abraham's
progeny, Jobs family, Nebuchadnezors furnace, Eliahs complaint, but now God
is known upon all the earth, his saving health among all Nations. The Apostles
were latent, which the door shut, the Christians silent, their lives couped,
the Antebunni, hymni, and private Liturgy were solitary; now God, even our
own God, has blessed us, and all the ends of the world shall fear him. This
Gospel, this woman, this work, this memorial, shall be wheresoever: A
blessed work, that is so emblazoned. Indi, Scitha, Thraces, Sauromatae,
Roffensis detribus Magdal.
quique Mauritaniam, quique Orthigias Insulas habitant, quod in domicilio
pauperis factum est a muliere, magna voce praedicant, says Chrysostom: Et vix
pro Christiano habeatur, qui non tenuerit nomen eius, says Gregory. A holy
work it was that was so honored, and it so continued, so repeated, says
Roffensis, Singulis annis per totum Christianitatis orbem in celeberrimo
Paschae Festo per tot Sacerdotum bursas, per tot Pontificum linguas, per tot
praedicantium tubas, hunc de Maria hymnum pronunciars. Wheresoever this Gospel
is preached: That not only already Peter at Antioch, and John in all Asia,
James in Jerusalem, and Paul at Rome, Philip at Caesarea, and Mark at
Alexandria, have long since honored this happy work of Mary: That Timothy at
Ephesus, and Titus at Crete, Polycarpus at Smyrna, Paulinus at Nola, Primasius
at Vtica, Eucherius at Lions, Chrysostom at Constantinople, Cyprian at
Carthage, Ambrose at Myllaine, Austine at Hyppo: The glorious company of the
Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Preachers, the noble army of Martyrs,
the holy Church throughout all the world wheresoever, does knowledge this
memory of the ointment of Mary, and that the memorial thereof does attend the
Gospel. Whence issues this last conclusion, Where the Gospel of Christ's
Passion and Resurrection is preached, Doct.
there the necessity of good works should be urged: The Reason, because they
be the manifest signs of our faith, and belief of the Gospel of Christ.
Faith is showed by works, the tree by the fruit, the stream by the fountain,
the light by the Sun. Our Savior is he that has done to us great things,
whereof we may rejoice, and holy is his Name. We must perform some service
for him to glorify his Name. He has been made poor, to make us rich, holy
is his Name. They that be rich, should for his sake succor the poor, to
glorify his Name. Our Savior did ever some good work at the Passover, which
was the greatest Feast of the whole year, and the greatest work of our
Redemption he performed at this Feast of the Passover, Holy is his Name. The
act, the feast, the time, the meeting, the glad tidings, the Gospel of this
Passover, this Gospel at the Passover, should bring forth some fruit to
glorify his name.

To conclude therefore this last point, Use.
the use hereof is to stir up all of us to imitate their first practice, who
first heard this doctrine of Christ's Passion and Resurrection, Acts 2.23.24.
Peter preached to some devout men of every Nation under heaven, that Jesus whom
they had crucified and slain, God had raised him up from the dead: This was
this Gospel. Observe from the 41. verse the fruit of this preaching, they
gladly received this word, 3000. souls were added to the Church: in the 44.
they believed, and sold their possessions, and goods, and parted them to every
man that had need. Here was the fruit of their faith, Doct.
the true use of the Doctrine of Christ's Death and Resurrection. Beloved, let
the same mind be also in you. The Christian Primitiues were no Possessiues:
the poor did not envy the rich, non enim ita diuites, none were so rich,
says Chrysostom; the rich did not despise the poor, for none were so poor.
They sold possessions to relieve the necessities and wants of the Saints: To
do good therefore, and to distribute, forget not; for with such sacrifices God
is pleased. Conclusion.
And such sacrifices this day have ye offered. Our Savior at the Passover
says Rupertus, R^ert.
fed the 5000. the number is great that ye have fed, clothed, cured; LONDON
is rep esented here like L^dia the purple seller, or as Dorcas full of goo^
wo^kes and almesdeeds, which she has done. The^^ poor men, and widows, and
children show the garments and coats, which Dorcas has made.

Stant inopes vidu^ij greges and ^r^c^ia morserant,

Exunijs enera a su^s. Beh^ld the beauty of this daughter of Syon, as an
orch^rd of sweet fruits, or a garden of sweet flowers, as R^ses or Ly^ies, as a
bed of violets, so do these poor Orphans, and I^f^nts, and indigent souls
appear this day, in ^his place, before God, and men, and Angels. This City as
Mary has powered out her ointment on the body of our Savior, and anointed the
feet in these his members: and for this, this whole land is filled with the
odor of your ointment. Posterity will honor your memory, the Christian world
in the days of your Childrens children shall rejoice in your memorial: Not
fame only, but God shall make you a monument, that shall never have an end. I
hope you have also anointed Christ's head at this solemn meeting, by
celebrating the great feast of Christ's resurrection, to the glory of God the
Father, the same mind should be in us, the same mind should be intended by
us: it was his end, it should be our end. To end all then, if this be our end,
why should we doubt but the Angel will descend at this time into the poole of
Bethesda, and some impotent man that never yet did good may be healed? Some
dry- withered-couetous hand may be cured. You have duly observed Christ's rule
in the feast; now you keep the feast you have called the poor, and the same,
and the blind. This feast is the time that the Jews kept their feast of first
fruits. The first fruits of Zacheus faith are found Luke 19.8. Behold Lord the
half of my goods I give to the poor. If Zacheus be dead without issue, yet at
least, let every one do some good, every one carry home some spikenard to
embalme their bodies for the burial, every one bring forth some fruit of the
resurrection; every one add somewhat to the joy of the Angels in heaven. If
all the Angels rejoice at the conversion of a sinner, o what is the joy at this
feast in heaven, for the resurrection of our Savior! Every tree and pl^nt, and
fruit, and flower, and herb for the use of man creepes out of the earth to
celebrate the resurrection of Christ. Does God cloth the grass of the earth,
the lillyes of the field, how much more cares he for you, o ye of little
faith? Let every one at this feast of first fruits, bring forth some fruit
worthy amendment of life. Every one has his talent, every one shall bear his
own burden, every one shall stand before the Tribunal seat of God: every
tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and every man's
blood shall be on his own head, and tribulation, and anguish shall be on every
wicked soul: but glory, and honor, and peace, and immortality to every man
that works good, and to the Israel of God, and all shall live to the glory of
God the father. Glory be to this God the Father, to Christ Jesus his Son our
Savior, and to the Holy Ghost his Spirit our comforter, as it was in the
beginning, so now let it be in this place, and in all congregations of the
Saints, this day, and all the days of our lives for evermore. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

