Ianitor Animae: THE SOVLES PORTER To cast out sin, and to keep out sin.

A TREATISE Of the Fear of God.

WRITTEN By WILLIAM PRICE, Batchelour of Divinity, and Vicar of Brigstocke in
Northamptonshire.

The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom.

PRO. 1 7. Let us hear the conclusion of all, Fear God.

Eccles. 12.13. Timor praesens securitatem generat sempiternam.

Aug. LONDON, Printed by I. D. for John Cowper at the holy Lamb at the East
end of S. Paul's Church. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Lord WILLIAM, E^rl^ of S^^t^bury, Vi^ount C^t^
b^rre, Ba^on of ^ss^^t^^, Captain of his Majestie^ Pensi^ne s, Knight of the
n^ble order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most hon^u^able privy
Council, and his most noble Patron; Together with the right honorable, the
Lady ^ath^^ine, C^un^^lle of S^lt^^ury, and his most noble L^dy; h^ ^o^thy
examples of the (...) and pra^tiz^ o^ time pr^t^^ and religion, Wi^liam Price
their devoted O^^t^^^^ and Chaplain wi^h^th the b^st of blessin^s from the
b^st of B^in^s.
May it please your H^^^urs;
I Prefix your worthy and great names before this plain and unpolished
Discourse: not that I intend to thrust my pen into any quarrelsome theme, that
may provoke the fury of the Dans of this world, Genesis 49.17
that serpent-like lie in the paths, to bite the heel of every passenger;
between whom and me, I should entreat your Honors as a screen, to interpose,
to hide me from their rage. For surely, no Christian has so far changed his
humanity with a beast, or cast himself so many degrees behind the purblinde
Gentiles, as professedly to bear arms against a Book honored with the title
of the Fear of God. Neither dare I over-weeningly presume, that there is any
thing in the style or conveyance of the subject in hand, that meriteth an
admission into your Honors closets, much less into the Cabinet of your more
serious thoughts, or that may attract an eye of favor from you. My weekly
laboring in Gods Harvest, forbids pomp in language, and ambition of
quotation. Next the advancement of Gods glory (which as our ultimate end, ought
to regulate, moderate, stint, and bound our actions) the scope that I level
at, is the unfeigned expression of my gratitude, and service, which your
constant countenance, your undeserved bounty, your propitious acceptance of my
mean fore-past labors, does more than challenge from me, who desires no
longer to draw his breath, than he shall study to approve himself

Your Honors Chaplain in all humble observance, William Price.

The Contents of the several Chapters in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. THE Introduction, p. 1. Chap. 2. Of the nature and kinds both of
fear in general, and of the fear of God in particular. p. 5. Chap. 3. How
God being the chiefest good, can be feared. p. 40 Chap. 4. Whether Adam in the
state of innocence feared God? and whether the Angels and Saints in heaven
fear God? p. 45 Chap. 5. How the fear of God can stand with the love of God,
with joy, faith and hope in God. p. 48 Chap. 6. How far the filial fear of
God may stand with the fear of man. p. 56 Chap. 7. Whether the fear of
Judgment he contrary to the filial fear of God? p. 76 Chap. 8. The proper
distinguishable symptoms of the fear of God: and first of those absolute
signs that discover the essential ingredients that constitute the genuine
fear of God. 81 Chap. 9. Of those signs that put a difference between the
slavish and the filial fear of God. p. 108 Chap. 10. Of those signs that
discover whether we fear God more than man, or man more than God? 131 Chap.
11. A dehortation from those sins that are contrary to the fear of God: and
first of carnal security, with the remedies thereof. p. 156 Chap. 12. Of
audacious presumption in sinning, and the antidot against it. 178 Chap. 13. Of
superstitious fear, and the counterpoyson against it. p. 204 Chap. 14. Of the
servile fear of God. p. 215 Chap. 15. Of the excessive fear of the creature.
219 Chap. 16. A serious exhortation to the fear of God: and first of the manner
how we ought to fear God. 226 Chap. 17. The means whereby the fear of God
may be wrought and increased p. 248 Chap. 18. Arguments for, and motives unto
the fear of God p. 253
Perlegi librum hunc, cui titulus est, Ianitor Animae, cumque typis mandari
permitto.

Sa Baker.
Ex aedibus Londin. Maij penult. 1637.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
IT is the triumph of this Theological virtue of the Fear of God, that those
who have least affinity with it, yet applaud it, and profess it: And it is my
happiness, that nothing can commend a grace, that is not with advantage
excentred in this. If I should here declare the nobility, excellency, and
transcendencie of the fear of God in it self; and the utilitie, and absolute
indispensable necessity of it in reference to us, I should but fore-stall and
prevent my self. It is sufficient to premise, both to excuse my writing, and
to provoke all Christians advisedly, diligently, and thoroughly to read this
ensuing discourse: that, though many have brief essays, yet few, or none,
have done this Royal grace the honor, or right to allot unto it a complete
full treatise. And that that may invite alleyes and minds hither, is this
consideration, that when many other graces are peculiarly pertinent to persons,
as they are members of a family in the threefold combination therein; between
husband and wife, parent and child, master and servant. Or as they are members
of a politic body, ecclesiastical or civil. And when other duties receive
specification and restriction from circumstances of time and place, this of the
fear of God, like a well limbed picture, casts an eye on all that look on
it. It corresponds to all persons, none excluded. It is seasonable at all
times, sacred and common; especially when the scourges of God lie upon
neighboring Nations, and threaten us. And the thoughts hereof may justly in
all places, press upon us, without being guilty of unmannerly instruction.

Now, for the methodicall contriving of this discourse, I shall (by divine
assistance) pursue that order that may most aptly answer the subject matter,
and may be most facile and appliable to the minds and memories of the Readers.

CHAP. II. Of the nature and kinds both of fear in general, and of the fear
of God in particular.
THE first inquiry will be, What the fear of God is. Where the nature and
kinds both of fear in general, and in particular of the fear of God, will
opportunely fall in.

Now to penetrate the depth of this Quaere, we must distinguish of fear.

1. As it is a natural affection indifferent in it self; neither morally
good, nor evil.

2. As it is a habit or quality inherent in the affection.

If we consider fear as it is a natural affection implanted in the reasonable
Soul of man, indifferent in it self, neither morally good nor evil: Then

1. The nature of fear.
For the general nature of it, it

1. Either stands aloof, at some distance from its object, admiring and
reverencing it: Or

2. It is averse from its object. For affections are of two sorts, Either such
as cleave unto, and desire a near union with their object, as faith, love, and
hope: or such as turn from, and desire a perpetual separation from their
object, as hatred, and some kind of fear.

2 The subject of fear.
2. If we look into the subject, wherein this affection of fear is implanted,
it will be found to reside,

1. In the sensitive appetite: for there is a rational appetite, and that is
the will that usually follows the dictate the guidance of the understanding.
And there is an inferior sensitive appetite, which contains within its verge,
the passions, perturbations, or affections, which often run before the
understanding and the will; being more rash, precipitant, and headstrong; and
one of these affections is fear.

2. There is a double faculty in the sensitive appetite; namely, the
concupiscible faculty which looks on the object under the notion of good or
evil. To which head the affections of love, joy, and grief are referred.

The other is called the Irascible faculty, which looks on the object under
the notion of difficulty; to which head are to be reduced, hope, which looks
on a good hard to be obtained; and fear that looks on some evil, hard to
be avoided. This is the subject wherein fear dwells.

3. The object of fear
3. For the object of fear, it is

1. Sometimes something good, which we esteem, and fear to lose.

2. Sometimes it is something that is great and potent, which we fear to
offend.

3. Sometimes it is something full of Majesty, excellency, and glory, which
we fear with a reverential fear, with a fear of observance.

4. Sometimes it is something evil: that is, either that which is evil in it
self; in its own nature, or that which seems to us to be evil; or that
which may prove perniicous and prejudicial unto us.

And the evil which we fear is,

1. Future, to come, we are troubled for those things that may come to pass.
Math. 24.6.
If an evil be present, we feel it, we hate it, we grieve under it: if it be
to come, we fear it.

2. As the object of fear is the futurity of evil: so also the propinquitie
and imminencie of it. We fear that evil most, that hangs over our heads,
ready to seize us: that like a mastive lies at the door, Genesis 4 7.
waiting but the opening thereof, that he might fly in our faces. Therefore to
affright men from envy and malice, Saint James says, that the Judge stands
before the doors. James 5.9.


3. The object of fear is as the nearenesse, so the unavoy dablenesse, the
unresistablenesse of evil; evil, that like the travail of a woman, 2 These.
5.3
cannot be escaped.

We see what the affection of fear is.

Next, we must consider fear as it is a habit, or quality inherent in the
affection. And so fear is either moral or spiritual. Moral feate.


Moral fear, is eitherthat virtue that is opposite to audaciousnesse, where
by we fear and shun those things that are contradictory to the principles of
moral virtue and rectisied reason. Or else it is taken for that fear that we
call Pusillanimity, that is contrary to fortitude or magnanimity: when a man is
so timorous, that as Solomon speaks of the sluggard, he cries when he is put
upon any action that there is a Lion in the way: When a man fears more the
show and shadow of evil, than the evil it self; as children fear more the
vizor, than the man: when a man fears that least, that he should fear most;
and that most, that he should fear least. As our brainlesse Duellers fear
more the loss of reputation, when it may be they never had any, than they
fear the loss of their souls. And therefore wisemen know such single
combatants to be the grossest cowards, because they in such a degree, fear a
cross word, or the giving of the lie. And cowards are most cruel, for they
will be sure to kill, if they can, lest their enemy surviving them, should
after be revenged upon them. This is moral fear.

Spiritual fear.
2. What spiritual fear is, we shall perceive by two or three profitable
distinctions, which do reflect one upon another; and con tribute mutual light
each to other, and all of them do illustrate the matter in hand.

The first distinction.
The first distinction is, that spiritual fear is five-fold. 1. The fear of a
guilty conscience. 2. The fear of a seave. 3. The fear of a servant. 4. The
fear of a son. 5. The fear of a chaste and a loving Wife.

There is a spiritual fear proceeding from a selfe-accusing conscience, that
is like the fear of a Felon, either ready to be apprehended, or standing at
the bar before his Judge: when a man only fears GOD as his Judge, or as his
executioner. And this fear is joined with a hatred of God, and with a secret
wish, that there were no God to condemn us. And this fear is lively and
graphically expressed in holy Scripture. It was in Adam after his defection, He
hid him for fear among the Trees of the Garden. Genesis 3.8.
It was in Cain after he had made his brother Abel the first Martyr, and
himself the first murderer. It shall come to pass, Genesis 4.14.
says he, that every man that meets me, shall stay me. His guilty fear
presented him with troops of men, when there were none almost besides himself
in the world; and with a thousand deaths, when he could dye but once. Levit.
26.36. Pro. 28.1.
The sound of an Aspen leaf shall chase the disobedient. Geen. 20 4.
The wicked flies when no man pursues him. Ier. 20.4.
They are a terror to themselves, afraid of their own shadows. This guilty
fear the heathen used to compare to Sisyphus his restless rolling of the
stone, and to Prometheus his vulture, which without intermission, gnawd upon
his heart.

2. There is a slavish fear; when a man fears God as a Gallyslave fears him
that took him captive, whom he would kill, or fly from, if he could or durst.
When a man counts the commandments of God to be bonds and fetters, which they
would feign shake off; like those that cried, Let us break his bonds, Psalm.
2.3.
and cast his cords from us: When a man hates to be reformed, Psa. 50.17.
like those the Psalmist speaks of. When a man hates God, Psalm. 139.21.
(and such there are) and yet sometimes subjects to Gods command, because he
dares do no other; As King Abimelech would have taken to himself Sarah,
Abraham's wife: but that he durst not, because God told him in a dream, that
if he did, Genesis 20.3.
he was but a dead man. And Balaam would feign have cursed the people of God,
at King Balaks request, but that he durst not, though Balak would have given
him his house full of silver and gold. Number. 24.13.
Thus the Devil himself is Gods slave, and in many things obeyes God, because
he dares not disobey him. Antronius convertit se aliquando ad timoreus,
runquain ad san^tatem. Or. pro P. Sylla.
It may be said of them that thus fear God, as Cicero said of Antronius, they
turn themselves sometimes to fear, Quum quis timorep^nae bona agit, in co
ipso pe^cat, quo pe^care veliet, so inulte potuisset. Greg.
but not to faithfulness. When the fear only of punishment instigates a man
to good; in this he offends, because he would commit that evil, which he
does forbear, if his Impiety might be with impunity. This is that fear,
which Divines use to call servile fear; and Saint Basil styles an hostile
fear; Hic timor pe^candi sacultatem disserre potest, ausorre non potest: and
quos suspendit a crimine avidicres reddit ad crimen. Chrysostom.
the fear of an enemy to God. And in this it differs from the fear of an
accusing conscience, because that fear reflects upon an evil already
committed: this fear prevents the commission of many sins. The fear of a
self accusing conscience, is a slavish fear; but every slavish fear is not
the fear of a self-accusing conscience.

servile, or slavish fear. For though every slave be a servant, yet every
servant is not a slave. And though the fear of a servant be not so good as the
fear of a son, yet is better than the fear of a slave. The slavish fear is
mixed with a hatred of God; but this fear is mixed with some small degree of
the love of God. That drives a man from God, this draws a man to God: Mar.
5.33.
as that woman that trembled, yet came to Christ, and fell down before him.
This fear is, when a man having well studied the Law of GOD, and compared his
heart and life with that perfect rule, sees himself fall infinitely short of
it, and thereupon acknowledges himself liable to all the curses of God, due to
the disobedient; and utterly disclaimes all help, or worthiness of help in
himself; and stands, like a man over a Vault of Gunpowder, the match being
ready to be put to the train, and sees no safety, but in Gods mercy, and
Christ's merits, which yet he is fearful to apply to himself, lest he
should have no interest in them. This fear is, though imperfect, yet
allowable, and necessary. Romans 8.15.
Ye have not (says Saint Paul) received the spirit of bondage to fear again:
whence note, that they had before received the spirit of bondage to fear. This
fear we call an initiall fear; and every thing must have a beginning. The
Law by stirring up this fear, Gal. 3.24.
is a Schoolmaster to lead us to Christ. It is like John the Baptist, who
prepared the way of the Lord. Like the Needle, that though of it self it sewes
not, yet it leads the way to the thread that does sew. The compunction of this
fear delivers up the Soul to the kindly impression of love. Compunct io for
midin^^ tra. lit animum compunctioni dilectionis. Greg. Et unus spiritus est,
qui fecit duos timores. Aug.
And through this fear of a servant we must pass to the fear of sons; and
it is one and the same Spirit of God, that works both these fears in us: and
the one as (...) preparative to the other.

4. There is a Filial fear, which though it be joined with a greater degree
of love than is in a servant, yet with a less degree of love than is in a
loyal wise.

This Childe-like fear,

1. Stands in awe of God for his excellency, and transcendent glory, though it
expect no evil from God, but good. It will keep a wary distance, and not be
over-daringly bold. When God has given Jacob fair promises in his sleep; yet
awaking he was a fraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! Genesis 28.16.17.
This is no other than the house of God: This is the gate of Heaven. And this
is called, a fearing before, Eccles. 8.12.
or in the presence of God. As when a man stands before his Prince, his Majesty
strikes a trembling awe into him; though otherwise he have no reason to be
afraid, his conscience bearing him witness, that he has not any way
willingly incurred his Princes displeasure. This is the fear of reverence.

2. As this filial fear is Reverentiall: so it is Careful, that God our
heavenly Father, may no way be displeased by us, not only because that Gods
displeasure may shower down in punishments upon us; but because he is our
Father, whom we have a tender care to please, he having deserved the flower of
our affection, and service. Psalm. 130.4.
There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared, says David.

5. And lastly, there is the fear of a loving and loyal wife: when a man
fears God, as a kind wife fears an indulgent husband. And this I make to
differ from filial fear, not in kind, but in degree. This Conjugall fear is
matched with an unspeakable melting love, and a constant care that no
unkindnesse happen. A son may express his love, but not in that height as a
wife may. And though the wife be without servile fear, yet she exceedes the
son in a fearful (but loving) Care, that her husband be not displeased,
that affection between them may not grow dull and remiss; that there may be no
cause given, that may occasion so much as a frown, or a cross word, much
less a separation. Saint Augustine sweetly sets this forth, in comparing
servile and filial fear of God, with a harlots and a good wives fear of
their husbands One fears left her husband should come home; Illa timet ne
venit, illa ne discedat: illa ne dam^et, illa ne d^ serat.
the other fears lest her husband should depart from her, though for a small
time. The one fears lest her husband should chide or strike her, the other
fears lest he should forsake her. To which I may add, the one fears lest
her husband should be angry with her; the other fears lest he should be angry
at all. The one fears her own vexation, the other fears her husbands
disquiet. This is the genuine true bred fear of God; which S. Paul makes a
sign of true repentance, 2 Cor. 7.11.
never to be repented of. What carfulness has it wrought in you? yea, what
fear? that is, what care, what fear, that the glory of God may not suffer
through you. And so much for the first distinction; where in, under several
resemblances I have shadowed out but two fears in effect, the slavish and the
filial fear of God: though they obtain several names by reason of their
different degrees, and extents of their operations.

The second distinction
The second distinction is this, that there is a forced fear, and a voluntary
fear of God.

1. The forced is the guilty, the slavish fear. For he that is possessed with
it, labors to drive it away; to drown it with drinking, merriment, joviall
company, vain discourse, or obscene songs: as the ancient Italians would
confound the noyce of thunder with the sound of Bells.

This was Belshazzars fear, Dan. 5.5.6.
when God sent a hand to write his doom upon the wall before his face; he
would feign have continued his mirth, but it would not be: for will he, nill
he, his countenance was changed, his thoghts troubled him, so that the joints
of his loins were loosed, and his knees knocked one against the other. Such was
the fear of Felix the Roman Governor, when he sent for Paul to speak before
him, he was so far from thinking, that Paul should terrify him, that he
thought to terrify Paul: For when S. Pa l reasoned of Righteousness, Act.
24.24.25.
and Temperance, and the Judgment to come, Felix trembled. And he dismissed
Saint Paul, that he might rid himself of those fits and qualmes of fear.

2. There is a voluntary, free, unconstrained fear of God; and such is the
filial fear: A fear that is desired, and prized by him that fears. It is
thirsted after: Nehem. 1.11.
We desire to fear thy Name, says Nehemiah. It is prayed for: Unite my heart
to fear thy Name, Psa. 86.11.
says David. It is a fear that a Saint dedicates, and gives up himself unto.
Psa. 119.38.
Thy servant (says David) who is devoted to thy fear. It is a fear that by
the fearer is esteemed and valued at a high rate. The fear of the Lord is his
treasure. Esaias 33.6.
This is the second distinction.

The third distinction is this: The third distinction.


There is a fourefold fear of GOD.

1. A fear that flows from the Spirit of God, but is not resident in the
heart with the Spirit of God: and this is that initiall fear that paves a path
for the Spirit of Adoption, and for the true filial fear. The Spirit works
many a common grace in that heart wherein it self is not: as it works this
fear. As the Sun before it rises, darts light into that part of the heaven,
and air wherein he himself is not. This fear is from the Spirit, but not
with the Spirit.

2. There is a fear where the Spirit of God is, and yet it flows not from the
Spirit: as many things may be done by children, or servants in a house, where
the father or master is, and yet they may not be the authors of them. Thus a
soul, that is the mansion of the holy spirit of God, may harbor in it carnal
distrustful fears, and cares, that the Spirit of GOD has no hand in. This
was David's fear, that was joined with a diffidence in Gods many promises made
unto him to the contrary. I shall perish one day, 18 am. 27.1.
says he, by the hand of Saul. This fear was with, but not from the Spirit.

3. There is a fear, that neither proceeds from, nor is joined with the
Spirit of God. Such is that unsanctified slavish fear, that turns the
affection from God, and moves a man to fly from God. It was the fear of those
in the Psalmist, that were in fear where no fear was: Psalm. 53.3.5.
and yet they turned back from God, they were filthy, they devoured Gods
people, they called not upon God. This fear is neither with, nor from the
Spirit.

filial fear. The Spirit of God is styled the spirit of this fear; Isai.
11.2.
because it is both from the Spirit, and with the Spirit.

These distinctions being well weighed, will cast such beams of light upon the
matter in quest, that he that runs, may read the full comprehension of the
nature of the fear of God.

CHAP. III. How God, being the chiefest good, can be feared.
IF it be demanded, how GOD, being good in himself, and good to all, can be
feared, seeing we usually fear only evil?

It Is answered,

1. That we may fear God with a fear of honor and regard. If I be a father,
says God, where is my honor? Matthew. 1.6.
If I be a master, where is my sear? In that text fear and honor are all one.

2. Though God be good, and we cannot fear him as evil, yet we may fear a
loss of, and a sep^ration from our good GOD: the more good any thing is, the
more we fear the cutting off of our interest in it. And in this sense are
those words of S. Nihil timemus, nisi, neid juod amanous, aut adeptum
amittamus, aut non adipiscamur speratum. Aug.
Austine to be taken. We fear good, in fearing lest we should lose that good
we enjoy, or not obtain that good we desire or hope for.

3. We may fear our God, though he be good, because he is a great and a
just God, who is able to save and to destroy, I am. 4.12. (...). Arist. Rhet.
l. 2. c. 5.
as St. James speaks Those things (says Aristotle) are to be feared, which
have an apparent power to inflict great punishments upon us, and to do us much
hurt. And this agrees with that of our Savior, Fear him who is able to
destroy both body and soul. Math. 10.28. All punishment comes from God, but in
that respect punishment is good, because it is a work of Justice. Thus we may
fear GOD, though he be good.

Lastly, we may be fearful of offending God, in the ingenuity of our
dispositions; because he has been, and is every way so good a God unto us.
Psalm 30.4 1 Samuel 12.24.
There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, says David. And these
two duties are joined together, Fear the Lord; and, Consider what great things
he has done for you. We fear God, not only for that evil that he may do
against us, but also for that good that he has done for us. Nay, fear of God
is? thing so proper, that some deriv^ (...), the name of God, from (...), which
signifies fear.

And why is GOD said to be fearful in praises, Exodus 15.11.
but because we both fear and praise him for his greatness and his goodness?
The object both of fear and praise may be the same. And to this sounds that of
the Prophet, They shall fear the Lord, Hosea 3.5.
and his goodness in the latter days.

CHAP. IIII. Whether Adam in the state of innocence feared God? and whether
the Angels and Saints in heaven fear God?
ADAM had the natural affection of fear in his Soul while he stood, though
he had no occasion to bring it into act, till after he fell. As Adam standing,
had a power, a faculty in him to be pitiful, if there had been an object
whereupon to exercise his pity. And there is no question, but in his innocent
estate, he feared God with the fear of honor, reverence, and observance.

Next, for the Angels and Saints in heaven, though that place will admit of no
fear of punishment; because no evil is possibly incident to the blessed: for
the celestial pararadise is a mansion of eternal security, wherein the
enioyers are not only safe, but sure they are safe. Et silvi and securt.
But yet it does not derogate from their happiness, to say, that those that
are in heaven, do fear God with a fear of honor and reverence, which St
Austin calls a secure fear. Timor securus. Aug.
And Gregory in his Morals, speaking of those words in Job, the pillars of
heaven tremble, says, Job. 26.11.
The powers in heaven stand in awe in the contemplation of God: Virtutes
coelestes in Dei contemplatione contremiscunt. Greg. Non timor paenalis, sed
^dmtrationis.
which fear he says, is not a penal fear, but a fear of admiration,
ecstasy, astonishment at the transcendent immensity of Gods glory. And we
shall offer no violence to that, Psalm. 19.9. The fear of God endures for ever;
and that Ier. 32.39. I will give them a heart to fear me for ever, if we
fasten this sense upon them.

CHAP. V. How the fear of God can stand with the love of God, with joy, faith,
and hope in God.
IT may be questioned next, How the fear of God can consist, and stand with
the love of God, and with joy, faith, and hope in God, since it is said, that
perfect love casts out fear: 1 Ioh, 4.18.
and fear and joy, fear and faith; fear and hope, seem to be plain
contraries, and to exclude each other.

To resolve which doubts, we must know,

1. For the love of God; that, though nothing is more opposite, than sincere
love, and slavish fear; yet none are more near and dear companions, than
love and the filial fear of God. Nothing is more fearful than his love, and
nothing is more loving than his fear. Where there is love, Res est solliciti
pl^^^ timo (...)
there is a fear of the wronging of the thing beloved. Love fulfills the Law,
says S. Paul, And to fear God, and obey him, is the whole duty of man, says
Solomon.

Love is a grace that unites and knits the heart to God: and fear is an
uniting grace, Psalm. 86.11.
Unite my heart to fear thy name, says David. I will put my fear into their
hearts, Jer. 32.40.
and they shall not depart from me, says God. Fear and love keep a man
equally close to God. And the same promises are made to love and fear in the
Psalmist. Psalm. 145.18.19.


2. The case is as clear for joy in God; If fear and joy did expel each
other, David would never have said, Rejoice with trembling; Psalm. 2.11.
neither would he have joined these two counsels together: Fear the Lord,
Psalm. 112.1
and rejoice greatly in his Commandments. He that fears to offend God, has
most cause of joy. Gaudebit sapious coetert lasciviunt. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l.
14. Mat. 28.8.
He that fears God, is truly joyful, others are but wanton. It is said of the
two Mary's, that they departed with fear and great joy. So that great joy and
fear may stand together.

3. The fear of God is no more an enemy to faith in God.

Noah believed that God would bring an universal deluge upon the world, and
yet save him from it: and therefore being moved with fear, he prepared an
Ark. Heb. 11.7.
Noah being warned of God in faith and fear, built an Arc. Nothing is more
common with David, than to put faith and fear together. Taste, says he, Psalm.
34.8.9.
and see how good the Lord is, blessed is the man that trusts in him: O fear
the Lord, all ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that fear him. The
promises are made unto fear: if therefore you fear God, you may on that
ground believe, that God will make his promises good to you. You shall find
fear, joy, and faith linked together in two verses in the Psalm, All men
shall fear God, Psalm. 6^. two last verses.
the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him. Therefore the
righteous fear God, because they believe that God is just, and powerful. And
therefore many do not fear God, because they do not believe. Besides, he
that steadfastly believes that God will save him, will not therefore presume, but
fear to dishonor so gracious a God.

4. Fear and hope kiss each other also. He that hopes (says the Apostle)
purifies himself, 1 Ioh. 3.3.
that is, he fears to present his God with an unpurified heart. No man
thinks, that that man hopes to rise, who fears not to vex, cross and abuse
his Prince. A loyal subject, who fears to moove his Prince, is the man of
hopes. And therefore David chains fear and hope together. The eye of the Lord
(says he) is upon them that Psalm. 33.18.
fear him, upon them that hope in his mercy. And again, Psalm. 147.11.
the Lord takes pleasure in those that fear him, in those that hope in his
mercy.

If the Soul triumph then in the Chariot of Grace, whereof Love, Joy, and Hope
be three of the wheels, I know not why the fear of God may not be a fourth
wheel.

The Soul standing on these four, is like a four square stone, which way
soever you cast it, it falls right.

CHAP. VI. How far the filial fear of God may stand with the fear of Man.
THE filial fear of God may stand,

1. With the fear of reverence, due unto men, as they are subordinate unto
God, as they are the Deputies of God on earth. God allows that the son
should honor his father, and the servant his master; and on this very ground
he challenges fear and honor to himself. If then (says he) I be a Father,
where is my honor; Mal. 1.6.
If I be a Master, where is my fear. This fear of Man Saint Paul imposes on
us all, Render to all their due, Romans 13.7
fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor belongs: and his reason is in the
foregoing verse. For they are Gods Ministers. He cannot fear and reverence
God, whom does not fear and reverence those that are Gods substitutes. And
therefore Solomon knew what he did, when he put these two duities together, My
son, fear thou the Lord, Pro. 24.21.
and the King. Fear the Lord first, and most; but yet fear the king too, who
is Gods Vicegerent on earth. These two are not like the Arc and Dagon; they
will both stand under the roof of one heart. Who feared God more than David?
and yet who feared King Saul more than he? his heart smot him for cutting off
but the skirt of K. Saul. his garment. 1 Samuel 24.4.5.
Let the Pope, whose religion is rebellion, Form of prayer on Novem. 5.
and whose faith is faction, persuade his misled fools, and his sworn
slaves, that to fear God, and to kill Kings at his command, are two virtues of
one house. Iam. 3.17.
They whose religion is from above, pure and peaceable, know, that light and
darkness, heaven and hell; God and the devil may as well have fellowship
together. The fear of God does neither make void, nor weaken this fear of
observance toward man, but rather confirm and establish it.

2. We may filially fear God, and yet fear man, with a fear of caution:
that is, we may fear the persecution, and the society of evil men.

1. We may fear their persecutions, our Savior will justify us in it.
Behold (says he) I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; Mat.
10.16.17.23.
Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, and beware of men: for they will deliver
you up to the Councels, and they will scourge you in their Synagogues; But when
they shall persecute you in one City, fly into another. Moses fled from
Pharaoh, David from Saul, Eliah from Iezebel; Nay, our Savior himself from
the Jews, Luke 4.29.30.
when they would have cast him down a hill. When Athanasius was persecuted by
the Arrians, he made this motion to his friends, Secedamus ad tempus nubecula
est, quae cito evanescet.
Let us step aside for a time, till this tempest be overpast: it will not be
long before this little cloud vanishes. And when his persecutors upbraided him
with his flight, he returned this answer to them, Si sugere mihi turpe, vobis
me persequi turpius.
If it be a shame for me to fly, it is a greater shame for you to persecute
me. Thus we may fear persecution.

2. We may fear the society of bad men, both for the infection, and the
danger of it,

1. We have just cause to fear the contagion of ill company. Grex totus
magris, unius scabie cadit. Iuv. Cum inter homines fui, redeo inbumanior. Sen.
When I have been among men, (says Seneca) I return from them more inhumane.
Beware (says Christ) of false prophets who come to you in sheeps clothing,
Mat. 17.15
but within are ravening wolves: Like our sneaking Mass Priests, that pretend
a pity toward our souls, Haeretici sub specie corsulendi, agunt negotium
seducendi. Greg. Mot.
but their end is to make us sevenfold more the children of the Devil.
Heretics act seducers under the habits of Counselors. And of such Saint Paul
forewarnes us, and gives us their Character, Traitors, heady, 2 Timothy 3.4.5.
high-minded, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: From
such turn away.

2. We have authority for fearing as the infection, so the danger of ill
society, by no less than a voice from heaven, Come out from Babylon my
people, Rev. 18.4.
lest you be partakers of her sins, and of her plagues. We read in
Ecclesiastical history, that S. John the Apostle being in a Bath at Ephesus,
wherein Cerinthus, a grand Heretic, was bathing himself, he leaped out of the
Bath, as if he had spied a serpent, and with these words in his mouth; I fear
lest the ground should sink under me, whereon such a mortal enemy of the truth
stands.

So then, the fear of God may stand with; Nay, what if I say, it cannot stand
without this kind of fear of men?

Besides, I must add, to prevent all mistake, that Gods dearest saints and
servants may be tempted, though not habitually, yet actually to fear Man more
than God.

The fear of man moved Abraham to deny his wife Sarah, Genesis 20.2.
so that she might have been exposed to Abimelechs lust. The fear of K ng
Saul moved Samuel to refuse to go at Gods command, 1 Samuel 16.1.2.
to annoint David King. David's fear of King Achish, 1 Samuel 21.12.23.
moved him, to the dishonor both of religion and manhood, to feign himself
mad, to scrabble on the doors, and to let fall his spittle on his beard before
king Achish. Jonah the Prophet, Iona 1.2.3
his fear of the Ninivites moved him, when he was sent by God one way, to
fly another. Iona 1.2.3.
The fear of man moved Peter to deny Christ his master with an oath, Mat.
26.69.
and a bitter execration.

And yet when the Saints thus fear men,

1. The Spirit of the fear of God has residence in them. Those that are in
heaven are all spirit, and no flesh: the wicked on earth are all flesh, and no
spirit. The saints on earth are partly flesh, and partly spirit: new converts
are more flesh, less spirit. Ancient standers in the school of Grace, are
more spirit, less flesh. In all the faithful there is a combat between the
flesh and the spirit. Gal. 5.17.
The flesh and the spirit are contrary to each other, so that we cannot do the
things that we would. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. A
Christian between these two, is like a piece of iron between two load-stones,
the one draws one way, and the other the other way; like a horse under an
unskilful rider, that spurs him on, and reins him in Sometimes the spirit
has the better of the flesh; sometimes the flesh has the upper hand of the
spirit: sometimes the carnal fear of man prevails against the filial fear
of GOD. When the Saints are thus shaken and winnowed by the relics of sin in
them, and by the temptation of Satan, they are not hereby proved to be
chafe, though it appears that they are not without chafe.

2. As this fear of men in good men, is not separated from the true fear of
God: so neither from the true love of God. When S. Peter denied Christ, he did
not hate Christ, Non odio habendo Christum, s^d scipsum nimis amando.
only he loved himself too much, says Saint Bernard. It is one thing for a
man to fall through the fear of the world, another thing to fall through the
love of the world: for he that loves the world, hates God, if we believe S.
James: Iam. 4.4.
But he that sometimes over-feares the world, may yet both dearly love, and
sincerely fear God.

3. When he that fears God does thus over-feare man; he does it not with the
uninterrupted swing of his affection; but he resists this carnal fear, and
heartily desires that it were wholly expelled; and that the fear of God in him
were perfect, and unmixed. Thy servants desire to fear thy name, Nehem. 1.11.
says Nehemiah. The fear of man in them is a tyrant, that forces their
subjection, not their King, to whom they freely yield their homage.

4. When the filial fearers of God do fall thus through the fear of men,
they fall not upon premeditation, but suddenly, being surprised by temptation
unawares. The Devil takes them at an unexpected advantage. The storm comes
before they have leisure to snatch their cloak about them. As a valiant man may
startle at the sudden discharge of a piece of Ordnance behind his back; who
otherwise having time to collect and summon his spirits, would not fear to
stand at the mouth of a charged Canon in a good cause. Saint Peter was
challenged by the damsel suddenly, before he could have respite to reach to
his weapon of faith to draw it; whereas had he had never so little time to
have recollected himself, his tongue would never have so grossly transgressed
its bounds.

5. Though a child of God be thus for the present scared by man, yet let him
alone a while, and he will return to his true temper, he will recover his
guard again, and his spiritual will conquer his carnal fear. As if you
shake the Compass, the Needle may be turned from the North; but let the
Compass stand still a while, and then the Needle will point full toward the
Northstarre. The most skillful Pilote may in a storm, be forced from his
intended scope, and port, who when the winds are silenced, will steer a right
course again. Put oil and water into a glass together, and shake the glass,
the water it may be, may get uppermost, but let the glass stand a while, and
the oil will, like a triumphant liquor, recover the supereminence. Though
Saint Peter in the time of temptation, did deny his master, yet presently
after, when he came to himself, he wept bitterly for it: and after that he
confessed Christ stoutly a fore a Council, who before denied him before a
Damsel: and he sealed his profession with his blood. Ecebolius, who in
Iulians time, revolted from the truth for the fear of man, did afterward cast
himself down in the sight of all, and cried in the hearing of all, Kick me
unsavory salt. Calcate me salem insipidum.
And Archbishop Cranmer, who for fear, had subscribed to many popish Articles,
after suffered for the truth; and he first thrust that hand into the flame,
wherewith he had subscribed. Thus, as it was said of Gad, A Troop shall
overcome him, Genesis 49.19.
but he shall overcome at the last. So fleshly fear may for a time overcome a
fear of God, but he who filially fears God, shall overcome at the last.

CHAP. VII. Whether the fear of judgment be contrary to the filial fear of
God?
THis doubt we resolve negatively:

For first, it is but natural to fear that that is contrary to nature. Though
Grace be above Nature, yet it is not contrary to Nature.

2. The best Saints have stood in awe o^ Gods judgments, and their fear is
recorded in holy Scripture to their praise. Psalm. 119.^20.
My fles^ says David) trembles for fear of thee, and I an afraid of thy
judgments. When I heard (says the Prophet) my belly trembled, Hab, 3.16.
my lips quivered, rottenness entered into my benes.

3. There is much good included in the fear of Gods judgments:

For first, it softens and melts the heart; the heart of the King of Judah was
tender, 2 Chton. 34.27.
when he heard God his threatenings.

2. This fear humbles the soul, and lays a man low in his own eyes. Psalm.
9. last. verse.
Put the heathen in fear, O Lord (says David) that they may know themselves
to be but men. Through the fear of the majesty, and the judgments of God,
(says the Prophet) the losty looks of man shall be humbled, Esaias 2.10.11.
and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down.

3. This fear preventeth the commission of many a sin. Laban would have
mischieved Jacob, but he durst not. Genesis 31.29.
Balaam would have cursed the people of God, Numb. 22.33.34.
if he had dared to have adventured: for the Angel of the Lord met him with a
drawn sword, and intercepted his purpose. Thus the fear of judgment is a
softner, a humbler, a preventer of sin. It softens the heart, as fire
dissolves the solidest, hardest metal. It humbles the heart, as thunder lays
prostrate the tallest, stoutest Cedars. It prevents much mischief, and so it
is like a hedge of thorns in a man's way, Hosea 2.6.
to keep him from breaking his bounds.

Therefore this fear is not evil in it self, but good, and necessary. For if
rulers are to be feared, because they are ministers to execute vengeance upon
evil doers; Romans 13.4
then GOD is much more to be feared for his vengeance, according to that of
the Apostle, Serve God with fear: Heb. 12.28.29.
for our God is a consuming fire: Where the fear of God, even upon this ground
is warranted.

CHAP. VIII. The proper distinguishable symptoms of the fear of God. And
first of those absolute signs that discover the essential ingredients that
constitute the genuine fear of God.
THese signs are many. Give me leave to present the Reader with the picture in
great, of him who fears God; and yet I shall be compelled, through the
variety and fullness of this subject, to do as they that draw Mappes of the
world, who set down a line for a river, and a spot for a whole country.

1. They that fear God, have a high reverend, awful, respective estimation
both of God, and of his Ordinances.

That thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. GODS Name.
THE LORD THY GOD, says Moses. That is for reverence toward the name of God.

With fear you received Titus; that is, with respect and reverence, 2 Cor.
7.15. Gods Ministers.
(says Saint Paul) There is reverence toward the Ministers of God.

When Jacob awaked out of his sleep, Genesis 28.16.17. The place of Gods worship.
in the place where God spoke to him in a dream; he said, Surely the Lord is
in this place, and I was not aware of it: and he was afraid, and said, How
dreadful is this place! this is no other but the house of God, and the gate of
heaven. That is for reverence in the place, wherein God shall be pleased to
manifest himself to us: and more specially the Church, the congregation of the
Saints.

He that fears God, will not be rash to utter any thing before God, because he
sees, and acknowledges such a vast distance between God and him; God being in
heaven, and he on the earth: as Solomon says in his book of his
Retractations, He that fears God, Eccles. 5.2.
fears before God, it is Salomons expression, Eccles. 8.13.13.
that is, in the presence of God, which is most manifest, and constant in his
holy Temple. The Lord is in his holy Temple, Psalm. 11.4.
says David; though his Throne be in heaven, the temple is his house, his
court, Psalm. 84.1.24.
as David styles it. This was David's fear; Psalm. 5.7.
I will come (says he) into thy house, and in thy fear will I worship toward
thy holy Temple. This was the fear of Levi, says God of him, Mal. 2.5.
He was afraid before my Name, that is, he was reverent in my worship. And
therefore these two are joined together in St. John, Fear God, Rev. 14.7.
and glorify and worship him. To glorify God in a reverent worshipping of
him, is to fear God. It is the song of the Saints in heaven, Who shall not
fear thee, Rev. 15.4.
O Lord, and glorify thy Name: For all Nations shall come and worship before
thee.

Sum up all, it amounts to this, He that fears God, reverences the name of
God, hohours the messengers of God, he behaves himself reverently in the
place of Gods worship: in the parts of Gods worship, in prayer, in preaching,
in hearing; in administering and participating the holy Sacrament. On the other
side, he that can blasphemously, toss and tear the awful name of God, by
hellish swearing, and divellish cursing; he that can take the sacred name of
God into his mouth, when there is little or no thought of it in his heart: Esa.
29.13.
he that disesteemes, undervalues, despises, scorns, mocks the messengers of
God; he that puts no difference between Gods house and his own; 1 Cor. 11.22.
between the sacramental Bread and Wine, consecrated to configure such
mysteries, 1 Cor. 11.29.
and common bread and wine; he that can willingly sleep or otherwise
regardlesly, oscitantly demean himself in the service of his God; he has no
fear of God before his eyes.

2. He that fears God, will thirst to be fully acquainted with the whole
will of God, that so through ignorance, or mistake, he may neither neglect
what God commands, nor do what he forbids, nor misdoe, nor over-doe any
thing. This is called proving, or searching what is the good and acceptable
will of God, Romans 12.2.
what he accepts, what he mislikes. It was King David's prayer, Psa. 86.11.
Teach me thy way, O Lord: unite my heart to fear thy name. He manifests his
desire to fear God, by desiring that GOD would teach him his way. This he
requests more than once in one Psalm; Psalm. 119.12 26.33.
teach me thy statutes: teach me the way of thy statutes. As that son that
fears his father, will punctually inquire into his fathers disposition and
will, what he likes, what displeases him. But he that takes no care to build up
himself in the knowledge of the will of God, but contents himself with
ignorance; nay, it may be, winks against the light, the beams whereof would
otherwise dart into, and irradiate up on his soul: on purpose that he might
sin more freely, without check of conscience, Gravis mile cons ientiae lux est^
en. Epist. 123.
which being enlightened; would do its office in accusing: That man does not
fear God. Of this stamp were those, whereof Job speaks, Job. 21.14
that said unto God, We desire not the knowledge of thy ways: and that say to
the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Isa. 30.10.
Prophecy not unto us right things, speak smooth things. As if they should
say, Do you look for thanks of us for preaching freely and frequently? we
would you would preach less, you would give us better content. There is (says
David) no fear of God before the wicked man's eyes. Psalm. 36.1.2.
How does that appear? By this: He flatters himself, and he desires to be
flattered. He would not willingly know the plain truth: he loves to drink in
troubled waters, that he might not see his own deformity, nor understand his
duty.

3. He that fears God, has a soft, melting, yielding, pliable heart to all
good impressions. I am afraid of God. says Iob^ for he makes my heart soft.
Job. 23.1^ 6 Isa^ 48.4. Ier. 3 3.
But he that has a brow of brass, a whoores forehead, an iron sinew, an
adamantine heart, a perverse thwart, cross will, that neither threats nor
promises; neither mercies nor judgments, can dissolve, or mollify: that man
owns not the fear of God. Therefore it is, that the fear of God, and
hardness of heart are opposed one to another, by Solomon. Blessed is he that
fears always, Prove. 28.14.
but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief. Our hearts are
hardened from thy fear, says the Prophet, Esa. 63.17.

4. He that fears God, will tremble at Gods comminations in his word. This is
poverty, and contritenesse of spirit to tremble at Gods word, Isa. 66.2.
as it is in the Prophet. When I heard (says Habakkuk) my belly trembled, my
lips quivered, Hab. 3.16.
(...) rottenness entered into my bones. When Micha prophesied of the
destruction of Jerusalem, King Hezekiah feared the Lord, Ier. 26.18.19.
and besought him to avert the evil. When Baruch read the book of Gods
threatenings in the ears of the Princes, the text says, Ier. 36.15.16.
they were afraid both one and other.

But he that hearing the words of this Book of GOD, Deuteronomy. 29.19. 1 These. 5.3
Amos 6.3.
blesses himself in his heart, and promises himself peace and safety, and
puts from him the evil day: He that thinks pulpit threats to be but
Bug-beares, and Scarcrowes to affright children with, and is no more moved
with them, than the seat he sits on: That man has no fear of God before his
eyes.

5. He that truly fears God, is in love with the fear of God, he rejoices in
it, he cherishes it; he wishes the increase of it. The Saints desire to fear
thy name, Nehem. 1.11.
says Nehemiah. Thy servant is devoted to thy fear, Psalm. 119.38.
says the sweet singer of Israel. But he that resolves to lead a merry life,
to take nothing to heart, to sing care away, and to stop the mouth of
conscience when it chideth; he knows not experimentally, what the fear of
GOD means.

6. He that fears God, when he conceives he has provoked God to anger, he
never cease praying, entreating the prayers of others, interposing the merits
of Christ between every word of his prayer, his heart is in unconstant rest,
till his peace be made with God, till he find God reconciled to him. Thus did
David lively express his fear of God. According to the multitude of thy
tender mercies, Psalm. 51.1.28*6.11.12.
blot out all my transgressions, wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and
cleanse me from my sin. Cast me not from thy presence. Make me to hear the
voyse of joy, that the bones that thou have broken may rejoice. Restore to me
the joy of thy salvation. How long will thou hide thy face? Psalm. 89.46.49.
for ever? And shall thy wrath burn like fire? Lord, where are thy former
loving kindnesses?

But he, that, because sentence against sin is not speedily executed, Eccles.
8.11, 12.
sets his heart to do evil, and thinks that God has forgotten; and so runs
on the score, and never thinks of agreeing with his maker, and making up the
breach; he is a stranger to the fear of God.

7. He that fears God, does at all times, and in all places, set himself as
in the presence of God. As David set God always before his eyes. Psalm. 16.8.
Psalm. 139.2.4 7.8.9.
Thou know says he) my thoughts afar off; there is not a word of my
tongue, but thou know it altogether. Whither shall I fly from thy presence?
Fear quickens the memory: Nothing more dwelles in our thoughts than that
person or thing that we most love or fear. He that fears God always, sees
him who is invisible. He conceives that God is always present; Heb. 11.29
(...). Sic semper deum presentem intelligit, ac si in sua essentra viderat.
Ber. form. bon. vit.. Acts 10.33 Psalm. 10.4.
as if he saw his very essence. He says, especially in solemn conventions,
and actions, as Cornelius did. We are all present before God. But he in whose
thoughts God is nonresident, he is as far from the fear of God, as the
thought of God.

8. He that fears God has a quick eye to discern when God is displeased,
and he is grieved at heart when Gods honor is im peached either by himself,
or others. He grieves for his own sins, and Ephraim bemoaned himself.
After I was instructed, Ier. 31.18, 19.
I smote upon my thigh. I was ashamed, yea even confounded. And as David cried
out in the bitterness of his heart, Against thee, against thee only have I
sinned. Psalm. 51.4.
He had sinned against Vriah, against Bathsheba, against Israel: but he is
most sensible of his offending of God.

Again, he that fears God, grieves when others are injurious to Gods glory.
Psalm. 119.136. and verse. 53.
Rivers of waters (says David) run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy
laws. Horror has taken hold upon me, because the wicked have forsaken thy
laws. He that fears God, will tremble to hear another ly, and swear, and
curse, and provoke God. But he that is neither moved with his own, nor with
other men's sins; but makes the one his pride, and the other his mirth, how can
the fear of God dwell in that man?

9. He that fears God will be careful for the future, to avoid whatsoever
may prove offensive to God. And therefore David puts these together, Stand in
awe, Psalm. 4.4.
and sin not And therefore he says, That the fear of God is clean, Psalm.
19.9.
because it keeps men's hearts and hands clean. The fear of the Lord is to
hate evil: Pro. 8.13. Pro. 16.6.
and by the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, says Solomon. He that
fears God, fears sin. It Is part of the description of a good man in
Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 9.2.
that he fears an oath: And so I may say of other sins. Nay, he fears
sin, when time, place, and opportunity do woo him to it. As Ieseph would not
yield to his mistresses lust, though there was no fear of discovery: All his
argument was, How can I do this great wickedness, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against God? But he that pass not how much God be displeased, so
he may please, humor, and satisfy his own lust, his heart is not possess
with the fear of God.

10. He that fears GOD will study in all things to please God; He will obey
God conscionably and constantly. And therefore to fear God, and to keep his
commandments, Eccles. 12.13.
are put together by the wise man. It Is said of the Centurion, that he feared
God; Acts. 10.2 Psalm. 2.11.
and it is added; he was a devout man, he gave alms; he prayed. Serve the
Lord with fear, says David. He that serves God, fears him; and he that
fears him, will serve him: they cannot be disjoined.

If thou make no conscience of diligent serving of God, both in thy general
and particular calling; and of serving him in that manner, that he desires to
be served in, never say that thou fear God.

Lastly, he that fears God, will not willingly wrong his neighbor, neither in
word or deed. Do this (says Joseph to his brethren) and live: Gen 42.18
for I fear God, that is, I will keep my promise with you, if you perform
the condition, for I fear God, and therefore dare be no promise-breaker. The
Hebrew mid-wives would not kill the male-children at the Kings command, because,
says the text, Exodus 1.17.
they feared God. And the law of God runs thus; Thou shall not curse the
deaf, Leuit. 19 14.
nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but thou shall fear God. As if
GOD should say, If thou fear me, thou will not offer injury to thy neighbor;
No, not though thou could escape unknown; thou will not curse him that
cannot hear thee, nor offend him that cannot see thee to call thee to account
for it. My predecessors (says Nehemiah) oppressed the people Nehem. 5.15.
so do not I, because I fear God.

But he that makes no scruple of prejudicing, and injuring superior, equal,
inferior, any that may fall with in his reach, he may call himself a servant
of God, and a Christian; but as yet the fear of God has no place in his heart.

These are more simple, and absolute signs of the fear of God considerable in
it self.

CHAP. IX. Of those signs that put a difference between the slavish, and the
filial fear of God.
THE slavish, and these on-like kindly fear of God, differ

1. In their several grounds and principles,

1. The slavish fear is awaked only by threatenings denounced by God against
disobedience. This moved King Abimelech to restore Sara to Abraham; God in a
dream signified to him, that if he restored her not, Genesis 20.7 8.
he and all his should dye for it. When Jonas had cried, Jonas 3.4.5.
Forty days and Niniveh should be destroyed: then they were amazed, and
fasted and prayed. On the otherside, the filial fear of God will be awaked by
the mere commandment of God, though there were no commination annexed
thereunto. This Solomon calls, Pro. 13.13
fearing the commandment; that is, fearing not to do what is commanded,
merely because it is commanded; and fearing to do what is forbidden, because
it is forbidden, though the commandment were not backed, nor seconded with any
sanction either of promise or threatening.

2. The slavish fear is stirred up only by judgments inflicted on men's
selves, or on others. Thou O God, (says Asaph) did cause judgment to be
heard from heaven, Psalm. 76.8.
then the earth feared: whereas filial fear is excited by the mercy, and
loving kindness of God. There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared.
Psalm. 130.4.
Hosea 3.5
They shall fear the Lord and his goodness, says the Prophet. God will not
afflict (says Job) therefore do men fear him. Job. 37.23.24
What men? Certainly not slaves, but loving and loyal sons.

2. Slavish, and filial fear differ in their objects. For,

1. The object of slavish fear is not sin, but punishment. As children fear
a Cole only when it burns; but otherwise be it never so black, they will
delight to handle it. Thus Balaam did not fear to curse Gods people, but he
feared the Angel that met him in the way with a drawn sword. Numb. 22.31.32


But the object of filial fear is sin, though there were no plagues in store
here, nor no hell hereafter for the offender. A righteous man fears an oath,
says Solomon, Eccles. 9.2
That is, he does so much fear the curse of the flying book that shall enter
into the house of the swearer, as he fears the oath it self. He fears more
to swear, than that God should swear in his wrath against him. Psalm. 95.11
He more fears to curse then to be cursed. To hate than to be hated: to
injure than to be injured. He fears more active, than passive evil. Like
that woman in the Hieroglyphicke, that having a firebrand in one hand, and a
pot of water in the other, is presented, wishing that with that firebrand she
could dry up the waters of Paradise; and with that water quench the flames of
hell, that she might serve God, neither for hopes of heaven, nor for fear of
hell.

2. If the object of slavish fear be sin; yet it is only sin of the
grosser size, of a scarlet dye. Mat. 23.24.
As the Pharisees feared to swallow Camels, but gnats would down well enough.
And among Christians, many fear the more horrid oaths; but the lesser break
no squares with them. Many fear to kill a man, who fear not to spleen, hate,
back-bite, or curse him, which is murder in a degree, as our Savior reckons it
in his Sermon on the mount. Mat 5.21.22.


But on the other side, they that filially feafe God, fear those sins that
seem least, as idle words, and vain thoghts. David feared the cutting of the
lap of Saul's garment. 1 Samuel 24.4.5. Job. 31.1.
Job feared to look upon a maid lustfully. Saint Austin feared the stealing of
a few apples. John Hus feared lest he should spend too much time at
Chesse-play. The truly fearful are jealous over themselves in the use of
indifferences, lest in tasting of the honey of them, they should like a fly,
stick in the slime.

Let every man apply this trial to himself.

3. Slavish and filial fear differ in their consequents, and effects. For,

1. Slavish fear dulles and deadens a man's heart, so that he is fit for no
good thing. It made Nabal his heart dye within him; 1 Samuel 25.37.
so that he became as a stone. When God (says David) rebuked, and spoiled the
wicked, they fell into a fear, so that none of them found their hands, Psalm.
76.5.6.8.
but they were cast into a dead sleep. As when there was an earthquake at
Christ his rising, and the Angels countenance was as lightning, Mat. 28.4.
the keepers for fear shook, and became as dead men.

But filial fear makes such as are endued with it lively, and active in their
duty. Thus Noah being moved with fear, Heb. 11.7.
did not sit still, but prepared an Arc. And indeed this is Gods command. What
(says Moses) does the Lord require, but to fear him, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
and to walk in his ways? Filial fear makes not a man lame in his duty, but
sets him upon his legs.

2 If slavish fear move a man to do any good, it will be but just so much as
the fearer thinks will serve him, and no more. He will give God but
gold-weight; very hard measure. But filial fear will make a man to strive
after perfection, to press hard forward to the mark of the high calling. And
therefore Saint Paul's exhortations runs thus. Perfect holiness in the fear of
God. 2 Cor. 7.1 I hill 2.12.
Work out your salvation with fear and trembling. If you fear God, you will
not work by halves; but work out your salvation. Not that merit or
justification by works, is admitted by us; the word fear and trembling
excludes that. To fear, and to be selfe-confident, are asustaticall, they
cannot stand together.

3. Slavish fear, and curb sin, it may make a damme against it; it may prune
or lop it, but it does not mortify sin in the power and love of it. This
fear is but like the quaking of a rotten quagmire. The wolf may fear to come
to the flock, yet he loves the blood of sheep never a whit the less. But he
that filially fears God, does not only avoid, but also hate sin. The fear of
the Lord (says Solomon) is to hate evil. Pro. 8.13. In imprevis formidai^
supplicto franatur sacultas, in probis sanatur voluntar. Aug.
In the worst of men, through the fear of punishment, the faculties indeed may
be bridled: but in those that filially fear God, the will is healed.

4. Slavish fear filles the heart with distraction, and distrust. It made Lot
fearful that he should be consumed between Sodom and the mountain, Genesis
19.19
though God had promised him his life if he hastened. It made the people deny to
go up to Canaan, because of the multitude and strength of the inhabitants,
Numb. 13.2.31.
though God had promised them conquest over the Canaanites, and the possession
of the land. It spurred Cain and Judas to despair. Non duxit ad dominum, sed
traxit ad la ^ucum. Greg.
It did not lead Judas to the Lord, but it drew him to the halter. But the
filial fear of God is never without faith in God, as has been before proved.
Psalm. 23.4.
Though I walk (says David) through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil, for thou art with me. Psalm. 64.9.10.
And again (says he) they that fear God, will trust in him. The kindly fear
of God does not dis-joynt, but consolidate, settle, and ballasse the heart
amidst all inward and outward storms and tempests.

5. The slavish fear of God is usually joined with hatred of God in some
degree. It was the speech of a tyrant: Oderint dum timeant:
Let the people hate me, so they fear me. This fear wishes there were no God:
or that he could not see, or not be able to punish sin. But the filial fear
of God is never dis-joyned from the fervent unfeigned love of God. They that
fear God, and they that love God, Psalm. 145.19, 20.
are put into the same description by the Psalmist, and they are interressed in
the same promises, that their prayers shall be heard, their desires fulfilled:
they shall be preserved and saved. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
And God in the Law requires fear and love united together. They that fear
God, love God, because they are beloved of God. For David calls the fearers of
God, Gods beloved. And we love God, Psalm. 60.4.5.
because he loves us first, says Saint John. 1 Ioh. 4.19.


6. Slavish fear drives men from God: we see it in our grandfather Adam, he
confesses that being afraid, Genesis 3.8.10.
he hid himself among the trees of the garden. Esaias 2.19.
They shall go (says the Prophet) into the holes of the rocks, and into the
caves of the earth, for the fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his
Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the earth. Apoc. 6.16
They shall say, (says Saint John the Divine) to the mountains, and rocks,
fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne. This
fear cares not how far God and it be asunder. Like that f^are of the
Egyptians, Psalm. 105 38.
Egypt was glad of the Israelites departure: for they were afraid of them. But
the filial fear of God unites the heart to God: it drives him who is possessed
of it, unto God. When David was in a great straight, he cries, 2 Samuel 24.14.
Let us fall into the hands of God And it is Gods promise, Ier. 32.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall never depart from me.
The fear of a slave provokes him to run from his master; the fear of a
loving child prompts him to apply himself the closer to his father. In these
six effects, these two fears are differenced.

4. And lastly, they differ in regard of time and duration. To wind them up
together, Slavish fear dreads not GOD in prosperity, when all things smile,
and succeed according to expectation and wish. Because the wicked have no
changes, Psalm. 55.19.
says the Psalmist, therefore they fear not God.

He that filially fears God, fears him at all times; you may imagine it to be
a misery, a bondage, to be always in fear: but the contrary is true of this
fear. Happy is that man that fears always, Pro. 28.14
(says Solomon.) The righteous man fears not God by fits and starts. He
fears most when he is most prosperous. He thinks that the greatest calmes
are but fatal, and immediate forerunners of the lowdest tempests. When the
Churches had rest and comfort in the holy Ghost, Acts 9.31.
even then they walked in the fear of the Lord. They think with St. Bernard,
Tum magis irascitur, cum non irascitur. Bern.
when they are spared too long, that then God is most angry, when he seems
least angry. When they sin unpunished, they cry with Saint Austin, N^le^^re
in s^^^ erdiam Aug.
Lord let me have none of this mercy, lest it prove but a reservation of me
to greater misery.

In a word, he that fears God slavishly, fears little longer than the rod is
on his back. It was the guise of K. Pharaoh, 1 King. 21. three last re^ses.
and K. Ahab, when the pang was off, they still hardened their hearts, and ran
their old Bias. 1 King. 12.18.19.
We find Ahab fasting and humbling himself in one Chapter; and the next news
we hear of him in the next Chapter is, he is quarrelling with the Prophet for
telling the truth. Nay, this fear turns into a greater security, as the
anvill is harder for beating; as hot water cooling, grows colder than ever it
was before.

But the filial fear of God is a lasting fear; it endures for ever, says
David. Psalm. 19.9.
the spirit of the fear of the Lord is not flitting, Esaias 11.2.
it rests on him, on whom it pitches. Let us all try our faces at this glass,
it is no flattering one, it will tell you truly, whether your fear be of the
right stamp, whether stamp, whether it will stand you in stead, or no.

CHAP. X. Of those signs that discover whether we fear God more than man, or
man more than God.
THere are signs of a third rank, that will make a full discovery to us,
whether we fear man more than God, or God more than man.

1. They that study more to please man than to please God, they that pass not
to displease God, so they humor men, they fear man more than God. If I yet
seek to please men, Gal. 1.10.
I am no servant of Christ. As if he should say, I cannot fear Christ as a
servant should fear his master; if I seek to please men. Would any of you
judge that a servant did fear his master more than other men, if his daily
care were to please other men rather than his master? Gal. 3.22.
It is not for nothing that Saint Paul opposes man pleasing to fearing of God,
implying that light and darkness can as well consist together, as
sycophanticke, slavish pleasing of man, can stand with the fear of God. Who
doubts, but that, at that time, Aaron feared man more than God: when, to
condescend to the peoples fancy, he made gods for them to worship in Moses
absence? Exodus 32.22.23.24.
Whether did Pilate fear God or man most, when to content the people, he
released Barabbas, Mark. 15.15.
and delivered Jesus to be crucified? When Herod the King vexed the Church of
God, and killed James with the sword, Acts 12.1.2 3.
and because he saw it pleased the Ieas, he proceeded further to take Peter
also, as it is writ of him; will any man say that Herod feared God more than
man? On the contrary part, they that fear God more than man, though in all
indifferent things he will please men, as St. Paul testifies of himself, 1
Cor. 10. last verse.
I (says he) please all men in all things (that is, in all lawful things) for
the profit of many, that they may be saved. 1 Cor 9.20.21.22.
Unto the Jews (says he) I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain them that are
under the law; to them that are without law, as without law, that I might win
them: to the weak I became as weak, that I might gain the weak. I am made
all things to all men, that I might by all means gain some. Yet in those
things that are not adiaphorous, indifferent, but either necessary, or
unlawful, they will not yield a hairs breadth, though to please the greatest,
and their best benefactors. And therefore the question of those that fear God,
is not, what man, but what God will be pleased with; as it was their question
(though with other intention) in the Prophet. Micha. 6.7.
Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten thousand rivers
of oil? 1 Thessalonians. 2.4.
We speak (says Saint Paul) not as pleasing man, but God, who tries our
hearts. That preacher, who fears God more than man, will in the pulpit speak
his conscience, with modesty and good discretion, even to the faces of the
highest Grandees and Magnificoes of the World, though he knows it will prove
harsh, untuneable, and unwelcome to their ears. When King Ahab sent for
Michaiah to prophecy to him, he was desired to speak as the Prophets before
him spoke, that which was good, and might please the King: his answer was, 1
King. 22.13.14.
As the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me, that I will speak. As if he
should say, Tell not me what other Prophets have said, what God puts into my
mouth, I will speak, be it good for the king, or not good, whether it please
him, or displease him. This was a fearer of God indeed.

2. They fear man more than God, who will rather obey the commandment of man
than of God. Romans 6.16
His servants you are (says S. Paul) him you reverence and fear, whom you
obey. That subject that will disobey his God, to obey a magistrate: that child
who will disobey his Father in heaven, to obey his earthly father; that servant
who will disobey his heavenly master, Ephesians. 6.5.
to obey his master according to the flesh: that subject, that son, that
servant fears man more than God. Psalm. 36.1.
The transgression of the wicked against Gods law, testifies (says David) that
there is no fear of God before his eyes. Whereas they that fear God more than
man, will infinitely prefer obedience to God, before obsequiousness to man.
None are more obedient to man, than those that fear God, in what is agreeable
with, or not contrary to the will of God. But if God command one thing, and man
another, they desire to be pardoned, if they take leave to obey the more
supreme. And therefore when the Council asked S. Peter, and the other
Apostles, why they preached in the name of Jesus, when they had strict command
to the contrary, their answer was, Acts 5.28.29.
We ought to obey God rather than men. And when the Council called them, and
commanded them not to preach in Christ his name, they returned this answer,
Acts 4.18.19.
Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken to you, rather than unto
God, judge ye?

3. They fear man more than God, that would not abstain from sin, but only
for the fear of man. Herod would have put John Baptist to death, Mat. 14.5.
but that he feared the multitude. And the chief Priests and Pharisees would
have laid hands on Christ, but that they feared the people, Math. 21. last
verse.
who took Christ for a Prophet. The Captain and the officers brought the
Apostles gently, and without violence, Acts 5.26.
because (says the Text) they feared the people, lest they should have stoned
them. Among us many fear stealing and murdering, because they fear hanging.
Many fear neglect of coming to Church, and to the Communion, because they
fear presenting. Many fear adultery an fornication, because they fear
discovery, the loss of their good name, and temporal mulcts. Oderunt peccare
mali formidine poenae.
And what is all this, but to fear man more than God? On the other part, they
that fear God more than man, will fear to commit those sins on which the
law of man takes no hold. As Job made a conscience of looking upon a maid to
lust after her. Job. 31.1.1
A fault not liable humane censure.

4. They fear man more than God, that will omit their duty, or commit any
sin for the threats of men. Isa. 57.11.
Of whom have thou been afraid, that thou have lied, says God? Not of God, but
of man. King Saul by his own confession, transgressed the commandment of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 15.24.
because he feared the people. Pope Marcelline, in the time of heathenish
persecution, for fear of death, offredincense to devils; as he after confessed
with grief: as many Papists in their writings make mention.

On the contrary part, they that fear God more than man, will not betray a
tittle of truth to save their lives. They will dye before they will yield so much
as a knee in an idolatrous way: or withhold any part of Gods worship from him;
or in any kind make shipwreck of a good conscience. You find two famous
examples hereof in the prophecy of Daniel: The one was this, Nebucl adnezzar
threatened the three children, Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego, that if at the
sounding of the music they did not fall down, and worship the golden Image
that he had set up, they should be cast in the hour of their refusal, into
the midst of a fiery furnace. But what answer did they return? This: Dan.
3.15.16.17.18.
O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. Our God
whom we serve, is able to deliver us out of thy hand, O King. But if not; be
it known unto thee, O King, that we will not worship the golden image that
thou have set up. An heroical resolution. The other example is this, K. Darius
sealed a decree, Dan. 6.7.8, 9, 10.
that whosoever should ask a petition of any God or man, for thirty days, he
should be cast into the den of Lions. Yet, for all this, Daniel knowing of the
signing of this decree, went into his house, opened his window toward
Jerusalem, and kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed to God. He
would not only, not omit to pray, but he would not forbear the usual
ceremonies in praying, of bowing the knee, of opening his window toward
Jerusalem. So little the fear of man swayed him. Theodoret and Nazianzen
relate of S. Basil, Nullam syllabam ds vinarum scr^pturarum in discrimen venire
patiuntur etc.
that he would say, That those that feed upon Gods word, will not suffer the
least syllable of it to come into hazard. Nos c^^teris humiliores sumus
omnibus, ubivero de side agitur minime timidi apparemus.
And again, that he would say, we are in all other things modest and
yielding; but when matters of faith and religion are in controversy, we are
not timorous then, but as bold as Lions. And again, that he would say to
Modestus, a potent man, Use all your power against me, Potestate tua contra me
utare, nunquam persuadebis.
you shall never persuade me to subscribe to your Arrian heresy. These men
feared God more that man. And we will not wonder that grace infuses such a
courage into the fearers of God, when we shall hear the answers of Elvidius
Priscus, a heathen, ito Vespasian the Emperor. The Emperor commanded him not
to come on such a day to the Senate, or if he came, to speak as he would
have him. He answered, that he was a Senator, and therefore it was fit, that
he should be at the Senate. And if being there, he were required by the rest,
to render his opinion, he must speak freely, and according to his conscience.
The Emperor threatened him, that he should dye then. He replied, that he knew
he was not im mortal: and he added, Do what you will, I will do what I
ought. It is in your power to kill me, but it is in my power to dye constantly.
Think but on this heathen, and then you will believe, that grace can make the
faithful much more spirited; they building upon better grounds than any
heathen could. Princes (says David) did sit and speak against me, Psalm.
119.23.109.110.161.
yet I meditated in thy statutes. And again, My life is continually in my hand,
yet I forget not thy law. The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I err not
from thy precepts. Princes have persecuted me, but my heart stands in awe os
thy word, As if he should say, I fear thee more than any persecution.

5. They fear man more than God, that in trouble fear man, and distrust God;
and upon the surprizall of any evil, think not on God, but of fortifying
themselves by leagues with men. Such were they in the prophecy, Esa.
22.8.9.10.11.
that looked after armor, and walls; rampires, and fortifications, but they
had not respect to God. They feared the enemy, but they dreamed not of him whom
they had provoked by their sins. But they that fear God more than man, will
be sure to make God sure, and for the rest they are fearlesse. What time
(says David) I am afraid, Psalm. 56.3.4^
I will trust in thee, I will not fear what man can do unto me. And again,
Though an host should encampe against me, my heart shall not fear; though
war should rise against me, Psalm. 27.3.
in this shall I be confident.

6. And lastly, they fear man more than God, that forbear open sins that
are obvious to humane eyes, but make no conscience of secret sins, of sins in
the heart; of sins in darkness, or in retired places. Such, whose maxim is,
if not chastely yet cautelously: Si non casle, tamen caute.
No matter for keeping sin uncommitted, so you keep it unknown. This was the
infirmity of Jacob, My father, Genesis 27.12.
(says he) peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to him a deceiuer.
His fear was not so much to be, as to seem a deceiver. But it is ordinary
with wicked men. The murderer kills betime, while men are in bed. Job 24.14, 15,
16.
The adulterer waits for the twy-light, and disguises his face. The thief
digges through houses in the dark. The time was (says Paul) that they that
were dunk were drunk in the night. 1 These. 5.7.
Though now these monsters outface the sun See thou (says God to the
prophet) what the ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, Ezekiel. 8.12
every man in the chambers of his imagery. And if every man had a window in his
breast, or his thoughts were writ in his forehead (as Cicero wished of every
Roman) what monstrous counsels shall we be spectators of. On the contrary,
they that fear God more then man; will with Joseph refuse uncleanness, though
they have opportunity, and secrecy. They will not curse a deaf man, that
cannot hear them, nor cast a block before a blind man, that cannot discover
them. They will not curse their rulers, not in their bedchamber, Eccles. 10.20.
not in their thoughts. This was Job his temper, I have not (says he) covered
my transgression. Did I fear a multitude; or did the contempt of families
terrisie me? Job. 31.33.34.
No; he feared God more then man. Let us all try our selves by this unerring
rule.

CHAP. XII. A Dehortation from those sins, that are contrary to the fear of
God: And first of Carnal Security, with the remedy thereof.
THat part of this treatise that is past is more doctrinal, what follows shall
be more applicatory: and that either Dehortatory, or Exhortatory.

The Dehortatory part forbids all those siins that are contrary to the fear of
God. And they are diverse: some whereof are contrary to it in excess, and some
in defect. I shall handle them in order.

1. One vice contrary to the fear of God, is carnal security; a wrtechlesse
carelesnes; when men are moved neither with the threatenings of God in his word;
nor with the execution of Gods judgments in the world, nor with the beginnings
of GODS wrath upon themselves. These are the three heads of this Hydra.

1. When men are not touched with the denounciation of the comminations of God
in his word: such are they That when they hear the words of Gods curse, Deuteronomy.
29.19.20.
bless themselves in their hearts, and say they shall have peace, although
they walk according to the stubbornness of their own hearts, adding
drunkenness to thirst; sin to sin; running round in the devils circle.
Such as make a coveant with death, Isay. 28.18.
and agreement with hell, as if they should not seize them.

Such as cry, the vision is for many days to come; Ezekiel. 12.27.
and the prophecy of the times that are afar off; the evil shall not fall
in their days. Those that put away far from them the evil day, as in Amos.
Amos 6.3.
Those that say in their hearts, the Lord will do neither good, nor evil, as
in Zephany. Zeph. 1.12
And are not most of our age of this guize? Do not we say in our hearts?
Come, God will be better then his word: He that has made all will save all.
Give the preachers leave to thunder, and lighten; we hope the best still, no
man shall put us out of heart. If we were not lulled asleep in the cradle of
security how durst we touch that forbidden fruit, that is guarded with Angels
(preachers I mean, for Angel fignifies a Messenger) when they have a flaming
sword in their mouths, thretning ruin to us? How durst we tear the sacred
name of God, when he has threatened, that he will not huld him guiltless,
that takes his name in vain? How durst we distrust Gods word, fear to
defend a good cause, commit adultery, or lie, when God has menaced, that all
fearful, unbeleeving, abominable, Revel. 21.8.
murderers, adulterers, and all liars, shall have their part in the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstome? No, no, our transgression says to all the
world, that there is no fear of God before our eyes, Psalm 36.1.
as David argues.

2. It is carnal security not to be afraid, when God has punished others for
the same sins, whereof we are deeply guilty, When our neighbors house is on
fire, not to fear our own. Such were the men of Laish, they dwelt carelessly,
and securely, Judge. 18.7.
as it is recorded of them. And this is our crime. Gods heavy Rod has rid
circuit about other nations, and our Halcyon days of peace make us secure and
careless. When a heathen can tell us, When you are highest in iollity, Vhi
maxim gaude^is, maxim metues. Sen. de Tr. l. 2. c. 31.
fear most. Evil is not confined to one people, it may go forth from nation
to nation, as God says. The prophesies are big with these expressions. It is
said in Ezechiel, Ier. 25.32. Ezekiel. 32.10.
I will make many people horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my
sword before them: they shall tremble every moment, every man for his own life,
in the day of thy fall. And yet we tremble not, though God has long brandisht
his sword before our eyes in neighboring kingdoms. God may complain of us, as
he did of them in Zephany, I have cut off the nations about them, Zeph. 3.6.9.
and made their Cities waste: and I said, surely thou will fear me, thou will
receive instruction, that thy dwelling also should not be cut off, but they
rose early, and corrupted all their doings. This is our case: the Lord help
us, and awaken us. As if we were better than our neighbors, or more able to
oppose our enemies, if God should let them in. I may take up that question to
England, that God asked Nineveh; Art thou better than populous No, Nahum 3.8,
9, 10.
situate among the Rivers, whose rampart was the sea? Ethiopia and Egypt were
her strength, yet she went into captivity. So may I say, O England, art thou
better than Germany, which now lies bleeding under desolation? If thou art not
better, why art thou secure, when she is ruined?

3 It is carnal security, not to be terrified with the beginnings of Gods
wrath. And it may be said of us, as Salvian speaks of his times, Nos non
^icinos nostros tantum ardere vidimus, sed ipsi etiam arsimus, arsimus,
arsimus, tamen flammas non timemus. Lib. 6.
We have not only seen our neighbors burning, but we our selves also have
been scorched more than once, more than one way, and yet we fear not the
flame. God has begun with us, by sending the Moth spoken of in Hosea; Hos.
5.12.
which moth insensibly eats out the heart of trading in England, Hos, 5.12.
so that it was never at so dead an ebb. The time was (as it is in the Prophet)
when Ephraim spoke, Hos. 13.1.
there was trembling; so when England spoke, there was trembling: but now other
Nations slight us. We may say (as David did) God goes not forth with our
Armies. Psalm. 60.10.
All this wise men see and know, and we are daily minded of it, together with
the plagues, agues, famines droughts, and unseasonable seasons, that we have
felt: And yet what man among us abates one drunken cup for all this? We are
as jolly, as thoughtlesse, as secure, as if we were in the third heaven. We
verify that that Antonius Pius spoke of the Christians, that when earthquakes
came, they were securest. This lethargy is too sure our disease. I can run no
better course to rouse us out of this leaden slumber, this dead sleep, then to
prove; that we are not the more, but the less safe for our security: And when
our mischeife arrives, it will be the more unsufferable the more unexpected it
is. Will we believe God affirming it? He that when hec hears this curse
blesses himself and promises to himself peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19.20.
the Lord will not spare him, his anger shall smoke against him, and all the
curses written in this book shall: fall upon him, and the Lord will blot out
his name from under heaven. Amos. 6.3.7.
They that put far from them the evil day shall go captive with the first
that go captive. The rich man in the Gospel said to his soul, Soul, soul,
Luke 12.19.20.
thou have goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be
merry. But there came a fearful message from heaven to him, Thou fool this
night shall thy soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall all these things
be that thou have provided? It was the old worlds case in the days of Noah,
they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, till the day
that Noah entered into the Arc, Mat 24.38.39.
and they knew not, till the flood came, and took them all away. And such
shall Christ's second coming be, like a snare it shall fall upon the world,
when they least think of it, when they are drowned in security. When men cry
peace and safety, sudden destruction shall come upon them, 1 These. 5.3
as travel upon a woman with child, says the Apostle. And it is a prophecy
of these latter days, we may sleep and snort in our sins, but our
damnation slumbers not, 2 Pet. 2.3.
says Saint Peter. This is the voice of the Scripture: and the Fathers speak
the same language; they were as cocks to awake these drowsy times. Security
(says one) is the forerunner of certain ruin. Certae ruinae praevia est
incuria. Qui sibt pacem promittit, securus invaduur. Aug. in Psalm. 130. Ablatus
a peccatoribus timor, ne posset esse cautela. Salv.
He that promises himself peace in an unlawful course of life, shall be
invaded when he least suspects it, says Saint Austin. Fear is taken from the
wicked, that they might not be aware when judgment seazeth them, says
Salvian. Nay, the glimmering light of the Heathen, discovered this truth to
them. Solent suprema facere securos mala. Oedip. 2.2.
Men use to be most secure, when the greatest evils hang over their heads,
says Seneca the Tragedian. Vbi tranquilla tibi omnia videntur, ibi nocitura
non desunt, sed quiescunt. Sen. de Ira, l. 2. c. 31.
When all things seem quiet, that which is noxious, is not absent, though it
be silent, says Seneca the Philosopher.

Nature will teach us, that the air is always calm before an earthquake; And
there is usually a lightning before death.

Little thought Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, when they rebelled against Moses,
that the earth would swallow them quick; Numb. 16.31.32.
they were gazing at the doors of their tents.

Little thought Zimri and Cosbi to be both thrust through the belly in the act
of adultery. Number. 25.8.
Little thought Agag the King of the Amalekites to be hewn in pieces by Samuel
his sword when he came in delicately, 1 Samuel 15.32.33.
and said, surely the bitterness of death is past.

Little dreampt Ananias, and Saphira, Acts 5.5.10.
when they lied to the Apostles, that they should fall down dead at the
Apostles feet.

When we like Adam are cast into a deep sleep; a thousand to one, but we
lose a rib for it. Let me add that this security makes us worse then beasts.
He that wants shame is like a beast; but he that wants fear is worse then a
beast. Oneramus asinum, non curat, quia asinus est: at si in ignem impellere,
si in fontem praecipitare velis, cavet quantum potest, quia mortem timet. Bern.
Load an ass (says Bernard) he cares not, because he was borne to bear; but
if you would force him upon the fire, or into a pit; he gives back with all
his might, because he fears death. What a shame is it for men then to cast
them selves without fear into the jaws of destruction? When Balaam his Ass
saw the Angel with a drawn sword in the way, he turned aside, his master
could not force him on: Numb. 22.23.
We shall show our selves more brutish than that Ass, if we precipitate our
selves into those ways wherein God stands with a drawn sword, eternally to
destroy us.

Nay (to drive this to a head, and to lay the Axe to the Root of the Tree) if
we be secure and fearelesse, we shall prove ourselves in our kind, to be
worse than the Devil himself: For Saint James says of them, that they
believe and tremble. James 2.19.
They believe Gods threats, and tremble at his wrath.

In a word, as it is a misery, that Death should be to a man the first
symptom of his sickness; so that man is to be bewailed with tears of blood,
that awakes not, till he be in hell, when it is too late.

All these considerations laid together, and well weighed, cannot eradicate
this poisonous root of carnal security, that is so diametrically, and so
unreconcileably opposite to the fear of GOD. We will not (like the Israelites)
sit down to eat and drink, Exodus 33.6
and rise up to play. But fear and care will be a more frequent guest in our
breasts.

CHAP. XII. Of audacious presumption in sinning, and the antidote against it.
A Second sin that is contrary to the fear of God, is presumptuous
audaciousnesse, or an audacious presumption in sinning. It differs from
security only in degree: for security is only a privation of fear; but
presumption is joined with an accession of boldness. Indeed it is security
strained to the highest pegge, and dipped in a scarlet dye. Cyclopica audacia.
Aliaque conges os ^^ru^^ss^ ad, dera montes. Eulia propago, contemptrix Superum.
The Heathen use to call it a boldness like that of the Giants spoken off by
Ovid; A generation that despised God, and heaped mountain upon mountain,
Pelion upon Ossa, and Olympus upon Pelion, as if they would dethrone God
himself. Such are all those that harbor blasphemous thoghts, or such as belch
out blasphemous words, that reflect upon God either directly, or by
consequence: and those that in their actions pass the bounds of all modesty,
like that unjust Judge, that neither feared God, Luke 18.2
nor regarded man.

1. There is an audacious presumption in the thoughts. Psalm. 14.1.
The fool has said in his heart there is no God. Thou thoughtest (says God
to the wicked) that I was such a one as thy self: Psalm. 50.21.
As if he should say, thou imaginest that I am a favourer of theevery,
adultery, and slandering. And the spectator of all hearts knows, that our
breasts are a daily stithy, an anvill wherein are forged, whereon are framed
many horrid thoughts of God, his worship, his servants: such thoughts as we
dare not utter. So that we had need to pray, that the thoughts of our hearts
may be forgiven us, as Saint Peter counseled Simon Magus. Acts 8.22.
But in this we must leave men to stand or fall to their own masters.

2. There is an audacious presumption in words, when the poison of Aspes is
under men's lips: Romans 3.13
when men bid God battle, and stand in defiance against him. And that is done,

1. By that which we strictly call blasphemy, when men's tongues do not only
walk through the earth, but they also set their mouths against the heavens,
Psalm. 73.9.
as David speaks. Such was Lamech, Genesis 4.23.24.
says he to his wives in a bravery, I will slay a young man in my wounding:
If Cain be avenged seven fold, Lamech shall be seventie times seven fold: As if
he should say, I will slay the best man that shall but never so little offend
me. And if God punishes Cain seven times, I will be revenged seventy seven
times upon him that but razes my skin. He would be more severe than an enraged
God. Such was Pharaoh (as his words report him) Who is the Lord that I should
they him to let Israel go I know not the Lord, Exodus 5.2.
neither will I let Israel go; As if he should say, I know no Lord greater
than my self. Such was Senaccherib, the Assyrian King, who sent this message
to good King Hezekiah, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest, 2 Kin. 19.10.11.
deceive thee, telling thee that Jerusalem shall not be delivered into my
hand. Which words Hezekiah calls, A reproaching of the living God. Such were
those that in Job, say unto God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge
of thy ways: Job. 21.14 15.
What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? And those that said, With our
tongues we will prevail, Psalm. 12.4.
our lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Your words (says God) have been
stout against me; Mat. 3.13.14.
ye have said, It is in vain to serve God. And I have read of a king, who
having received a strange blow from heaven, vowed he would be revenged upon
God; and therefore gave strict commandment, that for ten years, no man should
speak to God, or of God. And many of the Popes and Papalins have not fallen
much short of those monsters of men, if some of their own authors say true.
The time would fail me, should I reckon to you their numerous blasphemies,
that no truly Christian ear can brook. Leo the tenth, called the Gospella
fable of Christ. And one of his slaves said, that without the the testimony of
the Church the Scriptures are no more authentical than A^sops fables Another
says, that if the Pope should carry troops of souls with him to Hell, no man
should dare to say to him, Domine cur ita sacis?
Sir, why do you so? Another says, that there is well-neare as much virtue in
the mothers milk, as in the sons blood. Another in the Counsel of Trent,
called the cup in the Lords supper, a cup of poison. What is this, but to
afront, to outface, to dare God, to challenge him? And there are but too many
loose Protestanes, that give their tongues strange liberty to invey against
GOD, and all godliness. Black months, tongues set on fire of hell: such as dare
say, Religion is but a devise to keep men in awe. Preaching is but prating: A
religious life is but a male contented life. He that uses plain dealing, shall
dye a beggar. A young Saint, an old Devil. The heavens blush to see such foame
to come forth from Christian men's mouths.

2. There is a presumption in words, that displayes it self in justifying and
defending of sin, calling evil good, Isay 5.20.
and good evil light darkness, and darkness light: sweet bitter, and bitter
sweet, as the Prophet speaks. Aequo certamine c^rtat cum Deo, qui quod Deus
odit, d^sendit.
He enters the lists, and sights with God hand to hand, who defends what God
hates. Herein Jonah much forgot himself, when GOD said to him, Do thou well
to be angry? Iona. 4.9.
He answered, I dowel to be angry even to death. This is to provoke the holy
one of Israel to anger, Isay, 1.4.
as Esaias speaks.

3. It is the highest degree of presumption to boast of sin. None but brazen
brows can do that. Isay 48.4.
He that is shameless is fearlesse. It is wrong enough to God to worship an
Idol: But (says David) confounded be all they that boast themselves of Idols.
Psalm. 97.7.
If a man may vaunt of his sins, then let the prisoner glory in his fetters:
the dog in his vomit, and the infefected person in his plague sore.

This is presumption in language.

3. There is presumption in action,

1. When a man dishonors God in that place, wherein GOD uses, and ought to
be worshipped; namely, the Temple. This is to abuse God to his face, and in
his own house. Hos. 7.2.


2. When a man wilfully dishonours God in a time of general humiliation, when
others are be way ling their sins before God.

3. When a man sets himself, as in the presence of God, and yet then
dissembles with his lips. As those (that with Saint Augustine before his
conversion) pray against lust^, and yet secretly wish, that God would not hear
their prayer. And all that with spleenfull spirits come to the Communion,
professing before God, that they are reconciled unto their brethren, when they
intend no such thing. And those preachers that willingly deliver unsound
doctrine to the people, only to corrupt them, using the Name of God to poison
their hearers, doing what in them lies, to make God a liar. In a word, knights
of the Post, with their hackny consciences, that dare in a false oath call down
God to testify to an untruth; which is so horrid a crime, that I am persuaded,
that many a man now damned in hell, would have been ashamed to be guilty of.

4. When a man therefore breaks a commandment, merely because it is a command.
As St. Augustine confessed, that in his youth he robbed an orchard, not because
he wanted apples, Gens ^umanaruit in v^titum resat.
for he had as good, or better at home; but only because he coveted what was
forbidden.

5. When therefore a man abuses GOD more, because God is patient and long
suffering. Which sordidnesse of humane disposition Solomon takes notice of, and
brands. Because (says he) sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, Eccle. 8.11.
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
mischief. This is to sight against God with his own weapon. To turn his grace
into wantonness.

6. When man runs into a known gross sin, that Gods watchmen his ministers
have newly warned him of, or then when the Holy spirit of God suggests motions
to him to the contrary. This is to quench the Spirit, and to despise
prophesying; 1 These. 5.19.20. Acts 7.51. 1 These. 4.8.
to resist the holy Ghost and his instruments.

Lastly, when a man the more revolts from God, the more he is smitten, Isay
1.5.
as they in Isay. Like Pharoh, whose heart was the more hardened, the more, and
the sorer plagues God inflicted on him. Like the Thracians, that then shoot
their arrows against heaven, when it thunders; and lightens. Like Augustus,
who having been tempest tossed at Sea; defied Neptune the Sea-God, and in the
midst of his Circean sports, he caused his im ge to be pulled down, to be
revenged of him. Like Xerxes, whoscourged the sea, and wrote a bill of defiance
against the hill Athos, because they intercepted him in his expedition.

Me thinks the very naming of these things, should move us to ab horre them.
But to win more upon our affectio is, let us consider

1. That this audacious presumption is a despising of God. He that fears not
GOD, Quod non metuitur contemnitur Lactant. Pial. 10, 13
contemnes him. Wherefore do the wicked despise God? (says David.) For a
superior to despise his inferior, is no wonder; but for a peasant to despise
his Prince: for a piece of clay, for a worm, to slight his maker, is
intolerable. He that despises me, 1 Samuel 2.30.
shall be lightly esteemed, (says God.)

Saint Paul was grieved at heart, that by sins of infirmity he offended his
God. The evil (says he) that I would not, I do. Romans 7.19.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin? Shall
he groan under infirmities, and shall we make no conscience of presumptions?
God forbid.

3. What do thou mean, fond man, to wrest Thunderbolts out of the hand of
God, that would delight to power blessings upon thee? Who has hardened
himself against God, Job. 9.4.
and prospered, says Job? 2 Kings 19
Sennacherib slighted GOD, and the fruit of it was, an Angel in one ni^ht slew
his army, consisting of one hundred eighty and five thousand men; and he
himself returning home, was slain by his own sons, in the temple of his
God.

Libanius a Philosopher at Antioch, demanding of a good Christian in scorn,
How the Carpenters son (meaning Christ) busied himself? He answered him, that
he was making a Coffin for him; and indeed, he presently after dyed.

In the year of our Lord 510. one Olympius, an Arrian Bishop, in a B^th at
Carthage, blasphemed openly the holy Trinity: and the words were scarce out of
his mouth, but lightning descended thrice from heaven, Paul D^^^.
and at length consumed him.

Julian, the uncle of the Emperor Julian, coming into a Christian Church,
pissed in despite, upon the Communion Table, and struck Euzoius for reproving
him for it. But shortly after, his entrails rotted; and he voyded his
excrements at his mouth, and dyed. And Foelix, Julian his Treasurer, that
jeered at Christ, under the name of Mary's son, he vomited blood night and
day, Theodoret
till he died. You will say, we hope none of us shall ever run into these
extremities. But yet let us know, that every presumptuous sin against God,
binds us over to as great mischiefs, as any I have named. Will we believe
Saint Paul? If (says he) we sin wilfully, Heb. 10.26.27.
after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, but a fearful ezpectation of judgment, 2 Pet. 2.9.10.
and fiery indignation. The presumptuous are reserved unto the day of
judgment, says Saint Peter. The arrows thou shootest against heaven, shall
fall back upon thine own head again. Woe to him (says the Prophet) that
striveth with his Maker; Isay 45.9.
let the pot-sheards strive with the pot-sheards of the earth. What gain the
waves by striking against a rock? they stir not that, but dash themselves in
pieces. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks, says our Savior to
Saul. Acts 9.5.
If you walk contrary to me, Lev. 26.23.24.
(says God) I will walk contrary to you. Oh then let that of David be our
prayer, Psalm. 19.13
Keep back thy servant from presumptuous from presumptuous sins, let them
not have dominion over me: then shall I be upright, and innocent from the
great transgression.

This presumption is a second vice contrary to the fear of GOD. And therefore
Solomon opposes hardening of the neck unto fear. Pro. 28.14.
And Aristotle says, that those that are fearlesse, they slight God and man:
they are audacious and presumptuous. This is the Goliath that bids defiance
to God.

CHAP. XIII. Of Superstitious fear: and the counter poison against it.
A Third sin that is opposite to the true fear of God, is Superstitious*
Fear, when men fear where no fear is, as the Psalmist speaks. Psalm. 53.5.
That is, where no true ground of fear is. And this may be,

1. When men fear to do that which God permits and allows to be done. Thus
the Jews feared to name the name Jehovah: they thought the high Priest only
might name it: and that but once in the year, and that only in the holy of
Holies. Such were the Christians newly converted: they yet scrupulously
observed days, and obstained from meats, as upon imediate tie of conscience
from God. Such are some Romans also, that fear more to eat an egg at some
set times, than they fear to swear or curse, or drink drunk. Again, they
fear to allow marriage to Priests, which God allows. Have not we power,
(says Saint Paul) to lead about a sister, 1 Cor. 9.5.
a wife, as well as other Apostles? whereof Saint Peter was one. Heb. 13.4.
Marriage is honorable in all men, says the Apostle. This is a superstitious
fear, to dread that as unlawful, which God has left as indifferent, which we
may do, or not do.

2. When men fear to do that, that God does indeed indispensably command. As
the church of Rome fears to suffer the Laity to read the Scripture in a known
tongue; when Christ has strictly inioynd the searching of the Scipture upon
all. John 5.39.
And they fear, upon the pretense of many ridiculous consequences to grant to
the laity, the cup in the Eucharist, though by the denial thereof they prove
themselves enemies to the primitive institution of the Sacrament, 1 Cor.
11.23.24.25.
as St. Paul relates it. Thus the Anabaptists, fear to take an oath before a
magistrate, when an oath lawfully taken is a part of Gods worship. Thou shall
swear, says the prophet, Ier. 4.2.
the Lord lives: that is, upon warrantable occasion. If (says God) they will
learn my ways, Ier. 12.16.
to swear by my name they shall be built in the midst of my people. Heb. 6.16.
For an oath for cofirmation is to men an end of al strife, says Paul Again
the Anabaptists fear to wage war for any cause whatsoever, when indeed there
is a curse denounced against them that will not help the LORD against the
mighty. Judge. 5.23.
They will say, that was under the Law. But what can they answer then to our
Saviors words, He that has no sword, Luke. 22.36.
let him sell his garment and buy one?

3. When men fear to omit that, that God no where commands, as the Romanists
do too often. Of which their superstitions, God may justly say as he did of
the Israelites will worship, Ier. 32.35.
I commanded it not, neither came it into my mind.

4. When men fear to omit that that God forbids; as Papists fear to ore-slip
the adoration of a Saint, or of an Angel, against which adoration Gods
jealousy smokes. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve, says Christ.

In a word, there is a superstitions fear, when men are troubled at the
crossing of hare the f^lling of the salt toward them, and stumbling at the
threshold, and think these things ominous, inauspicious, d^s^^s^^ous. When men
are daunted at the conjunctions of the Planets, and other stars in their
several houses. These vanities God dehorts his people from, as heathenish, and
not becoming the servants of God. Thus says the Lord, Learn not the way of
the Heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the Heathen are
dismayed at them, Ier. 10.2.3.
and the customs of the people are vain These foolish fears, and the true
fear of God cannot stand together. In the multitude of dreams, and words,
Eccles. 5.7
are diverse vanities, but fear thou God^ as Solomon speaks.

These are the several kinds of superstitious fear; though those that are
guilty of some of these kinds of fear, shall rise up in judgment against
many of us. As they that think it unlawful to swear at all, shall condemn
those that stuff their common speech with oaths, and those that forswear
themselves. And they that think it unlawful to war, or to go to suite at
all, shall condemn those that thirst after blood: and like Salamanders love to
live in the flame of contention; yet we must be dehorted from this scrupulous
fear.

1. Because it argues a weakness in our judgment, when we know not the
bounds and precincts of our Christian liberty: when we know not what we may
do, what we must do, what we need not to do, what we ought not to do; what
is necessary, what is unlawful, what is adiaphorous, indifferent. And
therefore S. Paul calls one, whom every thing scandalizes, weak in the faith.
Romans 14.1


2. To frame to our selves doubts and scruples where God makes none, is to do
both what is thanklesse, and what is hateful. It is thanklesse: for God will
say to us, as to them in Isaiah, Isay. 1.12.
Who has required these things at your hands? Nay, it is hateful. Hateful to
good men; I hate them that regard superstitious vanities. Psalm. 31.6.
Hateful to God. They have chosen their own ways (says God) I will bring
their fears upon them, Isay 66.3.4.
because they have chosen that, wherein I delighted not. We know, that with us,
nothing is more nauseous, more tedious, than that man, who upon an ignorant
fear to offend us, leaves undone that, that we would willingly have done, or
importunately! fastens that upon us, which we count a trouble.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the servile fear of God.
A Fourth sin, contrary to the true fear of God, is, the servile or slavish
fear of God: when men fear him only for that treasury of wrath, which he
has in his hand, and can at his pleasure power in full viols upon us, both in
this life and eternally. This was King Abimelechs the pagans fear. This was
Balaams the witches fear. This was Iudasses, the traitors f^are, which we are
to be dehorted from

1. Because it moves a man to run from God, who is the fountain of all our
good, as a slave would run from his master, or as a Felon would feign break
prison, that he might never see the face of his Judge.

2. Because it works in man a hatred of God, so that he often wishes, that
there were no God, or that God were blind, that he might not be an
eyewitness of his wickedness, or that he were impotent, unable to punish him
for his rebellion. It is as true of a servile fearer of God, as it was of Saul,
that the more he feared David, 1 Samuel 18.29.
the more he became his enemy.

3. Because it makes a man an hpocrite: It suffers him only to avoid those
sins that are of the grossest bulk, that do lay waste the conscience.
Vastare conscientim.
It moves him only to forbear, but not to mortify his sin.

Lastly, this servile fear is but an earnest of hell torments in many a
wretched soul.

They that consider this, will grant me, that such a fear as this is to be
crucified with the rest of the body of sin. Not that it is unlawful to fear
God for his judgments; but to fear him for his judgments only: that is up
on no other, nor better ground. I plead not that this fear should be wholly
abolished, but that it may be rectifi^d and perfected, otherwise it is the
daughter of Infidelity, the sister of hatred, and the mother of despair.

CHAP. XV. Of the excessive fear of the creature.
AF^ft Sin that fights aginst the kindly fear of God is the excessive fear
of the creature; When man fears man, or any other creature either equally
with, or more then God. And this we are dehorted from.

1. Because; as the throne, and the bed can brook no rivalls; neither can God
endure that the fear due to him, should be given to another. Hear how
zelously he expostulates the case: Isay 51.12 13.
Who art thou, that thou sholdst be affrayd of a man, that shall dye; and of
the son of man, that shall be made as grass, and forgettest the Lord thy
maker, that strecheth forth the heavens, and laid the foundation of the earth?
And again. Isay 57.11.
Of whom have thou been affrayd, or feared; that thou have not remembered me
and thou fear me not? Indeed this is idolatry, and Sacrilege; to preferr^^
the creature before th^^ creator.

2. This ouer-fearing of man is a flood-gat^ that lets in much mischief. Genesis
20.1.
It made Abrhaam deny his wife Sarah. It made Jonas when he was sent to
Niniveh, Ion. 1.2.3.
to fly to Tarshish. It made St. Peter to deny his master with an oath, and a
bitter execration. Had we not need then to make head against it?

3. It is a ridiculous, brainelesse, Timent carcerem, non timent gebennam:
timent cruciatum temporalem, non poenas ignis aeterni: timent modicum mori, sed
non aeternum mori. Aug.
reasonlesse thing to fear man more then God. We use to laugh at children
that fear a vizour more, then the man that wears it. Saint Austin imputes it
to man's extreme folly. Men fear the prison; but they fear nor hell; Contemn
potes^tem timendo maiorem potestatem.
they fear temporal torment, but they fear not the pains of unquencheable
sire. They fear the first, but not the second death. Despise (says he) man
his power by dreading a supremer power. And again (says he) God commands one
thing the Emperor another, what must a man's answer be Pardon me dread Sir:
Da veniam, ^u carcerem, ille g^hennam.
you threaten prison, and God threatens hell. And agian (says he) What can man
do? Acuit novacul^m ut capillos radat, non ut caput incidit.
He can but sharpen his razour to shave off our hair, our heads are not in his
power. Every good man may answer the proud m^nances of men as Christ answered
Pilate Know thou not (says Pilate) that it is in my power to crucify thee?
Ioh. 19.103.11.
our Savior an answered; thou could have no power at all against me,
execept it were given thee from above. Now who would fear a sword that is in
the hand of him that loves him? Who would fear a slave, or Scullion more then
the Lord, and master? We would hiss at that man, who should fear an
under-officer, having a royal protection from his King.

4. He that for the fear of man injureth his God, many times loses God, and
man both, and is secured neither way. I have read, that a remorslesse wretch,
having his enemy at an advantage, held a pistol at his breast, and wished him,
if he loved his life, to renounce his GOD. To save his life, he did so; where
upon he pistold him, with these words, now my revenge is perfect, both upon
thy body and thy soul. We see how little the fear of man will advantage us.
For in this sense, he that would save his life, may chance to loose it, as our
Savior admonishes. John. 12.^ 25.


Lastly, God will pay us home in our own coin, if we will fear men more
then we ought, we shall fear man more then we would. The sound of an aspen
leaf shall chase us. We shall fly, Leuit. 26.36. Pro. 28.1.
when no man pursues us; As the Burgundains feared, that all the reeds they
saw were lances. Certainly he deserves to fear all things who fears not
God above all. Merito om^a timet, qui illum non timet.
Whereas the true fear of one would acquit us from the fear of many.

CHAP. XVI. A Serious exhortation to the fear of God, and first of the manner,
how we ought to fear him.
What is past is Dehortatory; what is behind shall be exhortatory. Now I have
untaught the false fears I must have leave to teach the true fear of God.
Every plant, that God has not planted must be rooted up, and the true bred
fear of God must be implanted in our hearts. And there are not more pathetical
moving, zealous, frequent counsels, commands exhortations to any theological
virtue, to any grace, then to this royal grace of the fear of God. It is Gods
wish. Oh that there were such a heart in my people to fear me! It is his
commandment thrice imposed in one chapter: the book of Deuteronomy is full of
this theme, Deuteronomy. 5.29 Deuteronomy. 6.1.2.13.24. Deuteronomy. 10.12.
Now O Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear him.
And in this Deuteronomy is a right Deuteronomy, repeating this law the second
time, for so the word imports) nay again; and again almost in every chapter:
certainly there is much in it, else there needed not such redoubled iterations,
and inculcations. This was a lesson that God himself would vouchsafe to teach
from heaven, and he required that parents should instill it into their
children. Deuteronomy. 4.10
Our Savior divides the old testament into Moses the Psalms and the prophets.
Luke 24.44.
And all these books often and seriously commend the fear of God to us. We
have heard Moses, now for the psalms. Let all the earth fear the Lord, Psalm.
33.8.
let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. Psalm. 34.9.
Oh fear the Lord yea his Saints. For the prophets. Isay 8.13.
Let the Lord God of hoastes be your fear. In the new testament. Phil. 2.12.
Work out your Salvation with fear, and trembling, says Saint Paul. 1 Pet.
2.17
Fear God honor the King says St. Peter We see that the fear of God is not
out of date under the gospel. The glad tidings of greet joy exclude not a holy
fear.

Neither are ignoble, poor men only obliged to fear God, but also the
greatest He, or she that the Sun looks on. Princes are Gods before men, Psalm.
82.6.7.
but they are but men before God. Their inferiors fear them, and they must
fear God. This fear is imposed upon Rulers, The God of Israel said, the rock
of Israel spoke to me: he that rules over men, must be just, 2 Samuel 23.3.
ruling in the fear of God. Upon Judges. Iehoshaphat said unto the Judges,
Take heed what you do: for you judge not for man but for God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.7.
wherefore let the fear of God be with you. Many yoakes there are that may
press some shoulders, but not others, but no neck can withdraw it self from
this yoke. And now let me do as that Priest did at Bethel. He taught them how
they should fear the Lord. 2 Kin. 17.28.
And indeed, a man had need seek as for silver, and search as for hidden
treasure, to understand the fear of the Lord, as Solomon says. Pro. 2.4.5.
I shall apply my self to the readers, as David does to the people. Come,
little children, Psalm. 34.11
and I will teach you the fear of the Lord. To descend to particulars. First,
we must so fear God, as to worship, honor, and reverence him, in thought, in
word, and in deed; especially in the use of his sacred ordinances: Ye that
fear the Lord, Psa. 22.23.
praise him, all ye seed of Jacob glorify him, and fear him all ye seed of
Israel. We see fear and praise, fear and glorifying of God, must go hand in
hand together. And again, Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name, come
into his court, worship the Lord in the beauty of his holiness: fear before
him all the earth. Psalm. 96.8.9.
Again, an Angel said with a loud voice, Rev. 14.7.
Fear God, and give glory to him, and worship him. He that fears not God,
cannot worship him; Quod non m^tuitur, non colitur.
and he that worships not God, does not fear him.

2. We may, and ought to fear God for his comminations; and for his
punishments. I am afraid of thy judgments, Psalm. 119.120.
says David. If the Lion roar, who will not fear? and if God threaten, who
can but fear? Amos 3.8.
When God threatened an universal deluge, Heb. 11.7.
Noah was moved with fear. And when God threatened such a hayle should fall in
Egypt, that should kill every man and beast found in the field. The text says,
That he that feared the word of the Lord, Exodus 9.20
made his servants and cattle to fly into his houses. Nature will tutor us to
fear thus. But we must also fear, when the judgments of God are executed on
others, though as yet they press not us. As an ingenuous child trembles when
he sees his father strike a servant, though he be not angry with him. Because
thou put away the wicked like dross, therefore my flesh trembles for
fear of thee, Psalm. 119. 1 19.120 2 Samuel 6.6.9.
(says David.) And when God smote Vzzah to death, it is said, hat David was
afraid of the Lord that day. And when Ananias and Saphyra for lying, fell down
dead at the Apostles feet, the text says in one place, that great fear came
on all that heard those things. And in another place, Fear came on all the
Church for this, though they were not guilty of the same sin that was their
bane. Acts 5.5.10.11.
When a neighbors house is on fire, no man is so senseless, as not to fear
his own house.

3. We must fear God, not only for his judgments; but also for his mercy.
As a chaste wife fears a loving husband, from whom she expects not a harsh
word, much less a blow. God does not afflict, therefore do men fear him, Job
37.23 24.
says Job. We ought to fear God, both because he afflicts, and because he
does not afflict: we must fear him for his justice and severity, and for his
goodness, They shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter days,
Hos. 3. last verse.
says the Prophet. Therefore God calls his people a revolting, a rebellious
people, because they said not in their heart, Let us now fear the Lord, who
gives the former and the latter rain, Ier. 5.24.
and reserveth us the appointed weeks of the harvest. Which plainly shows,
that we must fear God for giving seasonable, as sending unseasonable weather.
As we must love a just as well as a merciful God: so we must fear a merciful
as well as a just God.

That is (in the fourth place) we must fear to offend and dishonor that God,
who is so abundantly merciful unto us. The fear of God, and the discarding of
sin must go together, Psalm. 4.4.
Stand in awe, and finne not, says David. All the people shall fear, Deuteronomy.
17.13.
and do no more so presumptuously, says Moses And again, These that remain,
Deuteronomy. 19.20.
shall fear, and commit no more any such evil. It is not good that you do;
ought you not to walk in the fear of God? Nehem. 5.9.
says Nehemiah to the Nobles. Prove 3.7.
Fear the Lord, and depart from evil, says Solomon. It is a plain mocking
of God, to say we fear him, and yet not fear minutely to perpetrate that than
is derogatory and odious to him. Like them that feared the Lord, forsoo h, ^
King. 17. last verse.
and yet served their graven Images.

5. Fear of God must be accompanied and seconded with obedience to God. That
thou may fear the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.2.13.
and keep his statutes, as in Deuteronomy. Psalm. 2.11.
Serve the Lord with fear, says the Psalmist. Fear the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.24.
and serve him, says Samuel. We know, that service stands not in receiving
wages, in eating and drinking, in making legs, and in wearing liveries, but
in obedience. Neither does the service of God consist in outside complement,
or in wearing the badge of Christianity, but in the works of obedience to our
heavenly Lord and master. We must so fear God, as neither to make God to
serve us by our sins, (as God complains) not yet to serve our selves upon
God, Isay 43.24
but both in doing and in suffering, to resign up our selves to Gods will and
pleasure.

6. We must so fear God, as to cleave to him, and not to run from him; as to
love him, and not to hate him; as to trust in him, and not to distrust him. We
must serve God with fear, and we must s^rve God without fear: that is,
without distracting and diffident fear, Luke 1.74. Timor tristis and inutilis,
qui ventam, quia non quaerit non consequitur, Bern.
says Zachary. That (says Saint Bernard) is a sorrowful and a profitlesse
fear, that therefore obtaines not pardon, because it fears to seek pardon.
Fear and love, fear and faith, and confidence must be inseparably united.

7. We must so fear God, in, and through, and for Gods sake, to fear those,
whom God has, as his substitu ^s, set over us. Subjects must fear their
Sovereign, and God in him. 1 Pet. 2.17
Fear God, honor the King, says S. Peter. Children must fear their parents,
Ye shall fear every man his mother and his father, Leuit. 19.3
says Moses. God in their parents, and their parents, in and for God.

First God, and then their parents. Wives must fear and reverence their
husbands. Let the wife see that she fear her husband, Ephesians. 5. last verse.
says Saint Paul. Servants must fear their masters, Servants be obedient to
your masters according to the flesh, Col. 3.22.
with fear, and trembling, says Saint Paul, who elsewhere conjoynes the
obedience to masters with the fear of God. Servants (says he) be obedient to
your masters in all things, Ephesians. 6.5.
not with eye-service, but in singleness of heart, fearing God. That is,
fearing God in their masters, and their masters for Gods sake.

8. We must fear God above all the creatures in the world, though all their
force, and vigor were united together. This is the meaning of that of our
Savior, Mat. 10.28
Fear not them that can kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul, but
sear him who is able to kill both body and soul, Fear not him that can kill
the body; that is, fear not him so much as God. Shall we fear the creature,
and not God for whose sake only we fear the creature, for what strength has
any creature, where with God invests it not? What can any creature do for
thee, or against thee; that God cannot do? What can any man do against, or
for thee that God does not permit, and that he cannot interupt, or revoke? The
strength of all creatures combined together is but infirmity, weakness to Gods
power human policy is folly to Gods wisdom. We fear a giant more then an
infant, a mountain then a molchill, a flame then a spark, a sea, then a drop,
why then fear we not God more then al things.

Lastly, We must fear God always, constantly, without intermission, or
interruption. In youth, in age, in adversity, in prosperity. Josh. 4.24.
That you might fear the Lord your God for ever, says Joshua. 1 Kings 18.12.
I have feared the Lord my God from my youth, Psalm. 72.5.
(says Obadiah) They shall fear then as long as the Sun, Pro. 23.17
and moon endures (says David) Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day
long (says Solomon) Many duties there are that are sometimes out of season;
but the fear of the Lord never.

Thus I have displayed before the readers eye, the manner how we ought to manage
our fear of God. Wherein I have studied plainenes to leave the lowest
capacities without excuse. In matter of direction in a duty, wherein depends
life, or death, it is absurd to walk in clouds; or to use the enticing words
of man's wisdom.

CHAP. XVII. The means whereby the fear of God may be wrought, and increased.
Next to the manner how we ought to fear God; The means whereby this fear
is ordinarily ingenerated confirmed, and increased come next to hand.

1. Be a companion of all them that fear God, Psalm. 119.63.
as David professes that he was, The company of bold, foolhardy wretches that
dare venture upon any sin, is the next way to make thee, who ever thou art,
fearelesse and careless, till sudden and unrecouerable mischief fall upon thee.

Megn^ tibi cusledia necessariaest, qui ante oculos judicis vivis cuncta
cernentis. Bern. Medit.
2. The hourly consideration of Gods alsecing ey will keep the fear of God
lively and fresh in the heart. That man cannot but be fearful, and careful
that thinks with himself, that he lives always in the eyes of such a Judge,
that is the great and unswayed spectator of all things.

3. Read and hear the word of God frequently and diligently; there (O
Christian) thou will find what God is, and what the fear of God is; and what
unanswerable reasons thou have to fear him. Deuteronomy 4.10
Gather the people (says God) I will make them hear my words, that they may
learn to fear me. All the people shall hear and fear, says M^ses. And
again, Deuteronomy. 17.13. Deuteronomy 31.13.
that their children may hear and learn to fear the Lord. The soul is in
the care, what know thou but that upon thy constant attendance on this
sacred ordinance, God may strike the speeding blow, and work his fear in thee.

Lastly, we must daily, and zealously pray to him, whom we ought to fear, to
implant this his fear in us. David will put words into our mouths, Psalm. 86.^1
Lord unite my heart to fear thy name. Arowse our drowsy, leaden, and secure
spirits, and cause the spirit of thy fear to rest upon us, that at all times,
in all places, above all things, we may fear thee.

Much more might be added; but he who conscionably uses these means, cannot
be a stranger to the fear of GOD. You will say, these means are but ordinary
and plain. The better; what wise Physician will go a chymicall, curious way
to cure a patient, when known remedies will do the deed? That were only to
try conclusions upon the patient. We use to say, plain iron may do that,
Ferrwn potest, quod aurum non potest.
that gold cannot do. You cannot now say, the way is dark, for you have had
sufficient direction; nor that the well is deep, and you have no bucket to
draw with, for wholesome means have been prescribed. If we now fear not God,
it is because we will not. The next work then must be to bow our perverse
wills; and to provoke, our cold, dull affections to this transcendent grace.

CHAP. XVIII. Arguments for, and motives unto the fear of God.
AND now what incentives shall I use to work our affections to this fear? Let
us look but upon Gods little book, his word, and upon his great book of
nature, the world; and there is no line in the one, nor thing in the other, but
argues hard, and powerfully pleads for the fear of God. But not to let my
discourse loose into a hedgelesse field, let us remember,

1. The surpassing excellency of this grace in it self. It is an epitome, an
abstract of all religion. That which Moses calls fear, Deu. 6.13.
our Savior quoting that place, Mat. 4.10.
calls worship. And in the Greek, the same words do signify fear and
religion: (...).
as if all religion lay in this fear. When the Scripture would ^^^escribe a
good (...) denominateth (...) from the fear of God: As a tradesman commonly
takes his name from that, wherein he most deals. It was the style of
Obadiah, He feared God greatly. 1 Kin. 18.3
And of Hananiah, He feared God above many. Nehe. 7.2.
And of Job, He feared God. Nay, Job 1.1.
the fear of God is the Alpha and Omega, Et principuna and prae^ipuum.
the beginning and end, the complement, and perfection of all. Solomon calls
it, Pro. 1.7. Eccl. 12.13 Eccl. 1.6.20.
the beginning of wisdom, and the conclusion of all. It is (...), the root of
wisdom. Eccl. 1.23.
It is (...), the fullness of wisdom. It is (...), the crown of wisdom. I
had need of the tongue of men and Angels to give it its due praise and full
character. But

2. Let us turn our eyes upon God, the object of this fear, we will find that
he deserves, and may challenge our fear; and when we speak of God, we will
with David give him this addition, God who ought to be feared For; Psa. 76. 11


1. He is omnipresent, and omniscient. The eyes of the Lordin every place
behold the evil, Prove. 15.3.
and the good, therefore in every place stand in awe of him.

If a man were sure that his princes eye were always upon him, how fearful,
how wary would he be in all his carriage? Fear him (says Aug.) whose
constant care it is to look upon thee, and walk chastely; or if thou will
needs offend seek some retired place wherein God cannot see thee and then do
thy pleasure. What height of Atheism is it to fear the eye of a child, and
not to fear God his alseeing eye.

2. He is omnipotent able to save, I am 4.12.
and to destroy says James: now power is the proper object of sear. Thou even
thou (says David, Psalm. 76.7.
art to be seared and who may stand in thy sight, who thou art angry and
therefore God might well with indignation ask the question, Ier. 5.12.
Fear you not me? will ye not treble at my presence, who have placed the sand
for abound of the sea by a perpetual decree and the waves though they toss,
and roar cannot pass it? Our lives, our souls are in Gods hands. He has
the keys of death and of hell. Thou turnest man to destruction, Psalm 90.3.
Mat. 10 28
says David He is able to cast both body and soul into hell And shall we not
fear him? Our Savior redoubleth his words; Luke 12.5.
fear him: yea, I say unto you, fear him before whom man is but as a moth, as
the dust of the balance.

3. God is as just, as Jealous, as severe as powerful. He will not spare his
own children the aples of his eye, the signets on his right hand, if they
wilfully offend him. You only (says God to Israel) have I known of all the
families of the earth therefore I will be sure to punish you for all your
iniquities. Amos 3.2. Romans 8.32.
Nay he would not spare his only son when heewold stand in the place of
sinners. Now what guilty man fears not an austere upright, unswayd Iusticer?
What child fears not an angry fathers? what servant fears not his
incensedmaster: Do you know what Gods anger is? The fire kindled in his wrath
burns to the lowest hell, as says God, Deuteronomy. 32.22. Psalm. 2. last verse.
If his wrath be kindled but a little, blessed are they that trust in him,
says David. Do they provoke me to anger? Ier. 7.19.
(says the Lord) do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their own
faces? Heb. 10.31
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, says Saint
Paul. Heb. 12. two last verses.
Serve the Lord with fear, for he is a consuming sire, says the same
Apostle. And who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings? Isay 33.14.
says the Prophet.

4. God is gracious, therefore fear him: There is mercy with thee, Psa. 130.4.
that thou may be feared, says the Psalmist. A loving wife is fearful to
offend an indulgent husband. An obedient child is fearful to offend a
careful father. And shall we turn Gods grace into wantonness, and slight
him for his kindness? That were pity.

5. There is none so holy as the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.2.
says Hannah, therefore we ought to fear and reverence him. King Herod
feared John Baptist, Mar. 6.20.
because he was a just and a holy man, and he observed him, says the Text.
Shall a wicked man fear a man who is holy only by participation ^^^d shall
not we fear (...) whose Essene is holiness it self? It is David's argument;
Worship, reverence God, Psalm. 99.5.
for he is holy.

6. What ever God is in himself, sure we are he is our God, our Lord, our
master, our father. All which are strong obligations up on us to fear him.
Sanctify the Lord of hosts, Isay 8.13.
let him be your fear, and dread. There is one reason, He is God. But more
then that he is our Lord, If I be father where is my honor? If I be a master
where is my fear? Mala. 1.6.
says God. He claims our fear by this undoubted right. It is Saint Peter's
inference, If you call him father, 1 Pet. 1.17.
pass the time of your soiourning here in fear.

Lastly. If we regard not the duty for its own sake, nor for Gods sake, yet
let us fear God for our own sake: For

1. The fear of God has temporal promises annexed to it. What do thou
desire? the fear of God will make thee owner of it: worldst thou have rest,
and ease and estate for thy self, and thine? this fear bring it, what man is
he says David that fears the Lord, Psalm. 25.12 13.
his soul shall dwell at ease, his seed shall inherit the earth. Would thou
not be brought to poverty, and penury? then fear God. There is no want to them
that fear the Lord, Psalm. 34.9.
says David. Woldst thou live long? why the fear of the Lord prolongeth
days, Pro. 10.27
says Solomon: woldst thou have plentiful issue? it is promised to the fearers
of GOD. Woldst thou be content with thy present estates? Psalm. 128.
He that has the fear of the Lord, shall abide satis fied, says Solomon. In
a word, God counts nothing too dear for such. By the fear of the Lord are
riches, Pro. 22.4.
honor, and life, says Solomon. Either thou shall enjoy all these things, or
that which is equivalent to them, or better then them; or thou shall be content
with thy present state. Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, Pro.
15.16.
then a great treasure. But (2) all this is but dross to the spiritual
fruits of the fear of God. For;

1. It is the mother of wisdom. Pro. 1.7.
What man is he that fears God, Psalm. 25.12.14.
him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose, says David. The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant. He
that fears God, shall be acquainted with the pith, and marrow of Gods will,
when others shall scarce pierce the bark of it: this is true wisdom to be
wise to a man's self, Pro. 9.12.
every fearer of God is. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, Pro. 27.12.
and hides himself under the wings of Gods protection, so does every fearer
of God.

2. The fear of God is the porter of the soul, that casts out sin, Ianitor
animae, Bern.
and keeps out sin; So Bernard. It is the keeper of our innocence; So
Cyprian. Cuslos innocentiae. Cypr.
It is the anchor of the soul that makes a man stable amidst all temptations,
Anchora cordis. Greg.
so Gregory. The fear of the Lord is said by David to be clean, Psa 19.9.
because it keeps men clean; Tutissi^^u^iter quod suspectissimum. Sen. Ep. 59.
as he that walks fear fully, and warily, walks surely, and cleanely. That
way is the safer the more suspicious we are in it. By the fear of God men
depart from evil, says Solomon Pro. 16.6. This was Joseph his curb, Genesis 39.9.
how shall Icommit this great wickedness, and sin against God?

3. The true fear of God expells all false fears; as Moses his rod did eat
up all the Egiptian rods. It expels slavish fear because it is joined with joy.
Rejoice with trembling says David. Psalm. 2.11.
This fear breeds eternal security. It expells the excessive fear of men.
Isay 8.12.13.
Fear not their fear, but let God be your fear, says the Prophet: for indeed
this fear is a counter-poyson to that, Psalm. 13.4.
Though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no ill,
says David.

4. The fear of God is the mother of obedience. And therefore when David
desird to walk in the true way, he desired that he might fear God, Psalm.
86.11 Eccles. 12.13.
for no obedience without fear: Deuteronomy. 5.29 2 Chronicles. 19.5.6.7 Lev. 19.32
Every where in scripture, fear and obedience are linked together. If we
fear God, we will conscionably discharge all duties requireable in all our
conditions, and relations. Then Judges would accept no persons and take no
bribes, then young men would honor their elders. Then the wife would love, and
obey the husband; children their parents, and servants their masters. Then
executors would perform the will of the dead. And no man would offer to betray
a trust. Then every state would be in joint, and we should live godlily and
righteously, and peaceably, one by another. In a word, the fear of God is the
nurse of perseverance unto the end. He that is secure and presumptuous often falls
off, when he that fears God, and suspects himself, holds his ground. Fear
breeds care, and care continuance. Formido facit sollicitudine^, sollicitudo
perseverantiam. Tert. cont. Marcion.
Had Peter feared more, he had not fallen so foully. I speak not of cowarde, but
of faithful fear. It is Gods promise, Ier. 32.40. Ier. 31.40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall never depart from me.

Last of all. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Fear, and godliness have the promises of the life to come. The fear of God
tends to life, Pro. 19.23
says Solomon Pro. 19.23. How ever the squares go now, I know it shall go well
with them that fear God, Eccl. 8.12.
says the Preacher Eccle. 8.12. And Malachy. 3.16. God writes a book of
remembrance for them that fear him, Mal. 3.16.
and he promises that he will acknowledge them as his in the day, when he
shall make up his jewels.

Harder is that heart, then the hardest adamant, with which all these arguments
cannot prevayle.

Thus have I given this point its due (as I conceive) yet wishing that an abler
pen might ad what I have omitted. My sack has corn in it to feed the hungry,
though not gold in the mouth thereof to feed the humor of a fancifull reader.
My aim is not to please the humerous, but to profit all. For censure, and
detraction it will be lost upon me, for I regard it not. I pass not man's
judgment, 1 Cor. 4.3.4.
he that judges me is the Lord. He that regards the wind and rain shall
never sow. If I shall gain but one soul by this discourse I am abundantly
appayed, Isay 49.4.
but though Israel be not gathered, yet my work is with my God.

FINIS.
Errata.
GEntle Reader, in reading this Treatise, take notice of some faults escaped at
the press, as page 2 line 15. read made before brief Essays. p. 4. l 14. for
instruction, read intrusion. p. 49 l. 14. for his read this. p. 112. l. 12. for
does so, read does not so. p. 119. l. 7. for and, read may. p. 158. l. 19. for
coveant, read covenant p. 176. l. 19. for cannot seradicate, read cannot but
cradicate. p. 246 l. 1. for (...).


