A lamentable tragedy mixed full of pleasant mirth, containing the life of
CAMBISES king of PERCIA, from the beginning of his kingdom unto his death, his
one good deed of execution, after that many wicked deeds and tirannous murders,
committed by and through him, and last of all, his odious death by Gods Justice
appointed. Done in such order as follows. By Thomas Preston.

The division of the parts.

Council. For one man. Huf. Praxaspes. Murder. Lob, the 3. Lord. Lord. For one
man. Ruf, Commons cry, Co^mo^s complaint Lord smirdis. Venus. Knight, For one
man. Snuf. Small ability. Proof. Execution. Attendance. second Lord,
Cambises. For one man. Epilogus. Prologue. For one man. Sisamnes. Diligence.
Cruelty. Hob. Preparation the 1. Lord. Ambidexter For one man. Trial.
Meretrix. For one man. Shame. Otian. Mother. Lady. Queen. Yung child For one
man Cupid.

The Prologue Enters.
AGathon he whose counsel wise, to princes well exte^ded:
by good advice unto a Prince iij. things he has commended
First, is that he has government and rules over men:
Secondly, to rule with laws, eke Justice (says he) then.
Thirdly, that he must well conceive, he may not always reign:
Lo, thus the rule unto a Prince, Agathon squared plain.
Tully the wise whose sapience, in volumes great does tell:
Who in wisdom, in that time did many men excel.
A Prince (says he) is of him self, a plain and speaking law:
The law, a School master divine, this by his rule I draw.
The sage and witty Seneca, his words thereto did frame:
The honest exercise of Kings, men will ensue the same.
But contrary wise if that a King, abuse his kingly seat:
His ignomy and bitter shame, in fine shall be more great.
In Percia there reignd a king, who Cirus hight by name:
Who did deserve as I do read, the lasting blast of Fame.
But he, when sisters three had wrought, to shere his vital thread:
As heir due to take the crown, Cambices did proceed.
He in his youth was trained up, by trace of virtues lore:
Yet (being king) did clean forget, his perfect race before.
Then cleuing more unto his will such vice did immitate:
As one of Icarus his kind, for warning then did hate.
Thinking that none could him dismay, ne none his fact? could see
Yet at the last a fall he took, like Icarus to be.
Else as the fish which often had take, the pleasant bait from hook:
In safe did spring and pearce the stremes when fisher fast did look.
To hoist up from the watery waves, unto the dried land:
Then scaept, at last by subtle baight, come to the fishers hand.
Ene so this king Cambices here, when he had wrought his will:
Taking delight the Innocent, his giltlesse blood to spil.
Then mighty Jove would not permit, to proce offense:
But what measure ye king did meat, ye same did Jove co^mence.
To bring to end with shame his race, two years he did not reign:
His cruelty we will dilate, and make the matter plain.
Craving that this may suffice now, your patience to win:
I take my way, behold I see, the players coming in.
FINIS.
A Commedy of First enter Cambises the King, Knight and Councellor.
Cambises. MY Counsel grave and sapient with lords of legal train:
Attentive ears toward bend and mark what shall be sain.
So you likewise my valiant knight whose ma^ly acts does fly
By brute of fame ye sounding trump does perse ye azure sky.
My sapient words I say perpend and so your skill delate:
You know that Mors vanquished has Cirus that king of state
And I by due inheritance possess that Princely crown:
Ruling by sword of mighty force in place of great renown.
You know and often have heard tell my fathers worthy facts.
A manly Marsis heart he bare appeering by his acts.
And what? shall I to ground let fall my fathers golden praise?
No, no, I mean for to attempt, this fame more large to raise,
In that that I his son succeed his kingly seat as due:
Extend your council unto me in that I ask of you.
I am the king of Persia, a large and fertile soil:
The Egiptians against us repunge, as verlets slave and vile.
Therefore I mean with Marsis heart, with wars the^ to frequent
Them to subdue as captives mine this is my hearts intent.
So shall I win honors delight, and praise of me shall go:
My Council speak, and Lordings eke, is it not best do so?

Council. Oh pusant king, your blifful words, deserves abundant praise
That you in this do go about, your fathers same to raise.
Oh blifful day that king so yung, such profit should conceive:
His fathers praise and his to win, from those that would deceive.
Sure my true and souerain king, I fall before you pressed:
Answer to give as duty mine, in that your grace request.
If that your heart adicted be, the Egiptians to convince:
Through Marsis and the conquest wun, then deed of happy prince
Shall pearce the skies unto the throne of the supernall seat:
And merit there a just reward, of Jupiter the great.
But then your grace must not turn back, from this pretenced will
For to proceed in virtuous life, employ endeavor still.
Extinguish vice, and in that cup, to drink have no delight.
To martial feats and kingly sport, fix all your whole delight.

King. My Council grave a thousand thanks, with heart I do you render
That you my case so prosperouse, intierly do tender.
I will not swerve from those your steps, whereto you would me trau^
But now my Lord and valiant knight, with words give answer plain
Are you content with me to go, the Marsis games to try?

Lord, Yea peerlesse Prince to aid your grace, my self will live and dye.


Knight. And I for my ability, for fear will not turn back:
But as the ship against the rocks, sustain and bide the wrack.

King. Oh willing hearts, a thousand thanks I render unto you:
Strik up your drums with courage great, we will march forth even now.

Council. Permit (O king) few words to here, my duty serves no less:
Therefore give leave to council thine, his mind for to express.

King. Speak on my Council what it be, you shall have savor mine


Council. Then will I speak unto your grace, as duty does me bind.
Your grace does mean for to attempt of war the manly art:
Your grace therein may bap receive with others for your part.
The dent of death in those affairs, all persons are alike:
The heart courageous often times, his detryment does seek.
Its best therefore for to permit, a Ruler of your land:
To sit and judge with equity, when things of right are scand.

King. My grace does yield to this your talk, tobe thus now it shall:
My Knight therefore prepare your self, Sisamnes for to call.
A Judge he is of prudent skill, even he shall bear the sway:
In absence mine, when from the land I do depart my way.

knight. Your Knight before your grace eue^ here, him self has ready pressed:
With willing heart for to fulfill as your grace made request.

Exit. Council. Pleases your grace I judge of him to be a man right fit:
For he is learned in the Law having the gift of wit.
In your graces presinct, I do not view for it a meeter man:
His learning is of good effect. bring proof thereof I can.
I do not know what is his life, his conscience hid from me:
I dout not but the fear of God, before his eyes to be.

Lord. Report declares, he is a man that to him self is nigh:
One that fa^^ureth much the world, and to much sets thereby.
But this I say of certainty, if he your grace succeed:
In your absence but for a while, he will be warnd indeed:
No injustice for to frequent, no partial Judge to prove:
But rule all things with equity, to win your graces love.

King. Of that he shall a warning have, my heasts for to obey:
Great punishment for his offense against him will I lay.

Council. Behold I see him now agresse and enter into place:


Sisamnes. Oh puisant Prince and mighty king, ye gods preserve your grace.
Your graces message came to me, your will purporting forth:
With grateful mind I it received, according to mine oath.
Erecting then myself with speed, before your graces eyes:
The tenor of your Princely will, from you for to agnise.

King. Sisamnes, this the whole effect, the which for you I sent:
Our mind it is to eleuate, you to great preferment*
My grace and gracious counsel eke has chose you for this cause:
In judgment you do office bear, which have the skill in laws,
We think that you accordingly, by Justice rule will deal:
that for offense none shall have cause (of wrong) you to appeal.

Sisamnes. Abundant thanks unto your grace for this benignity:
To you his council in like case, with Lords of clemency.
What so your grace to me permits, if I therein offend:
Such erecution then commence, and use it to this end.
That all other (by that my deed) example so may take:
To admonish them to flee the same, by fear it may them make.

King. Then according to your words, if you therein offend:
I assure you even from my breast, correction shall extend,
From Persra I mean to go into the Egypt land:
Them to convince by force of arms, and win the upper hand.
While I therefore absent shall be, I do you full permit:
As governor in this my right, in that estate to sit.
For to detect and eke correct, those that abuse my grace:
This is the total of my will, give answer in this case.

Sisamnes. Unworthy much (O prince) am I, and for this gift unfit:
But since that it has pleased your grace, that I in it must sit.
I do avouch unto my death, according to my skill:
With equity for to observe, your graces mind and will.
And naught from it to swerve indeed, but sincerely to stay:
Else let me taste the penalty, as I before did say.

King, Well then of this authority, I give you you full possession:


Sisamnes. And I will it fulfill also, as I have made profession.


King. By council, then let us depart, a final stay to make:
To Egit land now forth with speed, my voyage I will take.
Strike up your dru^mes us to rejoice, to hear the warlike sound
Stay you here Sisamnes Judge, and look well to your bound.

Exeunt King, Lord and Council. Sisamnes. Even now the King has me extolde,
and set me up aloft.
Now may I were the brodered guard and lie in down bed soft.
Now may I purchase house and land, and have all at my will:
Now may I build a princely place, my mind for to fulfill.
Now may I abrogate the Law, as I shall think it good:
If any one me now offend, I may demand his blood.
According to the Proverb old, my mouth I will up make:
Now it does lie all in my hand, to leave or else to take.
To deal with Justice to my bound, and so to live in hope:
But oftentimes the birds be gone, while one for nest does grope.
Do well or il, I dare avouch, some evil on me will speak:
No truly yet I do not mean, the kings precepte to break,
To place I mean for to return my duty to fulfill.
Exit. Enter the Vice with an old Capcase on his head, an old pail about his
hips for harnes, a Scu^mer and a potlid by his side and a rake on his shhulder.
Ambidexter. Stand away, stand away for the passion of God,
Harnessed I am prepared to the feeld:
I would have been content at home to have bod,
But I am sent forth with my spear and sheeld. *

I am appointed to fight against a Snail,
And Wilkin Wren the ancient shall bear:
I dout not but against him to preuail,
To be a man my deeds shall declare.
If I overcome him, then a Butter fly takes his part,
His weapon must be a blew speckled Hen:
But you shall see me over throw him with a fart,
So without conquest he shall go home again.
If I overcame him, I must fight with a fly,
And a black pudding the flies weapon must be:
At the first blow on the ground he shall lie,
I will be sure to thrust him through the mouth to the knee.
To conquest these fellows the man I will play,
Ha, ha, ha, now ye will make me to smile:
To see if I can all men begile.
Ha, my name, my name would you so fain know?
Yea iwis shall ye, and that with all speed:
I have forgot it therefore I cannot show,
A, A, now I have it, I have it in deed.
My name is Ambidexter I signify one, *

That with both hands finely can play:
Now with king Cambices and by and by gone,
Thus do I run this and that way,
For while I mean with a Soldier to be,
Then give I a leap to Sisamnes the Judge:
I dare avouch, ye shall his destruction see,
To all kind of estates I mean for to trudge.
Ambidexter, nay he is a fellow if ye knew all:
Enter three Russians, Huf, Ruf and Snuf singing. Huf, Gogs flesh and his
wounds these wars rejoice my heart:
By his wounds I hope to do well for my part.
By Gods heart the world shall go evil if I do not shift:
At some old Carles bouget I mean for to lift.

Ruf. By his Flesh, nose, Eyes and Ears,
I will venture void of all cares.
He is not a Soldier that does fear any dout:
If that he would bring his purpose about.

Snuf. Fear that fear list, it shall not be I:
By Gogs wounds I will make some neck stand awry.
If I lose my share, I swear by Gogs heart:
Then let an other take up my part.

Huf. Yet I hope to come the richest Soldier away:


Ruf. If a man ask ye, ye may hap to say nay.


Snuf. If a man ask ye, ye may hap to say nay.


Snuf. Let all men get what they can, not to leese I hope:
Where soever I go in each corner I will grope.

Ambidexter. What and ye run into the Corner of some pretty maid?


Snuf. To grope there good fellow I will not be a fraid.


Huf. Gogs wounds what art thou that with us do mel?
T^ou seem to be a Soldier the truth to tell,
Thou seem to be harnessed. I cannot tell how:
I think he ^ame lately from riding some Cow.
Such a deformed slave did I never see:
Ruf do thou know him? I pray thee tell me.

Ruf. No by my troth fellow Huf I never see him before.


Snuf. As for me I care not if I never see him more.
Come let us run his Arse against the post:
A ye: slaves, I will be with you at the ofts.
here let him swinge the^ ahout. A ye knaves, I will teach ye how ye shall me
deride,
Out of my sight I can ye not abide.
Now goodman pouchmouth I am a slave with you:
Now have at ye a fresh again even now.
Mine Arsse against the post you will run:
But I will make ye from that saying to turn.

Huf. I beseech ye heartily to be content:


Ruf. I insure you by mine honesty no hurt we meant.
Beside that again we do not know what ye are:
Ye know that Soldiers their stoutnes will declare,
Therefore if we have any thing offended:
Pardon our rudenes and it shall be amended.

Ambidexter. Yea Gods pity, begin ye to entreat me?
Have at ye once again by the mass I will beat ye.

Huf. fight again Gogs heart let us kill him, suffer no longer:


Snuf. Draw their swords. Thou slave we will see if thou be the strongar.


Ruf. Strike of his head at one blow:
(...) we be Soldiers, Gogs heart let him know.

Ambidexter. O the passion of God, I have done by mine honesty:
I will take your part heeraster verily.

All. Then content let us agree:


Ambidexter. Shake hands with me, I shake hands with thee.
Ye are full of curtesye, that is the best:
And you take great pain, ye are a mannerly gest.
Why masters do you not know me? the truth to me tell:

All. No trust us, not very well.


Ambidexter. Why I am Ambidexter who many soldiers do love


Huf. Gogs heart to have thy company needs we must prove.
We must play with both hands with our hosts and host
Play with both hands and score on the post.
Now and then with our Captain for many a delay?
We will not stick with both hands to play.

Ambidexter. The honester man ye, ye may me trust.
Enter Meretrix with a staf on her shoulder.

Meretrix. What? is there no lads here that has a lust:
To have a passing Trul to help at their need?

Huf, Gogs heart she is come indeed.
What mistres Meretrix by his wounds welcome to me:

Meretrix. What will ye give me I pray you let me see?


Ruf. By his heart she looks for gifts by and by.


Meretrix. What master Ruf, I cry you mercy.
The last time I was with you I got a broken head.
And lay in the street all night for want of a bed.

Snuf. Gogs wounds kiss me my Trul so white:
In thee I swear is all my delight.
If thou should have had a broken bed for my sake:
I would have made his head to ache.

Meretrix. What master Ambidexter, who looked for you?

Ambidexter. Mistres Meretrix I thought not to see you here now.
There is no remedy at meeting I must have a kiss:

Meretrix, What man? I will not stick for that by gisse.


Kiss Ambidexter, So now gramercy, I pray thee be gone:


Meretrix. Nay soft my friend I mean to have one.
Nay soft I swear, and if ye were my brother:
Before I let go I will have an other.

kiss, kiss, kiss. Ruf. Gogs heart the whore would not kiss me yet:


Meretrix. If I be a whore. thou art a knave then it is quit.


Huf, But hearst thou Meretrix, with who this night wilt ye lyee


Meretrix. With him that gives the most monye.


Huf. Gogs heart, I have no money in pursse, ne yet in clout:


Meretrix. Then get thee hence and pack like a Lout.


Huf. Adieu like a Whore.


Ezit Huf, Meretrix. Farwell like a knave.


Ruf. Gogs Nails, Mistres Meretrix now he is gone:
A match ye shall make straight with me:
I will give thee sixpence to lie one night with thee.

Meretrix. Gogs heart slave do thou think I am a six penny Iug:
No wis ye Jack I look a little more smug.

snuf. I will give her xviij. pnce to serve me first:


Meretrix Gramercy Snuf, thou art not the wurst.


Ruf. By Gogs heart she were better be hanged, to forsake me and take this


Snuf. Were she so? that shall we see.


Ruf, By Gogs heart my Dagger into her I will thrust.


Snuf. A ye boy, ye would do it and ye durst.


Ambidexter, Peace my masters ye shall not fight:
He that draws first I will him smite.

Ruf. Gogs wounds Master Snuf are ye so lusty?


snuf. Gogs sides master Ruf are ye so crusty?


Ruf. You may happen to see:


Snuf, Do what thou dare to me.


Here draw and fight. Here she must lay on and coil them both, the Vice
must run his way for fear, snuf fling down his sword and buckler, and run his
way. Meretrix. Gogs sides knaves, seeing to fight ye be so rough
Defend your selves for I will give ye both enough.
I will teach ye how ye shall fall out for me:
Yea thou slave Snuf, no more blows will thou bide?
To take thy heels a time haste thou spied?
Thou Villain seeing Snuf is gone away:
A little better I mean thee to pay.

He falls down, she falls upon him and beat him and takes away his weapon,
Ruf. Alas good mistres Meretrix no more:
My legs, sides, and arms with beating be sore.

Meretrix. Thou a Soldier and loose thy weapon?
Go hence Sir boy. say a woman has thee beaten.

Ruf. Good Mistres Meretrix my weapon let me have:
Take pity on me mine honesty to save.
If it be known this repulle I sustain:
It will redound to my ignomy and shame.

Meretrix. If thou will be my man and wait upon me:
This Sword and Buckler I will give thee.

Ruf. I will do all at your commandment:
As servant to you I will be obedient

Meretrix. Then let me see how before me ye can go:
When I speak to you ye shall do so.
Of with your cap at place and at board:
Forsooth mistres Meretrix at every word.
Tut, tut, in the Camp such Soldiers there be:
One good woman would beat a way two or three.
Well I am sure Customers tarry at home:
Manerly before and let us be gone.

Exeunt. Enter Ambidex. Ambidexter. O the passion of God, be they here still or
no?
I durst not abide to see her heat them so.
I may say to you I was in such a flight:
Body of me I see the hear of my head stand upright.
When I saw her so hard upon them lay on:
O ye passion of God thought I, she will be with me anon
I made no more a do but avoided the thrust:
And to my legs began for to trust.
And fell a laughing to my self when I was once gone:
It is wisdom (quoth I) by the mass to save one.
Then into this place I intended to trudge:
Thinking to meet Sisamnes the Judge.
Behold where he comes I will him meet:
And like a gentleman I mean him to greet

Sisamnes. Enter Sisamnes. Since that the Kings graces majesty in office did
me set:
What abundance of wealth to me might I get.
Now and the^ so^e vantage I atchiue, much more yet may I take:
But that I fear unto the king, that some, complaint will make

Ambidexter. Jesus master Sisamnes you are unwise.


Sisamnes. Why so? I pray ye let me agnise.
What master Ambidexter, is it you?
Now welcome to me I make God avow.

Ambidexter. Jesus master Sisamnes with me you are well acquainted:
By me rulers may be trimly painted.
Ye are unwise if ye take not time while ye may:
If ye will not now when ye would ye shall have nay.
What is he that of you dare make exclamation:
Of your wrong dealing to make explication?
Can you not play with both hands and turn with the wind?

Sisamnes. Believe me your words draw deep in my mind.
In colloure wise unto this day to bribes I have inclyned:
More the same for to frequent of truth I am now minded.
Behold even now unto me Suitors do proceed.

Small ability. I beseech you here good master judge, a poor man's cause to
teder
Condemn me not in wro^gful wise, that never was offender.
You know right well my right it is, I have not for to give:
You take away from me my due, that should my corpse relieve.
The Commons of you do complain, from them you deuocate:
with anguish great and grievous words, their hearts do penetrate.
The right you sell unto the wrong, your private gain to win:
You violate the simple man, and count it for no sin:

Sisamnes, Hold thy tung thou prattling knave, and give to me reward
Else in this wise I tell thee truth, thy tale will not be heard.
Ambidexter, let us go hence, and let the knave alone.

Ambidexter Farwell Small habilitis for help now get ye none.
Bribes has corrupt him, good Laws to pollute:
Exeunt.
small habillitie. A naughty man that will not obey the Kings constitute.
with heavy heart I will return til Ged redress my pain.

Exit. Shame. Enter shame with a trump black From among ye grisly gosts I come,
from tirants testy train.
Unseemly shame of sooth I am procured to make plain,
The odious facts and shameless dee us yt Cambises king does use.
All piety and virtuous life, he does it clean refuse.
Lechery and drunkenness, he does it much frequent:
The Tigers kind to immitate, he has given full consent.
He naught esteems his council grave, ne virtuous briging up
But daily still receives the drink, of damned vices cup.
He can bide no instruction, he takes so great delight:
In working of iniquity, for to frequent his spite.
As Fame does sound ye royal trump of worthy men and frim:
So sha^e does blow we strained blast, ye trump of shame on him.

Enter the king, Lord, Praxaspes, and Sisamnes. (Exit. King, My Judge since my
departure hence, have you used Judgment right?
If faithful stuard I ye find, the same I will requite.

Sisamnes. No dout your grace shall not once hear, that I have done a mis.

Praxaspes. I much rejoice to hear, so good news as this.

Commons cry. Enter commons cry running in speak this verse, go out again
hastily. Alas, alas, how are ye Commons oppressed,
By that vile Judge Sisamnes by name?
I do not know how it should be redressed.
To amend his life no whit he does frame.
We are undone and thrown out of door,
His damnable dealing does us so torment:
At his hand we can find no releef nor succoure,
God grant him grace for to repent.

Run away crying king. What doleful cries be these my lord, yt sound do in
mine ear?
Intelligence if you can giut, unto your king declare.
To me it seems my Commons all, they do lament and cry:
Out of Sisamnes Judge most cheef, even now standing us by.

Praxaspes. Even so (O king) it seemd to me, as you rehersall made:
I dout the Judge culpable be, in some respect or trade.

Sisamnes, Redouted king have no mistrust, no whit your mind dismay:
There is not one that can me charge or ought against me lay

Enter Commons complain^ with Proof and Trial. Commons complaint. Commons
complaint I represent, with thrall of dolful state:
By urgent cause erected forth, my greef for to dilate.
Unto the king I will prepare, my misery to tell
To have releef of this my greef, and fettered feet so fell.
Redouted Prince and mighty King, my self I prostrate here
Vouchsafe (O King) with me to bear, for this that I appeer.
With humble suit I pardon crave, of (...) most royal grace
To give me leave my mind to break, before you in this place

King. Commons complaint keep nothing back, foar not thy tale to tell
What ere he be within this land, that has not used thee well.
As Princes mouth shall sentence give, he shall receive ye same
Unfold the secrets of thy breast, for I extinguish blame.

Commons complaint. God preserve your royal grace, and send you blisful days:
That all your deeds might still accord, to give the God ye praise.
My complaint is (O mighty king) against that Judge you by:
Whose careless deeds, gain to receive, has made ye commons cry
He, by taking bribes and gifts, the poor he does oppress:
Taking rebeef from Infants yung, widows and fatherless.

King. Vntrustful traitor and corrupt Judge, how likest you this complaint
Forewarning I to thee did give, of this to make restraint.
And have thou done this devilish dee, mine ire for to augment?
I sentence give, thou Judas judge, thou shall thy deed repent.

Sisamnes. O pusant Prince it is not so, his complaint I deny:


Commons complaint. If it be not so (most mighty King) in place then let me
dye
Behold that I have brought wine, both Proof and I ryall true
To stand even here and sentence give, what by him did ensue.

Proof. I Proof do him in this appeal, he did the Commons wrong:
Unjustly he will them has dealt, his greedy was so strong.
His heart did covet in to get, be cared not which way:
The poor did leese their due and right, because they want to pay
Unto him for bribes indeed, this was his wunted use:
whereas you grace good laws did make, he did ye same abuse.

Trial. I Trial heerto verify, what Proof does now unfold:
To stand against him in his wrong, as now I dare be bold.

king. How likest ye this, thou caitiue vile, can thou the same deny?


Sisamnes. O noble king forgive my fact, I yield to thy mercy.


king. Complaints and Proof, redress will I, all this your misery:
Depart with speed from whence you came, and straight co^mau^d by me
The Execution man to come, before my grace with haste.

All. For to fulfill this your request, no time we mean to waste.


king. Exeunt they three. My Lord, before my grace go call, Otian this Judges
Son:
And he shall hear and also see: what his father has done.
The Father he shall suffer death, the Son his room succeed
And if that he no better prove, so likewise shall he speed.

Praxaspes. As your grace has co^maundment given, I mean for to fulfill:


King. step aside and fetch him. Accursed Judge could thou consent, to do
this cursed il?
According unto thy dentaund, thou shall for this thy gilt:
Receive thy death before mine eyes, thy blood it shall be spilt.

Praxaspes. Behold (O King) Sisamnes Son, before you does appear.


king. Otian this is my mind, therefore to me come near.
Thy father here for Judgment wrong procured has his death:
And thou his son shall him succeed, when he has lost his breath
And if that thou do once offend, as thou see thy father have:
In likewise thou shall suffer death, no mercy shall thee save.

Otian. O mighty King, vouchsafe your grace, my father to remit:
Forgive his fault, his pardon I do ask of your as yet.
Alas although my father has your Princely heart offended:
Amends for miss he will now make* and faults shall be amended.
In sted of his requested life, pleases your grace take mine:
This offer I as tender Child, so duty does me bind.

king. Do not entreat my grace no more, for he shall dye the death,
Where is the Execution man, him to bercaue of breath.

Execution. Enter Execution. At hand and if it like your grace, my duty to
dispatch:
In hope that I when deed is done, a good reward shall catch.

King. Dispatch wc sword this Judges life, extinguish fear and cares:
So done, draw thou his cursed skin, strait over both his ears.
I will see the office done, and that before mine eyes.

Execution To do the thing my king commands, I give the enterprise.


Sisamnes. Otian my son the king to death (by law has me condemned
And you in room and office mine, his graces will has placed.
Use Justice therefore in this case, and yield unto no wrong:
Lest thou do purchase the like death, or ever it be long.

Otian. O father deer, these words to hear, that you must dye by force
Bedewes my cheeks wc stilled tears, ye King has no remorce.
the greeudus greefes and strained sighs, my heart does break in twain
And I deplore most woeful child, that I should see you slain.
O false and fickle frowning Danie, that turns as the wind:
Is this the joy in fathers age, thou me assignest to find?
O dole full day, unhappy hour, that loouing child should see:
His Father deer before his face, thus put to death should be.
Yet Father give me blessing thine, and let me once embrace:
Thy comely corpse in foulded arms, and kiss thy ancient face.

Sisamnes, O child thou makes mine eyes to run, as rivers do by streme:
My leave I take of thee my Son beware of this my beam.

king. Dispatch even now thou man of death, no longer seem to stay:


Execution. Come M. Sisamnes, came on your way, my office I must pay.
Forgive therefore my deed.

Sisamnes. I do forgive it thee my friend, dispatch therefore with speed.
smite him in the neck with a sword to signify his death

Praxaspes. Behold (O king) how he does bleed, being of life bereft:


King. In this wise, he shall not yet be left.
Pull his skin over his ears, to make his death more vile:
A wretch he was, a cruel thief my commons to begile.

Flea him with a false skin. Otian. What child is he of natures mould, could
bide the same to see
His Father fleaed in this wise? Oh how it greeueth me.

King. Otian, thou see thy father dead, and thou art in his room:
if thou be proud as be has been, even thereto shall thou come.

Otian. O King, to me this is a glass, with greef in it I view:
Example that unto your grace, I do not prove untrue.

Praxaspes. Otian, convey your Father hence, to Tomb where be shall lie


Otian. And if it please your Lordship, if shallbe done by and by.
Good Execution man for need, help me with him away:

Execution. I will fulfill, as you to me did say.


They take him away King. My Lord now that my grace has seen, that finished is
this deed,
To question mine give tentiue ear, and answer make wc speed.
Have not I done a gracious deed, to redress my commons woe?

Praxaspes. Yea truly if it please your grace, ye have indeed done so.
But now (O King) in freendly wise, I council you in this:
Certain vices for to leave, that in you placed is.
The vise of drunkenness (Oh king) which does you sore infect:
With other great abuses, which I wish you to detect.

King. Peace my Lord, what needs this? of this I will not hear,
To Pallaice now I will return, and there to make good cheer.
God Baccus he bestows his gifts, we have good store of wine:
And also that the Ladies be, both passing brave and fine.
But stay, I see a Lord now come, and eke a valiant knight:
What news my Lord? to see you here my heart it does delight

Enter Lord, and Knight to meet the King. Lord. Nonewes (O king) but of duty
come, to wait upon your grace:


King. I thank you my Lord and loouing knight, I pray ye with me trace
My Lords and Knight I pray ye tell, I will not be offended:
Am I worthy of any crime once to be reprehended?

Praxaspes. The Persians much praise your grace, but one thing disco^me^d:
In that to Wine subject you be, wherein you do offend.
Since that the might of wines effect, does often subdue your brain
My council is to please their hearts, from it you would refrain.

Lord. No, no, my Lord, it is not so, for this of Prince they tell:
For virtuous proof and Princely facts, Cirus he does excel.
By that his grace by conquest great, the Egiptians did convince
Of him report abroad does pass, tobe a worthy Prince.

knight. In person of Cresus I answer make, we may not his grace compare
in whole respect for to be like, Cirus the kings father.
In so much your grace has yet no child, as Cirus left behind
Even you I mean, Cambises king, in whom I favor find.

King, Cresus said well in saying so, but Praxaspes tell me why:
That to my mouth in such a sort, thou should avouch a lie.
Of drunkenness me thus to charge, but thou with speed shall see
Whether that I a sober King, or else a drunkard be.
I know thou haste a blisful babe, wherein thou do delight:
Me to revenge of these thy words, I will go wreke this spite.
When I the most have tasted wine, my Bow it shall be bent
At heart of him even then to shoot, is now my whole intent.
And if that I his heart can hit, the King no drunkard is:
It heart of his I do not kill, I yield to thee in this.
Therefore Praxaspes fetch to me, thy yungest son with speed:
There is no way I tell thee plain, but I will do this deed.

Praxaspes. Redouted Prince spare my sweet Child, he is mine only joy:
I trust your grace to Infants heart, no such thing will employ.
If that his mother hear of this, she is so nigh her flight:
In clay her corpse will soon be shrinde, to pass from worlds delight

King. No more adoo, go fetch me him, it shall be as I say:
And if that I do speak the word, how dare ye once say nay?

Praxaspes I will go fetch him to your grace, but so I trust it shall not be:


king. For fear of my displeasure great, go fetch him unto me.
Is he gone? now by the Gods I will do as I say:
My Lord therefore fill me some wine, I heartily you pray.
For I must drink to make my brain somewhat intoxicate:
When that the wine is in my head, oh trimly I can prate.

Lord. Here is the cup with filled wine, thereof to take repaste:


King. Give it me to drink it of, and see no wine be waste.
Drink Once again in large this Cup, for I must taste it still:
Drink By the Gods I think of pleasant wine, I cannot take my fill.
Now drink is in give me my bow, and arrows from sir Knight
At heart of Child I mean to shoot, hoping to cleue it right.

knight. Behold (O King) where he does come, his infant yung in hand


Praxaspes. O mighty King your grace behest, with sorrow I have scand.
And brought my Child fro mothers knee, before you to appeer:
And she thereof no whit does know that he in place is here.

king. Set him up my mark to be, I will shoot at his heart:


Praxaspes. I beseech your grace not so to do, set this pretense a part.
Farewell my deer and loouing babe, come kiss thy father deer:
A grievous sight to me it is, to see thee slain even here.
Is this the gain now from the King for giving council good:
Before my face with such despite, to spil my sons heart blood?
O heavy day to me this is, and mother in like case.

Yung child O Father, Father, wipe your face.
I see the tears run from your eye:
My mother is at home sowing of a band:
Alas deer father, why do you cry?

King, Before me as mark now let him stand, I will shoot at him my mind to
fulfill


Yung child. Alas, alas, Father will you me kill?
Good master king do not shoot at me, my mother looues me best of all

king I have dispatched him, down he does fall,
Shoot As right as a line his heart I have hit:
Nay thou shall see Praxaspes, stranger news yet.
My Knight with speed his heart cut out, and give it unto me.

knight. It shall be done (O mighty king) with all seleritie.


Lord. My Lord Praxaspes, this had not been, but your tung must be walking
To the King of correction, you must needs be talking.

Praxaspes No correction (my Lord) but council for the best:


knight. Here is the heart, according to your graces behest.


king. Behold Praxaspes thy Sons own heart, Oh how well ye same was hit
After this wine to do this deed, I thought it very fit.
Esteem thou may right well thereby, no dru^kard is the king:
That in the midst of all his cups, could do this valiant thing.
My Lord and knight on me attend, to Pallaice we will go:
And leave him here to take his son, when we are gone him fro.

All. With all our hearts we give consent, to wait upon your grace:


Praxaspes A woeful man (O Lord) am I, to see him in this case.
My days I deem desires their end, this deed will help me hence:
To have the blossoms of my feeld, destroyed by violence.

Mother. Enter Mother Alas, Alas I do hear tell, the King has killed my Son:
If it be so, woe worth the deed, that ever it was done.
It is even so, my Lord I see, how by him he does weep
What meant I yt from hands of him, this child I did not keep?
Alas husband and Lord, what did you mean,
to fetch this Child away?

Praxaspes. O Lady wife I little thought for to have seen this day.


Mother. O blisful babe, O joy of womb, hearts comfort and delight:
For Council given unto the King, is this thy just requite?
O heavy day and doleful time, these mourning tunes to make
With blubred eyes into mine arms, from earth I will thee take.
And wrap thee in mine apron white, but oh my heavy heart:
The spightful pangs yt it sustains, would make it in two to part.
The death of this my Son to see, O heavy mother now?
That from thy sweet and sugared joy, to sorrow so should bow,
What greef in womb did I retain, before I did thee see?
Yet at ye last when smart was gone, what joy were thou to me
How tender was I of thy food, for to preserve thy state?
How stilled I thy tender heart, at times early and late?
With velvet Papes I gave thee suck with issue from my breast:
And daunced thee, upon my knee, to bring thee unto rest.
Is this the joy of thee I reap (O king) of Tigers brood?
Oh tigers whelp had thou ye heart, to see this childs heart blood?
Nature inforseth me alas, in this wise to deplore:
To wring my hands O well away, that I should see this hour.
Thy mother yet will kiss thy lips, silk soft and pleasant white:
With wringing hands, lamenting for to see thee in this plight.
My Lording deer let us go home, our mourning to augment:

Praxaspes. My Lady deer with heavy heart, to it I do consent.
Between us both ye child to bear unto our lordly place, Exeu^t
Enter Ambidexter.
Ambidexter In deed as ye say I have been absent a long space.
But is not my cousin Cutpurse, wc you in ye mean time?
To it, to it Cousin and do your office fine.
How like you Sisamnes for using of me?
He played with both hands, but he sped il fauouredly.
The King him self was godly up trained:
He professed virtue, but I think it was fained.
He plays with both hands good deeds and il:
But it was no good deed, Praxaspes son for to kill.
As he for the good deed, on the Judge was commended:
For all his deeds else he is reprehended.
The most evil disposed person, that ever was:
All the state of his life he would not let pass.
Some good deeds he will do, though they be but few:
The like things this tirant Cambices does show.
No goodness from him, to none is exhibited:
But still malediction, abroad is distributed.
And yet ye shall see in the rest of his race:
What infamy he will woork against his own grace.
Whist, no more words here comes the kings brother.

Enter Lord Smirdis with Attendance and Diligence. Smirdis. The Kings brother
by birth am I, issued from Cirus loins:
A greef to me it is to hear, of this the kings repines.
I like not well of those his deeds, that he does still frequent:
I wish to God that other ways, his mind he could content.
Yung I am and next to him, no mo of us there be:
I would be glad a quiet Realm in this his reign to see.

Attendance. My Lord your good awilling heart, the Gods will recompense:
In that your made so pensife is, for those his great offense.
My Lord, his grace shall have a time to pair and to amend:
Happy is he that can escape, and not his grace offend.

Diligence. If that wicked vice he could refrain, from wasting wine forbere
A moderate life he would frequent, amending this his square.

Ambidexter. My Lord, and if your honor it shall please:
I can inform you what is best for your ease.
Let him alone of his deeds do not talk:
Then by his side: ye may quietly walk.
After his death you shall be King:
Then may you reform each kind of thing.
In the mean time live quietly, do not with him deal:
So shall it redownd much to your weal.

Smirdis. Thou say true my friend, that is the best:
I know not whether he love me, or do me detest.

Attendance. Lean from his company, all that you may:
I faithful Attendance will your honor obey.
If against your honor he take any ire:
His grace is as like, to kindle his fire.
To your honors destruction, as otherwise:

Diligence. Therefore my Lord take good advise.
And I Diligence, your case will so tender:
That to his grace your honor shall be none offender.

Smirdis. I thank you both entire friends, with my honor still remain:


Ambidexter. Behold where the King does come with his train.


King. Enter king and 1. Lord O Lording deer and brother mine, I joy your state
to see:
Surmising much what is the cause, you absent thus from me.

Smirdis. Pleases your grace no absence I, but ready to fulfill:
At all assayes my Prince and king, in that your grace me will.
What I can do in true defense, to you my Prince aright:
In redynes I always am, to offer forth my might.

king. And I the like to you again do here avouch the same:


All. For this your good agreement here, now praised be Gods name.


Ambidexter. But hear ye noble Prince, hark in you ear.
It is best to do as I did declare.

king. My Lord and brother Smirdis now, this is my mind and will:
That you to Court of mine return, and there to tarry still.
Til my return within short space, your honor for to greet:

Smirdis. At your behest so will I do, til time again we meet.
My leave I take from you (O King) even now I do depart.

King. Exeu^t Smirdis, attendance and diligence Farwell Lord and Brother mine,
farwell with all my heart.
My Lord, my brother Smirdis is, of youth and manly might:
And in his sweet and pleasant face, my heart does take delight.

Lord. Yea noble Prince if that your grace, before his honor dye:
He will succeed a virtuous King, and rule with equity.

King. As you have said my Lord, he is cheef heir next my grace:
And if I dye to morrow next he shall succeed my place.

Ambidexter And if it please your grace (O king) I herd him say:
For your death unto the God, day and night he did pray.
He would live so virtuously, and get him such a praise:
That Fame by trump his due deserts, his honor should up raise.
He said your grace deserved had, the cursing of all men:
That ye should never after him, get any praise again.

King. Did he speak thus of my grace, in such dispightful wise?
Or else do thou presume to fill my princely ears with lies?

Lord I connot think it in my heart, that he would report so,


King. How say thou? speak the truth, was it soor no?


Ambidexter I think so if it please your grace, but I cannot tell:


King. Thou plaist with both hands, now I perceive well:
But for to put all doutes aside, and to make him leese his hope:
He shall dye by dent of Sword, or else by choking Rope.
Shall he succeed when I am gone, to have more praise then I?
Were he Father as brother mine, I swear that he shall dye.
To pallaice mine I will therefore, his death for to pursue.

Exit. Ambidexter. Are ye gone? straight way I will follow you.
How like ye now my masters? does not this geer cotton?
The proverb old is verified, soon ripe and soon rotten.
He will not be quiet, til his Brother be killed:
His delight is wholly to have his blood spild.
Mary Sir I told him a notable lie:
If it were to do again man, I durst do it I.
Mary when I had done, to it I durst not stand:
Thereby you may perceive I use to play with each hand.
But how now Cousin Cutpursse with whom play you?
Take heed for his hand is groping even now.
Cousin take heed, if ye do secretly grope:
If ye be taken Cousin, ye must look through a rope.

Exit. Smirdis. Enter Lord Smirdis alone I am wandering alone here and there to
walk,
The Court is so unquiet, in it I take no joy:
Solitary to my self now I may talk,
If I could rule I wist what to say.

Cruelty. Enter Cruelty and Murder with bloody hands. My coequall partner
Murder, come away.
From me, long thou may not stay.

Murder. Yes from thee I may stay, but not thou from me:
Therefore I have a prerogative abooue thee.

Cruelty. But in this case we must together abide:
Come, come, Lord Smirdis I have spide.
Lay hands on him with all festination:
That on him we may woork our indignation.

Smirdis. How now my friends? what have you to do with me?


Murder. King Cambises has sent us unto thee.
Commanding us straightly, with out mercy or favor:
Upon thee to bestow our behavior.
With Cruelty to murder you, and make you away.

Smirdis. strike him in diverse places Yet pardon me I heartily you pray:
Consider the King is a tirant tirannious:
And all his doings be damnable and parnitious.
Favor me therefore, I did him never offend:

Cruelty. A little bladder of Vinegar prikt. No favor at all, your life is at
an end.
Even now I strike his body to wound:
Behold now his blood springs out on the ground,

Murder. Now he is dead, let us present him to the King:


Cruelty. Lay to your hand, away him to bring.


Exeunt Ambidexter. Enter Ambidexter. O the passion of God, yunder is a heavy
Court:
Some weeps, some wailes, and some make great sport.
Lord Smirdis, by Cruelty and Murder is slain:
But Jesus for want of him, how some do complain.
If I should have had a thousand pound, I could not forbear weeping
Now Jesus have his blessed soul in keeping.
Ah, good Lord, to think on him, how it does me grieve:
I can not forbear weeping, ye may me believe.
VVeep, O my heart, how my pulses do beat:
With sorrowful lamentations, I am in such a heat.
Ah my heart, how for him it does sorrow:
Nay I have done in faith now, and God give you good morrow.
Ha, ha, weep nay laugh, with both hands to play:
The king througe his cruelty, has made him away,
But has not he wrought, a most wicked deed:
Because king after him he should not proceed.
His own natural brother and having no more:
To procure his death by violence sore.
In spite because his brother should never be King:
His heart being wicked consented to this thing.
Now he has no more Brothers nor kindred alive:
If the King use this geer still, he cannot long thrive.

Hob, Enter Hob and Lob. Gods hat Naibor come away, its time to market to go


Lob. Gods Vast Naybor zay ye zo?
The Clock has stricken viue ich think by laken:
Bum Vay vrom sleep cham not very well waken.
But Naybor Hoh, Naybor Hob, what have ye to zel?

Hob Bum troth Naybor Lob to you I chil tell.
Chaue two Goslings, and a Chine of good Porke:
There is no vatter between this and York.
Chaue a pot of Strawberyes and a Calves head:
A zennight zince to morrow it has been dead.

Lob. Chaue a score of Eggs, and of Butter a pound:
Yesterday a nest of goodly yung Rabits I bound.
Chaue vorty things mo, of more and of less:
My brain is not very good them to express.
But Gods Hat Naybor, wotst what?

Hob. No not well Naybor. what is that?


Lob. Bum vay Naybor, master king is a zhrode lad
Zo God help me and holidam, I think the vool he mad.
Zome zay he deal cruelly his Brother he did kill:
And also a goodly yung lads heart blood, he did spil,

Hob. Vorbod of God naibor, has he played zuch a volish deed?


Ambidexter. Goodman Hob and goodman Lob, God be your speed.
As you two toward market do walk:
Of the Kings cruelty I did hear you talk.
I insure you, he is a King most vile and parnitious:
His doings and life are odious and vicious.

Lob. It were a good deed zome body would break his head:


Hob. Bum vay Naybor Lob. I chousd he were dead.


Ambidexter. So would I Lob and Hob with all my heart:
Now with both hands, will ye see me play my part?
A ye Whoreson traitorly Knaves:
Hob and Lob out upon you slaves.

Lob. And thou calst me knave thou art an other:
My name is Lob and Hob my next Naybor.

Ambidexter. Hob and Lob, a ye cuntry Patches:
A ye fools ye have made wrong matches.
Ye have spoken treason against the kings grace:
For it I will accuse ye before his face.
Then for the same ye shall be martered:
At the least ye shall be hanged, drawn and quartered:

Hob. O gentleman ye shall have two Pear pyes and tell not of me.


Lob. By God a vat Goose chil give thee.
I think no hurt by my Vathers soul I zweare:

Hob. Chaue lived well all my life time my naybors among:
And now chould be loathe to come to zuch wrong.
To be hanged and quartered the greef would be great:

Lob. A foul evil on thee Hob, who bid thee on it treat?
Vor it was thou that first did him name.

Hob. Thou lie like a varlet, and thou zaist the same,
It was zuch a voolish Lob as thou:

Lob. Speak many words and by cods nails I vow:
Upon thy pate my staff I will lay.

Ambidexter. By the Mass I will cause them to make a fray.
Yea Lob thou say true, all came through him.

Lob. Bum vay thou Hob. a little would make me ye trim.
Give thee a zawp on thy nose til thy heart ache:

Hob. If thou dare do it, else man cry creke.
I trust before thou hurt me:
With my staff chil make a Lob of thee.

Here let them fight with their slaves, not come near an other by three or
four yardes, the Vice set the^ on as hard as he can one of their wives come
out and all to beat the Vice, he run away Enter Marian may be good, Hobs wife
running in with a Broom and part them. Marian. O the body of me husband Hob,
what mean you to fight:
For the passion of God, no more blows smite.
Neighbors and friends so long, and now to fall out:
What? in your age to seem so stout?
If I had not parted ye, one had killed another:

Lob. I had not cared I swear by Gods mother.


Marian, Shake hands again at the request of me:
As ye have been friends, so friends still be.

Hob. Bum troth cham content, and zaist word neigbor Lob:


Lob. I am content agreed neighbor Hob.


Shake hands and laugh heartily one at an other. Marian. So, get you to market,
no longer stay.
And with yonder knave let me make a fray.

Hob. Content wife Marian, chil do as thou do say:
But busse me ich pray thee at going away.

Exeu^t Hob. Lob. Marian. Thou whoreson knave and prickeard boy, why did you
let them fight?
If one had killed another here, could thou their deaths requite?
It bears a sign by this thy deed, a cowardly knave thou art:
Else would thou draw ye weapon thine, like a man them to part

Ambidexter, What Marian may be good, are you come prattling?
Ye may hap get a box on the ear, with your talking.
If they had kilde one another, I had not cared a pease:

Here let her swinge him in her brom, she gets him down, and he her down, thus
one on the top of an other make pastime Marian. A villain, my self on thee I
must ease.
Give me a box on the ear? that will I try:
Who shall be Master thou shall see by and by.

Ambidexter. O no more, no more I beseech you heartily:
Even now I yield, and give you the maistery.

Run his way out while she is down, Marian A thou knave, do thou throw me
down and run thy way?
If he were here again, oh how I would him pay.
I will after him, and if I can him meet:
With these my nails, his face I will greet.

Enter Venus leading out her sone Cupid blind, he must have a bow and two
shafts, one hedded with gold and the other hedded with lead. Venus. Come forth
my son, unto my words attentive ears resign
What I pretend see you frequent, to force this game of mine.
The King a kinswoman has, adornd with beauty store:
And I wish that Dianas gifts, they twain shall keep no more.
But use my silver sugared game, their joys for to augment:
When I do speak to wound his heart, Cupid my son conset.
And shoot at him the shaft of love, that bears the head of Gold:
To wound his heart in loouers wise, his greef for to unfold.
Though kin she be unto his grace, that nature me expel:
Against the course thereof he may, in my game please me well.
Wherefore my son do not forget, forthwith pursue the deed:

Cupid. Mother I mean for to obey, as you have whole decreed.
But you must tell me mother deer, when I shall arrow draw:
Else your request to be attaind, will not be worth a straw.
I am blind and cannot see, but still do shoot by guess:
The Poets well in places store, of my might do express.

Venus. Cupid my son when time shall serve, ye thou shall do this deed,
Then warning I to thee will give, but see thou shoot, with speed.

Lord. Lord Lady, waiting maid Lady deer to King a kin, forthwith let us
proceed:
To trace abroad the beauty feelds, as erst we had decreed.
The blowing buds whose sauery sents our sense will much
The sweet smell of musk white rose, to plese ye appetite.
The chirpig birds whose pleasant tunes, therein shall hear record delight
That our great joy we shall it find, in feeld to walk a broad.
On Lute and Cittern there to play a heavenly hermony:
Our ears shall hear, heart to content, our sports to beauty.

Lady. Unto your words most comely Lord, my self submit do I:
To trace with you in feeld so green, I mean not to deny.

Maid here trace up and down playing And I your waiting maid at hand, with
diligence will be:
For to fulfill with heart and hand, when you shall command me.

King. Enter king. Lord and knight. Come on my Lord and knight abroad, our
mirth let us employ
Since he is dead this heart of mine, in corpse I feel it joy.
Should brother mine have reigned King, when I had yielded breath
A thousand brothers I rather had, to put them all to death.
But oh, behold where I do see, a Lord and Lady fair:
For beauty she most worthy is, to sit in Princes chair.

Venus. Shoot forth my son now is the time, ye thou must wou^d his heart


Cupid Content you Mother I will do my part.

Shoot there and go out Venus and Cupid.
King. Of truth my Lord in eye of mine, all Ladies she does excel:
Can none report what dame she is, and to my grace it tell?

Lord. Redouted Prince pleases your grace, to you she is a kin:
Cousin Iarmin nigh of birth, by mothers side come in.

knight. And that her waiting maiden is attending her upon:
He is a Lord of Princes Court, and will be there anon.
They sport them selves in pleasant feeld, to former used use:

King. My Lord and knight of truth I speak, my heart it cannot choose.
But with my Lady I must speak and so express my mind:
My Lord and Ladies walking there, if you will favor find.
Present your selves unto my grace, and by my side come stand:

first Lord. We will fulfill most mighty king, as your grace does co^mau^d.


King. Lady deer intelligence, my grace has got of late:
You issued out of mothers stock, and kin unto my state.
According to rule of birth you are, Cousin iarmin mine:
Yet do I wish that farther of, this kindred I could find.
For Cupid he that eyelesse boy, my heart has so inflamed:
With beauty you me to content, the like cannot be named.
For since I entered in this place and on you fixed mine eyes:
Most burning fits about my heart in ample wise did rise.
The heat of the^ such force does yield, my corpse they scorch alas:
And burns ye same with wasting heat, as Titan does the grass
And since this heat is kindled so, and fresh in heart of me:
There is no way but of the same, the quencher you must be.
My meaning is yt beauty yours, my heart with love does wou^d:
To give me love, mind to content my heart has you out found.
And you are she must be my wife, else shall I end my days:
Consent to this and be my Queen, to were ye crown with praise.

Lady. If it please your grace (O mighty king) you shall not this request
It is a thing that natures course, does utterly detest.
And high it would the God displease, of all that is the wurst:
To grant your grace to marry so, it is not I that durst.
Yet humble thanks I render now unto you mighty King:
That you vouchsafe to great estate, so gladly would me bring.
Were it not it were offense, I would it not deny:
But such great honor to atchiue, my heart I would apply.
Therefore (O king) with humble heart, in this I pardon crave:
Mine answer is in this request: your mind ye may not have.

King. May I not? nay then I will by all the Gods I vow:
And I will mary thee as wife, this is mine answer now:
Who dare say nay what I pretend, who dare the same wtstand?
Shall lose his head and have report, as traitor through my la^d.
There is no nay I will you have, and you my Queen shall be:

Lady. Then mighty King I crave your grace, to hear ye words of me
Your council take of Lordings wit, the laws aright peruse:
If I with safe may grant this deed, I will it not refuse.

King. No, no, what I have said to you. I mean to have it so:
For counsel theirs I mean not I, in this respect to go.
But to my Pallaice let us go, the marriage to prepare:
For to avoid my will in this, I can it not forbear.

Lady. O God forgive me if I do amiss:
The king by compultion, inforseth me this.

Maid Unto the Gods for your estate, I will not cease to pray:
That you may be a happy Queen. and see most joyful day.

King. Come on my Lords with gladsome hearts, let us rejoice with glee:
Your Music show to joy this deed, at the request of me.

Both. For to obey your graces words our honors do agree.


Exeu^t Ambidexter. Enter Ambidexter O the Passion of me, mary as ye say,
yonder is a royal court
There is triumphing and sport upon sport.
Such loyal Lords, with such Lordly exercise:
Frequenting such pastime as they can devise.
Running at tilt, Iusting, with running at the King:
Masking and mumming, with each kind of thing,
Such dancing, such singing, with musical hermony:
Believe me I was loathe to absent their company.
But will you believe? Jesus what haste they made til they were married?
Not for a Milio^ of pou^ds one day longer they would have tarried
Oh there was a banquet royal and superexelent:
Thousands, and thousands at that banquit was spent.
I muse of nothing but how they can be married so soon:
I care not if I be married before to morrow at noone.
If marriage be a thing that so may be had:
How say you maid? to mary me will ye be glad?
Out of dout I believe it is some excellent treasure:
Else to the same belongs abundant pleasure.
Yet with mine ears I have heard some say:
That ever I was married, now cursed be the day.
Those be they, that with curse wives be matched:
That husband for hankes meat, of the^ is up snatched.
Head broke with a bedstaf, face all to be scratched.
Knave slave and villain, a coild cote now and than:
When the wife has given it, she will say alas good man.
Such were better unmarried my masters I trow:
Then all their life after to be matched with a shrowe.

Preparation. Enter Preparation. With speed I am sent all things to prepare:
My message to do as the king did declare.
His grace does mean a banquit to make:
Meaning in this place repaste for to take.
Well the cloth shall be laid and all things in redynes:
To court to return when done is my business.

Ambidexter. A proper man and also a fit.
For the Kings estate to prepare a banquit.

Preparation. What Ambidexter? thou art not unknown:
A wischeef on all good faces, so that I curse not mine own.
Now in the knaves name shake hands with me.

Ambidexter. Well said goodman pouchmouth your reverence I see.
I will teach ye, if your manners no better be.
A ye slave, the king does me a gentleman allow:
Therefore I look, that to me ye shall how.

Fight Preparation. Good Master Ambidexter, pardon my behavior:
For this your deeds, ye are a knave for your labor.

Ambidexter. Why ye stale counterly vaillain, nothing but Knave?


Fight Preparation. I am sorry your maistership offended I have.
Shake hands that between us agreement may be:
I was over shot with my self, I do see.
Let me have your help, this furniture to provide:
The King from this place will not long abide.

Ambidexter. set the fruit on the board Content, it is the thing that I would
wish:
I my self will go fetch on Dish.

Let the Vice fet a dish of nuts and let them fall in the bringing of them in.
Preparation. Clenly master Ambidexter, for fair on the ground they lie:


Ambidexter. I will have them up again by and by.


Preparation. To see all in redynes I will put you in trust:
There is no nay to the Court needs I must.

Exit Prepartion Ambidexter. Have ye no dout but all shall be well:
Mary Sir as you say, this geer does excel.
All things is in a redynes, when they come hither:
The kings grace and the Queen both together.
I beseech ye my masters tell me is it not best:
That I be so bold to bid a gest?
He is as honest a man as ever spurd Cow:
My Cousin cutpurse I mean, I beseech ye judge you:
Believe me Cousin if to be the Kings gest, ye could be taken:
I trust that offer would not be forsaken.
But Cousin because to that office ye are not like to come:
Frequent your exersises, a horn on your Thumb.
A quick eye, a sharp knife, at hand a receiver:
But then take heed Cousin ye be a clenly conuayour.
Content your self Cousin, for this banquit you are unfit:
When such as I at the same am not worthy to sit.

Enter King. My Queen and Lords to take repast, let us attempt the same
Here is the place delay no time, but to our purpose frame.

Queen. With willing hearts your whole behest, we mind for to obey:


All And we the rest of Princes train, will do as you do say.


king Sit at the banquit. Me think mine ears does wish the sound, of musicks
hermony:
Here for to play before my grace, in place I would them spy:

Ambidexter. Play at the banquet They be at hand Sir with stick and fidle:
They can play a new dance called hey didle didle.

King. By Queen parpend what I pronounce I will not violate:
But one thing which my heart makes glad. I mind to explicate
You know in Court by trained is, a Lion very yung:
Of on litter two whelps beside, as yet not very strong.
I did request one whelp to see, and this yung Lion fight:
But Lion did the whelp convince, by strength of force a might.
His brother welp perceiving that the Lion was to good:
And he by force was like to see, the other whelp his blood.
With force to Lion he did run, his brother for to help:
A wunder great it was to see that freendship in a whelp.
So then the the whelps between them both ye Lion did convince
Which thing to see before mine eyes, did glad yt heart of Prince.

At this tale told let the Queen vveep. Queen. These words to hear makes
stilling tears, issue from Crystal eyes


king. What do thou mean my spouse to weep, for loss of any prise


Queen. No, no (O King) but as you see, freendship in brothers whelp:
When one was like to have repulse, the other yielded help.
And was this favor showd in dogs to shame of royal king:
Alack I wish these ears of mine, had not once heard this thing
Even so should you (O mighty King) to brother been a stay:
And not without offense to you, in such wise him to slay.
In all assayes it was your part, his cause to have defended:
And who so ever had him misused, to have them reprehended.
But faithful love was more in Dog, then it was in your grace:

king. O cursed caitiue vicious vile, I hate thee in this place.
This banquit it is an end, take all these things away:
Before my face thou shall repent, the words that thou do say
O wretch most vile, did you the cause of brother mine so tender:
The loss of him should grieve thy heart, he being none offender
It did me good his death to have, so will it to have thine:
What freendship he had at my hands, ye same even yt shall find
I give consent and make a vow, that thou shall dye the death:
By Cruels sword and Murder fell, even thou shall dye the breath.
Ambidexter, see with speed, to Cruelty ye go:
Cause him hither to approach, Murder with him also.

Ambidexter. I ready am for to fulfill, if that it be your graces will.


king. Then naught oblight my message given, absent thy self away:


Ambidexter. Then in this place, I will no longer stay:
If that I durst, I would mourn your case:
But alas, I dare not for fear of his grace.

king. Exit Ambidexter. Thou cursed Iil, by all the Gods, I take an oath and
sweet:
that flesh of thine these hands of mine, in pieces small could tere.
But thou shall dye by dent of sword, there is no friend ne f ee:
Shall find remorce at Princes hand, to save the life of thee.

Queen. Oh mightle King and husband mine, vouchsafe to here me speak:
And license give to spouse of thine, her patient mind to break.
For tender love unto your grace, my words I did so frame:
For pure love does heart of king, me violate and blame.
And to your grace is this offense, that I should purchase death:
Then cursed time that I was Queen, to shorten this my breath.
your grace does know by marriage true, I am your wife and spouse
And one to save a^others health (at troth plight) made our vows
Therefore O king let loouing Queen, at thy hand find remorse
Let pi^^e be a mean to quench, that cruel raging force.
And pardon plight from princes mouth, yield grace unto your queen:
That amity with faithful zeal, may ever be us between.

king. A caitiue vile to pity thee, my heart it is not bent:
Ne yet to pardon your offense, it is not mine intent.

first Lord. Our mighty prince with humbe suit of your grace this I crave:
That this request it may take place, your favor for to have.
Let mercy yet abundantly the life of Queen preserve:
Since she in most obedient wise, your graces will does serve.
As yet your grace but while with her, has had cohabitation:
And sure this is no desert why, to yield her indiguation.
Therefore (O King) her life prolong, to joy her days in bliss:

second Lord. Your grace shall win immortal fame, in granting unto this.
She is a Queen whose goodly hue, excelles the royal Rose:
For beauty bright dame nature she, a large gift did dipose.
For comelynes who may compare? of all she bears the bet:
This should give cause to move your grace, to love her very well.
Her silver breast in those your arms, to sing the songs of love:
Fine quallities most excellent to be in her you prove.
A preciouse pearl of prise to Prince, a Jewel passing all:
Therefore (O king to beg remorce on both my knees I fall.
To grant her grace to have her life, with heart I do desire:

King. You villains twain, with raging force, ye set my heart on fire.
If I consent that she shall dye, how dare ye crave her life?
You two to ask this at my hand, does much enlarge my strife.
Were it not for shame you two should dye, that for her life do sue
But favor mine from you is gone, my Lords Itel you true.
I sent for Cruelty of late, if he would come away:
I would commit her to his hands, his cruel part to play.
Even now I see where he does come, it does my heart delight:

Enter Cruelty and Murder. Cruelty, Come Murder, come, let us go forth with
might.
Once again the Kings commandment we must fulfill

Murder. I am contented to do it with a good will.


king. Murder and Cruelty, for both of you I sent:
With all festination, your offices to frequent.
Lay hold on the Queen, take her to your power:
And make her away with in this hour.
Spare for no fear I do you full permit:
So I from this place, do mean for to flit.

Both. With courageous hearts (O King) we will obey:


King. Then come my Lords let us depart away.


Both the Lords. With heavy hearts we will do all, your grace does say,


Cruelty. Exeunt king, and Lords Come Lady and Queen now are you in our
haudling:
In faith with you we will use no dandling.

Murder. With all expedition, I Murder will take place:
Though thou be a Queen, ye be under my grace.

Queen. With patience I will you both obey:


Cruelty. No more words but go with us away.


Queen. Yet before I dye some Psalm to God let me sing:


Both. We be content to permit you that thing.


Queen. Farwell you Ladies of the Court, with all your masking hew:
I do forsake these brodered gardes, and all the facions new.
The Court and all the courtly train, wherein I had delight:
I banished am from happy sport and all by spightful spite.
Yet with a joyful heart to God a Psalm I mean to sing:
Forgiving all and the king, of each kind of thing.

sing and Exeu^t Ambidexter. Enter Ambidexter weping A, A, A. A, I cannot choose
but weep for the Queen:
Nothing but mourning now at the Court there is seen.
Oh, oh, my heart, my heart, Oh my bum will break:
Very greef so torments me that scarce I can speak.
Who could but weep for the loss of such a Lady?
That can not I do, I swear by mine honesty.
But Lord so the Ladies mourn crying a lack:
Nothing is worn now but only black.
I believe all cloth in walling street, to make gowns would not serve
If I make a lie, the Devil let ye sterue.
All Ladies mourn both yung and old:
There is not one that wears a points worth of Gold
There is a sort for fear, for the King do pray:
That would have him dead, by the mass I dare say.
What a King was he that has used such tyranny?
He was a kin to Bishop Bonner, I think verily,
For both their delights was to shed blood:
But never intended to do any good.
Cambises put a Judge to death, that was a good deed:
But to kill the yung Child was worse to proceed.
To murder his Brother, and then his own wife:
So help me God and holidom, it is pity of his life
Hear ye? I will lay twenty thousand pound:
That the king him self does dye by some wound.
He has shed so much blood that his will be shed:
If it come so to pass infaith then he is sped.

Enter the king without a gown, a sword thrust up into his side bleeding.
King. Out alas what shall I do? my life is finished.
Wounded I am by sudain chance, my blood is m^nished.
Gogs heart what means might I make, my life to preserve?
Is there naught to be my help: nor is their naught to serve?
Out upon the Court, and Lords that there remain:
To help my greef in this my case, will none of them take pain?
Who but I in such a wise his deaths wound could have got:
As I on horse back up did leap, my sword from scabard shot.
And ran me thus into the side, as you right well may see:
A meruels chance unfortunate, that in this wise should be.
I feel my self a dying now, of life bereft am I:
And death has caught me with his dart, for want of blood I spy.
Thus gasping here on ground I lie, for nothing I do care:
A just rewad for my misdeeds, my death does plain declare.

Here let him quake and stir, Ambidexter. How now noble King? pluck up your
heart:
What will you dye, and from us depart?
Speak to me, and you be alive:
He cannot speak, but behold how with death he does strive.
Alas good King, alas he is gone,
The Devil take me, if for him I make any moan.
I did prognosticate of his end by the Masss:
Like as I did say so is it come to pass.
I will be gone, if I should be found here:
That I should kill him it would appeer.
For fear with ^is death they do me charge:
Farewell my masters I will go take barge.
I mean to be packing now is the tide:
Farewell my masters I will no longer abide.

Exit Ambidexter. Enter three Lords first Lord. Behold my Lords it is even so,
as he to us did tell:
His grace is dead upon the ground, by dent of sword most fell.

second Lord. As he in saddle would have lept, his sword from sheath did go:
Coring him up into the side, his life was ended so.

third Lord. His blood so fast did issue out, that naught could him prolong:
Yet before he yielded up the ghost, his heart was very strong.

first Lord. A just reward for his misdeeds, the God abooue has wrought:
For certainly the life he led, was to be counted naught.

second Lord. Yet a ^rincely burial he shall have, according his estate:
And more of him here at this time, we have not to dilate.

third Lord My Lord let us take him up, to carry him away.


Both. Content we are with one accord, to do as you do say.


Exeu^t. All Epilogus.
RIght gentle Andience, here have you perused,
The tragical History of this wicked king:
According to our duty we have not refused,
But to our best intent expressed every thing.
We trust none is offended for this our doing,
Our Author craves likewise if he have squared amiss:
By gentle admonicion to know where the fault is.
His good will shall not be neglected to amend the same,
Praying all to bear therefore with his simyte deed:
Until the time serve a ^^tter he may frame,
Thus yielding you (...) to end we decreed.
That you so gentlely (...) ^^^red us to proceed,
In such patien^ (...) as to hear and see:
We can but thank ye therefore, we can do no more
As duty binds us for our noble Queen let us pray,
And for her honorable Council the truth yt they may b^
To practice Justice and defend her grace each day,
To maintain Gods word they may not refuse.
To correct all those, that would her grace and graces laws abuse,
Beseeching God over us, she may reign long:
To be guided by truth and defended from wrong.
Thomas Preston. Amen.
Imprinted at London by John Allde.


