SERMONS PREACHED BEFORE his MAJESTY; and upon other special occasions: Viz.

1 The Pillar and ground of Truth. 2 The New Life. 3 A sensible demonstration
of the Deity. 4 Exact Walking. 5 Samuels support of sorrowful Sinners.
By the late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTION Dr.
in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emmanuel College
in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

LONDON, Printed for Leonard Green of Cambridge, and are to be sold by James
Boler, at the Sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1630.

To the Reader.
THE AVTHOR himself, being hindered by death, from digesting his thoughts into
Tractates more accommodate for all men's use, presaged notwithstanding, a little
before his death, that they would be pressed into public view by one or other,
which might perhaps be less careful; who that he might prevent, he
bequeathed the care of those Sermons that were only preached at Lincolnes Inn,
to those his worthy friends, by whom you see them faithfully set forth, who
living in the City, were better conversant with those that took them from his
mouth: All others whatsoever unto us, who (though much more unworthy and
unable) were yet more frequently his Auditors in other places, and had reason
fully to know his Doctrine, manner of life, purpose, etc should therefore be
more guilty of ungrateful negligence, if any of those Lamps, into which he
emptied the golden oil out of himself, should not by us be lighted up to
serve the Temple, to which undoubtedly by him they were devoted. Moved
therefore with the necessity of our duty, their former good example, and the
successful entertainment the rest have found, we do here adventure into
light these five short Sermons, preached at special times, and in Auditories
of greatest worth and expectation, and accordingly composed of more exact
materials, and closer put together, which in him may well be pardoned, who in
all his other works did bow his more sublime and raised parts to lowest
apprehensions. We have labored what we could to discharge the trust by him
reposed in us, and desire that others would be pleased to forbear the putting
forth of any thing of his, without acquainting some of us therewith, by him
deputed for that work; who as soon as may be will be careful to present thee
with what else soever we shall think useful: the Lord grant they may do as
much good as the Author of them did intend.

T. G. T. B.


THE PILLAR AND GROUND Of TRUTH.
1. TIM. 3. 15. But if I tarry long, that thou may know how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the Church of the living God,
the pillar and ground of the Truth.
THere are two maine principles, upon which the whole frame of Popery is
founded; first, That the Church of Rome is the only Catholic Church:
secondly, That the Church cannot err. By which latter principle they have
brought on themselves a desperate necessity, never to amend or reform
whatsoever is once decided by the Church. These are the principles they first
instill into their Novices; these are the trains, wherewith they seek to win
men to themselves: for when they cannot prove their points in special and
particular, they take them all in gross, and by this one principle (Our
Church, which cannot err, has so decided it) they prove a bundle of them
altogether. So when they can show no ground in Scripture for their clouded,
ungrounded, superadded opinions, they fasten them and hang them all upon this
pinnacle of the Church, which because it is infallible, admits of no
examination. And whereas truth seeks out no corners, desires to see the light,
and come to trial; Popery delights to hide it self in these obscure and
uncertain generalities. As for example: ask them what ground they have for
invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, Indulgences, superadded
Sacraments, and a multitude of superstitious ceremonies; their answer is, The
Church has so decided, and her decrees are all infallible, and not to be
examined by particular men, which are inferior. So that pull but this pillar
down, as Sampson did, and the whole frame of Popery, with all that stay
themselves upon it, comes presently tumbling down.

Yet because they think it too improbable a course to build all on the naked
assertion of the Church, which is only to interpret and not to make the Text,
therefore they bring in Traditions, which they call unwritten verities, and
make them of equal value and credit with the Text: but if you ask them what
these unwritten verities are, and how they may be known from counterfeit; they
say only the Church can tell that, to whose custody they were committed, and
who only is able to judge infallibly, which are the genuine Traditions, and
which not. And if Scripture at any time be brought against any of these
points, they say it belongs to the Church of Rome to declare what books of
Scripture are canonical, what translation is authentical, what interpretation
must be the sense of Scripture, and in effect they will be only judged by
themselves, and whatsoever we say, they choke us with these principles, Theirs
is the only Church, and, The Church can never err.

Now of all places of Scripture, whereby they would vindicate to themselves
this privilege, this verse that I have read is one of the chiefest; but how
justly, we are now to consider.

Says the Apostle to Timothy, I have written unto thee, that thou may know
how to behave thy self in the house of God: as if he should say, It is of much
moment that the house of God be ordered and kept aright, be swept continually
and purged, because it is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, that is, the ground
and place where truth (which is the households food) is nourished, and does
grow; into which if falsehood creep, their food will soon be poisoned, and so
not nourish but corrupt, not fit them to salvation but destruction: so that the
Apostle in this verse has this double scope.

First, to describe the Church by this distinguishing property, that it is the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, that is, Truth is the sign, whereby this house of
God is known from other houses.

Secondly, he says, in the house of God etc. not in the Church of Ephesus,
lest any should conclude (as now the Papists would) that the truth were so
nailed and fastened to any one particular house or pillar, that it could never
be taken down from thence, and hanged up in another place; which is flat
contrary to the scope of the Apostle in this place, who in the beginning of
the next chapter shows evidently, that in the later times some should depart
from the faith, and give heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils,
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats.

The Papists would make us believe, that because the truth was once at Rome, it
is there still. Indeed the house and place where once it was, they may still
show perhaps; but the inhabitant is now departed, and the truth, which was the
sign, is taken down, and hanged up elsewhere, in stead whereof these very
errors hang, which the Apostle does foretell to be the signs of Truth's
departure, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats. If they
object, they forbid not all to marry. I answer, no heretic or people since
the beginning of the world, did ever do it, nor is it credible that any ever
will; for then the world would soon be at an end: but they forbid some to
marry at any time, as the Clergy; all at sometimes; and that not as a
precept of conveniencie, but necessity and holiness.

The Papists indeed say, thatthe Church is so the pillar and ground of truth,
that there is no truth but what comes from the Church, and that whatsoever
comes from the Church is true infallibly, and not subject to error: but this
cannot be the Apostles meaning here. First, there may be truths in other
Writers that are not of the Church: though the Garden be the most convenient
and ordinary place and ground of herbs; yet some Violets may be gathered in
the Woods, and on the highway side.

By Truth therefore here is meant divine and sacred truth, a plant of Gods own
Garden, not growing in the Wilderness and Wast.

Besides, as some truths may be found without the Church, so some errors may
be found within the Church: though the Garden be the proper ground and place of
herbs, yet weeds may also grow there, as tares may in the field, which
notwithstanding is the proper place of wheat.

Again, when he says, The Church is the pillar and ground of truth, his
meaning is, that in the Church of God, the truth ought always to be preserved
and kept, that is, those that profess themselves to be the Church, ought to
maintain the truth; that is their duty, which they are bound at all times to
perform: but it is no good consequence to infer, A thing is surely done,
because some ought to do it; for men do not always perform their duties,
nor discharge the trust that is committed to them.

Lastly, it is to be marked, that the Apostle says in general terms, The
Church is the pillar and ground of truth, not this or that particular people,
of Ephesus, or Corinth, or Rome, or any other city or country; for the
Church may make a progress, from one people to another, as now it has from
those famous cities of Asia unto other parts. Indeed while the Church
continues in a place, so long the fundamental truths continue, but when she
changes habitation, the truth goes with her; for these cannot dwell asunder:
while the Church continued at Rome, so long the truth continued, but no longer.

If they object, that a pillar is the prop and Object.
sustent aculum of that building wherein it is, and therefore cannot be
removed to another place, unless the building be destroyed and perish: since
then the Church of Rome was once the pillar and ground of truth, it is so still.

I answer, the Apostle in this place speaks of a pillar, not more
architectanico, as understanding Ans.
by it some essential and inseparable piece of the building, but more forensi,
for such a post or pillar, on which tables and proclamations, and such things
are wont to hang; and from such pillars, such things may soon be separated.
Such a pillar was this people of Ephesus, which stood long after the truth was
taken down and Mahumetanisme hanged up in stead thereof. And that its thus
meant, appears by the other word, (...), joined with it, which signifies a
seat or receptacle, at all times separable from what is in it. And indeed (as
before I said) the Church is the ground of truth, as the garden is the ground
of herbs, which we know, may be plucked up and planted in another place. As
therefore that which hangs on the pillar may be plucked down, or other things
hanged with it, as herbs may be translated from one garden to another, or
weeds grow with them; so that people which are now the Church of God, may
cease to be so, or continuing the Church, may be obnoxious unto errors.

And that this is the meaning of the place, and not that which the Papists
hence deduce, namely, That the Church cannot err; may appear by these reasons.

First, not to be capable of error, is the inseparable attribute of God
himself; for God and truth are terms conuertible, which cannot be said of
any creature; because to creatures, truth is a rule, from which they may
decline; as the Carpenters hand may from the line that guides it. Truth is not
of the essence of a creature, as it is of Gods, and therefore separable and
distinct; as the Carpenters line, is a thing distinguished from his hand, and
therefore may be separated, his hand may sometimes deuiate and go awry. The
decree and will of God is the rule it self, and from it self it cannot
deuiate or err; but the creature has a line of rectitude, drawn to it by the
Scripture, from which, though now de facto it does not swerue, yet de possibili
it may. Esa. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to this word, it is because they have no light in them. As if one
should say to a Pilote, Know that in your eye, and in your hand, there is no
inseparable and inbred rule, to guide you in your course, but here is a
compass for to direct you; if you look beside this, or neglect this, you will
fall upon the rocks and sands: so the Lord says to his Church, Know that in
you there is no inherent selfe-sufficient light, but here is my word, to be a
lantern to you; if you keep not your eye on this, you may err quickly, and
make shipwreck of your faith.

Secondly, where there is ignorance there may be error; for ignorance is the
cause of error, as darkness is of stumbling; for a man cannot have a perfect
judgment of things, except he have a perfect knowledge of them: now the most
learned Bishops that ever were, in general Councels (which is the
representative Church, in all men's judgments least subject unto error) have
been ignorant of many things; for even in humane things, whereof we are more
capable, the wisest men have been ready to profess, that the greatest part
of that they knew, was the least of that they knew not; much more in things
divine, in which our eyes are like the eyes of battes and owls, unto the
brightest sunneshine, too weak and too angust to comprehend them: therefore
their knowledge being defective, their judgment likewise must needs be so.
1. Cor. 13. 11. We know in part, says the Apostle, therefore we prophecy in
part. Aristotle could say, He that looks not round about a thing, and sees not
all the parts and corners of it, can give no certain judgment of it: now who
can say in divine mysteries he is able to see all things? and if he be not,
he may both be deceived, and deceive.

Lastly, where God intends to give the end he always gives the means to
effect and bring that end to pass; but he gives not to the Church the means
of infallibility, as perfect knowledge of the truth, sincere love of it, right
ordered zeal for it; he takes not always from them those sinful lusts,
which breed errings from the faith, and often thrust and impell men into error.

How often have general Councels, been distracted into factions, leavened with
malice, puffed up with pride, etc? and shall we say when their hearts and minds
are thus corrupted, that their tongues are notwithstanding infallibly
ouer-ruled, to pour forth nothing else but oracles? To say that at that
instant there falls a spirit upon them to guide them with immediate revelation,
is to approve the fanaticall fancies of the Anabaptists; which they take on
them to abhor; which notwithstanding if any do affirm, as some have been
bold to do, they must consider, that the Prophets which were guided by such
spirits, and had the truth inspired by visions, and immediate revelations, did
never argue, discuss, or reason of the things they spoke and wrote; but only
did declare and manifest what was revealed; but in general Councels the truth
is bolted out by reasonings to and fro, the conclusions many times disputed of,
and strongly argued on both sides: now where the premises are only probable,
the conclusion cannot be infallible; for they are the cause of the conclusion,
and there cannot be more in the effect than was formerly in the cause. This is
sufficient to evince that though general Councels, do not at all times
defacto err (for we all acknowledge the great benefit of the four first
general Councels) yet to say that de possibili they cannot, is utterly untrue.

Christ has promised, John 16. 13. to send Object. 1.
his Spirit which should lead them into all truth; and Matthew. 28. 20. to be
with them to the end of the world.

These places must needs be understood Answ.
primarily of the Apostles themselves, who only were infallibly led into every
truth, and but secondarily of their successors, that is, so far as they
insist in their steps and doctrine; for if that were the sense that Bellarmine,
Stapleton, and other popish writers give, namely, that the promise is
indifferently made to their successors, as well as to themselves, then
particular Bishops and Ministers should be infallible judges of truth and
falsehood, and so all controverfies in the Church would presently have an end,
so as never to spring again. If they say, its not to beunderstood of them
taken single and apart, but as met together, and assembled in a Synod. I
answer, there is not the least intimation of this distinction in those places:
but the place for such a promise is Matthew. 18. 20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them; But this place
is to be understood of the least meetings of true Christians in the name of
Christ, as well as of the largest Councels, and so the smallest company or
convention should be capable of this promise of infallibility, as well as the
most general and ample Council.

But they farther object, If there should not be a visible, external unerring
judge, to which at all Object. 2.
times those might resort for resolution, that are not themselves able to wade
through the depth of diuinity-controuersies, there would be no end of wrangling
and disputing, nor any certain means to find the truth in matters questioned.

Though there be no infallible, visible, humane Answ. 1.
judge; yet there is an invisible, in fallible judge, and that is the holy
Ghost, speaking in the scriptures, which are therefore called the word of God.
And this judge in many respects, is better and fitter than any other. First,
this may be easily had, is always ready, and at hand, to which men of all
sorts may soon repair; the other ambulatory, to many inaccessible, and to all
difficult to be obtained. Secondly, the sentence of this judge is certain and
inflexible, not subject to error; but the others mutable like a leaden rule,
that may be bended to and fro: for in men, affections have their place; which
is the reason that among men there are Laws, because the Law is not capable of
affections; but the Lawyer is. Thirdly, this judge is better known, and may
sooner be agreed upon by all; for be it granted that the true Church is a
judge infallible, yet it may be sooner known which is the true Scripture, than
which is the true Church, there being more pretenders to the one, than to the
other.

While the Church is militant upon the earth, Answ. 2.
God has not said, there should be any such end of controversies, as these
men dream of; but rather he has said the contrary, 1. Cor. 11. 19. There
must be heresies in the Church, that those may perish who receive not the love
of the truth to be saved, and that those which are approved might be known.

If there were any such means, by God appointed Answ. 3.
in his Church to determine controversies infallibly, yer a general Council
(though in his place to be respected) is not likely to be it; for is it like
God would appoint a means for ending controversies in his Church, that for at
least three hundred years, (that is, till the time of Constantine the great)
could not be had? and though he and others his successors (while the Empire
was undivided) might easily assemble Councels, yet when the Empire fell into
many subdiuisions, and the parts thereof were governed by several Kings, of
different religions, as now they be, it is impossible the Church should have
the benefit of them.

What is the use then and benefit of general Quest.
Councels, if they could be obtained?

They are the best means to find out Truth; Answ.
for many candles give more light, and many eyes see more than one; and in
the multitude of Counselors there is health: and as they are the best means
to find it, so from them it has no small authority; yet notwithstanding they
may err in necessary and fundamental points, as the Council of Ariminum, and
Seleucia, where there were as many more Bishops, as at the first Nicene
Council; and therefore held in two Cities, because no one was able to contain
them; yet erred in a fundamental point, decreeing for Arrius heresy against
the Deity of Christ. The second Council at Ephesus did the like, and so ten
Councels, at Tyrus, Jerusalem, Philadelphia, Ariminum, Seleucia,
Constantinople, Alexandria etc. so the second Council at Nice set up Images,
and commanded them to be worshipped, which in the second Council of
Constantinople immediately before were utterly condemned.

More instances might easily be given, but these suffice to warrant this
conclusion, That a general Council may err in fundamental points. For
though the universal Church of Christ, taken for his mystical body on earth,
and complete number of his elect, cannot err in matters fundamental (for then
they might fall away, and the gates of hell prevail against them) yet the
external visible body of the Church may err, because the truth of God may
be locked up within the hearts of such a company, as in competition of
suffrages cannot make a greatet part in a general Council; so that the
sentence decreed therein may be a fundamental error.

From these grounds thus laid, may fitly rise a threefold application.

First, seeing it is the received and approved doctrine of the Papists, That
the Church of Rome cannot err in points of Faith and Doctrine; we see how
little hope there is that we and they should ever be reconciled, or that one
truth should arise from a composition of their and our opinions: for if they
yield in any thing to us, it would presently follow, that in that wherein they
now yield, before they erred, and so this fundamental point of their Churches
not erring, would from thence be overthrown. We may alter our Tenants if we
will, but they are strongly engaged to keep theirs without any change or
variation; we may go to them, they cannot come to us; witness the Germane
Interim, so carefully and often tempered, wherein there were but few of their
ingredients left out; yet was it more than Charles the Fifth could do to get it
entertainment on eitherside: and therefore those Cassanders that think by wit
and policy to reconcile us, attempt a thing impossible. For of what materials
shall any middle course be framed, when neither side can spare the smallest
piece of timber in their building? they cannot, because thereby they should be
argued of erring for merly; we cannot, for true Religion is of a brittle
nature, break it you may, bend it you cannot, no not in the least degree. It
cannot be accommodated to interests, and respects of policy and serving
turns; it cannot be mixed with error, no more than oil with water, iron and
steel with clay. Daniel 2. 43. They shall mingle themselves with the seed of
men, but they shall not cleave one to another: even as iron is not miset with
clay; or as the elements when once they are mingled in a compound body do
lose their proper forms; even so Religions, when made ingredients, and
compounding parts of any other, do lose their forms, and cease to be
religions in Gods account. 2 King. 17. 33. It is said, the mingled people of
Samaria feared the Lord and served their own gods, after the manner of the
Nations whom they carried away from thence; that is, they jumbled all together,
the fear of God, and worship of their Idols, thinking thereby to fit both
parties, Jews and Heathens, with a religion wherein both might be gratified.
But what says God? does he approve this mixture? verse 34. Unto this day they
do after the former manners, they fear not the Lord, neither do they after
their statutes, or after the law or commandment which the Lord commanded. God
will not own his own commanded worship when mingled and compounded with
another.

So Gal. 5. 1. 2. Be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage (that is)
take heed of entertaining those rites and customs of the ceremonial law,
from which now by Christ ye are set free. Well, but what if circumcision the
ancient character be still retained, and joined unto Christ? is it not better
to be sure of both? See what he answers in the second verse; Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. And
again, verse. 4. Christ is become of none effect to you; As if he should say,
Take whether you will, either Christ or circumcision; for both ye cannot have:
So Esaias. 1. verse. 21, 22. How is the faithful City become an har lot? But how
proves he that? Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water. He
denies not but they had silver and wine amongst them; but as silver mixed with
baser metal becomes dross, and is no longer accounted silver: so wine when
it is mixed with water leaves off to be accounted wine. Ier. 23. 28. He that
has my word let him speak my word faithfully; for what is the chafe to the
wheat? Whatsoever of our own we offer to annexe to the word of God, in Gods
account is as if we added chafe to wheat, by which addition the wheat can
be no gainer They that go about to mix true and false religions, are like
those that take too big a graspe, and so let whatthey meant to have sustained
fall and break, as we see in Jeroboam who mingled truth and falsehood, not
changing the worship, as he thought, but the place and manner of the worship
only, lest the kingdom should return unto the house of David, that was the
interest, whereunto he thought to make religion stoop, 1. Kings 12. 26. etc.
But what came of it? He made a nullitie of religion, and of his and his
posterities title to the kingdom. Saul had a strait command to destroy all the
Amalekites, but because in execution of it he needs would interpose his own
discretion, in sparing Agag, and some of the cattle, God takes the kingdom
from him for it. Moses will not yield to the King of Egypt to leave one hoof
behind him, of any thing that did belong unto the Israelites. Mordecay,
because God forbad them to make peace with Amalek for ever, will rather hazard
his own and others safety, than so much as bow the knee to Haman an
Amalekite. Daniel when God commanded to pray toward the Temple, will not omit
that circumstance of his prayer, though he cannot practice it without hazard
of his life. This is the disposition of all whose hearts are perfect with their
God; they dare not pare away the least lap from the garment of religion, nor
add the least fly to this box of precious ointment; for in this curious
clocke-worke of religion, every pin and wheel that is amiss distempers all:
And as we are wont to lay aside cracked vessels, and distempered watches as
unusefull, so does God distempered and mixed religions. As to the Jews, a
garment made of linzy woolsie might not be worn: so to us a Samaritan
religion, made up of true and false, is not to be endured; but as the stomach
loathes lukewarm water, so God lukewarm religions. As therefore Eliah exhorts
the people to follow either God or Baal, and not to halt between them both; so
it is good for us to take heed of mingling truth and falsehood, whereof God is
more impatient than of either of the two extremities apart. For one to be a
downright Papist may be a sin of ignorance; but to blend and mingle with
it, to pick and choose some tinctures of it to serve our worldly turns,
cannot but be a sin of knowledge: for if one were fully in his heart persuaded
that Popery were the truth, he would embrace that, and cleave to that alone;
again, if our religion were thought to be the right, that only will be
entertained; but when we mingle thus, and will not run without a by as, but
for advantage halt willingly between both, we cannot be accepted. This we
speak but for prevention, not knowing what temptations aftertimes may bring;
it is good preventing Physic to know the truth.

Secondly, seeing we have proved that the judgment of the Church is not
infallible in 2
points of faith and doctrine; hence we may learn, to take up nothing merely
upon trust, not to think things are so only because the Church has said it;
this foundation is too sandy for us to build our faith upon, that should be
built upon the rock which is the word of God: upon which ground, in a manner,
the whole Fabric of Popery will soon be overthrown, seeing all, or most of
them, are only took up upon the Churches credit; for in all the book of God ye
shall not find a word for invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images,
universalitie, and supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, purgatory, Popish
indulgences, prayer in an unknown tongue, prayer for the dead, consecration of
oil, tapers, and holy water, and all that rabble of superstitious ceremonies;
but are the hay and stubble that men have heaped together, now one, and then
another, according to their several fancies, till the mystery of iniquity
was come unto its fullness: for all these controversies are founded, either
upon the decrees of the Pope, or unwritten traditions, or the authority of the
Church, or Scripture wrested from the native sense to that which they are
pleased to put upon it; so that this principle of their Church not erring, is
that indeed on which the very weight of Popery does depend; let this be taken
away, and all comes quickly down.

Thirdly, as the Apostle here exhorts Timothy, and in him all Ministers to
take heed how 3
he behaves himself in the Church of God; so may we do all Magistrates, both
supreme and subordinate to be circumspect and wary how they behave themselves,
in this Church of God: for though the Ministers be the bees that make the
honey, yet the Magistrates are the hives wherein it is made and kept; the
Ministers are the vines that bring forth grapes, yet Magistrates are the elmes
that underprop and hold up these vines; the Minister defends the Church with
tongue and pen, the Magistrate with hand and power, wherewith for that end God
has furnished him; Ministers are the preachers of both tables, Magistrates the
keepers; the executiue power of Word and Sacraments belongs alone to Ministers,
but directive and coactiue, for the orderly and well performance, belongs to
Magistrates. And the text it self affordes us motives.

It is the house of God, and its reason the tenant 1
should keep the house in reparation; and they are Magistrates as well as
Ministers; for if the ruins and breaches of the house be once neglected, both
heresies and superstitions will soon creep in, and carry captive with their
errors those of the family.

It is the Church of God, of which good Magistrates 2
are nurses, Esaias 49. 23. as therefore the nurse is bound to look to the
child, and see it cherished with wholesome food, and kept from dangers, as they
will answer to the parents, whose child it is; so Magistrates are bound to
defend and keep the Church, to see it nourished with milk, and not with
poison, that is, with truth, and not with error, as they will answer to that
God, who with his own blood has purchased it unto himself, Acts 20. 28. It
is the flock of God, and its no disparagement for Kings to be his shepherds,
as David was; if Wolves therefore do enter through their negligence, and
snatch up now a sheep, and then a lamb, the Lord will one day require it at
their hands, as Laban did at Jacobs.

It is the pillar and ground of Truth, that is, the field or garden wherein
Truth grows, and 3.
Magistrates the gardiners or husbandmen; and therefore bound to see the good
plants watered, the weeds and stones thrown out that hinder growth, the hedge
kept strong and good about it; lest as the Serpent got into Eden, and beguiled
Eve, so the Serpents of our times creep through into this Garden, and corrupt
the minds of any from that simplicity which is in Christ. The like Motives are
every where in Scripture scattered; Revel. 2. 20. I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Iezebel, which calls her self a
Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit for nication, and to
eat things offered to idols. Therefore neither Errors, nor their Authors in
the Church of God are to be suffered. John 15. 13. Every plant which my
heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out: And who should root
them out, but Magistrates, to whom Gods Vineyard is committed?

Let Us come to the Old Testament, where the lives of Magistrates are
represented, as the face is in a glass, that shows both spots and beauty. 2 Chronicles. 17. Iehoshaphat commanded the Priests and Levites to instruct the People
in the Law, from the seventh verse to the tenth; but that's not all, but in the
sixth verse it is said, His heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord; so that
he took away the high places, and the groves out of Judah. Let us cast our
eyes upon the other Kings of Israel and Judah, and consider what God himself
has marked and observed in them, seeing his observation cannot but be of
moment, like asterismes in the margents of a book. Of Solomon God has
observed, 1 King. 11. 4. that when he was old his wives turned away his heart
after other gods, and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, that is,
satte loose from God, and then the Lord left off to do him good: Of Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 11. 17 that for three years he walked in the way of David, but when
he had established the Kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the
Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him, chapt. 12. 1. and 2. therefore in the
fifth year of Rehoboam, Shishak King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem,
because they had transgresses against the Lord: Of Asa, 1 King. 15. 11. etc.
that he did what was right in the sight of the Lord, took away the Sodomites
out of the Land, removed all the Idols that his Fathers had made, removed
Maacah his Mother from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a grove,
and burns her Idol by the brook Kidron, but the high places were not taken
down; therefore verse 16. there was war between Asa and Baasha King of Israel
all their days: yet those high places were but the groves where the Tabernacle
and Altar were which Moses made, where before the Temple was built it was
lawful for them to offer sacrifice; yet this was that for which the Lord is so
offended, because when the Temple once was built, it was no longer lawful to
offer sacrifice in any other place. Now when Almighty God shall be so curious,
have such a quick and jealous eye upon so small an oversight as this; how
sensible will he be, when matters much worse are tolerated and permitted? Jude
3. the faith once given to the Saints. It was but once given; therefore if
lost, or any way corrupted, it will not be given again: for it was given once
for all, and is not to be revealed a second time; and therefore he exhorts them
to contend earnestly for the same.

For our selves, we have cause to magnify Gods mercy in our present
condition, under the government of his gracious Majesty, and to remember this
day, which is the birth day of his Majesty, seeing under his shadow we enjoy
the public profession and practice of Religion, and may live not only a
quiet, but an honest life; a blessing that we cannot prize too much, and should
therefore much enlarge our hearts with thankfulness to God, and love to our
Princes, to bestow on them not only outward obedience, but also inward, to
assist them, and be subject to them, not by constraint, but willingly, to pray
for them not formally, but heartily, as for the instruments and conduitpipes of
so great blessings. notwithstanding we the Ministers of God have been bold to
deliver from the mighty God of heaven and earth, to conscience his vicegerent
this impartial and inflexible rule, not fashioned and bended by the hand of
man, but molded by the holy Ghost, that thereby we may discover where in we
have fallen short, and be careful to amend it: wherein we have done well, and
be encouraged to do it more and more, that is, to make freer passage for the
truth, and dam up the current of errors, whether Popish or Arminian, or of
what kind else soever; for it is the Lords business, and blessed is the man
that does it diligently: for as any walked more perfectly with God, so they had
more perfect peace, and where unevenesse was found in their obedience, there
was it also found in Gods blessing on them. Though wickedness and crooked
ways may get the advantage for a start, yet by it shall no man be
established, Prou. 12. 3. And again, though uprightness be sometimes
overwhelmed, yet like a cork at last it will arise from under water; the
prosperity of wicked men, like a watrie sunshine may for a while continue,
but the late evening will bring a storm that never shall blow over: he may
flourish for a time, like a green bay tree, but at last shall surely wither.
Those that are perfect with their God, may have a winters season, but shall at
last be sure to flourish. For if God be governor of the world, disposer of the
things therein, according to his will, if good and evil are done by him alone,
then certainly it must be well with those that fear him, and ill with those
that sin against him; for it will be always found a true and certain rule,
That uprightness and holiness is the cause of all our happiness, and
obliquitie, and sin the cause of all our misery.

THE NEW LIFE.
1. JOHN 5. 12. He that has the Son, has life: and he that has not the
Son, has not life.
THe Apostles scope here is to show us what great privileges we have by Jesus
Christ, among which this is one of the chiefest, that he that has the Son
has life, that is, he has the life of grace for the present, and shall have
the life of glory for ever; which he sets out by the opposite, and that is, he
that has not the Son has not life. So that this point lies evidently before
us, that whosoever has not a spiritual life, for the present, he is not in
Christ, and whosoever has it, is in Christ, and shall live for ever; where
these two things are to be observed:

First, that every man by nature is a dead man: dead, that is, in trespasses
and sins.

Secondly, that yet there is a life to be had that is, contrary to this death.

First, I say, every man by nature is a dead man: for life you see here is from
the Son; now there is no man borne a member of the new Adam, but every man is
borne a member of the old Adam; and therefore in that sense he is borne a dead
man, though otherwise endued with a natural life. For if the root be dead, as
the old Adam is, all the branches, that rise from the root, must needs be
dead also. Again, spiritual life is nothing else, but a conjunction of the
soul with the Spirit of God, even as the natural life is a conjunction of the
body with the soul; now as the soul leaves the body, so the holy Ghost
withdrawes itself from the soul, when it is disjointed, and distempered, and
made unfit for use: for even as a man dwells in a house while it is habitable,
plays on a musical instrument while it is fit, uses a vessel while it is
whole and sound; but when the house grows ruinous, and inhabitable, he
departs from it, when the instrument is unstrung, he lays it aside, when the
vessel is broken or boared through, he casts it away, and leaves it: even so
does the soul depart from the body, when it grows ruinous, when it is made
inhabitable through mortal disease, it lays it aside, as an outworn garment:
and after the same manner the holy Spirit withdrawes it self from the soul of
a man, when it is broken, and ruinated, and distempered through the mortal
disease of sin, and of natural corruption. And this is the case of every
natural man whatsoever, till he be renewed by the infusion of a new life; and
yet it is the common opinion of natural men, that if a man live in the Church,
and be baptized, and pray, and hear the word, and embrace the true religion,
and practice the outward duties of it, that he is (out of doubt) in the state
of this spiritual life; and therefore I think it would be an hour well spent
to discover dead men to themselves, to persuade men, that except they be made
new creatures, except they be borne again, they are in a state of death, and
cannot be saved in that condition: for you see, he that has not life has not
the Son, and he that has not the Son shall die, the wrath of God abides upon
him for ever, Ioh. 3. ult. Now it is said, Ephesians. 4. 18. that men are strangers
front this life through the ignorance that is in them, and through the
hardness of their hearts. Mark it; they are strangers from this life:

Partly through Ignorance, because they are ignorant of this work of life and
regeneration, they think there is a greater latitude in religion than there
is, within which compass if they come, they are safe; that is, though they be
not so strict, and so zealous, though they go not so fast to heaven as others,
yet they shall do as well as the best; In a word, they are ignorant what
belongs to this life, says the Apostle, and therefore they are strangers to it.

Partly again, they are strangers, because of the hardness of their hearts,
that is, either because they are so distracted and possessed with worldly
business, that they cannot attend it, or they are so soaked and surfetted with
pleasures and delights, that they are not sensible of the things that belong to
this life, and therefore they are strangers to it, that is, they are not able
to judge of it, whether they have this life of grace, or not. You will say unto
me, How shall we know it?

I answer, from those properties of life and death, that we take from the
similitude of the natural life and death.

First, a man may know whether he remain in the state of Nature, whether he
be a dead Sign.
man, by considering whether he have any change wrought in him: For as it is
said of Christ, he was dead and is alive; so it is true of every man that is
in Christ, he was dead and is alive. and this implies a great change.

There are many changes in a man: age makes a change, place and company make
a change, education and custom and experience make a change; but when a man is
translated from death to life, it is another kind of change, it is such a
change, as if another soul dwelt in the same body, that a man thus changed
can say, Ego non sum Ego. When his old lusts, his old acquaintance, his old
temptations shall come, he is able to answer them, and to say he is not the
same man; though they knock at the same door, yet there is another inhabitant
come into the house, and they find not him they look for. Even as you see
when a graft is put into a Crab-tree-stocke, it changes all; the sap, and
Simile.
the fruit, and the leaves, and all are of another fashion: so it is when the
life of grace is put into the heart of a natural man; it changes the inward
man and the outward, it changes the whole frame of the soul. For (my Beloved)
this is not a light alteration; but as the old stamp must be obliterate
before the new can be imprinted, as the old building must be pulled Simile.
down, before you can set up a new; so this old nature of ours in a great
measure, must be broken in pieces, and new molded, before a man can be made a
living man: which is done by the infusion of the supernatural qualities of
grace and holiness. I say supernatural; for even as the earth may bring forth
grass and Simile.
common wild flowers of it self, but it must be plowed and sown, before any
choice plants can grow there: even so these common natures, which we all have,
may bring out things that are morally good; but before they can bring forth
fruits of true righteousness, they must be plowed and sown. Plowed, that is,
a man must be broken in heart, with an apprehension of his sin, and of Gods
eternal wrath, he must see himself but a dead man, and he must be pricked and
wounded in heart with the sense of it, as those in Act. 2. after the sermon of
Peter, who were pricked in their hearts, and cried out, Men and brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? For this is the plowing and the breaking of the
heart. And again, they must be sown too, that is, there must be an
implanting of spiritual graces, which change and renew us, according to that
which you shall find, Romans 12. 2. Fashion your selves no more after this world,
but be ye changed, or metamorphosed, by the renewing of your mind; and this is
one way by which you may discern whether you be dead or alive.

Secondly, when there is no action, when there is no motion in a man, you say
he is dead; when a man acts nothing, when he stirs not himself, we reckon
him a dead man: now this is the case of every natural man; he is not able to
move hand nor foot, in the ways of true godliness.

If you say, I but they are able to do something, they are able to pray, to
hear the Word, to receive the Sacrament, they are able to do many excellent
duties of justice and righteousness amongst men.

I answer, it is very true; but yet the Scripture speaks of certain dead
works, as Heb. 9. 14. The blood of Christ is said there to purge our
consciences from dead works, that is, all these may be done by natural men,
and they are good works in themselves, having all the lineaments of works
truly good (as you know a dead body has of a living) but yet indeed they
are but dead works, that is, they may have a golden outside, and be very
beautiful in the sight of the doer, and likewise in the sight of men, but yet
as Christ's speaks, be abominable in the sight of God. A natural man, you see
therefore, may pay a certain debt of duty, and obedience to God, but he
paies it in counterfeit coin that has the stamp, and color, and similitude
of true coin, yet it consists, if you look to the inwards, but of base
metal. I remember a story that Remigius tells, who was a Judge in Loraine,
under whose judgment many hundreds of witches were condemned upon their own
confession, says he, the devil did bring them many boxes, that had current
coin in them, to the appearance of the witches, but when they came to use
them, they proved nothing but withered leaves: I say after the same manner,
Satan couseneth natural men in things of greater moment, he suffers them to
think well of the good works, and of the duties that they do to make them
think they are current coin; but when they come to make use of this treasure,
at the day of death, in the time of extremity, at the day of judgment, they
find them to be but withered leaves, such as God will not accept.

The Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 3. of certain men which had a form of
godliness, but denied the power thereof, that is, that had a formal customary
performance of good works, and of good duties, with which the conscience is
satisfied, because it is ignorant and is not able to judge. Satan does with men
in this case, as we are wont to do with children; we take from them true gold
and silver, and when they fall a crying, stop their mouths with counters; So,
I say, Satan labors to keep men from the lively and through performance of
good works, and of holy duties, and then satisfies their consciences with
that which has but a form of godliness without the power of it.

But you will say, How shall a man discern it, whether those good works that
are good in themselves, be good indeed, whether they be good in such a manner
as they are wrought by him?

I answer, you may know it by these two things:

First, it is certain, that except they be vital actions, that is, except
they proceed from an inward principle of life within, they are not good
actions, they are such as the Lord regards not. Now you know there are motions,
as the motions of clockes and watches, that proceed not from life, but from
art; so it is in this matter of religion: many good actions may be done, many
good motions in the ways of godliness, which yet may not proceed from life,
from the life of grace, but from outward respects to men, from fear of hell,
from fear of judgments, in sickness from the apprehension of death and
calamity; in such cases we may be stirred up to do them, and then, even as
the wheels that are set a going by a spring, when the spring is down, you
know they cease their motion; so commonly it is in these good fits, in these
good moodes of godliness, when that which sets them a work is removed, there
is an end of it; and therefore if you would know whether the works that you
do be right or no, such as God will accept at the last day, consider if they
proceed from an inward principle, from a principle of life within.

Secondly, you shall know them by their 2
coldness; for coldness you know is a symptom of death. These good works,
when they are done by a natural man, yet there is no life in them, there is no
warmth, no vivacity and quickness in them; whereas you know it is said, Iam.
5. Prayer if it be fervent prevails much: and Romans 12. Be ye burning in
spirit, serning the Lord; that is, all those duties that have not heat in
them, that have not fire in them, God regards them not; the reason is this,
because if no heat be there, then is none of his spirit there, and then you
know our prayers are but the voice of our own spirits, the works that we do
are but dead works, because they are but the fruits and effects of dead flesh,
if there be none of the holy Ghost there: Now if there be no heat there, I
say, there is none of the spirit; for the spirit is as fire. Whence you know it
is, that our Savior says, I will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with
fire, that is, I will baptize you with the holy Ghost, which is as fire. And
therefore you shall find that holy men, have been usually described by the
similitude of fire, as Chrysostom says, that Peter was like a man made all of
fire, walking among stubble; and to one that desired to know what kind of man
Basil was, it is said there was presented in a dream, a pillar of fire, with
this motto, Talis est Basilius, Such a one was Basil; and old Latimer when he
was asked the reason, why there was so much preaching, and so little
practicing, he gave this reason, Deest ignis, fire is wanting: the same we
may say in this case, there may be a performance, much performance, of many
good duties, of prayer, of hearing, of receiving the Sacrament, of worshipping
God, etc. but consider whether there be fire, consider whether they be not
done without that liveliness, and that fervency, that the Spirit of God
requires, whether they are either done without heat, or but half baked, as
Hosea's cake was, and if so, they be but dead works: whereas true praying in
secret between God and us, it is such as warmes and quickens the heart, it is
such as brings the heart into a good frame of grace, and sets it right before
God, and right hearing is such as kindles a fire in us, that in a great measure
burns up the dross of sinful lusts and corrupt affections. So that is the
next means, the second means, by which we may know, whether we are alive to
righteousness, or dead in sin, to consider whether we have any motions, and of
what kind those motions, and actions are.

Again, you shall know it by considering what you contend for most; for life
is sweet, 3.
and every Creature would maintain his life, and will part with any thing
rather than with that: So a man that has this life of grace in him, he will
suffer any thing, he will lose his life, his goods, his liberty, and all,
rather than he will wound his conscience, and violate his inward peace, and
communion with God, because that is as sweet and as dear to him as life;
whereas another man he contends as much for his lusts, for his profit, for his
credit, for his pleasures, nay for his sins, and will rather suffer the loss
of a good conscience, will rather suffer any unevenness in his ways toward
God and men, suffer any sin, rather than he will be prejudiced in these
things, because in this is his life, being dead to Christ, and alive to sin.

Again, such as the food is, such is the life. If 4
it be the life of sin that a man lives, which the Scripture calls death,
then the secret thoughts, and the inward affections feed on carnal delights,
either past, present, or to come, that is, either he solaceth himself with
the contemplation of what he has had, or he feeds on that which is present, or
he cheares up himself with the thoughts and projects of those carnal
delights which are future; whereas a man that lives the life of grace, the
contrary is most acceptable to him: for every life draws to it self that
which is most suitable, and most agreeable to it, that is, the food wherewith it
is maintained, and that wherein it delights: Pleasure, voluptas, being nothing
else indeed but the application of that which is convenient and agreeable to us.

And if you say now, But natural men may occupy themselves in hearing, in
reading, in praying, and such like holy exercises.

I answer, that they may, and it is well, these things are very good and
commendable, and not to be omitted: but yet there is something must be added;
for this is not enough, except we be nourished by these duties, and grow by
them; as you know it is said, 1 Peter 2. Desire the sincere milk of the word,
that you may grow thereby; and as your common saying is, Show me not the meat,
but the man. For Christ the great Shepherd of the sheep is affected in this
case, as shepherds are wont to be, that say not to the sheep, show me the hay
that I have given you, but show me the lac and lanam, the woole and the milk;
that is, show me the fruits and the effects of all your hearing, and praying:
for a man may be conversant in all these duties, and yet for want of life,
and for want of a digestive faculty within, that is, not turning them to blood
and spirits, he may not be nourished, he may not grow and be strengthened by
them, but be as a man in an atrophie, that cates very much, and yet is as
lean and meager as if he had eat nothing. Of such the Scripture says, They
have a name to live, but are dead: And they are always learning, but never come
to the knowledge of the truth, that is, to the saving knowledge of it.

But now for the last property of life, as it is the property of every life,
not only to draw to it self things suitable, but to expel and oppugn
whatsoever is contrary and hurtful to it: so he that is a living man in Christ
Jesus, though he has the relics, and the wefts, and the remainders of sin
still in him, yet he is sick of them, he fights against them, he resists
them continually, as health resists sickness, or as a living fountain refists
the mud that falls into it, it works it out, and does not rest till it be
clear again; whereas another man works out those good things, those good
thoughts and motions that are injected and kindled in him (for some good moods
and good fits they may have) I say they reject them, and are sick of them, and
weary of them, and of the means that should increase them, and they are not
well till they have gotten themselves into another element: but for the sins
which are suitable to them, either by disposition, or by education, or by
custom, those they suffer to lie continually unexpelled, and unresisted, as
mud in ponds and dead waters. And this (Beloved) is a great sign of death: for
I will be bold to say this, that if we lie in any known sin, that is, if
there be a continued, tract of any sin that we know to be a sin, that is
drawn as a thread through our whole conversation, be it fornication, or
adultery, or swearing, or drunkenness, or malice and envy, or any other; I
say it is very dangerous, yea deadly, if it have dominion, if we lie in it; as
you know a prevailing disease kills, and one disease will do it as well as a
hundred, as a swine that passes by a thousand dirty puddles, and yet wallowes
but in one, if she lie in one, it is enough to make her unclean and filthy all
over, as if she had done it in more. The Scripture is plain in this case, 2.
Cor. 5. 17. Whosoever is in Christ is a new creature, and old things are passed
away, all things are become new. Gal. 5. 24. Whosoever is in Christ has
crucified the flesh with the affections of it. So that if there be one living
lust in a man, if there be one lust perfectly living, it is an argument, that
the whole body of death is alive in us; and if it be so, we are yet in a
state of death, and are not translated to the glorious liberty of the Sons of
God. And so I have showed you that every man by nature is dead in trespasses
and sins, and how you shall know it, and that if we continue in that
condition, and are not partakers of the first resurrection, we shall never
partake of the second resurrection.

Now we come to the second, namely, that there is a life that is contrary to
this death; and that you may understand what it is, you must know that every
man by nature is in a dead sleep, and therefore he sees not this death, nor
feels it, nor regards it; for as a dead man feels not that he is dead, so he
that wants this spiritual life, he is not sensible of it; for the soul in the
worse condition it is, the less it feels it, though it be not so with the
body.

And therefore the first thing that must be done, to bring a man out of this
miserable condition of death, is to waken him, to open his eyes, to see that
he is a child of wrath, and to see what extreme need he stands in of Jesus
Christ, and to seek and to long after him; as a condemned man longs after his
pardon, and as he that was pursued by the avenger of blood, in the old law
came to the city of refuge, for safety and for shelter: I say, after that
manner we must first be awakened. This you shall see, Ephesians, 5. Awake thou that
sleep and stand up from the dead. That wakening therefore is the first
work. And so Romans 7. 9. (it is an excellent expression) says he, I was once
alive without the Law, but wen the Law came, sin revived, and I dyed; the
meaning of it is this, before when I was ignorant of the Law, I thought my
self a living man, in as good an estate as the best; but when the Law came
that is, when I was enlightened, when I saw the true meaning of the Law, that I
saw my self, and saw sin in a right glass, then sin was alive and I died;
that is, I found my self to be no better than a dead man. So that is the first
work, that God does to a man, whom he means to save, to waken him out of
this dead sleep, to charge sin upon his conscience, and to set it upon him
to pursue him, as the avenger of blood we spoke of before. When that is done
once, then a man will fly to the city of refuge, that is, he flies to
Christ, as Ioab did to the horns of the altar, and he cries and calls earnestly
for the pardon of his sins, even as Sampson cried for water, Give me water,
or I die. And when a man comes thus to Christ, thus humbled, then Christ
accepts him; and then he breathes this breath of life into him, as God
breathed the breath of life into Adam, and so is made a living man, according
to that, Ioh. 5. 29. The time shall come, when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall live, that is, those that are
spiritually dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and those that
hear it shall live; for when a man touches Christ by faith, as the woman
touched the hemme of his garment, there goes a certain virtue out from him,
that heales the soul, as that virtue healed her bloody issue. And this is a
thing much to be marked, that even as you see when the iron comes near the
loadstone, there goes a virtue from the loadstone, that draws the iron to it;
so though Christ be in heaven, and we are on the earth, there goes a certain
virtue from him, that draws us to him; and not so only, but it changes us,
and reformes us, and quickens us by this infusion of a new life, by this
transmission of a certain power and virtue that comes from him.

You will say, But this is somewhat obscure, Quest.
what kind of virtue is this? what kind of infusion and transmission is it?

My beloved, it is true, it is the great mystery Answ.
of life and regeneration; but as far as it is expressable, we will explain
unto you. It is done after this manner: Even as you see an artificer, when he
goes about any work of art, there goes a certain influence from the skill
that is seated in his mind, that passes upon the work as he moulds and
fashions it, and sets a stamp upon it according to that Idea that is conceived
within; or as we see, when the will moves the members of the body to and fro,
there goes a commanding active power from the will that acts the members, and
stirs them according to the disposition of the will; or as we see in the
works of nature, when the bees make their combs, and the birds their neasts,
there goes out a certain instinct from God, the author of nature, that impels
and instigates the creatures to do according to their kind. Such a kind of
virtue and power it is, that the Scripture calls the virtue of his resurrection,
that comes from Christ and from the Spirit of Christ, that moulds and fashions
the heart of a man, that commands powerfully in him, and that guides and
directs him, to do things agreeable to his will. And this is that, my beloved,
which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 1. 19. he prays, that their eyes might be
opened, that they might see the exceeding greatness of his power, that works
in those that believe; where mark this, that it is called power, that is, it
is not an empty form of godliness, but an effectual preualent power, that
puts not upon us only the washy color of a good profession, but that dies the
heart in grain with grace and holiness, that does not only alter that
superficies, but changes the whole frame of the heart, and turns the rudder
of the life, and guides the course to a quite contrary point of the compass.
And this differs from the form of godliness, that we spoke of before, as the
life differs from the picture, as the substance differs from the shadow, as
that which has sinews and efficatiousnesse in it, from that which is weak
and powerless. This virtue and power that comes from Christ, when God means
to make one a living man, it does not only make proffers and offers, it does
not only breed in the heart good desires and purposes, that when they come to
the birth, have no strength to bring forth; but it so plants them in the heart,
that they live there as the creatures live in their own elements; whereas in
those that have their old hearts, and their old natures still, they wither and
vanish away, as plants that are in a soil that is not connaturall and suitable
to them. And therefore if we would know whether this life be wrought in us or
no, let us consider whether ever we have had experience of such a great power
and virtue, of such an influence from Christ, that may change us and reform
and renew us, and make us not only willing to live a holy life, to have our
lusts mortified, to pray fervently, and to keep the Sabbath with delight, but
that enableth us to do these things also; as the Apostle speaks, I am able to
do all things through Christ that strengthens me. So much shall serve to
show you, that we are by nature dead, and that yet there is a life to be had
that is contrary to that death. Now for application of this, which shall be
threefold.

First, let us be exhorted to believe, that there is such a life; for it is
said, Col. 3. that this life is Use. 1.
hid with Christ in God: it is hid, and therefore to be believed; for things
that we see, we need not to believe. Now that we may know why it is said to
be a hidden life, let us consider,

From whom it is hid, and
With what it is hid.
From whom is it hid? Quest.


It is hid from natural men, even as colors Answ.
are hid from a blind man, or as they are hid in the dark. The colors are
there, but they are hid from man, because either he wants an eye, or he wants
light to seethem.

Again, with what is it hid? Quest. 2.


This spiritual life, this life of grace, is hid with this natural life;
wesee men breathe and Answer 1.
live, but this life is within, we are not able to see it.

Again, it is hid under a base outside, even as Christ was hid under a
Carpenters son, as Answer 2.
the wisdom of God is hid under the foolishness of preaching, as those whom
the world was not worthy of were hid under sheepskins, and goat skins, Hebr.
11. and as the great mysteries of salvation are hid under the mean elements of
Bread and Wine: after the same manner this life is hid; I say under a base
outside, because those that live this life of grace, for the most part, are
base and contemtible in the eye of the world: And this is another thing that
hides this life from us.

And thirdly, it is hidden with the infirmities of the Saints; even as you see
this natural life Answer 3.
hid in a swound, or as reason is hid in drunkenness, there is life there, and
reason there, but it is not seen. It cannot be denied that the holiest men
have many infirmities, (as you know David and Peter what they fell into) and
because of that we cannot see this spiritual life, but are ready to think
for the time that there is no life in them.

And last of all, this life is hid from us by misreports, even as Christ was
hid from the world, Answer 4.
being reported to be a Wine-bibber, and a companion of gluttons, and one that
cast out Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; thus he was hid: And so
the Apostle Paul, and the rest of the Apostles were hid from the world after
this manner, in 2 Cor. 6. says he, We are as deceivers though true, that is,
though we be true, yet says he, we are deceivers, that is, we are reported to
be deceitful and false men. Therefore those that are in great place, should
take special heed how they admit reports: for you shall find this, that in
all ages, in all stories, men for the most part have been mis-reported, good
men the worst reported of, and evil men the best; so that if we judge by
reports, we shall justify the wicked, and condemn the generation of the
just. I say, all these ways this life is hid from us; and therefore we must
believe it, though we may help our selves a little with experience. We see
there is a generation of men, whose life is not in carnal pleasures and
delights, that give not themselves up to sin against God, and it is certain
that no man can live without some delight, no creature can live without it:
since therefore their delight is not in these things, it is likely that there
is another life that they live, that is, an inward and retired life, even this
life, which is hid with Christ in God.

Again, you see there is a generation of men, that are willing to suffer
tortures, and imprisonments, yea death it self: and surely they would not be
so willing to part with this natural life, if there were not a better life, a
life that they set a higher price upon: I say, they would not let this go, if
they had not hope of another. Thus we may help our selves with experience, but
yet we must believe it. And this is the first use that we are to make of this,
to believe that there is such a life.

Secondly, if he that has not this life is not in Christ, why then, my
beloved, it concerns Use 2.
us to see that we have the fruits and effects of this spiritual life in us,
that that change be wrought in us, that we spoke of, that we have those
motions and those actions, that proceed from an inward principle of life, that
we have that attractive disposition, and that expulsive disposition which may
empty our hearts of all known sin, which is also an effect of this life. And
this further we must chiefly look to that we love the brethren, which for ought
I see the holy Ghost points at above all other signs of this spiritual life;
you have it 1 Ioh. 3. 14. We know by this that we are passed from death to
life, because we love the brethren. You know a dead member has no sympathy
with the rest, but a living member has a fellow feeling, yea a quick and
exquisite sense within, when any of the members are pained or hazzarded.
Therefore let us labor to find this character of life in our selves by being
affected to our neighbors and brethren, and the Churches abroad, by having
bowels of compassion in us, to melt over their condition, and to desire their
safty as our own. For why should we not? are they not the same Church of God as
we are? are they not bought with the same price, and are they not as dear to
God? and certainly, if we show love to any Church, because it is a Church, we
would do it to one as well as to another.

Again, we have reason to commiserate them for our own sakes. For we cannot
stand alone, and God has so ordered it in his providence, Luke 6. 38. that
look what measure we mete to others, in their distress, men shall measure the
same to us in our necessity; and how soon the fire may take here also, we
know not; But this you shall find in the prophefie of Jeremiah, when the
nations drank of the cup of Gods wrath, we see there the cup went round,
every nation drank of it, some more, some less. But if men do not do it,
yet certainly God will recompense us with good if we do it, with ill if we
omit it. For though he seem angry with his Churches for a time, as David was
with Absalom; yet as Ioab never did David so acceptable a turn in all his
life, as when he sought to bring home Absalom his banished son, though he
were angry with him, (because his inward affection was toward him all the
while) so we cannot do God a more acceptable turn, than to help his
Churches, though for the present they seem to be under the cloud of his
anger. And doubtless the Lord would take it exceeding ill, if we should
neglect our duty to them, (as I hope we do not, and shall not,) as you see,
Iud. 5. 23. We see there how the Lord is affected in such a case as this; Curse
ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord; yea curse the inhabitants of Meroz
bitterly, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against
the mighty. Mark, he does not say, because they did them any wrong, but
because they came not out, but sat still; and you know the rule, that he that
keeps not off an injury when he may, he does it.

Again, mark the ground why they came not out, because it was to help the
Lord against the mighty. When the enemies were mighty, they had respect to
their own safety, and sat still. and that phrase is to be observed chiefly,
they came not to help the Lord; it was not to help the Lord, but to help the
Churches at that time, and yet the Lord takes it as done to himself.

But now on the other side, as the Lord would take it ill, if we do it not,
so certainly if we do it, he will take it exceeding well at our hands. This
work has meat in the mouth of it, it brings a sure reward. Even as the Arc
when it was harbored by. Obed-Edom, and others, it brought a blessing to them;
so certainly the Church brings a blessing to those that defend it; whereas on
the other side, when the Arc was violate, and ill used by the Philistines, and
the men of Bethshemesh, you know how many thousands were slain for it. Whence
I gather, If God would do so much for that, which had but a typical holiness,
that was but a dead Temple, where he dwelt but for a time, what will he do if
his living Temple be destroyed? For the people of God are his living Temple,
Ier. 2. 3. it is said, Israel is a hallowed thing to the Lord, my first fruits;
and therefore, he that devours it, shall offend, and evil shall come to him,
says the Lord. And therefore in helping the Church of God from being devoured
by strangers, we helpea hallowed people, for we see the Lord reckoned Israel
so, though they were subject to many failings. Let this therefore stir us up
to do it with all diligence. We may fall out and in at home, and the
vicessitude of fair weather and foul within our own hemisphere may pass
away, and blow over (as I hope it will, and I pray God it may) yet in the mean
time, if any of the Churches shall be swallowed up, you know that is a thing
that cannot be recalled: Therefore let us resolve to do our best, and to do
it in time. And this I will be bold to say for our encouragement, they are the
Churches of God, and there is a God in heaven that tendreth them, and he is a
God that delights to be seen in the mounts, even when things are past hope;
and though their enemies be exceeding great and mighty, yet when they go
about to oppose the Church, they are as a heap of straw, that goes about to
oppress a cole of fire, that will consume them; or as one that devoures a cup
of poison, that will prove his death; or as one that goes about to overthrow a
great stone, that falls back again, and bruiseth him to powder; (they are all
the Scriptures expressions, as you shall find Zach. 12.) So I say, the Lord
will deal with the enemies of his Churehes, and will preserve them; therefore
let this hope encourage us to do it the rather. For your Majesty, we are
persuaded as your profession is, so your desires and intentions are most real
and firm: and when we say we are so persuaded, as Paul speaks in another
case, we speak the truth and lie not, (for pulpets are not for flattery;) but
we speak as from God, in the sight of God; and a message from God may comfort,
and encourage, and confirm you in it. For us that are subjects, let us be
exhorted to do our parts, to contend and wrestle with God by prayer, and not
to let him rest, till he have given rest to his Churches; and not only so,
but that we do our parts, that which is within our compass; especially as
any have greater power and opportunity of doing good, let them consider that
excellent speech of Mordecay to Hester, Hest. 4. 24. If then hold thy tongue at
this time, deliverance shall appear to the jews from another place, but thou
and thy house shall perish. The meaning is this, then there was an opportunity
of doing good to the Church, (as you know then in what extremity the Jews
were) therefore, says he, if thou do not do it, thou and thy house shall
perish. For if any be an impediment, nay if any do not do their best, I
pronounce this in the Name of the most true God, that shall make it good sooner
or later, they and their houses shall perish, and be as the straw that we spoke
of, that oppresses the coal of fire. But on the other side, if they seek to
deliver the Churches from his and their enemies, there is this great advantage
in it, it will move God to deliver them from their enemies again, or make
their enemies to be at peace with them; as Solomon says, When a man's ways
please the Lord, he will make his enemies at peace with him.

Thirdly and lastly, let us be exhorted to live this life of grace, that is, to
do the duties of obedience, Use. 3.
wherewith this life is nourished and maintained: for so the Lord says, He
that keeps my Commandments shall live in them; even as the flame lives in the
oil, or as the creature lives by its food: so a man lives by keeping the
Commandments of God, that is, this spiritual life, this life of grace, it is
maintained by doing the Commandments: whereas on the other side, every motion
out of the ways of Gods Commandments, and into sin, is like the motion of
the fish out of the water, every motion is a motion to death. And O that we
could think of sin, of every sin, as a motion to death, and of every good
action as a putting on toward life; that we could think this life of grace,
to be far more excellent than the life of nature, or the life of sinful
lusts, and pleasures, and delights! for so it is. Surely that life which God
and Angels live, must needs be the most excellent, and the fullest of joy; and
this life they live. To encourage us to it, let us but consider, how God
interlaceth this life of grace with the life of joy, and of peace and outward
prosperity; as you see in diverse examples. Gideon, as long as he did the
actions of this life, you know how he prospered, but when he set up a golden
Ephod, after which the people went awhoring, it was the destruction of him and
his house. Solomon, how glorious was his rising! as a bright morning without
clouds, and so he continued to the evening of his life; but then when he
began to suffer rebellions in his Kingdom against God in matters of Religon,
(as it is said he set up Ashtaroth, the abomination of the Zydonians, and
Milcom, the abomination of the Antorites, etc.) then God stirred up rebellions
against him, then it is said that Hadad, and Rhesin, and Jeroboam his own
servant, lift up his hand against him; for, says the Text, he stirred them up
for that cause: So that as long as Solomon did the actions of this life, God
prospered him continually in a high degree; and when he fell from it, he fell
from that peace which he had. so God interlaceth this life of grace, with the
life of joy, and peace, and outward prosperity. The like you see in his some
Rehobeam for three years, when he sought the Lord, says the Text, and did
the actions of this life, 2 Chronicles. 11. so long he prospered, things went well
with him, and in Jerusalem; but after three years he forsook the Lord, and
suffered the people to make them high places, then it is said in the Text, in
the fifth year of his Reign (God gave him two years space) he poured out his
wrath upon him and upon Jerusalem, by the hands of Shishack, the King of Egypt.
Where it is to be observed, that this evil fell upon him, not because
Shishack was angry, but because the Lord was angry with him; for it is not
said, that it was Shishacks wrath, but the Lords wrath; he was but the vial,
but the instrument, through which Gods wrath was poured upon him: But an
example you shall find of this most clear in Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 6. it is
said, that Vzziah sought the Lord all the days of Zechariah the Prophet, and
as long as he sought the Lord, he prospered; so long as he did the actions of
this life, the life of joy, and prosperity, and peace ran along with it; but
after verse 10. when the Lord had helped him that he grew mighty, then says
the text, his heart was lift up to his destruction. So that even as you see
blazing comets, though they be but comets, yet as long as they keep aloft,
they shine bright, but when they begin to decline from their pitch, and fall to
the earth, they vanish; so when men for sake the Lord and mind earthly things,
then they lose their light, and are dissipated and come to destruction; whereas
you see on the other side, all holy and good Kings, that lived this life of
grace constantly, they shined in the dark world, as stars in a dark night,
neither losing their light, nor falling from their place. And this you shall
find in all the stories of the Kings of Israel and Judah, that either their
suffering of Idolatry and superstition at home, or their resting upon Ashar
and Egypt abroad, was the cause of all their misery: for when they were in
distress, they sought to those nations that proved as broaken reeds, that did
not only deceive them, but did run into their hands. On the other side you
shall observe, that those that lived this life of grace perfectly, whose hearts
were perfect with God, that emptied out all the old leaven of Idolatry and
superstition at home, and in all their distresses and wants trusted upon God;
you shall find, I say, proportionably as they did this, more or less, so they
prospered. As you see in Asa, (it is the Prophets own speech to him, that was
sent to him from the Lord, 2. Chr. 16.) says he, Asa, when there came a
mighty army against thee of Lubyms and Ethiopians, that were (as it is in the
Chapter before) as the sands on the sea for multitude, yet because thou
restedst on the Lord, he gave thee the victory over them; afterward a small army
escaped his hands. And why? Because he rested on the King of Aram. So likewise
Iehosaphat, we see when he came back from helping Achab, at the battle of
Ramoth-Gilead, the Prophet Iehu meets him, 2. Chr 9. 19. 2. and says thus to
him, Oh Iehosaphat, will thou help the wicked? will thou love those that hate
the Lord? wrath is gone out against thee; and so in the next Chap. ver. 2. it
is said, that a great army came from beyond the sea, and Iehosaphat was sore
afraid. Likewise when he joined with Achaziah to make ships to go to Tarshish,
the Prophet Eliezar goes to him, and tells him, that God had broken the ships at
Ezion-Geber because he had joined with Achaziah the son of Achab, 2. Chron. 20.
35, 36. I might give you many examples more: Jacob, though the thing were good
which he did (as you know he might seek the blessing lawfully, for it was
promised to him) yet because he used evil means, Rebekah and he, and by a
lie did deceive Isaac, you know what it cost him, he was banished from his
fathers house many years; and you know how much sorrow Rebekah had for it,
even for failing in the manner. So David, look what intermission there was in
doing the actions of this life, this spiritual life, you see likewise his
troubles were.

Therefore let us be exhorted to live this life of grace, seeing we have so
great incouragment. I say, if you observe the Scriptures from the 2. Chron. 11.
to the end of that book, (which is exceeding well worth your reading, where not
only the story of the Kings is set down, but the cause of all the accidents
that did be fall them) you shall see all along, as they lived this life of
grace, as they did the actions of this life, that is, as they kept their hearts
perfect with God, so their outward joy and prosperity was accordingly; and the
interruptions, and intermissions they found in this, was according to their
intermission in that. Therefore let us be exhorted to live this life: For
certainly every life has an excellency and a sweetness in it more than any
mere being, and as any life exceedes other, so it has it more; as the life of
a man exceedes the life of a beast, and the life of grace exceedes the life of
a man, and therefore it is more capacious of greater joy, and of greater
grief: On the other side, as you know the joy of the Saints is unspeakable and
glorious, and passes all understanding, so the despair and horror of
conscience against it, exceedes as much. And let us mark this, that as he
that lives the life of a beast destroys himself as a man, so he that lives
the life of a man, that is, the life of reason only, the life of humane
wisdom and policy, destroys himself as a christian. Therefore let us be
exhorted to live this life of grace, which is best for our selves; yea let us
abound in the actions of this life, let us live it as much as may be; for one
man may live more in a day than another does in a year: for life is in action;
so much as we do, as far as we exercise this spiritual life, so much we live;
and look what time we spend vainly, and idly, so much of our life death
possesses, as it is said of the woman that lives in pleasures, 1. Tim. 5. 6.
She is dead while she lives.

Now the God of life work this life of grace in those in whom it is yet
wanting, and increase and enlarge this life in all those in whom it is already.

A Sensible Demonstration Of the DEITY.
ISA. 64. 4. For since the beginning of the world, men have not heard nor
perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen another God, besides thee,
which does so to him that waits for him.
THis particle For, which you have for the first word, has such a reference to
those before, that we must take in likewise the third verse.

When thou did terrible things, which we looked not for, thou came down,
the mountains flowed down at thy presence: For since the beginning etc. We
know in the new Translat. the words are read somewhat otherwise; but if you
look into the margin of your books, you shall find the same reading we now
use, and that I take to be agreeable with the original, and nearer the scope
of the Prophet in that place.

The words, at the first reading, seem to be somewhat obscure, but in brief
the plain meaning is this; When the people of Israel were oppressed with
enemies, more potent and mightier than themselves, the Prophet, in his own
name, and in the name of the people, makes this prayer unto the Lord; O Lord,
we beseech thee, break the heavens and come down, that the mountains may flow
down at thy presence.

And whereas it might be said, Our enemies are mighty, and as great as
mountains; Yet, O Lord, the mountains melt at thy presence: Or even as the
water boyleth when the fire burns under it; so do the nations tremble at thy
presence. And this prayer is enforced with this reason; O Lord, heretofore thou
have done terrible things, against those that provoked thee: again, thou have
done great things for those that wait for thee; therefore, we beseech thee, as
thou have done heretofore, so now break the heavens and come down etc.

And if it be objected, It may be there were some other causes of all these
evils, that befall us: the Prophet answers no; that it was not in the power
of the creature, but the coming down of the Lord, at whose presence the
mountains melted, that is, as a heap of wax, or lead, sinketh and falls
down when fire is put to it, so the mightiest nations melt away, when thou
come to do any work for us.

And if it be again objected, But there is all the question, whether there be
such a God or no, by whose providence these things are brought to pass: To
this the Prophet answers in the fourth verse, For since the beginning of the
world, men have not heard, nor perceived by the care; neither has the eye
seen, another God, besides thee, which does such things for him that waits
for him. As if he should say, Indeed there is the testimony of the Scriptures,
there is the witness of the Prophets, and evidence of miracles, that all things
are done by the providence of God, but yet (says he) I will leave all these
things, and appeal to the works of Nature, even to the things that the eye
has seen, and the ear has heard; for from them it is manifest that there is
a God, and that he it is who has done these terrible things which we looked
not for.

But not to stand long in the explication of the words, you shall find these
three points lying evidently before you.

First, That even from the things that the eye sees, and the ear hears, it
is manifest that God is, and that it is he that does these terrible things that
we looked not for.

Secondly, That this God is one, and that there is no God besides; the Idols
and the dunghill gods of the Gentiles are no gods.

Lastly, As he does terrible things to those that provoke him, so likewise
great and wonderful things for those who wait for him.

These are the three points which arise from these words; and of these in
order: And first for the first, That

It is manifest from the things that the eye seeeth, and the ear hears, from
day to day, that God is, and that it is by his providence that all things are
done in the world.

Now we must know, that this point, That God is, and that by his providence
all things come to pass; I say, this is made plain to us two ways: First, by
Faith, out of the books of the Scripture. Secondly, by Reason, out of the
books of the creatures.

Out of the books of the Scriptures; and that you shall see, Heb. 11. 3. By
Faith we believe that the worlds were made by God; and in the sixth verse, He
who comes to God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of
those that seek him. Here is mention made of the first way of knowing that God
is.

The second way you shall have set down in Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of
him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made: that is, though the eternal power and
Godhead be in themselves invisible, yet by the things that are seen and heard,
they may be made known and manifested to us: so likewise, Act. 17. 27, 28. If
so be we might grope after him, and find him; for in him we live, and move,
and have our being: as if he should say, The very things we hear, and see,
and taste, and handle with our hands, do all demonstrate that God is; which is
the very same the Prophet says here, Since the beginning of the world they
have not heard, nor understood with their ear, nor seen with their eye,
another God besides thee, which does so for him that waits for him. For we
must know, that the things revealed unto us, are of two sorts.

Such as have no impression upon the creature, such are the mysteries of the
Trinity, and 1
of the Gospel; these are only revealed.

Others there are, which have certain characters of them set upon the
creatures, so that 2
you may discern them; and amongst the rest this is one of the maine, that God
is, and that by his providence all things are disposed, in heaven and earth.

And although it may be though that there are none that doubt of this, yet
these proofs are useful, partly because they serve to answer those secret
objections of Atheism, which we are all subject to; and partly because they
strengthen that Principle in us, that God is: which is very necessary to be
confirmed, seeing it is the maine and principal foundation of all Christian
religion, and can never sufficiently enough be rammed down, as being that
that must bear all the weight of the building; therefore let no man think,
that those proofs that we shall use for the manifestation of this truth, are a
thing altogether needless; for certainly wheresoever the Scripture has a
mouth to speak, there it is useful for us to have an ear to hear.

First, therefore if we do but in general behold the universe, and look upon
the building of heaven and earth, we may easily discern therein, the eternal
power and godhead of the maker of it.

Suppose a man bred and brought up in some hollow cave of the earth, having a
house there built, and things necessary provided for him, and let him
afterward, (when he comes to a full use of understanding, and not before) be
brought and set upon the face of the earth, and there let him see the glorious
beauty of the Sun, and feel the heat of it, the force of the winds, and see
the swiftness of the clouds, the ebbing and flowing of the seas, the
apparelling of the earth; let him see the course of the heavens, and the
fearful darkness that follows upon the setting of the Sun; and after
that the Moon and stars lighted up for the use of men and beasts; would he
not wonder at all that, which we by reason of long assiduitie make nothing of?
It Is a true rule, Sapientis est rerum manifestarum causas quaerere; a wise man
enquireth after causes of manifest things, which another man passes over, and
asks not the ground and reason of.

And in this inquisition, when he finds that man is best of the creatures,
and yet was not able to raise such a roof as the heavens, nor such a floor as
the earth, he must needs conclude, that some one better and more able than
man, was the maker of all these things, which man could not make of himself.

And if it be objected, But this workman is no where to be seen, though
these things are Object.
to be seen.

I answer, that as it is, when you see a magnificent Answer
palace, the builder of that many times is not to be seen, yet we will say it
could not be done but by some wise Architect, whose wisdom and ability was
answerable to the work; or when we see a fair river run, though we see not
the spring from whence it issues, yet we conclude, that there is a wellhead
somewhere, that produces these streams; so when we shall see the succession
of creatures passing along by their generations, a wise man will say, Surely
there is a principle, a first cause, a wellhead, whence they do flow, though
he see it not.

But this is but in general, if we should bring you to the particular
observation of the creatures, it will be more evident, even by the things that
the eye sees, and the ear hears, that there is a God, by whose providence
all things are disposed; and we will instance in these particulars.

First, we may observe by that consent, which 1
arises from so many differences, and contrarieties amongst the creatures; if
you look into the fabric of the world, you shall behold one thing contrary
to another, one thing fighting against another, fire destroying water, dryness
destroying moisture, and moisture dryness, etc. yet withal you shall see
these brought to a comely agreement, coming together to build up and maintain
the whole Universe; how could this be done but by somewise Commander?

If you should see upon an Instrument twenty dissonant strings, and they all
brought into one harmony, we would say that some skillful Musician had the
tuning of it; and when we look into the world, and see so many contrary
things, and all those brought to so sweet a harmony as they are, must we not
needs acknowledge, that there is some wise Agent, that intends one and
remitteth another, and so makes an useful mixture of all? And this is the
first thing we are to observe; for how could so many contrarieties meet in
one, except they were guide ed by one which is above them all?

The next thing amongst the things which the eye has seen, and the ear has
heard, by 2
which this is manifested, is the fitting and composing of one thing to another.

If we should come into the shop of a Ioiner, or some curious Smith, and see
there all things fitted one to another; the sheath to the knife, the scabbard
to the sword, we would say this was not done by accident, but by art: when we
come into the shop of Nature, and see there all the works of Nature, thus
squared and fitted one to another, shall we not also acknowledge that there is
a high and wise Agent, that has done all this?

As for example: had God made the eye, and not color for a fit object of the
eye, to what end had the eye been made? if he had made the eye and colors,
and no light to discover the colors, the two first had been to no purpose;
and if he had made these three, and not another transparent body, as the air
is, through which the colors might be transmitted to the eye, the three former
had been to no purpose; but out of them all thus fitted the one to the other,
there resulteth an useful and perfect work: the like we may say of the rest.
So that the very things that the eye sees, and the ear hears, makes it
manifest, that there is such a God as made all these things. If you look into
the fabric of the world, and behold all other particulars, you shall see the
like.

The plants which thrust their mouths into the earth, draw sufficient
nourishment from the place where they are set; therefore as they need no
motion, so they have no motion given them, only a natural power to spread
their roots in the earth, for the farther strengthening of the bodies.

But for the beasts, which have no nourishment in the places where they are
bred, as they need motion, so they have motion given them; and as the spaces
are different through which they move, so are their motions different, some
creep, some go, some fly; and as their meat is different, so they have
different instruments to receive it, some have teeth and some have beaks, some
have gooms only; and not so only, but they have different appetites and
different tastes and smells, according to their several constitutions: so that
you see all is fitted one to another, The creatures, the motion, the meat, the
appetite, the instruments of taking it; whereas were there any disproportion or
disagreement in those, the whole work should be in vain.

If you take a Watch into your hand, and see there the wheels fitted one unto
another, you will acknowledge that this is not done without Art: when you see
the same done in the body of a man, where there are so many hundred bones
fitted one to another, so many arteries and sinews; shall we not acknowledge
a great providence, which has done all this? This is the second thing to be
observed.

The third observation is taken from those effects that proceed from bruit and
unreasonable creatures, the Storke, the Swallow, and the Elephant, whose
actions for the most part exceed their knowledge, and are beyond their
strength; As for example: they aim at an end they know not, they go by a rule
they understand not, they use the means that tend to such an end, and yet are
ignorant of it; all which argues that they are guided by one, who both knows
the journies end to which they aim, and the way that leads to it. Even as
when a man has passed through a way full of many turnings, and at length comes
to the right end, he will confess that some one has ruled and guided him
(through so many turnings) that knew the way: even so when we shall see these
creatures do things, and that constantly, and yet know not what they do, it
is an argument that they are led and guided by one that works all their works
in them and for them. Whence the saying of the Schoolmen, Opus Naturae etc.
the work of Nature is not the work of mere and bare Nature, but of the
Author of Nature: and therefore as these actions are above their knowledge, so
they are also above their ability; which you shall see in the art of the
Spider, curiously spinning his web, and the providence of the Ant, providing in
the Summer for Winter; in the wisdom of the Conies, that being a people not
strong, yet they make their houses in the rocks. Now it is a sure rule, that
wheresoever effects are produced above the reach and ability of the cause,
they always import some higher Cause, whence they proceed; and therefore when we
see such actions of wisdom and providence, done by the creature which have
neither wisdom nor providence in them, they must needs proceed from some
higher Cause that guides them: even as you see in a fair writing, that is
written by a new beginner, you will say surely it is the writing of him that
guided his hand, rather than his own. If you should see a hundred arrows shot
out of a thicket, and all these should hit the mark, though you see him not
that shot them, you must needs say that they were shot by some skillful
Archer: even so when you see the creatures that knew not the end they aim at,
nor the means that conduced to that end; yet using direct and pertinent means
to come to it, it is a most direct argument that there is an almighty Power
that guides them to all the things that they do: and this is the third
observation.

A fourth thing, by which the invisible things, that is, the eternal Power and
Godhead is made 4
manifest to us by the things that the eye sees and the ear hears; it is
the provident provision that is made for all the creatures. If you should come
into a well ordered Commonwealth, or family, and should see all their things
done in order, meat provided for all the family in due order and season, we
would not doubt but that there is a governor, that casts these things into
this order.

And shall we not acknowledge this same when we see it done in the great
house of the world where so many millions of men and beasts are daily fed, and
clothed, and ordered? Take but a small family, if there be but a little
improvidence, how soon does the whole family feel the want of it? and how do
we think that the great family of the world could be kept, without a
special providence to order it? If there were but a town, or a village to be
planted, how many things were necessary to maintain it? I will name but one,
Psalm. 104. 10. that is, the providence of God in bringing the waters and the
springs to many several towns. If we should see the same done in a great
house, water brought by pipes into every room that needs it, we would
acknowledge it to be the providence of him that ordered it so; and shall we
not acknowledge the same, when we see God bringing in water into so many
particular places in a country? And as in feeding, so in clothing so many
creatures; if men should cloth them, how would they begin to do it? But as
God has commanded the earth to bring forth grass, so he has commanded the
skins of beasts to bring forth hairs, and feathers, and wool, to be fit
clothing for them. And as it is in clothing, so his providence is also in
defending and in fortifying them against the injuries of one another. Some have
hoofes, and horns, and tuskes to defend them; those that have not, these have
legs to run away; those that want that, have holes and dens to hide
themselves in, and (which is to be observed) the weaker creatures go in herds
together, the stronger go alone; for if they should go in multitudes, no man
nor beast could stand before them: this you shall find set down, Job 37.
Psalm. 104. Now if the Queen of Sheba when she came to Salomons Court, and saw
the meat of his table, the sitting of his servants, and their apparel, 1.
King. 10. was astonished; I say, if she were so then, when she saw the wisdom
and provision in the house of Solomon, how much more when we look into this
great house of the world, where there are so many uprising and down-lying, that
must have bread and meat from day to day? how much more, I say, should we
admire, and acknowledge this great providence of God, which opens his hand
and gives them their meat in due season? This is the fourth observation.

The fifth is taken from the combination and connection which is among the
creatures, that dependence they have one upon another; men cannot live without
beasts to feed them, the beasts cannot live without grass to nourish them,
that cannot be maintained without the influence of the heavens to nourish it;
which subordination you shall see set down, Hos. 2. 21. I will hear the
heavens, and the heavens shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the
corn. Whence we may reason thus: Either this was done by accident, or by
providence; not by accident, for so you may as well say, that a multitude of
letters cast together by chance, can make a History or Poem, as that this
order, this connection, and dependence of the creatures, should come to pass by
accident* and if it be not by accident, then it is by providence; for this can
no more be done without providence, than in a History or Poem, there can be a
dependence of one word or sentence upon another, without the art of wit and
reason in him that composed it.

The last observation, is from the wisdom of the Creator; which is set and
stamped upon all his works, even as the skill of an Artist is upon all the
work he makes. When we see the statue of a man made, we acknowledge that it
was done by the skill of him that made it; and shall not we acknowledge it in
the maker of man himself? When we see a glass eye, an ivory tooth, and a
wooden leg, we say it is done by a skillful Artist; and shall we nor
observe a special providence and wisdom, in the making of the members
themselves? for the things are better that are done by nature, than those that
are done by art; for art does but imitate nature, and that which is imitated,
is better than that which does imitate: and shall we attribute skill and
wisdom to the works of Art, and not to the works of Nature, which do far
excel them? When we see a Dial describing the hours of the day, we
acknowledge it to be done by the skill of man; when we see the same done in
the heavens, ordering the times and seasons, shall we not acknowledge a
wisdom in him that makes and guides the heavens? It is reported that
Archimedes made a Sphere, wherein the revolution of the heavens, the course of
the Sun, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, is described and kept in the
order that themselves do move in, which when a man sees he is ready to say,
this was not done by accident, but by the skill of some excellent Artist; and
if so, then certainly the thing it self which that Sphere does but imitate,
could not be done but by the wondrous power and wisdom of him that does it.
I will proceed no further in this, but come to make some application.

First therefore, seeing beside the Testimony of the Scripture there are so
many proofs even from the things that the eye sees, and that the ear hear,
that God is, by whose Providence all things come to pass, it should strengthen
our Faith in that first and main Principle, that God is. For though an object
may be seen by a small light, yet when more candles are brought in, and when
there is a greater light, we see the same object more clear and distinctly:
so though we believe by Faith that God is; yet the addition of more Arguments
should strengthen us in this belief, and confirm this conclusion, and add
more to our assent to it: For (my Beloved) though it be not observed, yet it
is certain, that all that unevenness, all those exorbitances which are found
in the lives of men, do proceed from the weakness of this spring, that these
first Principles are not firmly and thoroughly believed. Men will not neglect
Religion altogether, neither will they make their hearts perfect with God in
all things; and whence comes it but from this, that this first Principle is in
part believed, in part not believed? that is, they say in their hearts, it may
be thereis such an Almighty God, that made heaven and earth, and it may be
not: and therefore they will have some care in the duties of Religion, but a
full care they have not; whereas if they did believe it fully, they would serve
him with a full and perfect heart.

But is this all the use that is to be made of it? is this all the Prophet
drives to in this place? No, his very scope is to show us, that if there be
such a God, then it is he that does the terrible things that are done to us,
they come not to pass by accident; therefore we so propound the point, that
by the things that the eye sees, and the ear hears, it appears that there
is such a God that does terrible things which we look not for. If it be not
by chance and by accident, nor the wisdom and endeavors of men, but the Lord,
which does both terrible and merciful things, both the good and the evil
which befall us, then let us live by faith and not by sense, that is, fear
him, and meet him in the way, while its yet time, lest we fall into the error
of the Israelites here, to have terrible things done to us before we looked for
them. For though we believe there is such a God, yet if we do otherwise, we
forget the Lord, and we live without God in the world.

Every man, when the evil is upon him, startles at it: as a beast when he
falls and sinkes into a ditch or quagmire, he struggles, and does his best to
get out; so men are taught by nature and sense, to expedite themselves out of
an evil when they are in it, but the greatest point of faith and wisdom, is
to foresee and forecast evil to come, and to prevent it. Saul when he was in a
strait, he could seek to the Lord; but then he would not answer him, neither
by Prophet, nor by Vrim nor Thummim. Ioab when he was in extremity, and had
no other refuge, he could fly to the horns of the Altar; as men use to fly to
prayer in sickness, in danger, and extremity; but then it was too late. Esau
when the blessing was past help and recoverie, he could seek it with tears:
But why did they do it no sooner while it was yet time? Certainly it proceeds
from a secret Atheism and Unbelief, to which we are too subject, which makes
us not to be moved with any forewarnings, till we feel the evil it self upon
us: And therefore it is said here, Terrible things are done to us that we
looked not for.

Death is a terrible thing, yet because its apprehended as a thing afar off,
who considers the shortness of his life, while its time to make sure his
calling and election, that his soul may not depend upon uncertainties? Hell is
a terrible thing, to consider that the Soul is immortal, and that there is
another place to live in for ever; and yet who considers this in time, and
takes it to heart? Outward Calamities that befall a Church, or a State, or a
particular Person, are terrible; but who considers them in time to prevent
them? This is, and ever has been the nature of man in all times; we think
we will do it modo and modo, but still we are put off: therefore let us not,
as those in Amos, Put the evil day far from us, and draw near to the seat
of iniquity, (for those two commonly go together) lest it befall us that
Solomon speaks of, As the Ox to the slaughter, and the Bird to the snare, so
we be led to destruction, and consider it not, till a dart strike through our
liver: but let us do somewhat in time, and not defer and put off; for the
very delay brings mischief. When the blow comes (as I say) every man fears,
but before we care not; but we do as those, who because the hand of the Dyal
proceeds insensibly, consider not how the hour passes, till the stroke of the
Bell gives notice.

It is a wise and true saying, Extremum stillicidium clepsydram non exhaurit,
and, ultimus ictus quercum non caedit; It is not the last sand that does
exhaust the houre-glasse, nor is it the last stroke that does overthrow the
oak; that is, it is not the next immediate cause that brings evil upon us, as
men commonly think, but it is the precedent acts, neglects and decays, that
were long before that blow came upon us. And who knows whether we be not now
upon the very Tropicks and turnings of Times? and yet as its said of old age,
there is no man that is so old that thinks he may not live a year longer; so
we are never brought to so low an ebb, but we are apt to think we shall hold
out yet a year, and a year longer. So that as the Lapwing falls before the
Traveller, and draws him a little and a little further, till at length he
be quite drawn away from her nest; so we are quite drawn off from doing the
things which might prevent those evils that are to come: and so terrible things
are done to us which we looked not for.

The ground of all is, partly because we live by sense, not not by faith,
which we are all subject unto, more or less, by which we think our present
condition shall continue whatsoever it be; if we be in affliction, we think
that shall always continue; and if we be in prosperity, we think as those
in Esaias 56. tomorrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant, that is an
observable place; says the Prophet, there is an evil near unto you, and the
reason is, the Watchmen are blind, they are dumb dogs, they cannot bark
etc. but look to their own way every one; and yet (says he) my people say,
Come bring wine, we will fill our selves with strong drink, to morrow shall be
as to day, and much more abundant: I say, this is natural to us.

Besides, another ground of it is, because we see dangers come, and go, and
pass away, and yet the blows come not upon us; and therefore we are apt to do
as that fool, that because he saw the river sliding away, stands upon the
shore, and hops at length that all will be past, that he may go over dry
shod, and considers not that there is a succession of waters, which will
continue it: so we consider not that God has an army of sorrows, when he has
afflicted us seven times, yet he adds seven times more, and if yet we
continue obstinate, he can do it seven times more; till at length his wrath
swell and grow over the banks, and carry all away before it. That expression
you have in the Prophecy of Nahum.

Partly it is again, because God is not seen, because God is forgotten in the
world: the creatures which should be as a glass to help us to see him more
clearly, they become as thick clouds to hide God from us; we look upon the
wall of the creatures, but we look not upon him that stands behind it, who
changes times, and seasons, as he does the weather: So that our wisest
conjecture of him, is as uncertain as the prognostication is of the rain,
snow and wind; we are ready to compute future things, as we compute days and
years, and forget that God that is the disposer of these, and so grow bold and
careless: But David thought not so, Psalm. 31 My times are in thy hands, O
Lord; As if he should say, They are not in the hands of Saul, nor in the hands
of Doeg, nor in any of mine enemies hands, to do me hurt, nor in the hands of
my greatest friend to do me good, but my times are in thy hands; for so thou
disposest of them as it pleases thee.

And therefore let us be exhorted to reckon it our greatest wisdom, to
foresee the greatest danger to come, while it is yet afar off. Fire may be
given to a train of Gunpowder a great way from the place, to which the blow
is intended: therefore it was a wise observation amongst the Romans, that when
Hannibal was besieging Siguntium, a City confederate of their Allies, which was
far enough from Rome, they thought every blow was given to it, that he was
even then beating upon the walls of the Capitol; therefore they took no less
care to prevent the danger in such a distance, than if it had already seized
upon them: So no doubt when the enemy is assaulting the Churches afar off, he
is even then striking at the root of this Church and Commonwealth.

It is a true rule, when the evil day comes, its time of spending, and not
of gathering, it must be done before; it is too late to fetch the oil when we
should use it, to go and buy when the Bridegroom comes; therefore they are
called foolish Virgins, because folly is improvident, it stands in the valley,
and sees not the evil before it be upon us: wisdom stands upon a hill and
descryes the danger, and the evils that are afar off, before they approach. Its
certain, (give me leave to speak, for we are the watchmen which stand upon
the watchtower, and should see more than those that stand below; and must give
warning, that we may deliver our own souls, left your blood be required at
our hands) I say, its certain that evil is intended against us, and will come
upon us, except something be done to prevent it. For there is a covenant
between God and us, and breach of covenant causes a quarrel; the quarrel of
God shall not go unrevenged: he says to the Israelites, Levit. 26. 25. I will
send a sword upon you, which shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant; As if he
should say, There is a covenant, and you have broke that covenant, and
therefore I have a quarrel, and I will send a sword to avenge my quarrel. Now
the quarrels of God are not rash and passionate as men's are, and therefore he
will not lay them aside without some true and real satisfaction.

If we will not believe his word, yet shall we not believe his actions? has he
not begun? are we infatuate, and see nothing? do we not see the whole body
of those that profess the truth are besieged round about through Christendom?
at this time are not present enemies, not only stirred up, but united together,
and we dis-joyned to resist them? are not our Allies wasted? are not many
branches of the Church cut off already, and more in hazard? In a word, have
not our enterprises been blasted, and withered under our hands for the most
part? have not things been long going down the hill, and are even now hastening
to a period? and do not we say now that such an accident, and such a
miscarriage of such a business, and such men are the causes? But who is the
cause of these causes? is it not he without whose providence a Sparrow falls not
to the ground? are not these crackes to give warning before the fall of the
house? are not these the gray hairs which Hosea speaks of, that are here and
there upon us, and we discern them not? Gray hairs you know are a sign of
old age and approach unto death.

And are not all these things arguments enough that God has begun with us?
will he leave his work in the middle? No certainly, you shall see what
himself says, 1. Sam. 3. 12. When I begin, I Will make an end. Samuel had
threatened fearful judgments against the house of Eli, but because they lived
long in peace, and were not suddenly executed, they were ready to think the
words of the Prophet, were but wind; therefore God tells them, that it was true,
he was patie^t, and long before he begun, but notwithstanding when he began
he would also make an end. wherefore I beseech you for our own sakes, and for
the sake of the Churches, let us well and seriously consider this; doubtless
there is somewhat for which God is offended; and if there be, certainly till
that be taken away, the Lord will not return unto us, and cause us to prosper
in the things we put our hands unto.

When Joshua saw the people fall before their enemies, he wondered at it, and
enquired the cause, and except that had bin removed, though it had been for
many years, yet he should never have had success, nor brought the children of
Israel to the Land of Canaan, though God had promised it; for Gods promises are
as his threatenings, to be understood with a condition. But a most remarkable
example you shall find, 2. Sam. 21. 1. When there fell out a famine in the
days of David, he knew the natural cause was the drought, but he enquired
after the supernatural cause, as wise men should do; as Jacob when he saw
the Angels ascended and descended, he enquired who stood on the top of the
ladder and sent them to and fro. Ezakiel enquires who stands on the top of the
wheel; but fools look only who stands on the next staire or step: whereas
we should enquire as David, what was the cause of the famine; and it was
answered him, it was Saul and his bloody house, because he had broken his oath
with the Gibeonites, which was done many years before: I say, so we should
do in all the calamities, afflictions and extremities that befall either the
Church in general, or any particular person; search what the cause is. I find
the phrase used in 2. Chron. 12. 7. says the Lord there, I will not at this
time pour out my wrath upon Jerusalem by the hands of Shishack: where observe,
that though Shishack was the immediate instrument, yet it was not Shishack his
wrath, Shishack was but the vial through which his wrath was powered out. Where
you may observe this connection, that when any affliction befalls a State or
Church, or a particular person, it is because God is agrie, and he is never
angry but for sin; and till sin be removed, his anger is never laid
aside, time wears it not out, as it does the anger and passions of men. And
therefore it is good for us to compound with the Lord, and to take up this
suite before it come to execution and judgment, and not to do as ill-husbands
and prodigals do, that suffer a suite to run on, and charges to grow from
Term to Term, lest we be enforced to pay, not only the maine debt, but the
arrerages also, that is, the time of that patience and long-suffering of God;
and not in this world only, but in that which is to come. It is apparent that
God is about a great work, yea to make a great change in the world, except we
do as it were hold his hand by seeking and turning unto him, and by removing
the things that provoke him: he does not lay all these stones, and move all
these wheels for nothing, and yet who knows what it is he is about, till it
be brought forth? such a metaphor I find, Prove. 27. 1. Who knows what a day
may bring forth? its a metaphor taken from a womb; there is no man knows what
is in the womb of tomorrow, or what evil tomorrow may bring forth. Saul little
thought that the next day traveled of such a birth as the overthrow of the
armies of Israel, and the death of himself and his sons. Job little thought
that the next day had in the womb thereof the fall of the house, and the
slaying of his children. If you observe the Scripture, you shall find that
there are certain seasons, wherein as the Angel troubled the poole, so God
troubles the Churches; and commonly when God does it to one, he does it to
all. 2. Chr. 15. 5, 6 And at that time there was no peace to him, that did go
out or in, but that troubles were to all the inhabitants; for nation was
destroyed of nation, and city of city; for God troubled them with all
adversity. Where you shall observe, that where God once begins to do it, all
the Churches come in, in the end; and whence was it? not because such an
accident fell out, and such offenses arose between Princes and Princes, and
Nation and Nation, but God had troubled them with all kind of adversity; but
especially Ier. 25. 15. a notable example you shall see, the cup went round,
when it was given to one nation to drink, every one tasted of it, though some
more, some less. So that, I say, there are certain times and seasons wherein
God troubles the Churches, and that very thing that distinguishes between
Nations and Churches, to be saved or to be destroyed, is the very ability to
discern of those seasons; Oh that we were able now, and willing to discern
that season.

I will give you two instances: When destruction was to brought upon Jerusalem,
when they were to be led into captivity, the Lord was above twenty years
about it, many warnings he gave them by his Prophets, he brought Nebuchadnezar
near them, and took him away again; and what is the complaint he takes up
against his people? says he, The Stork and the Cranes know their appointed
times, but my people know not the judgments of the Lord. Those creatures feel
and foresee the winter, and betake themselves to some warm place. There is a
judgment a coming, there are warnings' enough, but my people cannot discern
their season. And so when the last blow was to be given to the Jews by the
hands of the Romans, you shall see how pathetically our Savior expresses it.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if then badst known in this thy day the things
belonging to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. Mark, in this thy
day; there is a time and a season, and (...), time is exceeding swift, and
passes away. There is such a day wherein if Jerusalem had seen it, the
destruction had bin prevented, but now the time is past: It is a thing worthy
observation, that there is a double time, which we shall see observed in the
Scripture: There is a time of preparing, and threatening, and no more but
threatening, and a time of executing the decree; so you shall see it expressed,
Zephan. 1. 12. At that time it shall come to pass, that I will search
Jerusalem with candles, etc. There is a time of whetting his glittering sword,
and fitting the arrow to the bow, before the blow be given there is a time of
patience, trial and long-suffering, before he swears in his wrath, they shall
not enter into his rest; but when the time is come, when the word is once gone
out of his mouth, when the decree is gone forth, then, as Samuel said to Saul,
when he would have the sentence of his rejection to be retracted; No says he,
the strength of Israel is not a man, that he should repent, 2. Sam. 15. 29.
Therefore while the evil is yet in the clouds, before the storm come, while
things are preparing, while the sword is whetting, before the stroke be given,
before the decree be come forth, let us search our selves and meet him, to
preventit. The evils which men intend against us may prove abortive; they may
either die in the womb, or else they may travel with mischief, and bring
forth a lie, that is somewhat contrary to that they intend; sed fat a viam
invenient, but when God intends any evil against any, what power shall be
able to stop him? the destructions of God will find a way which we never
dreamed off, as we see often by experience; Vel puncto temporis maxima reram
momenta vertuntur, even in a point of time the greatest things are turned
upside down. My beloved, we all affect the praise of wisdom; and wherein
does wisdom chiefly consist, we shall see Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that my people
were wise: what to do? to remember their latter end; as if wisdom did
therein consist: So in Proverbs 22. 3. A wise man sees the plague afar off, and
hides himself, but a fool goes an, and is punished; its a Metaphor taken
from beasts, that feel the storm before it comes, and then hide themselves
in their dens; but the fool goes on and is punished; that is, either he is
ignorant and sees it not, or else he is besotted and stupefied, and so careless
to prevent it. So Pro. 14. 16. The wise man fears and departs from evil,
but the fool rages, and is careless, that is, the prudent man he fears the
evil of judgment, the evil of punishment; he fears the judgment to come,
therefore he departs from the vil of sin that brings it; as Joseph foresaw the
famine, and hid both himself and others from it by providing against it: so
Job when his sons were banqueting, he feared, lest they had sinned, and
blasphemed God in their hearts, and therefore he rose early and sacrificed for
them: but the fool rages and is confident; the word in the original is to
pass on whatsoever comes of it; as Balaam when the Angel met him with a drawn
sword to show the danger that he went in, yet he would not be ruled, but he
went on, and you know the issue: and so Ahab when he went to Ramoth-Gilead,
though Micaiah foretold him, yet he would go on, therefore came short home for
his labor: its accounted a point of courage and generosity not to fear, but
you see the wiseman says here, that a wiseman fears and departs from evil.
Indeed there is a double fear, there is a fear that ought not to be, that
causes the thing we fear to come to pass, that is such a fear as sets us
aworke to use evil means to prevent the evil; such was the fear of Saul,
that set him aworke to seek to the Witch, which was the very thing that brought
upon him that he feared; such was the fear of the Israelites, which made them
seek to Egypt and to Ashur for help, which brought upon them the thing which
they feared; and such a fear we should lay aside: but there is a good fear
which causes the thing that we fear, not to come to pass, because it sets us
a work to seek to God; such was the fear of Iehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 20. 3. When
there was a great multitude came against him, he feared, says the Text; and
what did this fear set him on work to do? He sought the Lord, and proclaimed a
fast throughout all Judah. Now this fear was a profitable fear, which caused
the thing he feared, not to come to pass; for by this means he had a
wonderful deliverance: such was the fear of Jacob, when Esau came against him
with 400. men, he was sore afraid, and what did this fear? it set him aworke
to pray, and to wrestle with the Lord Almighty; this caused the thing he feared
not to come to pass: such was the fear of Josias when he heard the book of
the law read, and thereby seeing the danger that was like to come, he feared;
and what did that fear bring to pass? His heart melted (says the text) within
him, and he humbled himself greatly before the Lord, and therefore the thing
he feared did not come to pass in regard of himself; for he had word sent
him by the Lord, that he should not see that evil in his days. So that there
is a good, an useful, and profitable fear, that causes the thing we fear not
to come to pass; and this is the fear that the wiseman speaks of, Pro. 28.
14. Blessed is he that fears always, but he that hardneth his heart shall
fall into evil. I will not add any more: another maine thing to which the
Prophet drives, is, that as the Lord does terrible things to those that
provoke him, to those that will not take warning; so likewise he does wondrous
things for those that wait for him. I am sorry I have not opportunity to add
this to the other; but I see the time is past, therefore here shall be an end.

Exact VValking.
EPHESIANS. 6. 15. Take heed that you walk therefore circumspectly (or exactly)
not as fools, but as wise.
IN the eighth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle lays Coherence.
down this conclusion, You were once darkness, but now you are light in the
Lord, walk therefore as children of the light; this he carries along by some
Arguments, and draws some consectaries from it, among the rest this is one,
Take heed therefore that you walk exactly, not as fools, but as wise. As if
he should say, Now the darkness is gone, now you are set upon a hill, now you
are in the broad light that all men may see you, now look to your selves, now
see that you walk exactly, not as fools, but as wise: so you have in these
words,

First, a command, or an exhortation laid on them, Walk circumspectly, or
exactly. 1 Division.


Secondly, that is backed with a reason, Not as fools, but as wise; as if he
should say, It is your 2
wisdom to do so, it is folly to do otherwise.

Thirdly, there is prefixed before it a means how to do it, Take heed, or
Consider, that is, it 3
is a thing that will not easily be done, it is a thing that will cost you
some labor; a man may do a bungling action without consideration, but if he
will do a thing exactly, he must take heed unto it, Take heed that you walk
exactly, not as fools but as wise.

I will open the words in particular, when I come to handle them.

Before I come to the particular points which these words afford us, something
we may gather from this particle Therefore: Therefore is a relative particle,
it has reference to that which went before, You are children of light,
therefore walk exactly, not as fools but as wise: Therefore; that is, since
you are the children of light, since you are those upon whom the Name of God is
called, since you profess the fear of God, it behooues you to look to your
selves that you walk exactly. In a table upon which a Picture is drawn,
before the Simile.
picture is drawn, the blemishes, and blots, and scratches upon it, are not
observed: but when the picture is drawn, a little blot is observed in it: so
it is with men in this case, a man before he be regenerate, before he is
made a child of light, while he walks in darkness, while Gods Image is not
drawn upon him, the sins that are in him are not Why sins are most taken
notice of in Gods children.
much observed, because there is no great difference between his general
carriage, and some particular failing: but when the Piece is drawn, that is,
when Gods Image is stamped upon him, and renewed in him, then the infirmities,
and sins, and faylings that he falls into, every man is ready to observe
them and mark them: and therefore we should in a special manner look to it,
because our condition is altered, whereas before we were darkness, now we are
light; whereas before we stood in the crowd, as it were among the rest of the
people, now we are set upon the Simile.
stage; every man marks what we do: nay, if we stand still and do nothing,
it is observed; and if we do, and do that which is indecent, that is observed
too: now when every one of our actions are observed, it behoues us to look the
more what we do, to see that we walk exactly. This thing I will not press
because it is common.

Only the use that we should make of it is Use 1.
this, to see what God and men look for from us; when we take upon us the
profession of his fear, his glory is engaged in our carriage, therefore we
should walk exactly, not as fools, but as wise.

Again, as any man has a higher degree of faith (for there be degrees,) as
any stand in a Use 2.
higher place, they must look to it more, as they are in more estimation and
glory, so they must take heed of falling to the scandal of their holy
profession: but I will not stand upon that. Now I come to take the words as
they lie.

Consider therefore, or Take heed that you walk exactly: for the walking
exactly, consideration Consideration necessary to exact walking.
is required you see; now the question will be, what this consideration is? It
is a thing that is little taught, and not well understood, and therefore I will
a little open it unto you, that you may know what this act is: it is a thing
often described in Scripture; I considered my ways, and turned my feet to thy
testimonies. Now consideration (to describe it to you) is nothing Consideration
what.
else, but an act of the practical understanding, whereby it reflects and
stays upon its own intentions, and comparing them with the rule, it proceeds
to lay a command Three things in consideration.
upon the will and affections, to put them in execution. I say it is an act of
the practical 1 The mind dwells on the action.
understanding, whereby it stays and reflects upon its own intentions, etc.
for there are many actions that pass from the mind of a man, that he dwells
not upon, but they pass presently away, these are not reflect acts, they are
not acts of consideration, he dwells not upon them; but when a man dwells upon a
thing, he will not let it presently pass from his hands. First, they are in
the intention, and then he looks back by consideration, when a man will see
what is in his mind, he will look round about as it were, and return upon
his heart, as it is called in the Chronicles, If you return to your hearts; I
say this is necessary, this is one part of consideration, but this is not all,
a man may dwell upon his actions for another end.

Therefore when this is done, in the second place this is to be added, that a
man so dwell upon his actions, as that he compares them with the rule: he sets
them both together, and 2 To compare it with the rule.
therefore in Prou. 4. 26. that which is called consideration in another place,
is there called Pondering; Ponder the ways of thy feet: the meaning Prou. 4.
26.
is, consider the ways of thy feet. Now you know what Pondering is, when you
have Pondering, what.
a thing to weigh, there must be something to weigh it by, which therefore is
the rule thereof; and as in measuring, there is the thing that you measure by:
this is the second thing to be done in consideration, to compare it with the
rule.

But yet this is not all: for there may be a comparing of actions and
intentions, with the rule by which it is squared, when yet it is not
consideration: a Scholar may take a thing into consideration, whether it be
true or false, whether it be a practike or a speculatiue thing, he may compare
it with the rule; but his end is not to practice it, but only to know the
truth of it, and so he lets it lie. And not only Scholars, but it is so with
all men for the most part, they hear us deliver the truth of God, their end is
to see (as it were) to understand it, to know the truth of it, they do no more
but see if the thing be true, and give their assent to it: but in consideration
there is somewhat more.

Therefore I add, that it lays a command upon the will to put it in
execution, or else it 3 To resolve upon the practice of it.
is not properly consideration; but when a man considers of a thing, so as that
he resolves to do it, that he lays an imperative iniunction upon the
inferior faculties, to put that in practice and execution that he resolves on;
so now you see more distinctly and clearly what the Apostle would have us do,
this is the action he would have us do, to Consider; that is, to stay upon
our actions, to compare them with the rule, and not to let them lie there, but
to put them in practice and execution; this is the thing we are here exhorted
unto, to Consider, or Take heed what we do. And it is that which we have
little reason to be backward to (though in truth we are backward to nothing
more, which is the cause of many errors of our life) if we consider.

First, that this consideration is the excellency Motives to consideration.
of all a man's actions, it is that which is proper to man, as he is a man,
there is no 1 It is an excellency proper to man.
beast capable of it: It is a peculiar excellency to man, to be able to
return and to reflect upon his actions. Beasts look forward altogether upon
the present pleasure which is propounded, but to consider an action, whether it
be to be done, or not to be done, it is an excellency peculiar to man.
Therefore as the Mathematicians say of Figures, the Simile.
strait Figure, or the strait Line is the weakest, but the Circle is the
strongest of all other, and the best, because one part returns to another, and
holds up another; so these direct actions of ours, these transient actions that
pass suddenly upon a thing, they are the weakest, in them we are most subject
to err, but these actions wherein we return again upon our selves, as a
circle or round figure, are more perfect and exact: I say it is the excellency
of an action, and this should make us ready to do it, but that is not all,
there is not only a general excellency.

But it is the best for our selves, it perfects us above all other; take all
other actions that 2 It perfects the soul.
go directly forward, they perfect somewhat that is out of a man, but they
perfect not the heart of a man. If it be in teaching others, in it is the
perfection of the Scholar, other actions of wealth, of honor, of learning, or
any thing of this nature, they perfect the thing upon which they are pitched,
but now this action, by which the heart returns upon it self, this reflect
action is that which perfects a man's soul, it makes him a better man, it
builds him up in grace and in truth; when a man looks in, and returns upon
himself, he makes up the breaches of his heart, if there be any thing amiss
there, he rectifies it: therefore it is an action that we should easily assent
unto, and agree to the exhortation of the Apostle. Therefore to conclude this
point, let Use.
us be exhorted, to consider what we do, the failing in this is the cause of
so many errors in our lives, the cause of so many ill spent Inconsideration,
the cause of errors in our lives.
hours, of so many vain speeches, of so many gross sins committed, all for
want of consideration. If the swearer would well consider what that is, when
the Lord says, I will not hold him guiltless that takes my Name in vain,
he would not be so ready to swear as he is. If the adulterer would consider
what God says, Heb. 13. Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge, he would
not so easily continue in that sin: so you may run through other
particulars, therefore this consideration is necessary in things that belong to
salvation. It is not so in other things, in other things the notion passes
soon from the mind to the rest of the saculties, as soon as the light, it is
no sooner kindled but present'y it is executed; but in matters that belong to
godliness, there may be a spark, and it will go out again in the heart, as
green wood puts out the fire; in that Simile.
case there must be pains taken, because of the stubbornness in the
faculties of the mind to obey the light, which is dictated to the conscience:
Therefore we must do in this case, as we do with stubborn servants, they
Simile.
must be bidden do a thing again, they must be forced unto it. If the
vnder-faculties were as ready to obey the mind in spiritual things as in
other things, it were another case. In other things (for the most part) we
shall find that the mind has no sooner resolved on a thing, but the
faculties presently are ready to practice and to execute it; If it be a matter
The vnder-faculties stubborn to spiritual things.
of pleasure, a matter of commodity, a matter of business, if a man resolve
once to do it, he finds no resistance; but if it be a matter tending to a
holy life, he is resolved and fully intended to do it, yet when he comes to
the point, how many impediments does he find in the vnder-faculties? they are
like stubborn servants that have need of pressing upon, and must have such
imperative injunctions upon them as I speak of. Therefore Simile.
this consideration is necessary for us, we see if we be negligent in it, it is
impossible we should lead a holy life, because we go up the hill in that,
there must be pains taken in that; there is no good action but it will cost
this consideration, and the rather we should do it, because (as I say) it is
that which perfects us most of any thing; we study many The best study what.
things, we study books, we study men, we study our selves, that is done by
this act of consideration, and of all studies that is the best, when a man
studies his own heart, when he dwells at home: It was the precept of the wise
Moralist, to exhort men to dwell at Simile.
home, to look inward; for a man to be as a good house-wife in her own
house, to dress the room of his heart, every morning to Simile.
sweep it, and to put things in order which the former day has put out of
order, that he may be fit to entertain the Lord of glory; therefore we ought
to keep our selves right and straight, to keep our selves clean and pure in
soul and body by this continual act of consideration, that we may be fit
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in and to continue in: therefore we should
do this.

First in general, take this general consideration; General considerations.
let a man think what his condition is, what he comes into the world for; let
him sit down and think with himself that he has a soul that is immortal,
that must live in another place for ever, that his life is uncertain, he
knows not when this soul of his shall be put out of possession; now if a man
would take these things into consideration, if he would sit down and consider
his latter end, consider the infallibility of the threatenings, consider the
uncertainty of this life, consider the terror of Gods wrath, because these
things are not taken into consideration; therefore it is that men go on in
courses of sin, this is that which the people failed in, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. says
Moses there, you have seen Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
what the Lord did to Pharaoh and all his servants, you have seen the
temptations and the great works which he wrought, but you have not hearts to
perceive, you have not eyes to see unto this day, you have seen, but you have
not hearts to perceive; that is, you have not hearts to consider it as it is,
as if he should say, this will profit nothing; this which was one of the
strongest arguments that was, (as how could a people have more arguments to
fear God than they had, to see such wonders as they did, but this) profited
them nothing, because they had not hearts to consider; so our Savior, Mark 6.
52. They considered Mark. 6. 52.
not the miracle of the Loanes, for their hearts were hardened: After that
miracle was wrought, when Christ walked upon the Sea, and they thought he had
been a spirit, they were afraid, the reason is given, because they considered
not the miracle of the Loaves; as if he should say, there was enough in that
to have strengthened their faith, that they should not have been so fearful;
but says Christ, the reason you did not profit by that was, because you did
not consider, your hearts were hardened: and therefore 2 Timothy 2. 6. it is Paul's
exhortation, Consider what I say; consider 2 Timothy 2. 6.
what in other places I have named to you, that is, though these be reasons
strong enough, yet consider, Timothy, or else it will never work upon thee,
therefore consider what I say, and because we are not able to do it of our
selves, he prays to God to teach him to consider, and the Lord giwe thee
understanding in all things: and indeed that we may do so, let us beseech God
to open our eyes to enable us to consider; till he set us a work, we cannot
do it to purpose, so that I say, we should learn to do this in general, and
not only so, but to make a daily practice of it, every day consider our ways,
to set some time a part for that purpose: when we come to God in prayer,
consider the business we have to do, consider what has been out of order
the day before, to reflect upon our hearts, and to set things strait before
God, and after this to have an eye upon our actions all the day, that our
tongues, our hands, our feet, or any part be not ready to act any thing before
we have considered and pondered it, before we have good warrant for it.

You will say this is impossible, must a man Quest.
stand considering every act on that he does?

I say, it is not needful that every action Answ.

We need not to consider every particular action in our way.


should be considered; as in a journey, you know it is not needful for a man
to think of every step, but the first intention of the journey will carry him
a great way; so set the Simile.
heart aright, and that intention will carry a man through many actions, though
he stand not to consider every particular; but because our hearts are so ready
to go out of the way, like young horses that are not accustomed to Simile.
the high way, they are ready to turn aside ever and anon, except the hand be
upon the bridle continually; so this consideration must be ever and anon
repeated in the heart to keep it strait, it is apt else to turn a side. This
Too much consideration of outward things.
we must learn to do in things that belong to godliness, in other things
we are apt enough to do it; the young man is apt to consider how he shall
satisfy his flesh, and the desires of it, how he shall obtain his pleasures;
the ancienter men, they consider how they may increase their wealth, how they
may keep correspondency, as it is said of the good house-wife, She considers
a field and gets it, Prou. 31. there is too much of this consideration, Prou.
31.
men consider such outward advantages: the thing that we require row, is to
consider how we may walk circumspectly and holily before God in all things,
this is the thing that we ought to consider, and to neglect this and to intend
other things, is no better than madness: If a man do but consider seriously
what he is, what his condition is, and what he is fit for, he will reckon it
madness to intend other things as he does; we reckon men mad, when they fall a
gathering strawes, Madness what.
and stick their clothes with flowers, when they scrabble upon the walls,
because we think these actions unmeet for a man: So come to a Christian, when
he is occupied in trifles, in pleasures and honors, (for they are no better)
when men do this with all their endeavor, this is as unmeet for a Christian,
this is as much below a Christian, as those other actions, that I named, are
below a man; and it is as truly spiritual madness, as the other is natural
frenzy; consider of this therefore, and come to your selves. I am not too
harsh in calling it madness, the Scripture calls it so, in Luke 15. the
Prodigal is said to come Luke 15.
to himself; for other things he was come to himself before, but for matter
of grace and salvation, therein he was not come to himself; so that a man may
truly say, that the world is full of mad men in this sense, because they come
as much short of that which belongs to a Christian, of that which belongs to a
man, as he stands in relation to God, as he stands in reference to eternity,
as the other actions are to other men, and you shall find they are occupied in
the same manner; look upon the imploiments of men, if we could see what they
are bufie about, what their thoughts and lives are taken up with, in the
morning if we could see them, as God sees them and beholds them, we should
see they do as mad men; as a man that makes a garland to himself, composed of
such vanity as he is most fancied with. Consider therefore what you do, Walk
exactly, not as fools, but as wise. So much for that. The maine point is that
we now come to,

Walk exactly. Consider therefore that you walk exactly, whence we will
deliver this Doctrine (to take the words as they lie,) that

It is required of a Christian that he walk with Doct.
God exactly in all things. Before I come to prosecute this point, I will It is
a Christians duty to walk exactly.
show what this walking is, and what it is to walk exactly.

In a word, by walking nothing else is meant but the tract and course of a man's
life, so that to walk holily is nothing else, but in all the To walk exactly
what.
passages and turnings of a man's conversation to keep himself close to the
rule, so that into what circumstance soever he is cast, still as Simile.
a, Dye to fall right, whether he be alone or in company, whether he be in
sport or in business, whether he be among enemies, or among friends, all is
one, his conversation is still of the same color, he keeps one tenure what
condition soever he is in, in crosses and adversity he is taught to wait, in
prosperity he knows how to abound, to behave him self as a Christian in any
particular action, whether it be gain or loss to him, whether he be in a
pleasant estate, or whomsoever he has reference to, whether it be for his
advantage or disadvantage, all is one, he does not shift, he does not dawbe it
out by seeking inventions, that afterward will fall off as untempered mortar,
his conscience puts it to him, and tells him this is not to be done, and he is
willing to let his conscience speak, he is ready to obey it; when a man thus
behaues himself in the constant course of his life, this is to walk exactly.

But then again there is somewhat in this word Exact, the Greek word (...)
comes of two words, that signify to go to the extremity of a thing; so to
walk exactly is nothing else, but so to keep the Commandments of God, that a
man goes to the utmost of them, to all the rules that he prescribes, not only
to content himself to do the maine duties of them, but you must look to
every particle of them, to be willing to go to the utmost of Preciseness
commended by the Apostle, condemned by the world.
every command; so the scope of the Apostle is, to commend unto us here the
thing that is so disgraced in the world, the which is a matter of much
obloquie, that same exactness or preciseness, for so the word may as well be
translated, and there is no word that fits the Greek better than this.
Consider that you walk precisely, or exactly, or strictly in all things; I say
that is the Apostles scope, to commend this to us, that men discommend so much,
though indeed it be the only excellency of a Christian; for is not that the
Simile.
best glass that shows the smallest spots? and is not that the brightest
light that shows the least moats? and do you not reckon that the finest flesh
that is sensible of the least pricking? so the conscience that is sensible of
the least sin or failing, is the perfection of Christianity which we are to
strive to attain, it is that which we are to reckon the greatest excellency of
all others, so far it should be from disgrace with us. To walk exactly is
required of every one, and this exactness is to go to the utmost; but a
little more particularly to describe it, to walk exactly requires these three
conditions. Three things in exactness.


First look to the whole rule, he that looks 1 Look to the whole rule.
but to a part shall never do a business exactly, but imperfectly and
bunglingly; that is, you must have respect to all the commandments, to all the
precepts that run through the book of God. 2 Go to the utmost of every
command.


Secondly, he must go to the utmost of every one, we see our Savior in Mat.
5. he Matthew. 5.
sets it down, it is not enough for a man not to murder, but he must not be
angry with his brother unadvisedly, there is the extremity of the command, he
must not only take care of the maine, but to keep the least; so he says,
that a man should not only not swear great oaths, or not forswear himself,
but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, says our Savior in the same
Chapter. And so for that command, Thou shall not commit adultery, (I give you
the instances in that Chapter, because Christ gives them upon the same
occasion; says he, he that breaks the least commandment, he that does not
keep every jot of the command, he shall not come to Heaven.) As for that
command of Adultery, though thou keep the maine, if thou lust in thy heart,
that is, if a man admit lascivious thoughts, adulterous lustful thoughts,
though he keep the maine Commandment, the maine duty which is there
commanded, yet he walks not exactly; there is a necessity laid upon him, He
that keeps not every jot of the command, shall not enter into Heaven; so that
you must have respect to the whole rule, and to every particular command.

And lastly, you must do it at all times, Psalm. 106. verse. vlt. Blessed is he
that does justice, 3 Do it at all times.
and loves righteousness at all times; otherwise a man cannot be exact; he
that does it by fits and flashes, that walks exactly one day, and is out
again another, this man is said not to walk exactly, he walks with God by
fits, as he that looks to half the rule, he walls but by halues; if either of
these be, that he walks Exactness required in three respects.
but by halues or by fits, he is not exact: thus much shall be said for the
explication. Now this exactness is required in three respects.

First, in respect of a man's person, that he be clothed with all the graces
of the spirit 1 In regard of the person.
that there be none wanting, there must be a generality in that, and therefore
in 2 Pet. 1. we see the graces are put together, Give all diligence that you
join with virtue faith, with faith 2 Pet. 1.
knowledge, with knowledge temperance, with temperance patience, etc. that is,
as if he should say, a Christian must not be adorned with some graces of the
spirit only, but he must have every one, he must be exact, he must have the
whole clothing, the whole Image of God, for Image of God what.
the Image of God is nothing else but the happy cluster of these graces: now
put the case that any of these be wanting, then you shall see what a defect it
will cause; if a man have faith, if he want virtue, that is, if his faith show
not it self in works, if it be not a working vertuall faith, what will his
faith profit him. If he be zealous and ready to the work, if there be virtue
in him, if he want knowledge to guide, and direct him, and turn him, he must
needs err exceedingly; and therefore he must join to virtue knowledge, if he
have knowledge that he know what to do, if there do not come in the practice
of other graces, if he be intemperate, it will lie as a blot upon him, there
will be great inconcinnity in his carriage, if he have other virtues and want
one; suppose if he be temperate, yet if he be an impatient man, this becomes
not one of those upon whom Gods Name is called; it becomes a Christian to have
his person adorned with every grace, because God requires so much beauty in
him, in Cant. 4. 7. says Christ to his Cant. 4. 7.
Church, Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee; that is, thou
art adorned with all the graces of the spirit, there is not one wanting, for
there is such a generality required, such is the beauty of a man in Christ, the
whole frame of grace is in him: therefore Christ is said to work grace for
grace, the meaning is, for every grace in himself, he has stamped another in
us; as the seal gives print for print, in the wax character for character, and
as the father to Simile.
the son limb for limb, and member for member; so Christ to his Saints, he
works grace for grace, that is, as he himself has the whole frame of grace
in his own heart, as the Image of God is perfect in him: so all that he
changes, all that are borne of him, not of the will of the flesh but of the
will of God, they have the same that he has; not in degree, no child has his
members in the same degree Simile.
as the father has, he has them as a child, the other has them as a
perfect man; so every Christian has them in the degree of a child, and yet he
must be exact in all in respect of his person.

Secondly, this exactness is required in regard of his actions, all the
actions that the 2 In regard of the actions.
holy man has to do are to be exact, therefore it is a rule of the
Schoolmen, an action cannot be good except all be good in it, except all the
circumstances be good, if there be one wanting the action is evil; this is
required Circumstances must be good in a good action.
of necessity to walk exactly, that is, take any action we do, if either the
principle of it be not good, that it comes from carnal fear, or from carnal
love and desire, or else the end is not good, or the circumstances are not
good; to pray, and not to pray fervently; to show mercy, and not with
cheerfulness; to keep the Sabbath, and not with delight; and and so you may
run through what particulars you will, the wanting of any of these
circumstances makes it an evil action; and therefore in regard of his actions
he must be exact.

Thirdly, in regard of others it is necessary that he walk exactly, as in
James 1. This is pure 3 In regard of others.
religion and undefiled to keep a man's self unspotted of the world; now if a
man will be James 1. vlt.
unspotted of the world, he must be exact in all things; if he fail but a
little the world will blot him and blaze his name all over, that no place shall
be empty of it, if there be any spot in him. It is true, the applause of the
world is not to be greedily looked for, but yet in this case every Christian
should be like Absalom, there should be no blemish in him from top to toe, he
should labor to be so blameless in all his conversation, to do as Zachary
and Elizabeth, to walk in all the Commandments without reproof, so that a
Christian in regard of his person, in regard of his actions, in regard of
others, he must walk exactly.

But now in this point that I have delivered Quest.
there is somewhat more than this, it is required I say of every Christian,
that he walk exactly before God in all things, here comes in a question or
objection, when I say it is required of them; the question is now whether it be
of necessity or no, that it be so laid upon every Christian, that they cannot
keep in good terms with God, that they can have no assurance of their own
good estate except they do it? whether it be laid upon them of such necessity
or no, to keep such exactness in their conversation?

To this I answer: this precept, as well as any in the Book of God, is to be
kept Euangelically, Answ.

How this precept of exactness is to be kept.


though we cannot keep it Legally; that is, we must endeavor to the utmost of
our power to do it, to strive with all our might, we must intend, and desire,
and purpose to do it, and we must have endeavors answerable to our purposes;
this necessity lies upon every man to walk exactly, that is, to allow himself
in nothing that is a known sin, there may be many failings out of passion, a
man may be transported out of incogitancy, out of inaduertancy, because many
things pass from him that he is not able to consider of; but let it come to
this case, to be a known sin, if he allow himself in it, this is a breach
of the Evangelical keeping of this Commandment, which requires that a man
walk exactly, and this lies upon every one of necessity, that he do not
admit of any known sin in his conversation, but in that respect to walk
exactly, and that will be manifested by Reasons why Christians should walk
exactly.
these reasons.

First, if there be but one thing in your conversation (pitch where you will)
be it greater Reason 1.

Else there will be a breach betwixt God and us.


or smaller, if it come to be a known sin, if it be revealed, that you know
such a thing is a duty, or such a thing is a sin; now if a man walk not
exactly in that, he makes a breach between God and him: as it is with two
friends, if there come but a small matter Simile.
wherein they differ, that falling between them, if neither of them yield, it
makes an utter breach and separation between them; so let it be a matter of
less moment, take the least sin, or the neglect of the least duty, yet when
I know this thing God requires at my hands, it is a thing that God will have
done; when a man now lies in the contrary and will not do it, certainly God
will not yield, and if he do not, it makes a breach between them, it makes a
separation between God and him: As it is with a Prince, if he command a man
to do any thing, when he proclaims Simile.
it, when there is authority put upon it, when it is made known to him in
particular, the standing out makes him a rebel; so it is in this, the standing
out with God in any part of our conversation, if we be not exact in all, it
puts us into a state of separation from God.

Secondly, except a man walk thus exactly Reason 2.

Else what a man does, is for himself and not for the Lord.


with God in all things, it is evident that what he does, he does it for
himself and not for the Lord, and if he do so it is not accepted of God; I
say what he does, it is for himself and not for the Lord, for if he perform
that obedience which he does for the Lord, and for his Commandment to please
him, what is the reason that he goes not to the utmost? why does he set limits
to himself, for God requires that we should do his will on earth as it is
done in Heaven? his commandment is, that we should go to the utmost of every
command; now when we limit our selves in holiness, when we come to such
thoughts as these, well; I will have as much as will bring me to Heaven, I will
labor for so much exactness of conversation, as will keep me in the state of
grace, as much as will preserve me from hell; I say the ground of all such
conversation is nothing out of a man's self; it is but regard to himself, he
does but only look at his own salvation and no more, which is a thing I
confess that may be looked at, but to look at nothing else, is self-love;
when a man looks at nothing but his own salvation, and how he may escape
hell, that man cannot be right; now when a man sets himself limits, and
circumscribes himself, and says with himself I will go thus far and no
further, when he does not endeavor to come to the utmost, to the highest peg,
it is a sign his heart is not upright, therefore there is a necessity laid
upon every man, that he walk exactly with God in all things.

Thirdly, take any particular in a man's conversation wherein he favors
himself, if he Reason 3. Else it argues a man is not in Christ.
be overcome of that, he is not in Christ, whosoever is in Christ overcomes
the world and the flesh, says the Apostle, Gal. 5. Whosoever Gal. 5.
is in Christ crucifieth the flesh and the affections, and ouercomes the
Devil, as we know the stronger man casts out the strong man; now when any one
particular of these lusts of the flesh, or the temptations of the world, or the
devil, shall come and set upon a man, if he yield to this he is overcome of
it, whereas none of those that are in Christ are overcome of the world, or of
the flesh, or of the devil; that is, if there be any particular Simile.
sin (for they are but soldiers that fight under those Generals and
Captains) if a man once yield to it, if a man give over striving against it, a
man is said properly to be overcome; whereas if a man continue warring To be
overcome what.
with sin, it is another case, but when he gives over resisting, as the
Apostle says, His servants you are, whom you obey: if a man come to obey any
sin, whatsoever he is in the whole course of his conversation, it interrupts
this exactness; when he yields, he is overcome; As we say water and fire, as
long as they Simile.
contend one with another, neither is overcome; but when they yield one to
another, when the fire is turned all to be water, then it is overcome; so in
this case, when there is a contestation between us and sin, if we yield to
it, then sin ouercomes us, and he that is overcome of sin cannot be in
Christ.

Fourthly, if there be any particular sin in a man's conversation wherein he
does allow Reason 4.

Else no means can be profitable.


himself, it hinders the use of all means and the profit of them, that
neither a man is able to pray, or able to hear, or able to do any duty as he
ought: So that as a medicine is applied Simile.
in vain so long as the Arrow head is in the wound, that must be removed first
before it can work any cure; so let there be but one sin, one failing in
this exactness of conversation, and all the means of grace are in vain:
therefore there is a necessity lies upon every man, if he will be a Christian,
if he will reckon himself of the number of those that are the children of
light, that he walk exactly. But not to stand to press this further, to make
some brief use of it, for I desire to come to the other part, Not as fools,
but as wise.

The use we are to make of this, is to set our Use. To labor for this
exactness.
selves about the work, to do the thing, to labor to walk exactly, and here
it is good to bring our selves to particulars. Come to the keeping of the
Sabbath, I would but ask this In keeping the Sabbath.
question, Whether the day be not holy? whether it differ not from other days
that are common days? and if it be not holy, why do you do any thing at
all? and if it be holy, is not a holy day to be kept holy? why do you not
keep it exactly to God? And for Prayer, when you come to call upon the Name In
Prayer.
of God, it is not the slight performance of the duty that God looks for, it
is another thing, he takes your prayers by weight and not by number, therefore
look you do it exactly; so in receiving the Sacrament, and all In receiving
the Sacrament.
duties, I leave it to your selves to consider particulars: and so for the
duties of your Calling, In our particular calling.
to be diligent in them, to serve God and men in them with the fatness and
sweetness of them: and so for sports and recreations, to be exact in them, and
not to use those In Recreations.
that be unlawful, and those that be lawful, not to use them excessiuely,
but to use them with limitations, and to put right ends upon them; and so in
all business and conuersing with men, in all the turnings and passages of a
man's life, look that you walk exactly, that your obedience be general,
otherwise that is a sign the heart is not changed, a man is not right borne
till he come to walk exactly with God, till he be willing to perform every
duty, and willing to shun every sin that he knows, every thing that has
a tincture of sin, if the heart be right there will be an antipathy between
us and whatsoever is called sin; otherwise what is the power of Religion, if
we only do duties that are facile and easy, to which we have no contrary
disposition, it were an easy thing then to be religious, but herein is the
power of Religion, to subdue every affection, to subject it, where there is a
strong stream of a contrary The power of Religion what.
disposition to turn the course of nature, to obey God when a man finds the
greatest difficulties, in the time of temptation and trial to do it, this is
that which is necessary for us, otherwise the truth is, we serve the flesh and
not God, says James, Iam. 2. The same Iam. 2.
God that said thou shall not murder, said also thou shall not commit adultery;
so I say to every man that fails in any particular, and allows himself to
lie in any particular sin that he will have his liberty in, I say, has not
God said, thou shall not do this as well as that, and if thou do one duty
to God out of love and respect to him, or if thou did abstain from any sin
because he forbids thee, does not he forbid thee that as well as this, and he
has commanded thee this duty as well as the other, why do thou not perform
all then? A little leake will sink and drown a Ship as well as a great
breach; one disease will take Simile.
away the life as well as many; so one sin, one failing in this exactness of
conversation is enough to destroy us, it is enough to put us out of a right
condition in Gods sight, therefore learn to walk exactly, beware of bywaies,
which though it may be hidden from the eyes of men, yet God knows it that sees
in secret; for that is a common course: Men do as wandering stars which are
carried about with the rest of the Heavens, and yet they Simile.
creep back by a contrary way, which is their own proper motion; so it is
the custom of men to do as others do for the outside, to come to Church, to
abstain from gross sins, to live ciuilly, to deal justly with men in their
common course, but they have a proper course of their own. Labor to be exact,
take heed, know that God observes you, and know this, that that has been the
practice of the Saints, it is not a thing impossible to be done, we must not
set upon it as upon a thing that Instances of exact walking.
none can reach to, look on Moses, see his manner of walking, when God
commanded him to go with all that he had out of Egypt, he would not leave so
much as a hoof behind him, he would do it exactly; look on Paul, he knew
nothing by himself, that is, he kept a clear conscience in all things, though
he were not thereby justified; look on Samuel and his walking, he calls the
people to him, and says to them, what have I done amiss? whom have I wronged?
Whose ox or whose ass have I taken?

Again, see those that fail in this, and we shall see that it is not a
slight matter; Saul Instances of those that walked not exactly.
walked with God, but because he did not walk exactly, because he offered
sacrifice before he should, you would think it a small matter, but because he
did not destroy, but spared Agag, God rejected him. So Nadab and Abihu, when
they offered sacrifice, you would think it to be no great matter, a
circumstance, and will not common fire serve the turn? but they were consumed
for not walking exactly; look upon the Prophet that did not keep him close to
the word of God, as he returned back he was slain of a Lion; look upon
Balaam, he walked with a fair outside, yet because he was not exact (for God
saw the falsenesse of his heart) God saw the secret by-ends that he had in it,
and for this cause God rejected him, therefore take heed that you walk exactly.

Not as fools, but as wise. It is our wisdom to do so (to speak a It is
wisdom to walk exactly.
word or two of that) to do that which God has appointed a man to do, to do
that which the rule of wisdom has appointed, that must needs be the wisest
way; now it is the rule of wisdom that commands us to walk exactly; and as he
is the best writer that comes nearest his copy, and he the best Carpenter
Simile.
that comes nearest his rule appointed him, so he is the wisest man that comes
nearest the rule of wisdom, which is the book of God, which exhorts us to
walk exactly.

Again, to be guided by God, who is the wisest, is it not the wisest way? it
is Gods appointment that we should walk exactly, examine the properties of
wisdom, and we shall fee what cause there is to reckon it to be wisdom to
walk exactly.

First, the maine property of wisdom is, The properties of wisdom.
when a man looks to the general universal end of his life, and frames all
things according to that, for therein properly wisdom or prudence consists;
when a man looks aright to the utmost and general end of his life, for a 1 To
direct all actions to an universal end.
man either to look to no end, or to be as those that roll up and down at
random, men that have no particular scope to which they direct all their
actions, this is gross folly.

But besides this, if a man have no end, or if it be but a particular end, he
is not said to be a wise man, he may be said to be a wise Pilot, or a wise
Statesman, or a wise Merchant, or a wise Warrior that sets such particular
ends; and so we may go through all, but he can never be said to be a wise man,
except he look Note.
aright to the general scope and the general end of his life; now he that
walks with God perfectly, he only is a wise man, because he only looks at
the general frame and course of his life aright. The cause of all our errors
(as one says) is because we look only upon The cause of errors.
part of our life, we look not to the whole, we have not our eye upon the
general scope and aim of our life, and therefore we walk vnprudently, he
only is a wise man (I say) that frames the whole course of his life aright,
and therefore wisdom has that excellency above all other things, because it
looks to the end; as the end is best, so any error about the end is worst
(says a Divine,) as the end is best, so folly, and imprudence, and error
concerning Error about the end the greatest.
the end is the greatest error: therefore the Scripture calls this wisdom
godliness, and this folly wickedness, the best and worst names that can be;
therefore if this be wisdom for a man to frame the whole course of his life
aright, to look to the general end, to be sure that his scope be good, then
he is the wisest man that walks exactly with God, whatsoever he be in other
things, this makes him a wise man.

Secondly, this is a property of wisdom for a man not only to know, but to put
in execution, 2 To put a man upon practice. Difference between prudence and
other arts.
that is the difference between prudence and other arts; in other arts, he
that knows what is best, is the best Artist, but in matter of prudence, he
that knows what to do, and practices not, is of all other the most foolish;
and therefore action is a chief property of wisdom, there is this requisite
to prudence to invent the work aright, and to put it in execution: therefore
he that walks exactly, he that not only knows what to do, but in good
earnest does it, he is the wisest man. Men are not to be judged according to
their knowledge, or according to their habits, but How men are to be esteemed.
according to the act, according to their execution and practice, as the
Apostle says, Romans 2. God shall judge men according to their works.

Again, another property of wisdom is, when a man not only looks upon one
part of 3 To look to every part of his business.
his business, but he looks round about it, he looks in all the nooks and
corners of it; it is the ground of error, when a man looks upon one part that
draws him on to the work, but he looks not round about, to see the
discommodities, to look to all: if this be wisdom, then to walk with God
perfectly is the greatest wisdom; take any other man that does it not, that
steps aside out of the ways of God, that walks not exactly with him, that
goes out and seeks some profit for himself or some credit, that steps out for
some sinful lust, to satisfy some pleasure which he thinks will be great
advantage to him, to have this which others want, what is the reason of this?
because he is not wise, he looks but upon one part; if he did look round
about, if he did put the antecedent and the consequent together, if he would
sum up all his life together, he would see that that were not the best way,
he would see that that would bring him much misery, and that the abstaining
from that sin would bring him much happiness: thus he would think if all
were put together, but when he looks on one part, and not on all, hence it is
that men walk not exactly.

Again, it is another property of wisdom, for a man not to look on the
outside, but to 4 To look on the inside of things.
look on the inside of things; fools look on the outside, but wise men see
the inside, they see the sap in the tree; when a man looks only Simile.
on the outside, he is subject to be taken with the snare, when he sees the
Corn spread, and sees not the net, but a wise man sees the hook in the bait:
the most precious things in the world, their carriage is base, their outside is
Simile.
base, the worst things are gilded, and men for the most part, for want of
wisdom, take the things that are gaudy on the outside, and leave the other. As
the Apostle says, We are as men of sorrow, though indeed we rejoice as men
having nothing, though we possess all things; his meaning is, the outside is
mean, the outside is base; is it not prudence through the gold to see the base
metals, to see the thing that is bad indeed, to see the vanity, and folly, and
deformity of sin, that God has forbid us to commit; to see the false glosses
of Satan that he puts upon sin, to see the base metal within: and on the
otherside to see the excellency of spiritual things? They that walk exactly
they see the inside: Moses had two things presented to him, to suffer
afflictions with the people of God, the outside was bad enough, or to enjoy the
pleasures of sin, the treasures of Egypt that he might have had in Pharaohs
court, here the outside was good, this was his wisdom to see through both
these; he that walks perfectly with God, he sees the inside of things, he sees
that God neglects things that have an outward gloss, and cleaues to things
that though the outside be base, yet in themselves they are excellent and
precious. I should have come to some exhortation, but the time is past: so much
shall serve for this time.

FINIS.
Samuels support of Sorrowful Sinners.
1 SAMUEL 12. 20, 21, 22. And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: (ye have
done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but
serve the Lord with all your heart:

And turn ye not aside, for then should ye go after vain things, which
cannot profit, nor deliver, for they are vain.)

For the Lord will not for sake his people, for his great Names sake: because
it has pleased the Lord to make you his people.


THe occasion of these words was this; in the former part of the Chapter Samuel
sets sorth the greatness of the sin of the people, in desiring of a King,
and he tells them that therein they had cast away the Lord who was their King:
And upon this a miracle was wrought, whereby God discovered his displeasure
from Heaven, which so amazed the people, as at the eighteenth verse it is said,
They feared exceedingly, and desired Samuel that he would pray for them; and
now in these words ye have Samuels answer, and his scope therein is to exhort
the people not to fear, for they thought that so great a sin could not be
forgiven easily, not they so easily received to mercy again; he therefore
labors to take away the discouragement, and tells them that if they would come
in, fear not, for God will receive you.

But they might object, but we have committed Object.
a great sin.

It is true, says he, I will not go about to Answ.
extenuate that, yet notwithstanding know this for your comforts, that God will
continue the same that he has been, and therefore fear not: and that he
further sets forth from an effect which commonly this fear has, which will
cause us to depart from the Lord: so that now he labors to take away their
fear by two things: first, by taking away their discouragement, the cause of
their fear: secondly, by showing them the bad effect it will bring forth, to
cause them to depart from the Lord, the contrary to which he exhorts them unto,
and confirms his exhortations by these reasons: first, says he, Turn not
aside from following the Lord; in which there is a reason couched, as if he
should have said, now you have committed one error, will you commit a second?
when a man is out of his way, will he go on? no, but will return rather, and
will you turn aside from following the Lord too? secondly, whither shall it be
that you would go? to the creatures, they can do you no good. Here are two
things that you all desire; first, deliverance from evil when you are in a
state of misery; secondly, such things as may advance you in a good estate. Now
the creatures can do neither for you, for they are vain; it is vanity, an
empty things, and will you leave the Lord who has power to do all this for
you, and what else you can desire?

But they might say, but we have displeased Object.
the Lord, so that he will not look on us as he was wont.

He answers and tells them that God is the Answ.
same, he will not easily forsake his people, for which he gives two reasons;
first, because he had chosen them to be his people, he had freely made them his
people at the first, and he is always the same, and therefore he will
continue to keep you.

But they might say, we have made our selves Object.
unworthy of being his people, we deserve to have a bill of diuorcement given
us.

But yet secondly, because they were his people, called by his Name, therefore
for his Answ.
Name sake he would not cast them away, it would be against his honor and
glory; so these are the sum of the words.

From these words fear not, the Doctrine is, that

Our natures are apt to be inordinate in our affections; in our fears as they
here, so in Doct.
our loves and griefs. Now that it was so with them, it appears by Samuel his
speech, for you may know the disease by the medicine, their hearts were shaken
and disaduantaged exceedingly, and wel-nigh drawn from the Lord, and therefore
he exhorts them that they should not fear; this shows that we are apt to
fear inordinately, they had Prophets no doubt among them that had told them of
this sin all the time they were about it, and then they feared not; but now
the thunder came, they began to fear extremely, so that Samuel had much ado
to compose them again. Now our affections are said to be inordinate, either
when we do not love, or fear, or grieve for that we should (for therein our
inordinacy consists in the defect;) or secondly, when as they are set too much
upon any thing, that is, when we ouer-loue or ouer-grieue, which is either by
pitching them upon wrong objects, or exceeding in the measure, and therein lies
all the error that is in our affections; now let us see our own disposition
by the disposition of this people: when we are well and in health, we fear
not any sin, but as the Prophets phrase is, Rush into sin as the horse
rusheth into the battle; a horse is not able to discern that they are
enemies, and so rushes on to his own destruction; so Solomon says, A fool
goes on and is punished, and a fool rages and is careless; that is, he is
violent in his affections to sin, and yet fearelesse withal: and this you
may see also in the people of Lystra, at the first they thought Paul and
Barnabas to be gods, and knew not how to do too much for them, but anon they
would have killed them; and so we see by experience, that those whom men had
magnified and esteemed most, they have at last most despighted and contemned;
and so before sickness we cannot humble men, insicknesse we cannot comfort
them, all which proves the Doctrine.

Now for the reasons of it; first, the general Reason 1.
cause is the fall, which has put all out of order, so that the soul is like
an Instrument quite out of tune, every stroke that is struck is amiss, there
is no harmony at all in it; secondly, the more immediate causes are, first
iniudiciousnesse, men are not able to judge aright, and then they are bold when
they should be fearful, and fearful when they should be bold, as one that
wants skill and judgment is fearful in that business, which a wise man
that knows it will not fear; secondly, affections want the bridle of grace
which should keep them in, and moderate them, they are of themselves unruly
horses that draw the soul out of the way, unless there be an Auriga, an hand
kept upon them by grace, and this being wanting it becomes further inordinate,
because Satan ioynes with thine affections very often, for that is his
advantage; to add wind to the tide, and hence arises his temptations, when as
he sees an affection stirring, he takes the advantage, intends it, and makes
them more violent.

The use is, to take notice of this inordinacy of our affections that we are
subject unto, Use.
we have an inmate within us that will have an hand in every business, and
what it does, it still does amiss; whatsoever therefore you are a doing, still
search what affections you have, and you shall find that all that comes from
your flesh is amiss, and be jealous over sins, and this ye should rather do
because they blind the judgment; when affections are strong then take heed of
them.

But you will ask me, how shall I know mine affections are inordinate? Quest.


I answer, then when they are hindrances; for you shall know this, that all
affections are Answ.
planted by God for a special end, use, and profit to man, and not to be
hindrances in themselves, so as we could want none of them, we could not want
grief for things past, nor could we be freed from fear of evils to come, for
otherwise we could not take heed nor labor to prevent them when they are
coming upon us, we could not be freed from anger, for it stirs up to remove
impediments that lie in our way. Now you know the inordinacy of an affection,
as you may know a disease in Physic; the general rule of Physicians is, when
there is actiolaesa, as when you view all the functions of nature, and you see
natural impediment in some natural function; why then we judge there is a
disease; so it is true in the soul, when your grief is such as interrupts
prayer, and hearing, hinders you in your duty to God and man, then it is
inordinate; and it was the case of the Israelites inordinacy, who could not
hearken to Moses for the grief of their hearts: so for anger, if it be such
as causes you to remove such impediments as lie in the way of good desires,
then it is good; but when it causes such a distemper, that you are ready to
fly in the faces of your brethren, and so as you are more unfit for what is
good, then it is inordinate: and so likewise your fear, when it expectorateth
your souls, so as they are made unable to prevent the evils that you fear,
and so discourageth you, that you fly from God; so as to hide your selves from
him as Adam did, and as they here would have done, and so if your delights and
mirths make you more indisposed and unfit to prayer, or for good conference,
etc. so it comes in as a dampe to your mirth, and when as that which should
oil the wheels and make you cheerful in good duties cloggeth you, then they
are inordinate.

Q. But you will ask me, how we shall resist the inordinacy of them? Quest.


A. Two ways: first, if thy inordinacy be in the defect, in not fearing when
we should Answ.
fear, or not loving when we should love; we must be careful then for to
stir it up, for we may sin in the want of affection, as much as in the
misplacing of them, as this people here finned as much in not fearing before,
as in fearing now, and in their fear now they feared the judgment and not the
sin: for had their fear been pitched upon that, Samuel would not have
labored to have taken them off. Secondly, they feared that God would not be
reconciled to them any more, so that their fear was misplaced, and therein
they sinned, whereas Christ says, Revel. 2. 10. Fear not the things ye shall
suffer; but the sins which brings those crosses.

Q. But you will say, when as our fears and affections are thus mis-placed,
when our hearts Quest.
are possessed of them, how shall we then resist and empty our hearts of them?

A. First, have your judgments set right, Answ.
for the obliquity in the affection comes from the judgment, as those things
we apprehend to be evil, them we fear too much, and therefore labor to have
it enlightened.

Q. If you ask me, how we shall do that? Quest.


A. Bring it to the Word, and see what that Answ.
says, for the Word is as a glass which represents things as they are: I
cannot stand to give instances out of the Word how to direct every affection;
as now take Poverty, which thou fear so much, the Word makes it nothing,
Reu. 2. 9. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich; as if he had said, it is a
matter of nothing: So likewise for your fear of men, Fear not him that can
kill the body, but fear him that can cast both body and soul into hell fire;
first, the Scriptures make nothing fearful but Gods wrath and sin, and
therefore now stick to the Word, and whatsoever thy fantasy is, yet say,
sure I am thus; God said, and therefore I am sure it is so, and this will
rectify the judgment; say it is but my fancy, howsoever it may be greater or
lesser, yet the thing is the same as the Word said it: As the garment Simile.
may be greater or lesser, yet the body the same; so take any thing else, as
the loss of credit, or the like, we think these something and fear them, but
the fault is in our fantasy; men do therefore well by fitting their hearts
to what the Word says, to stay themselves. Secondly, again if this will not
prevail, then let us pray our selves sober; for inordinate affections make as
much difference between a man and himself out of it, as is between a drunken
and a sober man. Now Prayer composeth the heart much, for it brings thee into
Gods presence: And as the Sun casts down the mists and dispels them, Simile.
so Prayer does an inordinate affection. Again thirdly, add to this communion
of Saints, and that is a good means; for we are in such fits, as men in a
fever whose mouths being out of taste, we should suffer our selves to be
ruled by the judgment and taste of others. Fourthly, after all this beseech
God to convince thy judgment, to persuade thy understanding fully, for that
none can fully do but he.

The second Doctrine is, that

The greatness of our sin is no impediment to forgiveness. Doct. 2.
It is true, says Samuel, ye have done this great sin, I will not go about
to diminish it, but the Lord will forgive you not withstanding. I will deliver
it in these terms, because we are apt not to think so, and when we have
sinned against the light of conscience, relapsed often, we are afraid to come
into Gods presence, as we see it by experience; and therefore now if any man
has committed any great sin, let him apply it to himself. It is true, I
have done such a great wickedness, why yet be of good comfort, humble your
self, continue to follow the Lord, you shall find God the same to you that
here he was to this people. Now the reason of this is:

First, because the pardon of the Gospel, which we preach, makes no exception
of any Reason 1.
sin; Christ came to save sinners, to take away the sins of the world, this
is spoken indefinitely. Secondly, not of any person, Reason 2.
preach the Gospel to every creature, there is not any exception of any rebel
or rebellion. Thirdly, besides the price that was paid answers for the greatest
sins as well as the least; Reason 3.
he is ready to forgive a thousand pound upon satisfaction, as well as ten
groats; and therefore if thou have Christ for thy ransom, it is no matter what
thy sins have been, great or small, for the same price may as well stand for
the one as for the other. Again fourthly, Reason 4.
the God which we have to deal with is a mighty God, even in this, even in
pardoning, Michah 7. 18. Who is like unto our God that pardons iniquity. and
passes by the transgression of his heritage? he will subdue them and cast
them all into the depth of the Sea, that is, herein the infiniteness of God
appears in forgiving transgressions, he shows his might in it, and being
merciful as God, and not as man, and therefore he uses that metaphor of
casting their sins into the depth of the Sea, that as the Sea drowneth
mountains as well as mole hills, if they be cast into it; so his Attributes are
infinite and so are his mercies: and therefore he takes delight to forgive
great sins, because we know him to be God and not man thereby, because he
forgiues more than a man is able or willing to forgive. But because examples are
more preualent in this case, I will give you a few. Adam was the cause of
murdering the whole world, he made all men not only guilty of the first
death, but also of the second; besides other aggrauations of his sin,
believing the Devil rather than God, etc. yet we see that God found out a
remedy and received him into mercy, for he himself preached the Gospel to
him, and therefore not without profit. So likewise Manasses sins exceeded, so
as indeed we know not how a man should commit more almost: yet when he humbled
himself greatly, (for he had great sins) God received him to mercy, and
restored him to his Kingdom; so as when we read of his sins, how he filled
Jerusalem with blood, etc. one of us would have been ready to have said, What,
Lord, will thou forgive this man and set him in his Kingdom, as if he had done
nothing against thee? To name no more than that in the 1 Cor. 6. 9. those
monstrous and heinous sins there mentioned, as greater there cannot be
mentioned, yet some of them that were guilty of them were received to mercy,
such were some of you, but now are ye washed and justified, etc.

The use shall be, that you would take heed Use.
how you limit the holy One in regard of his mercy, that he will go so far
in pardoning and no further; I dare boldly tell you, it is as great a sin to
limit God in his mercy as in his power; as that was the sin of the
Israelites, when as they were to go into the land of Canaan, they limited God,
and thought he could not bring them in because of so great walls and great
Giants, etc. and so take you heed lest you limit his mercy, as that when your
sins are such sins of so heinous a nature as that he will not forgive you.
How did David when he had committed the great sin with Bathseba, etc. and so
Peter that stood in the same terms with Christ that he did before; and if you
cannot bring your hearts to think this, then go beyond your own judgment by
faith, for this is it that hinders us from believing, that we draw a
scantling of the Lord by our own fantasies, whereas he says, That his
thoughts are above our thoughts in pardoning, Isaiah 55. Another point that I
will deliver from these words is this, that

The way to have a sin forgiven, is to aggrauate Doct. 3.
it, not to extenuate it. Samuel here you see, when he goes about to comfort
the people, he aggrauates the sin, but withal aggrauates Gods mercies, and
so comfort them; so that the best way to have a sin forgiven, is to
confess it to the utmost.

First, it puts a man into such a disposition as God has promised forgiveness
unto, for Reason 1.
then we come to see the vileness of our selves that we cannot stand upon our
own bottom, but are empty of all, and without God must perish, and so are
drawn from our selves and all in us, to rest no more upon our selves, but upon
God alone.

Secondly, besides, the more particularly sin is confessed, the more glory
arises to Reason 2.
God, and shame to our selves.

And again, it strengthens us against sin another time, a full confession
of any sin is a Reason 3.
great preservative against it, when a man has looked round about any sin,
and considered all the particulars of it, it shuts up all ways to the sin,
whereas otherwise, when men confess by halues, they live in some way of
sinning.

The use is, to teach you not to extenuate Use.
your sins, but to confess them to the utmost; and this you had need be
exhorted unto, for I do not know a duty more hard than this, though you may
think it easy; men are loath to confess their sins, because men are loath to
leave their sins; till they mean to leave it, they extenuate it; if men will
keep any reservation, and are not willing perfectly to forgo all, they will
not confess them fully.

Again, men want light to see sin fully, for we see sin in the circumstances
of it no further 2
than we have light lent us from the Holy Ghost; as the light is brighter and
brighter in the house, the more clearly do we discern the lest motes, so
here.

Again thirdly, there is a self-love in every one, and therefore while we
look on sin as 3
our own, we are ready to favor it; as Judah, whilst he looked on the
adultery, as in his daughter, he judged it worthy of death, he would have her
burnt, but when it came to be his own sin, then the case was altered: so
David would have had the man put to death that took his neighbors sheep, but
when it came and proved to be his own case, God was feign to take a great
deal of pains to humble him, and to make him confess it; and therefore
aggrauate your sins in your confessions, saying, I have had these and these
means, I have sinned against the great light again and again, and brake the
covenant that I have made with God, and know that this way you cannot exceed,
If our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts; let us 1 John 3. 20.
take a man that apprehends his sin most fully, yet God conceiues more fully
of it, so as we in our thoughts cannot reach to what he sees sin to be:
and herein you had need take pains and search diligently, for many sins that
are great sins will appear at the first to be but small ones, as this sin
of theirs, they thought it but a small matter at the first, it was but choosing
of a King that was not any where forbidden, and yet Samuel tells them that
therein they had first cast away the Lord; secondly, they cast away Samuel and
the Lord in him; thirdly, they had put trust in Kings: And so David's numbering
of the people seems to be but a small thing, a thing not in it self unlawful
for a King to see what strength he has to encounter an enemy, but David he
knew his own heart, he knew his own ends, then he cries out he had done
exceeding foolishly; know this therefore that this ye ought to do, and that
the more ye see sin abound, the more ye will see grace abound, and so you
will love the more, and prize Christ the more, and be more humble and content
with any condition. Again observe,

One sin makes much way for another. Doct. 4.
This sin of theirs had well nigh drawn them to a departing from the Lord,
now were they in the high way to slip from the Lord quite away.

The reasons are; first, because every act intends Reason 1.
the habit of sin, as when any thing is acted it increases the habit with
which it is acted; as every act of grace strengthens the habit of grace, so
sin makes the flesh to rise above the spirit, to get it under, and so at last
to get the victory.

Because every sin weakneth that grace which Reason 2.
should resist it; as in a disease there is not only a thing contrary, with
which health is to wrestle, but something also which weakneth the strength by
which health should resist; and so does sin (especially great sins) seize
upon the strength, takes away the rectitude of judgment by which we should
resist; if it be a great sin, it works as a great disease which seazeth upon
the principal part, and therefore is often little felt; a small sin is as a
small wound, which we may easily feel, because all else is in health, but a
great sin is as a blow upon the head which amazeth us.

Again, committing a great sin discourageth us from coming to God for
pardon, and Reason 3.
makes us bold to go on, and seeing we are over shoes, we are willing to go
on and be over boots too.

Aster commission of a great sin, God gives Satanleaue to take possession of
a man, as Satan Reason 4.
got possession of Saul by his envy at David; an evil spirit (as is said) fell
upon him, and he would have killed David; and so Judas, after his resolution to
betray his Master, the Devil entered into him, and would not suffer him to
continue there, but to hang himself, and therefore take heed of falling into
sin, for then ye are tanquam in pracipitio, so as you cannot stay your
selves, as in a quicke-sand you sink deeper and deeper; and therefore deal
with sin as you would deal with poison, which a man will not let alone to
lie long in his body, but he will take an antidote against it as soon as he
can. Another point we may observe is this, that

Discouragement and too much fear are great means of our departure from God.
Doct. 5.
Fear not, turn not aside from following the Lord, etc. There are many things
which keep us off from coming to God; first, our strong lusts, not willing to
give over all, nor 1
yet to do all. Secondly, our deferring of repentance, we can do it as well
hereafter, but 2
the greatest hinderance of all other is that which we have now named: Many
will say indeed, to enjoy the favor of God is a comfortable thing, and to have
assurance of our sins being forgiven, but I have little hope of this, I have
such a nature, and I have fallen often, and have so much hardness of heart as
God will never receive me, and so men sit down discouraged; and this must
needs hinder in many respects.

First, because it takes away all alacrity, for what a man has no hope to
bring to pass, he Reason 1.
will never go about it; so a scholar, if he has no hope to get learning,
will give over studying; take hope away, and take away all endeavor, nay take
away all desire, which is more, for what is out of a man's hope a man desires
not, for objects they work when they lie near the faculty, even as fire never
works till the fuel be nigh it, and the loadstone till the iron be put to
it: things that are afar off, we have little desire to: as now to instance; the
condition of Kings, though it be a thing most desirable, yet seldom men
actually desire it because it is out of their hopes, and therefore when men are
discouraged, as thinking they shall never have such a lust mortified, they sit
down without all desire or endeavor: and so when men look on the Lord as on a
strict and severe Judge, it causes strangeness in them; they will not come at
him, but they will be content with that liberty which they may enjoy without
him, as beggars when they see they cannot better their condition, content
themselves with what they are, and that liberty which they do enjoy; and so
men being discouraged from going to God, they turn and rest on something else,
for the heart will have some liberty.

Again, when we come to the Lord, Satan he casts in all these fears, he
musters up all objections, but the Spirit you see says, Do not fear; now
whether will you take part with Satan or the Spirit? If men be humble, Christ
says likewise, Come to me and you shall have ease, all ye that are weary and
heavy laden; let them not think that their sins are a burden that will
break their backs, if they come to him, and so the Iaylour he trembled and
thought himself undone, but Paul told him of the Lord Jesus, in whom if he
believed he should be saved; it is good for us to consider what Satan's end is,
in casting in such objections, as about the hardness of our heart, etc. his
end is to discourage you.

Q. But you will say, how shall I know when Quest.
such objections are from Satan, they may arise from a right judgment of what
mine estate is?

A. Ye shall know it by this, if they put you off further from the Lord, and
make the heart Answ.
listlesse to what it should apply it self to, as Prayer, Repentance, then it
is from Satan.

In that when the people had here committed this great sin, and Samuel bids
them not fear; they might happily ask him, what would you have us do? then he
says, Turn not aside from following the Lord your God, but serve him with all
your hearts; I raise this sixth Doctrine, that

When a man has committed any great sin, it Doct. 6.
is his duty, his best and wisest way to come in presently and turn to God.
The Spirit here by Samuel commands it, and therefore it is their duty, and what
he commands it is best and the wisest course to take; the reasons of it are.

Because the heart immediately after the sin Reason 1.
committed begins to contract hardness, and the longer it goes without
returning, the more hardness it contracts, but presently after it is more
sensible; and therefore a wound that is taken presently is the sooner healed,
and the smart will be the less, so it is in sin.

By committing one sin we are exposed to greater, for it is like the breaking
down of the walls, Reason 2.
which the longer they lie, the breach not made up, the more enemies may come
in; there is a gap made, which if it be not stopped, will let the good cattle
out and the evil cartell in; see this in David, if he had humbled himself and
renewed his repentance, he had prevented that murder, and making Vriah drunk,
etc. but he let the gap lie open, and see what a troop of sins came in: see
this also in Asa, his making a Covenant with the King of Aram, and rested 2 Chronicles. 16.
on him, at the beginning of the Chapter: but now if he had humbled himself,
all the rest that follows had been prevented, but he did not so, and then
follows putting the Prophets in prison, oppressing the people; when he was
sick, seeking to the Physicians, for he grew worse and worse, his end was not
answerable to his beginning, though he was a good man; and Peter now on the
other side, because he humbled himself, he presently was received to mercy,
and prevented all.

The longer ye lie in a sin unrepented, the greater the sin is, because you
abuse Gods patience Reason 3.
the more; for he considers every hour, and it is not slacknesse in him
that he forbeares you, but patience; which you abusing, add unto his wrath
every minute.

The same duties lie upon you that did before, which you ought to perform, and
your sin Reason 4.
is no privilege for the omission of them, and therefore your best way is to
turn, and not to go on in your sin.

Ob. But you will say, Must a man come in presently into the presence of God
after he Ob.
has so grossly offended him?

Answ. Ye may and ye ought to do it, but Answ.
not with that disposition remaining in your heart, wherewith you commit the
sin, but with an heart humbled, converted to God, stricken with the sense of
its sin, promising new obedience, and thus to come in presently is no
absurdity. If a Rebel, presently after his rebellion, comes indeed with a
sword in his hand into the presence of a King, let him not look for pardon: if
with meekness and a rope about his neck, he may: yea and I add this, that
the heart is sooner turned if you take the advantage of it presently after the
sin is committed. There are two objections in this case:

Ob. First, you will say, my heart cannot be presently humbled enough, to which
I answer. Ob.


A. That God stands not upon the measure of humiliation, so as to reject thee,
but if it be Answ.
in sincerity, if thou know and see the sin thou have committed, so as
thou art vile in thine own eyes, and art resolved not to return to it again;
if this be in sincerity, though in never so small a measure, the Lord accepts
thee. Again,

Secondly know, that thou can not be humbled as thou would at the first,
add therefore Answ. 2.
to thy humiliation afterward, as David when he said, Lord, I have sinned, God
forgave him, though he was not so much humbled as afterward.

Ob. 2. Again you will say, it may be my sin Ob. 2.
is not healed yet, then indeed I may come with confidence, and yet my heart
may be as false as ever.

A. I answer, that men are first to seek pardon, and then prepare for healing
afterward, Answ.
for this is a sure rule, that there is no sin healed till there is an
assurance of forgiveness. The Lord, as he washes away the guilt, so he
heals the stain, and gives a new Spirit, for this is his Covenant, Ierem.
31. Ezech. 36. I will forgive their sins; and what then? and give them new
hearts. We are all deceived in this, that we think when as we take a purpose
with our selves against a sin, that all is then done, but it is not so; as a
man that has a running issue in his body, it is not enough for him to say, I
will not have it thus, I desire it should not be, I purpose it shall not, but
he must use means to heal it. To conclude, when any have fallen into sin,
I say unto them, as Samuel here, Continue ye to serve the Lord, do you think
to mend the matter when you are out of the way, by going on or standing still,
but return rather and serve the Lord, for he is the same Lord still, and
there is the same bond still that binds you to serve him. And again, what will
you do, go some whither else, (for you must have a being) will you go to the
creatures to get rest from them, they are vain, they will not profit you nor
deliver you: but you will say, whither then? why, to the Lord, but what hope is
there that he should accept us? why, the Lord will not forsake his people. He
is still the same God, he will not forsake his own, as a father will not
forsake his child; and secondly, he will not for his Names sake. Lastly
observe hence, that

The sins which we commit make no change in Doct. 7.
the Lord. No substantial change; they may make him angry as a father may be
with his son, and that so as they may feel the effects of it, but yet he is
the same God still; for

First, It is not the slipping into great sins that breaks the covenant or
makes it void; there is nothing Reason 1.
that makes a bill of divorce, but an utter turning away from God.

Again secondly, God is the same, and you are Reason 2.
the same; your hearts are the same to him, the same bent of mind, the same
frame of heart remaining in you still, ye are his servants still, and he is the
same; upon the same grounds that he chose you first he loves you still, sins
work no substantial alteration; he chose you freely because he would, and
therefore as there is a transient act of sin passed from you, so a transient
act of punishment may pass from God; for as your hearts are the same for
substance to him as before, so is Gods to you.

The use is, that you would not think when Use.
you have sinned, that the Lord will reject you. Our Savior Christ shows the
same by the parable of the Prodigal: they in the house did not think that
such a son should have had such entertainment when he had spent so much, that
his father would have given him such an answer, to fall upon his neck, to be
so glad of him; by that our Savior expresses how willing God is to receive
sinners. David had no sooner said, I have sinned, but God said, I have put away
thy sin; and so Peter after his denial, Christ looked on him with the same
familiarity as he did before. Only do not think that God will hold the
wicked innocent; if ye have false hearts, then ye shall not be forgiven.

If the Lord be so ready to receive men after they have offended him, consider
how worthy Use 2.
of utter destruction they are that will not turn to him; if God should say to
any man here, Thouhast committed this sin against me, yet come in, there shall
be no hinderance of my part, unless the stubbornness of thine own will
hinder thee, who would not say that he that should refuse were worthy to be
condemned? Christ is said to come to render vengeance to those that obey not
the Gospel, and 2 These. 1.
therefore Samuel adds this in the end of all, if they would for sake the
Lord, know that you and your King shall perish.

FINIS.

