THE DEFENSE OF TRVTH AGAINST A book falsely called THE TRIVMPH OF TRVTH sent
over from Arras A. D. 1609.

BY HVMFREY LEECH late Minister.

Which book in all particulars is answered, and the adioining Motives of his
revolt confuted: BY DANIELL PRICE, of Exeter College in Oxford, Chaplain in
ordinary to the most high and mighty, the Prince of Wales.

1. King. cap. 20.11. Let not him that girdeth his harness, boast himself, as
he that puts it off. AC: OX
Oxford University coat of arms

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1610.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE HENRY, PRINCE of Wales, Duke of Cornwaile, and
Earl of Chester, the confluence of those choice blessings Peace, Grace, and
Glory.
MOST GRACIOUS PRINCE with all reverence and devotion, I present to your
Highness this labor. To whom should I dedicate it? But to your Princely
goodness, to whose service I have consecrated my tongue, and pen, and heart, and
all the offices of my life: it is an answer to a revolted late Minister, a
business (I may say) imposed me, by some, of very honorable respect, and much
encouraged by others, especially the most Reverend Archbishop: our late
Chancelour. It is the maintenance of truth, O let it receive countenance from
the royal heir apparent of the defender of the truth. The infection of Popery
spreads too far: some come not to our Church, others fly our Land and Church,
both revile and slander the Church. The eyes, and hearts, and hopes of all the
Protestant world, be fixed upon your Highness, all expecting your Gracious
faithfulness, and readiness in the extirpation of that man of sin. March
valiantly herein, Most Gracious Prince, and the God of Princes shall protect
you, his Grace and Providence shall reward your faith and Confidence, and shall
heap upon your Highness, favor, and honor, and glory, in both worlds. For
which, as long as I have being, I shall never cease praying.

Your Highness most humbly devoted, and faithful servant DANIELL PRICE.

ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.
Mr LEECH.

TO the learned, wise, and ingenious Academicks flowrishing in the renowned
University of Oxford.

ANSWER.

SIR, your book sent from Arras, as a piece of work of diverse colors, is at
length surveyed and reviewed, to see whether it be worth the answering. The
opinion of many was, as that of Tully concerning Act. 4. in verrem.
Heius, that you had rather mard the cause then bettred it, and therefore your
tract unworthy to be answered. But my mind was otherwise, that the cause mard
you, and therefore you and it to be viewed, to be pitied, to be answered. In
which succeeding discourse would I could deal with you as S. Jerome. Tom. 2.
Jerome desired to deal with Origin, that our Countrymen should know your
best things, and be ignorant of your worst. For my witnesses be in heaven, and
in my own bosom, that no motion of envy, gain, glory, irregular provocation
or popular ostentation, have drawn me to this: but the all guiding spirit of
God, by the honorable motion of some, and comfortable encouragement of others.
And therefore I do refrain all disparagements, and personal aspersions
against you: wishing you had done so, against those many worthy Doctors of our
University. An act, which I know you once disliked in that baaling Priest His
book entitled de Triplici hominis officio and his epistle to the University.
Weston, who as if he had been one of Psilli who only fed on Poison, or the
voice of a man in the mouth of a Devil, Esaias 36.4.
or Rabshekah sent out of Hell to blaspheme God, did vilify all the Bewclarks
of learning alive and dead, Doctors and governors of our Academy. But let his
branded character remain upon him and his memory. Cams curse, and Cains mark,
Genesis 4.12.
vagus and profugus in terris. The front of your Epistle shows at first that
you think otherwise of us the^ he does; seeing that you style our students the
learned, wise, ingenious Academicks flowrishing, and our University the
renowned Oxford: we shall see how you proceed.

Mr LEECH.

Experience does well approve Saint Bernards saying; Efficacior lingua, quam
litera: the tongue is of greater efficacy, then the pen. And therefore I
suffer no little disadvantage, in that I must now speak unto you in a silent
letter, and plead my cause by a mute advocate of my mind.

ANSWER.

It is true, efficacior lingua, quam litera; but yet, melior anima, quam
lingua. If your pen express not what your tongue is able fully, I would your
heart would conceive that which your tongue may speak truly, that as some
think there be certain strings that pass from the heart to the tongue, so
there might be a concatenatio^ that what your heart thinks, and your tongue
speaks, and your pen writes, may so agree, that they may be all to the
glory of God, the instructing of others, and saving of your own soul. For if
your tongue could thunder, as Aul. Gell. lib. 17-c. 17.
Aristophanes spoke of Pericles; or you had a tongue like a trumpet, as Hier.
adver. Ruffin. tom. 2. fol. 221.
Hierome says Hilary had; or, as Saint 1. Cor. 13.
Paul observes, the tongue of men, or Angels, and had not Charity: it were
but vain sounding, tickling, tinckling. The tongue not powerful without
charity, and charity not fruitful without verity. S. Austin noted that all
marvailed at Tullies tongue, but not at his invention; and at Aristotle's
invention, but not his tongue: I know not that ever you were admired for
either: But remember to use the talent given in both, as you ought; and think
not, you suffer disadvantage in that you speak in a silent letter: I would it
were not silent both for proof and profit, and that your mute advocate were
not mutinous.

Mr. LEECH.

But since I write unto the^, who are not strangers in my business, but as well
eye witnesses of the wrongs, which I have endured, as ear witnesses of the
doctrine which I preached among you; my undoubted hope is, that your hearts will
be touched with some compassion either toward me, unworthily entreated by a
faction (for I will not impute the crime of a few unto all) or toward your
selves, whom this particular does very highly import, in respect of your
learning, honor, and estimation.

ANRVVERE.

You write to those that are strangers, to your doctrine, not to your person;
or strangers, not to the hearing, but approving your opinion: strangers we are
all to any wrongs done to you, not to the wrongs offered by you. And therefore
think you not to touch the hartstrings of our students with a dittie of
compassion, as if you were (as you say) wrongfully and unworthily entreated by
a faction. Compassion every honest heart will afford you for being misled,
rather then misused. Lib. 1. de Controver. ad Cler. c. 31.
St Bernard distinguishes of pacidicos and pacificos, those that in word
speak of peace, but indeed make ready to battle. So may I concerning your
request for compassion, and yet even in that your petition, you break into a
furious passion, to accuse those reverend learned Doctors, who censured you, as
if they had been a faction. I will not be nice to climb over those seeming
difficulties that lie in my way: and yet without enlarging the limits of your
speech, as all your assertions like so many diseases attend upon the ague of
error; so this among the rest, wherein you censure those that iudicially
censured you, to be a faction. If any afforded your pen maintenance, or your
sermons countenance by clancular approbation, contrary to the judgment and
truth delivered by the learned Vicechancelor, and his worthy asistants; they
were the faction, not these. It is not a factious position which is generally
maintained by the happy and gracious Church of England, grounded upon
irrefragable places of holy Scriptures, taught by many impregnable places of
ancient Fathers, yea your grand Jury of Fathers called into the Star chamber of
judgment by a judicious learned and religious Doctor Benefield.
Divine, now all witnessing against you. Were you unworthily entreated when
love allured you, and authority solicited you to take better council? Were
you silenced, or imprisoned, or censured at all, til that engastred impostume
brake out, in your last sermon, all daily expecting a much more earnest course
against you, the discommoning rather of you, the^ the loss of your commons?
And whereas you desire us to be moved with compassion toward our selves; we may
use the words of our Savior, weep not for me but weep for your selves, so
compassionate not us, but your self. And for my self among many others I
shall ever afford you that hearty pity, non Bernard.
oris attactu, sed mentis affectu, as to say to you as the 1. Kings. 13.30.
old Prophet did of the seduced Prophet, alas for thee my brother.

Mr LEECH.

For as the injury, which God, and his truth have sustained in my person, is
now made known not only unto our nation, but the fame thereof begins to
spread it self abroad in these foreign parts, so it concerns you (my loving
fathers and brethren) to wipe away that disgrace, and blemish from your mother,
and your selves, which some of har unnatural children would both stain her
with, and derive upon you; endeavoring to obscure their private folly in the
public shame. Which protection I will never afford unto them, unless they can
obtain it by your own consent.

ANSWER.

Was the quiet and long forborne conventing of you, judicial hearing, learned
opposing, religious counselling, calm censuring of you such an injury unto
God, and his truth, that not only the whole University, but also the whole
nation, and, quae regio in terris vestri no^ plena furoris? almost all the world
takes notice (as you say) for the FAME thereof begins to spread it self in
those foreign parts. A good thing the more generally it is spread, the better:
but of the contrary ever the contrary falls out. Plut.
Plutarch tells of a plague that began in Aethiopia, thence filled Athens,
killed Pericles, vexed Thucydides, and spread it self far. It should seem by
the spreading of that report of what you endured, that it was some contagious
stuff that did so expatiate. But what if it do so, among those, who have
banished truth as a stranger, and chained up Religion as a prisoner? To preach
a doctrine twice before forbidden you, was seditious; to preach a doctrine no
way to be warra^ted, was erroneous; that doctrine so soon to spread it self,
through so great a nation, so many foreign parts, it was dangerous. Good
things are not so fertile. The great eye of heaven, and the God which must
judge you, and that conscience which must accuse you, do all witness how
injuriously you dealt here with your governors in disobeying them, and now how
unjustly abroad in traducing them. Durst any in those foreign parts, so
peremptorily, and presumptuously, publicly have maintained any point of the
contrary religion, but he had been apprehended and presently cast into the
jaws of that monster the Spanish inquisitio^: your usage was otherwise, you
were warned by some, counseled by others, pitied by all, not publicly
convented, not commanded to recante, not imprisoned, not expelled, only
forbidden to preach because you offended by preaching, and put out of commons
for a while the common punishment for any collegiate offense; and the fame of
this so far to spread, it cannot profit you any way nor prejudice the chariots
of our Israel the governors of our University. Only remember what De fam.
and spe. diat. 117.
Petrarch admonishes in such a case: Multi famam se mereri sperant, dum
infamiam mereantur. Let not this fame be your infamy, nor let these blemishes
and disgraces which you impute to our Academicall mother, or the unnaturalness
you deem to be in her children, be found all of them in you; fear your own
private folly, fly your own public shame (I use your own words.) To make a
show of nakedness where there is none, is worthily condemned: but to spit such
words of blemish, disgrace, folly and shame in the face of such reverend
Fathers, O remember it is accursed. I have gathered up all your burdens, bonds
pressures, complaints; sum them up all, they be all nothing.

Mr LEECH.

Wherefore, out of my affectionate zeal unto your credit I do both humbly
desire, and earnestly require you to avert this infamy from your noble mother,
and to free her from the imputation, which, otherwise, you draw upon her, as
being either a Patroness of falsehood, or fearful to defend the truth: which
folly in the first, or pussillanimity in the second, is a great stain to men
of your quality and place.

ANSWER.

It was Diog. Laert. in vita Diog.
Diogenes speech; Oportet sapientiam ab insipientibus feriri: but yet g wisdom
shall be justified by her children, Mat. 11.19.
and the blow given by you in the pulpit which you think shall leave a scarr in
the face of Oxford, is easily removed. For no sooner were you removed hence,
but the infamy was averted and the air purged from receiving the contagion of
any such amphibious amphibologious heresy. For your zealous affection, when
you are truly zealous toward God, you will be truly affectionate toward his
servants; let not the fume of envy, and foam of vanity, turn holiness into
hypocrisy, zeal into folly, and assure your self as long as this Metropolis
of learning shall stand, which I hope shall be as long as the sun and moon
endure, she will be so far from being either Patroness of falsehood, or
fearful to defend the truth, that she will ever have, many strong men armed in
the studies of Divinity, furnished with the skill of tongues, laboriously
exercised in the sacred Scriptures, studiously co^versant in the Fathers, well
acquainted with the history of times, who like the valiant men of Israel, that
guarded Can. 3.7.8.
Salomons bed, will be ever provided to encombat any Jesuitical Philistin that
revileth the host of the Lord of hosts. It lacked not such worthies in the
former time, such was our Scot. 4. see Did. 18.
Scotus resisting the real presence, Anno 1290. Our Wolsius lect memor. Tom 1.
Occam confuting the Popes authority, Anno 1330. Our Balaeus co^t. 6. cap. 1.
Wickliffe writing against most points of Popery about the year 1360. besides
those Roses of the field, and Lyllies of the valleys, as Aug.
Augustine called Martyrs, Cranmer-Ridly. Latimer.
those reverend and holy Bishops, who sealed our religion in Oxford with their
own blood. And it lacks not such worthies in these later times, such as are
those revere^d Doctors, who openly in Schools; and those learned preachers,
who have publicly and frequently in disputations, and sermons, worthily
confuted unsound and unsavory positions, and among the rest this of yours. For
many have descended so low as to take knowledge of this your unsound receipt or
conceit, all which have valiantly discharged peales of ordinance against it,
maintaining the contrary, irrefragably in Divinity schools in disputations, in
St. Mary's and Christ-Church most frequently in sermons, besides letters of
condemnation against you from the right Reverend Father our Chancellor to the
Convocation, My L. Grace of Canterbury in his letters to the Convocation Ano
1608.
speeches in our public Act, by the Vicechancelor, Proctors, Respondents, and
almost all that can write, or speak among us, will witness how poor your hope
of allowance is here. Nothing at this time and ever since the publishing of
your book being more commonly grateful to the hearers, graceful to the
speakers, the^ the daily co^de^ning and confuting of this your extravaga^t
Paradox; so that for folly or pusillanimity, it is not harbored in the breast
of our University.

Mr LEECH.

For you style your University the Fountain, and Eye of the kingdom. And you
say not unfitly; forasmuch as the Doctrine there taught does stream forth into
al parts of our nation: and all men come unto you to receive information of
their understandings, by your Academicall instruction. In which respect you
stand deeply obliged unto God, and men (as you have care of his glory, and
their benefit) to vindicate the truth from oppression, and to redeem her out
of captivity into freedom, that her luster may not be darkened, where so great
a pretense is made of the gospells light.

ANSWER.

Ex ore tuo? Shall I condemn you out of your own mouth? The story in Gell.
Noct. Attic. lib. 18. cap. 3.
Gellius tells you that when a bad man had set down a good cause, the people
liking the speech, but disliking the man, caused it to be pronounced by one of
better respect. I will not deal so with you, but I will take even your own
testimony. It is the fountain of our kingdom, and her streams be clear as
Crystal, sweet as the waters of Bethell, and fluent as Jordan that makes
glad the City of God. It is the eye of the land, wherein neither the moat of
schism, nor beam of superstition (I hope) shall ever take place, to darke^
the sight of this glorious light. Naioth in Samuels time, Jericho in Elizeus
time, Jerusalem in Josias time, Corinth in S. Paul's time, all schools of the
Prophets, and Universities; never more illustrious for Colleges and students
then this eye of our land, heart of our body, fort of our country, glory of our
kingdom. Neither need you ever doubt, but that there be many here, able,
willing, pressing, sweating, and striving to vindicate the truth from
oppression, and redeem her out of captivity; yea to lead captivity captive,
and to seek to bring redemption unto those, that sit in darkness, and to reduce
them into the glorious liberties of the sons of God: here being no pretense
of the light of Christ's Gospel, but the real presence of his spirit.

Mr LEECH.

Which just kindness if I may not procure at your hands, yet the truth shall
not be impaired thereby: nor will I be any whit discomfited, otherwise then in
a sorrowful commiseration of your estate. For my resolution is firmly made
within mine own heart, to spare no travel, that I may purchase condign
approbation of my cause, from all the Universities in Europe: if justice may
not be there done, where Gods truth, and I (merely for her sake) have
received such injury, as seems almost incredible unto strangers, who do not
yet sufficiently understand the courses of D. King, and of other Calvinists;
the assista^ts of his spleneticall proceedings.

ANSWER.

The law holds it injustice to afforde kindness to an adversary, and so you
are held, if not to our persons yet to our positions: truth by you has been
impugned, not impaired; for Rome and hell cannot suppress it: oppugnari
potest, non expugnari, says the Orator. For your co^miserating of us, it is
impossible you should afford us such kindness, being so unkind unto your
self. Quid miserius misero non miserante seipsum, says Aug.
Augustine? Charity must begin with it self. Begin then to pity your self,
and pray for your self, that though you be led into temptation yet the tempter
prove not victor. Your resolution to travel all the Universities of Europe
will be very laborious, and yet very idle, for the University of Leaden may
satisfy you well enough: and it will be very laborious, to carry such a mass
of flesh about you, and so mountainous a heap of torments of conscience, if
you have any conscience, to remember that in a discontented humor you have
forsaken your God, religion, nation, vocation, the truth in which you were
baptized, by which you were bred, and unto which you agreed, subscribed, vowed
your whole life and labor. But if you determine to be so resolute a pilgrim
as to travel al Universities in Europe, assure your self it will be as idle as
laborious, for it will be to no purpose. And if for idle Mat. 12.37.
words, much more for idle actions, answer must be made. Yet in your travel,
think not to darken the sun as you may a Candle, offer not to traduce him,
whom manners and oaths of the University and College where you lived, have
obliged you to honor; Think not to subject the honorable reputation of your
thrice worthy Deane, our most worthy Vicechancelor, by any slanderous,
scandalous speeches nor let any Phreneticall humor in you, judge his wise
proceedings to relish of any spleneticall savor. Let neither nature through
custom, nor bitterness through discontent force you, so far to forget the
duty you owe to this Basil.
(...) this most worthy servant of God, seeing they that live with him, love
him, all that know him reverence him, they that hear of him admire him; Qui
primas no^ habuisti sapientiae, secundas habeas parts modestiae, says Austin.
Retract.
Austin in his retractations. I would you would so retract. It is not credible
that you received (as you say) incredible injury in the lawful proceedings
against you. The University censured you, not imprisoned you. The College for
a time disco^moned you, not expelled you. This small punishment no banishment,
your Complaint is the same with In orat. pro sexto Roscio.
Fimbria in Tully, quod non totum telum in corpore recepisset, you received
great injury, because you were not suffered to do great injury. But be not
deceived, God is not mocked, enter into a serious and religious cogitation,
whether in this course that you are, you need not fear the true description of
malecontented Apostats, I would you were not suitable to them, as they be lively
deciphered both by S. 2. Pet. 2.
Peter and S. Jude. 13.
Jude, to be presumptuous, standing in their own opinion, wandering stars,
raging waves of the Sea foaming out their own shame, and, speaking evil of
them which are in authority, which a man that maintains your third Counsel
of obedience should not do. The scornful aspertion you cast upon us by the
byname of Calvinists we neither reject nor receive. Reverend, learned, holy
Calvin, was the greatest glory of the French Church that ever was, since he
was, Hooker praef. to his Church Politic.
as a famous writer witnesses. And though our Religion seek neither
antiquity nor authority from him, nor we denomination or confirmation by him,
because as the Apostle speaks we rejoice not in men: yet we reverence him,
because as the same Apostle in the same verse concludes, 1. Cor. 3.22.23.
whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, al are ours we Christ's, and Christ
Gods.

Mr LEECH.

Finally (my brethren) with my honest petition, and necessary counsel, I
join my hearty prayers (and tears with them) that it would please the author
of all goodness, and the God of all truth, to power the abundant riches of his
grace into your souls, that your understandings may be fully enlightened with
his truth, and that your wills may be made conformable thereunto in your
profession of the holy Catholic faith. For which as I now suffer the want of
my native country, so, in defense thereof, I shall be ready to yield up my
life, when it shall please my gracious Lord to call me unto that honor:
whereof I am unworthy.

Your devoted brother in Christ. Humfrey Leech.

ANSWER.

The Epistolary conclusion with a petition, and counsel, we should receive
more willingly, if your petition were more honest, and your counsel more
Evangelicall. Your prayers we return tenfold into your bosom, beseeching the
Lord that it may please him, to free your understanding by truth, ab Albert. in
Comp. Theol. lib. 5.
ignorantia very; to rectify your will by good, a concupiscentia mali; and to
purge your whole soul by grace, ab impotentia boni: that your will may be
subject to his will, your life to his service, not his service to your will;
and so you may be reduced to the true Apostolic, Catholic faith: that as
you complain you suffer the want, though the wanton want of your native
Country; so you may not endure the want of heavenly Jerusalem, your spiritual
Country: that when you are to appear at the fatal, and final judgment among
the great and small, when the muffling of conscience shall be discovered, the
worm of conscience be not your portion. And that in your pilgrimage here, you
may rather wash your garments in the blood of the Lamb, then in your own
blood: so by the tears of a sinner, blood of a Savior, and prayers of his
Saints on earth, you may be brought again to this militant Church, and in the
better world receive a permanent state in his triumphant Church.

Yours, if you be Christ's, DANIELL PRICE.

THE PREFACE UNTO the whole discourse.
Mr LEECH.

When first I set footing into this present business, my purpose was not (no
not in my most secret thoughts) to enter into any point of controversy, or to
give occasion of offense, or dislike unto any: only my resolution was,
plainly, and positiuely (as the course of my studies had ever bent, and
carried me) to glaunce at a maine point of doctrine (it coming but obiter in
my way) directly warranted, nay lineally deduced from the uniform consent of
all ancient times; bequeathed unto us by the perpetual tradition, and practice
of the Church.

ANSWER.

YOu took wrong footing in this business, both in secret, and in open sight of
God, men, and Angels: wherein let me remember you, how many aims you gave to
this question, how desirouslie you entered into it, how, not only in
Academicall, but Parochial sermons you taught it, how you frequentlie seasoned
your inkepot with the Colloquintida of contradiction, sometimes openly,
sometimes secretly, continually full of opposition. Wherein as you were not
often happy in the choice so not in the success, one being the cause of your
pastoral remove in A most Fair large, and ancient town, famous for
building, and clothing, but more especially for civil government care of
Religion, detestation of Popery, and what soever is praise worthy.
Shrewsbury, the other the cause of your Academicall censure in Oxford. And
whereas you say, you meant to give but a glaunce, the purport of your whole
sermon of distinguishing great and small, (a matter of great consequence
prosecuted to small purpose) shows how you did wire-draw a distinction upon
one part of your Text, and prosecute especially that one point so far as the
hour and your paper could afford: and indeed your glaunce so glanced upon the
whole Auditory, that some departed, others were perplexed, all offended
therewith. Religion so wronged, and the University disgraced, by the public
co^testing of a superstitious, supercilious doctrine, the consequences whereof
are pernicious and dangerous, and the question it self the very ground of
Monkish life, as the Rhemists confess, Annot. Rhe^. in Nov. Test.
wherein men flying some occasions of evil, they fly all occasions of doing
good; and prove dry fig trees, withered vines, empty sepulchers, broken
cesternes. And, whereas you affirm that the position was directly warranted,
nay lineallie deduced from the uniform consent of all ancient times; I think
I may speak of it, as Cael. Rhod. antiq. lectionum.
Rhodogine did of old Images, Perieru^t cum antiquitate: you have nothing to
prove your position to be old, but because it is rotten. But we deny it, as it
shall appear, to have any part of reverend antiquity to countenance it. And,
whereas you affirm your maine point of doctrine to be bequeathed; I enquire, if
bequeathed, by what Testament? surely neither by the old, nor new; by what
Legacy? Neither by the Fathers, nor General Councels: but by tradition (you
say;) wherein I may say to you, as our Mark. 7.9.
Savior said to the Pharisees, Well do ye reject the Co^manmandements of God,
that you may observe your own traditions. And yet for any Apostolical
tradition to confirm this, it will be no otherwise prooved then Confess.
Petric. c. 92. de Traditionibus.
Hosius proves that the greatest part of the Gospel is come to us by
tradition, and very little of it committed to writing; which is a most rash,
and false conceit of his. But Andradius acknowledges that the City of
refuge for all the runnagate points in Religion, is Tradition. His words
Andrad. Orthod. explic. lib. 2. page ^0.
be, Quam traditionum autoritatem si tollas, nutare and vacillare videbu^tur:
Many points would reele and totter, if not supported by the help of
Traditions. Saint 1. Cor. 9.6.
Paul has warned, that no man presume above that which is written: and Regul.
contract. 95. fol. page 502.
Basil admonishes that it is necessary and consonant to reason, that every
man learn that which is needful out of Scripture, both for the fulness of
godliness, and least they be invred to humane traditions. Yet I answer
concerning Traditions, that when this controversy is fully discussed, you
will be as unable to prove your position from any Apostolical tradition, as the
men of Doryla in Cicero pro L. Flacco.
Tully, who when they were to prove somewhat against Flaccus out of their
public Records, and their records were called for, they said they were robbed of
the^ by the way: so your Traditions which must speak for you, they are lost by
the way; no one, neither Bellarmine, nor Coccius, nor Sonnius, nor any writer
can produce one Apostolical sanction, tradition, or authority. And for the
practice of the Church, the Ecclesiastical histories show, that the ancient
servants of God, which first retired themselves from the world, did it not for
any opinion they had hereby to obtain perfection: but to escape persecution,
as Sozomen. lib. 1. c. 12.
Sozomen writes, and to hide themselves. And some of them were laymen, as
Athan. Ep. ad Dracont.
Dyonisius voucheth; some of them married men, as Dion. Ecclesiae hierar. c. 6.
Athanasius records; all of them freemen from binding themselves with vows,
as Nic. lib. 9. c. 14.
Nicephorus proves. And for the practice of Popish Monks, now the patterns of
this Evangelicall perfection, Philobib. c. 5.
Dunelmensis delivers it; Greges and vellera, fruges and horrea, porci and
olera, potus and patera, lectiones sunt hodie and studia Monachorum. And you
know the old verse; O Monachi, vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi:
Vos estis, Deus est testis, teterrima pestis.


Mr LEECH.

But yet since, contrary to my probable persuasion, certain private spirits
(whose faith is their own fancy) itching rather after profane novelty, and
heretical innovation, then abiding the wholesome doctrine of sacred
Antiquity, and the Churches dogmaticall tradition, have by all means,
labored to impugn my doctrine, and to defame my person: I have thought my
self in conscience, and duty (both before God, and man) obliged, a swell for
the general satisfaction of all, whom this present business may any way
concern, as for my own discharge in particular (being the party herein
especially interessed) briefly to co^pile, and publish the whole carriage, and
progress of this matter, in the ensuing treatise; humbly recommending, and
ever submitting my opinion unto the grave, and infallible judgment of the
Church, at whose feet, and tribunal alone prostrating my self, I must stand,
or fall: as also referring my self, with the moderat deportment of my cause,
unto the sincere judgment of the discreet, and impartial Reader.

ANSWER.

You were drawn to this, unwillingly, in respect of your vnabillity to
maintain the opinion; but most willingly in desire to stand out in
contradiction. But why should you rub over any here, with the title of
itching spirits? Barn.
It is the rule of S. Bernard, when in disputation or conference there is
railing or reviling, tunc non veritas quaeritur, sed animositas fatigatur:
Truth is not sought for, but strong and stubborn stomakes disgordge their
poison. He that has given leave to try the spirits, has prohibited the
condemning, nay judging of a brother: and therefore while you slander them with
the itch of profane novelty, you bewray your self to be infected with the
scab of heresy. They that gainesaid your doctrine, were wise and honest,
learned and religious; not a few, but the consent of all, of all degrees, among
us. And so far are they from defaming of your person, that I do assure my
self that every religious honest heart in Oxford, will be desirous to cover
it with the mantle of charity, and to pray that it may be invested with the
robe of Christ's righteousness: wishing from our hearts, that no other cause then
conscience, and duty (as you say) had obliged you to publish this your
Treatise; and that the discharge of your self, and satisfaction of others, had
been more truly, and charitablie performed; and that you had submitted your
opinion to Gods word, rather then the Church, seeing the Church is not the
infallible rule of judgment (as you hold.) Relec. controu. 4. de potestat.
ecclesiae in se. q. 3. art. 2. resp. ad arg. 5.
Stapleton him self, after long discussing, durst not absolutely affirm it
but seems to make it, rather probable, then credible, when he confesses that
it is not any article of our faith to believe that the authority of the
Church is the rule of our faith. And not only a Doctor, but a Pope speaks in
this case more plainly, Decret. Greg. lib. 5. de sent. excom. c. 28. a nobis
saepe.
Innocentius affirming that the Churches judgment follows opinion, which
often deceives and is deceived. And howsoever I may say to you, as Aug. de
unit Eccles. cap. 2.
S. Augustine did to some heretics of his time; De hoc inter nos quaestio
versatur, vtrum apud nos, an apud illos, vera Ecclesia sit: the question being
controverted between you and us, whethers is the true Church; neither of us
can prove the argument by the Church, seeing Chrysostom. in Hom. 10. in 1. Tit
Chrysostom does conclude that the Scriptures must teach who has the true
Church, De unit. Eccles. cap. 16.
S. Austin resolving that Scriptures be documenta, fundamenta, firmamenta; the
proofs, foundations, grounds of our cause: and therefore, unless you be
contented to submit your opinion to the Scriptures, it is manifest that you
acknowledge that your doctrine and the Scriptures were never acquainted. The
Pharisees the false porters of the kingdom, Mat. 23.13.
took away the key of knowledge; and they received their reward, a volley
Luke 11.42.
of woe. Take heed least doing the like, you incur the like danger. More
respective are the Schoolmen of Scripture, then you are. Lom. did. 23.
Lo^bard, Scot. 3. did. 23. q. vin.
Scotus, Oc. 3. q. 8. art. 3.
Ockam, By 3. did. 23. q. 2. lit. g. and h.
Biell in their distinction of faith; they hold, that it is either fides infusa
and inspirata, an infused faith wrought in us by the inlightning spirit of God,
and resting it self upon the truth of God; or else it is acquisita and suasa,
a natural faith grounding it self upon humane authority, and wrought by
humane motions and persuasions. The faith we have of the points in Scripture,
is of the former and better kind, not relying on the testimony of the Church,
whose authority is but a created thing from the first verity, as Prin. fid.
doct. lib. 8.
Stapleton confesses; when as the first verity enforces the mind without
further authority to yield obedience. As also Scripture is that Romans 1.16.
power commanding, that Ephesians. 6.17.
sword dividing, that Ier. 23.27.
hammer driving in, that 2. Cor. 10.
Pyoner powerful to overthrow strong holds, and to cast down every high
thing: and therefore only the authority of the Scripture is to be relied upon;
because our faith would reele, and totter, and fall, if the authority of
Scriptures stand not fast. O then submit your self to the censure of
Scripture, whose majesty is ineffable, whose decree inevitable: which rightly
looked into, with the eye of humility, harkned unto with the ear of attention,
and understood with the heart of faith, will be the certain rule, authority,
testimony, only to be relied on; the pillar of truth, and School of goodness.

Mr LEECH his Title. A TRIVMPH OF TRVTH.
ANSWER.

A Triumph, and why? Ludov. Vives in praefatio ad libros Aug. de civit. Dei.
Honorius the Emperor had a fighting Cock called Rome, whereupon Vives
records that when the Goathes surprised Rome the City, and news was brought
that Rome was lost, the Emperor thought it was his Cock, not his City. Your
Triumph, and his Cock may go together. A book in folio upon the 4. Gospels.
Johannes de la Hay the Jesuit, has lately robbed you of the Title, his great
volume being entitled Triumphus Veritatis: and surely he had some semblance
for it; for his volume seemed to be a vessel of good lading, though it have
nothing in it but stubble and hay. But you, to give your boat of so small
burden, the Title of a man of war; sure your title is too big, and your book
is too little. It is A Triumph, got by flying; or, a triumph, got without
fighting. Let the Pharisee be the Herald of his own praises, Pigmalion
enamored with his own devises; let Narcissus do ate on his shadow; let
Thersites vaunt without modesty: but how much better were it for you, that you
had styled your book with some humble and religious title, savouring of grace,
not of vainglory? But alas, Religion, without Truth, will be ever unsavory; and
reading, without judgment ever peremptory.

Mr LEECH. CHAP. 1.
Entreating of this parcel of holy scripture; I saw the dead, In a sermon at
Christ-Church in Oxford 1607 Apoc. 20.12.
both great, and small, stand before God; I distinguished a fowrefolde
acception, or signification of great, and small. FIRST; great, and small for
worldly authority, and temporal condition. SECONDLY; great, and small in
respect of heavenly supereminency of grace, and spiritual infusion. THIRDLY;
great and small in lieu of diversity of rewards, and retribution. FOURTHLY;
great, and small in regard of contrariety, and disparitie of works, and
operation.

ANSWER.

A time there shall be, when the books of every man's conscience shall be
laid forth; a day of fear and fury, when an universal flowde of fire shall
overstreame the whole world, when the heavens shall threaten, the earth cast
up, al creatures cry vengeance, devils accuse, conscience give evidence, and
the whole Jury of Saints pass verdict upon sinners: and then the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed. In holy Scripture this judgment is often
mentioned: but of all others, Hier.
that glorious Eagle S. John, mounting the high sphere of divinest
contemplation, does most expressly by his vision and revelation, manifest the
declaration thereof; and of all other places, most pregnantly in this your
text, Apoc. 20.12. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before God,
and the books were opened. Was there no other place to confirm an untruth,
but that which shall confound all untruth? no other Scripture to justify you,
but that which shall judge you? Would you sow tares upon that ground, upon
which, wheat, and tares shall be distinguished? Remember whence you are fallen,
and repent, and do the first works or else I will come against thee, says
Christ, Rev. 2.5. O the eternity of that cursed time, Rev. 2.5.
to be spent in wretchedness and confusion; no myriads of years to free from
the execution of that perpetual judgment. An end not ending, a death not
dying should terrify and amase you, and make you return, seeing the dead both
great and small shall stand before God. But to your distinction. There is a
great mistake in your fourfold acception of great and small. For antiquity,
which you so much boast of, do all expound it otherwise: Rupert. in Apoc.
Rupertus, by mortuos, magnos, and pusillos, understanding homines impios,
spiritus malignos; Anselm. in Apoc. 12.
Lyra in Apoc. 12.
Anselmus, Lyra, Hugo in Apoc. 12.
Hugo, the Gloss. in Apoc. 12.
ordinary gloss, and many others understanding by the dead, great, and small,
malos, only wicked men. And Carthus. in eund.
Carthusian intimates so much of St Austins opinion, that he understands
not, by mortuos magnos and pusillos, the Saints; but by libros apertos.
Carthusians words be plain; Augustinus per libros apertos, intelligit Sanctos,
in quibus mali poterunt legere, seu videre bona, quae facere debuerunt, and
neglexerunt: Austin understands by the books that were opened, the Saints, in
whom the wicked might see, and read the good which they ought to have done,
and have neglected. How then holds your fourfold acception, if by the dead you
mean the living, and by the wicked you mean the Saints? Caelius Rhodog. lib.
20.
Rhodogine records, that Polemo being the spectator of a Tragoedy at Smyrna,
a ridiculous actor comes out upon the stage, and being to pronounce, O coelum,
o terra! bends his hands and eyes to the earth and cries o coelum! and then
lifts his eyes and hands to the heaven and pronounces, o terra! Polemo
condemns his action for a soloecisme. It is no less in you, to call evil
good, and good evil: and in the Prophet it is forewarned with a woe. Whose
fourfold acception this should be, I know not. If your own, I am sorry for
the mistake, and I confess it is the first notice that I ever took of your
breathing in any School learning and in that, I shall do you no more injury
then Gretzer. App. 1. ad lib. 1. Bellarm. Idem dictu^ page 558. Caietanus, homo
potius in Scholasticis subtilitatibus and argutiis, quam in lectione Patrum,
Conciliorum, and veteris memoria exer^itatus.
Gretzer (that great Sir Railer of the society of Bar-Iesus) does to Caietan:
for he taxes the Cardinal that though he were well seen in the subtilties
of Schools; yet he was not so in the writings of the Fathers. So you on the
contrary, have taken upon you the reading of the Fathers; but your poverty in
School learning this naked distinction shows.

Mr LEECH.

Hereunto I applied that distinction of S. Gregory; Moral. lib. 26. cap. 24.25.
Quidam judicantur, and pereunt; quidam non judicantur, and percunt: quidam
iudicantur, and regnant: quida^ non iudicantur and regna^t. That is (as an
other ancient writer, somewhat varying the words, but keeping the sense, does
excellently render it) some are to be judged, and damned; perishing by
judgment. Some are judged, and damned already; perishing without judgment.
Some are to be judged and saved; saved with judgment. Some are judged and saved
already; saved without judgment. And all this diversity of judgment arises
from contrariety, and disparity of works, acted, and done here in this life,
by great and small mentioned in my Text.

ANSWER.

In the two Chapters of S. Gregory which you cite in your margin, though the
distinction be found, according to your quotation, but in some copies: yet it
makes no more for your purpose, then that place that Bellarm. de Mon. c. 5..
habemus in primis.
Bellarmine brings to prove the antiquity of Monks; Enos coepit invocare
nomen Domini: ergo Enos was the first founder of Monkery. So you infer that
there is a disparity of works, acted, and done in this life, by great and
small; ergo there is a distinction betwixt precepts and counsels: an argument
as forcible, as that common non sequitur of schools, A baculo ad angulu^. But
of this more hereafter. For many things that seem most material about the
question, are repeated so often and in diverse places, that I must be constrained
to bring those wanderers to your sermon.

Mr LEECH.

This distinction I briefly dilated upon, as the straightnes of time (which now
had overtaken me) would give me leave, and coming to the last member of the
distinction, in the very close, and vpshot of the sermon, I concluded, that
those, that were to be saved without judgment, are such, as did transcend the
precepts of the law by due performance of EVANGELICALL COVNSAILS of
perfection; endevoring not only to perform the Moral obligatorie decalogue,
but thirsting after more eminent perfection added, nay voluntarily by power of
an arbitrary choice, offered unto the lawgiver more, then the general precepts
of the law necessarily tied them unto; devoting and consecrating themselves
unto the heavenly profession of spiritual poverty, Angelical chastity, and
humble obedience, renouncing their own will, forgoing carnal concupiscence,
forsaking all things, yea and themselves, for Christ, and heavens sake. That is
to say; they despise the worlds transitory trash, and pleasures; and only
thirst after spiritual goods, which are the true treasure of heaven.

ANSWER.

Conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem; what a concatenation of mistakings are
here? your text misinterpreted, Anselme Hugo. Gloss. Carth. Aug. etc. vt supra.
as Antiquity, the Fathers, and glosses prove against you; your distinction to
no purpose urged and now the last member thereof so misapplyed by inserting
into the words of S. Gregory Evangelicall counsels of perfection, when as no
such point is in that chapter, that pity rather then pith must answer you. You
have wire-drawne this distinction, and twyned such webs in it, as have caught
your self. Your first overture of this Doctrine, was not so much as you here
report; it began like a snaile to creep out then, but neither head nor horns
appeared then. I reiourne the full answer of this, to the due place. Your
positions be vbiquitaries, I can apprehend the^ where I will, and I will do
it, where I see most sting and strength.

Mr LEECH.

This was the sum, and substance delivered in my first entrance into the
point, Mr Doctor KING (Vicechancelor of the University) being then present; and
giving no signification of dislike conceived by him against the verity of this
doctrine.

ANSWER.

Your discourse upon Evangelicall counsels was thrice presented to the public
auditory: but with much more reservation the^ you let your readers understand.
In the first you did but intimate or insinuate that which followed. And boast
not much that you handled it thrice, seeing it was misliked thrice, that in
this you may speak as the Poet did in another kind; Ovid. de Trist. lib. 1.
Ter limen tetigi, ter sum revocatus. Of Mr Vicechancelors manifesting no
dislike you do oppose, and I will answer in your next chapter.

Mr LEECH. CHAP. 2.
NOw let the indifferent, and judicious Reader observe, whether I may not more
then probably conclude, that either the Vicecha^celor, at this time,
apprehended it not; or apprehending it, in his own true judgment, and
conscience disgusted it not; or distasting it, yet being not able to convince,
and refell the demonstratiue evidence of it, could have been content to wincke
at it, and give it his indulgent connivencie, so that it might thus have passed
away in silence.

ANSWER.

THat you accuse the most vigilant governor of our university for silence as
if either by negligence, or connivence he did let pass your error, who has
as a true and most faithful servant in Gods church watched ever in his
government, that the wicked man sow no tares, you do it very impudently
without sense or shame. All confess with admiration the speediness of his
apprehensio^, the soundness of his judgment, the all ability of his
knowledge. His continuance, experience, honorable and holy employments in the
work of a true Evangelist have manifested to the world how far he is from
the imputations you put upon him, the reasons why he made no public dislike at
first, follow.

Mr LEECH.

Was the point erroneous? Where then was his judgment, that should have
descried it, if it deserved his censure? why escaped it then unrebuked? might
this doctrine now pass current, and must it afterward be judged counterfaict?
In a word: is the doctrine as it was generally intimated, allowable; and are
the particulars thereof being now dilated, and amplified, made thereupon
intolerable?

ANSWER.

Many questions not worth the answering; idle and dull interrogations only
worth the censuring. Two qualities strive for the first place in this
Paragraph, Impiety and absurdity, fit twins, but most unfitly bestowed in your
injurious traducing this honor of our Oxford. You might foreconceiue what is
answered to this before you read it, but to awaken you, receive thus much: How
your sermons were approved of (especially after you became the hackney preacher
of the University) both by him and others, is not unknown to you: they were
ever accounted the (...) of Postillary friars, bestowing those sacred hours in
gathering sticks, never making judgment the Master of your opinion, seldom
adorning your speech with the better part of that which the Navy of Hiram
brought to Solomon, I mean with gold and silver; but with Ivory and Apes and
Peacocks, legends, allegories, etc. But nearer to the purpose, to answer why
your doctrine was not descried by his vigilant wisdom and rebuked; the reason
was, either his absence at that time, which whither he were or no he knows
not, being not only then, but ever since he governed us, employed continually
in the greatest and most aduantageous business that ever any Vicechancelor
labored in: or else because of the undisposed, undigested, rude, and crude
manner of your preaching, wherein you proposed your positions so darkly and
obscurely, that unless you were unacquainted with your self, you had not
begun your Epistle with Efficacior lingua qua^ litera; for if Some body does
much injury you if he were not author of much and corrector of most in this
your book.
none had me^ded your pen, your most ingenuous friends, would have as much
neglected your paper work, as your pulpit. O how much are you to answer for
the prophanatio^ of that holy place, and for your idle words in that holy
work, beating the air, mispending the time, mistaking the Text, that the most
judicious among us, could hardly conceive, whether your doctrine were positive,
or privative, affirmative or negative, and the most charitably censorious
thought it perdere hora^ to hear you; Arist.
as the Philosopher spoke to such another (...), whose speech was composed of
non sense and non sequitur. If in your first sermon, you only urged the
distinction, and began to build your rotten wall upon that foundation
afterward: marvel not that when like a Mole you were working under ground,
you were not discried when you were not above ground. For as it is a doctrine
conceived in darkness, so you brought it forth in clouds of darkness.

Mr LEECH.

Howbeit certain of a purer strain ( Brethren some me^ call them; and
Brethren I confess them to be; fratres in malo, as Simeon and Levi sometimes
were) secretly murmured, and began in corners privately (as Heretics usually
have done) to traduce me, my doctrine, and my author S. Gregory: calu^niating
that in secret, which openly they durst not yet adventure substantially to
impugn.

ANSWER.

Nullus est eorum fidus affectus, Ierom.
quorum est diversa fides, says S. Ierom: Difference in religion extinguisheth
charity in affection. You prove this true when you tax the purer strain, and
yet you strain for a more perfect strain. Do any of the more pure strain
profess angelical integrity, virginal chastity, spiritual transcendency?
as you teach. Or to come to your meaning, be any here, of those purer strain?
whom while you scoff, he that sits in heaven shall laugh you to scorn: be
there I say, any here of those who making conscience of their ways have
refused in manual subscription, and orall declaration, willingly to manifest
their hearty consent and reverence to the religious Articles in our Church
maintained? The name of Brethren is much abused by you: a name that Christ by
his own mouth sanctified, the Apostles in the Acts so frequently used, S. John
in his Epistles so familiarly recited, the Primitive Church in their time so
blessedly entertained. The Ratisbon. in Comp. Theol
Schools observe the name of Brother to be nomen vnitatis, aequalitatis,
charitatis and societatis, and even by this brotherhood, we have santiorem
copulam cordium quam corporum says Bernard: Bern.
A name more welcome to the godly, then the Olive branch to Noah, then David to
Jonathan, then the waters of Bethel to David. It is an Oade, a Psalm, a
Canticle, a Cant. 1.2.
name as an ointment powered out, as that name in the Canticles. It was the oyer
and determiner of Genesis 13.8.
Abraham and Lots controversies in the law, and it is the bond of peace and
girdle of truth to al true Christians in the Gospel. Of Joseph's miseries it is
recorded that the Archers greiued him, and shot against him, and hated Genesis
49.23.
him. Malicious, perfidious, murtherous brethren grieved him, iniuria operis;
shot against him, blasphemia oris; and hated him, invidia cordis, says Hugo in
Genesis
Hugo. You may be rankt with such brethren if you continue the Cacoethes of
traducing those worthies, whose lives shine before men, that they honor God and
glorify their Father which is in heaven. Discharge not then such arrows, even
bitter words, hedded with venom, feathered with fury, and shot off with folly.
But these Brethren you say they be fratres in malo, such as were Simeon and
Levi. How Caiphas-like you denounce judgment against fratres in malo, your
brethren in iniquity, look the Text Genesis 49.5. Genesis 49.5.
etc. Never any Scripture, came so near to any offenders, as that to fratres
in malo, the salt Peter Pyoners; who like as if the dream of the Stoics had
come to pass, that the world should be fired, had instruments of cruelty in
their habitations, into their secrets let not my soul come (says old and
Reverend Jacob) my glory be not joined with their assemblies: for in their
wrath, they killed a man; and in their self will, they dug down a wall:
Cursed be their wrath, for it is fierce; and their rage, for it is cruel. Nay
the very curle of curses, and very bottom of the vial and dreggs of
vengeance, with the dissipation and dispersion of their families upon the face
of the earth; the eternal detestation of their names, with the clapping and
hissing and supplotion of all the world against them, be upon them, and their
posterities, that practice such Helborne boundless conspiracies. We have no
such fratres in malo. Object not murmuring against any among us; it is the
brand of malecontented Traitors, not of godly preachers. The Christians in this
life may be compared to the Stork, desolately sitting; to the Turtle, mourning;
to the Dove, lamenting; to Rahel, weeping; and to the souls under the altar
crying out, How long Lord, holy and true, do not thou avenge? So they may
sorowfully complain to see the abomination of desolation, Romish, diuilish,
Antichristian positions presume ever to be taught in our Churches and Temples.
It was no factious murmuring, no secret calu^niating, as you unjustly term
it: but the vindicating of truth from oppression, which neither Policy for
example, nor religion for peace could tolerate. Your preaching was misliked,
not your author. S. Gregory's praises we neither deny, nor envy: yet Bar. Tom.
8. Annal. An. Christi. 1593. number. 62. p. 57.
Baronius affirms that he lived in a barre^ time, and therein taxes him for
some wants in learning. And Canus loc. Theol. lib. 11. c. 6.
Canus observed that he was overcredulous in the reports of miracles in his
time, and therein touches his defect in judgment. But whatsoever he was in
other points, sure he was no father, or author of your position; your
citations out of him, have no one word of Evangelicall Counsails of perfection.

Mr LEECH.

The report, and rumor whereof (by relation of some friends) no sooner came
unto my ears, but presently (knowing well the assured grounds of my doctrine)
I addressed my self to have satisfied, and contented any ingenious, and
unpassionate auditour, by a second repetition, with a brief, punctual, and
perspicuous explanation and confirmation of my aforesaid doctrine: For I was
altogether unwilling to suffer the least imputation or scandal to be fastened
upon it, or upon the Author (were it but in corners secretly) and farther,
though I intended not to run into a public opposition, yet now occasion might
be ministered unto me, and others to vindicate a necessary truth from the
detraction of calumnious tongues.

ANSWER.

To satisfy any auditor is not only ingenuous, but a religious act. But did
you give content to any man that conferred with you in it? Did you not rather
in your preparation for the second sermon, take occasion to cast the stumbling
block of offense in your third, verifying that speech, (...).
Finis vnius mali

gradus est futuri? I will not ask you whether the second sermon were your
own: or whether you purged the bowels of a Friars Postill, and culd all those
your pearls (as you thought them) out of the Dunghill of some moath-eaten
Monk, tied up in chains, till you came to free him, and to bind your self.
The general judgment upon your book, when it came first forth, was this,
that it was composed of two styles, diverse in form, vneequall in fabrique;
the one somewhat dull and leaden very resty, the other more nimble and
quicke-silvered but somewhat scurvy: whereupon a familiar acquaintance of yours
censured it thus, that the ground of your paper was plowed by an ox and an
ass, a coniunctio^ forbidden in the law. I do not desire to make my paper
guilty of idle words, but yet this I must profess that your second
repetition, which you mention, does savor of much unsavory stuff, and has in
it d sapientiam attramentalem, non mentalem. Senec.
You say, you did not purpose to run into a public opposition, when you did
reiterate that, in your second, which you had in your former sermon. But I
desire you to summon the sobriety of your senses before your own judgment,
and confess plainly how it could otherwise be, But that the proclamation of
co^tradiction in you, would prove a public oppositio^ mainetained by you:
weigh this in the balance of discretion, and you will find it lightness and
innovation. you seem to join your forces in mainetenance of your position,
when you say occasion was given to you and others to vindicat this necessary
truth. What others assisted you? Among us, all desire to purge the Temple from
superstition, and to sweep away those cobwebs which the Spiders of Rome have
hanged up. There is no one, that dare polute our Holy places publicly, with
any such infectious doctrine: so far are your fellow Counsailors from making
a plural number, that a duall number never showed themselves amongst us yet in
this controversy.

Mr LEECH. CHAPT. 3.
BEing thus occasioned by the secret, and clancular murmuration of Brethren
(the fame whereof began now to disperse it self abroad) to address some
defense of my former doctrine; I took the next opportunity to supply the
public place, and willing rather to give a little farther touch to convince the
said Brethren, then to dwell, as yet, upon any maine, and full discourse (which
was not my purpose; the point being yet not publicly contradicted) I
repeated, and dilated upon the point more at large, as it was originaly deduced
out of the last bra^ch of S. Gregory his distinction; to wit, quida^ non
judicantur, and regna^t: to this purport, and effect.

ANSWER.

OCcasion and scandal be either given or taken, they were both given by you
rather then offered you. You desired to give a touch to convince the said
Brethren: all of us were brethren in this, all agreed in dislike of your manner
of preaching; which was so dull and Delphically mystical, that few heard you,
and none approved you. But I would willingly desire you to reconcile these two
places in this paragraph. First that the fame of the brethrens murmuratio^
began to spread it self abroad, and yet within five lines you confess, the
point was not publicly contradicted. If murmuration be contradictio^, then non
sense may serve as a marginall note. But because you breath at the brethren
again in this chapter (though I defend none that Schismatically contradict
the state or break the blessed peace of our flowrishing Church, neither do
know any such here, God that knows the secrets of all hearts, bearing me
record;) seeing you so malitiouslie traduce this Honorable University, as if
it were an Anabaptisticall Seminary: I do challendge you, or any of your
part, to answer these two points; First that there be Vide Johan Pappium. Peace
of Rome and many other books.
more material differences in points of religion, and more gross points of
Chatharisme among Papists, then among all the Schismatiques or Separists:
Secondly, that the Church of England never had any so Puritannical; as to
judge themselves celestial men, terrestrial Angels, excelling, surmounting,
transcending in perfection, fulling the law, nay more then the law.

Mr LEECH.

Of this point (said I) I may speak as S. John speaks to the seven churches
of Asia; co^cluding ever the burden of his admonition which a pathetical
Epiphonema in the reprehension; Let him that has an ear to hear, hear what
the spirit says to the churches. And may not I apply, let him that has not
only an ear to hear, but a soul to save by the ears hearing, hear what the
celestial Oracle heavenly spirit and Catholic Church jointly speak, and
deliver concerning Evangelicall Counsels.

ANSWER.

Remember not only what S. John ends his epistle with: but also what he
seals up his whole revelatio^ with, I Apoc. 22.19.
protest unto every man that hears the Words of the prophecy of this book,
If any ma^shal add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that
are written in this book. For that sweet aphorism and acclamation of every
of S. John's Epistles cited by you, I acknowledge the power and divine spirit
speaking in it. For what is recorded of Hercules Gallicus, that his speeches
tied the ears of his hearers to his tongue, is more true by many degrees
concerning God: and therefore it is not only David's incitation, Ps. 34.9.
O come and see and taste how good the Lord is; but Ps. 34.12. Apoc. 1.
O come hither chidren and harken, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. And
S. John's proclamation in the first of the Apocalypse; Blessed are they that
read, and they that hear, and they that keep the words of this book, and
therefore let him that has an ear, hear what the spirit says to the
churches: yet whosoever hears and receives false doctrine willingly,
receives and hears his own damnation. And for the Catholic Church you
brag of, Lactantius lib. 4. Institutio. cap. vlt.
Lactantius has given warning of such boasts, singuli haereticorum coetus suam
esse Ecclesiam Catholica^ putant. The Celestial Oracle, heavenly spirit, and
true catholic Church (I say and will confirm it by all manner of arguments)
they never taught that point as you seek to mainetaine it, concerning
Evangelicall Counsels of Perfection.

Mr LEECH.

Or I may speak with our blessed Savior, advising, exhorting, counselling,
yea, out of the whole mass of mankind, inviting, nay inciting some to that
angelical gift of virginal chastity; qui potest capere, capiat; he that can
aspire to the top of angelical integrity, let him become a votary of virginal
Chastity.

ANSWER.

The strangest exposition of words, that ever I read or heard. Virginal
chastity: the word virginal is out of tune; a weak wired chastity, to ascend
the top of angelical integrity. Paul did not only approve, but appoint
Ministers: and yet asks the question, 2. Cor. 2.16.
Quis idoneus ad haec? And though Christ not only was a virgin, but did allow
of virgins: yet he may pronounce this speech, Qui potest capere, capiat,
without any such inference or consequence. You deliver no gold without dross,
no place of Scripture without some wrested and impertinent gloss. But in your
sermon you shall receive more satisfaction.

Mr LEECH.

This is S. Paul his sapientia inter perfectos; apostolical wisdom for men
of angelical perfection. These easily disclose, and discover the worlds
foolishnes and impostures, when they paragon them with heavens remuneration,
and treasures. These are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world:
stars fixed in the sphere of heaven, the Church militant; not wandering in
their motion toward heaven, the Church triumphant.

ANSWER.

The ancient writers do not so expound those words. Al show that the Apostle
does therein distinguish between the believers and unbelievers, as may be
seen by the connexio^: but more especially Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. 2.6.
Chrysostom thus expounds perfectos, (...), he calls them perfect which
did believe. S. Hierome expounds so, Theodoret so, and the whole curre^t of
expositors understand a kind of perfection in belief, not in life. Aquinas
has such a restriction that agrees with the rest: and all this shows that
your speech is mere Pelagianisme, wherein you magnify the arm of flesh, and
the nature of mankind, and so seem to approve a perfect perfection, which you
do most imperfectly. It is S. De peccat. mer. and remission. 15.
Augustines advise, Cum dicitur cuiusque perfectio, qua in redicatur videndu^
est: When perfection, says he, is named, we must consider wherein it is named.
Perfectus est aliquis sapientiae auditor, non perfectus Doctor: a man may be a
perfect hearer of righteousness, not a perfect doer, or as some think, a perfect
knower why? we know but in part, 1. 1. Cor. 15.
Cor. 15. Yes we know perfectly perfectione viae, non perfectione patriae, by
the perfection of the way here, not by the perfection of our Country hence, say
the Schools. Perfectione ordinis, non finis, says Iunius.
Iunius; perfectione partium, non graduum, says Lomb.
Lombard; perfecti viatores non perfecti possessores, says Aug. in Ps. 38.
Austin, perfect travelers in righteousness, not perfect possessors: and this
so limited, by that good Father, as that he allows it only pro consortio
humanae societatis, pro huius vitae capacitate, pro statu viatoris, pro huius
vitae modulo, only for a perfection sufficient to converse and hold society
with mankind, a perfection for the model and capacity of this life, for the
state of passengers and wayfaring men; and concludes, Ad Bonif. lib. 3.
Omnium in carne nostra imperfecta perfectio, the perfection of all men while
they are in the flesh, is imperfect. John Baptist had not a greater among the
sons of women: but whosoever was least in the kingdom of God, and all the
celestial spirits, is far beyond him. Inter natos mulierum, non autem inter
choros coelestium spirituum, Bern. sermon. 38. in Cantie.
says S. Bernard: among sons of women, not among armies of Angels. Not John
Baptist, a Prophet, nay more then a Prophet? Who had for his clothing hair;
for his habitation, a desert; for his meat, wild locusts; for his title, the
praecursor; for his preaching, Repentance; for his ministration, Baptism; the
usher, and harbinger of our Savior: had not he angelical perfection? If he
that so faithfully attended his Master, had it not: how should you, that have
fled from your Master, attain unto it? I say not, Esaias 14.12.
o Lucifer how did thou fall? but, O Lucifer, whether would thou rise? Is
it obedient humility, to be so proud? Spiritual poverty, to desire to be so
pompous? Angelical chastity, to be so luxuriant? I acknowledge, that there be
some that are salt of the earth, lights of the world, roses in the field,
lillies in the valleys, terrae gemmula, coeli stellulae; yet far from
Angelical integrity. They may climb a step, but not to the top of Jacobs
Ladder.

Mr LEECH.

These are our best pilots amongst men; their godly co^versation ought to be
our holy imitation. These guide by their examples the barks of our bodies
(wherein the eternal treasures of our souls are carried, as in earthen
vessels) through the perilous rocks of the seas of this world, that they may
ariue safely at the designed haven of heaven, when they flit from the bed of
this mortal body.

ANSWER.

Pilots they may be: and yet, as the Ovid. de Trist. lib. 1.
Poet of his Pilot spoke; Rector in incerto est; nec quid fugiatue, petatue,
Denotat: ambiguis ars stupet ipsa malis,
So I of the best; they have their slidings, falls, faults, trances,
appolexies. If you have read over S. Austin, you may find the distinction
between peccatum, and crimen: sin in general, which no man is freed from;
and heinous, notorious, scandalous sin, culpable in the eyes of men, crying
in the ears of heaven. In his Enchir. ad Laurent.
Enchiridion ad Laurentium he affirms this; the life of holy men may be
found, though not without falt, yet without an offensive fault; and more
whosoever teaches, is Heretical. Beware in defending your perfect Pilots, you
make not shipwreck of a good conscience: the mast of your faith is shaken; let
not the anchor of your hope be broken.

Mr LEECH.

These are beacons on a hill (the hill of the Church) whose lives as lights,
and burning lamps, forewarne, and so forearme us against all invasion of any
spiritual enemies. These are entia transcendentia men soaring above the
ordinary pitch of men, celestial men, terrestrial Angels, surmounting and
transcending the precepts of the law by Evangelical counsels of perfection:
endeavoring not only to perform the law, but thirsting after a more holy,
heavenly, and excelling perfection, have performed more the^ the laws general
precepts obliged them unto; adding over, and above the law, De vera
virginitatate prope finem.
that which the law wanted of the merit of perfection; as S. Basil speaks;
professing spirirituall poverty, Angelical Chastity, and humble obedience; and
all this for heavens sake.

ANSWER.

Holy men in all ages through faith, as the Apostle speaks, have obtained
good report. We yield it with reverence unto them, we honor their virtues, and
seek to imitate their examples. But that you should seperat any from the
praedicament of humanity by being transcendents, that they should so far
hurl beyond the reach of man, I know no reason for it. Some may transcende
the Politic laws of Nations, but not the laws of God, as P. Matt. loc. Com.
clas. 3.
Peter Martyr distinguishes: or some may be Transcendents respectively, if
compared with others, but simply, they are not so, in themselves. Gregory does
not teach it, you cannot prove it. You affirm that the keeping of more then
the laws general precepts, is possible. I answer, that we do understand the
keeping of the law either according to the letter of the law, Loc. com. clas.
3. cap. 3.
or according to the meaning of the law Or as Peter Martyr distinguishes, the
law may be considered either by the general outward judgment of man, no
farther then the bark of the letter, as the Pharisees did: Mat. 5.
or by the inward sense and pith of the law, as our Savior in the fifth of
Matthew expounded it. According to the letter of the law, a man may be so
happy by grace, as not to be a worshipper of images, no blasphemer, no
adulterer, no thief, no murderer, and so of the rest: but according to the
meaning of the law, it is impossible for any in this mass of corruption, to
perform perfectly, and fully, any of the precepts of the law; much less,
more then the precepts. And hereupon I infer what S. In Cant. ser. 50.
Bernard in this case speaks, The commandment neither has been fulfilled
in this life, nor can be. And that which an ancient Marc. Herem. de lege spir.
Hermit voucheth to this purpose, Seek not the perfection of the law in man's
virtues, for no man is found perfect in it. You unjustly accuse the law, that it
wants perfection: it must judge you, condemn you it not. Scripture says it,
heaven and earth cannot gain say it, that Psalm. 119.
the law of the Lord is perfect. The best that ever were, wanted much of the
fulfilling of the law, confessing themselves unprofitable servants. You seek
to prove comparatively, that one man may soar above the ordinary pitch of
others, by reason of his gifts: and this we grant. But hence to prove that the
law is imperfect, and that man may pass absolutely beyond the law, is absolutely
untrue. The place in Basil cannot prove any such point; and your own speech in
your sermon, does disprove any such assertion, when you urge David's confession
of the immense measure of the law, Psalm. 109.
Mandatum tuum nimis latum: so that like Peter in the mount, you speak you
know not what.

Mr LEECH.

And that they may more readily follow, and devoutlie adhere unto Christ they
cast away that which presses down so fast, nay which often times presses
down to hell; overloading, and surcharging the soul with immoderate weight;
the thorny cares, and choking riches of this present world.

ANSWER.

The abnegation of the world, yea of themselves, is the first vow in Baptism:
no sooner we come into the world, but vow to forsake the world. The Apostle in
the Phrase Heb. 12.1.
Heb. 12.1. exhorting to cast away every thing that presses down, and
hangs on so fast: means that riches should be cast away then, when they are
the occasion of sins. And therefore S. Ierom does condemn, not him In 6. Matthew.
qui habet, sed qui servit divitiis. So in regard of Christ, we must discharge
our selves, if they be hindrances to us, of whatsoever; though never so dear
or precious to us: we must put them of, as Bartimaeus did cast away his
cloak, to follow Christ. It is most true, they be thornie cares, the roots
thereof ilia terrae, the exenterated guts and garbadge of the earth; and fruits
thereof, though lillia terrae, yet but the fading strewing flowers of the
earth, The roots stinking, the fruits dying. And yet as of poison, Plin.
amulets may be made: so of the unrighteous Mammon, there may be good use; a
man being no more to leave his riches and possession, then his place and
vocation, unless he find that God so appoint and call him, and that his
riches do corrupt and hurt him.

Mr LEECH.

These with fear and trembling recompt, and remember that terrible
interrogation of our Savior concerning the worlds riches, and the profit
redounding unto man in the vain, and maine pursuit thereof; what shall it
adva^tage a man to win the whole world, and to loose his own soul?

ANSWER.

If conscience be, as some define it, a bit before sin, a scourge after sin:
think upon it, least it do worthily torture you for knowing your masters will
and doing it not. Recompt, and remember, and examine your own soul; whether,
like to the profane Heb. 12.16
person in the epistle to the Hebrews, you have not sold your birthright for a
portion of meat. A sin against knowledge, and conscience, is near to the
unpardonable sin. Seeing you know, nothing can redeem a soul without
Christ; remember with fear, and trembling, your own speech, What shall it
advantage a man to win the whole world, and to loose his own soul? Which
place, as you use it, does justify my former speech, that then riches, and the
whole world are to be conte^ned; when the soul by delighting in them, is
endangered.

Mr LEECH.

And therefore these professors of Evangelicall Cou^sailes, merchandising for
their souls earnestly with all spiritual endeavor upon the seas of this
world, follow the counsel, which Christ gave to the young man (who came to
the WAY to learn the way to heaven) if thou will be perfect, go sell all that
thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and
come and follow me.

ANSWER.

Professors of Evangelicall counsels S. Gregory calls them not: S. Gregory
has no such word as Profession of Evangelicall Counsels.
you lack both proofs and grounds for your assertion. The young man I shall
bring to your sermon: there you shall see, that, though S. Gregory use the
same words of Christ to the young man, yet to noe such purpose. Till then I say
to you, as our Savior did to another young man; Young man, I say unto thee
Arise: and if you hear not this, I ingeminate his speech yet to a third young
man; Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Mr LEECH.

O what an exchange had this young man made, what an offer did Christ make him,
what counsel did the wisdom of the father give him, how much does it now
repent him? In a word: o how happy had he been, both in body and in soul,
since he had been secure of the salvation both of body, and of soul, and not
only secure of that, but thesauru^ habuisset in coelo, his penny had been of
pure gold, and he had had measure for measure, yea above measure, heavens
remuneration heaped upon him in lieu of Christian perfection, if he had parted
with himself, and abandoned the worlds trash, to have partaked with Christ,
and heavens treasure.

ANSWER.

It had been a royal exchange, if he hereby for riches that are transitory,
had obtained heavens bliss, his souls security. I am glad that all your lamp
is not leavened; that yet, you believe a man may be secure and certain of his
salvation, which is a point uncertainly delivered among you. What mean you by
his now repenting? Think you that he is in hell? I doubt not but you may
easily know, seeing in Rome you have news every day from hell and purgatory.
Certainty of salvation, howsoever it be opposed by the Jesuits in general; yet
Medina. 1. 2 q. 112. art. 5. p. 630.
Medina averreth, that he would have every believer certainly to hope he shall
obtain eternal life: and Vega (says Greg. de Valentia tom. 2. page 957.
Gregory de Valentia) holds, that some spiritual men may be so certain that
they be in grace, that this their assurance shall be without al fear and
staggering. And Cathar. assert. and apolog
Catharinus holds the same certainty of faith which we teach. I might urge much
out of 3. d. 23. p. 46.
Scotus, Par. 3. q. 61. mem. 7. art. 3.
Alexander of Hales, Lib. 3. distin 20. q. 1. art. 2.
Bacon, and others who^ you claim yours. And Stap. de Iustif. page 341.
Stapleton comes so nere to the point, as that he professes thus we leave
not a sinner hanging in the midst of wavering doubtfulnesse, but we place him
in good and firm hope. Your penny of pure gold I will not stand to weigh: if I
should bring it to the balance of the sanctuary, I should find it scarce
sense, and much less Scripture.

Mr LEECH.

And yet this being a counsel not a precept, it is not enioined as a precept
to all, but given by way of counsel unto perfecter men, as the Fathers teach.
And the reason is excellently rendered by S. Gregory the great, to be this. It
is not enioined as a precept to all (for then were it sin either to marry, or
to possess any of the worlds goods) but yet it is counseled unto men of more
holy rank; For these have an arbitrary, and voluntary choice in their things.

ANSWER.

That your own advocate should give evidence against you, is great
disadvantage. S. Gregory himself calls it, praeceptum; a precept, not a
counsel. I desire all indifferent readers to look on the 25 Chapter of his
26. book of Moralls, Greg. Mor. lib. 26.
where (as I said before) you borrowed this distinction: there is only the
word precept; neither counsel, nor counseled is there mentioned. And in your
place, urged, but not quoted, not found in S. Gregory, suppose it were so, it
may have a good meaning: for that which you call a counsel, is nothing but a
particular praecept; which, though it bind not all, yet it must be observed of
those who are furnished with gifts, and find themselves fitted thereto by Gods
spirit.

Mr LEECH.

Such were the Apostles, and those Apostolical me^, that having possessions,
sold them, brought in the money and laid it down at the Apostles feet.

ANSWER.

What Apostles did so? Indeed Peter and Andrew forsook their nets, Mat. 4.20.
and Mat. 9.9.
Matthew forsook his custom. Reliquerunt, non ve^diderunt, says one. Luke
19.8.
Zaccheus did restore al; Luke 19.8. Mat. 19.27.
The Disciples did forsake all; Mat. 19.27. S. Phil. 3.8.
Paul did vilie value all, Phil. 3.8. Only the Merchant did sell all, Mat.
13.46. But that is but a parable. Laert. Plut.
Heathens did somewhat in this kind. Mat. 13.46.
Diogenes neglected all, Socrates contemned all, Crates cast away all: and yet
these were as far short of the disciples, as the Disciples of Angelical
perfection. But to the purpose: that the Apostles sold all, it is not so; they
sold nothing, for they had nothing to sell. That the Apostolical me^ sold their
possessions, Act. 4.35.
Act. 4.35. it is true: but it was not by Evangelicall counsel, nor for
Angelical perfection; but to supply the present want of the Church.

Mr LEECH.

Such was holy Antony that ancient Monk of Egypt; S. Paul the Hermit; S.
Benedict; S. Hierom; S. Basil; S. Gregory Nazianzen; S. Gregory the great; S.
Bernard, and many other Doctors, and Fathers; the most renowned lights of
learning, and greatest pillars of the Church.

ANSWER.

For your Catalogue of Saints; Trithem.
Anthony was no such Monk, nor Benedict: the former lived in the year 330; the
later in the year 500. I marvel not, that you make these to be Monkish
Counselors; seeing before, you have so reckoned the Apostles themselves. You
join the Saints very unequally; and claim kindred of some, that never knew
your religion. I examine not the sanctity of some of them, but deny all their
bills of Sale: or, if they sold al, I hope you will be acco^ptable what they did
with the money. I acknowledge the reverence of those blessed Fathers, S. Hierom,
S Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, etc. I marvailed why you brought not in S.
Francis, till I remembered that Canus loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 7.
Canus calls him a lousy Saint: and yet he instructed a Cade lamb so well
that it would kneel at Mass, and the Saint was wont to preach to geese which
heard him with devotion. Or why remembered you not S. Baron. ano 1208. n. 5.
Fulbert, a man of Evangelicall perfection; who being sick, the virgin Marie
came and gave him suck from heaven? Or, among many others, Ant. part. 3. art.
23. c. 1.. 1
S. Dominicke, who^ Antoninus makes the first inventor of Evangelicall
Cou^sailes? Of whom he affirms, that before he was borne, there were two
images found in a church at Venice; the one of S. Paul, the other of
Dominicke: on S. Paul's image was written, By this man you may come to Christ;
on Dominickes image, But by this, easier. Antoninus gives the reason; because
Paul's doctrine led but to faith, and keeping of the comma^dements: but
Dominicke should teach the observing of Evangelical Counsels, which is the
easier way. Risum teneatis amici?
This story might have fitted you.

Mr LEECH.

And was not Christ himself Master, and Regius Professor of this spiritual
poverty? spiritual I call it, because the contempt of this world for the hope
of heaven, is the work of Gods spirit, wrought within our souls. Witness his
entrance into this world, when his house was a stable, his cradle a cratch;
witness his continuance in the world, living merely upon alms ministered unto
him by certain godly women, and devout persons. Witness his complaint; the
foxes have holes, and the birds of heaven have nests, but the son of man has
not, whereon to rest his head. And was he any richer at his departure out of
this world, when wanting a sepulcher of his own, he was enterred in an other
man's tomb?

ANSWER.

^ri^^. Mot. 6.
It is blasphemous in k Bristow, to affirm, that no man is able to put
difference between the miracles of Christ, and of his Apostles, and of Thomas
Aquinas, Bernard, Bonaventure, Becket, Francis, Dominicke, and others. It is
almost as much in you, to parallel Christ Jesus, blessed for ever and ever, with
your Saints: I mean not with the Fathers (that were more tolerable, though
unfit) but that his sacred name, person, function, birth, life, death; his
precepts, actions, passions, all his conversations, should be paraleld, with
false, vtopicall, Annalogicall, Imaginary, statuary Saints. Know, and hear,
and fear, and tremble; He will not hold him guiltless that takes his name
in vain. But I will catechize you, in this point farther: was that practice of
poverty in Christ, performed by any Evangelicall Counsel, or not? If by
counsel; from whom received he counsel, that was the wisdom of his father,
and himself the great Esaias. 9.6.
counselor? If not by Evangelicall counsel; why do you bring Christ for an
example of the practice? We confess to our endless comfort, his willing and
gracious readiness to become poor, to make us rich, in that he borrowed a
stable, to be borne in; a cratch, to be laid in; a pitcher, to drink in; a
parlour to sup in; and a toombe, to lie in: but this is not to your purpose.

Mr LEECH.

Finally; though he were Lord, and owner of all (being God the Lord, and
creator of all) and the sole heire-appara^t of heaven, and earth; yet was he
content to forsake all: of rich he became poor, teaching as well opere, as ore,
by example of living, as manner of teaching; real practicing, as or all
instructing; first doing, and then teaching; and all to this end, vt
conversatio magistri forma esset discipuli; as blessed LEO speaks; that is,
that he might generally weane all Christians from the love of this world; but
especially, that he might become unto his disciples, and all Apostolical men,
a perfect pattern of this spiritual poverty; the masters conversatio^ being
the scholars best instruction.

ANSWER.

Every action of Christ serves for our instruction, but not every action for
our imitation. It were ridiculous in us, if we should presume to think we
might Mat. 14.15.
walk on the water as he did, or Mark. 8.3.
endeavor to cleanse the leapers, or Mat. 9.25.
to raise up the dead, or John. 9.1.
give sight to the blind, or Mat. 4.1.
to fast forty days and forty nights, or to go about to live in such hunger
and thirst and want, as our blessed Savior did: it is impossible we should
perform them. We have no lawful warrant for these; and more the Apostle
teaches, whatsoever is not of faith is sin. As for poverty, it is no where
in Scripture enioined us. A blessing, spiritual poverty has, Mat. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, it is (...), not (...) but for the want of
temporal things, it afflicts so many, that none need to affect it. Hugo de
claustro animae.
Hugo de claustro animae, shows how some affect a monkish poverty, that they
may come to some spiritual dignity: and gives the reason; Et in Ecclesia
honorari volunt, qui in sua domo non nisi contemptibiles esse poterant. You
know by practice among you, this to be true, that among the Monks, and
Monkies of Rome, Poverty is made the first step to ambitious vain glory, and
masked humility the usher to obtain aspiring dignity. The words in Leo in the
end of that sermon, make not for you. They only show the humility of Christ in
all passages of his life: and in that close exhort us thereunto, as he himself
did by his own mouth; learn of me to be humble and meek.

Mr LEECH.

For Christ came not down from heaven to earth, from the bosom of the Father,
by his eternal generation, God, to the womb of his Mother, by temporal
incarnation, Man; when he deigned to stoop down so low, nay vouchsafed
exinanire seipsum, to put of the garment of his Fathers, and heavens glory,
investing his incomprehensible deity with the base rags of finite mortality;
I say Christ did not perform all this only to fulfill the moral Decalogue,
but over, and above the laws righteousness, Se S. Basil de vera virginit.
he taught that, which the law wanted of the merit of perfection.

ANSWER.

The conclusion of this, is nothing else but this, Christ did more then the law
required, therefore there is somewhat more then is required in the law. I
answer he did more then the law required of him, for himself, by his passive
justice in suffering that which was due unto us; whereas, his active justice,
was enough to satisfy for himself, and whereby also the law is satisfied by
us. But this argument is like Mephibosheth, lame in both feet; for neither did
Christ all this to practice Evangelicall counsels as you infer, nor did he
hereby manifest any want of perfection in the law, as you do urge, out of Basil
de vera virginitate, which book is misdoubted to be his, because it is one of
the (...) which are fathered on Basil, of which works Eustathius, one violent
against Marriage, was the author, as Sozom. l. 3. cap. 13.14.
Sozomen witnesses. Besides the disallowing of the book, receive this
satisfaction. If the book were S. Basils, and that it were his speech that
Christ did add perfection to the law: it must so be understood, as that he
added fulfilling and perfect observing to the law, not thereby manifesting that
the law did want perfection. For if that be perfect, as the Philosopher
defines it, to which nothing can be added; and that God himself gave that
especial command in three several places in Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 5.32. and 12.32.
Deuteronomy, that nothing should be added to the law: how dare you accusing
the law of imperfection, stand out against Gods wisdoms proclamation? (...),
which is commonly translated transgression, may also be interpreted outlawry:
1. Ioh. 3.4.
you are subject to the sentence and punishment of outlawry; the law does
accuse you for sin, and you accuse it for imperfection. Unless you send for an
advocate to Hell, there is none to speak for you. Briefly to your quotation, I
say the law wanted not perfecting, but man wanted means of fulfilling it.
Christ in that sense added perfection to the law in fulfilling it, because as
Cardinal Cusanus excit l. 10.
Cusanus confesses, never did any fulfill the commandments but Christ. But in
this there was no addition, and therefore no former imperfection in the law.

Mr LEECH.

And as he taught this unto us by practice in his own most sacred person, and
in the persons of his Apostles, so he left us the first pure primitive Church,
and raised up many in the other succeeding ages and Centuries of the Catholic
Church, to be examples, and patterns of these Evangelicall Counsels.

ANSWER.

It is a toil that my pen must follow yours, in these so idle repetitions and
needless Tautologies. I ingeminate my former answer; Christ did not profess
the teaching of Evangelicall Counsels, he came not from heaven with another
edition of the law then what Moses had brought. The Primitive Church knew not
the name of Evangelicall Counsels: that as Assert. Luther conf. art. 18. page
86.
Fisher B. of Rochester said of Purgatory, that there was little mention or none
at all, among the Ancients, thereof; so I say of Counsels, this opinion was a
Posthume to the Primitive Church. Anselmus, that lived many hundred years
after, denies that any man may perform more then he owes, as you would teach
by Counsels. His words be, Anselm. de concep. virg. c. 21.
Nullus potest reddere quantum debet, solus Christus reddidit pro omnibus qui
salvantur, plus quam debetur. But as Dion. Xiphilin. in epitome Domit.
Decebalus, king of Dacia, put to flight the Romans, by arming trunks of trees
instead of soldiers: so the new Romans suppose to gull us, by obtruding
shadows instead of substance; inserting into their Pamphlets the name of the
Primitive Church, Ancient Catholic Church, Fathers of the Church, in those
matters controversed between us, whereas the Church and Fathers in this case
may answer Papists, as answer was made to 1. Sam. 28.26
Saul, in the 1. Sam. 28.16. Wherefore do thou ask of me, seeing the Lord
is gone from thee and is thine enemy?

Mr LEECH.

This was the sum of my repetition, with a more ample explanation of my
former doctrine; justified now in public against the Brethren, who had
traduced it in their whispering conventicles, according to the liberty of their
private spirits.

ANSWER.

You have landed this discourse, thinking hereby to gain the name of an
authorizer, if not an author. But brag not that you have publicly justified
that against the Brethren, which you will be constrained to deny before the
Saints. The written Copy which you delivered, is much different from this
second repetition, and you and it far from truth. Because with Peter, you
hope to warm your hands at the high Priests fire: therefore you deny the truth
of your Master. Follow Peter rather in repenting, then in forswearing.

CHAP. 4. Mr LEECH.
THis sermon being ended, and supper time immediately approaching; M. Doctor
Hutton (one of the Channons of Christ Church; now deputed Provicechancellour in
the absence of Mr. Doctor King) sent for me by one of my fellow Chaplains
into the common kitchen, A place fit to treat upon Iovinianisme; but unfit
for the sacred mysteries of Religion.
to confer with me upon the point delivered in my sermon.

ANSWER.

The sum of this ensuing chapter, was begot in the Kitchen, it is so full of
smoke and heat. Your marginall note does much traduce Doctor Hutton,
Prebendary, and Subdeane of Christ-Church; an ancient learned preacher,
Professor, Doctor of Divinity: the least of these titles might have restrained
you in your duty toward him. But a more near respect of observance bound you
to reverence him, not only for private, but for public authority; not only
for fear, but for conscience sake, says the Apostle. He was the Magistrate,
Provicechancellor, Deputy Governor of your betters, at that time; not in that
house alone, but in the whole University. He might have sent for you by an
officer, not your fellow Chaplain; unto a public place, not so familiar; to
co^vent, censure, imprison, punish you, not to confer with you. It is not the
place, that does honest the man but the man the place. Lucifer rebelled in
heaven, Adam sinned in Paradise; when as Lot served God in Sodom, Joseph in
Egypt. Better to speak truth in the Kitchen, then falsehoode in the Pulpit.
The place of all other is least circumstantiall.

Mr LEECH.

Hither I no sooner came, but, he (interessing himself in the quarrel of
IOVINIAN) began very fiercely to assault, and chardge me for preaching
scandalous and erroneous doctrine; excepting farther against the terms of
Angelical Chastity, and Evangelicall Counsels of perfection; expressly
mentioned by me in the aforesaid sermon.

ANSWER.

For any Iovinian heresy that you tax him with, or the opposers of your
opinion, you know in your conscience that no Protestant ever defended any of
them. S. Aug. de haeresibus ad quod vult De um haeres. 82.
Augustine in his tract De haeresibus ad Quodvult Deum, the 82. heresy,
recites the diverse positio^s of Iovinian: and I do freely and fully protest,
that I know no point wherewith our Church in that kind may be accused. In
what point of Iovinianisme was he guilty? name it. I am sure, if you could, you
would. Your doctrine offered much offense, and therefore was scandalous; and was
opposite to our Churches doctrine, and therefore to be called erroneous.

Mr LEECH.

The onset being thus given by his worship, my ward was; Sir. (under your
correction) the doctrine lately by me preached (howsoever you disconceipt it)
is not, nay cannot possibly be either scandalous, or erroneous; for it is the
doctrine of that great Pillar of the Latin Church S. Gregory; accorded unto,
and confirmed by uniform consent of fathers, both of the Greek and Latin
Church.

ANSWER.

As Solomon spoke of Eccl. 12.12.
making many books, so may I of using many words; There is no end: the one,
wearying of the flesh; the other, angariation to the spirit. It is not as you
take it, the doctrine of that great Pillar of the Church, S. Gregory: it is a
Doctrine which is the Pillar of Monks, and I assure my self the Monks would
not maintain it, unless it did maintain Monks. The Fathers of the Greek
and Latin Church, are answered so sufficiently, as that I hope you will change
and challendge your Grand-Iurie for being too partial for our part.

Mr LEECH.

As for the terms of Virginity equalleth it self to Angels; yea, if we
examine well the matter we shall find it to exceed Angels; for that contrary
to nature, it gets a victory in flesh above flesh which Angels do not.
Cypr. de bono pudicitiae. Virginity (an Angelical gift) exceeds matrimony,
as much as an Angel excels a man. Damas. l. 4. Orthodoxae fidei cap. 25.
Vide Cypr. de nativitate Christi and Hieron. lib. 1. contra Iovinian.
Angelical Chastity; and Evangelicall Counsels of perfection, I have not
hammered them upon any anvile in the forge of my own brain, but rather borrow
them from Orthodox Antiquity.

ANSWER.

It is no doubt that you forged not these terms: for this mystery of
iniquity, though it be but novelty, has been more ancient then you. You quote
places in the Margent: the first out of Cyprian de bono pudicitiae, a book
much doubted of to be his, as Reverend Mr Perkins in his problem.
Perkins in his Problem proves; and the other out of Damascene, and Cyprian
de Nativitate, and S. Hierome contra Iovinianum. For that book of Cyprian de
Nativitate, it is not only doubted of, but denied by the Cent. 3. cap. 10. p.
245.
Magdeburgenses, In edit. Bas. apud Froben. 1520.
Erasmus, Medul. Patrum com. 1. lib. 24. p. 37.
Scultetus; and by your own, In argument, lib. de Card. operibus Christi.
Iacobus Pamelius, Biblioth. sanctae lib. 4. de falsa librorum inscriptione.
Sixtus Senensis, In appar. sacr. voce Cyprianus.
Antonius Possevinus, and De amist. great. and stat. pec. lib 6. c. 2.
Bellarmin. But suppose it were Cyprians, and that those other Fathers did
speak so largely of virginity: yet you know that by their Hyperbolicall
praising of it, they almost made an Idol of it. And therefore the Jesuit
Acosta lib. 2. de virginitate c. 18.
Acosta confesses, concerning S. Hierome; Dum oppugnatores virginitatis
insectans, videtur aliquando matrimonio iniquior. They thought it the fittest
kind of life, for those times, because of the imminent danger of persecution:
but Espen. com. in 1. Tim. 3.
Espencaeus denies not, nay absolutely affirms, that in these times a man may
marry, and yet his marriage no hindera^ce to his desire of a more perfect
life: Nuptiae licet plurimum difficultatis habent, sic tamen assumi possunt, vt
vitae perfectiori impedimento non sint.

Mr LEECH.

Against this he replied; that if I preached any erroneous doctrine out of S.
Gregory (such as this must needs be) then both the defense of the doctrine,
and Author himself would be required at my hands. For (said he) cannot
Gregory have his errors, but you must broach the^ here to infect this place
with POPERY?

ANSWER.

He required with much wisdom but that which was reason. If it be the
Apostles rule, that every one must be able to give account of the hope that is
in him: then much more a Preacher to give account of his doctrine. And that
Gregory is thought to hold some points erroneous, I doubt not but your Ghostly
Fathers will enioine you to believe. For besides that many errors are imputed
to the Fathers by Biblioth. sanct. l. 5. c. 6.
Sixtus Senensis, Biblioth. select. lib. 12. c. 23. p. 53.
Possevine, and Mel. Can. lib. 7. de loc. Theol. l. 4. c. 6. obs. 2. p. 558
Melchior Canus: Gregory in particular, is rejected by a Tumul tuaria Apol.
pro dispens. matrim. Henri. fol. 46. de Noverca.
Champion of your own, in Apologia Tumultuaria, wherein the Author thus basely
disclaimeth Gregory's judgment; Gregorius hic non est audiendus, neque quantum
ad ius naturae, neque qua^tum ad honestatem: Gregory here is not to be heard,
nether as concerning the right of nature, nor honesty. And before gives the
reason, Apol. Tumul.
Scripturas obtorto collo ad suum institutum pertrahit: for with a wrested
neck he draws the Scripture to his own purpose. And Heart in his conference
with Doctor Rainolds, Conference betweeene Doctor Rainolds and Heart. page 386.
line 21. Gregory did mistake the words of Scripture.
does scornefully reject the opinion of Gregory: and therefore it was not so
unfitly said that Gregory had his errors. The Church of Rome denies him in
many things, as will appear: and Durand. l. 4. sent. did. 7. q. 4.
Durand concludes; Gregorius, quum fuerit homo, non Deus, potuit errare. And
therefore D. Hutton spoke truly, Gregory has his errors.

Mr LEECH.

This was the account, that the culinaria^ Doctor made of S. Gregory the great;
one of the holiest, Ildephons. de viris illustribus ca. 2. Isidore de viris
illustribus cap. 2. Vide Greg. Turon. lib. 20. histor. de laudibus Gregorii.
and learned doctors, that ever breathed in the Catholic Church; excelling
S. Antony in holiness, S. Cyprian in eloquence, S. Augustine in wisdom; full
of compunction, humility, the grace and fear of God; endued with such light
of knowledge, that not any of the present time was equal unto, no nor of the
former: to whose moral exposition of scripture all the doctors give place,
and that in the judgment of a general council.

ANSWER.

Cham in Noah's family, or Dathan in Moses Policy, could not have vented out
more loathsome unseemly speeches, then this your Culinarian Title of him, whom
you were bound to, not only for the participation of Gods blessings to you in
his learning, wisdom, government; but especially for his worthy care, and
love to you, being a special means to bring you into that College. Of God
the Psalmist testifies, that he sets up one, and puts down another: but
that you should so presume to extol one Doctor, and disgrace another, I do
believe you will much blame your self upon due examination. Your scoffing at
Doctor Hutton is senseless and graceless: the most learned, reverend, and
ancient here, will testify against your greasy scoff, that his young years
were beautified with all kind of learning, in which he was eminent, his middle
years with all ingenuity in judgment, his reverend years with great wisdom
in government. Therefore forbear scorns. Concerning S. Gregory, we are
willing to give him whatsoever he deserves: but it is very Hyperbolicall and
indiscreet in you, to affirm, that none of the latter should be like him, none
of the former. Comparisons are ever odious, and dangerous. And yet we could be
content to afford S. Gregory that attribute of greatness, which Alexander had
in Greece, Pompey in Rome, Arsaces in Parthia, Eusebius.
and Charles in France: but to give him so many Titles as Eusebius records that
Galerius had, Po^tifex Maximus, Thebaicus Maximus, Sarmaticus Maximus,
Quinquies Persarum Maximus, etc: the greatest Bishop, greatest in Thebes,
greatest in Sarmatia, in Persia five times greatest, greatest in Germany,
greatest in Egypt, to give so many titles of greatness to your Gregory, is to
make him a monster. That he should exceed S. Anthony, S. Cyprian, S. Austin;
all that know their story, will deny. Anthony not worthy to be compared with
Austine: nor Gregory with Cyprian, or Austin: for these two most worthy pillars
of the Church, were as the flowers of Roses in the spring of the year, as
Lilyes by the fountains of waters, as branches of Frankincense in the time of
Summer, as fair Olives that be fruitful, or Cypres trees that grow to the
Clouds, as Ecclesiast.
Ecclesiasticus speaks of others. Cyprian for eloquence, Austin for dexterity
of wit, wisdom, learning. Cyprian was, as Naz. Orat. in Cyprianu^.
Nazianzene reports him, the great name of Carthage and of all the world;
whose name was famous in all Churches, both Heretic and Christian; whose name
and works Nazianzene professes he reverenced, more then he did all others,
and for his eloquence surpassed all other men, so far as other men do bruit
beasts. Saint Epist. ad Paulinum de instit. monat.
Jerome calls him sweet, professing that the Lord dwelt in him, and De doct.
Christ. c. 40.
Austin calls him a most sweet Doctor, and most blessed Martyr, and
concludes of him; Tanti meriti, tanti pectoris, tanti oris, tantae virtutis
Episcopus. And concerning blessed Austin, Epist. ad Aug. 31. and 37.
Paulinus calls him the salt of the earth, a Candle worthy to be set on the
candlestick of the Church, his mouth like a Conduit pipe of living water, a
vein of that eternal fountain. Eras. epist. praef. 1. tom. Augustini.
Erasmus testifies of him, his name being Aurelius Augustinus, that the world
has nothing magis aureum, vel augustius; that there never was a golden name
more worthily given to any, then to him. And if I shall reckon Titles given to
him, that is called the perfection of the Fathers, the Hammer of Heretics,
the Treasure, Megasine, living library of learning, and infinite his other
Titles: it would be tedious. Nay Jesuits and all kind of Papists afford him
such Encomtasticks, that never had any Father of the Church so many. Look
Possevin. in appar. sacr. p. 151. 152.
Possevin in his Aparatu sacro, where he gives him the greatest and worthiest
Titles, that ever any Doctor of the Church had, and testifies that by the
consecration of the Synod. Florent.
Florentine Synod, he was called Illustrissimus Latinoru^ Doctorum. You see how
gross your comparison is. Concerning the approbation of a general Council,
there is no such thing directly named in any of the Concilia Toletana, being 13
in number. The only Council of all which, that mentions Gregory, is the
last; of which Caranza in Epitome Co^ciliorum.
Caranza in the Epitome of Counsels, gives this note, Nihil habet hoc
concilium singulari annotatione dignum.

Mr LEECH.

Concilium Tolctan.
Did it then become M. Doctor Hutton to detract from the due worth of so great,
and learned a Saint? since I may yet add this to perfect his praise;
whatsoever he was unto others, doubtless unto us he was an Apostle (to speak
in the phrase of the Apostle) to whom our English nation stands perpetually
obliged for her conversion from Paganism unto the Christian faith. Beda,
Eccles. hist. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 1.


ANSWER.

Gregory was not our Apostle. All histories be against you. Britain had true
religion planted here, before your Gregory or his Monk Austin were extant. It
is recorded by your Baron. Ann. 35. number. 5.
Chronologicall Cardinal, that Joseph of Arimathaea was here: Theod. de
curand. grec affect. lib. 9.
Theodoret says, S. Paul; Bar. anno 597. n. 20.
Baronius thinks, S Peter; Nic. l. 2. c 40.
Nicephorus says, that Simon Zelotes: and Tertul. advers. Iudaeos
Tertullian, Orig. in Hom. 4. in. Esec.
Origin, and other of the most worthy of the Fathers do affirm, that the
Gospel was planted here in the time of the Primitive Church. And that you
shall not reply, that religion was extinguished, and afterward lightened by
Gregory: I say, religion was not extinct at the coming of that proud petty
Monk, Austin, whom he sent. Witness Lib. 1. c. 8. 17. 21.
Bid whom you untruly cite, who writes that before Austins coming, the
Britains were troubled with Arrianisme and Pelagianisme: but that three French
Bishops delivered them. And the forger of the three co^versions Three con. par.
1. c 9. n. 1
testifies more, that from king Lucius time until the coming of Austin,
which was four hundred years and more, they did not alter their faith, but it
remained among them when he entered. Therefore Gregory converted not our land,
per se, nor per aliu^. And Austin, as impetuous or imperious as he was, was but
Gregory's Curat. For Gregory, at that time, as Ordo. Romans praef.
Cassander observes, did change the Lyturgies and service books, used in our
western parts: for which cause it is likely Austin came over. So that Gregory
and Austin converted books, not souls: and therefore were Translators,
Correctors; no Apostolical Doctors, or founders of our Church.

Mr LEECH.

But to pass over the praise of this bright shining star in the firmament of
the Church; my reioynder was, that this doctrine must first be proved to be
erroneous and scandalous before any such imputation ought (upon any absolute
necessity) to be imposed, and fastened upon it, since sca^dall does arise from
error, and error is an approbatio^ of that, which is false in judgment, and
understanding.

ANSWER.

The answer of the Philosopher in Diog. Laert. in vit. Phil.
Laertius, to one that immoderatly praised him, was fit for you: Me hic aut
ludit, aut odit; this fellow would procure me to be scorned, or hated. Your
unmeasurable LASHON of co^me^ding Gregory, it deserves no other speech. We
esteem Gregory to be the best Pope, from the year about 600, wherein he lived,
to this present. He never held the Reg. Epist. lib. 9. ep. 9.
supremacy, Lib. 7. ep. 69. l. 7. ep. 30.
merits, and other points of Popery: and he never taught this Doctrine, as you
do; and therefore the error, and scandal must remain with you not with him.

Mr LEECH.

And as for defending of S. Gregory, my opinion then was, and now is, that the
very name, it self, and Authority of this worthy Father ought and would rather
(amongst all learned, and judicious divines) be my just defense and full
dischardge, then that his credit should be so far called in question, as now
(after a 1000. years continuance in the Catholic Church of Christ: being
generally reputed Orthodox so long) to stand in need of mine, or any other
man's defense whatsoever.

ANSWER.

The worthiness of Gregory is not denied: But that his very name should be
sufficient to prescribe against all opposers, and to patronize your conceit,
it is much doubted. Concerning Gregory, I think of the reading of him, as S.
Hier. in ep. ad Romanum
Jerome does of reading the other Fathers: Meum propositum est antiquos legere,
probare singula, retinere quae bona sunt, and a fide Ecclesiae non recedere. I
would you had taken this course in reading Gregory. But for the point in hand;
you have not in all the words of S. Gregory, the distinction of Praeceptu^, and
Consilium: no place that defines Evangelica consilia, neither their name,
number, or any thing concerning the^. And therefore to any never so little
intelligent, you will seem strangely ridiculous, to make Gregory, Godfather to
that child he never knew; or Author of that doctrine, which he never taught,
or thought. We call not his credit into question: I would yours did it not, as
I formerly showed, and especially Bar. Tom. 8. Annal. Ann. Christi 1593. number.
62. p. 57.
Baronius, who speaking of the barrenness of learning in Gregory his time,
shows that Gregory himself was ignorant in many things.

Mr LEECH.

And yet rather then the doctrine shall be thus odiouslie traduced, and my
Author want his promerited defense, I will according to that poor ability
(wherewith God has enabled me) endeavor to defend both it, and him: and
therefore if S. Gregory, in this point, has not transgressed the bounds of
Ancienter Church, nor crossed any tenent of his own Present Church, nor yet,
for this, has hitherto been censured by the lawful judgment of any
Catholic succeeding Church; nay if the Church more ancient then his, his own
present, and the ever after succeeding Centuries of Catholic Church have,
from hand to hand, delivered unto him, received with him, and with uniform
consent followed him in this point of doctrine, never so much as once noting
it, questioning it, impugning it, co^tradicting it (which certainly they would
have done, had the doctrine been erroneous: for their devoted piety spared no
Heretic, Origin. Millienar; Tertul. Montanising Cypr. rebaptising.
no not the most renowned martyrs, nor glorious fathers of the Church in any of
their errors, repugnant unto the unity of Catholic verity) then, upon these
premises, I may irrefragably conclude in defense of my Author, and doctrine,
that S. Gregory his position is no private opinion hatched out of his own
brain, but the uniform deduction, and tradition of Christ his spouse the true
Catholic, never erring Church inspired, guided, and directed by God his holy
spirit in all ages.

ANSWER.

Rather then you will let truth have the supereminence, quae magna est and
praevalet, you will continue to father your opinion upon Gregory, yea and upon
the Primitive and Derivatiue Church. Act. 9.
But it is hard for you to kick against the truth. The weeds of
supererogation, growing under the shadow of Evangelicall Counsels, have had
no time of increase of growing, in the ancient primitive Church. None of the
first and worthier Fathers, taught it. It is a common, but not comme^dable use
among you, of imposturing and interpreting the Fathers in a wrong sense. The
chiefest ground for your doctrine, is the misinterpreting of that place of S.
Paul: which sense neither the Original will carry, nor any Greek Father
ever followed. And that blessed servant of God Mr Perkins, in his Problem,
proves against opposers, how far the Fathers were from mainetaining works
of supererogation. Physicians, that mean to cure the disease, first beginnne
with the cause: so give me leave, seeing works of supererogation be only the
inductions and cause of teaching this doctrine. First I desire you to answer,
whether S. Hierome thought any such works were performed, who disclaiming them,
thus speaks, Hier. lib. 1. c. 3. cont. Pelag.
Tum ergo iusti sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur, and iustitia nostra non
ex proprio merito, sed ex Dei consistit misericordia; or, whether S. Retract.
l. 1. c. 19.
Augustine does think a man might supererogate, who affirms a contrary
positio^, Omnia mandata Dei facta deputantur, quando quicquid non fit,
ignoscitur; or Chrysostom. in 8. Hom. in. 4. ad. Roman.
Chrysostom, who in his 8. homily on the 4. to the Romans affirms, No man
to be justified by the Law, because none can fulfill the Law; Bern. in 73 ser.
in Cant.
or Bernard, in his 73. upon the Canticles, who wishes no man to trust to his
own justice, or fulfilling of the Law; or, to approach nearer, what meant De
Consil. Evang. and statu perfectionis.
Gerson, that famous Doctor, to deny any perfection in Evangelicall counsels.
Secondly, I desire you to answer, why Aq. 22 dae. Art. 5.
Aquinas teaches that perfection does essentially (which is perfectly) consist
in keeping the Commandments (which none can do,) and in the fulfilling of the
Law, if that perfection of Counsels be so much above the Law; why In sent.
lib. 3. distinct. 34, q. 3.
Paludanus upon the Sentences, does affirm, that some men may attain to as
great height of perfection, living in marriage, and possessing much, as they
that live single, and give away all that they have. I will ask no more
questions, but seeing this is so taught by so many reverend Ancients, yea and
by many of your own later, Ians. in 100. Cap. in Evang.
Iansenius in his 100. chapter upon the Evangelicall concord professing with
Gerson and Aquinas, that only the fulfilling of the law does justify, and Cus.
excit. lib. 10.
Cardinal Cusanus confessing that none but Christ ever did fulfill the
Commandments; seeing all this is thus: why will you so boldly affirm, that
this doctrine was never impugned, never contradicted, etc: which indeed was
never rather taught, never approved? It is true, S. Gregory was never
contradicted in this, for he never taught any such thing: But this opinion was
gainesaid, and disliked; and the Church never received, never generally
delivered any such position. Although if it had, your epithet of never erring
Church is scarce current: for you cannot deny but the Church has had her
blots. Dial. contra Lucif.
S. Jerome complained that the whole world groaned and wondered to see it self
Arrian; and Aduers. proph. Novit.
Vincentius Lerine^sis confesses, that not only some portion of the Church,
but the whole Church may be blotted with contagion. But this was none of her
blots, spots, or infectious blemishes: for she never generally mainetained, or
taught this Doctrine.

Mr LEECH.

But M. Doctor Hutton lending a deaf ear unto my defense (though in my
conscience, and judgment, it ought to have satisfied him) sounded another
alarome, and ringed a fresh peale in my ears, charging, nay surcharging me (ad
nauseam vsque) for holding any distinction betwixt Precepts and Counsels. For
(said he) there is no such distinction: those, which you falsely call
Cou^sailes, are in deed Precepts and not Counsels.

ANSWER.

The Comoedia^ Plautus.
Plautus taxes some that had no stuff in them but in their tongue, and that
only in speaking lewdly of their betters; Isthic est thesaurus stultis in
lingua situs, ut quaestui habent male loqui melioribus. Let the laws of God,
Nature, and Nations move you to reverence this honest and learned Doctor: he
did truly, and wisely chardge you, that S. Gregory had no such distinction.
Praeceptum, and praecipitur, be Gregory his words. In your strongest place out
of him, you can urge no such thing. That the Fathers have called virginity,
poverty, etc: precepts, shall hereafter appear at large. In the mean time, to
prescribe against al opposers, to give you a taste, and to bring your metal to
the test before I try it by the balance: Virginity is called a precept by
Athan. in edit. Comelin. Graecol. p. 77.
Athanasius, his words be, Omnium Rex Christus tantum valuit praeceptis sui^,
vt pueri nondum maturi legum disciplinae, virginitatem quae supra leges,
profiteantur; Poverty and leaving of al, is accounted a precept by Hilary in
19. Mat.
Hilary on the 19. of Matthew, where on those words, vende omnia, he thus
speaks, Adolescens insolens iacturam legis facere praecipitur. And not only
these, but many other of the Fathers do so call them, thereby strongly
invading your opinion.

Mr LEECH.

And this was his definitive resolution, sifting out of the sieue of the Church
all the wheaten meal, I mean the fine flower of spiritual Poverty,
Angelical Chastity, and leaving naught else within it, but the branne, and
husks of Iovinian his heresy; which (to speak of it in one word, as it
deserves) is the very evacuation, and exinanition of all the best fruits of
our Christian religion. And this he did with an earnest protestation; not being
able to contain himself from vowing, and solemnly swearing before God, that
he would send me up to my Lord Bishop of London, to answer the point before
the high Commission.

ANSWER.

The Church is compared to the house of God: but that in this house there
should be such a vtensile as a sieue, I never read nor heard. It is not mystica
vannus Iacchi, that it should as you think, after such a preposterous manner,
retain the bad and shake out the good. I leave your sifting comparison, and
yet will remember you, Mat. 3.12.
that there is one, who shall come with his fan in his hand, and shall purge
his flower, gathering his wheat, burning his chafe. You seem ignorant of the
difference between asseverations and oaths, when you term Doctor Huttons
earnest and religious protestation, an oath, David to Jonathan, Vriah to David,
Elisha to Eliah, the Sunamite to Elisha, S. Paul to the 2. Cor. 11.31
Corinths, 1. Tim. 2.7.
Timothy and Gal. 1.20.
Galathians, did use more earnest and vehement protestations: and yet were not
taxed for swearing. Satan has his brand for accusing his brethren: how full
you are of Accusatiues, every page does betray it self. He maintained no part
of Iouinians heresy, uttered no oath in any violent fervency: you strain out
vires and virus, passion and poison against him, that afforded you much love
and compassion, who was a means to obtain a place for you in that house, and,
when some distasting you sought to work your remove, he defended you against
that storm.

Mr LEECH.

To this I replied. Sir: the distinction betwixt Precepts and Counsels is no
devise of mine, but the doctrine of S. Paul, grounded upon Christ his
restrictiue negative; non omnes capiunt: whereupon S. Paul had no precept: and
upon Christ his exhortatiue affirmative, qui potest capere capiat. Hereupon the
Apostle gives his counsel; Consilium do: 1. Cor. 7.21.
and thus all ancient Church has interpreted his sentence.

ANSWER.

It was not S. Paul's doctrine, Counsel is not his word, (...) is not so
translated, the Lexicons show that the greek Poets and Orators did not so
understand it, Doctor Benefield has so sufficiently answered it, that there is
no gainesaying. The heresy of Nestorius lay but in the change of one letter,
taking (...) for (...): and those many Bishops that resisted Nestorius as S.
Basil. apud Theod. l. 4. c. 19.
Basil observes, were so religious in the carriage of that controversy, that
they would not excha^ge a syllable or letter. If the change of a letter may
do so much: what may the misinterpretation of a word? though it be a very
naked proof, to ground any point of belief upon one word, howsoever
understood. I know you have not distilled much out of the School-limbiques, and
therefore will remember you of this distinct difference between counsel, and
sentence; that the one is proper to the will, Aquin. 22 dae.
the other to the understanding. The place of Scripture out of Christ's mouth,
makes nothing in this matter for you, non omnes capiunt, etc. The later words
of the Text answer the former: Omnes non capiunt hoc: Christ his speech is
interpreted in respect of the common condition of nature in general. So
virginity may be proposed, not imposed upon any: none may be compelled, none
constrained thereunto; but Capiuntij quibus datu^, they must, that are able to
take it upon the^. And so Christ inioineth, enforces, and commands them by
an Imperative in the 12. verse; He that is able to receive this, let him
receive it. Thus the Church has, and does interpret this speech. Omnes no^
capiunt, all in general not enforced, because not enabled: but, qui potest
capere capiat, he that is so furnished by Gods spirit, (...), he is commanded
by this word of God: it is not voluntary, but necessary; therefore no counsel,
but a co^mande, and so consequently, the place makes not for you.

Mr LEECH.

But admit (by way of supposition) your peremptory conclusion, and suppose that
there be no counsels, but let all be precepts; do they not the^ as Precepts
bind you, and that sub poena? For that which is a precept is commanded; that
which is commanded, must be done of necessity; that, which must perforce be
done, is punished being left undone: and in vain is that commanded as
necessary, which is left in the free choice of the commanded as volu^tary as S.
Hierome teaches. Wherefore give me leave (without offense) to demand; why do
you, or any other marry, or possess any of the worlds goods? Ought your
practice to be contrary to the precept? And does not S. Gregory teach, that if
cou^sailes were precepts, then were it sin, and that damnable too, to possess
any of the worlds goods? And were not marriage taken away (which is no less
then flat heresy) if virginity were a precept? as S. Basil and the Fathers
teach.

ANSWER.

The Stoics divided the offices of Philosophy into (...) and (...), perfectum
et commune. So the Papists distinguish all the duties of a Christians life, into
these two; Counsels, and precepts: Mat. 7.11.
and so by the Pharisees l Corban, they affect such perfection by the rule of
Counsel, as that they transgress the law of Commandment: for, as Pez. p.
552.
Pezelius notes, they make the^ Perfectiores leges Evangelicas, which be but
Enarrationes decalogi. But to your supposition, how vmbragious soever you seem
to be, it is manifest you never understood the state of the question. Counsels
are precepts, I can easily bring a Jury of Fathers to prove it, not such as
you impanelled to condemn your self. Precepts, I say, they be to particular
men, who exceed others in gifts of grace. And because much shall be required
of him, that has much given him: therefore a Counsel as a praecept does
oblige not all in general, but him that is particularly furnished by God, for
such a purpose and service; and therefore he that has the gift of chastity,
other circumstances concurring, is bound sub poena, not to marry. S. Hierom
does only speak of general precepts: and the place in Gregory is often cited,
and as often answered, but not quoted at all. But I say the same of him, Greg.
mor. l. 26. cap. 25.
as of Hierome: for Gregory is most plain in the point, in the 25 Chapt. of
the 26 book of Moralls, his words be, specialis iussio, and specialia
praecepta, and specialiter imperatur; and the distinction of generale
praeceptum, and speciale praeceptum, is so often repeated about the midst of
that Chapter, as nothing can be more plain. So that Jerome and Gregory come
over to us: for they mean special precepts, not general. And certainly, as
S. Basil speaks, if virginity were a general command to all, it would
exclude marriage but being not, some may marry, some live chaste, all do well.

Mr LEECH.

This I demanded; but he then passed it over with silence; and therefore I
expect his answer now, how he ca^ avoid this consequence, which follows
upon his own learning.

ANSWER.

Eccles. 12.
The words of the wise are like Goads, and like nails fastened by the masters
of the assemblies, says Solomon. His words might have satisfied you, if truth
and reason would have yielded you satisfaction: but a false opinion once
grounded is like poison fully settled, or like Deianiraes shirt; it will hardly
be shaken of without plucking the skin with it.

Mr LEECH.

As for sending me up to London, to answer the point there, my reply was;
that, for my part, I was ready to answer unto the point, and to justify the
doctrine either there, or else where in what consistory soever in the kingdom.
Only for your own credit sake, and place (said I) which you supply, I wish that
it would please you to be better advised; at least to confer with some other
doctors, who heard the sermon as well as your self, and maturely to
deliberate, whether there be scandalum datum, or acceptum, a scandal on my
part justly given, or on your part unjustly taken; and whether your exception
against my doctrine will bear weight, or no being poysed in an indifferent
balance of equity; before you resolve upon this precipitation. Otherways, you
shall bewray great want of sound judgment in opinion, and disclose much
oversight in discretion.

ANSWER.

Theod. in Plut. Pericl.
Pericles had that skill in wrestling, that though he received a fall, yet he
would persuade the wrastler that cast him, and others that beheld him, that he
conquered. I know no such subtelty in you, as you would have your hearers to
believe: but sure I am, you did not brave it so with the Doctor as you here
relate. In all these proceedings of D. Hutton, you have injured him much, but
your self more: you know what slays the soul, and therefore ought to
forbear al insulting terms, iniust imputations, circumstantiall
disparadgments, false relations, and to regard age and authority, learning and
piety, so are you bound by fear and conscience. What, other Doctors judged,
concerning your sermon, you know, by those reverend Divines and governors
among us, when you were censured about it: and therefore it is an idle
question, whether you gave or took the offense. The doctrine, you know, was
Papisticall: therefore you ought not to have obtruded such a point in the
pulpit. Christ's speech is general, ^ Mat. 18.6.
whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea. Your weapons were made on the Philistims
forges: Aug.
your arguments were neither de veritate, nor pro veritate; Neither truth of
matter, nor sobriety of speech, had place in your tempestuous conceit, and
disiointed sermon. You were not so willing to answer at London, nor so
peremptory to accuse the Doctor for want of judgment in opinion, or oversight
in discretion.

Mr LEECH.

And farther; I assure you; call me whether you will into question, I shall
discharge my self with sufficient credit, when you shall gain little by
questioning my doctrine or molesting me causelessly.

ANSWER.

You well ad the word farther, for you never spoke so far as this: you have a
strange gift of amplification, you scarce spoke the tenth part of that, which
you have here so enlarged, as is confirmed and averred by wise and honest
witnesses that heard it. This large discourse was not extant then. You neither
durst, nor could babble so much in so short a time. you durst not, for your
distraction that night, observed by many, was very much: it showed that then you
had not altogether dispassioned your conscience, but that there was some
spark, which did fear and follow you, observed by her own eye, though no
other eye should perceive her; chased by her own foot, though nothing, either
in heaven, or earth should pursue her. Relation tells me there was some
ouerture of compunction then, in you; your looks, gestures, words gave
testimony, that you durst not speak so peremptorily. And, that you could not,
it is plain: scarce three questions and answers passing between you, and those
rather commanding your Copy, then disputing the question.

Mr LEECH.

Here the kitchin-conference brake up: only, in the loose, he required a copy
of that doctrine of Counsels delivered by me out of S. Gregory. To this I
voluntarily condescended: adding these words to intimate my confident
resolution. Sir. For the doctrine, I will request no favor at your hands: only
I hope that you will do me justice: if not, assure your self, I shall right
my self else where. This was the last period of our conference at that time:
and so we parted: supper calling us both away.

ANSWER.

So much for your saucy and unsavory kitchin-stuffe. You need not again to
insist upon the place, a circumstance in that business lest material. And the
advantage of malice and hatred hence, is very small, if duly considered.
Therefore breefly to inform the Christian indifferent Reader; Concerning that
aspertion of disgrace, you call the kitchen conference, thus it was, as I have
received it, from the mouths, and under the hands of those it concerns.
Presently upon your sermon, you were sent for, because of the general distaste
thereof: being not found before Evening prayer, you were sought for again,
after that divine service, but not found, till M. Doctor Hutton, Subdeane, was
come into the kitchen, instantly before supper. A common order and custom in
that house required, that the Subdeane and Treasurer should (as you well know)
come into the kichin to see that provision and service performed, as Bursers
do in some of our lesser Colleges, Stewards in others. You being first met
with there, were examined, the copy required, you were admonished not to preach
the like doctrine, taxed for not understanding S. Gregory, reproved learnedly;
and lastly, threatened to be sent to the Castle, if you did not with some
speed yield up your Papers.

CHAP. 5. Mr LEECH.
SOme two days following (upon the very point of the prefixed time, which
doctor Hutton had appointed) I delivered unto him (in his own lodging) a
punctual sum, and copy of the doctrine, so vehemently by him excepted
against, and so earnestly required.

ANSWER.

YOu desired but till the next morning, and then promised to bring that part of
the sermon, but did not till two or three days after: which showed, either
negligent presumption, in contemning authority; or ignorant dullness, in
compiling your notes without method or dexterity.

Mr LEECH.

The said copy, with all seeming alacrity he cheerefullie, and contentedly
received at my hands, dismissing me without any further questioning about the
point, either the^ or any other time after. Whereupon I concluded, that he had
retracted his former opinion, by a more prudent circumspection.

ANSWER.

You conclude not Logically, the premises be not well collected: it was a
Censure, if you well observe it, that you were inhibited to preach that
doctrine any more: he did neither fear, nor faint in the business, as by the
remainder will appear.

Mr LEECH.

And that he now determined to pursue me no farther, I was then, and am now the
rather induced to believe, because, on the very night of our said
kitchin-conference, he repaired unto a very grave, and learned Doctor in that
University (who had heard my sermon) to crave his opinion, and resolution
concerning the point; complaining first of my peremptory, and obstinate
resolution; discovering withal his disgust of the Doctrine; certifying him
farther of his purpose to send me up to the Bishop of London to answer the
point there.

ANSWER.

It is a fiction that there was any reluctation in Mr Doctor Hutton, or that
he desired by any to be resolved in the point: he was no reed to be shaken
with the wind of unsavory breath. He only repaired to that excellent
pattern of learning, life, and government Doctor Kilby, to desire the help of
his memory, concerning the point that you delivered in that evening sermon,
thinking you would not have endured to deliver your copy: and therefore, being
to send the notes the next morning to our Vicechancelor, then at London,
because he would not be partial, or confide^t in his own memory, he desired
the Brotherly help of this grave and worthy Doctor, and this was his only
occasion of repair unto him that night.

Mr LEECH.

The venerable Doctor perceiving his heddy resolution and withal conceiving
the truth of the Doctrine (which his discreet and mature judgment could not
possibly suffer him to dissemble) very prudently, and learnedly advised him to
stir no more in the point; but to pass it over with a calm, and quiet
silence. For (said he) in sending him up to London, well you may put him to
trouble and chardge: but for the Doctrine (for ought that I could conceive) the
issue will be this: he may, and will answer it either here, there, or else
where, with more credit, then you shall possibly gain in calling it into
question.

ANSWER.

The Reverend Doctor consulted with, was a friend to your person, not to your
Doctrine: and that rather in commiseration, then approbatio^ of you. How often
did he dissuade you, from maintaining any such positions? intimating that it
had been the course of heretics in all times, to open some strange points
to get them a name. The general notice of his sou^dnes of Doctrine, and
excellency of learning, may free him: but more then this he protests utterly
against any adhering to your opinion, ever distasted and detested your venting
and ventilating of such heresies. Besides, it is false that the Doctor should
use any such speeches, Plaut. Pyrgopol.
that you could answer the Doctrine with credit. The bragging soldier in
Plautus, thought to purchase him self very high commendation in the Comedy,
when he cried out, Magnum me faciam nu^c, quoniam illi me collaudarunt: and so
you attribute much to your self, because, you say, you have the opinion and
approbabation of this Reverend Doctor. And I must confess, if you had any such
shelter, you were in better state then you are. But seeing his wisdom, and
integrity, vprightnes before God, and man, do deliver the contrary, and his
religious protestation does seal it: silence your self, and repent with
other, this error.

Mr LEECH.

And is this said he the reward of our Pulpit pains? Are Scholars, whose
state you know to be but mean, to be put by scholars unto this extraordinary
charge, needless, and causeless expense? Ought not you, and I, and all of our
rank, rather study to give them all lawful content, then to seek their
grievances, by surmising against them unjust matter; taking exception, where no
scandal is given, to bring them to just discontent? wherefore (Master
Subdeane) to waste neither more time, nor words about this point; for
conclusion (since, as you say, you are come purposely to ask my opinion and
counsel in this matter) my advise is (if you will be ruled by me) let all
matters be hushed; rest as they are; and there an end, without either further
troubling, or provoking him.

ANSWER.

It is a true saying sometimes, Aug.
Qui volens detrahit famae, nolens addit mercedi. You do in this supposed
Dialogue, detract from the worth of this learned Doctor, and yet unwillingly
you accumulat much honor to him in traducing him. They that are so pitiful in
the grievances of Scholars, are to be reverenced, and no doubt shall be
rewarded. I would scholars were not wanting to scholars in these offices.
But your case was so spiteful, that it deserved not to be accounted pitiful:
and therefore his wisdom knowing the Apostles Cannon, Reject him that is an
heretic after once or twice admonition, did then no farther intercede for
you, then that you might be censured at home, and receive condign reformation
here, rather the^ to be transported to London: And that he did for many
reasons, either because the world should not take notice that any durst make
our Pulpits Antichristian Oracles, as you did; or, because he knew that your
censure in that high and honorable Court of Commission, would be like Genesis 4.13.
Cains sentence, to heavy for you to bear. Whereas you double that speech in
this Paragraph, that Mr Doctor Hutton came to ask counsel or advise, both
these Doctors do utterly deny it: and I am sorry you so maliciously repeat
it again, knowing how confident each of them be in the contrary opinion to
you. Caietan. in Thom. 22dae. q. 184. art. 7.
Caietan his censure upon the doctrine of Counsels, is, that he thinks
this doctrine fit to be sprinkled with salt. I apply it to you; your lines be
unseasoned, they lack truth in relation, soundness in opinion, want of verity
in the^, want of charity in you, want of salt in both.

Mr LEECH.

Thus the good Doctor soundly, plainly, and, on al parts, charitably afforded
him his friendly advise. And herevpo^ it was, that Doctor Hutton was
satisfied; whereof he gave sufficient signs, when he received the aforesaid
copy.

ANSWER.

The Hebrew Buxdorf. in Hebrea Gram Coniug.
Gra^marians have a rule, that Characteristicum temporis excludit
Characteristicum coniugationis: so the characters of the time in many Apostats,
do exclude the notes of all honest respects, and characters of all parts of
honesty. Your paper seems to groan under your lines, it is so heaped and
dawbed with untruths. The Doctor spoke charitably, but his charity did not so
fully cloth you, but he left place for the rod of correction. And though
Doctor Hutton for a small time seemed content, having received your copy: yet
he daily exspected besides your silence, some recantatory satisfaction.

Mr LEECH.

So the matter was, for that time, ended; and the doctrine, without any manner
of prejudice, or farther contradiction, cleared: being now at two several
times by me preached; First generally glanced at, and intimated only: Secondly,
against the Brethren (who in private corners traduced it) publicly repeated,
amplified, and explaned.

ANSWER.

There was only a cessation a while from your trouble, no satisfaction given
for your doctrine. Your fear was somewhat calmed, but the point no way
cleared: your inhibitio^ was sufficient note of the contradiction of your
opinion; but that was not all, for all among us did distaste it. You did
present this twice to the University: but it was denied grace as often as
presented. You verify the Psalmists speech, Psalm.
Impij ambulant in circuitu: The wicked weary their souls untruly, in their
unruly designs and desires.

CHAP. 6. Mr LEECH.
AND now resolved, as my next occasion drew me to preach, to proceed forwards
with the exposition of my text, and to have unfolded the sense of the opening
of those mystical books; the book of conscience, and the book of God his
eternal prescience; for so it followed in my text; the books were opened, and
an other book was opened; which is the book of life. This was my intention;
because I had now spoken sufficiently of that point (as I thought) which I met
withal but obiter in my text, upon a subdivision, and a distinction cited
forth of S. Gregory.

ANSWER.

IT had been good that you had here ended your course discourse upon
Counsels, without Counsel, rather then to sow up these thin fig-leaues
which you gathered out of Bellarmine and Coccius to cover the nakedness of the
cause: you thought you spoke sufficiently of the former point, few so thought
but your self. Sufficiently indeed to manifest the corruption of your heart,
but not sufficiently to teach the truth of the point.

Mr LEECH.

As I resolved privately upon this course, so I had performed it accordingly,
if a certain exorbita^t accide^t had not interrupted, and disturbed this my
quiet, and settled resolution; diuerting my purpose (for that present) and
co^verting my forces another way. The occasion whereof was as follows.

ANSWER.

Greg. Mor. lib. 18. c. 6.
Gregory in his Moralls writes of some newfangled questionists, Praedicamenta
doctrinae quae quaeru^t ad quaestionem habere non valent ad refectionem, that
as 1. Tim. 1.4.
S. Paul speaks they give heed to wrangling, which breed questions, rather
then godly edifying which is by faith. You have been ever ready, but ever
unhappy in these questions, for still coming to the well of a deep and
profound controversy, either with the woman in the Gospel, you had nothing to
draw with, or else with the child in the fable, your bucket was too small,
and your roap too short. What forces you mean I know not, but it seems they
were conducted under the regiment of the whore of Babylon.

Mr LEECH.

In the Easter time following M. Benefield (one of the Inceptors of divinity
for the Act ensuing) whether it were of his own proper motion (which I very
hardly can suppose) or upon the instigation of some other of the Brethren
(which I do more easily believe; since he must needs go, whom a maine
schism drives) purposedly provided one of his six solemn lectures (read for
the assumpt of his degree of Doctorship) mainely, and directly by way of
opposition, and confutation of that erroneous Popish doctrine. A new doctor of
Oxford contrary to all the Catholic Doctors of the Church.
For so it pleased this initiate Doctor to brand the Doctrine of all the
Ancient Catholic Doctors, delivered concerning Evangelicall Counsels.
Wherein whether I, and my doctrine were mainely shot at and impugned or no, I
will not judge in my own cause; let the equal, and impartial Reader vmpire
for us both.

ANSWER.

This worthy, discreet, and learned Doctor ( Corp. Christi College.
of that honorable foundation, which has bread as rarely endowed divines,
Ludov. Vives. B. Iuell. Mr Hooker. D. Rainolds. etc.
as ever lived in our Church) is much abused by you, yet not so much injured by
you, as honored by all others. In respect of him, and the Choicest oracles of
our wisdom, whom you abuse, I cannot but break out into that speech of
Seneca, Seneca. Trag. in Thyest.
Quid sancta prodest pietas,
Quid vita prodest honesta, flagit io carens?
This good servant of God, neither by instigation of others, nor in
contradiction of you, as he protests, provided and promised in the public
school to read on this point, eight weeks before. You know those solemn
lectures are commonly all, concerning points of controversy: and why then
might not this be the subject of one of his readings, as well as any other? No
maine schism ever drew him to this action or any exotical opinion; he was
never subject to interpretation for any Schismatic contradiction: his worthy
Lord, the most reverend Bishop of London, Bishop Ravies of honorable memory,
cuius pia memoria defleri potest, no^ deleri, approved him to be free from
schism and abounding in science; and his sermons, Lectures, Exercises,
actions, all proceedings justify him, and condemn you: in his lecture he
never named you, nor aimed at you; he only read against the question, as
Bellarmine defended it.

Mr LEECH.

This business was not so secretly plotted by the aforesaid Brethren, nor yet so
privately intended, and carried by the Actor himself, but I had certain notice
given me by a friend of mine (a grave Bachellour in divinity, M. R.
and a man of good esteem) who was acquainted both with the project, and the
day of lecture: whereof he gave me a particular intimation.

ANSWER.

As S. Paul speaks of some widows, 1. Tim. 5.11.
that being idle, they go from house to house, and not only idle, but pratlers
and busy bodies: so no doubt we may judge of some intelligencers or relators,
that bestow only their time, in condemning the time, in accusing of their
Brethren, abusing of their betters. But Mr Russell, whom you quote in your
margent, is none such: and the learned Doctor did desire him to certify this
to you, because you might take notice he red against Bellarmin, not against you.

Mr LEECH.

This lecture I both heard, and noted in writing. But such an other lecture, so
false, so Heretical, with such violent wresting of sacred write, such impudent
rejecting of holy fathers, quite besides the drift of the one, and clean
contrary to the resolution of the other, I seldom, or never heard in that
famous, and renowned Academy.

ANSWER.

Quousque tandem: how far shall the bounds of your froathy and foaming waves
pass? Job.
God has set land marks to the sea, and the Arist. in Ethic.
Philosopher has set limits to that salt and sulphurous humor of raging: and
will neither Divinity, Plut.
nor humanity confine you? Plutarch sets down the difference between the
sea, and those that be te^pestuous sailers ever in the storm of unsavory wind
of words. The sea raging in a Tempest casts mire and dirt, sed mare tum
purgatur, but the sea is then purged of the filth, and froath, and scumme: But
the heart of such, when it rages, casts their stomach of bad and boiling
virulent speeches: Ea dicentis animum conspurcant, the words that come from
them, defile them, says Math. 7.23.
Christ; And they foame out their own shame, says Jude. 13.
Jude. Helvidius (says S. Hier. cont. Helvidium.
Jerome) thought his conscience then best discharged, when by reviling, his
stomach was most disgorged. But do you not so: for God knows, I wish your
good and salvation in Christ Jesus; and these kind of actions will much
impeach and impair your spiritual good. Yet seeing you have blown out such a
Tempest of disgrace, I will in the rugged sea of your last Paragraph cast Ancor
for this worthy Doctor, and to vindicat him whom soundnes of judgment in
learning, sincere conscience in his actions, and singular mildnes in his
deportment, do immure and compass from any just imputation: Know that his
learned reading upon the point now in hand, his lecture is extant, read it,
answer it, or acknowledge, that you have uncharitably, and unchristianly
traduced him, who never injured you: he has wrested no Scriptures, rejected no
Fathers, falsified nothing in his lecture.

Mr LEECH.

The text by him treated upon was; go sell all that thou have, and give to the
poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; and come, and follow me. A maine
ground, and pregnant text (as I take it; and I take it aright, if all ancient
Church mistake it not) to build up rather the^ to batter down; to confirm
rather, then to confute Eva^gelicall Counsels. The Fathers which he cited,
and named to stand for Counsels were diverse: he might have urged all, both
of the Greek, and Latin Church; all of them being resolute for Counsels
(and that upon those words of our Savior; go sell all, etc. As also upon that
distinction of the Apostle; Now concerning virgins I have no precept from our
Lord; but I give my advise; or Counsel) which is a weighty consideration, if
their iointe consent and uniform authority might have borne any sway with
this noble Inceptour.

ANSWER.

The text and interpretation thereof by all Ancients, as is by him most amply
proved, makes against you. Some Friars he named, that mainetained the point,
but no Fathers: professing then, neither to name, nor number those authorities,
that Bellarmin vnsitly collected out of the Fathers. How plainly, and yet
profou^dly he has delivered the opinion of al ancient, and modern, Fathers,
and Sons, both in his Text, and that place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 7. I desire
every honest ingenuous reader to observe; and your self to examine his
Lecture, and Appendix.

Mr LEECH.

But this novitiate Doctor (if yet he deserve that title, who dealt thus rudely
with the true Doctors of the Church) as he perverted the sacred writ of God
(his revealed will in his word) so rejected the Fathers, blasting them all with
this one heretical breath, that they were all bewitched, deceived, and carried
away as men with the errors of the time wherein they lived. Thus Calvin,
Luther, the four good fellow Germans (who composed their false, and fond
Centuries in a stone of Magdeburge) taught their novice to blaspheme. O times,
o ages, wherein we now live; when Calvin, Luther, four carowsing Almans (nay
rather Ale-men) and one puny Doctor, dare thus openly (in the ears of
Christendom, and in the public eye of so famous an University) blaspheme God
his holy spirit, promised by Christ to lodge in the bosom of these venerable,
and sober aged Fathers, chief pillars of the holy Catholic Church.

ANSWER.

Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
S. Ambrose observed of an adversary of the truth, Que^ veritate non potest,
laceret convitijs. It is your practice; whom you cannot tax with untruth, you
torment with slanderous reproaches. It was a base retaliation of him in the
Terent. in Andria.
Comedy, Si mihi pergit quae vult, dicere: ea quae non vult, audiet. It were
vile, if you should hear again such words as you spoke. Ephesians. 4.29.
S. Paul mentions (...) Epes. 4.29. corrupt speech, which is as a stinking
breath, outwardly breathed corruption, a sign as Physicians hold of inward
putrefaction. When you make your throat thus an open sepulcher, to belch out
such vnsavorynesse, it is an argument that like a grave, you are full of dead
men's bones: and I fear that your inward parts are full of wickedness. D.
Benefield used no such uncivil speeches of bewitched Fathers: unless you were
bewitched, you would not so accuse him. Concerning your scornful speeches
against Calvin, Luther, and the Magdeburgenses, I say not as Zachary said to
the Angel, The Lord rebuke thee, but from my heart I wish the Lord to forgive
it you. Of that rare and blessed instrument of God, Reverend Calvin, I may
truly speak, as Mr Hooker in the pref. to Church Polity.
Hooker does in the preface to his Polity, For my part, I think he was
incomparably the wisest man, that ever the French Church did enjoy, since the
hour it enjoyed him. And for Luther, let Eras. lib. 11. Epist. ad Car. Eborac.
Erasmus who was his familiar, give testimony of him, that his life was
approved with great consent of all men, and that the integrity of his manners
was so great, that his very enemies could find nothing which they could
calu^niate. And for his learning, let Hosian. trist. cat. cent. 16. p. 837.
Andreas Masius speak for him, whom you have reason to believe: who reports
of him, that there was more divinity in one page of Luther, then sometimes in a
whole book of some Father. The Magdeburgenses, though they seem to be
censorious, and Aristarchicall, were very special servants of God: for lives,
most honest; for knowledge, most learned: the ears that heard them, blessed
them; and the eyes that saw them, gave witness unto them, and, as Job speaks
of himself, so I of them, They brake the jaws of the unrighteous man, and
plucked the pray out of his mouth. Neither they, nor Doctor Benefield did
blaspheme Gods spirit, as you slander them. Neither was Gods spirit promised
to lodge only in the Fathers of the Church, but even jointly in all the
members of the Church. And yet for the Fathers, we do reverence them, as
much, or more then the Papists do: as the KINGS most excellent Majesty, In
his Premon. to his book
in his Premonition, does profess.

Mr LEECH.

This is right the Puritan cut: as D. Bancroft observes against the
Presbyterian faction, in some whole Chapters of his Survay.
And yet after he had thus censoriously handled the Fathers, upon my private
conference with him, in stead of the Fathers, which I called for, he offered
unto me two English pamphlets; one whereof was entitled the Apology of the
Church of England; whereat I could not but smile, in regard of his simplicity,
though inwardly grieved much at the times misery, when a statizing Pamphleter
(who would fly upon the wing of his pen unto the height of some ambitious
designment) shall be compared, nay preferred before the ancient Orthodox
divines, that painefully labored in the vineyard of the Church against the
brunt of all heresies.

ANSWER.

That you came to Doctor Benefield, to be informed about this doctrine, it is
true: you came even then, when you knew the instant approach of the Act was at
hand; the very next Saturday before the Vespers which time being unseasonable
did abridge him of any large or ample discourse with you. Otherwise, I assure
my self, that, as no suitor came to that good Emperor Titus, that returned
discontented: so none shall ever come to this worthy Doctor to ask counsel or
conference, that shall return unsatisfied. The two books that you were
offered, either of them might have informed you, that you held an opinion
contrary to the Church of England, to whose Doctrine you subscribed. The one,
which you call the Apology of the Church of England (Oportet esse memorem) was
a book entitled, The Catholic doctrine of the Church of England, an
exposition of the Articles of religion professed here, published by authority:
The other, Revere^d Mr Perkins reformed Catholic; such a book, and such an
Author, that your Bishop could wish he had never been Priest, it has so
entoiled him, and he In the beginning of his answer.
confesses that he never saw any book of like quantity published, by a
Protestant, to contain either more matter, or to be delivered in better
method. For Mr Rogers, he lives, worthy of much commendation for that
necessary pain: and his learned labor will live long after him. M. Perkins he
is asleep in the Lord; his holiness of conversation, soundnes of learning,
actions, labors, life, death, have sealed him A blessed servant of God. I
would others were as free from being flying wanderers, as he, or M. Perkins
from being statizing Pamphleters. You smiled, you say, at the Doctors
simplicity: but, unless you repent, the world will laugh and hiss at your
folly. Was it simplicity? indeed, as simplicity is taken for integrity, veritas
est simplex, the greatest attribute of truth is to be simple, and so he might
well prefer the simple positive truth, in one of those books, before all the
iugling expunged, impostured Copies, which you urge for the Fathers. The name
of the Orthodoxall Fathers in matter of controversy, I hold to be nomen
verendum and reverendum; and the current of the Fathers in the true Copies, for
the first 500 years, or thereabout, after Christ, is like Jordan which passes
sweetly and quietly through Canaan: but for their Current in some points, after
that time, it is (I will not say, like to Jordan falling into mare mortuum) but
it is much hindered, corrupted, and abused.

I had here ended this point, but that your Marginal urges a testimony from
that most wise and learned observation of dangerous Positions, and proceedings,
published and practiced for the Presbyteriall discipline. First, you may please
to understand, that there was want of good manners in neglecting the reverence
you owe to that rightly honorable AVTHOR whose eminent place in the State, My
Lords Grace of Canterbury.
painful Government in the Church, careful authority over our University,
and other his honorable respects, do adorn him with the co^fluence of many
Titles; and yet this sacred Prelat, grave Counselor, our noble Chauncellor,
must pass so unregarded by you. But what do you ground out of that note? His
Grace wrote against the ambitiously factious, and Paradoxically furious
Presbytery. Doctor Benefield, none such: his Profession, an honorable Bishops
Chaplain; his Positions, mainely against Presbytery, declare so much. Haec
nota nihil notat, praeter notam malitiae.

CHAP. 7. Mr LEECH.
THis solemn lecture, read in public schools by an inceptor in divinity
for so venerable a degree, enforced me now (eve^ as I would not openly betray
the truth of this doctrine) unto a more plain, ample, and personal defense,
inciting me also, nay inflaming me with some extraordinary desire, for the
reiection, and depulsion of his infirm reasons.

ANSWER.

IT is observed, Plin. not. hist. lib. 11. c. 37.
that in the falling sickness, the eyes though open, see nothing, when the
mind is darkened and dim-sighted: so seems it with you, when in your
declining and falling away, you could not see; or, like the deaf adder, would
not hear, charm the charmer never so wisely. You say, you were inflamed with
an extraordinary desire, for the reiection of the infirm reasons of the
lecture. I marvel you should be in such a heat. It had been well, if with
David you had cried out; My heart is hot, and the fire is kindled within me:
that was a heat that took fire from the altar; but yours was no such
spiritual heat. Albert. in comp. Theol.
Albertus observes, that many sins are deciphered by many sicknesses; luxury
by a fever, envy by a leaprosie, Anger by a phre^sie, and pride by an
inflammation: take head of proud heat, such inflaming will breed flashing. I
would be sorry from my heart, to hear that you should turn Melancholy
Dominican, or lousy Franciscan, or lazy Capuchine; but of all others, a
Jesuitical incendiary: for he is the wild fire of the world: in mind,
ravenous as a wolf; in head, crafty as a Fox; in heart, fierce as a tiger; in
tongue, poysenous as an aspe; in eye, deadly as a Cockatrice; in hand, bloody
as a Lion. O avoid the heat of a Jesuit: he is hell fire, heaping powder,
breathing fire, writing blood. Reip. geren. praecept.
Plutarchs speech is true, that fire begins not commonly in public and
sacred places, but often breeds first in a private house, by some snuff of a
candle among straw, and after sets on fire Churches and Temples: so the
stinking snuffes of candles, that fall among quarrelling papers in the study of
a male content, if they be not quenched, may fire Gods Church. Take care that
you be not so inflamed.

Mr LEECH.

And though diverse of my best friends (whose entreaty in any other matter,
might have prevailed with me) dissuaded me from this enterprise (as being to
full of peril) fearing the violence of the time, and the manifold dangers,
that by this resolution I stood likely to expose my self unto, yet ten
thousand such like motives of terror could not detain me, nor deter my
resolution. For a higher hand then humane (even the hand of heaven) so
ouerruled me (commanding, nay countermaunding all my affections that way) that
partly the pure zeal, and entire affection (which I ever bare unto the blessed
Fathers; being wholly indebted unto them for that little which I have) and
partly my devoted love unto many of that University; whom I could not
patiently suffer to be thus perverted in so main a doctrine, tending to all
Religious piety; and lastly the perfect hatred, that from my innermost soul, I
ever conceived against Puritanisme (the very bane of ancient Christianity)
these I say, and the like motives (to recollect the^ altogether) could not
suffer me, without the shipwreck of all conscience, to fit still and to be
silent, whilst God his eternal truth, Christ his holy direction, and the
perpetual tradition of the Catholic Mother Church were so publicly impugned,
and so notoriously profaned.

ANSWER.

Importunity of friends could not withdraw you, manifold ensuing perils could
not touch you: yet the Book of Canons agreed upon with the Kings Majesty's
licens in the Synod at London 1603 Canon 53.
Canon, provided against the public contradiction of Preachers in the pulpit,
should have staid you. You attribute your act to the hand of heaven, very
rashly. Howsoever, Senec.
quicquid agimus, quicquid patimur, venit ex alto, as the Poet well notes:
yet, that by the hand of heaven, you should be moved so much to magnify the
arm of flesh, that, whereas God Job.
lays folly on his Angels, you will lay such perfection of glory on his
mortal creatures, it may seem strange. It was not the direction of the hand
of heaven. Your motives commanding, and countermanding you, were, as you say,
first your entire affection unto the Fathers: 1. Mot.
your mother the Church, should have been dearer unto you then all your
Fathers, her peace more the^ their credit, her maintained religion, rather then
out of the^ your conceited opinion. But you would uncover nakedness in the
Fathers, where there is none: the Fathers disclaim your position, for
illegitimate. I know you boast that you have read all the Fathers, and I
think you have seen all the world: but the one in a map, the other in a
model. In this your tract when you brag so much of reading the Fathers, it
calls to my memory the distinction of Goron.
Goronides concerning readers: some are spunges, which draw up all with out
distinguishing; others are houre-glasses, which receive, and power out, as fast
as they fill; others are bags which retain only the dregs of the spices,
and let the purest escape; 2 Mot.
others, like Sieues, only retain the best. I reckon you in the first number.
Your second motive was your devoted love to many of that University, whom you
could not suffer patiently to be thus perverted in so maine a point of
doctrine, tending to all religious piety. Did ever any point that you preached,
gain any such belief, applause, acceptance, as that you should imagine that
many would have been perverted, but for the opening thereof by you? Or was
that, so main a point, tending to all religious piety, which served for no
other use, but the induction of Monkery: when as Monkery it self, is but the
privation of virtue, the life of vice, the habitation of darkness, stoue and
stews of filthiness, 3 Mot.
lethargy of drowsinesse, dormitory of profaneness, and profession of
idleness? Your third motive, was the perfect hatred that from your innermost
soul you conceived against Puritanisme, which you call the very bane of ancient
Christianity. For Puritanisme, if there be any spark of conscience, or
religious fear of God in you: confess how idely you traduce those reverend
Fathers, that opposed your doctrine. These were no Motives: Temptations were
your motives, which you obeyed; by the Te^pter you were drawn to run from
God, from the truth, from your Country from your self.

Mr LEECH.

1. Reg. 26.
Therefore as Abishai, out of his love to his anointed king, said unto David,
Benefield, with all his compeeres.
when he meant by one blow (surely laid on) to end all quarrels betwixt Saul
and him, let me strike him but once, yea nail him to the earth with a spear,
seeing God has thus closed him into thy hands and I will strike him no more;
even so (to apply the words only; for I justify not the intended fact of
Abishai) my love unto the king of heaven (when I purposed by one other blow
soundly given, to end this controversy) forced me to cry within any heart; let
me strike him but once and I will strike him no more.

ANSWER.

Your abuse of Scripture is so common through out your book, that I admire it
not only here, 1. Sam. 26.8.
in your wresting of that place of Abishais speech, Let me strike him but once,
and nail him to the ground. Impar congressus Achilli; it was a very unequal
match: Abishai, unworthy to strike a king; and Abishag, the fathers ignorance,
as the word imports, unworthy to deal with a Doctor. First I marvel you
would offer to strike, seeing S. Paul has bound all clergy men to the
peace, 1. Tim 3.2. 2. Tim. 4.10.
and to the good behavior. But Demas is fallen away, and forgets S. Paul.
But if you would strike, think you that this Paper-gun can strike down such a
worthy of Israel? Caedars stir not at such blasts, strong martialists fall not
at such blows. Give me leave to catechize you in the intended fact of Abishay
to kill Saul. Do not you justify it? Take heed least you be put out of
commons again. Are you one of those Israelits, that spoke Ashdod, and Hebrew?
Do not you justify that horid fact of that tragike fury, who has lately
murdered that most illustrious, and Victorious Prince, the French King? which,
howsoever, that blood shall ever cry for vengeance, being an act, Seneca in
Thyest.
quod nulla posteritas taceat, sed nulla probet, exceeding any particular
Scythian, Scillian, Marian, Tartarian, Barbarian, Jewish, Turkish villainy: yet
it was plotted by Catholics, Anticoton.
conspired by Catholics, acted, Ioh. Mariana.
and to be acted by Catholics, and maintained as a lawful doctrinall
position, by Catholics. Heretofore it was a Catholic doctrine, held
tyrannous in a king, to kill a Priest: but now it is thought a meritorious
point, in a Priest, to kill a king: and you must justify it. If you justify
not it, they will not justify you.

Mr LEECH.

And if this blow have not hit home to the final deciding of this quarrel,
depriving his heresy of al breathing, let him, or any, or all his accomplices
(and especially those six well selected doctors, who have so far engaged
their credits by interessing themselves so deeply in the quarrel) ward, and
answer the blow which they have publicly received, Doctor Benefield.
for all of them put together have not yet diverted the stroke. Or if the
cause, which the principal Actor undertook, will abide so much as the least
touchstone of trial, let him, upon what grounds, and confidence soever he
stands (as I dare boldly chardge and challeng him he stands upon none, but
heretical) divulge his lecture unto the ce^sure of the world.

ANSWER.

Your challe^dge is received. But why were not those many challe^ages answered
by you, which were offered by the ingenious and learned students of
Christ-church, and by the ingemminated motions of the Reverend Deane, that you
should sit, to answer or oppose in the scholasticall form of Disputations,
about this point. The six Doctors need not to raise their forces to encounter
you: One of them, whom it most concerns, has opposed more then you and Rome
will ever answer. His lecture is divulged to the worlds censure, and so it was
desired, by the Rightly Honorable, and most reverend Bishop Ravis, whose great
care before his death, was, that your ignorant and scandalous Pamphlet (they
were his own words) might receive a rigid answer. The learned and painful
lecture is able to satisfy any, who give 1. Tiim. 4.1.
no heed unto spirits of error and doctrines of Devils: which speak not lies
through hypocrisy, having their consciences seared with a hot iron. With that
lecture the places of Scripture be truly expounded; the question, as in the
sight of God, truly discussed: and in the Appendix, the ancient Fathers most
sufficiently answered.

Mr LEECH.

Mean while, for the honor of God, and confusion of Satan, to preserve Christ
his word (the word of verity) from the infectio^ of Heresy; for the just
defense of this doctrine and the due reproof of heretical innovatio^, I have
thought good here to insert a true copy of the Sermon preached by me in Oxford
to justify Evangelicall Counsels upon the occasion above mentioned. Anno
Dom. 1608. 27. die Iunij.


ANSWER.

Chem. in loc. Commun loc. de Cons. Evang.
Luther, about to confute this very doctrine, uses these words; In perpetuam
rei memoriam, maxim vero in Redemptoris gloriam, ista sunt memori mente
servanda and exaggeranda, adversus impudentissimos rabulas, Papisticae
abominationis defensores. I will not be so bitter: But to the glory of God,
dischardge of my conscience, and satisfying of those great and honorable
friends that did importune me to this business, I follow you line by line, to
see whether your copy be right. You say you have endeavored to reprove
heretical innovation; I say so much: dicit Scaurus, negat Varius, vtri
creditis? you must put your self upon God and the Country.

Mr LEECH.

Read it (dear Christian brother) severely; judge of it impartially; and God
grant it may effect in thee what I wish heartily: and that is (if thou feel
thy self called, and thy soul moved effectually) to practice the same. Amen.

ANSWER.

Wish faithfully, pray religiously; and then no doubt, God will give you
understanding in all things: which you must have in your self, before you ca^
wish it, or teach it to others. I lament you should so oppose your self to the
doctrine of Christ's holy Catholic Church, and in a mercenary respect, and
discontented humor, burden your soul with so foul a sin as this is truly
judged to be, even Apostasy. All such to the life S. Paul does decipher, and
gives order against such. 1. Tim. 6.3, 4.5
If any man teach otherwise, and consents not to the wholesome doctrine,
which is according to Godliness: he is puffed up, and knows nothing, he
doateth, or languisheth about questions, and strife of words, whereof comes
envy, strife, raylings, evil surmises, vain disputations of men of corrupt
minds, and destitute of the truth, which think that gain is Godliness. Fly
such, and fear such. So I wish you, so I counsel you, so I pray for you, and
seal my counsel wishes and prayers with Amen.

Mr LEECH. THE SERMON PREACHED IN defense of EVANGELICALL COVNSAILES, and the
Fathers.
ANSWER.

It was, and ever will be true; Causa patrocinio, non bona, peior erit. In that
it is Bellarmines doctrine, all your authorities gathered from him: you are his
advocat, he your author. But I know not whose the Sermon is: he made it, but
preached it not; you preached it, but made it not.

Mr LEECH.

AND I saw the dead, both great, and small stand before God, Apoc. 20.12.
and the books were opened, and another book was opened which is the book of
life, and the dead were judged of those things, which were written in the
books according to their works. This verse naturally flows, into three
streams, of Christian Doctrine: The first is a general citation of all; And I
saw the dead, both great, and small stand before God. The second is a particular
examination of all, upon a twofold evidence brought in: liber conscientiae,
libru^ praescientiae: the book of conscience, and the book of God his
eternal prescience: the books were opened, and another book was opened,
which is the book of life; A final retribution, involved in the act, and
particular manner of the judgment; and the dead were judged of those things,
which were written in the books according to their works.

ANSWER.

AS the Surgion, seeking to heal some vlcerated parts of a corrupted body,
does not apply his Kataplasmes unto every member, but unto those that are worse
affected: so must I deal with your sermon, seek to cure only those parts,
that are most tainted. In this first Passage, if by the rules of Criticisme I
should examine it, I should find it guilty of diverse errors, but chiefly of
your mistake in calling the first part of your text a Citation, which is an
appearance, or a vision of the appeara^ce, the effect of the citation: I saw
the dead both great and small: your best help here will be to let it be dispensed
with, per metonimiam satis impropriam.

Mr LEECH.

The general citation, more particularly wrappeth in the dead: the extent of
this great, and small: subjection to this throane; stand together with the
judge, before whom this grande GOD: and I saw the dead both great and small
stand before God. Of the persons appearing, summoned by Christ his imperial
power comma^ding, and produced by Angels voluntary ministering, and all
creatures necessary obeying, (sea, death, and hell surrending their dead) I
have already spoken; as also of the extent of this appearance; subjection to
this throane, and of the Judge before whom this appearance is made. In the
extent of this appearance I noted a fourefould acception great and small.
First, great and small for worldly authority, Secondly, great and small, in
respect of heavenly supereminencie of grace, and Thirdly, great and small, in
consideration Fourthly, great and small, in regard of disparitie, yea
contrariety also of works, and operation.

ANSWER.

Supereminence of grace causes a disparity of working: and therefore two of
your interpretations be coincident, and make but one. But I urge a farther,
and more material point: you ground the argument of your sermon upon a
symbolicall interpretation, Aquin.
and therefore, as the schools have noted it, can prove nothing. That it is a
symbolical interpretation I prove, because it is not the true literal sense:
that it is not the true literal I prove, because the literal sense is but one,
as Aquinas teaches, sensus literalis est, Aq. prim. primae. q. 1. art. 10.
quem author intendit, that which the author intends, and therefore your text
cannot literally be interpreted so many ways: and so consequently your
acception of it in the last sense (great and small, in regard of disparity, yea
contrariety also of works and operation) ca^ be the ground of no argument,
because it is not the proper sense of the letter of your Text. The rule of the
schoolmen is, Multiplicitas sensuum in vna Scriptura, Aq. 1a. 1ae. q. 1 art.
10. Aug, 48. cp. ad Vincentiu^
parit confusionem and deceptionem, and tollit arguendi firmitatem, and
secundum hoc aliquae fallaciae assignantur: And S. Austin in his 48 Epistle ad
Vincentium, does worthily tax the Donatists for grounding arguments upon
mystical senses of Scriptures, De verbo Dei lib. 3. cap. 3.
which Bellarmin acknowledges and expressly delivers, ex solo literali sensu
peti debere argumenta efficacia, and concludes that oftentimes it cannot be
proved that mystical senses be the meaning of the holy Ghost. Aust. Carthus.
Lyra. Hugo. Gloss.
So that my exceptions against this part, be chiefly these two: first, that the
ancient interpreters, as before is proved, do understand the Text otherwise
then you interpret it; secondly, that the symbolicall acception of great and
small, if it were truly expounded, cannot be the ground of any effectual
argument, to found any point of doctrine and belief, but rather a use,
allusion, or application.

Mr LEECH.

And from this last signification, arose that foure-folde distinction of S.
Gregory: quidam non judicantur, and pereunt; quidam judicantur, and pereunt;
quidam iudicantur, and regnant; quidam non judicantur, and regna^t. That is (as
another ancient writer, commenting upon my text, fitly rendereth it) some are
not judged but condemned already; perishing without further judgment; some are
to be judged, and condemned; perishing by judgment; some are to be judged, and
saved; saved by judgment; some are judged and saved already; saved without
judgment.

ANSWER.

Distinctions in divinity, are like fomentations in Physic: Cor. Celsus.
the one to be applied in dissolving tumors; the other, in resolving doubts. In
all diseases to let blood, says Celsus, it is a strange fashion: and in every
occasion to use a distinction, it is means to dull the text, and darken the
cause; but then especially, when besides the sound constitution of the
distinction, you infer an unsound addition and conclusion, following in the
sequel of the sermon.

Mr LEECH.

The first rank are such, whose damnation sleeps not, Ioh. 3.18.
but is already certain: Qui non credit in filio Dei IAM judicatus est; he
that believes not in the son of God is already condemned, being thereto
ordained, and predestined; ad poenam, non ad culpam; ad supplicium, non ad
peccatum, ad mortem animae, non impietatis primam, sed ad mortem animae,
damnationis secundam: as that mellifluous Father Fulgentius speaks: De
praedestinatione ad Monimum.
that is to penalty, not to iniquity; to the wages of sin, not to the guilt of
sin; not to the first death of the soul, that is transgressio^, but to the
second death of the soul, to wit certain damnation. For their sins (being
loud crying sins) cry with Sodom in the ears of heaven: are open before
hand, and go before them unto judgment.

ANSWER.

S. Augustine teaches; Opera non praecedunt Iustifica^dum, sed sequuntur
Iustificatum. And, as that is true in salvation, so this is true in damnation;
peccata sequu^tur reprobationem, praecedunt damnationem. Aug. Polan. partit.
lib. 2. p. 356.
Sins do follow reprobation, in him that is to be damned; but sins do not
predestinate him to this reprobation: the rule of Schools being this, voluntas
Dei reprobat, peccatum da^nat; the hidden inscrutable judgment of God does
determine man's reprobatio^, but his sins do cause the execution of damnation.
And so the words of Fulge^tius (which you have by fragments taken out of the
place cited) are to be understood. Though God has ordained some ad poenam,
non ad culpam: yet he has so appointed them, ad poenam propter culpam. Exodus
33.19.
For it stands not with Gods justice to condemn any one without offending:
though he will show mercy, Romans 9.15.
upon whom he will show mercy. We are al in his hands, as the clay in the
Potters: If he ordain one to honor, Romans 9.20.
another to dishonor, who can say, Why haste thou made me thus? I intend not a
litigious discourse about words that may be well construed, but I attend your
progress.

Mr LEECH.

The second sort are such, whose damnation is yet uncertain; for admit, that
they be now in the state of damnation, yet let them turn from their sins, God
will turn from his wrath: he offers them heaven, and threatens them hell:
he sets life, and death, good and evil, before the^: let them reach out
their hand, and choose whether they will.

ANSWER.

Your second branch of the distinction concludes these to be judged and
perish; and according to Gregory, iudicantur and pereunt: how then is their
damnation uncertain? If this be not a Soloecisme, what is? They are judged,
there is certitudo reprobationis; they perish, there is certitudo
condemnationis. Their condemnation sealed, and delivered, and an immovable
stone of heavy vengeance, lying upon the mouth of hell, that they shall never
come forth: Job. 14.14.
and yet, the damnation of these to be uncertain. It is Jobs question, Can a
man that is dead, live again? I ask in another sense the same question, Can
he that is denounced reprobate, judged, and condemned to eternal torture, can
his damnation be uncertain? You will answer, it is uncertain while he is
in this life, because he may turn from his sin, and so God turn him from
his wrath, etc. But though this be true in some, that are predestined to
life before the beginning of the world: yet it is never so with those, that are
ordained to death; their damnation is certain. For, Tho. in quaestione de
veritate quaest. 16. art. 1.
as Aquinas teaches that necessariae propositiones and Deus, be both immutable
and immovable: so the judgment of God, it is like the law of the Meades and
Persians, it alters not. And, if Gods judgment should be any way uncertain:
it were to make God subject to inconstancy, which, as Tho. 22ae. q. 55. art. 2.
Thomas teaches, is speciale peccatum imprudentiae. No marvel you seem
ignorant of what is true in judgment, and good in will: if you pursue your
corrupt opinion with such abortio^ of Contradiction. This is certainety or
uncertainty. You repriue those in this section, whom you find to be judged,
and damned, in Gregory's distinction; Iudicantur, and pereunt.

Mr LEECH.

He that would not the death of a sinner, (for our merciful God, would have
all to be saved) offers means of salvation, unto these sinners; knocking
outwardly, inwardly, by the operation of his word, by the inspiration of his
spirit, at the steepie door, of their drousie consciences, to awaken them (if
it be possible) from the dead sleep, and lethargy of sin: opening their
eyes sometimes, and inlardging their hearts, that, if they will, they may come
to repentance, and amendment of life, out of the snare of the devil, who are
taken of him at his will.

ANSWER.

The Pope, your Lord God, Did. 61. Catinensis.
cannot bind a man to do things impossible, as in the Canons is taught: and
yet you will enforce the Everliuing God to things impossible, as if he offered
means of salvation to those whom your second branch holds to be judged and
perish. The extent of Gods mercy is such, that noe dimension in art, no
proportion in nature can describe: but, ab inferis non est redemptio. There is
a time, when (as S. John says) there shall be no more time: Romans 10.6.
and the large extent of mercy reaches not so far. Though mercy, the
sweetest companion of man upon the face of the earth, Psalm.
did fetch David's soul from the snares of death, from the Chambers of death,
yea metaphorically from the nether most hell: yet they that are ordained to
damnation, shall never be redeemed thence, but for ever receive the execution
of condemnation; Ab inferno non est redemptio.

Mr LEECH.

Which means of their conversion, proceeding from his mere compassion (which
should lead them to compunctio^) if they refuse, and after their hardness of
hard that cannot not repent, Romans 2.6.
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, then are they taken of Satan at
his will. Hence springs the second branch; some are judged, and condemned.
These happily, though they have not sinned with so high a hand against heaven,
as the former have done; yet certainly have they so grieved the spirit, which
should have sealed them up unto the day of redemption, and so highly have they
offended the Majesty of heaven, that their sins follow them unto judgment; nay
dog them, as a sergeant at heels, to arrest them.

ANSWER.

In the former paragraph almost in the last line, you say they come to
repentance: and yet here you urge that Scripture against them, that after the
hardness of their heart they cannot repent. You are quickly turned Thomist, to
produce your secunda secundae. Review your words: in the last Paragraph but
one, you say the second sort of these whose damnation is uncertain, and now in
this that second has got this second; here springs the second branch, some
are judged and condemned. This is like the fellow in the Comoedy, Haec nunc
quasi cum, Terent. Heau Act. 2. scen. 2.
that spoke he knew not what: and my answer to you is the same as his was,
Quas, malum, ambages mihi narrare occipis? In your written copy delivered at
the command of authority, there be many cloudy, ambagious, obscure lines, so
invelloped in the mysts of error, as if the ambiguous Oracles had spoke again:
in this printed copy, so many strange, disiointed, vnsinnned sentences, as if
you would profess to read a lecture of non sense: one paragraph does not know
the other; or, if they be acquainted, they contradict each other. Page 31. And
from. page 32. The second sort. page 32. He that would. page cad. Which means.
Some are damned, and perish, say you; and yet of these within Page 31. And
from. page 32. The second sort. page 32. He that would. page cad. Which means.
few lines you affirm, they may be saved: some may come to repentance and
amendment of life; and yet of the same penetentiaries you deliver, that after
the hardness of their heart they cannot repent, and so you make the^
impenitentiaries. Of the second bra^ch you say there are some, whose damnation
is uncertain: and yet here you infer, Hence springs the second branch,
some are judged, and condemned. Then their condemnation and judgment is
certain.

Mr LEECH.

The third sort are such, whose salvation is not yet certain, certitudine rei,
though it be spei; not sui, though Dei: with certainty of real possession,
though it be of spiritual expectation; with any certainty arising from
themselves, but with a certainty proceeding from God. Gods promises are
conditional, and his election infalliblie implies in it, nay points unto
the very means of our salvations; his eternal prescience so directing the
decree of his Counsel.

ANSWER.

The works of God, as the Schools teach, are either interna seu immanentia,
Aq.
or externa seu transeuntia: the former are immanent in ipsa Dei essentia, the
other transeunt in all his creatures. Of al other works of the later kind,
predestination is a most special one, and in it the certainty is of much
moment, and in the certainty the manner of our certainety of salvation is
chiefly to be considered. Our adversaries and we in this point, differ most
about the manner of this certainty they hold a certainety by revelation, by the
missio^ of an angel, by some extraordinary miraculous manner: we go further,
that we are certain of salvation, not certitudine intellectus, for that is but
the natural assent, grounded upon inbred principles; neither certitudine
scientiae, for that is certainety of conclusions, begot from those principles;
nor only certitudine experientiae, for that is drawn from sense; nor only, as
you affirm, certitudine spei, for that may be wavering: but we are sure,
certitudine fidei, by the certainety of faith, and that not a dead, temporal,
historical, miraculous faith, but by a true, lively, quickening, justifying
faith. Lastly your distinction seems very strange, which says, a man cannot
be certain of his salvation, Certitudine rei: and yet he may Certitudine Dei.
I had thought that Certitudo rei, and Certitudo Dei, had been the same.
Because God judges not as we misconceiue, but as the thing is.

Mr LEECH.

These though they stand, 1. Cor. 10.12.
yet must they take heed least they fall. For these are but yet in via, not in
patria; upon the seas of this world, floating, not in the haven of heaven,
reigning. Begin they in the spirit? Yet they must not end in the flesh, or be
made perfect by the flesh. For they are yet in certamine, not in triumpho,
warfaring on earth, encompassed with thieves and pirates, the world, flesh, and
devil on all sides assaulting them; not triumphing in heaven, environed and
guarded, with legions of Angels, and armies of the spirits of just and perfect
men.

ANSWER.

The words of S. Paul do not serve to prove any uncertainty in the faith of
the Saints, 1. Cor. 10.12.
any hesitation or doubting concerning their salvation: but (those and the like
words, Be not high minded, but fear) are inculcated rather, ad supprimendam
praesumptionem, non ad imprimendam dubitationem. A filial fear is the
character of the child of God: a fear of offending, nor of final falling;
for he knows that to be true, Quos amor verus tenuit, tenebit. Howsoever
there may be this fear in faith, as that a Christian be in his faith, as
Christ in his fight; in agony, passion, sweat, and blood: yet he resists unto
blood, yea unto hell; for the gates of hell cannot prevail against him.

Mr LEECH.

These must remember, and remembering tremble at that fearful distriction, and
terrible commination (so often reiterated and direfully threatened by the
prophet.) If the righteous turn away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and do according to all the abominations, that the wicked man does,
shall he live, says the Lord God of hoasts? All his righteousness that he
has done, shall not be mentioned, but in his tra^sgression, that he has
committed, and in his sin, that he has sinned, in them shall he die. And
the same reason is excellently rendered by the Apostle: Hebr. 6.4.5.6.
For it is impossible, that they which were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have
tasted of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come, if
they fall away, should be renewed by repentance, seeing they crucify again to
themselves the son of God and make a mock of him.

ANSWER.

The infernal furies, distrust, fear, and horror do keep the souls of the
wicked continually in alarm: but these be strangers, yea enemies to the
Godly; they know how to temper their fear with joy, to cast sweet wood into
the bitter waters, to cast anchor in the Tempestuous storms of distrust,
knowing that they cannot fall finally and totally from God. And howsoever the
frequent mentions of these and the like Scriptures are very necessary, yet
neither of these do prove that the true and faithful Saints do fall: for the
place in Ezekiell is (as Danaeus answers Bellarmine) to be interpreted only
of those that are just in their own eyes, not of those truly just before God.
They do not hereby prove that ever the truly righteous have fallen finally,
but in such sort that they may rise again: and so you grant in your former
distinction that they are certain certitudine Dei, and is not that sufficient
assurance for the conscience to build upon? The place out of the Hebrews is
very obscure, and one of those places that S. Peter spoke of, 2. Petri, 3.16.
that in S. Paul's Epistles there were (...), places hard to be understood,
which unstable and unlearned men pervert, as they do other Scriptures, to their
own damnation. Novatus, who lived about the year 253. abused this place to
prove that it was impossible for those that had once fallen, after Baptism, to
be renu'd by repe^ta^ce. Your Doctrine seems to be neighbor to his error.
Chrysostom. Epiphanius, Athanasius, Ambrose, and Austin, do interpret it against
Rebaptizatio^: that such as fall, should not be renewed again with another
Baptism. But others interpret S. Paul by himself, Heb. 10.26.
in the 10. Chap. ver. 26. that he understands those only, Paraeus in Heb.
not that fall in part, as David into adultery; nor wholly, of infirmity, as
Peter in his Abnegation: but wholly, finally, and maliciously, as Julian, and
Porphiry did, because they spite the spirit of God, and count the blood of the
Testament an unholy thing. Others may fall, and rise again: as, I trust, you
will. And for the objections against our certainety of salvation, I briefly
answer them thus: If you object Saul to have fallen finally, we acknowledge
it, but we deny him to have been endowed with the spirit of grace: he had
only spiritu^ consilij, and dominationis, not gratiae, and regenerationis. If
you object Judas fall, you cannot prove that ever he had the true justifying
faith: he had gratiam gratis datam, not gratiam facientem gratum. If you urge
the reiectio^ of the Jews, the Olive branches, we answer that these branches
were grafted in, only quoad externam and visibilem Ecclesia faciem, not quoad
internam and invisibilem gratiam, according to that of Christ, Every plant
which my fathers right hand has not planted, shall be rooted out. If lastly,
you vrdge Moses, and Paul, (for I know you will disturb not only Prophets and
Apostles, but even Saints and Angels: nay and Lucifer from hell, concerning
whom this answer is sufficient, Stella cadens, no^ est stella, cometa fuit) For
Moses and Paul, when they did wish that their names might be rased out of the
book of life, they did it, rather out of an ardent forcible zeal, Z^nch.
Danaeus.
the^ out of a possible act: non proprie and vere, sed (...); if it could have
been, which was not possible to be done: herein expressing their care, and
love, and zeal of the salvation of their brethren. But absolutely, it is the
most certain (...) that can be, that any true servant of God should finally
fall from grace: the promise of the Father is, I will put my fear into their
hearts, Luke 22.32.
and they shall not depart from me; and the prayer of the Son is, for Peter,
and in him for all faithful, I have prayed that thy faith fail not. Faith may
sometimes be seen Orient, in her full heat and luster; sometimes in the
occident. Sometimes it is in the flower, sometimes private in the root;
sometimes in the flame, sometimes in the spark: but as that stone in Pliny
once made hot, never loses its heat; so faith is never dead, dried, or
extinguished. If faith take fire from Gods altar, it is like the fire in the
Temple on the altar, never goes out. Men, Angels, Devils cannot extinguish it.
It is as mount Syon, that shall never be removed. Flac. Illir. co^tra relig. pp.
Catharinus thought so, and mainetained it against Dominicus Soto in the
Council of Trent, of which Counsel they that were the Presidents, did protest
they did not think the question to be sufficiently discussed, and therefore the
decision thereof was deferred two several times. And Antonius Marinarius does
exquisitly speak herein, If heaven fall, if the earth vanish, Dominic. Quad. 4.
if the whole world ran headlong, I will look to the goodness of God, and, as
he adds, if an Angel from heaven shall labor to persuade me against the
certainety of my salvation, I will say Anathema to him. So against such we
will shut up the bowels of charity, and as far as the power of the keys is
given unto us, the gates of everlasting life.

Mr LEECH.

The last sort are such, whose salvation is already certain; and these differ
from the other, quoad gradu^; gradum in via, perfectionis; gradum in patria,
retributionis. 1. Cor. 15.41.
For if stella a stella differt gloria (the Apostle applies it to the bodily
resurrection) that is, if there be degrees of exaltation in the kingdom of
glory; of necessity, by force of inevitable consequence, it must follow, that
there be degrees of Christian perfection in the kingdom of grace, the one
being a retribution of the other; heavens remuneration awarded, according to
Christian perfection practiced.

ANSWER.

This is your part of the division that divided you from your part among us,
upon this all your paper building consists, upon this Champion ground you
marshall your munition, and here be the sluices of your invasion: this is the
squadron you encounter us with. But in this Paragraph, three things are to be
reproved. The first, your misinterpreting of the place of the Apostle S. Paul.
There be Interpreters that prove that that speech, and the collation thereof,
is only inter corpus depositum and corpus restitutum: it is not a comparison
between the elect in glory, but between a glorified and a corruptible body,
Pet. Martyr class 3. c. 17. 8. Paraeus Com. in 1. Cor. 15.
to manifest resurrection. Secondly, your disiointed consequence is to be
reproved, stella a stella differt gloria, ergo there be diverse degrees of
exaltation in the kingdom of glory, according to Christian perfection
practiced in this life. Aristotle, 2. Post. c. 15. 4. Top. c. 3. 6. Top. c. 2.
7. Top. c. 2.
in many places of the Organon, gives caveats against arguing from Metaphors,
and figurative speeches; and therefore your foundation is faulty in Logic, but
much more in the law. Thirdly, though we deny not but that there be degrees of
holy life in the kingdom of grace: yet the reason is not good, that therefore
there be degrees of perfection in this life, because degrees of exaltation in
the life to come; in as much as these degrees of exaltation depend not on that
proportion you imagine, which is between the work and reward, but on the
grace and favor of God, who bestows liberally. I am not ignorant, that Ierom
is fierce against Iovinian for maintaining an equality of glory, S. Austin
ioineth with Jerome, and Mr Calvin with both, and Peter Martyr acknowledges,
Aug. Ench. c. 3. epist. 146.
that all the Fathers believe it. Yet this was never urged or held, that it
deserved the name of an inevitable consequence: but rather, of a probable
opinion.

Mr LEECH.

These ioin with their faith, virtue, 2. Pet. 1.5.6.7.10.
with virtue knowledge, with knowledge temperance; with te^perance patience,
with patience godliness; with godliness, brotherly kindness; with brotherly
kindness, love; the very bo^d of perfection, nay pliroma tou nomou; the
fulfilling of the law; and doing these things they can never fall. These give
all diligence to make their calling, and election sure by faith, by works, by
precepts, by Counsels. These are terrestres Angeli, coelestes homines, earthly
Angels, heavenly men: their names are written in heaven, and themselves
registered, and enrolled, in the book of life, and of the Lamb. These (I
remember well) I styled entia transcendentia, men soaring with the wings of
faith and works, above the ordinary pitch of men: etiam praecepta legis
perfectiori virtute transcendentes; transcending, surmounting the precepts of
the law, by Evangelicall Counsels of greater perfection: so speaks S.
Gregory in the place about cited.

ANSWER.

So speaks not S. Gregory: you insert the words, Evangelicall Counsels, in
place above cited. It is the most absolute distinction of general and special
precepts that can be urged, Praecepta generaliter specialis iussio
perfectiorib' imperatur. praecepta ^^^cialia.
but no word of counsels mentioned. Four especial notes be there, for to
guide any man (that runs not astray through the wilderness of his will) to
the true knowledge of the difference of that divisio^. Your very paper is a
writ against you, for you cannot out of Gregory cite the word Counsel. As
for the fulfilling of the law, it can be in this life but only ex part, non ex
toto, as is taught in the third of the Sentences, 3. Sent. dis. 17.
the 17 distinction, and as Calvin and Bucan worthily teach, the best of Gods
servants have peccatum domitum, Greg. 4. mor. cap. 24. Manuscripts in the
public Library of Oxford wherein are found many 1000 differences in the works
of Gregory and many a hundred contradictions to the now extant Roman Coppie, as
will shortly appear.
non dominum, sin does remain in them, though it does not reign in them. S.
Gregory does elegantly prove this, Chananaeus populus non occisus, sed factus
tributarius: meaning hereby, that the Saints here, as long as they live in the
world, have the flesh to vex them, and the Angel of Satan to buffet them. And
for that fragment out of Gregory, perfectiori virtute transcendentes, or
perfectionum virtute as some copies, or perfectionis virtute: I say none can so
transcend as you interpret, some me^ may transcend other men, but yet not
transcend the law, or they may improperly be said to transcend the precepts,
that is, the ordinary and customary observing of the precepts: they may
transcend in seeking to keep them in a more holy manner then others, that be not
so well enabled by gifts, but yet they do not surmount the precepts of the
law, nor pitch beyond the Commandments. If you pitch beyond that pitch, he
that touches your pitch, will be defiled with it. The Poets observation may
warn you, Deus immortalis haberi Dum cupit Empedocles ardentem firgidus Etnam
Insiluit. Hor. Art. Poet.


Mr LEECH.

For explanation of which sentence of that good Father and great pillar of the
Latin Church we are to note, that precepts and Counsels, may be considered
comparatively two manner of ways; viz. either generally, camparing all the
precepts of the law jointly with the Counsels of the Gospel severally, or
particulary, by comparing several Counsels of the Gospel, not with every, or
with all the precepts of the law jointly in one aggregate body, but severally
with the precepts co^versant circa eandem materiam.

ANSWER.

You went upon trust, but not on credit, for this distinction: Lib. 2. de
Monach. cap. 6.
acknowledge the Principal and pay Bellarmin the intrest for great part
thereof. The first member of your distinction, is very ridiculous, to compare
all the precepts of the law, with one Counsel of the Gospel. The second member
is verbatim taken out of Bellarmin, to which Iunius answer is prompt: first,
Annot. in Bellar.
he denies Counsels to be any thing besides personal precepts, and therefore
they cannot be preferred before Precepts in general: secondly, he answers,
that Bellarmin out of Aquinas does grant that Counsels avail but
instrumentally to perfection, Aq. 22 ae. q. 184. ar. 3.
but precepts essentially. This is therefore to prefer the color before the
cloth, or the pen before the writer, or, more properly, a river before the
Ocean.

Mr LEECH.

In the first consideration, I stand not to justify those words of S. Gregory,
Psalm. 119.
transcendunt aliqui praecepta legis perfectiori virtute. For mandatum tuum
nimis latum Domine: thy commandment, o Lord, is exceeding broad: yea so broad,
that the law alone, lex immaculata, that undefiled law of God, contains in
it, primarily, originally, essentially, all kind of Christian perfection; and
it was never that orthodoxe Fathers meaning so to compare them. But in the
later consideration, most true are those words of S. Gregory; transcendunt
aliqui praecepta legis perfectiori virtute.

ANSWER.

As the Apostle spoke of the love of God, O the height, and breadth, and the
depth, and length of the love of God: Ps. 9.119.
so say I of the Law of God, it passes al dimensio^s, all proportions we can
conceive; ma^datum tuum nimis latum, Tertul.
Domine. And as Tertullia^ spoke of all Scripture, so I of the law, Cuius
plenitudinem adoro, whose fulness I adore and reverence: because this law, as
you upon fear of Anathema are constrained to confess, contains all
perfection, yea al kind of perfection. And seeing it does contain AL KIND OF
PERFECTION, what kind of perfection is left for Counsels? But you may make
something to be transcendent to ALL, seeing you make man, who ( David says) is
nothing, to transcend the law. Esops collection was this, Esop. vit.
when his fellows were to be sold with him in the market and the Marcha^ts
asked of every one of the^ what they could do, they answer, all things: but
when the buyers questioned Esop what he could, nothing says he, giving the
reason, he could do nothing because his fellows had professed severally to do
all things, therefore nothing was left for him to do. So, ask your counsels
what they shall do, they will answer; nothing, for you acknowledge that the law
does perform and co^taine all. Besides, your gloss is a great stranger, and
your comparison most odious when by mandatum tuum nimis latum you say, id est,
all precepts of the law, jointly, are more the^ one counsel of Gospel. None
of the Fathers father this.

Mr LEECH.

To illustrate this comparison by example. First compare vade, vende omnia, and
da pauperibus, and sequere me, with that precept, non furaberis. And secondly,
compare that Evangelical Counsel qui potest capere capiat, Mat. 19.12.
(which Luther himself in the 30. article of his assertion, held to be the
only Evangelicall Counsel) with that precept, non moechaberis: then you shall
see evidently, that an higher degree of perfection is in the action conformable
to those two counsels, then in the actions inioined in the other two
Precepts. For in actions there must needs be degrees of goodness; witness some
actions good in a mean degree of goodness; as not to hate his own flesh, to
requite good for good, not to steal, not to commit adultery, etc. Wherein I
may demand with our Savior, what singular thing is done? do not Publicans do
the same? Did not blind-folded Gentilisme do these things? Other actions there
are, which are good in a higher degree of goodness: such are the actions,
performed in the Counsels of voluntary Poverty, virginity, and the like.

ANSWER.

That which should lighten and illustrat your meaning, does clod and clowd it.
Such illustrations as these are broods of the night of ignorance; begot in
darkness, conceived in blindness, and brought forth in doubtfulnes. Luther Tom.
2. Assert. art. 30.
Luther is here ill cited by you: for in the place quoted, he allows John Hus
to have offended in numbering 12. Evangelicall Counsels, quu^ non sit nisi
vnicu^ virginitatis sieve caelibatus, when as, says Luther, there is but one
only, Luther 2. To. de votis Mon. ^. de virgin.
and that of virginity. But Luther afterward teaches otherwise, and denies
virginity to be a counsel, in his 2. Tom. de votis Monasticis, c. de
virginitate. Degrees of goodness we deny not: but will you then in these
actions, make an opposition between these degrees, where there only is a
supposition, and call the imperfecter degree, a precept; and the perfecter, a
counsel, when a Counsel is but a degree of the same praecept? It is as if
Jacob should dream a lower round of his ladder to be a ladder, and a higher
round to be above a ladder. To hold, that calor ad octo is more then heat,
because calor ad quatuor is heat, would argue much weakness and ignorance in
Philosophy: to hold that to love the Lord with all the heart, with all the
mind, and with all the soul, is more then to love, or more then the law
requires, is false in Divinity.

Mr LEECH.

All perfection of man here, is it is in the way of perfection to the service
of God, is not equal, witness the Apostles forsaking all, and following Christ:
did al do so that believed in Christ? witness the first fervor, and zeal, of
the Primitive Church (newly founded, in the blood of Christ, and watered in the
blood of his Apostles) selling all their possessions, without the least
reservation of any part, and laying down the whole price thereof at the
Apostles feet; witness S. Austin in his 18. Sermon de verbis Apostoli: where
that good Father speaks thus in the person of certain virgins (in his time)
religiously devoted, and consecrated unto the entire service of their God, Quod
iubes, ne adulterae simus, hoc praecipis: amando te plus facimus quam jubes.
Whereas thou command us not to commit adultery, this thou give us in
charge by way of precept: but in loving thee, we do more then thou comma^dest.
Witness learned, and judicious Hooker in the second book of his Church
Polity, in the third page before the end of the same book: witness also
the Apology in defense of him, written by Doctor Covell; in the 14. Chapt. of
Satisfaction.

ANSWER.

Tertullian observes, that Orthodoxall teachers use first to teach, Lib.
contra Valent. c. 1.
and then to persuade: but heretics use first to persuade, and then to teach.
I can find abundance of wants both in your manner and method and matter of
this sermon, This sermon does nether teach nor persuade.
teaching by false proof, and persuading by fained power, to strengthen that
which no man besieges, or gain says, that there be degrees of perfection. In
this part, your proofs so sinisterly collected, from the practice of the
Apostles, Authority of S. Austin, from the opinion of Mr Hooker, and Doctor
Covell, need rather an interpretiue answer, then a defensive encounter. 1. For
the Apostles, that they did forsake all, the necessity of the times, and their
vocation required it: Legend.
yet Christ bids them keep their Scrippe and Coat. Friar Juniper thought
that was too much, and ran about, without his breeches: and Friar Ruffin, as
Sedulius witnesses, Apol. l. 2. c. 5. n. 7.
did preach naked. Secondly, for the Virgins in S. Austin, whose speech is
amando te plus facimus quam iubes, Sermon. 18. de verbis Apost.
by loving thee we do more then thou command, that is more the^ thou
command, Perkin. prob. Tit. super.
hoc mandato de non moechando, as learned Perkins answers, or it is to be
understood in genere to others, that God did not command all so to love him as
they did: that is, in that kind, he commands al to avoid adultery, but he
commands not all to profess Virginity; and yet those that he has separated
for that kind of life, are bound, because commanded so to live, and cannot say
plus facimus quam iubes. For your third allegation out of that Reverend Author
Mr Hooker; In the place cited, he makes not any mention of the word Counsel.
One of his propositions among others is this, that God approves much more the^
he does command, which may be spoken in a good sense, for as much as God does
approve many things he does not particularly command in holy Scriptures. I
will seek no other example then that which Mr Hooker alleges there, his
words be these, Hook. 2 book of Eccles. Polity 8. p. 120 lin. 39.
Hereat S. Paul undoubtedly did aim, in so far abridging his own liberty,
and exceeding that which the bond of necessary and enioined duty tied him unto.
What that was his marginal quotation shows. 1. These. 2.9. the words be these,
1 Thessalonians. 2.9.
Ye remember brethren our labor and travail, for we labored day and night,
because we would not be chargeable to any of you, and preached unto you the
Gospel of Christ. To preach the Gospel so freely, as that he that serves at
the altar, does not seek maintenance from the altar, is more then is enioined
generally to the Ministers of the Gospel, and yet is approved in the sight of
God, and no doubt rewarded. Yet upon some circumstances, where the people are
unwilling to hear, because unwilling to pay for their hearing: a Minister,
ratione officij, rather then beneficij, is bound to preach, because his rule is
this, vbicunque quandocunque quomodocunque, wheresoever, whenever, howsoever:
he is commanded to preach the word, in season, and out of season. For your
authority out of learned Doctor Covell, I answer aetate^ habet, doctrinam
habet, he may save you the help of a Friar to lash you, for stealing out of
that one Article above forty lines of his words without his meaning. According
to my understanding, all that he endeavors to show, is, that there be diverse
degrees of perfection in this life, and of glory in the life to come; that, to
attain this perfection, some courses be more exquisite the^ others; that such
courses are not of necessity prescribed to ALL, and therefore in that regard
they may be said to be more then is commanded in general, or in particular to
any absolutely, but only conditionally with supposall of gift or vocation.
These he calls Counsels. And we refuse not the name if the thing were taken
aright, but that by such we may merit for our selves and others, and come with
an overplus to be treasured up, to make merchandise for indulgences, let him
speak himself what he thinks in this Article whence you borrowed much, but
understood little. The 8. Article 8. of defense of M. Hooker. Title Super.
Article of his defense of Mr Hooker, in the Title, works of supererogation:
whereas you quote him for the 14. Chapter, the Title Satisfaction. But to the
purpose, in the place above cited the vpshot of his tract is this, we cannot
supermerit, by these more then we ought. Therefore his speech fasteneth no post
in your weak building. And in a word, to add this Corolarie to Mr. Hooker and
Doctor Covell which will I hope give some light to any that shall sinisterly
interpret them: Lib. 3. de anima.
It is a position in Aristotle lib. 3. de Anima, that intellectus Coniunctus
semper progreditur ab imperfecto ad perfectum, which Thomas and the schools
have made use of in the Metaphysickes to prove that conceptus particularis, a
particular conceit, is ever more perfect then an universal, so species then
genus, individuum then species is held more perfect because in descending
downewarde there is ever something added to the perfection of the universal,
which the particular includes. This may be well applied, to the present, and
to the conceit of these learned men, to which you never attained. Though the
universal precept binds al, and in that may be said to want no perfection,
yet the particular, adding some thing from extraordinary means to a branch of
the general precept, is some way said, to be a more exquisite way:
notwithstanding, these lists are ever to be kept: that as the Poet spoke Est
modus in rebus sunt certi denique fines:
Quos vltra, citraque nequit consistere rectum.
So say I, and so held these in divinity, in all the actions of our life there
be land marks of our procession, which strive we never so earnestly we cannot
go beyond: and therefore not beyond the precept.

Mr LEECH.

The perfection of man here in this life, is the souls union with God; not
essential, (for this is peculiar only to the Trinity.) Not personal (this
proper to Christ his humanity.) Not sacramental (this extends to the whole
Church in general.) But it is, vnio animae spiritualis, the souls spiritual
union with God, when the soul is wholly sequestered from the world, and is
sincerely ravished with the love of God, of Christ, and of her neighbor;
guided, and led thereunto by precepts, and Counsels.

ANSWER.

It is true according to Bernard, that the union of the soul in this life, is
not essential, or personal, or Sacramental, but spiritual. But this union
has not its full complement in this world, the soul cannot be wholly
sequestered from the world. It has not the true participation and fruition,
therefore not the true reality of this union: not so ravished with the love of
God, of Christ, Heb. 12.1.
and the neighbor, but that much imperfection hangs on, and tainteth, and
leueneth the best parts of the best Saints. Romans 7.19.
Witness Paul, The good that I would do, I do not; but the evil that I
would not do, that do I.

Mr LEECH.

Which precepts, and Counsels, though they perform this, yet do they
diversely direct thereunto, according to the diversity of those things, about
which they are conversant; differing only in modo, not in re.

ANSWER.

A monstrous co^tradiction.
You say Counsels and Precepts are conversant about diverse things, this is a
real diversity: and yet they differ in modo, not in re, hereby you contradict
a real diversity.

Mr LEECH.

To explain this point. Some things are contrary to the love of God, wherewith
Charity, and the love of God, ca^ have no more agreement, then light and
darkness, God and Beliall, the Arc and Dagon, Baall his false priests, and
Eliah the Lords true Prophet. And for removing these forth of the way of
perfection, precepts are mainely given.

ANSWER.

It is true, some things are so diametrally opposed, as the Northern and
Southern Poles shall sooner meet, then they shall ever agree. And such is, for
example, the disagreement of us and the Papists, In 2 Tracts dedicated to the
last King of France.
in points of religion: in which Piere Coton has taken some pains to
reconcile both, which is as impossible, as if reconciliation might be made
between righteousness, 2. Cor. 6.14.
and unrighteousness; believers, and infidells; the cup of the Lord, and the cup
of devils. For our difference is not for circumstance, but for substance: and,
Academie. Quaest.
as Tully spoke of the Stoics and Academicks, Non de terminis, sed de tota
possessione contentio, It is not for the bounds and limits, but for the whole
possession of religion; whether God or man, nature or grace, the blood of
Christ or merits of Saints, a written verity or unwritten vanity, honorable
marriage or abominable Monkery, the Lion of the tribe of Judah in authorizing
Kings, or the Bull of the Pope of Rome in deposing Kings, shall take place.
These be contrary as the Arc, and Dagon; Baal his false Priests, and Eliah the
Lords true Prophet. But to the purpose, Precepts are not only given for
removing these out of the way of Perfection: but for removing all kind of
hindrances whatsoever. Every spot of sin by the precept is prohibited: and
therefore every spark of occasion of sin, is by the precept to be removed.

Mr LEECH.

Other things are impedimenta charitatis, or impedimenta actus charitatis:
Bern. ser. 35.36 parvorum sermonum.
that is, non illicita, sed impedimenta iustitiae; impediments of charity, or
impediments of the acts of charity, to wit not things simply unlawful, but
encumbrances unto righteousness: and for removing of these lets, Counsels are
given.

ANSWER.

Aq.
It is so that they be impedimenta, but it is as the schools teach, vitio
hominum, non natura rei; adiumenta his: impedimenta illis: pro donorum vary
tate. Riches a great means to set forth Gods glory: Abraham was rich, so was
Joseph, so was Job. Could not these therefore be perfect? Riches well used may
serve even in the way of perfection, ad necessitatem, ad honestate^, ad
liberalitate^: and, the Schools observe, that there is triplex solicitudo;
Providentiae, Necessitatis, and diffidentiae: the two former are lawful and
commendable: so may the possession and Christian use of riches, be not only
tolerable, but available to Gods glory.

Mr LEECH.

The first inioineth abstinence from things simply evil and unlawful, that
cannot stand with the love of God, nay contrary to the love of God, and of our
neighbor. And for removing of these, a Precept is necessary. The second
commands not, but advises abstinence, from things not simply evil, nor in
themselves unlawful; as marriage, and the riches of this world (the good
creatures of God) but they may well stand with the love of God; yet may they
be so used, nay rather abused, that they may withdraw the mind from the love
of God. Qui duxit vxorem, 2. Cor. 7.33.
curat quae sunt mundi: the married man cares for the things that are of this
world, etc. Again; it is easier for a Camel to pass through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man, that trusts in his riches, (for so Christ
expounds it) to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Are not here marriage, and
the consequences thereof (necessarily ensuing) riches, and the cares thereof,
impedimenta iustitiae, lets, and encombrances unto righteousness? And therefore
these are left arbitrary, and at our free choice, to be followed, or
pretermitted, as every man's proper gift shall be; vnusquisque suum habet
donum; 2. Cor. 7.7.
every man has his proper gift. So S. Hierom ad Eustochium; and against
Iovinian, S. Ambrose, in the 10. book of his Epistles; the 82. Epistle ad
Vercellensem Ecclesiam; and in his tract de viduis, toward the end. S.
Augustine in his 61. sermon de tempore: the second book of his Evangelicall
questions, chapter the 19. and in his Enchiridion, ad Laurentium chapter the
121.

ANSWER.

Your distinction is not found, your authority vnproved, and your discourse
impertinent. The second member of your distinction by which you mean Counsel,
does not only advise, but command I must return the speech of Gregory upon
you, wherein he fully does overthrow this your distinction and the whole tenet
of your doctrine; Lib. 26. Mor. cap. 15.
Aliud est quod per sacram Scriptura^ omnibus generaliter praecipitur, aliud
quod perfectioribus imperatur: here is no counsel or advise, but a command,
yea so expressly commanded as that it argues inexcusable negligence, palpable
ignorance, or damnable impudence to deny it. For riches and marriage they be
not properly impedimenta actus charitatis. The necessity, the use the blessing
of riches I spoke of in the former Paragraph. And of marriage I may speak much
more, it may be a help to attain salvation. How was Eve Adams helper, if it so
much be hinderance to Gods glory? How was Adam being married perfect in state
of innocency, how shall the believing wife save her unbelieving husband, how
shall Sara among the married, Hanna among the barren appear in Perfection, Ad
Eustoch. Espen. com. in 1. Tim. 3.
as S. Hierome says? And how may a man marry and not hinder his desire of
perfect life, as Espencaeus does affirm and teach: if that marriage be such an
obstacle and impediment? Yet notwithstanding all this, if marriage be like to
be an vnavoideable hinderance to the service of God, a man must cut of the
thought of marriage not by advise but by express command, Mat. 5.30.
yea upon pain of eternal damnation as Christ does witness; If thy hand offend
thee cut it of, and if thy eye offend thee put it out: better it is to go into
heaven with one eye or one hand, then into hell. Now for your Authorities:
Coccius.
what * Cock hatched your Authority, and like a Cuckoo brought them into his
own nest I find, whence these Testimonies be urged verbatim as you quote
them. The most authorities drawn from Bellarm. Coccius and others from their
tracts of Monkish life.
Coccius Treasury out of the bad treasure of his heart lent you them. Vita
Monastica is the Common place and Arsenall from whence you furnished your
self, which is the less credit to your opinion, and you cannot deny but from
mare mortuu^ you did fetch your water in as much measure as the Pitcher of your
understanding could carry, otherwise Bellarmine and Iodocus Coccius could have
furnished you with many more I am far from tearming the ancient Fathers so,
but I mean, the authorities falsely and sinisterly drawn out of them be false
witnesses.
false witnesses. But if I should take out a Commission from the kings bench of
Scripture to examine these, not one of them would stand to you. You begin
with Saint Hierome, if I should usher Saint Hierome, with the estimation that
some great Clerks among your Priests and Jesuits have afforded him for his
contempt of marriage in comparison of Virginity, Tom. 14. in 1. Cor. 7. Disput.
14. ad dubium. De contine^t lib. 3. cap. 11. De rati studij Theol. l. 4. c. 5.
obl. 2.
I should quickly vnedge the authority you seek from him: Salmero^ affirming
that he was in this, iniquior and acerbior; Espencaeus, that he was aequus sane
parum nuptijs; Villavincentius, Male audit accusaturque Hieronimus dum pro
virginitate propugnans; the Jesuit Acosta, Virginitatis oppugnatores insectans,
videtur aliquando matrimonio iniquior. But I proceed to the exposition of him,
rather then exposing so holy a Father to detractio^. S. Hierom ad Eustochiu^
has these words, Quod non habet Domini de virginitate praeceptum, etc. Besides
that S. Hierom is hardly ce^sured by your own, for that and the like speeches,
it is manifest that there his words be rather declamatory then assertatory:
and howsoever he speak thus, Si virginitas imperata, nuptiae videbantur
ablatae; yet, that virginity is commanded, he grants, when in another place
he calls it praeceptum virginale. Again, in his 1. book against Iovinian
though he has such words as you intend, Quia vbi consilium datur, offerentis
arbitrium est; vbi praeceptum, necessitas est servientis: yet I again answer
S. Hierom does call that which is here by him termed a counsel a precept, in
his Commentary on the 19. of Mat. he has not only the words before urged, but
more, praeceptu^ pudicitiae, praeceptum virginale etc. Secondly, if you urge
the power and strength of this his speech, vbi consilium datur, offerentis
arbitrium est: I answer that the word arbitrium does interpret the word
consilium, for it is arbitrium in respect of the things commanded, which lie
indifferent to the choice; but it is mandatum in respect of the Comma^der.
Answer to S. Ambros.
S. Ambrose authority out of the first place upon the words of the Apostle,
Apostolus de virginibus praeceptum no^ habet, consilium habet; non enim
praecipitur quod supra legem est: It is thus easily resolved, S. Ambrose did
follow the vulgar translation of the Bible which so does read that place of S.
Paul, but there is no warrant for such interpretation. What need we seek
light of a Candle when we have the most resplendent beams of the Sun? And
what need we to crave the help of a translation in a point of controversy,
when we have the original? 2. Cor. 7.25.
First I say the greek has the word (...) which signifies advise, not (...)
which is interpreted Counsel: and therefore though I owe al reverence to S.
Ambrose, and the other Fathers, yet if they read it so, when the word in the
Primitive sacred Copy does not so render it, I had rather prove the Fathers
by Scripture, then prove Scripture by the Fathers. Sixth. Senens. Bibl. lib. 8.
in fine p. 365. D. Bannes in 1. Part. Thomae q. 1. p. 67. Line. de Opt. genesis
interpr. l. 3. c. 1.2.4.6.
Sixtus Senensis, and Dominicus Bannes, but especially Lindanus do condemn
the vulgar Translation to have monstrous corruptions of all sorts. scarce one
copy to be found undefiled, sundry places to be thrust from their natural
sense, the Translator to be no Latinist but a smattering Grecian. And sure, as
your own do thus condemn your own Coppie of the Trent vulgar Translation,
so do I the old vulgar (for I will never believe that S. Ierom so translated
it.) But as Lindan thought of your Translation, that he was a Grecian, no
Latinist: so think I the contrary of him that interpreted (...) to signify
Counsel, he was scarce Latinist, but sure no Grecian. But to the later
inference out of Ambrose, Quod supra legem est, non praecipitur; it is true, if
we consider supra legem to be supra legis observationem: so Virginity is above
the law, above the general law commanded to all, but not above that proper Law
and Precept of virginity which S. Hierome calls praeceptum virginale. Hier.
in 19. Math. Ambros. tract de viduis.
The second place you urge out of Ambrose; Foeminae non coguntur autoritate
aliqua praecepti, etc. It is meant not by authority of any general precept
commanding all women, but by the especial which does inioine some furnished
with that spirit, and gift: and the words following enforce not any more,
Honorabile co^iugium sed honorabilior integritas, Marriage is honorable, but
integrity more honorable: integrity, not virginity, for in Marriage there may
be great measure of integrity. That which closes up this sentence, been dixit
Apostolus, De Virginibus praeceptum no^ habeo, consiliu^ do, the Fathers are no
strangers to this interpretation that there is praeceptum omniu^ commune,
Greg. in 26. Moral. c. 25.
and praeceptu^ aliquorum particulare, a general precept enforcing al men,
such a precept concerning Virgins, the Apostle had not; and there is an
especial precept enioyning some me^, this was the Counsel Paul meant, and
that Counsel is the precept which Christ gave, Qui potest capere capiat. S.
Austin in his 61. Sermon de tempore, Answer to S. Austin.
has these words, Aliud est consilium, aliud praeceptum, distinguishing there,
the common precept from a special precept, which he calls by the name of
Counsel, and so does expound himself in his 3 book de Doct. Christ. c. 17.
when he affirms alia omnibus communiter PRAECIPI, alia singulis and quibusque
generibus personarum: here is the universal or common, and that proper or
special precept distinguished and he gives the reason, that God has not in
this only taken care for the general infections, sickness of sin in all; but
particularly for the spiritual disease and infirmity of every one, Psalm. 103.
he has given medicine to heal these sicknesses, and the direction of the
receipt is a Praecipi. Conf. l. 10. c. 29.30.
And not only here, but in his Confessio^s he acknowledges that god does
command virginity and continency: Imperas nobis co^tinentiam, continentiam
iubes; da quod iubes, and iube quod vis. The second and third places of S.
Augustine may be so answered. But in a word to either, the former of the two, in
which I must aim at the word, for I find no quotation of these places often
urged, I say the former of these Eva^g quaest. 2. l. cap. 19.
whence you would prove not only Counsels, but supererogation, means nothing
else, but that a man may by grace outstrip the common iniunction enioined other
men; but that ex debito, not ex consilio, as in other places Austin holds.
And to his latter place, Enchr. ad Laur. c. 121.
Quaecunque ergo mandat Deus, etc. Danaeus answers, that howsoever Austin
seems to distinguish Counsels and precepts there: yet the very word in that
place, speciali Consilio, does sufficiently manifest his meaning to be of
precepts. For an especial Counsel is only herein especial, as having
reference to a general: but general Counsels there be none, but only
Precepts: therefore it is plain, by speciali consilio he meant a special
precept. Thus you are left without authority, the scabbard whereof you will
presume to keep, for you see the sword is taken from you, or else so vnedged
that it serves not for your turn.

Mr LEECH.

Precepts and Counsels therefore differ thus. Precepts are of necessity;
Counsels arbitrary, left to our free choice. Both aim at the mark of
heaven, by shooting at the butt of Christian perfection, but differ in the
manner. Both level at the means of salvation: that is, perfection of charity,
yet Counsels after a more exquisite, and excelling perfection.

ANSWER.

Counsels and precepts do differ no more then Genus and species; for Counsels
be but the branches and species of Precepts: neither be they left to our
free choice, for we have no free choice, but in every good thing the directing
hand of heaven does dispose of us. Secondly, they be not Arbitrary simply. If
we grant them to be Arbitrary in regard of the things to be undertaken which
be indifferent: yet they be not so in regard of the persons undertaking, who
are bound to love, and serve, and fear God as much as they can with their
best gifts, and yet in the end be unprofitable servants.

Mr LEECH.

The stage of this world, and the theater of the Church present unto our free
choice the worlds trash, and heave^s true treasure, the more man cleaves to
heavens permanent felicity, the more perfect, and excellent is he; nay to cast
the worlds trash wholly away in lue of heavens treasure, as seafaring men do
their goods and wares, in danger of shipwreck, when the life is in hazard,
this is no precept of necessity, but only an advise of greater perfection.

ANSWER.

The stage of the world, and the Theater of the Church, are very unfit Phrases,
and more unfit to be coupled. But these do not present to our free choice the
casting away of the worlds trash: for the Apostle, necessitate praecepti, Heb.
12.1.
does bind every man to cast away every thing that presses down. And yet all
Christians are not generally commanded to give away all, or cast away al, but
to imitate the merchant in a dangerous tempest, to cast away all, rather then
hazard his life, and this is but conditional: and when the danger is less,
he will depart but with some part, reserving the rest for helping forward his
traffic. So the Christian seafaring man, will upon an extremity rather
forsake all worldly profit, then endanger the shipwreck of faith, and a good
conscience. Nevertheless in the common course of his life, which is ordinarily
hazardous, will not be wanting, to throw daily some of his goods into the salt
sea of other men's misery, for their relief, always so giving, that he may
always give.

Mr LEECH.

Transgressors of the laws precepts, deserve punishment; but they that
perform not Counsels sin not; only they want some measure of perfection.

ANSWER.

They that perform not counsels, as Evangelicall precepts particularly
inioined them, sin peccato omissionis. For a man must serve God, as much as he
is able, obligatione praecepti, as it is iterated in Matthew, Mark, Mat. 22.37.
Mark. 12.30. Luc. 10.27.
and Luke; Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind: which is not only by the Fathers, Aq. 22ae q.
44. art. 5. Com. in Math. 22.
but by Aquinas and Caieta^ thus expounded, that in the service of the heart is
dedicated the affection; in the soul, the consecration of the life; in the
mind, the sacrifice of the understanding. Yea scire is required in the heart;
velle in the soul; posse in the mind: all our faculties, of soul, and body,
are required by that precept, delivered in the law, confirmed in the Gospel,
and containing the very sum of Law and Gospel, of Precepts and Counsels,
and requiring the utmost degrees of perfection that may be performed in this
life.

Mr LEECH.

Observers of Counsels shall have greater reward, yea they shall sit upon
thrones; and not only judge the twelve tribes of Israel, but doom both men
and Angels. It was Christ his promise of remuneration made to his disciples for
their consolation, to encourage them to go forwards with the practice of
Christian perfection, embracing for his, and heavens sake, voluntary poverty,
virginal chastity, and humble obedience. It was proclaimed also by that
trumpet of the Apostles, preacher of the world, Apostle of the Gentiles, and
descrier of heavenly mysteries, holy, and blessed S. Paul; know you not, that
we shall judge the Angels? etc. The words are so pregna^t, that all the
wra^gling wits, and contentious private spirits in the world cannot wrest them.
But law breakers, without repentance, shall have greater punishment.

ANSWER.

To the Saints in general it is promised by the Oracle of truth, Mat. 19.28.
the truth himself, not only in Matthew, that they shall sit upon twelve
throanes, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel: Luke 22.30.
but also in Luke, that they shall eat and drink at his table in his
kingdom, and sit on seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And it is
most true, that S. Paul says to the Corinthes, 1. Cor. 6 2.
that the Saints shall judge the world, and shall judge the Angels. In the
Gospel, Christ pronounces it unto them of the regeneration; and in the
Epistle, Paul proclaims it unto the Saints: and will you impropriate so
great an honor, only to your Observers of Evangelicall Counsels? The Saints
shall judge the Angels, iudicio assessionis, or approbationis, as the Schools
speak: but they have this endowment of honor, for being of the regeneration,
not mentioned for keepers of Counsels. And it was not only an assurance made
to the Disciples, but to all the Saints; neither were the Disciples professors
of voluntary poverty, virginal chastity, or humble obedience, as you interpret
obedience. First, not of voluntrary poverty; we never read they begd: Paul
made Tents, and Peter did fish; neither of them did beg: and, not only the
Disciples did labor, but, as S. Austin proves, the Monks and Clergy men of
ancient times, enjoyed both their possessions, and wives, and taxes the
Apostolici, some, Ad quod vult Deum. haeres. 40.
that in a blind superstitious ambition, would imitate the Apostles in refusing
those into their company that had goods and wives. Arrogantissime se
vocaverunt, says S Austin, they did most arrogantly call themselves
Apostolici; I may add, that most falsely they called themselves so: for the
Apostles did not refuse the communion and fellowship of any, in that kind,
neither were they professors of voluntary poverty, as it is proved; neither did
they profess virginal chastity, as I proceed to prove. The Apostles, for the
most part, were married men: S Ambrose says, In 2. Cor. 11.
AL but only John the Evangelist. The old Postils, Dormi secure in Johan. 2.1.
Dormi secure, Bentontine, and others, say that S. John was also married, and
that when Christ was at the marriage of Canaan in Galily, then John his
marriage was celebrated: and Pontanus, Diez, Costerus, Pontan. bibl. con. tom.
1. fol. 217. Diez. Con. 1. Cost. to. 2.
with many others of the most quicksilverd wits among the new Papists do so
affirm. For their humble obedience, they practiced all obedience in general,
but not Monastical obedience, as you intend; not such obedience, as Ignatius
warns his fellows of in an Epistle to the^, that they be careful least
(says he) the famous simplicity of blind obedience should decay. Ep. ad
fratres in Lusitan.
A blind obedience indeed: for it is so straightly inioined them, Pseudo Martyr
cap. of Jesuits obedience.
that if one of them were so highly dignified, as in a revelation to talk with
Angels, if his superior call him, he is bound to leave them and come away. The
obedience of the Apostles was no Monastical obligation. And howsoever
Bellarmin would found this upon Christ his speech to the young man, sequere me:
yet, De Monach. c. 9. sex Test Mat. 19.21.
if it would please his father-hood to look into the Text, he shall find,
that that obedience is there Commanded, not cou^selled; Matthew. 19.21.
it is (...), an imperative, follow me. But his Cardinals hat, serves for a
cap of maintenance, for more wrestings and inforcements of Scripture then this.
You double your citatio^ of the Saints judging the Angels, which you say all
the wrangling wits, and private contentious spirits in the world, cannot wrest
them. The words of Scripture with all joy and comfort we acknowledge: but the
inference we deny. You sprinkle your lines with sulphur, in steed of salt: we
wrangle not about Scriptures, we abuse them not, we wrest them not; we say to
all, that shall read our interpretations, Aug. ad Petil.
as Austin said of Petilian, Petilianus Manichaeum me esse dicit, dico me non
esse, eligite cui credatis. So you say we are wrangling wits, and contentious
spirits: we say we are not. Let the world choose whether of us they will
believe. But, for the abuse, detraction, profanation, falsification, and
blasphematio^ of Scripture by men of your side, it is so common, that men and
Angels stand aghast at it. The young Novice, that understood his father was an
Abbot, said he might well cry Abba Pater. Owen. Epig.
And Gonzaga himself, the devout Jesuit, Vita Gonz. fol. 187.
when he heard his Father was dead, answered, that now nothing could hinder him
from saying, Our father which art in heaven. These iocular wrestings be
hateful, and harmefull: but there be not only these among you, but most
monstrous, and blasphemous wrestings of holy writ, whereby, as enemies of
righteousness, Act. 13.10.
ye cease not to pervert the straight ways of the Lord.

Mr LEECH.

To shut up all in one word; Precepts are exalted as necessary; Counsels are
offered as voluntary, and arbitrarie. The one being done, is praised, and highly
rewarded: the other being undone, is reprehended, and punished.

ANSWER.

In one word, Bell. de Mon. cap. 7.
you should have urged Bellarmin his own words, from whom you had this
Paragraph, lib. 2. de Monachis, cap. 7. Praeceptum visua obligat etc. To which
Iunius and others answer, humane counsel are arbitrary; divine, necessary. For
if that of Plato be true, Plato ep. 7. ad Dion. propin. and fam.
(...), that the petitio^s or requests of kings lay a co^ma^d: much more should
the counsels of God, Rev. 3.18.
those counsels being comands as, among others, that to the Church of
Laodicaea, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried by the fire, that thou
may be made rich: it is a command, because it has a threatening inferred in
the former words; Rev. 3.^6.
It will come to pass, that I will spue thee out of my mouth: the threat
menaced, enforces it, as necessary; if necessary, a precept, and so your
distinction between the precept and counsel, properly holds not.

Mr LEECH.

This distinction betwixt precepts, and Counsels, is no new doctrine. S.
Hierom ad Eustochium, de custodia virginitatis, and against Iovinian, lays
down the point, and differences thus. Where there is a counsel, there is left
a freedom; but precepts inioine a necessity; precepts are common to all,
Counsels are the perfection of some few. ( And this is agreeing with that of
Gregory in the place above cited; non omnibus praecipiuntur, sed perfectioribus
consuluntur: they are not commanded to al, but advised to men of the perfiter
rank. Precepts observed have a reward, not observed a punishment; Counsails not
observed have no punishment, but observed have a greater reward.

ANSWER.

Your urging of these fathers is no new argument, it is twice before answered.
Is this no new doctrine? Plead antiquity while you will, Scripture has taught
me that the Gibeonites old shoes were but fained, and that Bildad stood on
Antiquity to overthrowe the Truth. His words prove your work, for he was the
first that corruptly urged the Fathers; Ios. 3.5. Job. 8.8.
Prepare thy self to search of their Fathers (says he.) How the Fathers have
understood, has been sufficiently delivered. The point is this: does S.
Hierome, S. Gregory, or S. Augustine, any where affirm that a man furnished
with gifts beyond other men, is not bound by Gods commandment, to make use of
those gifts to the utmost of his ability, to set forth Gods glory and his own
good? If you show this, you prove somewhat: if not, nothing. Where you infer,
that Counsels not observed have no punishment: Bellarmine in those words
wrested out of S. Austin against himself, Lib. de Mon. cap. 7. 2.
is thus evicted. The Cardinal confesses, that a Counsel includes a
Precept: if therefore he that observes not a Counsel be not punished, then
the observation of the Precept is not punished. And if the careful keeping of
a Counsel be not punished, it is to be only so interpreted, that it is not
punished in those who are not tied to it: as, if Abraham neglect virginity, it
is not censured; but, if the Nazarite breaks that iniunction, it is condemned.

Mr LEECH.

And to this purpose, almost in the very self same words speaks S. Augustine
in his 61. sermon de tempore: his 18. sermon de verbis Apostoli: his second
book of Evangelicall questions cap. 19. and in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium
cap. 12. S. Ambrose in the 10. book of his Epistles, the 82. Epistle ad
Vercellensem Ecclesiam, and his tract de viduis, prope finem: and generally the
Greek and Latin Fathers: such is the uniform consent, and heavenly harmony of
all orthodoxe Antiquity in this point of Doctrine.

ANSWER.

You quote strangely, sometimes words, but not the places; and often places, as
here, but not words: so that it proves, that either these often urged
authorities make but weakly for the cause; or else you took the^ up in gross
from Coccius Treasury, or some Polyanthy. The mad man in Athenaeus, Athen.
Dipnos.
that thought all the ships that came to the haven to be his, was for no other
cause more ridiculous then for such a brag as yours, that all the Greek and
Latin Fathers, heavenly harmony of all Antiquity is yours. In your Pithagorean
cares you hold the orbs to make music, and dream of a harmony and consent,
where there is none. All the Fathers disclaim as illegitimat this opinion, and
so your Jury has given verdet against you. And Ierom, pa. 145 Ambros. p. 146.
Aug. page 147.
these in particular are answered.

Mr LEECH.

The defense therefore of Evangelicall Counsels of perfection quoad viam, and
quoad gradu^, which I would only commend unto the learned and judicious (who
well know that the whole course of Antiquity, and concurrence of the fathers do
often mention them) is this; that there are in the gospel of Christ certain
Counsels, which the Ancient pillars, and Patriarchs of divinity, call
consilia perfectionis Counsels of perfection: and they are so called, no^
quod ipsae sint perfectiones, sed dispositiones quaedam ad perfectione^, quae
constat in hoc, vt men's hominis Deo vacet: that is, not that they are in
themselves perfections indeed, but rather dispositions, directions,
preparations to perfection, which consists mainly in this; that the soul
(wholly sequestered from the world) may be truly, and sincerely ravished with
the love of God, and of his neighbor.

ANSWER.

You should say, the offense therefore of Evangelicall Counsels: for the
defense was so bad, that heresy, novelty, and almost blasphemy were the best
vpholders of you. I would not possess your will, unless I entered in with
authority by the portall of your Judgment: but certainly, if you would drive
away those impediments of conceit, opinion, prejudice, and error, from the
entrance of your soul, you might easily admit the truth to keep mansion in
you, where now she has small habitation. You present your doctrine, you say,
to the judicious and learned, that know the course of Antiquity: you should
say iniquity, for who knows not by reading of you, how you derogate from the
law? approve that a man may do more then is commanded by God, make Angels but
equal to me^, before teach the greatest degrees of perfection, and now, when
you have better co^sulted about your Counsels you teach they be not the
perfections of man, but dispositions to perfection. When you were among us, you
were such a one as the soldiers of Gastro, Polycenus de strat.
an Egyptian in Grecian harnes: and as you were then ready to hold Papistical
Paradoxes among Protestants; so now you are constrained to confess a truth of
Syon, in Babylon, that counsels are but dispositions. Act. 9.5 Tho. 22 ae. q.
184.
And so hard a point it is, to kick against the Truth, that Bellarmine is also
forced to confess out of Thomas that perfection does consist essentially in
Precepts. And thus what Gerson has formerly delivered truly, that Counsels do
only dispose to the better fulfilling of the Precept, the same at length you
are drawn to acknoweledge unwillingly. Where be your entia transcendentia in
regard of the general precept? Logic will not admit a particular to
transcend a general. And whereas you require that the soul should be
ravished with the love of God, thus much the precept co^ma^deth in the highest
manner that may be performed. What did David practice and profess but the law?
and he was so ravished by this law, as that he protests twice, Psalm 69 4. Ps.
119.139.
that the zeal of Gods house had eaten him up. If your counsels stretch
further then the law, you know the story of Esops Frogge, that would swel
bigger then his skin could stretch, and so brake.

Mr LEECH.

And therefore as Origin excellently observes in his commentary upon S.
Matthew his 8. Homily, upon those words of our Savior, given by way of
Counsel to the young man: if thou will be perfect, etc. Non sic debemus
intelligere, vt in eo ipso tempore, quo homo dat bona sua pauperibus,
efficiatur omnino perfectus, sed incipit ex eo tempore speculatio Dei adducere
eum ad omnes virtutes, vt incipiat ex eo tempore proficere: that is to say; we
are not so to understand perfection, that in the very moment, wherein a man
gives all his goods to the poor, he is made altogether perfect, but from that
time forwards, the speculation of God begins to lead him unto all virtues,
that ever after he makes a good progress.

ANSWER.

Origin his speech is most true, and none deny it. But I may ask you, as the
Poet did, Quo nunc se proripit ille? I confess the true urging of an
orthodoxall Father in a sound point of religion, it is either a light to
confirm, or as lightning to confound any that contradict that doctrine. But,
as Pliny mentions, when divinations were made upon the fall of lightnings,
Plin. lib. 2. c. 43.
those lightnings that fell into the sea, or on tops of mountains, were never
brought into observatio^, but were called Bruta fulmina: so when the
testimonies which you urge, fall not upon the point in hand, I may call them
Bruta fulmina, though the authors be most worthy, yet their authority unfitly,
and therefore unworthily urged. You urge Origin here, but observe whether to
the purpose or no. You are to prove, that there are Counsels of perfection
that surmount the precepts of the law, whereby a man may do more then he is
commanded. But how does this appear? You answer by this argument out of
Origin, when a man forsakes all, then he begins to be perfect. Ergo he does
more then the law commands. Do you hold this to be good fustian? I would be
loath to give you any thing for it.

Mr LEECH.

This also is evident in the words of our Savior, where he places not
perfection in ipsa divitiarum abdicatione, in the very renouncing of riches,
but rather teaches, that the forsaking of the world is a certain direction,
preparation, or disposition unto perfection. And so the very form, and manner
of Christ his speech does evidently co^vince. For first he proposes the
question to his arbitrary If thou will be perfect. Secondly, he pursues it go
sell all that thou have, and give to the poor. Thirdly, he infers the
conclusion, the follow me. Lastly, he annexeth the remuneration, the
forciblest motive thesaurum habebis in coelo, thou shall not want thy reward.

ANSWER.

Our Savior indeed places not perfection in divitiarum abdicatione, or in
rerum carnalium abnegatione, but teaches that the forsaking of the world, is a
certain direction or disposition to perfection, in those that are covetously
affected, as the meaning of the place shows. Such a one was this young man,
for when he heard that he was to sell all, he went away sorrowful, so that as
much as I can draw out of the Elixir of the best Interpreters, it is proved
strongly to my judgment and understanding (both which I seek to keep
inviolably as my soul, from deceiving, or being deceived,) that Christ's speech
was a personal precept proposed to him, and not a counsel arbitrarie, as you
gather. All are not obliged to do the like, but all so affected (as he was)
are enioined, and without forcing or wresting, out of your own words I will
evict it to be a personal precept: you close up the Paragraph; page 41. The
distinction of Precepts and Counsels, thus; Precepts observed have a reward,
not observed a punishment; Counsels not observed have no punishment, but
observed, have a greater reward. I argue thus, If the neglect of this
Iniunction to the young man were punished, then was it no Counsel, but a
precept: but the neglect of this Iniunction to the young man was punished: ergo
It was no Counsel, Nil. These. de precat. Papae.
but a Precept. Nilus thought it in vain to debate with the Pope, because the
Pope would be Judge himself. But I think it my best adva^tage to decide this
with you, when, ex ore tuo, your own words shall be judge for your self. For
the Mayor, I prove it out of your own words, Precepts not observed, are
punished; Counsels not observed, are not punished, Page 41. The distinction.
page 41. in the end of the Paragraph, The distinction. The Minor, I prove out
of your former words of this young man, Page 8. O what an exchange.
p. 8. Parag. O what an exchange etc. where afterward showing his greef for
his negligence, you say; How much does it now repent him? which repe^ta^ce as
Albertus observes, was not poenite^tia vera, Albert. Com. Theol. lib. de sacra.
but poenitentia sera, the repentance of the wicked in hell. And in the lines
following you intimate that he was damned, for not obeying Christ; when in
these words you affirm, if he had don this he had bin secure of his salvation:
therefore not doing it, the rules of the school make plain, Contrarij
affectus habent contrarios effectus. And to make this more plain, if he were
in heaven, he needed not repent; nay he could not repent. For, as S. John in
the Revelation speaks, Rev. 21.4.
There shall be no more death, nor sorrow: and sorrow is a most essential part
of repentance. So then a Counsel neglected is punished; and therefore, habeo
confitente^ reum that it is a precept, for he now repents, and is punished.
But I return to your young man. The scope of our Savior in his speech to him,
was no other then this, to correct by the law, that which was amiss; and to
increase by his love, what he saw laudable in him: resolved Paraphrastically in
this manner; Somewhat it is thou say o young man, and I approve thy
endeavors. Thou say thou have observed the law from thy youth, yet mistake
not: the sense of the law is stricter, then thou collectest of the words; the
justice of the Scribes and Pharisees must be exceeded, and more performed then
the old gloss requires. For thy self, I know thee to be tainted with the
leaven of Covetousness: thou love thy self, which howsoever the world
takes no notice of, yet the tryer of the hearts, and raines, sees it to be thy
imperfection. If thou will therefore be perfect, that is, if thou will fulfill
the law, not to satisfy the letter only, which commonly is held enough; but
exactly take the sense, as the lawgiuer strictly requires: go and sell all
(for thy riches are a clog unto thee, they possess thee, not thou them) and
then thou shall be fitter to fulfill the law according to the meaning, and
then the better may thou follow me as thou ought. Hieron. Beda. Chrysostom.
in hunc loc. Ambros. Hierom. Austin. Bellarm. 2. de mon. c. 9.
The Fathers favor this exposition; Hierome, and Beda, Non voto discentis, sed
tentantis interrogat: though Chrysostom dislike this, yet he denies not but
that he was covetous, and a lover of money. Ambrose, Hierome, and Austin cited
by Bellarmine against us, prove no other thing, but that our Savior teaches
here a perfection no more then the law requires, in its own true meaning; but
more then the young man had attained. Bellarmines own close is, Si vis esse
perfectus, vende omnia; nam hinc apparebit te habere perfectam charitatem:
which perfect charity I take to be no other, but to love the Lord with all thy
heart, Mat. 22.
mind, and soul. In the end of this Paragraph as in many others, you
contradict your self: for having already taught that voluntary poverty is a
perfection, now you acknowledge that if the young man had sold all, and so
undergone this poverty; yet the co^summation of perfection had not been in
this, but in sequere me, in following of Christ.

Mr LEECH.

Now this following of Christ (which is nothing else but the souls spiritual
union with God) is our Christian perfection: whereunto the abdication of riches
fitteth, and prepares a man, listening not so much to that which is lawful,
as to that which is expedient: avoiding riches, and other things of like
nature, not as things unlawful, but as impediments, and hindrances unto
righteousness.

ANSWER.

Abdication of riches fitteth those indeed, that are covetously minded: for to
such only these are hindrances and impediments, and no other. Did God grant a
clogge to Solomon, when he gave him wealth? Let me propose a Question. Is it
lawful for all men to sell all that they have, and pursue this perfection? I
see no reason but they should: for why in good matters should not one be as
forward as another? If so: who should buy, when all sell; or give alms, or
exercise deeds of liberality, when they have nothing? If otherwise: then this
is no arbitrary counsel, but a particular precept to some, to whom it may do
good. And, howsoever that be true which S. Austin in the 61. Psalm speaks,
that God does not say, Nolite habere, Aust. 61. Psalm.
sed nolite cor apponere; Non enim damnat divitias, sed cor appositu^, quod
scilicet non expendit, sed recondit: yet I say, Riches are unlawful when they
be impediments unto righteousness.

Mr LEECH.

And S. Augustine, in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium, is of opinion, that
perfection of charity (which is the perfection of Christian life) consists
neither in the sole performance of the actions of precepts, conformable to non
moechaberis: nor yet in the performance of the actions of Counsels, unless
both actions of precepts, and counsels, be rightly referred with relation to
the end, of all the actions of precepts and Counsels, which is charitas erga
Deum, and proximum propter Deum: charity toward God primarily, and charity
toward our neighbor for Gods sake, secondarily.

ANSWER.

This place of Austin is most forcible for our assertion, and returns upon
you vnavoidably. For if all that we can do by precepts and Counsels, Deuteronomy.
6.5. Mat. 22.37. Marc. 12.30. Luke 10.27.
are referred as means to attain this end, to love God above al etc. and if
this be so expressly and often commanded, not only by Moses in the law; but
thrice by Christ, in the Gospel: how then can counsels outstrip precepts,
that by them may be performed works of supererogatio^, unless the means
should exceed the end, and the middle the top. S. Austin does highly extol
our love of God, the more to exhort us thereunto: and the Schoolmen with him,
and out of him, do urge the worthiness of charity, being (as they affirm)
bonorum principium, quia a Deo; bonorum medium, quia secundum Deum; Albert.
Aquin.
bonorum finis, quia propter Deum: and do further observe, that, whereas other
virtues have bonum for their object, and yet not for their end; charity has
bonum pro fine, and obiecto: all, as Austin speaks, performed to God; and all
Christian offices to our neighbor, for Gods sake. Nostrarum haec meta viarum

Mr LEECH.

And because the performance of the actions of precepts, are, in themselves,
absolutely necessary for atcheiving this end (being such, as without it, the
end cannot be attained) and the performance of the other of Counsels does
only secondarily tend thereunto, as a help, or as a removens impedimentum:
hence is it that schoole-divines, have this distinction, or rather conclusion
comprised in a distinction: viz. Perfection of charity, which is the perfection
of Christian life, consists primario, and essentialiter in praeceptis; but
secundario, and accidentaliter in Consilijs; primarily, and essentially in
precepts; but secondarily, and accidentally in Counsels.

ANSWER.

You come nearer and nearer to us. If Perfection consist accidentaliter and
secundario in Consilijs: then Counsels are of less value then precepts,
Caietan, in Th. Aq. 22 ae. hoc articulo.
as much as the circumstance is less then the substance. And Caietans grain
of salt must season this distinction, and then it may well be admitted:
precepts necessary to all, as including the thing to be done; Counsels
necessary to some, as prescribing secondarily and accidentally, the best manner
for them of fulfilling the precepts, which, as I have often said, be
particular to such, Gers. de confilijs Evang. Paludan. in sent. lib. 3. did.
34. q. 3.
because each man is tied to the fulfilling of the law, in the highest degree,
and best sort he can, according to the talent received, and the ability
wherewith God has endowed him. So Gerson, and Paludanus: the one in his tract
de Consilijs Evangelicis, and statu perfectionis; the other, In Sent. lib. 3.
distinct. 34. q. 3.

Mr LEECH.

Benefield, and his confederats in Iovinians heresy.
If any be so wedded to his own private humor, as not, in this sense, to admit
of Evangelicall Counsels of perfection, quoad viam, and quoad gradum, but that
they will confound Precepts, and Counsels together (holding both of like
necessity, Counsels as well precepts) so did the heretics called Apostolici:
Austin. haeres. 40. Epiphane haeres. 61.
or that Counsels contain in them no kind of perfection; it is a branch of
Iovinian, and Vigilantius their condemned heresy. Read Saint Hierom against
Iovinian; and S. Ambrose in the 10. book of his Epistles, the 80. and 81.
Epistles. Or lastly, if any will hold the profession of them unlawful, and
that there be none; the first crosses many pregnant testimonies of Scriptures
verity; and the second thwarteth the joint consent of all orthodoxe
Antiquity. The which Tertullian de praescriptionibus adversus haereticos;
Cyprian de vnitate Ecclesiae: Augustine de vtilitate credendi; Vincentius
Lyrinensis in his Commonitoriu^ against all the profane innovation of
heretics of his time, make to be the very square of prophetical, and
Apostolical interpretation, drawn along by the line of the Church.

ANSWER.

We admit of Evangelicall Counsels in the same sense that the Fathers did,
not as transcending the strict meaning of the law. That famous, and ancient
Chancellor of Paris, did sufficiently tax the error of those, that understand
not the Fathers in this point; for according to his judgment, Counsels and
precepts be coincident: and yet neither that famous Gerson, nor we do
maintain any heresy herein. Our Tenet is this; we deny not, but there may be a
verbal distinction of precepts and Counsels, as that thrice worthy Austin of
our age, the Deane of Winchester does grant: D. Morton in his appeal. lib. 5.
c. 4. sect. 3. number. 11.
but we abhor and detest the maintaining of them, as the workmen of Babell
uphold them. We hold that they transcend not the strict meaning of the law
nor have heat enough to hatch the addle eggs of works of supererogation,
which are of a later brood: but we maintain against the gates of Rome, and the
strength of hell, that Counsels tie not all, but those only who are better
enabled with gifts then others or tied by their vocation to some stricter
courses; as Abraham is tied to marry, John to live single, Peter to forsake
all, Philip to keep somewhat for his daughter. Some quoad viam in this life,
may go further then other me^, as having greater graces from above, and a
richer talent committed to them: and quoad gradum, as in this life there is of
Christian perfection, so some degrees in the life to come of Celestial
glorification, may be obtained by Gods infinite mercy. We confound not
therefore precepts and Counsels (understanding the word aright:) yet
distinguish them, as in our University the general statuts which bind all,
and the particular which tie only those of such a quality and degree. Whence it
appears, that we hold not the like necessity, as you conceit, who never
knew what we held: for the general precept necessarily binds al, the
particular being that which in regard of indiffere^cy of the courses to be
undergone some call a Counsel, but so that the same act may be Consilium in
electione, praeceptum in opere, and they only can, and if they can must
perform these, who are extraordinarily disposed and furnished beyond other
men. And that this is true doctrine, faith and reason do both join in the
proof. For if all be too little, can somewhat be too much? And Can thou
help me with thy oil, Tertull.
says Tertullian, that art a sinner, and want for thy own Lamp? No, our
conclusion must be; that we are ready to confess, as Christ taught his
servants to profess, Luke 17.10.
we have done nothing but that which was our duty to do. In the old Testament
just Noah, faithful Abraham, meek Moses, true hearted David, beloved Daniel
could do no more; did profess no more. Tom. 2. Epistolar. lib. 2. adver. Pela.
And in the new Testament, Ecce Apostolos omnes ardentes etc: says S. Ierom;
behold all the Apostles, and all believers come short of that they should: and
whosoever hold that they may do more, an Ostracisme must be had for them, for
they are too just. Hier. Comment in 19. Mat..
And for the Fathers so heaped, and wrested, there be as many that call these
Precepts, as Counsels. I will trouble the reader but with some Virginity by the
Decretals is called a precept; Lib. de Incar. verbi Dei. In edit. Comel. Greek.
and Hierome calls Virginity, virginale praeceptum; and so Athanasius,
speaking of Virginity, Chrysostom. in Tit 3. col. 1636.
in huiusmodi praeceptis ta^tum Christus valuisset vt pueri virginitatem, etc.
And concerning Poverty, the iniunction of Christ to the young man, is called a
precept by S. Chrysostom, Austin. ep. 84. G. 4. Hilary. Can. 18. in Matthew.
in Tit. 3. Vides vt ideo praeceperit ei vt Christum sequeretur; and S. Austin
in his Epistle 84. has much to this purpose; and Hilary, on the place, calls
it vtile relinque^di seculi praeceptu^; Eusebius. lib. 3. historiae. c. 31. Cocc.
These. Cath. Tom. 2. l. 4. art. 3. p. 383. Aug. de dat. Christ. c. 17. Greg.
Moral. lib. 26. c. 25.
by Eusebius. in his history, Praeceptum Domini antea traditu^; by Saluianus as
Coccius confesses, imperativum officiu^. And, to omit others, S. Austin does
so plainly distinguish the difference (in his 3. book de Doctrina Christiana,
the 17. chapter) between praeceptum commune omnium, and particulare praeceptum
aliquorum; and Gregory does so absolutely deliver (in his 26. book of Morals,
the 25. chapter) the distinction of generale praeceptum, and particulare, that
nothing is more resolutely and positiuely taught by that reverend Father. And
yet neither Gregory, nor the other Fathers, nor we are guilty of being
Apostolici: we abhor their sect, and heresy, and yet think Precepts and
Counsels both to inioine necessity. The Apostolici mentioned in Augustine, are
not branded with any Character, but that which is the indelible mark of Monks,
to refuse the society of those that have possessions and wives, therefore were
they condemned, but no word of Precepts and Counsels in that chapter of
Austin. Epiphanius, Aust. ad quod vult Deum haeres. 40.
in his Chapter of Apostolici, has no word of Counsels and Precepts,
neither do I find any part of their heresy to concern this point. Secondly,
we teach that Cou^sailes contain not in them perfection. First, not the
perfection of a few, for all are called to perfection. 2. Cor. 13.11. Ephesians.
4.3. Col. 1.28.
Paul inviteth all the Corinthians, and afterward all Christians, as in the
Epistle to the Ephesians: giving reason hereof to the Collossians, because
perfection is the end of all preaching. If all are called, and commanded to be
perfect: then Counsels of perfection serve not as you teach, for some few. But I
step a degree further; there is no perfection in Counsels: you affirm it Page
41. Parag. The defense, in these words, they are not in themselves perfections,
but dispositions, directions, prepaparations to perfection. So that in denying
them to have perfection in them, we are no more guilty for Iovinians heresy or
Virgilantius, then you are. According to the way, Act. 24.14.
which you call heresy, so worship we the God of our fathers, believing all
things written in the Law and Prophets. In which Oracles of truth, of the Law
and Gospel, we find no lawfulnes to vow single life: Ramus well observing,
Ram. lib. 2. de relig.
de talibus perpetuae virginitatis votis fides nulla, nulla in sacris literis
est litera. Whatsoever was heresy in Iovinian, we detest: and yet in this
equalling of marriage with virginity, we are no more Iovinianists the^ S.
Austin, Clem. Alex. strom. l. 7. c. 6.
who equalled Abraham's married state, with John's single life; or Clemens
Alexandrinus, who affirms that the conjugal parties do overmatch the
virginal profession in perfection of holy life, and gives instance in the
Apostles-Vigilantius heresy we are no way tainted with: and Espencaeus,
Espens. l. 1. de con. page 3.
more charitable the^ many of the calumnious Papists, did profess he thought
it a slander to the Churches reformed, to be accused of Vigilantius heresy.
Lastly, to answer to your objection, if we hold none we thwart all antiquity, I
deny your infere^ce: for never did antiquity maintain any such profession of
Monkish Counselors. They were free from the new bond of humane ordinances,
Polyd. Virg. l. 7. Inv. c. 1.
and vows, as Polidor Virgill testifies: and they had both goods,
possessions, and wives, as S. Austin teaches. Aug de haeres. ad Quod vult Deu^
haer. 40.
The profession of every Christian, God has appointed it unto him; he must
keep Centinell, follow his vocation, seek to give holy example by his
profession, not outwardly only, but inwardly: acknowledging, according to our
Saviors interpretation, that the law requires the exactest obedience, and
that we are not able in this life to do so much as is commanded, not in the
lest precept: and therefore works of supererogatio^, are supervacaneous, yea
derogatory to both Law and Gospel, founded on hay and stubble, one of the
greatest impostures and Mountebankish gulleries, that ever the world was
consened with. Demas? what in your marginall note you demand of D^^enefield,
he has answered, and you will never reply.

Mr LEECH. Principally Benefield.


And therefore first; I would but ask them, what our blessed Savior meant,
Mat. the 19. (who upon occasion of the divorce, his disciples perplexed, the
difficulty of chastity, exemplified by Eunuchs so borne, so made, so making
themselves; a natura; a violentia; a voluntate, naturally, violently,
voluntarily; as Aquinas well observes upon the place) I say, what meant our
Savior to propose, qui potest capere, capiat, if there be no Counsel of
Virginity? Secondly; I would demand; what Christ meant, Mat. the 19. to advise
the young man (and that in a matter of the greatest moment; even the salvation
of his soul) go sell all that thou haste, and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, etc. If here be not a Counsel of voluntary
poverty? For as truly as Christ meant to perform his promise in the
remuneration, thesaurum habebis in coelo; so was it upon condition, that the
young man should embrace that Counsel of voluntary poverty, tending to the
top of Christian perfection.

ANSWER.

Sigonius tells us that Albericus was better at writing then disputing: Cor.
Sigon. de reg. Ital. lib. 9.
I can attribute dexterity to you in neither. Theological disputations you
never undertook among us: and your confusion in writing is such, that he that
but reads you, had need to pray for patience, much more, he that answers
you. Besides that these examples now produced be very many times answered
already, in your text, here you again urge the^ in worse manner then ever
before, with a Parenthesis no less then six lines, long enough for you to
ride your wildgoose chase. From the 19. of Matthew you ask two questions: the
one what our Savior meant by that speech, Qui potest capere, capiat. Your
ignorance does ask, and our Grammar does answer you, that the original word
(...) is an imperative enioyning, Pet. Martyr. in 1. Cor. 7.1. and 26.
enforcing, and commanding. And further Peter Martyr does silence all that
shall violate the sacred sense of this Scripture to your purpose, by this
distinction, Alij vruntur, and non continent; alij vero donu^ habent
co^tine^tiae: Qui vruntur et non continent, etc. The sum of which
distinction, and that which follows is this; they which have not the gift of
co^tinency, are bound to marry, by the general precept: but they which have
the gift, and do find themselves called by God, to a single life, they are
commanded so to live, by a special precept, and such is this, Qui potest
capere, (...), no potentiall, but an imperative, a word of command, a Corpus
capias, a writ to cease upon the body of sin, that by breach of chastity, it
sin not against the spirit. Your supplicat secundo, when in the second place
out of the same chapter, you demand, what Christ meant to advise the young
man to sell and give to the poor: I thus answer. The manner of speech, (...),
and (...), give, and follow, (both imperatiues) do both show that it was a
speech full of commanding power, and may be considered either in case of
necessity, or without necessity. Extra necessitatem, they are no precept,
individual circumstances not concurring. For it is not precisely commanded to
all, Gods affirmative precepts being not obligatory always, as the Schools
observe, because obligant semper, sed no^ ad semper; Tho. 22 ae. quaest. 71.
art. 5. ad 2. n.
ad semper velle, but not ad semper agere: they require disposition to be
perpetual, but not action to be continual; willingness ever to be afforded,
but practice so often only as occasion is offered. But if we consider this
speech in casu necessitatis, they are a precept, as to him: necessity did
enforce him to do it, and therefore it was a precept personally inioined him;
if he would follow Christ, he must, (...), go sell. And in the last clause,
in your own words, you manifest so much, in acknowledging it to be
conditional, in that you say, that Christ would have kept his promise and his
part of the counterpane, for remuneration; if the young man had kept his part,
to sell all, and to follow him in that degree of perfection. So that hence I
infer, that seeing he did not undertake this profession in this required duty
to sell all and to follow: therefore Christ did not so far (as to his
salvation) extend his mercy conditionally promised, and therefore the young man
was punished, and so consequently this was a precept: for you affirm that not
the observation of Counsels, but of precepts only is punished. Lastly you ask
principally D. Benefield, what the meaning is of that Text. Mat. 19. If with
humility and integrity, you had attended his worthy Lecture upon this Text,
whereat you were present, you need not here require the answer.

Mr LEECH.

Calvin. Mark. 10.21.
Did Christ, in this, discover the young man his hypocrisy? Some interpreters
say so: but S. Mark says no. For Christ looked upon him, and he loved him. It
was not (I hope) for his hypocritical profession and vain ostentatio^; but
for some good performance, disposition, and inclination. Again; Christ had
erroneously taught him the way to life, by vade, and vende omnia, and that this
was that one thing necessary to aspire to the top of Christian perfection,
Calvin is a blasphemous interpreter.
if here be not a Counsel of voluntary poverty. And this is no less then
open blasphemy against the Majesty of heaven.

ANSWER.

Hier. com. in Mat. Hill. Con. in 19. Mat. Ambr. Com. Aug. ep. 89.
Some interpreters, therefore not only Calvin, whom you so uncharitably abuse,
Ierom, Hilary, Ambrose, Austin, Theophilact, Beda, and more do interpret it
so, that making himself so absolute a Insticiarie, he did bewray his
hypocrisy. S. Mark, if you mark it, does not deny this Mark. 10.21. Basil.
hom. 2. contr. divit. avaros. Chrysostom. Euthim. in loc.
, as you say; but in the 10.21. he says, Jesus looked upon him, and loved
him: And hereupon Basil, and Chrysostom, and Euthimius deliver, that the
young man spoke truly, and not hypocritically. Both may well be reconciled:
Christ loved him, for the good disposition he saw in him; yet discovered the
covetousnes that hindered him: the first, was to cherish that which was good;
the second, to remove that which was il: a man may have in him much laudable,
Hyperoclis facetiae.
and yet much vituperable. Hyperocles tells of a schooleman ((...): is his
word,) who to know, whether sleep became him, clausis oculis inspexit
speculu^: if you had not done the like, you had never rambled on such a
Collection as this, to say Christ had erroneously taught him the way to life,
by vade and vende omnia, if this be not a Counsel of voluntary poverty. Your
sequel is out of joint, and absurd: rather, Christ would have never applied
this plaster, if he (looking through the windows of this young man's soul,
into his inward most retired room) had not found covetousnes to be his
hinderance, and encombrance. And this proves it self in the Text: for he went
away sorrowfully. I cannot but note the malice and virulent dealing of your
ignorant contradicting spirit, traducing Calvine for a blasphemous interpreter,
who taught no more then he learned of the Fathers: and if among those that did
interpret Scripture, since the fathers time, any one is worthy to be accounted
fidus interpres, Horat. Art. Poet.
for his sou^dnesse, and profoundnesse; blessed Calvin is, who was as Eramsus
wrote of Tonstall, a world of learning, Eras. epist. 84. Claud. Verderius
conscio. in Autores page 174.
and as Theodorus Gaza testified of Plutarch, that if any man were so limited
that he could only read one humane authors books, he would read Plutarch, so
many renowned Divines, next unto sacred Scripture have of all other authors,
choisly and chiefly selected this holy servant of God. So that in this
Paragraph you blaspheme God, iniure truth, accuse your knowledge and abuse your
conscience.

Mr LEECH.

Lastly I would but demand, what S. Paul meant 2. Cor. 7.25. Vid. Damas. dict.
Gnomi in Indice.
to distinguish plainly betwixt Precepts and Cou^sells, thus; praeceptum non
habeo, consilium do (for so the vulgar reads; which all the latin Church
follows: and all the Greek Fathers have so taken it) if there be no
Counsels? For he groundeth this his distinction upon his Masters words; Non
omnes capiunt, and therefore S. Paul had no precept. But qui potest capere,
capiat. And hence flows the second branch; consilium do: as S. Hierom, S.
Basil, and diverse others of both Churches do observe.

ANSWER.

Discourses that grow tedious, are odious; and such is this your frequent and
too often querulous quaere. The distinction in S. Paul is between (...) and
(...), between a precept and sentence, no word signifying Counsel in that
place. I have already showed how Antoninus makes S. Dominick the Author of
Evangelicall Counsels, Anton. part 3. vt ante.
and S. Paul the teacher of faith and the law: and yet you produce S. Paul as a
special bullwark for your Counsel house. Many Fathers have, (I confess) read
that Text so: but the original ministers no such interpretation, nor do the
Fathers themselves otherwise hence ground, but that qui potest, being enabled,
is, qui debet he that is commanded. You, and Coccius teach the Fathers to
speak very preposterously. Beware of the Fathers curse, or rather of Gods
curse, seeing you call them to bear false witness, against the Law, Gospel,
and God himself.

Mr LEECH.

And that this point may be every way full, and perfect, builded upon so many
several rocks, as there be several places of Scriptures: let the Doctors of
the Church speak, Vincentius Lyrin. in co^monitorio.
being the most probable Masters and teachers in the Church: and, against quot
capita, tot sensus (the very bane of all religion and mother of innovatio^) let
the church interpret Scripture; and he that will not hear the Church, you
know what follows; 2. Pet. 1. vlt.
sit tibi tanquam haereticus? Nay; sit tibi tanquam ethnicus. For as it is said
of the letter of the scripture, that it is not of any private inspiration (For
it came not in old time, by the will of man, but holy men spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. Sermon. 17. in Cantic.
) So may it be as truly said of the sense of the Scripture, that it is not of
any private spirits interpretation. And the reason, why every man should fly
from a private spirits interpretation, A sentence that strikes the Religion in
England as dead, as a door nail.
is this (as it is excellently rendered by that mellifluous Father, S Bernard)
Nonnulli adesse putant spiritum, cum non adest, suumque sensum pro sensu
spiritus sequuntur deviantes, suasque sententias magistrorum sententijs
praeferu^t; that is (for I cannot but translate it) many men think that they
have the spirit of God, when they have it not: erroneouslie following the sense
of their own private spirits for the meaning of the holy Ghost: preferring
their own private opinions before the public judgments of their masters,
and teachers.

ANSWER.

You have suffered shipwreck upon your rocks. They be several indeed, Psalm.
for they are severed far from you, which is manifest in that you rock to and
fro in your preposterous building, like a tottering wall, or like a broken
hedge. You call for advocates, the Doctors of the Church, Number. 23.38.
and fetch them in as Balaac did Balaam: but they answer, as there he did, but
with a more holy spirit. We are come unto thee, and can we now say any thing
at all? The word that God has put in our mouths, that shall we speak. But
if this help you not, you call the Church to testify with you. To the church
we leave as much, as the spowse has made her iointer: and in the
interpretation of Scripture by the Church, Tertull. libro de praescrip.
haereticorum.
that of Tertullian is to be remembered, who warns of some, Qui non ad
materiam Scripturas, sed materiam ad Scriptur as excogitant, and thereby run
into one of those two miseries which S. Austin observes, Aust. Comm. Faustum
lib. 22. cap. 32. Caiet. in praef. Com. in lib. Mosis
aut falli imprudenter, aut fallere impudenter. you say the Fathers of the
Church are for you: yet Caieta^ believes, that God has not tied the
exposition of the Scriptures to the senses of the Fathers. And if the Fathers
serve not, you say let the Church interpret Scripture. We distinguish the
Church from the Synagogue of Antichrist: and seeing we hold that Scriptures
must tell which is the Church; we must deny that the Church must tell us the
sense of Scripture: and Gerson does disclaim the judgment of Pope, Gerson. de
exam. doct. part. 1. co^. 5.
Council, or Church, concerning interpretation of Scriptures, and trial of
doctrine, when he delivers that the examination of doctrine concerning
faith, belongs not to the Council, or Pope, but to every one that is
sufficiently learned in Scriptures. Cus. Ep. 2. page 833.
And Cusanus cannot deny but that by the judgment of the Church, the Scripture
is fitted to the time, and the sense altered, as the time alters. We make the
spirit of God speaking in Scripture, to be judge of the Scripture: and, Act.
17.17.
as the men of Berea sought the Scripture to approve the doctrine of the
Apostles, though the Apostles doctrine was Scripture; so we admit of no
fundamental interpretation to build upon, but that which is approved by the
sacred scriptures. The place that you urge out of Matthew, Math. 18.17.
He that will not hear the Church, let him be tanquam Ethnicus: you may (upon
your better review) find, it is spoken concerning those that refuse to hear
the admonition or judicial censure of the Church, not the gloss, or
interpretation of the Church. We confess the letter of Scripture was not, nor
the sense is, of any private inspiration; and therefore, trial which is made by
the Scriptures, is no private judgment, but the public ce^sure of Gods spirit
that speaks openly in the Scriptures, to all men. And Basils rule shall be
ever the true practice of the true Church, Basil. de examine. doctr. part. 1.
Cons. 5.
that they that be conversant in the Scriptures, should examine all that is
said, whether it agrees with Scriptures. From a private interpretation not
agreeing with the Canon of Scripture, we fly; because, as you urge out of
Bernard, Nonnulli adesse putant spiritum, Acts and monuments by Mr Fox.
many think that they have the spirit of God with them, as they that in that
Council sang, veni spiritus, and an Owl was sent them, and they killed that
spirit. And many think they have the spirit, Nicol. Clau. disput. de council.
and yet shut out the spirit, as the Council of Pisa did. You say the
sentence of Bernard strikes our religion, as dead as a door nail: it is a
clownish marginall; you might have learned amongst Scholars, that a door nail
could not be said to be dead, because it had never life. Private opinions with
us sway not; each well disposed man, submits himself to the censure of the
Church wherein we live, our Church to the Scriptures, and this we make to be
the last resolution.

Mr LEECH.

It is lawful to follow the spirit in interpreting the Scripture: but it must
be the spirit of the Church: that spirit of peace, unity, charity, that
descended upon the Apostles united, for domus vna, etc. they abode all in one
house; a sign of external charity; Men's, and anima vna; one mind, one
soul; for they had but one God, one faith, one Church; Ancient Church.
Calvin's, and Luthers congregations.
a sign of internal, spiritual unity. The same spirit ever since continued
in the Church, united in faith, not divided in faction. And we may seek for
the sense of the scripture: but where? It must not be out of the stinking
puddle of a private brain; The aforesaid gentlemen, etc.
but forth of the treasuring memory of the Church. Christi Evangelio vim no^
inferat humana praesumptio: patrum semel definita non sunt iterum in dubium
vocanda: This is contrary to cursed Luther.
it is blessed Leo in his 94. Epistle: let not humane presumption dare to offer
violence unto the Gospel of Christ: for the constitutio^s of fathers, once
decreed, are not further to be questioned. Nec definitiones eorum perpetuae
commutandae, quorum regulam secundum scripturam esse didicimus. (So speaks
Flavianus bishop of Constantinople in his Epistle to Pope Leo the first.)
Neither are the perpetual determinations of them to be changed, whose rule we
have learned to agree with scripture.

ANSWER.

Unity was the bond of Patriarchs, Chariot of the Prophets, refuge of the
Apostles, solace of the Saints, and Character of Christians. But is this
belonging to them who abhor unity, whose religion is rebellion, whose faith
is faction, as our Church litargie speaks in the prayer against the
conspiracies of Papists? What part in unity have they, that have divided
Christ's Coat; nay Christ's body, Christ's Church? Quis tulerit Gracchos de
seditione loquentes? Do all the opinions in the world, squadron themselves
into so many divided factions, as Papists? Do not they, like the Midianits,
sheath every man his sword in his neighbors side? Cumel is against Suarez,
Bellarmine is invaded by Carerius, for giving to little to the Pope Marsilius
and Father Paulus encounter him, for giving to much: Cardinal Columna strives
with Baronius, Barelay with Boucher, Antonius Augustine tilts against Gratian.
That, as Ieronymus de Cavallos has set forth, in the law, his speculum aureum
opinionum Communium, contra communes, so also in the diversity of
contradictions, riotting one against another, the sweet and mellifluous Author
of the Peace of Rome (whom I may term a library for a whole nation as
Mirandula entitled another great scholar) has most amply delivered and sealed
it with their own proofs; Doct. Hall.
so also has Crastovius, in his book Bellum Iesuiticu^, 205 contradictions of
the Jesuits; Pappus has collected 237 differences in doctrine out of
Bellarmine. Laborious and reverend D. Willet proves that there be 70 maine
contradictions between the old Papists and the new, 37 among the Jesuits, 57
points wherein Bellarmin is at strange variance with himself, 39 essential
contradictions of Popish religion, 100 opposite Constitutions of the Popish
Canons. And many more might in this kind be registered, wherein are diverse
assertions which are only taile-tied, as Sampsons Foxes, with a firebrand
between them: but are head-severed, wrenching one from another? So that you
are the divided faction, not we: our difference only de fimbria, non de toga;
yours de toga, de corpore, de Christo: many ridiculous, many blasphemous, all
erroneous. We do not seek the sense of Scripture out of the stinking puddle
of a private brain as out of the Crows nest of your invention, that impostumated
phrase does traduce us; nor do we by humane presumption offer violence to the
Gospel of Christ, as many thousand places in Popery be abused, as your
blasphemous Pope, who upon that place, Act. 2. Papa Clem. In Canonis cap.
disertiss. 12. quaest. 1. Bellar. lib. 2. de sacram c. 1 Bell. Tom. 1. lib. 3.
cap. 3. Bell. de Mon.
Erant Apostolis omnia co^munia, adds, immo and coniuges; or your detorting
Cardinal Tortus, the Torturer of Scripture, upon that, spiritus Domini
ferebatur super aquas, ergo Baptismus confert gratiam ex opere operato; or
again, upon that Scripture, Bibite ex hoc omnes, id est, says he, omnes
Apostoli; or upon that place, vocauit nomen eius Enos, and coepit vocare nomen
Domini, ergo, Enos fuit Monachus: and infinite many more violences by him
offered. Your cursed epithet against Luther is full of hellish fury. I do
assure my self, that God blesses, where the Pope curses: and as sure I am,
blessed are they that die in the Lord, and so is he, for he rests from his
labors. And was Luther cursed for denying some interpretations of the Fathers?
Did not Caietan as much, In praef. com. in lib. Mosis.
in affirming that God had not tied the expositions of the Scriptures to the
sense of the Fathers? And did not Andradius, so who teaches that the Fathers
do in many places not expound the Scriptures according to the literal sense,
the only which, has power to prove points of faith, and that when they seek
the literal sense, they do not always find them, but give diverse senses one
unlike another, therefore we may forsake their senses all, and bring a new
unlike to theirs? Now, dare you curse Caietan and Andradius, Andrad. desens.
fid. Trid. lib. 2.
and bestow that epithet upon these, that you do on Luther? I know you dare
not. But as in others, so in you, Tullies observation is remarkable, Tully.
that bad Orators instead of reasons, use exclamations. The reason why Luther
is so much vilefied among you, Erasmus gave long since, Chronic. Carrion. Auct.
a Melanthon. lib. 5.
when being asked by Frederick Duke of Saxony, what he thought of Luther so
earnestly seeking reformation; Erasmus answered, as Carrion records it, that
Luther had committed two great errors one was, that he touched too near the
Crown of the Pope; another, that he purged too much, the belly of the Monks.
But, the name of Luther shall remain among the posterities for ever: and
howsoever, Hell and Papists, have endeavored to transfer upon the cause,
personal weakness, most falsely imputed unto him; yet that Epitaph of his,
framed by Reverend Beza, shall be monumentum aere perennius, Beza in Epitaphijs.
Roma orbem domuit, Romam sibi Papa subegit:
Viribus illa suis, fraudibus iste suis.
Quanto isti mayor Lutherus, mayor and illa,
Istum illumque vno qui domuit calamo?
The last part of this Paragraph urges Flavianus, to which speech, we most
willingly agree. The determinations of the Fathers are not to be changed, when
their rule is consonant to Scripture: but we deny, that the general consent of
the Fathers, ever held this point; for many of them whom you urge, have not
(as in your proofs it is plain) so much as the distinction, or any word of
Counsel. And again, if by the misinterpretation of that place of S. Paul,
some of the Fathers read the place so: yet the Greek Fathers have not any word
of Counsels, D. Benefield his Appendix page 186.
in all their works, as Doctor Benefield in his Appendix witnesses.

Mr LEECH.

And therefore to exemplify further upon this ground, and to raise the
particular building upon this general fou^datio^: I would but ask; what meant
S. Cyprian (that ancient famous martyr, in his tract de Nativitate Christi.
sectione 10. penultima) and S. Gregory (that worthy pillar of the latin
Church) in his 26. book on Job to style these consilia perfectionis,
Counsels of perfection, if there be no Counsels? Secondly; what meant
Theodoret, Primasius, Sedulius, Haymo, Theophylact, Ambrose, Augustine,
Hierome, Gregory, Basil, Chrysostom, Beda, Lyra, Aquinas, Anselmus, with all
antiquity greek and latin Church, so to expound that place of S. Paul 1. Cor.
7.25.

ANSWER.

Suffragia potius sunt pendenda, quam numeranda; voices and authorities are
rather to be weighed, the^ to be numbered. Cyprian or Gregory have no word of
Counsels. The book falsely ascribed to Cyprian, is denied to be his by
Pamelius, Bellarmine, Possevine, and many others of your own, as has been
proved: and the ancient manuscript thereof, in the library of All-soules
College here in Oxford, entitleth Arnolde, an abbat, to be the Author of it.
For Gregory, as I have many times cited, so do I now again, if in that place
so often quoted, viz. the 26. book 24. and 25. Chapters, you find the word
Counsel: I will surcease to answer, and begin to believe you. It is an easy
business in you, to feign the distinction of Counsels to be in Gregory, seeing
that the Vaticane Cyclopses have foisted 168. Epistles into him, besides
infinite corruptions, and contradictions, as will shortly appear by the exact,
and laborious endeavors, of that living Library, Mr Thomas James, the
indefatigable, and careful President of that business; and the diligent
assistance of many, some whereof are the choicest, and most eminent in all our
University. The Fathers, that you muster together out of rank, I reverence:
yet what Austin, in his 19. Epistle, said in such another case, that I hold
good; For all these, Austin. in Ep. 19.
and above all these we have the Apostle Paul (says he.) Though some of these
Fathers do so read, according to the translation formerly condemned: yet,
habemus Apostolu^ Paulum, we have Paul to witness the contrary, in his own
word (...); it was but his advise or sentence, not counsel.

Mr LEECH.

Thirdly; what meant S. Hierome ad Eustochium, and against that Epicurean
Heretic Iovinian (one of the first impugners of this Doctrine) S. Ambrose in
the tenth book of his Epistles, the 82. ad Vercellensem Ecclesiam, and in his
tract de viduis prope finem: S. Augustine in his 61. sermon de tempore, his 18.
tract de verbis Apostoli, chapter the 21. his 2. book of Evangelicall
questions, chapter the 19. and in his Enchiridion ad Laurentium, chapter 121.
Origin upon the 15. to the Romans S. Basil de vera virginitate: S. Chrysostom
in his 8. Homily de poenitentia: Nazianzen in his 3. oration (which is the
first invectiue against Julian) and many others? The time would fail me, if I
should reckon up all. And therefore to close up all in a word; what meant all
antiquity, greek, and latin fathers, so to distinguish betwixt precepts, and
Counsels, if there be no Counsels.

ANSWER.

Lubertus truly observes of Bellarmine, that in a point where he is weakest,
there will he name and quote Authorities most plentifully: but, when he
should come to the life of the point, then he shuffles away among his
multitude, like a Cut purse in a thro^g, or like the fish sepia, who being
ready to be caught, darkens the sea round about with a black water issuing from
her. These authorities and Testimonies of the Fathers, have been answered in
that part of the Tract before the Sermon, and, as the occasion was offered, in
the sermon; and all of them, even the most strong, and selected authorities
that you could gather, are answered plentifully in Doctor Benefields
Appendix: where it is proved, that the Fathers did not set a man beyond the
Land-marke of Gods commandment: but that by the general precepts, enioining
all; and the particular, commanding some; every man, is bound to serve, and
fear, and love the Lord, with all his heart, with all his soul, and withal
his mind. And this, necessitate praecepti, by the necessary obligement of the
commandment, Austin. in 38. Psalm.
that which Austin upon the 38 Psalm. has written with the pen of a diamond,
standing fast as Hercules Ne plus vltra; that no man can say, he is perfect,
Nemo se dicat esse perfectum, and so proceeds, that if any man do look for
perfection in this life, decipit se, fallit se, seducit se, non potest hic
habere perfectionem.

Mr LEECH.

To these I might add Wickliffe against the order of begging friars: where he
styles them Christ his high Counsels. Likewise Luther in the 30. article of
his assertions. Judicious and learned Hooker in his Church Polity, and the
Apology in defense of him in the Chapter of satisfaction. D. Barlow.
The Bishop of Rochester (and elect of Lincoln) in his sermon preached at
Court concerning the authority of Bishops; the 4. page, before the end.

ANSWER.

It is not unfitly said by you, I might add: for never was so small a book so
stuffed with additions and detractions, as this is, adding to diverse Authors,
detracting from diverse persons. Heresy is a Bastardy, it seldom knows the
true Father: that names many Fathers falsely, this urges many fainedly, and
indeed has no lawful Father but that outlawried pervagus terrae in the first
of Job, Job. 1. Genesis 4.
it self being vagus terrae, as Cain was, in the 4. of Genes. For those that
here you ad to your Catalogue of Authors and Authorisers. First, Wickliffe must
be heard in his own manner of speech, Wick. against begging Friars Chap. 34.
Luther.
yet he needs no interpreter. In the 34 Chapter against begging Friars, these
be his words, Many blind fools binden them to the high Counsels of Christ,
that cannot keep the least commandment: but see hypocrisy of them; since each
Counsel of Christ is commandment for some time and some circumstances, how
binden they them to more then the commandments? Not by the Counsels, for they
been commandments: but they fainen this, to draw young children, into their
rotten habit, and other fools, that known not the perfection of Christ's
order. Now, you have heard wickliffe himself, believe him, and read no
reporters of his fragments. Next, Luther favors your cause very little. In
the place you cite him, he says that there is but one Counsel Evangelicall:
if you stand to him there, avowing only the Counsel of Virginity you must let
Poverty go beg, and obedience go loose. But Luther upon better consideration,
does utterly discharge all Cou^sails, Luther de votis Monasticis Tom. 2. fol.
300.
in his book de votis Monasticis Tom. 2. fol. 30. a. Mr Hooker is before
interpreted, and I hope will give satisfaction, though you quote him falsely,
in his Chapter of Satisfaction, the place being found in the Article of
superogation. His Apologist is also made plain in the same place. The Bishop
of Rochester, now of Lincoln; then the Austin of Hippo, now the Ambrose of
Millaine; does no way yield you suffrage in his powerful sermon concerning
the Antiquity and Superiority of Bishops, showing out of Clemens Alexandrinus,
that the Apostles manured the Church, with a double tillage (...): If (says
he) any think that this makes way to Popish traditions, unwritten verities,
it is no other then S. Paul's distinction of praeceptum and Consilium etc. His
reverend wisdom, and most accute judgment, alleging the word out of a vulgar
translation means by the name Consilium those things which S. Paul 1. Cor.
11.34. calls (...), things vnwritte^, which the Apostles did or spoke, as the
times occasioned, and the holy Ghost directed; further then this, there is
nothing in that place or sermon, giving warrant to your opinion, of justifying
popish and monkish Counsels, and how great his dislike is to any such
position, his learned speech at Lambeth (which like a thunderbolt struck you
dumb) does testify to all. So that all these witnesses refuse you. Luther,
wickliffe, Hooker, D. Covell, and this most reverend Prelat not vouchsafing
your doctrine countenance or maintenance.

Mr LEECH.

These, and many more of their rank I might add; if I could be persuaded,
that the Fathers needed their sons suffrages. And yet certain I am, Sons in
this point; or such like. For no otherways did I mean.
that the sons stand in need of their fathers testimonies. Or were it not
rather so, that all these (being men of eminent note in our Church) are rather
relatores antiquae fidei, quam authors novae doctrinae; relators of the
ancient faith of the Church, (to their credit and honor, in that respect, he it
spoken) rather then authors, and coyners of any new doctrine? And therefore
passing them, and for this time sparing them, not to strike a hairs breadth
from my former grounds; Leo Epist. 17. and 94.
my maine conclusion is this: maneant termini patrum, intraque fines proprios
se quisque contineat: sufficiant limits, quos sanctorum patrum providentissima
decreta posuerunt: let the bounds of ancient church abide, and let every man
keep himself within due bounds, and limits; let the meets which the Fathers
most provident decrees have set, content us. And the reason is excellently
rendered by S. Bernard: Epist. 77. ad Hugonem de S. Victore.
viz: quanto viciniores erant adventui salvatoris, tanto mysterium salutis
before praeceperunt: the nearer the Fathers were to Christ his incarnation,
the more clearly, and fully received they the mystery of salvation.

ANSWER.

It is true the Orthodoxall Fathers need not the suffrages of their sons, and
yet Bellarmine denies it, and is so unnatural to the Fathers as that he
makes them to need the suffrage of the Pope: Bellar. de Po^t l. 2. c. 27.
Respon. istos
for when he is pressed by Nilus, to follow in the question of the Primacy,
the opinion of the Fathers, he professes that the Pope has no Fathers in the
Church, for they are all his sons. So by this Gregory the great shall stand in
need of Burgesies testimony. Ca^ you endure this, that Gregory, whose learning
holiness eloquence etc. was so eminent, he that you call Patron, though he
never bestowed so much as opinion upon you, shall he need the testimony of
Mounsieur Burghesi, whom your own confess to be none of the best Popes, and
sure not of the best men. But to the Fathers this I say, we respect and honor
them in general: and the present quotation of S. Bernard, we dislike not. For
Patres quo saniores, eo seniores; quo iuniores, eo ieiuniores; but they being
impostured, as Papists profess to practice it, in their Index expurgatorius,
that if the Fathers speak against any points now maintained by papists, Ind.
Expurg. belg. fol. 20.
then the Index warns thus, Let us excuse it, or extenuat it, or deny it by
some devise, or feign some other convenient sense when it is opposed in
disputation: Our main conclusion hence is, Patres quo Papis viciniores, eo
corruptiores.

Mr LEECH.

To these, were my judgment and opinion any, Of Luther, Calvin, and all their
proper Disciples Qui non co^sentit Sa^ctorum Patrum expositionibus, seipsum
alienat ab omni sacerdo tali communione, and a Christi praese^tia. Eudoxius in
Council. Chalced.
I durst not otherways then subscribe with all humble submissio^ to the
censure of the Church; fearing that censure of Flavianus (Bishop of
Constantinople,) in his first Epistle to Pope Leo the first; Haeretici est
praecepta patrum declinare, and instituta eorum despicere: It is the property
of an heretic to decline the precepts of holy fathers, contemning their
cannons, and decrees.

ANSWER.

Your judgment or opinion is very small, seeing you take up any thing at the
second hand, and from Coccius Treasury, that cocks dunghill, cul Pearls as you
think them. Twice before you submitted your self to the Church, and in every
page almost to the interpretation of the Fathers. That the Church has
necessarily a stroke in the decision of Controversies, we deny not: but so ever
that it subscrib to the truth of scriptures. Next you submit to the Fathers:
the Fathers we reverence more then any Papists in the world do: neither do I
believe that ever any Protestant in the Christian world, has offered so much
disreputation, unto the Fathers, as Bellarmin himself has don not only in
general, De Pont. lib. 2. c. 27. resp. istas. Bell. de Purg. c. 18. praeter^a
and q. ad quartum de poenitent. l. 1. c. 1. igitur. Beilar. de verbo Dei. l. 3
c. 10. dicens.
making all the Fathers but Children, and novices to the Pope, but in
particular, almost every Father, is vilified by him. To Damascene he gives the
flatly, and affirms that Tertullian is not to be reckoned among Catholics,
and so, and worse then so, he speaks of many others, so ill a Patron is he of
them, that disesteeming any of them in any thing that crosses his assertions,
he concludes thus; it is evident that the cheifest of them have grievously
erred. So that it seems Bellarmine is the heritique, that Leo speaks of,
who declineth from the precepts, and co^temneth the decres of holy Fathers.

Mr LEECH.

Thus much be spoken in defense of that great pillar of the latin Church S.
Gregory saying; Quidam non iudicantur, and pereunt, quidam iudicantur, and
pereunt; quidam iudicantur, and regnant, quidam non iudicantur, and regnant: as
also in defense of that sentence, inferred upon the last branch, transcendunt
aliqui praecepta legis perfectiori virtute.

ANSWER.

It is strange in divinity not only, but in common sense, that first you should
make your sermon, and the^ after choose your Text: it was usual in you, if
those that were best acquainted with your vnmethoded studies, be not mistaken.
You grounded your distinction upon that Text, that without much wresting and
wiredrawing, would not serve you. And you accommodated your distinction as
unfitly to this doctrine of Counsels, as you father this doctrine upon
Gregory, from whose authority you cannot produce any word of Evangelicall
Counsel; your defense was a very poor on, you left S. Gregory to fight for
himself, for you fled. Cum caeteri pugnabant maxim, tu fugiebas maxim, says
the Comoedy. Father Anbignies defense, for concealing Ravelliacks damned
treason against the last French King, was this, Anti-Coton.
that God had given him a grace to forget, all that he heard in confession: It
appears you have the like gift, to mistake most that you read in the Fathers,
else you would never have maintained such disiointed inferences.

Mr LEECH.

This I have the rather done (God, and his holy Angels in whose presence I now
stand, and speak, De Mysterio Mediatoris lib. 1. As heretics as temporizers.
bearing me witness) lest that imputation of Fulgentius should light upon me,
viz. Fidem Ecclesiae nolle asserere, est negare, vno eodemque sile^tio firmat
errorem, qui errore, seu tempore possessus, veritatem silendo no^ astruit;
Dominicam gloriam qui non firmarit, evacuat; and divina^ contumeliam qui non
refutarit, accumulat. Miles ignavus some nole^to corpore depressus, regia castra
oppugnantibus tradit, dum competentibus vigilijs non defendit. That is; not to
aver the Doctrine of the church, is to deny the faith of the Church; So are
some in England. So are others
for with one, and the self same silence, he strengthens an error, who being
possessed or carried away with error, or time, avoucheth not truth by his
silence. He that confirms not the glory of God, weakneth it; and he that
confuteth not injury offered unto God, augmenteth it. The slothful sleepy
soldier betrayeth the Kings tents to his enimes, whilst he keeps not true
sentinel as he should.

ANSWER.

Fulgentius speech, fitteth us, as well as you: your protestation we partly
believe, and yet, but partly, because you sin more of negligence then of
ignorance. I would I could give you that testimony which S. Paul did the
Israelits, Romans 10.2.
I bear you record that you have the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge, or as another testimony of Scripture in the like case, that you do
only stray by ignorance: Then would I hope, that terror of conscience should
not punish your error in knowledge. The Donatists loved their opinions better
then their lives, and you affect your own folly more then Gods glory:
wherefore my exhortation to you is; Return, Return o Shunamite: Can. 6.12.
if you will not, my prayer and Petition for you is this, Father forgive him,
for he knows not what he does. Your marginallis false: sca^dal not our
Church, slander not our professors. The Law and Gospel agree in this, Cursed
be he that revileth the elders of his people.

Mr LEECH.

Has any weeds of superstition grown up with this Doctrine in the field of
the Church? Oh let not the pure wheat of Evangelicall Counsels of perfection
quoad viam, quoad gradum, fare the worse for the weeds. Unskillful husbandmen
are they, and very unfit to manure the Lord his tillage, whose preposterous
zeal issuing from the ground of a private groundless judgment, would pull up
both wheat, and tares together.

ANSWER.

The words be otherwise in your copy, commanded by authority, and by the
notes, against which, exception was taken by the learned of our assembly.
Under your own hand. This Paragraph begins thus; Has any weeds of
SVPEREROGATION grown up, etc. And dare you not now use the same term?
Insteede of supererogation, you put in, superstition. I grieve to think, that
you do receive the wages of iniquity for maintaining (as far as your poor
revenews serves) these two bastards of the Pope, Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 19.
Hier. l. 1.3., contra Pelag. Theodor. in Romans 10. Chrysostom in Romans 10. hom 17.
Sed. in 10. Ro^.
impiety and absurdity. The works of supererogation are of al other points of
Popery most abominable, besides that none of the fathers teach so, and that
many of them be expressly against the^, as Austin, Hiero^, Theodoret,
Chrysostom, Sedulius: your own defenders Aquinas, Gerson, Iansenius,
Paludanus, and Cusanus, all deny this point. And seeing, that Scarlet whore of
Babilo^, dru^k with the blood of Gods Saints, is now carted by heavenly
justice through all the reformed Congregations of the world: I see not but
every true Christian should be ready to cast a stone, and the stone which I
cast against superogatio^ is no other, the^ that which S. John cast against it,
who gives the lie to him that says he has no sin. Bell. de. Mon. lib. 2. c.
13.
And Bellarmine is constrained to confess that S. Austin, Bernard, and Thomas
do think it impossible to keep that Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

Mr LEECH.

These are wiser, and fuller of zeal, then Christ himself, who suffered, nay
gave commandment (as it is in the parable) that both tares and wheat should
grow together, until the harvest of the last judgment; and then should the
tares, and weeds be bound up in bundles, fitted for the fire; and the wheat
should be gathered into his barn. For at the last judgment, Sermo 3. de le
iunio and collectis. 1. Cor. 3.12.13.
there are some things vrenda flammis, other things condenda horreis, as S. Leo
speaks. And does not S. Paul allude to this? Whose words be; if any man build
upon Christ (the foundation) gold, silver, precious stones, timber, hay,
stubble; every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it,
because it shall be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's
works, of what sort they are. To which fire, let this Doctrine be reserved to
stand, or fall; to burn as stubble, hay timber; or rather to escape, as gould,
silver, and precious stones.

ANSWER.

True zeal, is the true seal of a Christian. If you had any spark thereof, I
would wish, as Porsenna did to Scaevola concerning his Country, Lavater.
Iuberem macte virtute esse, si pro mea patria virtus ista staret. So I for
true Religion. Jobs friends had a bad cause, but handled it well; Job had a
good cause, but maintained it ill; neither ability of the cause, nor dexterity
of the handling have assisted you. The multiplicious abuse of Scripture in your
text, is frequent: that, as the Prophet spoke of aslying book, so may al of
your lying book. You would by intimation of that Scripture in the Parable of the
Tares, desire, that as the tares are suffered to grow, Mat. 13.30.
so your doctrine may remain vnce^sured till the judgment. It is well that
you acknowledge your doctrine to be like the Tares. Fearful will that
judgment be at that universal Sessions where Christ will be judge, and the
Saints the Jury, when you are accused with those words of the Parable, Master
sowedst not thou good seed in thy field? whence the^ are these tares? In that
Parable of Christ, as the stream of interpretation does carry it, is meant,
that by the evil seed mixed with the good, the Church shall never be free from
some wicked, and that it is impossible to root them finally out: for if we
wish to avoid these so fully as the godly could wish, we must go out of the
world, as the Apostle speaks. So that of lewd persons, not of heretical
positions, that place is to be understood: for Christ does threaten the
Churches in the Revelation, for connivencie of false doctrine: Laodicaea, Rev.
2.3. chap
for being neither hot nor cold; Rev. 2.14. Rev. 2.20. Gal.
Pergamus, for maintaining the doctrine of Balaa^ Thyatira, for suffering
Iesabell to teach and deceive his servants. The Church of Galatia is reproved,
for that they suffered the Copartnership of Jewish Ceremonies, when they were
established in the Gospel of Christ and shall Religion the truest bond betwixt
man and man, the knot of conjunction and consociation, In Dion. Cass.
shall it be divided? Shall Maecenas wish Augustus to hate and correct any
that change any thing in the service of the Gods? Joseph. cont. ap. 2.
Shall the Athenians enact that they that spoke of their God otherwise then the
law appointed should be severely punished? And shall we so much neglect the
atonement of judgments, and peace of souls, as to suffer blending of
doctrines, not only leaven in our Lump, but poison in our bread? Far be it
from us and from our seed for ever. Let it be the brand not only of a
lukewarm affection, and of a Policy overpolitique, but of Machiavillians and
matchless villains, to call for connivency of heretical positions. From hell
it came, to hell it must return again. We cannot choose but suffer the Tares
of iniquity to grow up: but we will endeavor pro aris and focis to eradicat
the Tares of heresy. Your second place of Scripture out of S. Paul (A
chardgeable Appeal) is very fit for your purpose; and the words in the next
present verse, as fit for mine, 1. Cor. 3.11.
Let every man take heed how he builds: and the later of those verses shall
be my prayer for you, that though your work burn at that day and you loose,
yet you may be saved. In the mean time Scripture has disapproved you, and the
fathers have refused you.

Mr LEECH.

Now to God only wise be rendered praise, power, might, majesty, rule,
dominion, and thanksgiving, and let all the creatures in heaven, in earth, or
under the earth, say so be it; Amen.

ANSWER.

Unto that supreme judge, Rev. 22.13.
and to the last judgment be this referred, and unto the everliving God, who is
in himself a and o in Angelis sapor et decor, Aust.
in justice adiutor and protector, in reprobis pavor et horror, be ascribed, the
admiration of his Majesty, the acknowledgment of his mercy, the awful
remembrance of his power, the joyful continuance of his favor. And
Hallelu-iah, Rev. 19.1.2.
Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power be to the Lord our God, for true
and righteous are his judgments, for he has condemned that great whore, which
did corrupt the earth with her fornications. Amen. Hallelu-iah.

CHAP. 8. Mr LEECH.
THus (gentle Reader) thou have seen my maine defense of this doctrine,
wherein I have followed the mature advise of the Philosopher, and Orator. For
I thought it not sufficient to confirm truth in the former part of this
sermon, unless I confuted falsehood also in the later. And this I did for
establishing thee if thou be in the right: or reducing thee unto it if thou
have been in the wrong.

ANSWER.

THus (Gentle Reader) thou have seen the mean defense of this doctrine,
wherein whether the author (as he professes) has followed the advice of the
Philosopher or Orator, judge by the contradictions, misapplications,
falsifications in the sermon. Can Oratory or Philosophy be obtained without
Grammar? or cannot a Grammarian distinguish between Concilium and Consilium,
the one, coming originally a conciendo, Calepin.
id est, convocando; the other, derived from Consileo, eo quod vno consulente,
caeteri consileant? It was a most probable trial of the Ephraimits in
shibboleth, Judge. 12.6.
and sibboleth; the mistaking, cost the death of the body. It was a laudable
trial between the Counsel of Nice, and Arius, in the difference of (...) and
(...); the mistaking was heresy, the death of the soul. The Hebrews have a
Tradition in their Talmud, that they that could not discern the pronouncing of
(...) from (...), should not be made Priest, Meg. c. 3. p. 24
or reader in their Synagogue. And surely, unfit is he to write of
Counsels, that knows not the difference of letters in Concilium, and
Consilium. I hold those titivillitious altercations of some Critics, not
altogether so necessary: as whether Epistula, or Epistola; iccirco, or idcireo;
cotidie, or quotidie be the better reading. But, in a matter of moment, of
maine difference, a letter may much alter the sense. Caranza, Caranza in Epit.
Council. in Council. Laodicens. Can. 35.
in the Council of Laodicaea, the 35 Cano^, which was made against the worship
of Angels, puts in Angulos instead of Angelos, having no other corner to
run into, to free his Church from the assertion of Idolatry; and in this
there was wit joined with knavery, so that it was pretty, though pestilent: but
it was absurd to continue in your written Copy, ever to write Concilia with
the ^ in steed of s, as fearing to make longam litera^, The great difference of
the things, and the warning of Franciscus So^nius should have made you more
critical. For Sonnius very plainly, gives a Caveat in this behalf, as
supposing some such as your self should hereafter need it. This is such a
soloecisme, in any learned judgment, that it would have cost a lashing in any
free school in England. And howsoever, you hold that common rude speech of the
Popes true Fiatur, in co^tumeliam omniu^ Grammaticorum, yet not Theologorum.

Mr LEECH.

And howsoever the truth of this doctrine has not already (nor yet happily
hereafter shall) escape the tongues, and penns of some malicious, or ignorant
carping adversaries (enemies of God, and his Church) yet can it never be
suppressed; but it will prevail in the end, and flourish like a green palm
tree; being justifiable and glorious both before God, and man where reason
swaieth, and not passion rages.

ANSWER.

Heresy has been gainsaid in all ages, and among the rest this, where, by
the title of Evangelicall Counsels of perfection, vain Imaginarists have
sought to prove merits, perfection, supererogation, and other strange and false
positions. To the suppressing of which, the Fathers in all ages, have
concurred, as to the extinguishing of a general devastation by fire. Account
you the opposers of your doctrine, malicious and ignorant carping adversaries:
but God, whose cause they have in hand, sees and judges, whether they that
acknowledge their sins, or they that object their merit; whether they that
confess themselves unprofitable servants, or they that profess Angelical
perfection; Psalm. 19.7.
they, that with reverence do believe the law of the Lord to be perfect, and an
undefiled law, or they that accuse it for want and imperfection; they that
profess, it is impossible to fulfill the law, or they that vaunt of performing
more then is required by the law: and, as he sees and judges, so he rewards
every man according to his work; and has pronounced that the wicked shall be
as the chafe, that the wind scatters to and fro. Psalm. 1.4.


Mr LEECH.

Farther; I can for more full complement (if need be) produce all charters,
roles, evidences, judgments, ce^sures, sentences, arrests of all Christian
parliamens, the vmpiring determinations of the highest Ecclesiastical
tribunalls, and general Counsels notwitstanding all pretenses, pleas,
intrusions, surreptions, shifts, contentions of all Heretical Iovinianists.

ANSWER.

This Paragraph has put you out of breath, and put truth out of you: It is
like that congerious and multiplicious numeration of Critics Phrases in
Merula, where he reckons up, Commentarios, Adversaria, Merula. page 218.
Annotationes, Scholia, observationes, Animadversa, Castigationes,
Disquisitiones, Miscellanea, Centurias, Syntagmata, Collectanea, Catalecta,
Spicilegia etc. Such is your disfigured figure in conglomerating your charters,
roles, evidences, sentences, arrests, etc. But what have these to do with
Evangelicall Counsels, Quid ad Rhombum.
any of sense, that reads it, will afford no other allowance, but this of the
Poet; Hor. art. Poet
Quid dignum tanto feret hic promissor hiatu? If I should follow you in this
kind, I could urge, to make up an army royal in encounter of yours, all
Scriptures, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Saints, Kings, Bishops,
Fathers, Doctors, Professors, Schools, Chaires, Universities, decrees of the
Church, Canons of Councels, Constitutions of Synods, Histories, acts and
monuments of all times and of all places: Notwithstanding the Index
expurgatorius of the Pope, the demolishing of Antiquity by the Jesuits, the
Corruption of the Fathers and all authorities by the Vatican impostors; and all
the endeavors of Rome, and Hell, to violate the truth.

Mr LEECH.

Ad nihilum devenient ta^quam aqua decurrens: which S. Austine does fitly apply
unto heresies.
Such is the difference betwixt truth, and falsehood, that error in time (as it
is but the entertainment of time) will of it self fall away, when Truth will
stand impregnable, how many soever impugn her; so true is that of the Apostle;
we can do nothing against truth.

ANSWER.

The difference between truth and falshoode is as much, as the height of
heaven, and the depth of hell. But you never took pains to distinguish truth
from falsehood, never to enquire publicly, or to study seriously the arguments
against your opinion. S. Augustine thought it fit to make known whereof he
stood in doubt, and also wherefore: your course was otherwise, Aug de Genesi
literam.
you conceived in the ear, and brought forth in the mouth; you read Coccius
and Bellarmine, believed them, and preached them, and took up from the^, upon
trust, but not upon truth. You builded upon the sands, and your building is
fallen, because not founded on the corner stone, for other foundation can no
man lay, then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ.

Mr LEECH.

And therefore leaving thee (modest, and discreet Reader) to judge of the
matter, and doctrine now in difference, as reason, and Religion shall induce
thee, and not as the instigation and humor of some factious persons will seek
to mislead thee; I proceed to prosecute the remainder of this business;
hoping that no man (of any apprehension) will suffer himself to be deceived by
vain, and unlearned suggestions.

ANSWER.

Reason must be submitted unto Religion, but the trial of Religion only is
submitted unto Truth, the ancor of Christians in the Tempest of Controversy.
Account it no instigatio^ by humor, or prosecutio^ against you by favor. The
Poet is my warrant, Hominem malignum forsan te credant alij,
Ego te miserum credo, etc.
Neither Fathers in divinity, nor Fathers by authority can satisfy you, but
you presume to proceed. I fear that like a fly about the Candel, you will
perish, in the gainesaying of Corah. None here will be worthily thought men
deceived by vain and unlearned suggestions.

Mr LEECH.

And if some men will obstinately shut their eyes, yet my trust is, that others
will look up to Heaven, whence this doctrine descended, and whether it does
most readily conduce; and that they will no longer take darkness for light,
night for day, poison for medecin, Heresy for verity; since truth brings
ever with it, certainety, peace, and security at the last.

ANSWER.

Psalm. 135.16.17.
The legend gives Scripture the lie. Scripture says that Idols have eyes, and
see not; ears have they, and they hear not: Legend. Aurea.
and yet the legend reports that many of the Idols and Images have spoken,
seen, and hard. They open their eyes and see not, we may shut our eyes and yet
see, that this Doctrine never proceeded from heaven, or if it descended from
thence, the descention was like to Lucifer that fell from thence into the
bottomless pit, and no doubt Lucifers sin was no other then this, so far by
elatio^ to superlatiue man, that in pride he rebel against God. By respiratio^
we send our prayers to heaven, by inspiration we receive instruction from
heaven, but I find not that Phrase in any approved Author, that doctrine
descended from heaven. And though the Priest in the law could only distinguish
between a Leaper and a Leaper, yet in the Gospel the Lord has so illuminated
his servants, that they can easily discern between the darkness of the
understanding which is falsum and the light thereof which is verum. Which truth
is the daughter of Syon, and is atte^ded with Peace of Conscience, joy in the
holy Ghost, remission of sins, communion of Saints and life everlasting.

Mr LEECH. THE SECOND PART CONTAIning the irregular, and violent process of
the Vice Chancellor, and his accomplices against me, and the former doctrine.
Wherein the Reader may excellently discern the nature of heresy, and the
condition of Heretics, as in a perfect glass. *
As Iannes, and Mambres resisted Moses, so do these resist the truth; men
corrupt in mind, and reprobat concerning the faith. 2. Tim. 3.8.

ANSWER.

THE SECOND PART Contains, the exorbitant and virulent disobedience, and
palpable and heretical ignorance of the Author of the Triumph; as also the
false suggestions, and uncharitable imputations, against most of the Reverend
and worthy Doctors of the University of Oxford: wherein the nature of a
conceited malecontented Apostat is discovered, who having out of heresy spun
the Spiders web, an opinion Popish, and ridiculous; and out of slander and
unsavory words, hatched the Coccatrice e^ges, phrases reproachful and
malicious; does behold his natural face in a glass.

Psalm. 75. I said unto the fools, deal not so madly. Iud. 11. They have
followed the way of Caine, and are cast away by the deceit of Balams wages, and
perish in the gainesaying of Korah. A TRIVMPH OF TRVTH. OR DECLARATION OF THE
DOCTRINE CONCERNING EVANGELICAL COVNSAILES;
Mr LEECH. CHAP. I.
When I had ended my sermon, it seemed good unto Mr Doctor Hutton (who was
there present, and confronted me with ridiculous behavior) to cite me before
himself immediately in his own lodging; where I found him accompanied with two
other Doctors; D. Kilby, and D. Benefield, who gave special attention unto my
sermon, with great show of discontent.

ANSWER.

Chrysostom. in 2. epist. ad Tim. 2.
IT is S. Chrysostomes observation, that the cause of all evil, is the neglect
of the authority of spiritual governors, when no reverence or fear or honor
is used toward them. If this had not proved true in you, you had not presumed
(when authority contradicted it to reiterate your former opinions. Or to accuse
D. Hutton of ridiculous behavior, whose gravity, and reverent deportment
according to his place and age, found not in the whole course of his life any
accuser but you: his resolution in judgment and office then in government, were
the motives causing him to send for you: you confess that the Doctors
accompanying him, attended, but much disliked your sermon so did not they only,
but the whole Church, many standing amassed to see you bring forth so publicly
those two twins ignorance and impudence. Of these two Doctors in the former
part you affirmed that one of them approved your Doctrine, and Apologisd for
your opinion, which is most untrue for he ever abhord your assertion, as
formerly I have answered you that his worthiness protests, and as here
plainly unto all appears in that you say these two Doctors gave attentio^ to
your sermon with great discontent.

Mr LEECH.

Before these men, D. Hutton began to charge me with scandalous, erroneous, and
Popish doctrine, fitter to be preached in Rome, then in Oxford; and therefore
in no case to be suffered there to disturb the peace of the University.

ANSWER.

The Provice chancellor and these Doctors as Indices et iudices veritatis did
discharge that true care of Gods glory, to charge you with the breach of the
peace of the Church, by obtruding a doctrine scandalous for the occasion,
erroneous for the opinion, unsafe to be read and unsound to be preached.

Mr LEECH.

To this accusation, I framed my answer to the same tenor, and effect, as you
have formerly seen in the kitchin-conference; adding farther, that the
doctrine of the Trinity, consubstantialitie etc. might be branded with the
imputation of Popery, as well as this doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels.

ANSWER.

You preached this doctrine twice over ( verbatim almost) as appears by the
Coppies under your hand that now I have in keeping, at least verbatim in your
extorted producing of testimony: and now verbatim you have the same Apology for
your doctrine of the Trinity, consubstantiality, etc. which you rank with
Evangelicall Counsels, and of which I shall have occasion to reckon with you
in your motives.

Mr LEECH.

But such is the temerity of some men, that they will rather disclaim a
manifest truth, then they will concur in opinion with the Church of Rome. And
for my part, I see no reason, why you may not as well renounce that Popish
doctrine of the Trinity, as this of Evangelicall Counsels, since both have
their evidence from the same ground ( Canonical Scripture and Ecclesiastical
Tradition) yea the later has more clear deduction, and testification out of
the Scripture then the former.

ANSWER.

Such is the misery of some men, that they will in the corruption of their
rotten hearts, undertake the defense of some manifest untruth, to get them a
name; as Reverend D. Kilby protests he often warned you: and it is the
baseness of some, that in the fruitful grounds of learning, they smell after
some dunghill questions of Popery, to obtain a title of singularity. Mistake
not, slander not, we disclaim not positions, so much, because Rome maintains
them, as because Antichrist and heresy invented them: and yet look into her
streets, mark well her Bullwarkes, and religiously consider, what fountain
has she not poisoned, what part of Religion has she not corrupted? The
doctrine of the Trinity, seeing you here again urge it as above, so I hence
remove it as above, to your Motives.

Mr LEECH.

Secondly; his worship objected unto me that D. Benefield had lately, and
learnedly confuted the said Popish doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels, and that
thereupon I ought to have surceased; my reply was, that D. Benefield his
opinion was no canon of my faith, nor that his authority was of such value with
me, as to preponderate the judgment of the Ancient Church, and testimonies of
the venerable Fathers. And therefore since I began to publish this doctrine
upon such grounds, I was bound in conscience to defend the same; and specially,
since he made an opposition in schools unto my position in the pulpit; so that
I could not be silent without treason unto God, and his truth.

ANSWER.

The argument consisted of reason and religion, in reason if the doctrine were
answered, how could it be gainsaid? the learning, wisdom, degree, of Doctor
Benefield by infinite degrees paramounting all that ever will be in Mr Leech. In
religion, for if the Canons of the Church (grounded on Scripture) do someway
obliege our consciences, and that among the rest, one especially provideth that
there be no public contradictio^ of points in religion, how durst this to be
infringed, and opposition so peremptorily maintained by you in the Pulpit. But
you say you did so, because that his opinion was no Canon of your faith etc.
And yet you did make opinion the Canon of your faith and produced your conceit,
distinction, grounds, testimonies, proofs, etc, all for the most part out of
Bellarmine, and though you disclaim it, yet you underwent that Babilonicall
servitude, which by Alphonsus de Castro is called Miserrima servitus iurare in
alicuius verba Magistri: Alphons. de Castro. cont. haeres. lib. 1. cap. 7.
so that opinion was your Cano^. I have already professed from the Protestation
of D. Benefield that he read, no way with purpose, to touch you: but only in
general as this controversy was the occasion of much innovation, much
corruption: so that yours was the contradiction, not his.

Mr LEECH.

Thirdly; whereas he laid unto my charge, that he had inhibited me to
intermeddle any farther with this point; I answered; that de facto, he had
never done it, and that de iure, he could not do it. For God must be obeyed
rather then man. Besides; though in discretion, and submission unto your
authority, I would have surceased from prosecution of this matter, yet this
notorious, and intolerable impugnation did force me to break my intended
silence.

ANSWER.

Deny it not, for you were charged upon your second sermon, not to intermeddle
any further in this point: and therefore your distinction de facto and de iure,
is fond. Your inhibition de facto, should have restrained you; de iure, should
have feared you: for the Magistrate bears not Gods sword in vain. But you
say, God must be obeyed rather then man. By what revelation or fained new found
vision, had you command from God to preach this sermon the second time? We must
obey (say the Lawyers) Parents and Magistrates in licitis and honestis: but God
in omnibus; because all things are not only lawful to us, but fruitful for us,
if enioined by him. But God, Stella in Luc. Glory, judgment, vengeance, proper
to God only. Psalm. 8.5.
that (as Stella observes) has impropriated 3 things unto himself, the first
being his glory; never did send any warrant to you, so much to oppose his
glory, as to place man, not as David speaks, little lower, but equal, or
somewhat higher then the Angels, in Angelical integrity, spiritual
transcendency, etc: as if man should be beholde^ to you, more then to his
glorious maker. Besides, (say you) intolerable impugnation did break your
silence: you would make the world believe, you were injured. S. Austin asks
in this case a question; libet hominem vindicare? Tom. 10. ser. 42. in Orat.
Domin.
and must you encourage your self in the unlawfulness of revenge? But God,
and me^, and Angels testify, you do injury, to affirm you had injury, by
any notorious or intolerable impugnatio^. Were you imprisoned, censured,
excommunicated? Deserving all these, you were punished by none of these.

Mr LEECH.

Fourthly; whereas he demanded a copy of my sermon (protesting upon his faith
and troth to God, that he would send me presently unto the Castle, unless I
then delivered it) I was content (upon the persuasion of Doctor Kilby) to yield
into his hands the original, and only copy thereof. And so I was dismissed for
this time.

ANSWER.

The Copy was demanded. And, though you say you delivered it upon persuasion:
yet it might have been enforced from you. This protestation you objected once
before against the Provice chancelour, and now again. If you could fasten any
aspersion upon him, or any that the cause concerned. I know you would.
Protestations are often justifiable and commendable, Romans 9.1. 2. Cor. 11.31.
Gal. 1.20.
as I have given instance before in many of the Saints, but especially in Paul
in diverse Epistles: To the Romans, I say the truth, and lie not, my conscience
bearing me witness; To the Corinthians, God, the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, knows that I lie not; To the Galathians, I witness before God that I
lie not. And Espencaeus, in his own practice shows, that a protestation may
very religiously be used; Espenc. tract. 6. Epist dedic. ad Card. Cast.
his words translated be these, I do RELIGIOVSLY SWEAR, that as often, as I
thought upon the report of obtaining the Red hat freely, (which others hunted
after for money, who were repulsed) I give immortal thanks unto God, that he
suffered not, I will not say so much good, but so much evil to happen unto me:
Quid facerem Romae? mentiri nescio. What should I do at Rome? I cannot lie.
Thus much, for your objection against his protestation: and thus much, for the
honesty of the place, where your habitation is now supposed.

Mr LEECH. CHAP. 2.
This storm being thus overblowne, a quiet calm ensued, until M. Doctor
King (deane of Christ-Church, and Vicechancellour of the University) was now
returned from London; unto who^ I made repair partly to do my duty unto him,
and partly to prevent that sinister impression, which D. Hutton, and others
sought to work in him to the prejudice of me and of the doctrine which I had
preached. For which purpose, I had collected the testimonies of 24. Fathers;
that thereby he might be well informed in the state of this present question.

ANSWER.

A storm it was not: you felt neither the thunderbolt of excommunication, nor
lightning of expulsion. If in this storm, as you call it, you had shed a
shower of repentant tears, then you might have been happy, Aust.
in that which S. Austin applies to such a purpose, Post pluuiam sequitur
magna serenitas, post nubilu^ magna claritas, post tempestatem magna
tranquillitas. Though you thought the storm calmed; yet it was no otherwise
then that the expectation of our most worthy Vicecha^cellors coming home staid
it: to who^ by prevention and anticipation, you made repair, to repair your
weather-beaten credit, and (you say) to do your duty, which you had neglected
to his deputy. But why feared you so^e sinister impressio^ in him, who like
that noble Emperor, in all causes kept an ear as well for defendant, as
plaintiff? I conjecture the cause: conscience was the Notary, Register, and
Remembrauncer of an offense; and will prove the sting and scourge for the
offense. Conscience, at this your first appearing, made you inwardly cry guilty.

Mr LEECH.

As Soon as he beheld me, he brake forth into this passionate declamation. Sir,
would you have a word with me? In very good time; I have many words to speak
with you: for the shameful rumor of your doctrine has filled my ears
wheresoever I came, in London, in Lambeth, or else where: your doctrine was
still laid in my dish; yea I have been charged by diverse to my face, for
tolerating such scandalous, and erroneous doctrine freely, and openly to be
preached in this University.

ANSWER.

His passion was no other, then that which should be the proper passion of
every true hearted Christian. He was (with Elias) jealous for the Lord of
hoasts: 1. King. 19.14. 2. Cor. 11.2.
and as S. Paul was jealous with a godly jealousy, so was he passionate with
a religious holy Passion. It concerned him in a double respect: as a provident
Vicechancellour of the University, to see that the Lords ground receive no
tares; as the diligent Governor of that honorable College, to see that the
envious man live not in his house, that would sow these tares. His burden of
this double labor, requires a double ardor, and without doubt it will receive
a double honor. The speech he used to you, was the living representation of
himself, full of courage, wisdom, truth, and honorable spirit: and therefore
I may return Martial his Apostrophe upon you, Sed male dum recitas, incipit
esse tuu^; His sweet speech has lost much, by running through your Channel.
Occasion of much grief it was to him, to hear that under his Collegiat
regiment, any one should presume to teach that, which was scandalous and most
erroneous doctrine. And what freedom the world uses in taxing Governors, as
guilty of connivency to some unruly Heretoclits under their authority,
Seperatists and Papists (like Herod and Pilat) in their daily invectiues do
testify.

Mr LEECH.

To whom returning my answer in dutiful sort, I protested first, that I came
not to insinuate with him, nor to divert any course of justice. Secondly; I
know the doctrine to be founded upon such invincible proofs, and reasons, that
it will stand impregnable against all assaults whatsoever. For demonstration
whereof I presented the aforesaid testimonies unto him, and desired him to take
a diligent review of the places alleged in that schedule.

ANSWER.

Your dutiful answer was undutiful: in that, first, you came not to crave
his favorable interpretation, and thereby in submission, to have committed
your self and cause unto his worthy judgment, as being in a double respect
under his government; secondly, you might have remembered to speak truth, in
this your answer, for you presented no such Testimony of Fathers, as you report
here, nor collected any authorities out of them at all. When you were Collector
for the poor proofs, that you produce, it seems you were Collector for the
high ways also: you gathered that rubbish out of Bellarmine and Coccius,
Ierem. 6.16.
not out of the old way as the Prophet calls them.

Mr LEECH.

Whereupon he contemptuously entwited me, saying: go, go; you are a fool, an
ass, etc: when you preach, here is nothing but Leo, Leech, and all the Fathers.
A proverb, which he had borrowed from some braynsicke Puritans, and profane
scoffers.

ANSWER.

Reproves be as necessary Purgations: and you know how lawful it is according
to the proverb, to affirm, Schapha est Schapha, as also that it is held true
in Physic, Morality, and Divinity, varium poscit remediu^ diversa qualitas
passionum. Ioh. 4.7. Acts. 7.51.
John Baptist to the Pharisees cries out, O ye generations of vipers; Stephen
to the Jews, O ye stiff necked, and of uncircumcised hearts and ears; Peter
to Ananias, Why has Satan so filled thy heart, Acts. 5.3. Acts. 13.10.
that thou should lie unto the holy Ghost; and Paul to Elymas uses no other
language but this, O full of al subtilty and of all mischief, the child of the
devil and enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease, to pervert the
straight ways of the Lord? Such reproves even to the dividing asunder the
bones and the marrowe, have been used frequently and necessarily. But the
wisdom of the reverend Vicechancellor forbear any such words as you impute
here to him: and therefore in being the false relator, you are become the
author of these titles you give your self. The Title of Leo Leech, was so
commonly grown to a Proverb of you, as that you grew proud of it: but without
reason, for you know, how the creature was dealt with, that strouted in the
Lions skin. But this title of Leo Leech, was not named then, but deferred till
your final Censure, (...) is your disease, your Title of brainsicke Puritanes
is spleneticall if not Phreneticall. We are all free from the note of that
Schism, we profess no transcendencie, every man has subscribed, and
willingly acknowledged, the most auspitious and gracious government by the
Religion professed, and for ever to be avowed in our Church. Forbear then this
tongue murdering, and malignant slandering.

Mr LEECH.

Which contumely I repelled with few words, and digested it with patience;
assuring him, that Leech with one Leo would be too hard for any man that
impugned this doctrine.

ANSWER.

Why should you boast of Leo, when you had neither strength nor honey from this
Lion. Leo is none of your Jury, you have no Counsel from him. Look over your
Catalogue, you find him not there; and look into your conscience, and you will
find, that you made no mention of him here: though you be false in opinion,
yet continue not in every paragraph to be false in relation.

Mr LEECH.

And truly I could not but marvel, that he, who in his lectures upon Jonah,
has made a copious defense of the holy Fathers, and approved the use of their
testimonies in public sermons, should now so vehemently except against me,
and so meanly esteem of them. But such is the condition of these men, that
they will accept, and reject the Fathers at their own pleasures; as wind, and
weather go.

ANSWER.

That our worthy Vicechancellor was no Antipater, may be plainly seen by his
most exquisite apology for the use of those great Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, who derived their streams of divine knoweledge from the Scriptures,
and from whose Lamps all Christendom have received light. But in this, Art,
and Grace so far above Art, have so enriched his judgment by study, that
though he mainetaineth the reading of the fathers and the frequent quotation of
the^, and makes use of them in Sermons as much as any whatsoever (in which
kind, as in all others his talent is most extraordinary) yet he far
disclaimeth, that ever he believed that you could produce any true authorities
either in general from the fathers, or in particular from Gregory, whom you
make the Author, pillar and maintainer of your Doctrine. The observation of
Ludovicus Rabus is fit to be remembered by you: In his 1. volume of Collection
out of Austin, Lud. Rab. in 1. tom.
to reco^cile (by the meditation of that reverend father) diverse places of
Scriptures. There be, says he, two sorts of men which much wrong antiquity,
Quorum alterum iniquum nimis and plane distortum, omnia a veteribus, and pia
antiquitate prodita magno supercilio fastidit atque contemnit. D. Kings 40.
Lecture upon Jonas.
And these are most learnedly confuted by the 40. Lecture of Doctor King upon
Jonas. Being worthy to be hissed at, and contemned, for contemning those
blessed ornaments of learning and pillars of religion in their time, who spoke,
and wrote, and lived, and died in defense of Christ's truth. Ambrose worthily
styled orbis terrarum oculus, Augustine haereticorum malleus, great Athanasius,
eloquent Cyprian, golden mouthed Chrysostom, and the rest. Their names be
memorable, and their monuments of indefategable pains, be honorable
throughout all generations, and let it for ever be a brand of the greatest
ignorance, to contemn their learning and writing. Lud. Rab. ibid
Alterum vero nimis cautum and circumspectu^ absque iuditio aut discrimine
vllo, omnia veterum dicta and scripta tanquam Praetoria amplectitur and
mordicus defe^sa cupit, such as suck only the gall of their ink, and study
only the blotts of their papers, and if there be any (...) imposed and
impostured into the Fathers writings, these they study to maintain. That if
Tertullian savor of Montanisme, or Cyprian of Rebaptisme or Origin of
Millieranisme; if Nazianzen seem to be an Angelist, or Hierome a Monagamist,
this they swallow without distinction or discreatio^, never looking into the
Interpretations or Retractations of those opinions. And this they will as
resolutely teach as Canon of Scripture, whereas the most worthy Father that
ever lived since Christ time, S. Austin, in his 2 Tome Epist. 19. Aust. 2. Tom.
Ep. 19. Ep. 40. ad Vinc. Ep. 111. ad Fortun.
ad Hieronymum, in his 48 Epistle ad Vincentium, in his 111 Epistle ad
Fortunatianum, does absolutely conclude, Neque enim quorumlibet disputationes,
quam vis catholicorum and laudatorum hominum, velut Scriptur as Canonicas
habere debemus, vt nobis no^ liceat, salva honorificentia, quae illis debetur
hominibus, aliquid in eorum scriptis improbare, atque respuere, si forte
invenerimus, quoad aliter senserint quam veritas habet, divino adiutorio vel ab
alijs intellecta, vel a nobis. Talis ego sum in scriptis alioru^, tales volo
esse intellectores meorum. This caveat may serve you, especially who rely more
upon reading, then upon understanding. Your clause of accusation is false,
wherein you impute to that famous Doctor and others, the accepting and
rejecting of the Fathers at their pleasure. It is the common practice of your
own, as I have already showed.

Mr LEECH.

Now, whereas I added farther, that the best learned in Oxford concurred with
me in this point; yea (said he) there are many of you, that will play with
Popery, as the fly does with the candle: you hoouer, over and about it, as
near as you dare, but you will be sure to keep your wings from sindging.

ANSWER.

You that father opinions upon the ancient Fathers, may as easily traduce
modern Doctors. Did ever any concur with you in public declaration of this
doctrine. I speak it again, and am assured of it, that you traduce some that
favored your person, rather then your doctrine, and did much distaste, that you
should any way deal with controversy. Who interceeded for you? who offered to
defend it? to dispute it? The speech of Mr Vicechancelour, concerning those
that play with Popery etc. I believe was only and particularly appropriated to
your self, though you desire to draw others into your reputation and livery.
If any do confectionat their religion, and double in the true worship of God,
I fear to judge them, and as much fear to follow them.

Mr LEECH.

Though I made a friendly defense of those men (at who^ he maliciously girded)
as being me^ of incomparable worth in that place, yet I disclaimed all
assistance from them, or any others, protesting, that I depended not upon men,
nor Angels; but only upon the sacred Scripture, interpreted by the ancient
Church. Which rule of faith as it is most certain, so my application thereof,
in this particular, is free from all exception.

ANSWER.

Your friendly defense, it does offer offense, in continuing the derivation of
your own folly upon any of incomparable worth. Incomparable worth, is a title
to be bestowed only, upon men of Incomparable pains and studies, and so are
our Public Governors, and most learned Readers in divinity. Of these (as many
as had occasion to discourse upon your doctrine) have all gainsaid it, and in
solemn Lectures and Disputations in our public divinity School it has been
often fanned, and confuted. You say you depend not upon Angels, so think I
also: for though the Angels be not ambitious, yet I am sure they would think
it some injury (if not to the^, yet) to the truth, that man should be equal to
them in perfection, and Angelical integrity, as you affirm. From Scriptures
interpreted by the Church you received it not; the Church did never grant it,
the Scriptures do no where ground it. What the rule of faith is, you have
already been taught.

Mr LEECH.

Well (quoth he) whether I shall be able to prove this doctrine, false, or
not, I cannot tell but, as I think I shall. Howsoever; certain I am, that I
shall be able to condemn you of great indiscretio^, for preaching such
doctrine in these revolting times, when there is such general Apostasy from
the gospel unto Popery.

ANSWER.

Qui semel verecundiae limits transilijt, gnaviter fit impude^s. Whether this
your speech deserve not the blackest Character of falsehood or no, I will not
say I cannot tell, but I am bound by all the assurances of truth, to believe,
that your report in this, will be an article against you in judgment. O^
impudens! Was there diffide^ce, or distrust, or the least touch of doubt in
him? was not his resolution so firm, and his protestation so faithful, that
he told you with much zeal and earnestness, he knew, and would prove your
doctrine to be false and shameful, and your self ignorant and most
unskillful in point of Controversy. Of revolting in these later times, he had
reason to speak when the misery of this age is such, that an asses head is
sold at a shekle, and our Philistine adversaries will offer any preferment to
him that will turn their Proselite, and yet when they receive them, admit them
into no order but of Mendicants, as the late proof of some, and present
experience of your self show. ^. Pet. 2.1.
Apostasy was foretold, as by others, so prophetically by Peter, that there
shall be false teachers, which shall privily bring in damnable heresies. And who
can ponderat this? but with much sense and sorrow he will lament that any
son of this Country, nay any son (in the outward appearance) of the church
should exenterat his natural, nay his spiritual mother, and do this in a
sinister conceit either for some particular discontent, or for want of
preferment, ever for want of judgment? Lamentable is such Apostasy to
Antichristian Popery.

Mr LEECH.

At which simple suggestion I could not but smile within my self; first to
consider, that whereas he had absolutely charged this doctrine to be erroneous,
yet now he could not tell whether it were true, or false. Secondly, to observe,
that the preaching of truth, contained in the gospel, should be a means to
draw men from the gospel unto Popery; as he was pleased to speak.

ANSWER.

Simple suggestion. If the Cumane beast could speak, more modesty and duty
would be uttered. You smile like the Picture, that having two faces, has his
emblem over it, Nos tres, and so you by an enterchangeable view looking on
them two, you smile as ill favored as they, and so make three. The first cause
of your unseemly smile is, that which will cause gnashing of teeth, unless you
repent. He whose wisdom and knowledge joined together faithfully and strongly
to charge you with the error of your doctrine, did he now doubt whether it
were erroneous? It is a mint of forgeries and falshoode, and unworthy the
invention of any that is called Christian. Your second smiling consideration
was as fond as the other was false, did you preach the truth out of the
Gospel? Bern. sup. Cant. ser. 65.
Evangelium apellasti, ad Eva^gelium ibis: Have thou appealed to the Gospel
(says Bernard) unto the Gospel thou shall go. The Law is said to be the
killing letter, but the Gospel will be the killing letter at the arraignement
of this supposititious erroneous position.

Mr LEECH.

But perceiving him to be enkindled with the flames of passion, I forboare to
add fuel unto the fire; and therefore I pretermitted the me^tioning of his
folies at that time. Only I made this brief answer: that if some truth be
not to be preached at all times, yet the Contrary unto truth was to be preached
at no time: and if it be lawful for any man to impugn it, is it not lawful
for me to defend it, and especially, when it concerns my self in particular?
For so it did in this case: the eye of the whole University being cast upon me
in this behalf.

ANSWER.

Rather say, But trembling and fearing to stay, much less to speak: that
there is so black liuor in your paper, seeing you had so white a liver at your
speech, I admire not much, Iam. 3.
seeing your fictio^s be great, though your Poetry none at all. You say you
forbear to add fuel unto the fire. S. James says the tongue is a fire, but
I find that your pen is a fire, and yet but ignis fatuus: I wonder that these
poysonfull and filthy calumnies, fabricated in the forge of a froathy brain,
eat not through your paper. Lubert. Replic. l. 1. c. 1.
If you continue this railing, reviling, slaundring, you will so envenom your
book, that none will buy it: as Gretzer (the devils agent in slaundring
villainy, and railing scurrility) was used in Frisia, where only one of his
books were to be sold: which none would buy, because that foul mouthed
Cerberus does so besmeare all men's reputations he deals with. The conceited
malice in you, whetted with a custom of slander, and edged with a contagion
of error, has made your tongue so keen, your style so sharp, and your truth
so short, that you wou^d whom you can. What follies can the bottomless pit of
your open sepulcher, me^tio^ against this Paragon of men? In whose defense men
and Angels stand against all clamorous railers. When you say, Only I made this
brief answer etc. that only, is ONLY more, you neither did, nor could reply
so. You never had that advantage given you, as the acknowledgeme^t of one
spark of truth in that doctrine, nor ever was there doubt made but truth is
allowed to be preached, and that you say the eye of the University was upon
you, it was only the eye of judgment and condemnation, not the eye of respect
or expectation: few lent you their eyes, fewer their ears, none their belief.

Mr LEECH.

Thus I took my leave of M. Vicechancellour, he being full of passion and I
of resolution for this matter: against which he declamed with many words, and
without any reason; consorting herein with those furious Donatists, of whom S.
Augustine pronounces truly: Contra lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 51.
Quid hoc aliud est, quam nescire quid dicere, and tamen non posse nisi
maledicere?

ANSWER.

He was full of resolution, you full of discontented turbulent passion, you
were glad to be gone, being so beaten with the power of truth: for the words
that stroke you, were full of reason, faith, and religion, as your conscience
knows, notwithstanding your profusd dissembling, and professed railing. S.
Austins speech to the Donatists retorteth it self upon you so full of
contradiction and malediction: Aust.
and with it I return another speech of S. Austin, Non est intuendu^ quam
amarum, sed quam falsum. I stand not so much upon your acerbity, as to show to
the world how you falsify.

Mr LEECH. CHAP. 3.
THis Magistrate intending a preposterous course against me, and yet pretending
a formality of justice, convented me before him in iuridicall manner, upon the
vigill of S. Peter, a practitioner of my doctrine. Lord (said he) what shall we
have, that have forsaken all, and followed thee?

ANSWER.

THis faithful deputy of his maker and Master, intended no preposterous course
against you. His breast like the heart of a good Magistrate, is the Ocean
whereinto all the cares of our Academicall causes empty themselves, which he
ever sends forth again in a wise conveyance by the streams of justice; he
has in all the time of his government, been the Play Master of good deserts and
Patron of Peace; it was not formality of justice he pretended, but the
satisfaction of the whole University, who importuned that you might be
convented and censured. What vainglorious humor rises up in that froth of
ostentation, to cause you call S. Peter a practitioner of your doctrine? He was
married, therefore practiced no Counsel of Virginity; he continued his
fishing, therefore undertook no wilful Poverty; he carried his sword and stroke
Malchus, and therefore professed no Monastical obedience: you deal with S.
Peter, as the Printers in Rome do with Christ, for they in their Printed
Tables of the Popes, first place Christ then Peter, etc. as if Christ had been
Pope. But as Christ is contrary to the Pope Antichrist: so S. Peter is most
opposite to this your doctrine, and gives command to put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men. 1. Pet. 2.15.


Mr LEECH.

Appearing now upon my summons, Other Doctors (of better worth) who heard my
sermons were not called unto my trial; whereas two only of these six Judges
were my Auditors.
I found M. Vice Chancellor assisted with 5. compeeres; D. Airay, D.
Aglionbee, D. Hutton, D. Harding, D. Benefield; a selected company for his own
humor. Who as they were generally to be excepted against by me, as incompetent
Judges: so in special D. Hutton for his inveterate malice conceived against me
long since upon a base, and unworthy respect. D. Benefield, as he was my
principal opposite, so he, with the rest, being a doctrinall Calvinist could
never afford me an equal trial in this issue, Quid mihi dabis etc.
depending upon the Fathers; which he, and they, do really disclaim.

ANSWER.

These five Assistants are known to be of much worth and sufficiency. Just
censures they deserve not, as living without the compass of an adversary;
unjust they contemn. Although you load al of them ple^tifully, you should
express some reason why these were inco^petent Judges in general, seeing these
were as eminent for learning, honest for life, and have been often chosen
Delegates by our whole University in our Convocation for the greatest affairs
that concern our Academicall state. Or what inveterate hate Doctor Hutton had
against you in particular. He was a special means to obtain your place, a
continual shelter for you against all storms while you were in the house:
when he might have imprisoned you, he forbear: Is this the inveterat malice?
He may say as our Savior said, for which of these good deeds do you
persecute me? For any aspersion of base bribery in your Marginal Quid mihi
dabis, he disclaimeth the thought, and abhors the fact: his free, and good
disposition, course of life, ability, and integrity be his compurgators, and
his protestation shall more prevail with all honest me^, then al your oaths.
Your exception against Doctor Benefield is as insufficient as the former
Malignant. Though he were, as you in scorn entitle him, a Calvinist; yet he
does not disclaim the Fathers, as in his practice, we all can testify having
red more in the^, then your head and your back can carry: and what his
estimation of the fathers is, in his Appendix he does manifest, and for Mr
Calvin his works show that he did read and use the fathers, and not only
approved the^, but even the citing of heathen authors as may be seen, Call.
Com. in 1. Cor. 15.33.
in his Comment upon the Corinth. 1. Cor. 15.33. though he be maliciously
traduced to the contrary.

Mr LEECH.

These petty Judges being thus assembled; M. Vicechancellour inveighed against
me with a bitter, and passionat speech, co^taining in it these capital
accusations. First; that I had lately preached scandalous, and erroneous
Doctrine. Secondly; that I was vehemently suspected of Popery, and that, by this
doctrine, I had now justified the suspicion. Thirdly; that I had brought an
infamy upon the University, and in special upon him, and his house. Wherefore
I must expect a censure according to my demerit.

ANSWER.

It is scornful and shameful in you so to term me^, of as Beaw-desert as
our Church or kingdom has any. The Vicechancelour, in this your blast of
words, is often falsely taxed for being passionate, whose passions are as so
many good servants, which stand in a diligent attendance ready only to be
commanded by reason, and religion, in no other sort is he passionate. The
accusation consisting of those three articles, was most true: your doctrine was
sca^dalous, it offered much offense, being generally distasted; and was
erroneous, being detected to be the floodgate of Traitors staiers, loosing in
some supposititious doctrines, and many blasphemous arrogating much to man,
derogating much from God. Secondly, it was suspected (by many of our most
religious and observant Doctors and Students) that you were much tainted with
Popish corruption, and it now grew manifest; by the breaking forth of the
Impostume in your last sermon. Thirdly, that you drew public infamy upon
Oxford, where Popery in former ages of blindness, had been discovered, that
now in the sple^dor of the Gospel here Popery should be, by any maintained.
And you derived from the general invndatio^, a stream of aspersion upon your
Collegiate Governor, and his house; the worthy Deane and all his Society, who
all profess thus, I and my house will serve the Lord: upon these your errors,
you were to expect the ensuing Censure.

Mr LEECH.

To the first I answered, that as upon sufficient descovery of the pretended
error, I would recant it (since I sought nothing but the advancement of truth)
so I should consequently acknowledge that I have given the scandal if I have
preached the error. But my conscience tells me that I have offended neither
in matter, nor manner; substance, nor circumstance.

To the second; that men might suspect what they pleased, and that it lay not
in me to hinder every suspicion. As for the imputation of Popery in this point,
it cleaves unto the Scripture, and all Antiquity from which (jointly) I
assumed this Popish doctrine.

To the third; that as he, and his house could receive no infamy by such a
truth, so much less the University; forasmuch as the best in judgment there,
(if not the most in number also) concurred with me in this point.

ANSWER.

I answer these three Paragraphs together, thus. First, the discovery was made
of the falsenesse and faultiness of the doctrine, by D. Huttons inhibition,
and by D. Benefields Lecture: and therefore your conscience might have been
informed that you offended in MATTER, by condemning the law for being imperfit,
and therefore requiring Counsels, in mad insolence durst you control? where
you should wonder. In MANNER you offended, daring to say over the same lesson,
which was by authority forbidden you. Thus you were guilty both in substance
and circumstance. Secondly, you ought to abstain, as the Apostle speaks,
from all show of evil, as well in opinion as in action, and therefore not to
give so just occasion of suspicion, or more; of detection of Popery in you.
This point of Popery, like a high house built upon small pillars, though you
say it had countenance from Scripture and Antiquity: yet it is most plain,
that both these authorities do disclaim utterly any maintenance of the point
in controversy. Thirdly, that the best, or most, concurred with you is most
untrue. Saint Austin in one of his Epistles, mentions his conference with
one, that sought to overcome him, Aust. ep. 174.
non veritate, sed clamore. And such a one you seem to be, bragging of
Scriptures, and Antiquity, of the most and best to concur with you: whereas
no one ever showed himself, in teaching or defending any such point. So that
this bladder full of wind, and skin full of words shows you to be your own
Broker, having no Author, no Protector.

Mr LEECH.

Here D. Aglionbee suddenly interrupted me; demanding, who they were; and,
making me the trumpetter only of other men's opinions, he said, that I was set
on by some, who, though they affected this, and other such like points of
Popery, yet they dare not broach them themselves, but whosoever they are, they
shall be met withal either in schools, or pulpit.

ANSWER.

His interrogation was no interruption: he might well think you were set on by
some, but sure his charity exempted his thought, from any of our University. I
dare be so bold to interpret his meaning, that he affirmed that some
Papisticall alients to our Congregation incited you: noe Domestical commorants
in the University did instruct you. Which interpretation I have the more reason
to believe, because he professed they should be met with, either in Schools,
or Pulpit; for with whom do our Sermons and Disputations contend, but with
foreign persons and Positions, with Rome, and Antichrist, and Heresy? But
this is the most grating ingratitude that ca^ be, whom you dare not openly
backbite, or wound with a direct censure, those Pyonerlike, you would privately
blow up, as smoke smatcht in opinion, and reputation.

Mr LEECH.

This is the Miles gloriosus, who challenges his betters for Popery; At Merton
Coll. before a great assembly.
but they are able, and will confidently appeach him, not only of Iovinian
heresy (which he defended expressly against S. Hierome) but of sundry other
blasphemies, and heresies, which he preached publicly in S. Mary's Church: the
particulars whereof I have seen in writing.

ANSWER.

He is indeed Miles gloriosus, not in the Comicall sense, but in the
Evangelicall: he is one of those glorious and triumphant Martialists in the 19
of the Revelation, that attend the Lamb, to the conquest of the beast. He is
dead; o dead I say: Quam parva tellus nomen ingens occulit! Prosper de August.
And this testimony I dare send after him; Acer erat ingenio, suavis eloquio,
in secularibus literis peritus, in Ecclesiasticis laboribus studiosus, in
quotidianis laboribus clarus, in omni sua action compositus, in quaestionibus
solvendis acutus, in convincendis haereticis circumspectus, in expositione
fidei nostrae Catholicus, in explanandis Scripturis Canonicis cautus: such an
Austin for the pulpit, such a Aquinas for the Schools; that it deserves an
Chrysostom to emblason this Babilas, or an Austin to praise this Cyprian. But
to the purpose: what Iovinian heresy defended he? S. Austin ad quod vult Deum
in his tract de haeresibus the 82. heresy, mentions the positions of
Iovinian, omnia peccata (sicut Stoici) dicebat esse paria, nec posse peccare
hominem, Lavacro regenerationis accepto, etc. and after recites his opinion,
in equalling the state of marriage with virginity. I know that any man that
ever read S. Austin will acknowledge, that in his works he shall find the
same position defended, and therefore writers on both parts have granted that
matrimony may be equallized with virginity. I could urge many of your own: the
Confession of Wittenberge in express words does deliver, Lindan. Panopl. lib.
4.
No^ est sentiendu^ quod hoc genus vitae (speaking of virginity) per se sit
coram tribunali Dei, excellentius, aut sanctius quam coniugium: Episc. Espenc
Iesuita in 1. Tim. 3.
and Bishop Espencaeus, a Jesuit (as before I have urged) teaches in his
Comentary on Timothy, that marriage may so be undertaken that it may no way
hinder a perfect life? And if this were heresy in that famous Schooleman, and
blessed Christian D. Aglionbe: what was it in Erasmus, Eras. Arg. in lib. 1.
advers. Iovin. Rhen. Argum in Tertul. de extract castitat. Salmer. tom. 4. in.
1. Cor. 7. Disput. 14. ad dubium. Villavin. de stud. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 5.
obser. 2. Espenc. de continentia. lib. 3. cap. 11. Acosta. libro 2. de Christo
Revelato. cap 20.
in Rhenanus, in Salmeron, in Villavincentius, in Espencaeus, in Acosta, in
many others of your own, who all taxed S. Jerome for over much contempt of
marriage and excessive praise of virginity? What heresies did D. Aglionbe
preach, what particulars have you in writing? Could ill will have dispersed any
more spightfull narration? How unhappy it is to be only witty, in devising
suggestions? First you accuse him for table talk, which if any place should
challenge immunity for freedom of speech it might. Each such solemn meeting
at our University meals should be like to Augustus table, fraught as well with
disputations as dishes: and cannot that liberty be enioied, but you must gather
up the Crummes of contradiction and calu^ny, and not only this, but tax him
with sundry other blasphemies and heresies, whose knowledge and life contained
such sufficiency and sanctity as was honored of all.

Mr LEECH.

These things I could have then objected unto him. But being not willing now
to exasperate him, or any other there present, I returned him my answer in
this manner. Sir; it may suffice you now to understand, that there are such
men in this University, that will constantly defend this doctrine: who they
are, I leave it unto your inquiry; you may find them out by getting a general
subscription here unto your opinion, or by some other means. Only, to give
you farther assurance of there resolution in this point, it pleased some of
them freely (without my desire or knowledge) to draw a letter, wherein they
recommended me, and my cause unto the Archbishop of Canterbury; informing his
Grace that the doctrine was most clear on my side, and that they would stand
in public justification thereof.

ANSWER.

This Paragraph wrappeth in it, a narration; which being begot by error, has
never yet been carried into the world by rumor: and no marvel: for even the
worst of men and most subject to credulity, will never believe that any in this
University did, or can defend this doctrine, either by open profession or
private subscription. You are your own Secretary and of your counsel, but few
others (if any) did agree with you. To hold that there is a verbal
distinction of Precepts and Counsels, I know that some deny not and some whose
abundance of learning and worth I honor: but that any among us, do maintain
the opinion, as you preached it, by Counsels to induce men to Monkery, to accuse
the law of insufficiency, to invest man in Angelical integrity, etc. I never
will believe it, as knowing that this untrue suggestion has disiointed the
affection of those that did most pity you, and that you will deeply answer
this, unless you stain your cheeks with the blushes of recantatio^, and
send over the form of your penance without the secret glosses of double and
reserved senses. Did some in over much charity petitionat for your pardon, from
the heavy burden of censure: and do you traduce their innocence, so far as to
accuse the^ for connivency, nay for authorizing your doctrine? You shall pardon
me for crediting this any more, the^ that of Doctor Kilby, of whom in your
first book and 8. chapter you report, that he contested with Doctor Hutton,
for the truth of the Doctrine, and that you might answer it with credit: whose
reverend protestation against that speech, and against your opinion, and
against this subscription, into which you entitled him, is forcible and
suasible, and availeable with any honest heart to measure this speech by that,
and to assure all that here you traduce others, as there him.

Mr LEECH.

But I pray you, Sir to be advertised by me; that I never made use of their
letters: one reason whereof meets with your objection. For as I assumed this
doctrine from the holy Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, so I determined to
maintain it upon these grounds, without any assistance: and much less was I
set on by any of them.

ANSWER.

This is a firm confirmation of my former opinion. Would not you have used
those letters, and produced the^, if you had any such? You, that ransackt all the inventories, and catalogues you could, to muster up testimonies: and your
modesty so to modifie your cause, as not to urge vivum testimonium, the living
witnesses of your assertion? Absit, far be it, but that al here should hate
falshoode more then death, and be so faithful Clients of truth, as not to
yield an ear, much less a hand or heart to any startling opposer. Object as
often as you will, that you used not these letters because you relied on
Scriptures and Fathers: yet if you had had but the least manual or oral
assistance, you would have produced it, and traduced the Authors whosoever.

Mr LEECH.

And that you may know upon what authority I first began, and do now proceed;
here are the Doctors (24. in number 12. Greek 12. Latin) who set me on; here
are their testimonies; produce their books; convince me if you can.

ANSWER.

And that you may know that there be ashes scattered to descry your footing:
it is manifest that as in your sermon you gleaned from Bellarmine very much, so
in your proofs you have borrowed from Coecius much more; the Quotations that
you cite, in the same order found in him, as in you. But as Bellarmine in the
point of Purgatory, professing to prove it by 10. places in the old Testament,
and 9. in the New to make for it, is afterward constrained to confess that
there is no direct place in Scripture. For being in the last Chap. 1. book of
Purgatory, urged by the argument of Peter Martyr and others, that Purgatory is
found in no place of Scripture therefore no matter of faith answers Non est
necesse vt Scriptura vbique omnia dicat. Bellar. c. vlt. lib. 1. de Purg.
And again, Talia enim ad Apostolicam traditionem sunt referenda. So some of
your Fathers have not so much as the word Counsel, others that use it, do
either in the same words or in other places, as I have showed, distinguish the
general from the special precept by the name of Counsel, that whereas some
Challendge their Jury, your Jury does challendge you, of rash indiscretion and
false information.

Mr LEECH.

Whereat his courage began to abate; and first he excepted against me for
producing the Greek, in whose language (said he) you have but slender skill.

ANSWER.

His purposes be so deliberate, and resolution so firm that your paper gun
could not abate his courage, as you falsely inform, your leane-heart-fretting
envy, fatting it self with contumelious scorns. You were questioned with
twice whether you understood the Greek, first your answer was affirmative:
being pressed again, you confess, you understood it only by the translation, It
was replied by the Vicechancelour, that if the translation erred then you did
partake in that error, instance given in (...), so much mistaken in the vulgar:
to this you did, nor could answer a word. You were not able to understand the
Greek fathers, and in retaliation none of the Greek fathers will afford you
one word of Counsel.

Mr LEECH.

To which malicious, and impertinent exception, I answered first; that it was
sufficient for me to rely upon the translations approved commonly in the
Church. Secondly that I had so much skill in Greek, as to compare the
translation with the original, and that none there was so exact, as to
understand some Greek fathers (and namely S. Gregory Nazianzen) in their
native idiome. Thirdly; that if I had no Greek Author on my side; yet here is
a sufficient Jury of Latin Fathers; whose language I understand, and whose
conspiring tenent, I hope, you dare not renounce.

ANSWER.

A Scandalous and vnreuerent Phrase. Was it malicious and impertinent, to ask
whether you understood the Greek, when you dosend up the greek fathers as if
they had been pickled herrings, and yet understood them only by the use of an
interpreter. That you answer, (first it was sufficient for you to rely upon
translations, I say in point of controversy it is not so: S. Hierome did
practice and did Counsel the contrary, Hier. Epist. ad Suniam and Fret. tom.
3. Aug. de Doc. Christ. lib. 2. c. 11. Theol. Lov. Praef. lib. var. lect in
lat. Bib. edit. vulg.
and S. Austin gives the same rule in his book de Doctrina Christiana. The
Divines of Lovaine approve the same, and Villavincentius does prescribe it, as
most necessary. In differences or doubts, or controversies to repair to the
Hebrew for the old Testament, and to the Greek for the new. Secondly, in that
you affirm that you have so much knowledge in Greek, as to compare the
Translation with the original, and that none there were so exact as to
understand some greek father etc. both parts be faulty. He that is able to
compare the translation, must carry in his head a Lexicon: you have the room,
but you lack this furniture. It is the labor of a well read, and thoroughly
grounded Grecian. And that any father should be so hard to be interpreted,
that it were difficulty to find out in this choice company, one able to
translate him: it is a calumny to the ancient Fathers, and to these reverend
Doctors; the former writing elegantly, these able to translate the^ faithfully.
Your third, has cut, off the third part, but half your army of Fathers: you
are driven out of Greece, and as the Greek Fathers knew you not, so the Latin
Fathers (as is plentifully proved) assist you not.

Mr LEECH.

Doctor Aglionbee being thus pressed by me and having nothing to answer in
his defense; D. King interposed himself; obiecting that D. Hutton had
inhibited me: that D. Benefield (whose books I was not worthy to carry) had
publicly confuted my doctrine etc. with such like frivolous allegations.

ANSWER.

Here to help your memory, which wandreth as much as your judgment, you
forget that upon your brag, that all the Latin Church held with you: D.
Aglionbee asked you what was the Church, and you receiving a blow, where you
had no ward, were driven so far out of the way, as to affirm, the last
resolution of the Church, to be, not in primam veritatem, but in the judgment
of men: the absurdity of which position I have dealt with in your Epistle. The
Vicechancellour seeing such presumptuous insolence joined with ignorance,
hereupon remembered you, how the inhibition by authority, and the confutation of
that controversy, might have staid your proceedings, and added the due worth
of the Doctor who had determined that point in his solemn Lecture.

Mr LEECH.

As for D. Hutton his inhibition I answered as before; adding farther that I
respected not his judgment in this matter. For I knew (indeed) that as his
understanding is not very deep, so his affection is not very good; who, in a
certain book (or rather statizing pamphlet) concerning the cross in
baptism; defends this laudable Christian ceremony by tradition of the
Church, as it is witnessed by the holy Fathers: and yet now in a point of
greater importance, expressed in Scripture, taught by Fathers, practiced by the
Saints, defined by the whole Church, he blushed not to accuse me, nay S.
Gregory himself of Popery in this doctrine. But singular is my comfort to
consider, by what Judge, I am thus used, in what cause, and with what Patron;
from whom our Nation first received her first faith, and for whose faith I must
now forsake my nation.

ANSWER.

You leave the answer of your neglect of D. Huttons government, and traduce
his judgment. Inhibition is matter of authority, not of learning: why
disobeyed you that command, you answer (but not to the purpose) you respected
not his judgment. Let not malice be judge, but consider how base, infamous,
and malicious your reproaches be: his sou^dnes of judgment, is approved
sufficiently by the consent of our whole University. And that book which so
scornfully you reproach, is esteemed deservingly, and is of reverend respect
with the best Bishops of our Church. Where the Fathers agreeing to Scripture,
are truly urged, and understandingly interpreted, both D. Hutton and all of our
part, with all willingness, receive their assertions. But, when Fathers are
misvrged, arrested, and impostured by Coccius, or Bellarmin and you receive
them at second hand, not from the fountain but from the ditches: we return
your party-colored, blended sentences, as unworthy of approbation, because
they be used as the Tyrant entertained his guest, if to long for his bed to
chop of; if to short, to rack them out: The doctrine which you call a point of
great importance expressed in Scripture, taught by Fathers, practiced by the
Saints, and defined by the whole Church, is not so founded, as you presume to
teach, Scriptures no where express it, Fathers teach it not, the Saints of God
have not practiced it, the Church of Christ has not defined it. Therefore he
only accused you of Popery, but not Gregory. For as formerly has been said,
D. Hutton, and all any way seen in Gregory's Moralls, may perceive how you
foist into the Text, the words [Evangelicall Counsells] Your comfort, will
prove your corrasiue; your Judge in this was God, others were but his deputies;
the cause was religion, nay the very marrow and pith of Religion, and the
opposition of many absurd heretical positions. Your Patron, was not Gregory,
he neither taught you this, nor from him our Church received their first
faith. Neither for defending this were you constrained to leave the Land; you
forsook your Religion, rather then your Nation. Vegetius tells that in the
Roman Armies, Vegetius.
Non fugere, was a special precept. The way for you to Triumph, had been to
recant, and to remain in your station, not to fly. Bosquiers speech is true,
Bonsq. cont. 7
the Devil is overcome by resisting; but the flesh and the world, by running
away: but you fled because you would run into the world.

Mr LEECH.

As for D. Benefield with his lecture, and his books, I passed them over:
considering that M. Vicechancellour made excursions from the point, loading me
only with contumely and disgrace.

ANSWER.

You passed him over, because he does so far overpasse you, but he is in your
bosom, his Lecture lies heavy on your heart, it is such a pang, that you will
not easily remove. The Vicechancellour loading you (as you call it) with
disgrace, knew you had a back provided for a burden. If his speech seem
harsh to you, you turned his tongue, being turned your self. Otherwise, his
tongue is the hearauld of encouragement and comfort, himself the refuge of
innocence, a Tutor to his College and a father to the Clergy, in his
Accademicall government.

Mr LEECH.

Wherefore, not suffering him to divert me from the maine issue, Haeretici est
praecepta Patrum declinare; says worthy Flavian in his first epist. to LEO the
great.
I desired him to deal punctually, that is to say, first to admit a trial by
the Fathers, or to deny it: if he denied it, he should be thereby sufficiently
convinced. Secondly; if he admitted this trial, then either to disprove my
authorities, or to approve my doctrine.

ANSWER.

To deal punctually, is so proper unto all his discourses, that all his
Auditors will acknowledge this a special felicity, in the power of his speech.
Your demands were preposterous: in your Epistle, you commit your self to the
censure of the Church, now to the trial of the Fathers: no appeal at all to
the Scriptures, without which, whatsoever is taught, is like Israells building
in Egypt, without stuff, no warrant for the matter they build with.

Mr LEECH.

But he not daring to make a brief, and punctual answer to my reasonable
demands, fell extravagantly into a mention of the reformed Churches; summoning
me before their tribunal, for the censuring of this doctrine.

ANSWER.

Not daring? Why continues this Bracchadochian humor? it has long been in
the consumption, it will at length spend it self. What dares not he, that
undertakes without rashness, and performs without fear? did ever your
experience find him to be a read shaken with the wind, or to want the sinews
of courage and resolution? No you know he is ballaced with wisdom, and
worth, able to undertake the most resolute and vndauntedest of the contrary
side in the world. Neither in this was there the least note of extravancie, as
your exorbitancie of accusation does impute: for by whom should a minister of
the reformed Churches be censured, but by the power and judgment of the
reformed Churches?

Mr LEECH.

Which course of proceeding, I utterly disclaimed, as unequal; because the
later Church is not to judge the former, but contrarily the former is to judge
the later.

ANSWER.

Who ever, that was a supposed member in our Ecclesiastical state, durst
disclaim the judgment, censure, authority of our Church? But your reasonlesse
reason is, the later Church is not to judge the former. If by the former
Church, you mean the ancient Catholic Church for the first 500. years, we
maintain our reformed Church to be the same: but if by the former church you
mean the now Roman Catholic faith, as Bristow and the Rhemists deliver,
Bristow. mot. 12. in marg. Rhem in Annot. in Romans 1 8.
that the Roman and Catholic Church be all one; then we reject and abhor
that Synagogue of Satan, wherein Ziim and Iim, the Ostrich and Vulture and
Schritchowle do remain. And by many more degrees then Papists prefer the
Pope before the Emperor, we prefer the Reformed Churches, which do
mainetaine the ancient, Catholic, Apostolic faith, reformed from errors,
superstitions, and heresies, stealing in by the degrees of time, and occasion,
into the window of the Church.

Mr LEECH.

And what did I herein (good Reader) but observe the prescription of Antiquity
in this behalf, Contr. Julian Pelag. lib. 2.
and namely that of S. Augustine against the Pelagian heretics; Patres oportet
vt populi Christiani vestris novitatibus anteponant, eisque potius eligant
adhaerere, quam vobis?

ANSWER.

Nay what did you, but as Pelagian himself did, magnify the nature of man,
and so strengthen the arm of flesh, as if you would incite it, to rebel
against heaven: and what did you otherwise then as heretics of all ages, who
have stood so much upon authorities out of some authors falsely collected,
that they will not be drawn, no not by Scriptures, to the acknoweledgeme^t of
their errors? Such S. Austin observed the Donatists to be. Aug. contra Donatist.
Quis autem nesciat sanctam Scripturam Canonicam tam veteris qua^ novi
Testame^ti, etc. where in a large discourse, he manifests that the Canon of
Scripture, is only so sure, that there ought to be no doubt or disputation
thereof: but for Fathers and Ancient Bishops, much might be reprehended
therein. The cause that S. Austin (in confuting the Pelagians) did appoint the
reading of the fathers to the people, was this, because the fathers formerly
had delivered by strength of scripture, the contrary doctrine to that heresy.
And yet that holy father, speaking of himself and all the ancients before him:
Neque enim debeo negare (says he ad Vincentiu^) sicut in ipsis maioribus, Aug.
ad Vincentium. Victorem.
ita multa esse in tam multis opusculis meis quae possunt iusto iudicio
culpari, that in him, nor in any other this is a prescription of Antiquity, to
rely only on fathers.

Mr LEECH.

Here D. Airay distasting my refusal to stand unto the verdict of the reformed
Churches, questioned with me about the rule of my faith; I answered him
briefly; Contr. haeres. cap. 1. etc. See D. Field page 239.
that I wholly followed Vincentius Lyrinensis his direction; to wit, Canonical
scripture, and Ecclesiastical tradition; the first being sensed by the second.

ANSWER.

To refuse the judgment of the ruler, and to fly to a stranger, is punishable
in Policy: to condemn, and contemn your own mother Church, and to stand to
the judgment of a strange Church, nay of a Synagogue a stranger from the
Church, is culpable in divinity. It was a seasonable question, to ask the rule
of your faith, when it was manifest you had forsaken the faith: and your answer
was unsound, ioining with Canonical Scripture, Ecclesiastical tradition;
these be two, and therefore not the rule but rules, whereas Canon and regula
must be but one, Aq. lect. 1. in 1. Tim. 6.
Aquinas on Timothy affirming, that the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles
is called Canonical, because it is the rule. Traditions we renounce as
unworthy to be joined with Scripture, Melch. Can. lib. 3. c.
because Canus in this does expressly teach that whatsoever the Church of Rome
practices and has not warrant from Scripture, the same things and the
practice of them she has received by Tradition: which Popish traditions we
abhor to supply scripture with, as knowing that the Scripture contains all
things necessary to salvation: and also affirm that the most certain rule of
interpretation, is by comparing Scripture with Scripture. Vincentius Lerinensis
is not for you: he allows nothing barely upon Tradition. For by all the
passages of his book he does plainly teach, that no Tradition is to be
received, but that which is consonant unto Scripture, such as S. Austin
delivers, Quod vniversa tenet Ecclesia, Lib. 4. contra Don. cap. 23.
such as the whole Church has, and does hold, agreeing to the Canon of the
revealed word. And from famous D. Field (that powerful hammer of all Heretics
that claim tenure in the Church) you ca^ produce nothing to help your cause,
either in that page, or in his whole book. Neither is Tradition to sense or
expound the Scripture, as you say. This is your third interpreter: first, you
appealed to the Church; then, to the Fathers; now, to Traditions; the next
appeal must be to the Pope, or else you will be cashierd.

Mr LEECH.

This rule he called Popish, exclaiming against it as the very ground of
Popery, and superstition. Whereupon I desired him (for my better instruction)
to give a rule of faith more certain, and infallible then this, which be
bra^ded with such disgraceful imputation.

ANSWER.

Popish it is, without all gainsaying. For howsoever, we reject not all
Traditions: as first, D. Field in his 4 book of the Church.
the number and names of the Authors of Canonical Scripture; secondly, the
chief heads of Christian doctrine, as delivered in the Creed of the Apostles;
Thirdly, the religion purely collected out of Scripture, delivered to
succeeding ages; fourthly, the continual practice of the Primitive Church,
though not expressly commanded, but necessarily contained in Scripture; and
lastly, Traditions of order, not of faith, such as are our Canons and
Constitutions agreeing to the ancient, and grounded on S. Paul's speech, Let
all things be done in order: I say, we reject not these, though Waldensis in
his time, complained, Waldens. tom 3. tit. 7. cap. 63.
that the necessary Traditions of the Church were so confounded, that they
could hardly be discerned from the rest. The points that we deny, be these:
first, Scripture needs not the Adjective help of Traditions, it is a most
sufficient rule, and contains all things necessary to salvation; Secondly,
we abhor the comparison of these two, and much more the preferring of
tradition before Scripture, as Hosius, Baronius, Symancha, and others profess:
some affirming, Hosius contr. Petric. c. 92. Baron. an. 33. nu. 11. Sym.
instit. tit. 24. n. 40.
that all Scripture came to us by Tradition, therefore Tradition more worth;
others, that Scripture needs help from Traditions, but Traditions need no
assistance from Scripture. And therefore, if you desire to be taught the rule
of faith, out of an humble, and a religious meaning, here you may learn it: it
was a question worth his asking, a point worthy your learning.

Mr LEECH.

Why (said he) what other ground of faith, then the pure word of God? I
demanded then; who shall interpret this word? He replied; the spirit. What
spirit good Sir? The spirit of God only which private men think they have?
Against which rule I except, for that it was the common plea of all condemned
Heretics. Wherefore I required a trial of this pretended spirit; for I
cannot admit that to be God his spirit in any private man, which consents not
with the spirit of the Catholic Church. And thus you see M.D. Airay that what
you formerly rejected out of my rule, as Popish, you must necessarily admit as
true; that is: Ecclesiastical Tradition annexed to the sacred Canon for the
discerning of private spirits. Otherways each Heretic will sense Scripture
in the mould of his own brain.

ANSWER.

That the word of God, is the ground of belief in God, sacred Scripture it
self proves in manifold and pregnant places, as in the old Testament, in the
Proverbs, Prove. 2.9.
They make a man understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity, and every
good path; Esaias. 8.19.20.
in Esaias, should not a people enquire at their God? at the law, and at the
Testimony? they that speak not according to this word, there is no light in
them; by Malachie, Mal. 4.4.
Remember the law of Moses which I commanded all Israel with the statutes and
judgments: in the new Testament, in S. Paul, 2. Tim. 3.15.
The Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation, through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus; in S. Peter, 2. Pet. 1.19.
We have a most sure word of the Prophets whereunto we must give heed, as to a
light that shines in darkness, till the day star arise in our hearts; Luc.
1.4.
in S. Luke, They contain the certainty of those things whereof we are
instructed; and in S. John, Ioh. 5.39.
These things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is that Christ,
the son of God, and in believing ye might have eternal life, and by Christ
himself sealing this point, Search the Scriptures, for in them you have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me: but to this also the
Fathers with all reverence have agreed. Basil. Ep. 80. ad Eust. Med.
Let the Scriptures be arbitrators between us, says Basil, in his 80
Epistle, and whosoever holds consonant opinions to those heavenly oracles, let
the truth be adjudged on their side. We are to enquire for judges, says
Optatus Contra Parmenianum; de coelo quaerendus est Iudex, Optat. cont. Parmen.
l. 5.
the Judge must be had from heaven: but, says he, wherefore need we to knock
at heaven, when we have a judge, and wohm we find in the Gospel? The
Scripture is the rule of faith, says Tertullian, contra Hermogenem. Tertull.
cont. Hermog. Chrysostom. in 13. Homil. in 2. Corinthians.
It is a most exquisit rule, says Chrysostom, in his 13 homily upon the
second to the Corinths. It is an inflexible rule, Greg. Nyss. Grati. de ijs qui
adeunt Hierosolyma^.
says Gregorius Nyssenus. And S. Austin, ample for this, in many places in his
book de bono viduitatis, testifies, that the Scripture pitcheth down the
rule of our faith. And not only the Ancient Fathers, but the Schoolmen have
succeeded in the same resolution. Aquinas writes expressly, Aq 1. qu. 1. art. 8.
that our faith must rest upon the Canonical books of Scripture. Durand
agrees with this, Durand. pref. in senten.
that the manner of our knowledge exceed not the measure of faith, and the holy
Scripture expresses the measure of faith. Sum part 3. tit. 18. c. 3.
Nay, Papists have acknowledged this. Antoninus confesses, that God has
spoken but once to us, and that in Scripture, so plentifully, that, he
voucheth, Gregory in the 22 book of his Moralls, thus; God needs to speak no
more concerning any necessary matter, Al. 1. sent. quaest. 1. art. 3 1. Coroll.
seeing all things are found in Scripture. Alliaco consents to this, The
verities of Scripture be the Principles of divinity, quoniam ad ipsas, says
he, fit vltima resolutio Theologici discursus. Bell de verbo Dei. lib. 1. c. 2.
In one word, Bellarmin agrees to all these Testimonies, in his first book de
verbo Dei; Sacra Scriptura est regula credendi certissima, tutissima. This may
serve to show you, that there is no other ground of faith then the word of
God; Scriptures, Fathers, Schoolmen, nay even our Adversaries being witnesses,
Deuteronomy. 32.31.
as Moses speaks. You demand, who shall interpret this word. It is replied,
the spirit of God: which spirit the elect do know certainly that they have;
not only think, as you traduce the speech of this revere^d Doctor, but they
assure the^selus that they have the spirit, and he that knows not this, ^.
Cor. 3.16.
is ignorant, as Paul teaches by an interrogatio^, Know ye not that ye are
the Temples of the holy Ghost, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? But
against this rule you except: for this was, you say, Chrysos. prolog. in Epist.
ad Rohan. 3. de Lazar.
the plea of al Heretics. It is false. Heretics and the devil did urge
Scripture: but these could never for want of Gods spirit, compare Scriptures
together. The private spirit, even every Private man, of himself (says
Chrysostom) only by reading, may understand, yea need nothing else but to read,
Chrysos. hom 13. in Gene^.
by which he means to confer one place of Scripture with another. And the
same Father gives the reason, Scriptura seipsam exponit and auditorem errare
non sinit: The scripture expounds it self, and suffers not the hearer to
be deceived. Distinct. 37. Relatum.
So speaks Chrysostom. 13. hom. in Genes. The Canon Law is most plain herein, Non
enim sensum extrinsecus alienum and extraneum, sed ex ipsis Scripturis, sensum
capere veritatis oportet: For we must not from without them, seek a foreign
and strange sense; but we must out of the Scriptures themselves, receive the
meaning of the truth. And a cloud of witnesses do testify the same. Wherefore
it is no way necessary, that we ask help of Tradition: which is, as I
formerly spoke, the city of refuge for all runnagate points in your religion.
Popish Tradition in the Church, soiourning only as the devil does, to deceive;
as a treacherous stranger, not to be acquainted with; or, as an Infidel, not
to be conversed with: and therefore D. Airay taught you the truth, when you
heretically thought you might mould the sense of scripture in the brain of the
brazen head Tradition.

Mr LEECH.

And now M. D. Airay being thus overthrown in the rule of his faith, proposed
unto me a question of capital danger; wishing M. Vicechancellor to question me
upon the point of the kings Supremacy; for surely (said he) you shall find him
unsound therein.

ANSWER.

The reverend, faithful, and laborious Doctor, must possess his soul in
patience, and receive his part of your improbable, and uncharitable
interpretations, as well as others. His understanding, enlightened with the
beams of divine truth, suffer not (as you slander) him to be overthrown in
his rule of faith: his memorable free will offerings in Sabbath exercises to
turn many to righteousness, his worthy performance of all University exercises,
his indefatigable studies, so great that a place of the most public charge
did sue to him, to draw him from his chosen retiredness, his zeal, pain,
faith, doctrine, manner of living, though he hold his mind unfeignedly below
his place: yet these testify to the world, his worth to be far above his
state. The reason that he proposed the point of supremacy to you, was this: in
the course of the proceedings, and speeches with you, he observed, that you had
forsaken the reformed congregations of the church, the scriptures, the
infallible rule of faith; and therefore, seeing your fidelity to God was so
changed, it was fit time to observe how you were affected to the Kings Majesty,
seeing the Apostle ioineth them together, Fear God, honor the King; and you
having neglected the first, the second was to be feared. The question of the
supremacy in this kind, was the only Touchstone, the Shibboleh, to try an
Ephramit: Iud. 12.6.
for in every true subject there ought not to be more love in his heart, the^
liberty in his tongue; to profess the crown, and dignity, and supremacy, of
that loadstone and gracious loadstar of hearts, the kings most royal Majesty.
This being not only an ancient Canon. and a point confessed by Bishops in this
our land, in the reign of the most ancient kings, who resisted the usurpation
of that man of blood, the Pope: but (as in the beginning of many Princes
reigns, so revived) in the inauguratio^ of our most peaceable, most wise, most
religious Solomon. Canons and Constitutio^s made 1603. Canon. 1.
When in the Convocation, held by all the Beaw-peeres of learning, the Bishops
and Clergy, it was commanded, that all Ecclesiastical persons of what degree
soever, should maintain no obedience, or subjection, to be due, to any
foreign power: but that the Kings power within his Realms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries, is the
highest power under God, to whom all men as well inhabitants, as borne within
the same, do by Gods laws owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above all
other Powers and Potentates in earth. If you give not God, what is due to God:
no marvel you gave not Caesar, what is due to Caesar. A disease in the head, is
the head of diseases: and rebellion against the head, does manifest the
infectious state of the whole body of your belief. And therefore it wisely was
questioned concerning the supremacy. It was a question, guided by a religious
intention, and grounded upon wise observation.

Mr LEECH.

But M. Vicechancellours thoughts carried him so far away at that present, that
he gave no care unto this impertinent, and bloody question: but prosecuting the
vindictiue designement (formerly concluded upon betwixt D. Aglionbee, and
himself who held a secret conference together) he resumed his old accusations
of false, erroneous, scandalous, and Popish doctrine: for delivering, and
reinforcing whereof, I deserved the severity of Justice.

ANSWER.

His vigilance was not absent. Had he been set on vengeance, as you shamefully
accuse, now had been the time to be avenged: but now you see, notwithstanding
al your reproaches and slanders of passion; the worthy Vicechancellour limited
his power, by his will; and this was a noble revenge, that he might hurt, and
did not. There was no such conference between Doctor Aglionbee and him, as you
report. But he did truly and worthily ingeminate and often repeat those
terms, of erroneous, scandalous, and Popish doctrine.

Mr LEECH.

Perceiving now their resolution to punish me without farther examination of my
cause, or respect of my just defense, I finally proposed unto them these two
demands.

First; that they would proceed against me iuridically, and by way of
Articles; so I should know precisely what was the error, and falsehood of my
Doctrine; and they should receive my answer made in form of law. For this has
ever been the custom of proceeding in this University, and in God his Church.

ANSWER.

It was time, when you held right neither in point of Scripture, of faith, of
the Church; or of the point in controversy: rejected their censure, neglected
their judgment, and able to uphold your self by no means but negatiues. And
therefore never continue this obstinate accusation, that they did not examine
your cause or respect your defense. The cause was offered by disputation to be
discussed, by Lecture it was already confuted: defense you were able to make
none, but what you brought in a schedule transcribed out of Coccius. Your first
demand was senseless. Was it not a Iuridicall proceeding? to be called
according to our University statute in that behalf: which is this, that for
scandalous preaching the Vicechancellour require the assistance of the Doctor
of the chair, whose incomparable and indefatigable pains hindering him, he
desired to be spared at that time by the present approach of the Act. D.
Holland.
Upon the absence of the Reverend Father of the chair, some other Doctors of
Divinity are to be called, and there were five more in Iuridicall manner
appointed: here you were convented and censured, by the most absolute form of
Law.

Mr LEECH.

Hereunto M. Vicechancellour replied. What? Articles? you shall have articles
time enough: mean while, I say that all (meaning my Sermon) is false;
scandalous, Popish, erroneous, etc.

ANSWER.

Articles were not promised you: you accused your self, and delivered your
Articles in your sermon; no mention, no promise, no expectation of any at this
your conventing. You prevaricat by prescriptio^ and custom. The old Monk
almost blasphemously applied, Sicut erat in principio: but I may say truly,
beginning, middle, and ending, every Page, Section, and Paragraph have matter
faulty in faith, or false in fact. And among the rest, this Article is to be
preferred against you, for speaking of Articles here, where there was no such
request obtained by you, nor expectation of any, by promise from him. It was
justified and ever will be till you recant, that your doctrine was false in
opinion, scandalous for the occasion, Popish for tradition, and erroneous for
heretical innovation.

Mr LEECH.

My Second demand thereupon was; that he, and his associats would condescend
unto this small request; to wit; I will here set down this affirmative
proposition; Sunt Evangelica Consilia; and subscribe unto it in your presence.
May it please you also to set down the negative; No^ sunt Evangelica Consilia;
and subscribe your several names thereunto; and signify therewithal, that
you have punished me for teaching the contrary assertion.

ANSWER.

Your second demand, was out of all course of reason or sense. Was it not
known to al, that you were censured for preaching such Evangelicall Counsels
of perfection, whereby a man might do more then the law required, yea more
then man need to have performed? was not your convention now, and inhibition
before, and censure at last, sufficient witness to all the world what you
delivered, why you were censured? etc. Nay was not this, yea more then this,
your request, offered you? viz. that you should, if you durst hold your position
in the divinity Chapel, in Christ church, and in form of a Respondent,
answer; the Vicechancellour promising to appoint five paires of Masters to
oppose you, which you knew had easily been performed, in that honorable and
fruitful College. This you refused, and thereby showed, that you had not an
original state, but a Traditionall insight in this question. This you durst
not, and therefore you required the subscription, to make way to some
threatening opposition. That, as the Poet speaks, Pede pes, and cuspide
cuspis: so now you hoped there might have bin another kind of digladiation;
pen against pen, and hands against hands, which you never could have obtained.

Mr LEECH.

This request, D. King not only denied, but also exclaimed against me for
making this petition. And no marvel; for he that durst never, throughout this
whole proceeding, formally, and by express mention, condemn Evangelicall
Counsels; how could he yield unto any such subscription? whereby he and the
rest might have remained Heretics upon their own record.

ANSWER.

You neglected the reverence you did owe to his government, and detected the
wilful weakness of your own judgment to require it. No such course usual
in any Iuridicall proceedings. And for your vile slander, that the
Vicechancelour durst not condemn Evangelicall Counsels: it is impudent. He
did in the proceedings, often rebuke, and confute your manner of handling that
point, not denying but that a nominall distinction of counsels was sometimes
used, but he expressly condemned such Counsels as you preached, being of
another kind, then S. Austin d^livereth with the rest of the Fathers, and
Wickliffe, whom you urge: who all maintain each Counsel to be a command for
some time and some circumstance. Which sentence and judgment how you oppugned
in your sermons, may be seen: where, till you recant, you remain an Heretic
upon your own record. I use your own words.

Mr LEECH.

The conclusion of all was this, M. Vicechancellour beating me down with the
blow of authority (having no other means to convince me) pronounced his
definitive sentence against me; which I will here relate word for word, as
near as I could possibly bear it away.

ANSWER.

You were beaten down (as you truly say) by authority but more the^ by, humane
by divine. You were drive^ by Scripture to refuse scripture to be your judge;
beaten by the censure of the Church, that you deny to be censured by the
Church; convicted for stubborn impudence, for preaching that doctrine which
was inhibited you, when you were countermanded it. You were convinced for
ignorance, in that you produced witnesses that you knew not, and urged Greek
Fathers that you read not. And this conviction was not only by the blow of
authority: but by such a blow from heaven, as Paul in the Acts was stricken;
Scripture, Church, Fathers, Acts. 9.
and all arguments of power did agree to this deiection of you and your cause,
and to the censure that ensues.

Mr LEECH.

M. Leech; for preaching scandalous, and erroneous doctrine (Doctrine, as you
well know, stiffly defended by the Church of Rome, and whereupon many
absurdities do follow) I do first as Vicechancellour silence you from
preaching. Secondly; as Deane of this house, I suspend you from your commons
and function here for the space of twelve months. This is my sentence; and
before these my associates I require you to take notice thereof.

ANSWER.

Here is the Act, the manner of the Act, the reason of the Act, or censure. The
sentence was deliberat, and guided with ripe wisdom; and the hand of Justice
in him, was slower then the tongue. For besides your heresy in the deliverie,
there was contumacie in you for presuming so to preach forbidden by Authority:
and yet was this censure easy, by many wished to be more, by all marvailed
at, that it was no more. For as the times increase in danger: so the rigor
should increase in discipline. But the manner of this censure was mild: it
passed no farther then loss of commons for a time, this was within the walls
of the College; and silence for preaching within the precincts of Oxford, and
this within the limits of the University. This was no eiection, expulsion, out
of College and University. It had been worse by infinite degrees, had you
been sent to London. And the reason of all this, was first intimated, for your
scandalous, erroneous doctrine, a doctrine stiffly defended by the church of
Rome, inducing many absurdities. I will use an honorable speech of that most
noble Cou^sellor at the arraignement of Garnet, Earl of Northampto^.
fit to be bestowed upon you; Currat lex, viuat Rex, vincat veritas. The
marginall scurrile Note, which you borrowed from some more witty, but as wicked
pate as your own; I could return as a dart to your very soul: but I
forbear, because all reproach and contumelies against this worthy, do break
themselves, as waves shattered in pieces by the force of a rock.

Mr LEECH.

Which sentence though it were tyrannical and unjust, yet it no ways
discouraged me, but rather confirmed me in my opinion. Wherefore I protested
the doctrine again more resolutely, then before; wishing M. Vicechancellor,
and his assista^ts to understand thus much from me. First: that I held the
doctrine with as much, nay more confidence then ever I did. Secondly: that I
farther concluded the invincibility of the point out of the manner of their
proceedings, whereat they were driven into the extremity of fury, and passion.

ANSWER.

This was a great degree of the hardness of your heart, and it is manifest
that you apprehended this, as a pretense of your revolt. The Vicechancelour was
urged, to this doom; which, as it was impartial, so was it no way
Tyrannical: had it been any other, it had bin merciful injustice. You should
have acknowledged the Truths victory, and given some sign of humility,
modesty, and reverence to authority. You say, you were hereby confirmed.
Confirmed you were in your flight; not in your faith. And in your boast, that
you so again protested the doctrine, if it had been so, you showed more
boldness then goodness, and the Truth had lost less then you gained: but it was
not so, you did not, you durst not contest, so vmbragiously, as you protest
here. My observation through your whole book, holds true: where you brag
most, you feign most; and where you paint your speech, there it is most
corrupted and falsified.

Mr LEECH.

Thus the asse^bly was dissolved, and I, putting M. Vicechancellour in mind of
the Articles (which he formerly promised, and bade me now to expect within two,
or three days) took my leave for that time.

ANSWER.

What prostituted conscience would so persevere in falsity? This must not pass
vnconfronted. Articles were not promised you. It is more then improbable, that
such experienced discreation, and expert resolution, should first condemn and
sentence, and after give the reason. It is neither the custom, nor
commendation of Iuridicall proceedings. His wisdom prevented you in this
scandal, and told you before many, that you most falsely did belly him: all may
perceive your spiting spleen, to break out in revenge: which revenge that you
seek to wreake upon others, will without repentance prove vengeance to your
self.

Mr LEECH.

And now (courteous Reader) since thou have seen the proceedings of these me^,
consider with me, whether I have not just cause to complain against them as S.
Augustine complained long before against the Donatistical faction, Fecerunt
quod voluerunt tunc in illa caecitate*
Non Iudices sederunt, non Sacerdotes de more,
Quod solent in magnis causis congregati judicare:
Non accusator, and reus steterunt in quaestione,
Non testes, and docume^tu^: quo possent crime^ probare.
Sed Furor, Dolus, Tumultus: qui regnant in falsitate.


Wherefore I conclude this whole passage with the burden of that excellent
Psalm: Omnes qui gaudetis de pace, modo verum judicate.

ANSWER.

Consider Christian reader, and duly ponderat, whether a malignant adversary,
or a repugnant Controversiary, may more truly be portraied, then these
antecedent proceedings of M. Leech, have most lively deciphered. Malice has
strengthened error, error begot heresy, and this last brought forth Apostasy.
The virulence of speech is much, in the former chapters; Prolog. ad. 1. sentent.
the accusation in this Paragraph, is the sum of all. Lombard well notes
that in such cases, fidei defectionem sequitur hypocrisis mendax. And, I fear
me, this will prove a remaining disease in the bowels, not only of this
Triumphant Pamphlet, but of any thing that shall come from the same Author. It
is absurd you should so unfitly and rudely apply S. Austins verses. Fury,
Deceit, and Tumult, are the vpholders only of Heretics. And as good Physic
misapplied, is but poison: so good Authorities misvsed, though they keep the
sense, yet loose their reason. To your verses so rudely applied, in prose we
return S. Chrysostom his speech upon Genesis; Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 5.
Quocirca divinae Scripturae vestigia sequamur, neque feramus eos qui temere
quidvis blaterant: and this shall be the resolution of us, to follow the
steps of holy Scripture, and not to endure those that rashly babble every
thing. And if this prose serve not, we return part of the same Psalm of
Austin contra Partem Donati, Sacerdotes transmarini possent inde iudicare?
Quid curritis ad schisma, and altar contra altar?
Vt quod postea iudicatum est, iam non possetis audire,
Et a iudicibus vestris cogeremini appellare,
Dum vultis erroris regnum quoquo modo confirmare.


You may abuse and accuse your judges, seeing like to the Donatists, you
appeal from them. The clause and aphorism of the song of S. Austin we
receive, and honor: our Savior is the Prince of peace, our Gospel the Gospel
of peace, we are the children of peace, and the end of our belief is the peace
of God that passes all understanding.

CHAP. 4. Mr LEECH.
When S. Paul had appealed unto the tribunal of Caesar: Festus (the deputy)
thought it an unreasonable thing to send a prisoner unto his Lord, and not to
signify the cause. For thus the light of nature could teach an Heathen, that,
in discretion, and in justice no man should be called into question, without a
pretense (at the least) of some special crime.

But see now a Christian Magistrate inferior unto an heathen in this behalf:
who did not only convent, but condemn me: and never signified the cause: which
yet could be none other, 1. Cor. 7.25.
then that which concerned S. Paul himself: Consilium do etc.

ANSWER.

To whom appealed you? whether were you sent Prisoner? An idle and dull
comparion. And (to use your own words) if but the light of nature, had
taught you any thing: your comparison had not been so rude, nor your senses so
duld, as not to remember what was objected, not as a pretense, but as a
general scandal, offered, not only against authority, and the University, but
against the law, and the truth of God. For which, you were often convented,
threatened, inhibited, and now censured. Was not the cause signified by Doctor
Hutton, by the Vicechancelor in your censure, and by all that were assistants?
and dare you say the cause was never signified? Was it so: and do you deny it?
Do you deny it in one line, and in the next say it could be no other then that,
which concerned S. Paul himself, Consilium Do: whereas, it is manifest S. Paul
has not the word Consilium? By this you confess the cause of the censure,
though we deny that ever S. Paul was the cause of your doctrine.

Mr LEECH.

Howbeit, if he had dealt with me according to the law (...) spark of sin:
he would answer him, as he answers you, Avoid Satan; I will worship the
Lord my God, I abhor the name of perjury, I will never swear, but in truth
and judgment and justice. And for that which follows in this poiso^ful
Paragraph: I say that which S. Jerome in the like case counsels, Ierom.
prol. super Mat.
if Shemei bark and snarle at thee: contumelious words are to be regarded
only as the barking of Dogs. And I end this with the speech of Seneca; Men
speak evil of him, but evil men. If Marcus Cato if wise Lelius, if Scipio
should so speak, it would grieve him: but when professed slaunderers, branded
with the indelible mark of falsehood, and pursued with the fury of fear,
taught by error, tempted by Satan, replenished with unrighteousness and
malitiousnesse; let it no way grieve goodness it self.

Mr LEECH.

When I perceived what small conscience he made either of faith in his promise,
or of equity in his proceedings, I desired him with many earnest obtestations,
that it would please him, at the least, to signify unto me now by word of
mouth, expressly what that point is, for which he had thus punished me to my
disgrace, and loss. And this favor I humbly requested at his hands as much for
the general, as my own particular satisfaction. For many saw the punishment,
but could not know the cause.

ANSWER.

Is there extant in the worlds greatest volume of history, example of such
dullness, and senseless apprehe^sion, that when the cause had been
ingeminated, yea tergeminated, so often mentioned, yea so often exprobrated and
censured: that yet you should plead, that you knew not the cause? And that
without fear of God, or care of truth, you did so importunately crave for
occasion of public advantage: which, as often as you desired, so often you
received the resolute repulse? You pretended the general and particular
satisfaction only, as a pretext: for who heard your sermon, that desired not
censure against your opinion?

Mr LEECH.

This petition was reinforced in my name by a grave, and ancient M. of Arts;
who pleaded to obtain the same in regard of Justice, wisdom, and Charity.
Justice; See Act. 25.16. vt accusatus locum defendendi accipiat ad abluenda
crimina quae ci obijciuntur.
because (said he) it was the form of law, that the party accused should
answer articulately unto the crime objected. Wisdom; that you may deliver
your self from the suspicion of injury; and especially since the whole
University is much distracted upon these late proceedings. Charity; that you
may rectify M. Leech his understanding by a proper conviction of his supposed
error: To punish without, instruction, it is tyranny. Salust.
And I dare promise in his behalf, that if you can convince his judgment, he
will recant the doctrine; for I have heard him often protest thus much.

These reasons, and persuasions of my friend, entered so deeply into M. Doctor
Kings heart for the present, that he promised to convent me again, and that he
would proceed with me according to my desire herein. Notwithstanding he
violated this promise also to his exceeding great disreputation.

ANSWER.

The grave and ancient M. of Arts, though able to speak very elegantly, yet
not very willing in so bad a cause: protests he used no such terms as you
do by Atturny here utter. His honest care was such, that first he sought to
remove your opinion, before he made means for your pardon: which motion of his
to you, as he testifies, took so good effect, that he found you willing to
acknowledge the offense, till some nocturnus ambulo, diurnus nebulo, some
Romish fugitive altered you, who is not only suspected, but known to have
dealt with you here, in this business. By this your grave and learned
Advocate, the Vicechancelour was moved only as Deane of Christchurch, to
vouchsafe you the benefit of your Commons. This, conditionally he promised: for
no man is more mild to a relenting vanquished adversary. But for promise of
second convention, the Revere^d Deane, and your loving and learned friend do
both disclaim any speech of it. Upon your and his importunacy, you were
promised one to confer and dispute with you, if you would. But first the
condition was to be performed, namely, that as you had offended in disobedience
to authority, contrary to D Huttons inhibition presuming to preach: so you
should come first to acknowledge this, and after you should be conferred with.
But this conference you accepted not, fearing it would prove a disputation, as
knowing the much difference between dicere, and disserere. Your opinion you
knew was but Chymicall, and durst not abide the touchstone of Argument. It is
shameless therefore to urge any promise of another convention, your conviction
being past; and graceless to accuse the Vicechancelour for violating such a
promise, which he never mentioned, and which your friend never moved.
Conscientia cauterizata, having lost spiritual feeling, cannot be more
hardened, the^ I fear me you are. A bramble having no reputation, would set on
fire a Caedars estimation.

Mr LEECH.

But I come now unto his answer, which he made unto my former humble petition.
Sir. (said he) it shall satisfy you, and the University, that I have don it;
take your remedy, where you can. If I have wronged you here, right your self
elsewhere.

This was spoken like a King indeed; and not like a subject; who though he be a
Magistrate over others yet should be subordinate unto a common law, and Lord.
And happy are those governments, where the wise sentence of an heathen Poet is
not neglected.

Quicquid a vobis minor extimescit, Horat.

Major hoc vobis Dominus minatur.
This was my last refuge, and final hope; but how far I was deceived in my
just expectation, the sequel shall declare.

ANSWER.

As your petition was most unreasonable, so also the time was unseasonable, the
Reverend Vicechancelour at that time being negotiated, with the particular
occasions and presence of very many. Upon your preposterous coming to him, and
vehemently desiring not so much as formerly you did, but that you might answer
at another place; his wisdom did as earnestly wish it, as you did impetuously
and intempestiously move it: not only because he knew his proceedings to be
justifiable, but that by this, the light of his judgment against you, might
the more appear by the darkness of your understanding, and apprehension, that
had followed so bad a cause, with so incessant suite. The resolute answer,
gave you leave, and encouragement, if you had had any such intent, Your scorn,
This was spoke like a King indeed, calls to mind not only what a resolute
champion of truth does testify for this worthy against Parsons, D. Morton,
Deane of Winchester. Encounter.
who venteth his choler adust upon the name of Doctor King; where Parsons is
answered, that he considered not the admirable, and indeed kingly worthiness
of this our Doctor: And to this I may add the title that MAJESTY it self
has bestowed upon him, entitling him, the King of Preachers. And though he be
a Magistrate over others, yet noe one more considerat of his awful observance
to those above him, or of his respectfull care of those below him. And this may
be his crown and garland, that he has ever so confined himself within the
circle of justice, that his ears never heard any accusation against his
government but yours, which is as hateful as shameful. All hearts else, have
both the affections, of love, and fear, so sweetly co^ioined, that there is as
much joy in us, that we live under such a governor, as in such a place. Your
verses quoted out of Horace, but not found there, are in Seneca his Thyestes.
And I requite them with Horace, seeing you quote him, who prophesied of you;
Hor. de art. Poetic.
Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hyrudo.

CHAP. 5. Mr LEECH.
BEing now silenced by the Vicechancellour from preaching within the precincts
of the university, so that I could not exercise my function neither in the
public audience of the learned, nor yet in any of the parish Churches (which
I had usually visited, by course, every sabbath, and holy day; unless some
special occasion diverted me from my customable practice) I received letters
from the Lord Bishop of London (my very Honorable, and much respected friend;
whom it pleased freely to bestow that place upon me, in regard of my first
sermon preached in Oxford, from which his successor had now suspended me for
the last) wherein his Lordship required me to preach at S. Paul's cross, and
not to fail at the time prefixed in his summons. Whereupon I prepared my self
accordingly, and certified his Lordship thereof, as he had inioined me in his
said letters.

ANSWER.

MAny offend as much in obtruding themselves, as others in retyring, and
especially when their doctrine is unsound. In this is your condemnation
(rather, then commendation) more, that you acted the best part, with so bad a
mind; seminare zizaniam, as the old Seminary Satan, had done long before. You
were silenced not for assiduous, but erroneous preaching: and being desirous to
utter some such point in a more eminent place, (though wise men hold our
University sermons to be as solemn, and more censorious then any other in the
land,) you by great means obtained letters from some Chaplain, to be sent for
to preach a vacation sermon; the Common course of which letters was, that they
pass in name of the Bishop, who often knows not the men, or their worth. I
must confess that the Right Reverend Bishop, the Angel of that Church, did
know your person, and your no worth, and had bestowed upon you a Chaplains
place by the earnest suite of some of Reverend and eminent place, in Oxford,
but not for your first sermon as you arrogate. His Lordship did not request you
at al, nor enioin you, not to fail your summons, as you boast. They be the
cursary Terms of every of those missiue letters.

Mr LEECH.

The Vicechancellour, getting notice of these summons sent for me immediately,
and requested that he might have a view of the Bishops Letters; which, in
courtesy, I then communicated unto him, howbeit I had just reason to suspect
(for his countenance expressed much perturbation in his heart) that he would
plot some means to hinder this designment. And as (in all probability) he did
conjecture that I would have constantly asseuered my former doctrine in the
greatest audience of the kingdom, so I must acknowledge that this was my
resolved determination.

ANSWER.

The Reverend Bishop most earnestly required the Vicechancellor to call for
those letters, and the first notice that he had, was from the Bishops own
mouth, whereby it is manifest that his Lordship sent no such letters, nor knew
of them at first: for he was so earnest with his worthy successor, that in a
zealous vehemency, he desired, that upon his coming home to Christ-Church
you might be expelled, grieving he had been a means to give any encouragement
to any so stubborn, disobedient, and ignorant. The letters being demanded by
the Bishop, it was not courtesy (as you call it) but duty, to communicate, or
rather to render up those letters? There was no perturbation expressed by the
faithfully zealous and (in this) wisely jealous Goueror, he only grieved that
such a shame was like (by your scandal) to be imputed to Oxford? Howsoever,
what he did in this, was by the direction, yea and obsecration of that Reverend
Bishop of London. And durst you inte^d again, to presu^e to appear, I say not
in the face of me^, but in the sight of God, to deliver a doctrine, so
confuted, so condemned, and for preaching of which you were twice inhibited,
censured, silenced? This determination (as you call it) came not from God, no
motion of his spirit. But the truth is this, how ever you brag here, you avowed
with all earnestnes and the most eager protestations and imprecations against
your self, that if you might be suffered this time to preach at the Cross,
you would neither preach this, nor any point of controversy.

Mr LEECH.

But Master D. King fearing least with so public a promulgation of this truth,
I should also blazon his shame (which now neither Oxford, nor London, nor our
divided world it self shall contain within her limits) handled the matter so
by his policy, and authority, that my Lord of London (through his misinforming
suggestions) countermaunded the former by second letters; discharging me from
the performance of that duty. And now Master Vicechancellor thought that he
had not only inconvenienced me, but also secured himself.

ANSWER.

Had the ink that wrote this, been mixed with the poison of spiders, it could
not have been more venomous, then this is malicious. I grieve to think how
little in this book does savor of a Minister, nay of a Christian. What son of
Zerviah can utter more reproachful, and shameful speeches? And what roapes
can be used to draw down more speedy vengeance upon your head, then these
false accusations against him, that is true of heart? He to fear his shame,
whose conscience is murus ahaeneus? He receive any disparagement, from the
mouth of any railer, that by reviling of the most bright fixed stars in the
firmament of our Church, has manifested an infallible demonstration of his
degenerous and degenerate mind? Shall not Oxford, and London, or the divided
world, only contain the promulgation of this? I will not iniure Scripture, but
I hope I may safly apply that speech of Christ to the woman: and therefore, to
counterblast your unsavory breath, I say, wheresoever the Gospel shall be
preached, mention shall be made of him, no way but in honor, for the
cleerenesse of judgment, sweetness of style, gravity of person, grace of
conversation, and true hearted soundness in religion; let them al, backbiting
Dogs, spit out livor, and liver, and heart, and all. For what Erasmus spoke
of Prude^tius, shall be true of him, Ibis quovis seculo inter Doctos Prudenti.
There was no suggestion used by the Vicechancelour against you: it was the
Bishops own motion, and earnest impetrature, who also in his second letters
manifested his reasons of disliking, and disabling you for that service.

Mr LEECH.

For this end, and purpose also he repaired then unto a Doctor of principal
place, and eminent worth (a man not under any; if not over all) with whom he
entertained long discourse touching the Doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels;
complaining that in Oxforde, it had been lately broached, and obstinatly
defended. And now, I pray you, good Sir (said he) what is your opinion
concerning this point?

ANSWER.

To this Reverend Deane, he was with many other Doctors, invited to dinner: he
repaired not to him as to a Cou^sellor in this business as you falsely
inform. The worth and eminency of this Oracle of Textuall and School
divinity, is acknowledged with revere^ce: but from his own mouth I have
received it, that he protests against you in this imputation, absolutely
denying that the Vicechancellor ever asked counsel or opinion of him. Only
among many other discourses at Table, this question was repeated, but not
debated. Besides this false imputation here, it is confessed by you that you
obstinately defended the point, and obstinacy is offensive whatsoever the
defense be.

Mr LEECH.

Here by the way, give me leave (good Reader) to propose two things unto thy
discreet consideration. First; that D. King either had no knowledge at al, or
not well grounded in that point, wherein he condemned me by violence of
authority, and not by force of reason. Secondly; that as I suffered with a good
conscience, so he punished me with an evil. For I had not the least scruple,
nor diffidence in this point. All testimonies, divine, humane; of God, and of
his Church, did firmly establish me therein. And therefore, though I conferred
with many learned men upon the same, yet I never demanded of any man, by way
of doubt; Sir. What is your opinion etc. but, I always said; This is the
Doctrine of all the Fathers; this is the judgment of the whole Church; it is
founded upon sacred Scripture etc. will you stand to it, or will you disclaim
it? whereupon I commonly received this answer; the doctrine is true in it
self, though not seasonable for these times. But Master D. King having not any
such certainty of infallible grounds, could not but fluctuate in the
instability of his private judgment.

ANSWER.

Which two proposed considerations be both false. How can any indifferent
Reader look upon your lines with any other entertainment but contempt. first
you accuse Doctor King to want well grounded knowledge who^ your conscience
knows to be profound, ready, and resolute: in all faculties, in all studies,
in all learning: was not the force of reason used, as the means to co^vert
you, when a solemn lecture was read upon the point, was not the Tene^t of our
Church showed you, were not disputations many times offered you, and did not the
Doctors that assisted at the convention of you, catechize you, so far, as
they found you not able to answer what the church was, what faith was, what
the rule and Canon was, etc: was this violence of Authority or force of reason.
Violence did not appear in authority against you, never was wild fire so
quietly quench^d, nor open mouthed adversary so favorably handled, so movingly
incited, or so fully confuted. Your secondly is twin with the former, only the
limbs be greater. Did he punish you with an evil conscience, and you suffered
with a good? Or you suffered with an evil, and he censured you with a good?
You say you had not the least scruple of diffidence or distrust in this point.
Doubting in some causes is comme^dable, it is the means to sift, and fan,
and try the wheat of truth, from the chafe of error. What mist had veiled and
invelloped that eye sight that saw not the monstrous absurdities of this
point? But (you say) all Testimonies are for you; divine, humane, etc. Your
Testimonies have been perused, and in them there is nothing worthy to
command affection, or belief, God and his Church I am sure, certitudine
fidei, be against you: and this I am established in, that Gods law is not
wanting, nor imperfect, craveth not the assistance and support of Counsels; God
uses not second editions with suppleme^ts, he has set forth no other
Deuteronomy. In your conference with many, I believe you traduce many: for I
know that some that you had personal, though not doctrinal favor from, do for
ever disclaim any honest thought of you. Were any common measure of hatred fit
for a revolter, I should have hoped that you would forbear your slanders
against many: but your heat and hate do both conspire to make them subject to
interpretation, who are most opposite to your opinion. I dare pronounce it,
that no one of judgment learning, and sound Religion, did give you that
answer, that here you deliver. I have been bold to enquire of your questions
with some of very worthy respect, and they disclaim the countenance, and
mainetenance of your opinion: and you know, you were so repressed from
preaching this Doctrine, that while a Reverende and learned Doctor, of public
respect and place in the Church, and private government in the University,
remained here, you durst not deliver this; but in the time of his attendance
and absence in Convocation business, then you began to settle your self, and
unsettle truth. Traduce none, nor gull the world, as if any affirmed your
doctrine to be true. All the learned in the world can not make sense of that
which you by your written copy delivered: where your literal meaning is often
so poor, that it can reach no sense; and your mystical so transcendent, that
no sense can reach it. Truth is seasonable at all times, and only enemies of
truth will at any time suppress it. Falsify no man's speech. This slander
comes from no good spirit. The well rooted resolution of the Vicechancelour,
anchored him, his grounds had certainty, and (if Scripture contain it) he had
truth, and infallibility; his judgment was not private, his certainty did not
fluctuate. Jude. 11. 2. Pet. 2.17.
S. Jude does attribute this to Apostats, and S. Peter describes them to be
clouds without water, carried about with a tempest, to whom the blackness of
darkness is reserved for ever.

Mr LEECH.

To return now unto the conference of M. Vicechancellor with the aforesaid
Doctor; he received a cold satisfaction unto his hot demand. For the Doctor,
wondering that any difficulty should be made in this matter, answered presently
without any demur; there are Evangelicall Counsels; and no doubt can be made
thereof.

And what was (think you) Doctor Kings reply unto this grave, and confident
assertion? Did he dispute against it? no; he could not. Did he gainsay it? no;
he durst not. Thus the renowned pulpit-Doctor, that could domineere over his
poor inferior, censure him, deprave him, vilify him with intolerable
reproaches (such as he feared not to utter, but I am ashamed to mention) stood
mute; not daring to disclose his opinion, which he could not justify by any
weight of reason.

ANSWER.

To return to your most untrue relation. As before, so again I answer, that
the Vicechancelour did not doubt of the doctrine, he manifested no haesitation,
he sought no satisfaction. The discourse was at dinner, where neither argument
was urged, nor any suffrage of judgment required: the allowance of the
distinction being granted by this reverend Deane, what follows thereupon?
Dare you conclude therefore, that your doctrine was true. The other sister and
famous University, has had much experience of his rare dexterity in clearing
the obscure subtilties of the School, and easy explication of the most
perplexe discourses: And not only he, but others have granted such a
distinction, for distinctions be but intentions, they are signarerum, non res
signatae: Many grant Counsels, that do as much hate your opinion, as you
hate our Religion. And how different from your Tenent this learned Doctor is,
does appear in the sequel of this Chapter: But first to your interrogation,
or rather your imaginary supposition. The Vicechancelour needed not to dispute
it, nor meant to gainesay it. For howsoever properly there be no Evangelicall
Counsels and so he does and ever did maintain, yet he never denied such a
distinction, reprehe^ding the consequents, and positions you grounded
thereupon, rather then the name of Counsels. In scorn you call him the
renowned Pulpit Doctor a Title generally and worthily bestowed upon him, for
who ever saw him without reverence, or hard him without wonder. Yet you heap
so many obloquies upon him, that I marvel your soul does not break with the
burden. Did he domineere over you? whose care did pity you, and if in any
thing he be partial it is to his enemy. Did he vilify you, who received many
slanders, many scandals, nay many bitter imprecations (O bloody) against him
and his. And yet hated to pay these private wrongs with the advantage of his
public office. Was he mute, who was as able and resolute in the Point as any
whatsoever? if you suffer your lawless Tongue, to walk through the dangerous
Paths, of such false conceited suppositions: Each ear will be weary of you,
and you at length weary of your self.

Mr LEECH.

Now, if Doctor King will stand in denial hereof, or any other be in doubt of
my report, I protest in the faith of a Catholic man, that I write this from
the immediate relation of the Doctor himself, unto whom I was led by the
conduct of my good Angel. Farther; I am so well persuaded of his resolute
judgment, and honest heart, that I dare boldly say; Doctor King shall never be
able to procure his subscription against this doctrine.

ANSWER.

I will not bandy oaths with you: but in the religion and faith and truth of a
Christian, I do protest, that from the immediate, and proper, personal
speech, and mouth of this monument of learning, I received these circumstances
following, to satisfy all that see how you traduce him. You came to enquire
his opinion concerning the point (as you falsely traduced D. King, in the former
Paragraphs) and received this answer; The distinction of Counsels may be
used, so that hence, merit, perfection, or supererogation be not taught, for
this is erroneous and Popish. To which answer you replied, that the Fathers
were absolute for that point. His wisdom sounding the depth of you, and
finding that your collectio^ of the Fathers, was but at the second hand, blamed
you much, showing how herein any may be seduced: and further told you
plainly, how worthy you were of censure, and how unworthy to deal in
controversy, that so impudently would assume authorities out of Bellarmin, or
any other Papist. With these and other such goads, (as Solomon calls the
words of the wise, Eccl. 11.11.
) you were pricked, that you departed much discontented, because all his words
tended to condemn your judgment, yielding no jot of encouragement, as here
you brag. And howsoever there needs not so great means to convince your
ignorant impudency, as to seek subscription from any, for that which God
himself has subscribed: yet I return your own words, I am not only
persuaded, but I am sure (such is the riches of his learning) he is in argument
so powerful, in knowledge so plentiful, in truth so faithful, that he
denies, defieth the least maintenance of the point, and that all the means of
the world shall not obtain approbation from him of those Popish doctrines, and
consequences, that you preached. And this you might have observed by his
speech. But the deaf Adder will not here, charm the Charmer never so wisely.

CHAP. 6. Mr LEECH.
AS I always had comfort in my wrongs, because I suffered for righteousness
sake; so I conceived good hope, that the superior Magistrate would rectify
the proceedings of his inferior. Wherefore, being oppressed with the injuries
of the Vicechancellour, I appealed unto the Archbishop; thinking that his house
had been as Jerusalem, when justice and judgment were lodged therein.

Being admitted into his Graces presence, I unfolded the whole process of
this business; acquainting him first, with the doctrine, which I had preached.
Secondly, with the grounds, and reasons whereupon I built the same. Thirdly;
with the entertainment, which it, and I for it, had found within the
university of Oxford.

ANSWER.

PErsecution for righteousness sake is pronounced blessed, but neither were
you persecuted, nor your cause righteous. Your Appeal was needless and
causeless, your offense being ce^sured not by rigor, but favor of the
proceedings. You fled from the Vicechancellour to the Chancellor, but the
higher the worse like Phaeto^ here you burnt your wings, and received your
fall. The Asylum of justice and judgment, you found in the Archbishops house:
but you iniure all you deal with. Your admittance was an appearance, and at
your declaration what circumstances passed, (all tending to your disgrace) I
omit. In your third, you confessed, how general the mislike of this doctrine
was in Oxford.

Mr LEECH.

The maine sum of his answer consisted in these two particulars. First; that
he must defend the estimation of his Vicechancellour, of whom a good opinion
was generally conceived. Secondly; that the Text of S. Math. (commonly alleged
for that purpose) does not afford the doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels. 19.
21. vade, vende omnia etc.
And here his Grace (falling into Calvin's false, and absurd exposition) said,
that our Savior does not here give any Counsel of Poverty, but only
dismasked the hypocrisy of the young man, being a proud, boasting Pharisee etc.

ANSWER.

First, that it is the care of superior Magistrates, to defend the estimation
of their deputies, Piety in many causes, and Policy in all does command: but
then especially, when the eye of the world does behold the integrity and
dignity of the Governor. Secondly, it was not only Calvin's exposition, that
this young man did mask under a veil of hypocrisy: but as I formerly showed,
Hilary, Hierom Ambrose, Austin, Theophylact, and Beda, do all concur in this
opinion, and therefore the Epithets of false and absurd belong not to Calvin's
interpretation.

Mr LEECH.

My whole reply was, that as I sought not the impeachment of his
Vicechancellours credit, farther then he had wronged it himself by his
indirect proceedings, so, if I could not make my accusations good against him,
I would be content to sustain my former punishment, with a greater
augmentation.

ANSWER.

How you sought the impeachment of the Vicechancellours credit, and how many
breaches you sought to make, for invasion into the general and honorable
reputation of him, the former passadges do testify. Your accusations, what,
how many, and how faulty they were, I have examined: but had you bin so
observant as you profess, your journey had been spared, and the business
ended at Oxford, where your doctrine had been brought to the touch, and test,
and balance, by disputation.

Mr LEECH.

As for the text of S. Matthew. I expounded it by Saint Mark: who says that
Christ beholding the young man, loved him; which love of Christ did clear him
from all suspicion of hypocrisy, and dissimulation. Besides; I humbly
entreated his Grace to remit himself, and me, unto the general consent of
Antiquity in this matter.

ANSWER.

The Text of S. Matthew, compared with S. Mark do both join to afford that
interpretation, which is proved true in my answer to your Sermon, Page 176.
that Christ loved that which he saw good in him, and yet did descrie the
covetousness of him. And for your request to his Grace to remit you to
Antiquity: compare Ierom, and Austin, Theophylact, etc. with Basil, and
Chrysostom, and Euthymius, and you will prove the truth of this, that as Christ
did look upon him and loved him, thereby to excite him, and to cherish the
good, so also he did unmask him in that covetousness, which hypocritically
lay hid, thereby to cure and remove the ill.

Mr LEECH.

Here Doctor Barlow interposed his verdict: who^ if I had known as well by his
face, as I knew him by his sermon, I had then appeached as a man of little
honesty, or conscience: page fourth before the end.
because he (in a sermon preached before his Majesty at Hampto^ Court,
concerning the authority of Bishops) does justify the distinction betwixt
Precepts, and Counsels; citing a text of S. Paul to that effect; 1. Cor. 7.25.
and yet now, seeing his Grace of Canterbury disaffected toward this
doctrine, he also spoke against it. And thus it pleased D. Shaw (who proclaimed
the Earl of Essex his Cales triumph, and his London ruin) to cross himself
with a flat contradiction, rather then to dissent from his assertion, by whose
favor he had mounted into the chair of Honor.

ANSWER.

This Reverend Prelat did interpose, both because of your brag of Antiquity,
(in which he observed your insufficiency) as also, that you did seek to
besmeare the credit of the Vicechancelour: for both which, his Lordship did
powerfully reprove you, and so pusle you, that as a man amazed you were able to
reply nothing. The distinction used in the sermon, I have answered, Page 191.
where how far the meaning of the words be from strengthening of your
assertion, may be seen. Your intolerable impudence in scornful manner, to
cast the by name of that Popish Priest Shaw, upon this Honorable Bishop, is to
be repaied you in another world. And therefore I forbear to defile this paper
with such terms as you deserve. What was done, was commanded by the State,
into the depth of whose actions, your shallowness cannot look: and if charity
and truth had observed that sermon, as well as spite and misprision, it had
appeared to all, how great a share in the general sorrow, this worthy Preacher
and Prelat had, lamenting the death of that Peerless and Renowned Earl,
acknowledging that a great Prince was fallen that day in Israel.

Mr LEECH.

Many occurrences there passed at that time; with the recapitulation whereof I
will not now surcharge this little treatise. In conclusion; my Lord of
Canterbury demanded a copy of my sermon; which I delivered unto Master Barkham
(one of his Chaplains) together with the authorities, which do hereafter
ensue. In the end of all.


The sermon was received, the authorities were returned unto me again: which
made me think, that my cause should never come unto an indifferent trial. And
truly I saw no probability of any trial. For though I gave continual
attendance at Lambeth, for the space of fifteen, or sixteen days, yet I was
fed with delays, to my just grief and great expense.

ANSWER.

All occurrences tended to your reproof, confutation and condemnation of your
carriage in your sermon and co^ventio^. The authorities were returned you,
because it was known, whence they were had, as also how great your crack and
how little your knowledge was in the true use and reading of the fathers. Trial
you needed not to expect farther; so weakly you were able to defend your self
at your first appearance before his Grace, that (with desire) you could not
expect a second. Your attendance at Lambeth was needless, you had your answer
at the first. The proceedings in Oxford were justified, your Doctrine
condemned, and your Ce^sure continued.

Mr LEECH.

Wherefore, seeing no hope of redress, where it lastly remained, and was
justly expected, I retired my self unto some privatnesse; recollecting my
thoughts in meditation betwixt God, and my own soul.

And now, in the sweetness of contemplation, having God only for the object of
my comfort, I took an intellectual review of my cause, and all circumstances of
the fore passed Business; commending the whole unto God, the great and
sovereign Judge. For I had now resolved to be no farther troublesome unto his
Grace of Canterbury, who had so little respect of truth, and no greater
compassion of my wrongs.

ANSWER.

What hope to be expected, when contumacie so remained, as an inseparable
quality in you? neither the inhibition, convention, censure in Oxford; nor
here the dislike, opposition, contradiction, and detestation of your wilful
deportment both in action and opinion Privacy, is then happy, when men be free
as well from vices and discontentments, as from tumults: but other wise the
Tempter has no fitter apprehensiue opportunity, then retirednes. The world
knew you, but did not want you: and had you continued your contemplative
priuacy here, you had done better then in your active Monastical poverty where
you be. Your retirednes had wrought your happiness, if you had duly, as in the
sight and fear of God, considered all circumstances belonging to the cause,
the weakness and wilfulnes of your assertion, and especially how in all the
particular passages you found God still opposite to you. You commend that
business to God, that has had so much dispraise before men: but how dare you
commend that cause which does so much derogate from the Law, and truth of God?
dare you offer a blind sacrifice without the eye of truths direction; or an
oblation without salt, the seasoning of religious discretion? The Apostles and
Martyrs, though their defense were good, did show reverence to heathen Judges
when they appeared before them: but you manifest all contempt, contumacy,
calumny, and vncivility before Christian Governors, though your cause be most
faulty. And because God (to whom you say you commended your cause) has not
redressed it, you fled to the Pope, where you serve and starve.

CHAP. 7. Mr LEECH.
When I had now remained a fortnight space in my private meditations, his
Graces Chaplain (accompanied with a doctor of Divinity) made diligent enquiry
after me; and finding me out, D. Childerly who is a Chaplain also unto his
Grace.
he demanded of me what was the reason of my long absence from his Lord; who
(as he said) would write his letters effectually unto his Vicechancellour for
our reconciliation: so that I should be relieved, and restored as well unto my
former liberty of preaching, as unto the fruition of my place.

But here I remembered the answer of Iehu unto the question of Ioram. Is it
peace Iehu? what peace (said he) while the fornication of Iezabell, thy mother,
and her witchcraftes are yet in force? So, what reconciliation, what peace
betwixt me, and D. King, while truth was thus suppressed, and his heresy
(worse then witchcraft) stood yet in force?

ANSWER.

THe company that you frequented in this space, and the provisions for your
flight, are discovered: your private meditations were public circumvagations.
These learned and Reverend Divines, (when they found you,) offered you this
promised favor, only upon condition of your submission: for otherwise it was
not only improbable, but impossible to obtain the benefit of your place, or
faculty to preach. That being most true (which you falsely apply) of Iehu and
Ioram: while the fornications of Iezabell, and the abominations of Babell, were
mainetained by you, no peace to be kept with you. Isay 48.22.
God commands it, There is no peace to the wicked, says God.

Mr LEECH.

Wherefore, after signification of my thankful mind to his Lordship, who now
vouchsafed in some sort, to commiserat my unjust vexations: I answered, that I
had greater respect of the cause, for which I suffered, then of the punishment,
which I did sustain: assuring M. Barkham, that restitution unto my place was
not the principal part of my desire.

For as God did require of me the constant justification of his eternal truth,
so I could not but require it also at their hands, who by their function (as
Ministers) and dignity (as Bishops) were specially obliged thereunto.

ANSWER.

His Grace commiserated your stubborn opposition, but never judged your just
punishment, unjust vexation. The respect you had of the cause, was more then
your respect of God, truth, faith, peace, or conscience. If restitutio^ to your
place, was not the chiefest of your desires: what was? Was it your desire of
conquest and victory? that your individual sentence, should have overswayed the
judgment and definitive resolution of so many, so wise, and learned Judges? It
is impiety to aver that God did require the justification of this truth by
you. Truth it is not: to be justified it was not: and by all the proceedings it
is manifest, that God (by the mediatio^ and mouth of his Magistrates) approves
it not. The function and dignity of your judges did yield you all equity;
though you continue your accusations and supercilious detractions against them.

Mr LEECH.

Whereas he pressed me farther, with motives of profit, and that I hindered the
course of my preferment, by contending against the authority of Magistrates (
who as he said, must stand one with another) my reply was to this effect, that
I desired not to rise where truth must fall: virtue is the path to Honor:
Heaven must not be lost for earth: the plenty of riches does not recompense the
emptines of the soul: a good conscience is a continual feast.

ANSWER.

These motives of profit and preferment (if they were used) are subordinate to
the motive of saving your soul. These can neither repair, nor empaire those
directing, inciting comforts, that come from above. The contentments, that the
world ca^ afford, are but weak and momentary: but the ambition of preferment
in heaven, is the holy resolution, making a true Christian firm and square.
You hindered your self in your worldly and heavenly course, in co^tending with
religious Authority. And howsoever you profess, you made virtue the path to
honor yet this is proved contrary, for you refused the best of virtues,
Lombard. quadruplex conscientia.
your religion. And, though a good conscience be a continual feast, yet
Lombard and others distinguish of conscience, that as a good conscience may be
troubled, so an evil conscience may be so quieted, that it thinks it self
good.

Mr LEECH.

As for the Magistrates I reverenced their persons, and honored their places;
knowing that their power is from God, but designed for the preservatio^ of his
truth: which if I impugned, let them strik me with the sword of Justice: but
if they withstood it, yet, I must defend it with courage, Ecclus. 4.
as also I shall suffer for it with patience. For I always had the counsel
of the wise man before mine eyes, Strive for the Truth unto death etc.

ANSWER.

Had you considered duly, that not only their power is from God, Romans 13.2.4.
as Paul speaks, but as he adds, he that resists the power resists
the ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves
condemnation; giving the reason, for he bears not the sword in vain: your
respect had been more to the^, if you had thus remembered the dignity from God
given them. Courage is then good, when a good cause and a good conscience meet.
But to be courageous in defense of any adulterine proposition that has not
radical truth: it is condemned, and will be punished. Acts are to be measured
by desires, desires by integrity. And, had you had God always before your
eyes: you had not been so Apocryphally wife, in your own eyes.

Mr LEECH.

Which resolution in me though it sorted not with his liking, nor yet
(perhapps) was expected from a poor, oppressed scholar (whom his uncharitable
adversaries had determined either to bow, or break) yet he importuned me, at
the least to see his Lord, and not to neglect his favorable inclination to do
me good.

ANSWER.

Poor, and lame, and slack arguments, cannot enforce resolution in the will,
or settle information in the understanding. All the connexions, and all your
concoxions out of Coccius, had not this nutritive power to nourish your
conscience to such a strength of resolution. But some other vnrevealed cause
there is, which only the searcher of all hearts knows. Reprehension is not
oppression, nor had you any uncharitable adversaries: they are adversaries to
all uncharitableness, they meant to direct and straighten you: not to bow,
much less to break. Some upon whom you seemed to rely most in Oxford, have
protested, that they had proceeded in the same, or a more strict course against
you, if the censure had passed their hands.

Mr LEECH.

Whereupon I made a show that I would shortly visit his Grace. And this I did,
because I did probably collect, that my intention was by some means disclosed
unto him; whereby I might be defeated of that course, upon which I was now
wholly resolved.

For me thought that God did speak within my heart, as he spoke sometimes unto
Abraham his servant. Go forth of thy land, Genesis 12.1.
and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, and come into the land,
which I shall show unto thee. For, can any Church, or any faith be in that
land, where the very grounds, and principles of ancient Christianity are
dissolved, where there is no certain foundation to build Religion upon? Where
every man's power is his reason to make good his doctrine? Where an injury
sustained for the truth, can find no redress without treasonable connivencie
to see the truth oppressed?

ANSWER.

This was Aequivocation in speech, and action: neither honest, but both common
among Papists. S. Austin condemned the Priscilianists, for this, and so other
Fathers have reproved this lying mummery and hypocrisy. Sepulueda de Ration.
dice^di testimon. Et de ratione dicendi occulta. in praefat. Azor. Ies. Inst
par. 1. l. 11. c. 4. in fine cap. Emanuel. Sa. in Aphor.
And not only Scotus, Aquinas, Henricus, Gabriell Biell are resolute against
it, as Sepulveda witneseth: but also Jesuits themselves have reproved it, as
Azorius, Emanuell Sa, and others. You began to equivocate timely, I doubt not
but you have increased it. The reason of making this hypocritical show, was,
lest you should be defrauded from robbing the Church of a Son, the King of a
Subject, and your self of a soul. Your misapplication of that speech of God
to Abraham, I might dilate much upon, as having variety of interpretations,
which do understand that place, of the devil, the world, and the flesh. But I
come nearer to your purpose, hoping that those words, that you say God spoke
to you, were received by no revelation: a frequent imposture among Papists,
filling the mouths of many, swaying the faiths of some. But what is the
blemish you see in your mother? ^oth our Church deny the principles of ancient
Christianity? Do we not receive the Scriptures, the Creedes, and Fathers of
the first 500 years? Do we not build our Religion upon the foundation Jesus
Christ the corner stone? Is the rule of our doctrine any other, then Gods
sacred will revealed in his word? Is any injury sustained by you, for truth? It
is not injury but true justice, to punish those that be stubborn in action,
precipitat in resolution, and faulty in opinion: not able to maintain their
cause but with much wresting of conscience, their revolt ever attended with
sedition, scandal, and humane respect.

Mr LEECH.

But I will pretermit (good Reader) here to make a special enumeration of my
Motives, drawing me unto my final resolution; for they will ensue orderly in
the third, and last part of this Treatise. Only consider (with me) now, with
what conflict of flesh, and blood I could intertaine this resolution, to come
out of my Land, and from my kindred, and from my Fathers house; with what
grief I could forsake a noble University, the company of my kindest friends,
the comfort of my dearest familiars; other emoluments, which such a place does
actually yield, and prepares unto greater.

ANSWER.

Your Motives shall be answered, as briefly as urged, because they be to be
scanned at a higher bar. Your conflict was not with flesh and blood, but you
did agree with the world and the Devil, and applied your self, to the service
of that painted, but ill-favored witch, the church of Rome. Neither did you
forsake our University, friends, and familiars, before they forsook you. They
at length heard, and hated, who at first observed your folly and pittyed.

Mr LEECH.

Howbeit (my Brethren) since there is banishment indeed, where no place is left
for truth, I esteem al these things as dongue, that I may gain Christ; for he
is my sufficient reward. I did not conceive that when I preached my doctrine
among you, I should have given you such an example thereof in mine own
person. But thanks be unto him who disposes all things sweetly for the
benefit of his children.

Finally (my brethren) I wish that you may enjoy your country, which is above,
without forsaking that, which is below: But if you cannot, by reason of the
time; the^ look up unto your eternity; let not your excellent spirits abase
themselves unto the love of transitory things; For behold I show you a more
excellent way. 1. Cor. 12.13.


ANSWER.

If in the world there be any sanctuary for truth: it is there where she may
appear without control, without colors or disguises. Which you would
willingly acknowledge to be true, if ignorance were not the mother of your
devotion. To forsake all for Christ, is blessed: but to forsake eve^ Christ
himself, it is most cursed. He is a sufficient reward to all that fear, and
follow him: and will follow the^, that fly from him. How pervious you were, to
fly from your Country, after you had fled from the truth, your intent before,
and your practices since, have manifested. But far be it, that God should be
reputed as the disposer of you, to this unnatural and unchristian disobedience
to the Church and State. O what bitter punishment must attend that presumption,
that endangers a double perishing, and is so far from having express command,
that it has direct and just inhibitions! Your wish that we may enjoy our
country that is above, is a wish above your charity. We wish your admission
into the heavenly Jerusalem which is above, and would from our hearts pray for
your triumphant state there: Luke. 16.25.
but that, as Abraham said to Dives, Remember thou in thy life time receiuedst
thy pleasure, and Lazarus pains, therefore he is comforted and thou art
tormented: so we are willing to awake you, with this that seeing, you make your
self of the Church triumpha^t in earth, you (continuing this course) are like
to have small part in the triumphant glory in heaven. And while we (for our
parts, and stations) are here, we will affect no pilgrimage, but from nature
to grace, and so to glory; hoping to accompany them, that are in possession of
the laurel. And to this journey we have no other hie way, 1. Kings 8.36. 1.
Sam. 12.23. Ier. 6.16. Ioh. 14 6.
but the good way which God teaches, and the right way which Samuel
describes, and the old way which Jeremy informs; al which be not as yours
be, Cross ways, but do terminat in the way, even Christ Jesus.

THE THIRD PART CONTAIning 12. Motives, which persuaded me to embrace the
Catholic Religion. Briefly, and naturally derived out of the premises. *
S. AUGUST. In Psalm. contra partem Donati. Scitis Catholica quid sit, and quid
sit praecisum a vite: Si qui sint inter vos cauti, veniant, and vivant de
radice.
THE THIRD PART CONTAINS 12. Articles against you: whereby your 12. Motives
are disproved, as having not affinity with the faith of the 12 Patriarks, or
spirit of the 12. Prophets, or doctrine of the 12. Apostles, or belief of the
12. Articles of our Creed: showing that as Art does imitate Nature, and an ape
a man, so as many grounds as good Christians rely upon for their faith,
Apostats boast to allege for their fall. Wherein as in the premises, the
particular Apostasy is confuted and condemned, with much facility and breuity.
*

S. AUGUST. In eod. Psalm. Contra Partem Donati.
Ipsam formam habet sarmentu^, quod praecisum est de vite
Sed quid illi prodest forma si non viuit de radice?
Venite fratres si vult is ut inseremini in radice,
Dolor est cum vos videmus praecisos ita iacere.
Aug. de vnitate Ecclesiae. cap. 2. De hoc inter nos and illos quaestio
versatur, vtrum apud nos an apud illos, vera Ecclesia sit.
Mr LEECH. To the conscionable, and Ingenious Reader.
THOUGH the general motives unto the Catholic Religion, are many, and
weighty; yet the particular, which issued out of this present business, where
such, as convinced my understanding, and swayed my affection to approve, and
embrace the same.

Wherefore (courteous Reader) as well to procure thy good, as to justify my
self, and to satisfy others, I have communicated them unto thy view. For
matter; they are the same now, as when I conceived them in the beginning: for
manner; they are brought forth in somewhat a different shape.

Thus much may suffice for thy instruction concerning these Motives. Only I
may not forget to advertise thee; that whereas through their titles, I use this
perpetual style: THE PROTESTANTS etc. (howbeit the most learned amongst them,
differ in judgment from the common sort: and in this respect, cannot be
concluded in the generality of ALL) I have not done this without good
consideration.

For though the principal divines in England, do utterly distaste the vain
opinions of D. King, and such like; yet, since by public profession of the
truth, they give not sufficient notice unto the world of their Catholic
positions, I must involve them also in this common accusation. And as they,
against their knowledge, Cord creditur ad iustitiam; ore fit confessio ad
salutem.
do suffer a prejudice to fall upon God his truth, they must likewise, against
their will, suffer an infamy to remain upon their own persons.

ANSWER.

The Catholics, like to the old Circumcellions are Individua vaga ever in
motion. Campians reasons, Bristowes motives, the one ten, the other 48, yours a
Jury. This former treatise has answered all yours. But seeing they so
commanded your affection, and convinced your understanding, we will hear your
descriptions, and mark the motions.

If it be the good of your Reader, you wish, you would not lead him into so
many dark entries of the Chambers of death: your book is come into the hands
of many better informed souls then your self, and some that have breathed
lately from their Antichristianisme, that have seen, and heard more then you
have, and have hated and abhorred and returned. You seek to justify, but do
condemn your self: and you hope your satisfaction, will prove an infection to
some. But each man does disdain, that these should draw over any wise
Proselyte. They are the same in substance, as in your sermon, only as the
Patron of error can change his shapes, so do these. You say you must not
forget, to advertise, and I cannot omit to discrie, the untruth in the
advertisement. For if with an indifferent eye, ANY, observant in the state of
our Church, do look upon the more learned. Of our Divines he shall find that
either they be writers, or public Readers, or continual Preachers against
Popery, neither do they differ in judgment from the common sort, as most
injuriously you traduce them. By public profession in the unity of the spirit,
in the bond of peace, in the essense, and substance of religion, all agree. And
howsoever there have been some differences in opinion, between many of the
most orient fixed stars in the firmament of the Church as between Ruffinus
and Ierom, Ierom and Austin, Austin and Symplician, and many others: yet all
the world will free our Church from having in her Religion, any diversely
affected from the truth, and addicted to Popery, at the least, any that ever
were of deserving note, or accounted the Principal divines. If there be any
such homely and home-made pieces as your self that coccle, they be no sooner
noted, but punished.

Your prejudice and infamy, will return upon your self, for accusing our
worthiest to maintain a linsey woolsey, blended, mangled Religion. Being
supplanted your self in reputation, you seek to suppla^t others: the utmost
spirits of your malice and spite, being as Enginers, to overthrow the credit of
those, that by their learned pains do seek to overthrow the walls of Babell,
Their public profession and positions free them from your common accusation;
their sermons, Lectures, writings, might satisfy you, but that these heavenly
showers have fallen besides you: Error surprising your will, and ignorance your
knowledge; a small things may move you that were never settled.

Mr LEECH. The First motive. The Protestants admit not a trial of their
Religion, by the testimony of the Fathers; whatsoever they pretend to the
contrary.
BEcause it is a preposterous devise to judge the former ages of the Church by
the later; D. Field. page 204. We willingly admit a trial by the Fathers; says
he in the name of his Church.
therefore the courses of my study have ever been directed unto a diligent
perusal of ancient Fathers; whose authority, simply considered, as it may
preponderate our modern writers; so, in reference unto the Church, being her
witnesses (who is the judge to define all controversies) their testimony is to
be preferred before all Authors whatsoever.

Neither resolved I thus without serious deliberation; and especially, contra
haeref. cap. 1. and. 2.
the grave counsel of Vincentius Lyrine^sis did prevail with me, seeing,
that learned and holy men did generally conspire in this opinion: If any man
will discern Heretical pravity from Catholic verity, he must be furnished
with a double help; first the Canon of sacred Scripture: Secondly the
tradition of the Catholic Church: wherein three things inseparably concur;
Universality, Antiquity, Consent.

The reason of which prescription is yealded by him to be this. The Scripture
is sublime; and, forasmuch as all men sense it not alike, it is necessary to
adioine thereunto the continual interpretation of the Church.

Upon this infallible ground (evident unto all men of any apprehension) I
builded my faith; conforming it always unto those Orthodoxe principles, which
I had derived out of the venerable Fathers.

Hence I assumed this doctrine of Evangelicall Cou^sells, which as I delivered
out of the sacred volumes of Antiquity; so Antiquity it self deduced it
(with me) out of the divine Oracles of holy Scripture. And therefore seeing
that my opinion was clearly built upon this foundation: I pressed it
incessantly, until my unjust Judges were enforced to forsake this means of
trial, and consequently to punish the Fathers in me, as I had spoken by them.

But when I plainly saw, that my doctrine could not be condemned without
condemnation of the ancient Church, and that my Judges were driven to this
extremity, I inferred that their Religion could not be good; and that their
consciences were very bad.

ANSWER.

It is a most preposterous devise, to make the Fathers judges of the
Scriptures, whereas the Scriptures as S. Austin confesses, ought to be the
judges of the Fathers: otherwise, what you impute to us, is the practice of
your selves, which you seek approbation of the former Church by the latin.
That the Fathers may preponderate the modern writers; I answer, for their
antiquity they do: but where the same truth is in both, for their authority,
they do not exceed. Has the Church had no growth since their time? Has the
son of righteousness, Psalm. 19.
going from the end of the heavens, and in his compass returning to the end
thereof again, by his beams given no more light, then when it first rose?
Has not God revealed somethings to one, which he has not to another, 1. Cor.
14.30.
as S. Paul speaks? Our reverend estimation of the Fathers is most learnedly
and fully delivered, by his Majesty, in his premonition: and our willingness
of a trial by the Fathers is openly testified by the Reverend Bewcleark D.
Field, these exceptions or rather annotations considered, that there are diverse
Fathers merely forged, as Hyppolitus, Amphilochius, the epistles of Cletus,
Anacletus, etc. B. Iuell, D. Rainolds, and that world of learning the honorable
B. of Winchester, have proved which point was never answered, as yet. Secondly
diverse false tracts are fathered on the true fathers, as Mr Perkins Problem (a
book never answered) and the work now in our Oxford library in hand, for
comparing all the Fathers with their most ancient manuscripts, do show- 136.
bastard Epistles already discovered, in Gregory. Thirdly, the Fathers are
rejected most scornefully, by Papists, where they cannot wrest them to their
purpose, as is proved by the practice of Canus, Villa vince^tius, Sixtus
Senensis, Baronius, Bellarmine. Fourthly that all of these Papists have taxed
the Fathers, for particular errors. Fifthly (omitting many more reasons) the
fathers make more for us the^ for Papists nay only for us not for Papists; as
that precious Jewel of the Church has irrefragably proved.

The counsel out of Lyrinensis, is already answered, but this I add, he
does not there mean unwritten verities, or a supply to be made to scripture,
for he does acknowledge in the next Chapter, and so again in the 41. that
solus Canon Scripturae sufficit ad omnia, Vincent. Lirinens.
satis superque, that the Scripture is sufficient alone, against all
Heretics, yea alone for all things, and more the^ this, that it is more then
sufficient, and his 41. Chapter does plainly deliver, vnam regula^, to be
scripture, the interpretation of which, is ever to be approved by Scripture.
And for those notes of universality Antiquity, and consent, which you say do
inseparably concur, Vinc. c. 4. c. 5. and 11.
he says not so, the word inseparably is not his, for Vincentius shows that
Heretics have claimed the two former, showing that the Arrians had
universality, and the Donatists Antiquity. And for consent, he forewarneth (as
a Prophet) in 39 Chapter, that when men endeavor Maiorum volumina vitiare, to
corrupt the ancient Fathers as Papists most openly do to obtain Consent: then
the only remedy is sola Scripturarum authoritate convincere, to convince them
by the only authority of Scripture. And therefore if you built your fort upon
this ground as not having red, or not understood your Author, choosing some
fragments and not observing all the particulars, and passages of his meaning,
your foundation is not on the corner stone, the foundation rotten, the building
reeling, and your doctrine has no approbation from Universality, Antiquity, or
lastly from consent, either jointly from all, from the greatest number of
fathers, or from that which is the only Countenance and Approuer of Spirits and
Doctrines, from the Scripture. That therefore, which you make your first motive
to have rended you from the truth, the same I make my first confirmation, to
settle me therein, and to detest Popery, that seeing Papists admit not a trial
of their religion by Scriptures, and that the Fathers admit none that reject
Scriptures, as also that Papists approve not always the Testimony of the
Fathers (as they pretend) I infer in particular that this doctrine of yours, is
worthily condemned, but not the Ancient Church; as also in general, that by
condemning of us in any point you condemn Antiquity, seeing our Reformed
Churches be reduced to the ancient Primitive. And therefore your New found
Religion is Rebellion against the Truth, and Apostasy from Scripture and
Antiquity.

Mr LEECH. The second Motive. The Protestants prefer their Reformed
Congregations, before the ancient Catholic Church.
AS my violent Judges did palpably disclaim the sentence of the ancient
Church, so they vnreasonablie required my submission unto their reformed
Congregations; which, as they be not comparable with the purity of the former,
so their principal Doctors ( Luther, and Zwinglius; men no less odious each
unto the other, S. Austin. S. Ambros. S. Hierom.
then both are hateful unto the Church of Rome) are no ways matchable with
the Patrones of my doctrine.

For as S. Gregory Nazianzen justly excepted against the Arrians in this
manner; If our faith be but 30. S. Gregory. Epistola 1. ad Cledo^ contra
Arrianos.
years old (400 years being passed since the incarnation of Christ) then our
gospel has been preached in vain; our martyrs have died in vain until this
time, etc. So if for a point of faith I must remit my self unto Luther,
Zwinglius, Calvin and their reformed conuenticles, rather then unto the holy
Fathers, and ancient Church; the^ surely the gospel has been miserably
taught, and all our predecessors have been pitifully deceived for 1600. years
since.

Singular therefore was the folly, and partiality of my Judges, to detract
authority from our blessed Fathers, and to yield it unto Lutherans (men of as
new a sta^pe in these times, as the Arrians were in S. Gregory Nazianzen his
time) whose carnal appetites, and base condition of life, drew them to allow
that in their doctrine which they performed in their practice; being contrary
in both unto the canon of scripture, and continual succession of the Church.

The consideration whereof did manifestly detect unto me, that either their
understanding is very mean, or their will very perverse; who feared not to
disauthorise the Fathers, and yet would not grant me the same liberty against
their brethren; in whom I never approved any thing other ways, then it was
consonant with the prescription of Antiquity, or dissonant from her Tradition.

ANSWER.

THe reformed Church that has left Babylon, and is escaped as a bird out of
the snare of the fowler, having received true Religion (...) according to
Scripture, was in all reason to have had submission performed from you, both
because that the truth professed is against this position, as also for that
profession and subscription you had willingly afforded to her, when you were
supposed to be not only a member, but a Minister in her Congregation. Had you
straied as a sheep through simplicity, it had been lamentable, but to fly
being a shepherd, through Apostasy, this is damnable. Luther and Zwinglius,
though they agreed not in all points, yet they both joined in demolishing your
Dagon. Great lights of the Church have diffred in some particulars, nay have
whet their pens like rasors, and edged their tongues like swords, and yet in
the truth of God they have agreed to the suppressing of the kingdom of Satan.
The differences between these two, were nothing so sca^dalous as their joint
conflicts with Rome, were victorious. To cou^tervaile your place out of Gregory
Nazianzene, Prudent. Peristep. him. 10
which you apply improperly. Prude^tius witnesses the heathens did scornfully
so deal with the religion of Christianity in the beginning thereof, Nunc dogma
nobis Christianum nascitur, post evolutos mill demu^ Consules: so you, as if
after so many holy Fathers, our Religion had beginning from Luther, Zwinglius,
or Calvin. But how contrary to all truth, this is: Bristow Motive 45.
Bristow his confession shows in these words, the truth is, that some there
have been, in many ages, Motive. 46.
in some points of their opinion and in his next motive, that many points of
Protestancie were long before, and in diverse places. As also the Waldenses
spoken of by many, who were almost 400. years since, do manifest our Religion,
to have been more ancient then so But we stand not so much upon these, as
because we are certain that from the time of Christ, the profession and
succession of the doctrine of Protestant religion, has with much happiness
continued: and has appeared in place and persons, and time and Doctrine: and
from the beginning of the Churches declination, there have been some ever who
resisted the Church of Rome, and refused their Doctrine, and therefore you may
conclude as you do: that the Gospel has been miserably taught among the^ who
have not sought after the purity of doctrine. Scornful and shameful is that
title you call us by, in the by-name of Lutherans: we have no other title, but
Christians. And as unjust is your slander, that Lutherans are men of carnal
appetites and base condition: whose regularity in life, by integrity of
conversation, is far above any sort of Papists. And this your second
consideration is my second confirmation, that Papists having not true knowledge
cannot have true faith, either Originally in the foundation, or Doctrinally in
their assertions, because they want the assurance either evidentiae, or
inhaerentiae, accounting the Scriptures subordinat, and the Reformed Churches
illegitimat.

Mr LEECH. The third Motive. The Protestants brand the Catholic doctrine with
the name of Popery.
Luther.
THe name of Papists was first devised by a luxurious Apostata; inventour also
of the name of Sacramentaries; for so both Catholics, and Zwinglians stand
indebted unto him in these respects.

By the insolency of this man it came to pass, that as many other doctrines,
so particularly this, had been stamped with the imputation of Popery; whence
it was that my Calvinian Judges (calumniating both me and it) were pleased to
fasten the note of Popery upon it, and of a Papist upon me.

But since my grounds are merely Catholic (as you see) and since this
doctrine it self is the common faith of ancient Church; it follows, either
that it is no Popery, (as these me^ term it) or that Popery (truly
conceived) is the very Catholic faith. But of the two, the later is more
probable.

Whereupon I inferred this conclusion for my final resolution; that Popery was
necessarily consequent upon the true grounds of divinity; and therefore my
Judges betrayed their own folly in this behalf; for as much, What Pope did
ever devise this and many other doctrines which are called Popepery?
as by a condemnation of this doctrine, they must inevitably confess, that
Popery (well understood) is the doctrine of Antiquity; and that the Fathers
were no less Papists have in then my self.

ANSWER.

LVxurious Apostat you, know is a scandalous title, cast upon Luther: whose
many volumes, continual sermons, and indefatigable pains did receive a better
Testimony out of the mouths of learned Papists, as is before proved. The
surname of Papists, is among some of you gloried in: and are you ashamed of it?
Seeing it comes from the word Papa, that is, the Pope, to (whom you all
profess) subjection, as a matter necessary to salvation: why should you abhor
it? Indeed it is S. Hieromes rule aduersus Luciferianos; If any, which are
said to belong to Christ, will be termed not of our Lord Jesus Christ, but of
some other, Hier. advers. Lucif.
etc: they are not the Church of Christ, but the Synagogue of Antichrist. But
you reply, that you do not approve and assume this name: more learned and more
wise Papists do. Anast. Cochel Palaestrit. honoris and 1. p. 9. and 6.
Cochelet is zealous in the defense of it: if it be odious to others it is
glorious to him; we are Papists, says he, and confess it, and glory in that
name: and to this purpose I could cite others. Luther was the first Author
(you say) of this name. It were the abuse of my Reader to discourse about such
impertine^cies: but otherwise I could easily disprove this. This doctrine was
by Luther and your Calvinian Judges called Popery. It was some injury sure to
join things, of so dislike natures, as to call him Papist, who holds popery:
and it had been a great calumny to you, if you had not become Papist, because
then you were termed so, and now profess your self to be so. Is not this a
good reason, to make you Turnecoate, and to leave the religion and Church
wherein you were Baptized? Or because we term your Catholic doctrine,
Popery; therefore you are so angry you will leave us. But consider that
Catholic Doctrine is the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and the true
Catholic church by the signification of the word, is the universal Church so
called because it is over all the world, and is not tied to any Country, place,
person, or condition of men. According to which sense, the Roman Church cannot
be called the Catholic Church. Boz. sig. Eccl. l. 19. c. 1. Bell. de Romans
Pont praef. and lib. 3. c. 21.
For Bozius, and Bellarmine do complain that the Protestants doctrine
possesses many and large Provinces; England, Scotland, Denmark, Norwey,
Sweden, Germany, Mag Gregor. descrip. 166.
Poland, Bohemia, Hungaria, Prussia, Litvania, Livonia. And Maginus in his
Geography says, that the Greeks long since departed from the Church of Rome,
and appointed themselves Patriarks: and these provinces follow the Greeks
religion; Circassia, Walachia, Bulgaria, Moscovia, Russia, Mingrelia, Brosina,
Albania, Illyricum, part of Tartary, Servia, Croatia, and all the provinces
living upon the Euxine Sea. And not only all these, but how manifest is it,
that the kingdom of France, and the low Countries flourish in the Protestant
belief, besides many thousands in Spain, and Italy? It is as easy to prove
that Popery is not Catholic in time, as it is plain it is not universal in
place: for besides that Reynerius, who lived three hundred years ago, Refert.
Illyr. catol. tom. 2.
does acknowledge that the Waldenses which professed as we do, were reputed
to have been ever since the Apostles time: so on the contrary, it is open to
all the world, that the Roman Church has received many new born bastardly
opinions, which were never before extant. I know there was a time when the
faith of the Romans was published through out the whole world. Romans 1.8.
But now the Angel has told us, that Babylon is fallen: many alterations from
the state of that Church. Who knows not how strange the point of Supremacy
was even in the time of Gregory the great? how the Counsels of Lateran, and
Trent, give the Pope so great a transcendency, as that he is above a general
Council? that the Council of Constance and Trent forbid the Cup to the lay
people? that Transubstantiation was made a matter of faith by Innocent the
third, in the Lateran Council, within these 400 years? that the Council of
Trent proposed Images not only to be worshipped, Pol. Virg, lib. 6 c. 13. de
inventi.
which as Polydor confesses all the Fathers condemned: but it also inioined
men to yield them divine honor? These and infinite more alterations in
religion, falling from God, truth falling from them, do show, that the name of
their opinions deserves not a Catholic title, but is mere Popery.

You lay for your ground, that it is probable only, that Popery truly
conceived, is the very Catholic faith: yet notwithstanding you conclude for
your final resolution, that Popery is the necessary consequent upon the true
grounds of divinity. Can this stand together, that Popery depends necessarily
upon the grounds of divinity: and yet it is but probable, that it is the
Catholic faith? This your third vnconsiderat consideration is my absolute
resolution that either the Catholic faith is not a necessary co^sequent as the
grounds of divinity, which is absurd to think: or Popery is not the
Catholic faith, which I verily believe, and have proved by many testimonies.

Mr LEECH. The fourth Motive. The Protestants subvert the truest means of
piety, and perfection.
PErfection is not absolute in this life, but graduall; that is to say; men are
perfect in a degree: some more, some less, according to their cooperatio^ with
divine grace

To which end, and purpose, there are Consilia perfectionis, Counsels of
perfection, as Virginity, Poverty etc. which remoouing the impediments of
perfection, are excellent means to conduct us thereunto; in as much as they
withdraw us from the love of the flesh and of the world, which are our capital
enemies assaulting us with their continual delights, and pleasures.

But the Protestants (being in the number of them, of whom the Apostles, by
prophetic spirit, spoke long before; that they would not suffer wholesome
doctrine) renounce the advice of their Savior; qui potest capere, capiat; they
reject the monition of S. Paul, consilium do; they cast behind the^ the common
judgment of ancient Fathers in this point. And whereas themselves are now
carried away with the evil current of this worst age; they fear not, not only
to disclaim the Fathers but irreligiously to slander them, D. Benefield. in
his lecture.
as as men bewitched with the errors of their time.

Hence it is that the plausibilitie of the fifth gospel seeks not to cast any
raines upon the fervor of nature, but yields passage rather, and help unto
her precipitate course.

S Paul was of a contrary opinion; witness his own words, castigo corpus etc.
Antiquity was of another disposition; witness S. Hierom in his epistle unto
Pope Damasus, and unto the virgin Eustochium. Witness S. Gregory Nazianzen in
his funeral oration upon S. Basil. witness the whole quire of ancient
Church; Carnem legibus fraenavit.
which with a sweet heavenly harmony, as well in practice, as in doctrine, has
commended unto us the restraint of lawful things with a singular austerity of
life.

These things, being wholly opposite unto the delicacy of Luthers spirit, are
reputed Popish by him, and by his carnal sectaries; whose single faith (not
clogged with the burden of pious works) can more easily mount unto heaven.
Thus are they lulled a sleep in the cradle of security, dreaming of a victory
without any striving at all.

If this be the way, unto happiness, the Way it self has misled us; our
guides have seduced us; our teachers have misinformed us: the austerity of so
many Saints registered in the canon of Gods word, and recorded in the Calender
of the Church, has been practiced in vain; and the late gospel is more
profitable then the former.

But whether I may rely more safely upon the first, or last; I remit me unto
the consideration of any man, that has the sense of true piety lodged in his
breast.

ANSWER.

PErfection we teach thus. All true believers have a state of perfection, in
this life, and that this perfection has two parts: first, the imputation of
Christ's perfect obedience, which is the ground and fountain of all our
perfection whatsoever; Secondly, sincerity, or uprightness. And this stands
in two things: first, in the acknowledging of our imperfection and
unworthiness, in respect of our selves; secondly, in a constant purpose,
endeavor and care to keep the commandments of God. So far are we, from
perverting the true means of perfection, as has been often answered, and
needs no more to be answered, but that your odious Tautology does expect some
kind of answer. We refuse not that which is called by the Apostle wholesome
docrine, but that which the same spirit has called Doctrinam Daemoniorum,
Doctrine of Devils; the texts of Scripture are often and fully satisfied, and
the Fathers plainly and truly interpreted, so that it is most contrary to our
practice, to disclaim the Fathers to slander them as you slander us: But
especially seeing herein you cast this imputation on D. Benefield his Lecture,
see his answer, Praefatione ad Academicos Oxonienses. 4. ad 7. where how
untruly you tax him, and how unworthily the Papists have dealt with the
Fathers may appear. How many points of the Popish Religion, do directly tend
to subversion of pieety, to maintenance of sin, and liberty of life? Have not
they variety of dispensations for any sin, lice^ces for all things unlawful;
and as if Popery consisted but of this triplicity, impudence, ignorance, and
indulgence it is maintained, they may believe as the Church believes, and
never need to learn what the Church holds; they may justify the allowance
of Stews for a common wealth, so Harding teaches; Hard. confut. Apol. p. 161.
they profess that Papists are discharged of all bond of allegiance toward
Princes, if they be not of the same religion, so the Jesuits hold; they
profess that debtors may except against their creditors, and choose whether
they pay them, if they be not of the same Religion, Ovand. 4. d. 13 Sam Ang. p.
101. nu. 15. Caiet. 22 ae. p. 144. Greg. de val. Tom 3. page 1090.
so Ovandus professes; that prisoners may break iaile as Caietan averreth;
that Children may marry without consent of their Parents, as Gregory de
valentia maintains; that the Sabbath may be broken, obedience neglected, an
oath infringed, murder justified, and what not? Your fifte Gospel, we are
not to be taxed with, we only acknowledge the 4 rivers of that Paradise of God.
The fifth was the work of a monk of your own, of the same stamp with Alcoranum
Fra^sciscanum, and our Ladies Psalter, all manner of blasphemies abound in
both. You urge S. Paul his castigo corpus: does not every true Christian seek
to practice this among us, letting blood in the swelling veins of pride,
launcing the impostume of greedy desires, quenching the fire of filthy lusts,
and all the fiery darts of the Devil? Saint Hieroral, whom you urge, did
worthily practice this, (I confess:) and had that good father not been over
luxuriant, in commending virginity, and condemning matrimony, your own men had
not so censured him, as they do. Gregory Nazianzene his speech concerning
Basil, no doubt is as true of many thousand Protestants, who have bridled the
appetites, and lusts of the flesh, and have subdued themselves to the obedience
of Gods spirit. And howsoever Antiquity have commended the restraint of lawful
things to us: yet in this they ever taught that lawful things when they are
hurtful to us, are unlawful, and we are bound to avoid al things that are
hindrances to Gods service. Continue your virulency and acrimony of speech
against Luther: let his works and studies testify, whether he were of so
delicate a spirit as you affirm: and, if by his carnal sectaries you mean
Protestants, read our D. Downham, Mr Rogers, Mr Greenham, nay Luther himself,
and see whether we maintain not that a Christian is bound to watch, and pray,
and fast, and the^ consider whether we teach a single faith or no: for as we
teach, that faith only must justify us, so also we declare that works must
justify our faith, and continually we preach the excellency and necessity of
good works. If you lacked Chastisement, you might have complained and been
supplied: fasting, I doubt not but you were practiced in, you were put out of
Commons: and for whipping (the Monks exercise) though it sort better that you
have it abroad, then at home; yet that should not have been wanting to you, if
you had acquainted your friends. Seriously, I answer, that Protestants are not
lulled a sleep in the cradle of security. How many sighs, do many send up to
heaven, for their sins, what strains of compu^ction, what streams of
contrition flow from the limbecke of many of their souls? And yet this only
serves not.

For, if this had been the only way to happiness: the^ had the Pharisees by
violence obtained heaven. The holiness of their carriage, continuance at
devotio^, avoidance of all means of polution, their yearly tithing, monthly
alms, weekly fastings, daily whippings, howrely prayers had holp them. But of
al such, God asks, Who required these things at your hands? nay who
counseled any man, to do this, but only such as require will worship? Al these
ways, in the balance of the sanctuary, appear to be but hay, and stubble,
and straw. To this the way has not led, the guides not directed, the teachers
not informed. For performing of this, the true Saints have not been registered;
in this, the true church has never bin practiced. Wherefore my fourth
confirmation, is to stick to the unity of that happy Church, which has so
worthily cleared it self, from these visards of perfection and rags of
superstition.

Mr LEECH. The fifth Motive. The Protestants corrupt the holy scripture in
defense of their opinions.
THe proper means designed by God to convince Heresy, are two, to wit, sacred
scripture; and Ecclesiastical Tradition. Now because Heretics are clearly
refuted by the second, therefore they fly only unto the first, which they
deprave, and mangle according to the liberty of their spirits. And this they
perform partly in their translations, and partly in their interpretation
thereof.

Though many examples might be afforded in this kind yet I need not seek after
further proof, then this present business does afford, whereof I now entreat.
For whereas the words of our Savior are easy, and plain; all men do not
receive this saying; as though there were such an impossibility therein, that
the freedom of will concurring with the grace of God, could not subdue the
inclinations of corrupt nature.

Tom. 7. in ep. ad Wolfgang.
Hence Luther (the slave of his affections) says, that the propension of
fervent nature in MAN toward a WOMAN is so created by God in his body, that
it cannot be extinct by any vows, and therefore he, that resolves to live
without a WOMAN, must leave the name of a MAN, and make himself to be plainly
an Angel, or spirit. For it is by no means granted unto him by God; so that
it is above his strength to contain himself from a woman. And this is by the
compulsiue word of God, willing, and commanding the same.

Wherefore the Counsel of virginity is intolerable with them, that conceive
such an impossibility to fulfill it. To increase, Tom. 5. sermon. de matrimon
and multiply, it is not a precept (says Luther) but it is more then a
precept; it is implanted nature; it is as necessary as meat, and drink. It is
no more in the power of Man to live without a woman, then to be a woman, and no
man.

In vain then does our Savior give his advise, and S. Paul his Counsel.
For, in Luthers gospel, it is more then a precept to avoid virginity. And yet
my Judges not admitting it to be a Counsel, could not deny it to be a
precept. Which yet if it be so; why do they then make less conscience to
fulfill a Precept, then Catholics do to follow a Counsel? For the neglect
of the first is a sin; but it is not so in the second; unless we tie our
selves unto it by a voluntary vow, being not constrained thereunto by a
necessary command.

ANSWER.

THe proper means appointed by God to confute all sprouting Heresy is
Scripture, which, because it is so powerful, against Popery, therefore Papists
do disclaim it, and with the most contemptuous Phrases brand that testimony,
that has marked them with the stamp of heresy. Tearming it a nose of wax, as
Peresius blasphemously does, Peers. de Tradit. praef. Pighius con^ 3. Eckius
Enchr. c. 1. prop. 4.
or dead ink and a dumb judge, as Pighius (and besides many other titles of
disgrace) Eckius affirms that God never commanded his Apostles to write any
Scripture. Thus they vilify the word, to magnify tradition: which tradition
we acknowledge not, for with Mary we have chosen the better part, and do
assure our selves, that there is no means so absolute as scripture to co^vince
Heretics: which means you would take from us, by laying to our charge false
translations, and corrupt interpretations. Concerning false Translations, much
might be spoken, conferring yours with the Original, how many hundred
differences will be found? how many Additions, Detractions, Falsifications,
Depravations, Lyndan. de opt. genesis Interpret. l. 3. c. 1. 2. 4. 6.
and intolerable Barbarismes be in the vulgar Lindanus has confessed, who
acknowledges that there be monstrous corruptions, of all sorts in it, scarce
one book of Scripture that is undefiled, and so have Bannes, and Sixtus
Senensis, and others accused it. And I desire but this resolution of any
learned Papist, that seeing the Council of Trent has approved and commanded
the use of the vulgar translation, affixing a Bull before it; and Sixtus
Quintus has afterward commanded only his translation to stand in force,
showing many errors in the vulgar, and therefore has prefixed his Bull before
it; and after him, Clemens Octavus, finding manifold corruptions in the Bible
of his Predecessor, caused it again to be translated with the Preface of his
Bull upon fear of a curse, commanding all to approve only this, of his: I
ask, seeing these translations differing in so many hundred places, some
merely co^tradicting each others, and seeing all of these are commanded upon
no less the^ the Thunderboult of Anathema, Bellum papa^^.
to which of these must Papists adhere for their resolution in doubts. I am
sure Doctor Morris being asked that Question was not able to answer: and being
again pressed to this, was as silent as before showing thereby the
translations insufficiency.

This Motive you had from Gretzer, who makes himself sport with our later
translations, fitter for a stage then a matter of such consequence.
Interpretation
And concerning interpretation of Scripture, if you go no farther then the
Rhemists Testament, it were enough to pay him in his own kind: These and such
other more absurd be the common words of the Rhemists translation.
Be not these dainty words to instruct the unlearned, Agnition for
acknowledgme^t, Azimaes for unleavened bread, Didrachmes for tribute money, the
Dominicall day for sunday, for Preaching Evangelize, for a young scholar a
Neophyte, Paraclite for a Comforter, victimes for sacrifice, and many, many
more? And for the place you lay to the chardge of our translation: First I may
answer it, as Bellarmine does answer Chemnicius, concerning a place in
Ecclesiastes, Non numerando verbo, sed expendendo, and sensum eorum exprimendo:
which kind of Translation S. Hierome approves. Secondly, the word (...) used
in the original text, Mat. 19 does not only signify, caepio, actiuely: but
also passiuely, capax sum. whereupon Erasmus tra^slates it, non omnes sunt
capaces, and the Syriae according to your own Fabritius Boderianus renders it
omnes non sufficienter capiunt: not so much because they will not, but because
they have not the gift, and therefore cannot. To a man that will admit reason
the next words enforce it; All receive not this saying (or word:) yet some do.
what are they that receive it? they to whom it is given. Is it not manifest
then, that a peculiar gift inableth a man to such a course of life and not any
thing of himself? S. Augustine (which both the Rhemists and your Gregory
Martin urge to maintain this your frivolous exception) is wrested, contrary to
his meaning: his words are these; All men take not this saying, but they to
whom it is given, Quibus enim non est datum, aut nolunt, aut non implent, quod
volunt. This nolunt you refer to the gift, as though all might take it, if
they would, and if they do not, it is no aversment. But S. Augustine
understands it, of the effect of the gift as if he should have said; They
that have not such a gift (let them vow what they will) they enjoy not the
fruit of it: either they mind not to do what they are enabled for; or, if they
purpose any such matter, they fail because the groundworke which should come
from above, is wanting: whereupon S. Augustine in another place says, Aust. in
Psalm. 147.
Paucorum est virginitas in carne, omniu^ debet esse in cord. But your
Rhemists urge Origin. It is given to all that ask it. It is true, but look
what Doctor Fulke answers out of Origin, Tract. 7. in Matthew.
Vtile est autem scire, quid quis debeat petere.

The places you wrest out of Luther, be to be interpreted (as by circu^sta^ces
of the places may be collected) of the ordinary strength of me^. For he denies
not a peculiar gift. Conscience is to be made of doing that which God enableth
us to do: and yet presumption is to be feared, if we undertake that which we
cannot perform. It is better to marry then to burn: and S. Augustines
conclusion is firm, Lib. de sancta virginit. cap. 18.
Melior est in Scriptura Dei veritas, quam in cuiusquam mente virginitas. And
this is not against Christ's gospel, or S. Paul his advise: for the same Act is
in the choice and election, a Counsel; and in the performance and practice a
precept neither do Protestants less care or endeavor, to fulfill in general,
the Precept then in particular, each man enabled, to exercise his gift in the
Counsel or branch of the general precept. Knowing, that punishment is
certainly due to neglect of both. And therefore this is my fifth resolution, and
pillar in the building of my faith, that Papists understand not scripture
fully, nor interpret truly, who have so many wrested opinions, and manifested
Corruptions.

Mr LEECH. The sixth Motive. The Protestants are Iovinianists, and therefore
Heretics, and not Catholics, even for this cause.
S. Augustine (as a Register of the Cotholique Church) does witness that
Iovinian broached this heretical fancy, Here Is. 82. See the perorat. of S.
August. his treatise, vide Ambros. 10. lib. epist. epist. 80 and 81.
contrary to the received opinion of the whole Church. There is no more merit
in the virginity of Nonnes, and other continent persons, then in chaste mariadge.

The very same opinion is defended, Counsels of perfection denied by Iovinian.
and embraced by the Lutherans, and Caluinists; and they both conspire with
Iovinian in this heretical tenent; that there is no greater perfection in a
virginal, the^ in a conjugal estate.

And though it pleased Doctor Field to say; Page 143.
We do not approve any private opinion of Iovinian, contrary to the judgment
of Gods Church; yet both he, and his Grace of Cant. (who approved his book)
speak herein against their own conscience, yea mine own experience in this
particular business informs me otherways the^ they pretend. And I desire no
better witness to convince them then S. Augustine, who writes of this matter
in the name of the universal Church.

According to whose relation (compared with the general opinion of Lutherans,
and Calvinists) I do confidently affirm, that the Protestants are Heretics
in this behalf; and that, for this cause (besides many others; which I spare
to deal in at this present) they are exiled out of the society of the ancient
Catholic Church.

For S. Augustine protests (in the peroration of his aforesaid treatise) that
whosoever does maintain any of these Heresies, which he has recorded before,
he is not a Catholic Christian; and therefore an Heretical companion. Which
censure does necessarily fall upon my Calvinian judges, and upon all such, as
concur with their irreligious opinion.

ANSWER.

THe private opinions of Iovinian, disagreeing from the judgment of the holy
Catholic Church, we approve not. The opinion for which you term us
Heretics, is noted by S. Austin to have been an equalling of married, with
single life. S. Augustine numbreth this among their heresies, not so much
because he thought it to be a heresy, for in many places that good Father does
equallise matrimony with virginity: but he mentions it rather, because S.
Ierom had not long before written against that point as Heretical, for which
Act, S Ierom himself was much condemned: and how his books against Iovinian
were excepted against, even at Rome D. Field shows in the place cited by you.
Whose words (which you propose so disgracefully) are better worth the pondering
then you think. Our determination and state of that question, is this breefly;
virginity is a state of life, wherein, if all things be answerable in the
parties that embrace it, there are fewer occasions of distractions from God,
and more opportunities of attaining to the height of excellent virtue, then in
the opposite state of marriage: yet so, that it is possible for some married
men, so to use their estate, that they be no way inferior to those that are
single. This does S. Austin confidently defend, so your Jesuit Espencaeus, as
before, and so also Gregory Nazianzen absolutely does prove it, Nazianz.
in his Oration made in the praise of Gorgonia his sister. I might stand much
in proof of this, as also, that the old Roman Church did defend and maintain
the cause of Iovinian. But I have in many places already answered this
accusation, and therefore I retort upon you, that seeing your imputations be
furnished with malice and spite, rather then truth and spirit, my sixth
resolution is, to acknowledge with thankfulness, duty, and comfort, the truth
of God, defended in this Church of England, from whence rather out of a desire
to malign, the^ out of strength of argument to repugne, you are fallen by
contumacy in action, and heresy in opinion.

Mr LEECH. The seventh Motive. The Protestants accommodate their Religion unto
the state, and present time.
AS the forms of Ecclesiastical governments are varied by the Calvinists in
sundry places according unto the state, under which they live, so their
Doctrines are framed according to the times, and made suitable unto the policy
of their common wealths. Pipe state; and dance Church. Religion must have no
coat otherwise, then measure is taken by the State.

Aiust experience whereof I had in the passage of this business. For as the
more gross, and senseless Calvinists in England do Heretically confound
Evangelicall Counsels with Legal Precepts, so others, more regardfull of the
time, wherein they live, then of the truth which they should profess, do
willingly yield (for if they should do otherways, they should speak against
their judgment, and conscience) that this distinction is founded in the
gospel, and propounded by the Church; but they say, that it is not a doctrine
seasonably to be delivered in these times.

And might not this statizing reason as well plead for Arrius his damnable
Heresy, being more generally disaffected by the state in those times, Contra
Lucifer.
dum totus mundus ingemuit sub Arrianismo; as S. Hierom speaks.

But I considered first; that truth is not to be impugned and suppressed, is
the common fury of Calvinists has ever sought to extinguish it, to the
uttermost of their power. in which respect I found my self extraordinarily
affected for the reiection of their heresy in this behalf. And I trust it was
not without special motion of that spirit, which breaths in the whole body
of the Catholic church, and consequently in every member of the same.

Secondly, though time bear the blame, yet men are in the fault: and therefore
seeing that the open enemies of truth did bark, when her secret friends did
hold their peace: I conceived that it was my duty rather to change the time
from evil into good, then to suffer it to grow from evil in to worse.

And though some men (assisted with power to punish that, which their peevish
fancy disaffected) did bear me down by violence, yet I took no less
comfort by this injury which they offered unto me, the^ courage by the course
which they held against my doctrine. For I saw that they rather observed
profane policy to force me unto silence, then either show of justice or piety
in proceeding against my (falsely supposed) crime, or weight of reason in
convincing my understanding. And why? they are the slaves of time, but not
disciples of truth.

ANSWER.

HOw true this imputation (urged against us) is in the Roman Religion, some
parts of the Christian world see, and others feel it. Leo, that kinsman of the
roaring Lion, when he was about to go in visitation to his infernal cosen,
confessed how much worth to his purse, fabula Christi, that tale of Christ was
(as he blasphemously, called the gospel.) And is it any better esteemed at
this day among Papists? at lest, have they not enioined tales and fables and
lies, to be believed as well as the Gospel? Indulgences, and Purgatory (to go
no farther) be they not only invented to get money? does the Pope ever keep
fire, but he has his fuel from Purgatory? Is not this doctrine of Monkery,
only inve^ted to humor diverse mela^cholike fat pau^ches. If our land were a
poor Country the Pope would never keep such a stir: it is not to gain
souls but Peter pence. And to sum up all in one word, all religion depends on
the Popes pleasure. That, as in the Metaphysickes, the utmost proposition is,
Nihil simul est and non est: so in Popish divinity the utmost resolution is,
Papa non potest errare. Wherefore Bellarmine holds Question of Supremacy
(which all the world sees to be but a matter of Policy. Bellarm. in praef. ad
3 co^trovers.
) to be summam rei Christianae,) who then are the statizers? To say nothing of
your Jesuits, that manage all the affairs of those Princes, in whose Courts
(like Salomons Spiders) they remain. Our Religion is the same which the
Apostles did teach, and was in practice in the Primitive Church; and happy is
the state in which this true Religion flourishes: your distinction of Precepts
and Counsels has been sufficiently ca^vased, and you have been taught in what
sense we retain the name of Counsel, and that S. Austin calls your
Consilia perfectionis, Aug. lib. de perfect. iustitiae ad coelestinum.
praecepta perfectionis. It is a slander by which you seek to deceive by your
speech of accusing any of our part, as if they did profess, that your doctrine
was true, but not seasonable for these times. We hold that all places and all
times must entertain truth, and therefore your first collection is false.
Calvinists extinguish not truth, Rome does rack, and burn, and torture the
Gospel and the truth thereof: but we fear the punishment of sinning against
conscience and knowledge, if we should suppress but the lest truth; we behold
it with an impartial eye, we repress not the professors, but adversaries
thereof, of which number you were accounted one. Your second Collection (which
has more sound then sense) is easily refuted: time bears no blame for truth,
secret enemies may look against her open friends, but wisdom will be
justified: and though Satan seek to sow bad seed in good ground, yet the Lords
busbandmen sleep not, but will reform ill by good, and refute that is false,
by faith. Your last close, concerning men assisted with power to punish you,
disaffected by peevish fancy, is merely false: it was not peevish fancy, as
your Popish folly terms it, but it was religious piety and policy that
disaffected, and rejected your doctrine, the power of Scripture, of Fathers, of
all authority assisting them. Rage, not courage strengthened you, and therefore
Justice and Religion did censure and punish you: and God will (without your
repentance) plague you for your vile and violent terms against the disciples
of truth, your self being a fellower of blindness, and a hater of goodness. In
the mean time this is my 7 confirmation, that our doctrine is true Religion
and Catholic, seeing they that seek to disgrace it, be either statizing
Politiques, or slaundering Heretics, able to say little in show, less in
sense, least in truth.

Mr LEECH. The eight Motive. The Protestants can patiently suffer the articles
of the Creed, etc. to be violated: but they are severe in those things, that
repugne their vtility, or sensuality whatsoever.
EVery truth, in respect of God revealing it, and the Church propou^ding it, is
of equal necessity to be believed; howbeit, in respect of the matter it self;
one truth may be of greater consequence, and dignity then an other. And yet it
is not the greatness of the matter it self, but the manner of revealing, which
tieth us to a necessity of belief.

I will instance in this present business. The distinction of Evangelicall
Counsels from Legal Precepts, is a truth to be accepted upon necessity of
salvation. Why? because it is sufficiently revealed unto us by God, and fully
propounded by the Catholic Church; so that it is either wilful ignorance,
not to know it, or extreme obstinacy to withstand it. But yet the Articles of
the Creed, which are the first elements of faith, commended unto us by
Apostolical tradition, may justly be reputed more weighty, in respect of the
matter, which is handled therein; as namely the descent of Christ into hell.
Which article of faith, is admirably perverted by the Ministers in England, un
so much as 3. or 4 sundry opinions thereof are freely, and vncontroulably
delivered by them, unto their simple flocks.

I might instance in their different opinions about the Sacraments, and other
high mysteries of salvation, wherein fanaticall spirits expatiate without any
reproof. But I willingly pretermit these, and come to other particular points
of doctrine, which I preached amongst them without impeachment.

First, against Calvin his heretical Autotheisme destroying the unity of the
divine essence, I taught, with the Nicene Creed, and all antiquity; that
Christ is Deus de Deo, having the same substance that is in the Father, really
communicated unto him in his eternal generation.

Secondly; with S. Gregory, Damascen, the Greek, and Latin Church I taught,
that Christ assumed our nature perfect, and complete in the very instant of his
conception: contrary to the absurd opinion of diverse Calvinisticall
Protestants, who avouch that his incarnation was by te^porall degrees, and not
by entire perfection in an instant.

Thirdly; that God was only the permissiue, not any impulsive cause of sin;
though Calvin blaspheme to the contrary, and deride the distinction.

Fourthly, Christ crying out, Deus meus, Deus meus, etc: was not in a trau^ce;
he suffered no torments of hell; died not by degrees (as though his senses
decayed by little and little) but in perfect sense, pain, obedience, patience,
humility, constancy, he rendered up his righteous soul a voluntary sacrifice
for sin. But the common opinion of Calvinists is contrary unto this position.

Fifthly; Filius and spiritus sanctus quoniam non sunt a se diem and horam
iudicij nesciu^t a se, pater autem quoniam a se est scit a se Hilar. in Mat.
Respectu ordinis non teporis. Lib. epist. 8. c. 42. In Marc. 13.32.
Christ was not ignorant of the day of judgment either as God or man: not as
God: for though he knew it not primarily, and originally as of himself (being
not God of himself) yet did he know it secondarily by way of communication
from the Father. Not as Man, for though he did not know it Ex natura
humanitatis, yet did he know it In natura humanitatis, as S. Gregory
distinguishes. And this doctrine is contrary to Calvin his blasphemous gloss;
to wit, Christus communem habuit cum Angelis ignorantiam.

These, and many such like doctrines (directly opposite to Calvin his tenants)
as he is contrary to truth (for though his disciples call him a great light of
the gospel, yet I rather approve the censure of D. Hunnius, Calvin. Iudaiz.
a famous Lutheran, saying, that Calvin is an Angel of darkness) could pass
unnoted, and uncontrolled by my Calvinian Judges, and all other adherents unto
that faction.

Why then is this distinction of Precepts and Cou^sailes so hateful unto the
Calvinists? Alas, it touches their copy hold, most of them being either
married men, or bending that way: and therefore let Sacraments, Christ, Church,
etc: be abused, nay let many points of Catholic doctrine be preached by
Orthodox divines, yet they are more attentive unto the suppression of this
truth, and the like, which does more directly concern their carnal pleasure,
and worldly profit.

For they that have sold themselves to be the exact vassals of their own
affections, and other men's wills, are careful to provide against any thing
right, or wrong; true, or false; which may be prejudicial thereunto; rather
attending what it is which will maintain their sensuality, the^ what is
orthodox in sound divinity.

ANSWER.

The dignity of truth, with the necessity of every truth we preach: but this
distinction so often, and idle and unnecessarily repeated I pass over, as ever
holding that they be Evangelicall precepts: The Article of Christ his desce^t
into hell, is not perverted by our ministers, it is believed and taught by us,
witness Mr Rogers in his book The Catholic doctrine of the Church of
England, Mr Perkins on the Creed, our Articles concluded upon in Convocation,
and other books in this kind. Bellar. de Anima Christi. l. 4. cap. 6..
quaeritur.
Bellarmin de anima Christi lib. 4. cap. 6.. quaeritur 2. says thus; Omnes
convenient quod Christus aliquo modo ad inferos descenderit. Of the manner only
of this descending if there be some doubt, there was the like also among the
Fathers, and so Bellarmine also in the place before cited, declares that above
threescore Creedes of the ancient Fathers and Counsels, leave out this
Article: yet Luther, Brentius the Centuriasts retain it, and Calvin cited by
Bellarmin lib. 2. Inst. cap. 16.. 8. dicit hunc articulum in praecipuis
habendum, The schoolmen agree not on it. Durand 3. sent. did. 22. quaest. 3.
Durand. 3. sent. did. 22. quaest. 3.
is confuted by Bellarmin in his book de anima Christi lib. 4. cap. 15. So
that if this be a motive to forsake us, it should also be a motive for you to
forsake the Fathers, and schoolmen. Our differences about the sacraments are
none at all. Crastovius has observed many contradictions of the Jesuits
herein. The doctrines that follow in rehearsal, Crastov.
which (you say) you preached without impeachme^t, were ce^sured though not
publicly, yet privately: you were the^ pitied, rather then opposed, as being
known to be ungrounded in these principles. For you understood not Calvin,
Bellarmine does defend him, Nescio (says he, Bell. lib. 2. lib. 2. de Christ.
cap. 19.
speaking of this imputed error) an sit in re, ^n solum in verbis; and again,
Non facile pronuntio eum in hoc errore fuisse; and again, that Calvin was free
from error, he absolutely affirms, in the matter he erred not, in re non est
quaestio, and again in the Tom. 3. in edit. Lugdun. An. 1596.
Index of his book, referring the reader to the place these be his words,
Calvini sententia (...) explicatur and defenditur: and more the^ all this,
speaking of Symlerus expounding Calvin's meaning in this point, Iosi^ sententia
non video cur Catholica dicenda non sit. So that Bellarmin allows Calvin's
opinion to be Catholical, and you revile it with the term of heretical: Ergo,
with you Catholica se^te^tia est haeretica.

Secondly, for the Conception of Christ, Thomas stateth the question, after
this manner. In the conception three things are to be considered: 1 the
co^fluence of the matter, 2 the forming of the body of Christ out of this
matter, 3 the groth of it so formed in the womb: this Confluence, and growth he
acknowledges to have proceeded successively; but concerning the forming of
this body, in the which the essence of the conception consists, his assertion
is, that it was in an instant, not member after member, or lineament after
lineament, in 46. days, as the conception is of other men. This opinion of
his, which he groundeth on Gregory's authority, though it do scarsely relish
with Caietan, Psalm. 139. v. 15 16.
yet by us was not so much disliked, as meddled not with: we hold with David,
that the fashioning of us in the womb, is a secret, clasped in Gods book,
which yet has not been opened. And if it be so in the fabrique and framing of
our bodies: how much more secret, is that sacred mystery of Christ's
incarnation? of which matter with what unsanctified and unpolished terms you
did sometimes entreat, you know, and many of a religious understanding
Congregation in England will never forget. It is not therefore absurd to deny
that which we see no ground for: but presumption in such matters, to affirm
more then is revealed. Which Euclide a heathen did acknowledge, when being
asked a curious question, about the Gods, he answered, Caetera quidem nescio,
illud scio quod odere curiosos.

Thirdly, your rebukeable rebuke of Calvin, which unjustly you tax him for, is
easily answered. No doubt but that in the actions and passions of unrighteous
me^, there is more to be deemed of God, then his bare permission, for
doubtless, he has his will therein: yet not in counselling, and much less in
compelling thereunto, but in ordaining and governing them, in applying them to
better ends, the^ sinners be aware of, he has a will, but not a willingness,
and this not in respect to the sin it self, but to some other good, adioined
unto it. As in the statutes of our Common wealth, there are many things
contained, more then the laws either commit or allow, as treasons, fellonies,
heresies, etc. which notwithstanding the Laws do order and dispose of: so in
the will of God, within the compass and and pale of his arbitrament, much more
is contained, then either by action or authorizement from him, could ever be
defended, and yet that will of his is the Judge and disposer of all those
particulars. But, to come unto that which Bellarmine and you enforce upon
Calvin, and Beza: after many windings and turnings, Bellarmin is driven at
length unto the same tenent. For who acknowledges not this received
distinction, how in every sin two things are to be co^sidred: first, the
action it self, which the schooleme^ call the subject or materiality of the
offense; secondly, the obliquity or deformity of the action, as Oc^am calls
it, which is the swaruing from the line (according to Bellarmin) which Gods
word has drawn us? the first has God for his author, and the Papists cannot
deny it: the second, man's will, and the devil, and no more have our men
affirmed. Suarez, the great schooleman among the Jesuits ingeniously professes
so much: the Protestants, says he, knew well that God intends not that which
is formal in sin, nor inclines the will of man, that he should intend it. And
Bellarmine his words be these to that purpose, Bell. de amiss. great and statu
perfect. c. 2.
Adversarij verbo fatentur, id quod Catholici docent, In words (says he) our
adversaries teach no otherwise then we do. God is not properly the author of
sin, but the orderer: he ordains the work, not the fault; the effect, not
the defect: and by this it is plain, he is more then the permissiue cause. And
if you observe Calvin truly without common malice, you will find that he is
much wronged, and wrested, and may say for himself; If I have evil spoken,
bear witness of the evil: but if I have well spoken, Ioh. 10.23.
why smitest thou me?

Fourthly, Christ crying to his father, Deus meus, Deus meus, may in some sort
(says Bernard) be said to be forsaken, non per dissolutionem unionis, sed per
substractionem visionis: he suffered all poenall punishments, but not pecca^t,
as Aquinas; al miserable pains, but not damnable, as S. Austin distinguisheh.
And howsoever Calvin's words be wrested, as if he thought Christ was in some
kind of despair: yet they bear it not it was vox tanqua^ desperantis, but
not simply despera^tis; the sacrifice he offered, as it was most necessary in
regard of our sins, so was it most voluntary in respect of himself, and
Calvin holds no other position.

Fifthly, Christ was not ignorant of the day of judgment: Calvin does pass no
further the^ the words of Christ, Marc. 13.3^.
that none knows, not the son, but the father only. He was ignorant,
secundum concomitantiam, non secundum causam, as Bonaventure speaks: and, as
Bernard speaks, he took all infirmities, and therein this of ignorance, all
which made for the appearance of the truth of his humanity, and these he had by
necessity, not a derived, but an assumed necessity, as Bonaue^ture proves: and
Calvin has not any where further: for in respect of Christ his humane nature,
he witnesses himself, None but the Father knew this; but by the Hypostaticall
union, ioining both, he was equal to his Father in this knowledge. What may
seem in Calvin to relish otherwise, is not his own opinion, as by the place
is most plain.

Papists have given as reproachful titles, to their own fellows, as this:
the advantage is small, to take up a term of contumely from any hot-brained
railer, to cast upon the name of this Angel of his Church. Your Paradoxes did
not pass unnoted, both because of the rudeness of the delivery of them, the
unaptness of the terms; as also your ignorance, that, as you would not
truly preach as a Protestant, so you knew not how neatly to play the Papist.
All of any note, noted your absurdity, and insufficiency either to show
yourselfe a friend, or an enemy. You ask why this distinction was so
hateful. I answer, the distinction so used as the Fathers interpreted, was
not denied: but the co^seque^ces of it, as you urged it, were harmefull, and
therefore hateful Not because so many of our Religion be married: for
howsoever marriage is a most honorable state, how many hundreds in our
University have consecrated themselves to God in the Ministry, that abhor
your opinion, and yet be not matched, or married? but the cause of the contempt
and loathing of the Doctrine, is, that it was derogatory to the law of God, to
the Church of God, to the son of God: a doctrine, that has bewitched many,
and led them Captives into the habitation of darkness, the Cell, or Hell of
blindness: a doctrine, whose root is heresy, whose trunk uncommanded
privacie, whose branches be infidelity, against truth, violating the law,
contemning the Precept: whose leaves be pertinacity, hypocrisy; whose fruits
be idleness, drowsinesse, filthiness. This is the cause of the suppressing
and choking of this, and such continuing weeds of heresy, that seek growth in
our Church, no other cause of pleasure or profit, God and his Angels be
witnesses.

They that have sold themselves to work wickedness with greediness, looking
for the reward of Balaams wages, are ready to resist all truth, and if it fall
within compass of their itching humor, willing (to get a name) will be the
Patrons of bewitching error. And therefore, here I fasten my right constant
determination, to avoid that religion that corrupts the knowledge with
blindness, and the heart with hardness.

Mr LEECH. The ninth Motive. The Protestants do unconscionably impugn the
known, and manifest truth.
SInce the controversies of Religion are many in number, and intricate in
nature, it was my desire (from the beginning of my pains in the study of
sacred Theology) to find out the true Church, that so I might refer my self
unto her decision, and rest within her bosom.

For which cause I wholly employed my self in turning over the volums of the
ancient Fathers; and whatsoever I found clearly expressed by their uniform
testimony; I accepted that (according to Vincentius his rule) as the judgment
of the Church.

Among other Doctrines (which seem Popish unto the new Evangelists) I received
this particular from their instruction; so clearly taught, so conformably
witnessed, so jointly approved, that, if the grounds of Religion be not
uncertain, then this Doctrine is absolutely free from all exception. And for
proof hereof, I remit me unto the se^tences of the Fathers, wherewith I
thought it meet to conclude this discourse.

Wherefore, since they that glory in the Fathers (and want neither wit, nor
learning for this matter) do impugn this doctrine, and punish her
professors; how can I think that they do not fight against their conscience,
and reason? And how can I think that any truth will find entertainment at
their hands, when this truth so potent, and so irrefragable: is thus fondly
rejected by my Calvinian judges?

But whom have they condemned? me? a brother sometimes of their gospel, a
graduat of their schools, a Minister of their Church? No; but in me, and with
me, reverend Antiquity, the gray headed Fathers, the venerable Doctors, yea
holy scripture it self is censured by my unworthy judges.

Wherefore, as Jeremiah, See Apolog. Iusti Calvin. page 11. 12.
the Patriarch of Constantinople, wrote unto the Lutherans, so may I testify,
and proclaim unto these men, The ancient divines, who were the light of the
Church, you entreat at your own pleasure; honoring and extolling them in
words but rejecting them in deed; endeavoring to shake them out of our hands,
whose holy and divine testimonies we should use against you. We see that you
will never submit your selves unto the truth.

Finally, as the Patriarch concludes, that he will have no intercourse with
the Lutherans, forasmuch as he is taught by S. Paul to avoid an heretic,
after the first, or second admonition, so I (being persecuted by men of this
condition) am bound to a void them; knowing (as S. Paul speaks) that such (as
they) are condemned by their own judgments.

ANSWER.

THE controversies in Religion are many, hence great alterations have been
moved in Europe, great changes through the world. Controversies were in
abundance raised by the infection of the smoke of the bottomless pit: diverse
armies of Heretics, vanquished by the Reverend fathers, yet al these, as if
but half dead, are again revived by Antichrist, only this is the difference:
the former Heretics were confuted, because they opposed the fathers; these
later (wiser in their generation) seek to confute all other that oppose them,
by the Fathers. Each man among them at first asks the way to the Church, and
no Church can serve them but Rome, that is their parish Church, all other but
Chapels, they observe not the alteration of many Christian nations from the
sea of Rome, or the occasion of this revolt, the declination of that sea from
the sincerity of the faith, and the unspeakable corruption thereof. Which
seperatio^ was made, upon these two grounds: first, because Rome did persecute
the professors of this reformation with all bloody massacres; secondly, because
that Antichristian sea would admit no reformation of her corruptions, but grew
incurable, according to that of the Prophet, We would have cured Babylon, but
she would not be healed. And such has been the growth of this Reformation
(the Lords most holy name for ever be praised:) that the Church has recovered
more health in one age, then she had lost in two; and the Roman Synagogue
left infected, as that it has not only drunk the cup of all others
abominations, but breeds heresies in it self inwardly, and has received
such poisons by ambition, such corruptions by want of reformation, and such
indelible marks of Antichrist by continual persecution, outwardly, as now it
is made plain to all the world she is not the Church. But the Question of the
church you ask of the fathers. It is a worthy speech of Job, ask the fathers
and they shall tell thee: but how unhappy is he that perverteth all he
reads; or that stomach, that turns all into poiso^, that it receives?
(you say) you bestowed your whole time in turning over the volumes of the
Fathers (you did turn them indeed from their meaning) it was no more
co^me^dable the^ the continual praying of the Eutichae, or the continual
reading of the Pharisees: the one without care, senseless; the other without
knowledge, fruitless; and both superstitions. Vincentius rule is twice already
interpreted, and without any further answer to your clamarous repetitions and
interrogations, You received not this point jointly from the fathers. The Latin
fathers, how ever they retain upon mistake of S. Paul, the word Counsel: yet
have no part of your meaning: the Greek are so far from your meaning, that
they had not so much as the word. They therefore that impugn your doctrine, do
it not untruly, or unconscionably; nor have condemned you as a brother, a
graduat, or a Minister: but because you were a false brother and betrayed
truth, and in your degrees, like the Sun that went many degrees backward, that
in your ministry you were disobedient, you were no better then a Minister of
Satan, to buffet the ears of Gods servantes with heresies, and in a stubborn
opposition and contradiction you did repugne Authority and orders, and stood
out against the Judges and Magistrates that confuted and censured you. And how
could you profess such reverence to the fathers you knew not: when you were so
opposite to your natural fathers, as this is, your Country; Academicall
fathers, as this is, your University; spiritual fathers, as this is, Aust. 48.
epist.
your Church? We answer your Patriarch with Saint Austin in his 48. epistle,
Audi, dicit Dominus: non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Hilarious, aut Ambrosius, aut Augustinus: sed, dicit Dominus. We honor the
fathers, and where they bring Dicit dominus, our ears, and hearts be open to
entertain them. And as S. Austin using the same words which your Patriarch
does, both using the words of Scripture, Haereticu^ devita: so this is my 9.
irrefragable position, to avoid that Religion which claims, but has no
Antiquity; and only has, though it confesses it not, the most absurd and
ridiculous Novelty for mainetenance of their positions.

Mr LEECH. The tenth Motive. The Protestants, for want of better means to
convince the Catholics, propose unto them questions of capital danger.
I have often heard the Catholics complain, that, where as they are
persecuted for righteousness sake, and for their Religion; yet they are traduced
with the crime of obstinacy, disobedience, treason, and such like odious
imputations.

But above the rest, their just grief (arising from unjust vexations) did
seem to deserve great compassion, forasmuch as their life, and liuelyhood is
always in the mercy of a most unmerciful law, touching Reconciliation and
the Supremacy; matters of high, and capital nature.

Touching the later of these two, I can say more, Doctor Array.
because the bloody heart of a Calvinist did seek my ruin and subversion
thereby. For whereas, in my sermons, I continually gave this style unto his
excellent Majesty; viz: in all causes, and above al persons, for justice, and
judgment, supreme Head, and Governor; the Calvinist suspecting me not to stand
thoroughly affected to the kings Supremacy, according to the purport of the law
(whereby his Majesty has as much spiritual Jurisdiction, as ever the Pope,
de facto, had in England; and, 26. Henr. 8. chap. I. I. Edward 6.1. Elizab. See
these things excellently discoursed by a Cath. divine against the 5. part of
Sir Ed. Cooks Reports.
by virtue of his said supremacy, power of Excommunication is granted by the
Lord Chancellor unto the Delegates upon Appeals, from the Archbishop of
Canterbury his courts,) wished M. Vicechancellour to examine me upon this
point, and to require my opinion therein.

Which severity though it was then declined, yet if that other Calvinist had
been in office (as lately he was) al me^ may easily conceive into what
extremity of peril I had been cast.

For though I ever did, and shall attribute that right unto his Majesty,
which, by the law temporal (not dissenting from law divine) is annexed unto his
imperial crown; yet I must confess that I did purposely moderate his title of
Supremacy (as the law has established it) because I always conceived, that
the style of Defensor fidei (given unto the Crown of England, by the Pope) did
more properly belong unto him, then the other, which was translated from the
Pope unto the Crown, by the violence of a King, and by the flattery of his
subjects.

And if Doctor Airay had made a conscience of his Masters judgment, he would
rather have condescended unto the equity of my opinion, then sought to draw my
life into the certainety of such a danger.

But these men are so possessed with malice, and adulation, that they rather
desire to satisfy their own passions, and to win favor from their
Superiors, then to speak, or do according to the truth which pleads for it
self within their corrupt hearts, and daily accuses them before the throne of
greatest justice.

ANSWER.

MAny complain without a cause, as the full bellied Monks: so fat that they
could scarsely breath, and yet cry, Heu qua^ta patimur pro Christo? The
Protestants never persecuted your Religion, but for the unrighteousness thereof.
The mulct was inflicted for Popish opinion, but execution never was threatened
for Religion. The oath of supremacy required, is not (as you treacherously call
it) a most unmerciful law: if it were not required, it were an unwise and
unjust mercy. Your accusation so uncharitable, as to term him bloody, who in
his government has been meek as Moses, nay in heavy injuries, cast upon
him, has been as meek as a Lamb and not opened his mouth: I would you were
as far from bloodthirsting, as his heart was from the desire of your
bloodshedding. But if you remember the particulars, as they be discussed in my
answer Page 262. it was most seasonable, to sound how you stood affected to the
kings Majesty: when you denied your faith, and appealed from your Church. The
rather, because in your Prayer you often left out the words, supreme Head and
Governor. For, howsoever (you infer,) that you used all that belongs to the
Supremacy in acknowledging his most excellent Majesty to be supreme Head and
Governor in all causes and above all persons for justice and judgment: yet
seeing in the form of the oath, prescribed unto al, you were in particular
bound utterly to testify, and declare in your Conscience, that the Kings
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness dominions, and countries, as well in spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Te^porall; you ought for the avoidance of this suspicion,
to have spoken clearly and plainly. I know there be some, that use such
manner of speech, in their public prayers for his Majesty: yet their form is
much more consonant to the required form, then yours is. And howsoever Solomon
was placed on his throne for justice and judgment, as the Queen of Sheba told
him; and Doctor Raynolds in the end of the Preface to Hearts Conference, 1. Reg.
10.9.
affirms, that the Lords Anointed are the higher powers, ordained to execute
justice and judgment: yet ever these words have been interpreted, to contain
not only ius Politicum, but Ecclesiasticum, in which point you were most
unsound, and vouchsafed not to afford so much unto the Kings most royal
Majesty, as Heart does, who in the end of the Conference, thus cloaseth out of
S. Austin; D. Rain. conf. with Heart. c. ^ 10. fol. 589.
Kings do serve God in this, as Kings, if in their own Realm they command
good things and forbid evil, not only concerning the civil state of me^, but
the Religion of God also, and thus much (says he) I subscribe to. I omit here
to lengthen my discourse, by inserting any speech, concerning the Oath. The
Apology where of, seeing Majesty has so divinely, and powerfully delivered, As
also that the grounds of all that can be said, are so exactly long since proved
by that Reverend father of our Church, the Bishop of Winchest. and now of late,
in the diverse answers to the snarling Curres that bark at the Ecclesiastes of
our Solomon. I also omit purposely the quotation of your Cath. Divine against
the exquisite labors of that most Reverend and most iudiciously learned Sir
Edward Cook, because others of eminent place, either have already perfited, or
very shortly will silence your Catholic divine. Your profession that you
attribute as much to his Majesty, as the law Temporal requires (not
disse^ting from the law divine) is false. The law divine does give unto Caesar
place upon earth next unto God. And from the virtue of that law is derived, the
oath of English men for the KINGS Majesty against the Pope, 2. Kings. 11.4
usurping part of his right, as well as Iehoiada of the men of Judah for Ioas
their King against Athalia that usurped his state. And do you presume to
moderat this title of Supremacy? I would from my soul, that I might moderate
your title of Traitor. It is too much to be an Apostate, an Adversary: but in
this kind to offend, it is an offense with a high hand. You see the^, that the
Doctor had good reason to susspect you, when you translated your self from the
title of subjection; and the KINGS Majesty, as much as in you lies, from his
lawful dominion. You shoot at Calvin in your margin, and again, and at the
Doctor in your Text: the Reverend Doctor is scholar to none but Christ, though
he and all honest men do reverence blessed Calvin. And Calvin in the place
quoted reproves not the title of Head, as Protestants granted it: but in that
sense which Popish Prelates gave it him, namely Stephen Gardener, who did urge
the title of Head so; as if he had meant thereby that the KING might do things
in Religion according to his own will, and not see them done according to Gods
will.

Wherefore cease that calumny, and quench that tongue which sets on fire the
course of nature, and is inflamed by hell fire. You were not oppugned by any
flattering devise, or spiteful malice, as you affirm: but by truth and faith,
alleagiance to God and the King. Hence I ground my tenth pillar, that their
religion is bad, who possessed with malicious recusancy, and treacherous
Apostasy speak evil of those that be in authority, and yield not Caesar,
that which is Caesar's, or unto God, that which is Gods.

Mr LEECH. The eleventh Motive. The Protestants manner of proceedings against
Catholics, and Catholic Religion, is absurd in reason, and unequal in
Justice. And hence they are proved to be Heretics.
IN my perusal of the ancient Fathers and Ecclesiastical histories, I did
very often observe these two things. First; that the Catholic Church had
wisdom to discern Heretical innovations. Secondly; that she had power to
enact necessary laws for the suppression thereof; so that an Heresy could not
escape her censure, nor an Heretic her justice.

If Popery therefore be Heresy, and Papists Heretics (as some fanatically
brand them) then surely the Catholic Protestanticall Church is able to show,
that she, in all ages, has impugned this Heresy, and that she has her proper
laws to proceed against Heretical offenders: If not so; then doubtless she
is no more Catholic, then the furious Congregations of Donatists, Arrians,
and such like; who afflicted the true Church against all order of justice,
being never able to show any Catholic predecessors, who maintained their
opinions, nor any laws made by them to correct the impugners thereof.

That this is the condition of Protestants, I am a witness by their disorderly
proceeding against the Doctrine, which I delivered out of the conform
testimonies of the Church.

For whereas it pleased my Calvinian judge to call it Popish, erroneous, false,
lying, absurd Doctrine; they could not reprove it otherways, then Arrians, and
Donatists, that is to say, by rejecting the Fathers, and by a tumultuous
process, without any legal course.

And though I required them to deal with me as with an Heretic, by refelling
my doctrine, and by proceeding Canonically against me; yet they oppressed me
with authority alone; having their will for reason, and their power for justice.

But for as much as I have such abundant proof for the verity of my doctrine,
and that their opinion is condemned in the Church for no less then Heresy,
Ambr. 10. lib. epist. epist. 80 and 81.
(by Syricius Bishop of Rome; and a Counsel there: by S. Ambrose Bishop of
Millain, and a Counsel there) I appeach them confidently as Heretics for
embracing Iovinianisme; as Heretics for contemners of Antiquity; and therefore
as Heretics culpable of singular pride.

Which infamy if they can wash away from themselves by learning, and honesty,
then I will retract my sentence, and confess my self to be an Heretke (for
the one of us must needs be Heretics) howsoever every ingenuous, and
indifferent man must needs confess, that they did not carry themselves as
they should have done to prove me guilty of this crime.

ANSWER.

In your abusall of the Ancients, you observed much, and deserved little for
it: because it was far from their meaning, to speak as you desired to teach
them. Your two observations here, be good (I confess) but ill applied. For the
Catholic Church being the same with our Protestants, in all ages, has
impugned the heresies which Papists mainetaine. The Valentinians worshipped the
Cross, and were condemned as Heretics, says Irenaeus. The Carpocratians
worshipped Images, and they were condemned for heretics, Iren. lib. 1. Aug.
haeres. 7.
says S. Austin. Collyridiam heretics, for adoring the Virgin Mary; Angelici,
heretics, for adoring the Angels; Pelagians, heretics, for holding
perfection; Priscilianists, heretics, for mental reservatio^; Maniches,
herteicks, forbidding to eat flesh; Tatians, and Montanists, forbidding
marriage, and Anthropomorphites, painting God in similitude of a man. Are not
these all by Austin, Irenaeus, and Epiphanius, and others condemned? and be
not all these positions by the Church of Rome maintained? For our Catholic
Protestant Predecessors the fathers of the first 500. years are ours: and from
thence a continual succession, of learned, faithful, and courageous teachers
in all the following ages, as Mr White in his learned Chronologicall
collection, in the 50. Paragraph of his way to the true Church does prove. And
that we have had the assistance of Councels, in all ages to make laws against
such positions, witness the Greek Church against Bonif. his Supremacy the 6.
general Council decreeing the marriage of Priests; the general Council of
Constantinople, under Leo Isamus, against Images; the Council of
Constantinople, under Constantine Capronymus; of Franckford, under Charles the
great, the second Nicene Council, and many others. This doctrine of yours was
repugned by doctrinall and legal authority, and without rejecting of the
fathers, we rejected your Doctrines: we maintain, that they never received it:
with Arrians, or Donatists we reject not the fathers. All that shall see the
premises, will witness that you were dealt with legally according to the
statuts of our University for the breach of that order, which inhibited you to
forbear preaching this doctrine again: as also you were censured Canonically
for infrindging that Canon made against the public oppositions of Preachers.
Your Pope Syricius, and his Council, tax no position that we hold: and if
Ambrose had any more then what Doctor Benefield has fully satisfied, you had,
before this, produced it. Satan was at your elbow, when you wrote that
heretical imputation of singular pride: and therefore you are culpable of
judgment, if not of further punishment. Stand to your promise, come back,
confess, repent, retract: if you be not convinced by truth which stirs in
your conscience, and moaneth that you have so repressed her, then for ever
forget the name of any thing but Heretic. Otherwise this shall be my 11.
Motive to abhor that Religion that does so possess any, that they grow
resolute in evil actions, peremptory in talking, fastidious in hearing,
hard-harted in obeying, hypocritical in professing the word of God.

Mr LEECH. The twelfth Motive. The superior Magistrates amongst the
Protestants concur with their subordinates, to suppress the truth, and to
oppress the patrones thereof, against all equity, and conscience.
Though there be a very near connection betwixt the superior, and inferior
Magistrate, yet since all Magistracy is ordained for the conservation of
truth, and justice as well in the Church, as in the common wealth (nay much more
in the first, then in the second) it is very requisite, that the superior
should yield redress, where the inferior has done a wrong; and that rather
respecting the cause, then the persons, he should minister equity unto both
with an impartill hand.

For which consideration, when my petty judges had oppressed me according to
their own humors, and passions; I appealed unto my Lord of Canterbury his
Grace; in regard of his Academicall sovereignty over me, and them (being our
honorable Chancellor) and much more in respect of his Archiepiscopall
dignity; he being the Primat of our Church; persuading my felfe also, that as
he is more high in place, so he would have been more equal in justice; and
specially in this cause, since his Grace has sufficiently manifested himself
(and has been so generally reputed) to be averse from Calvinisme, Tempora
mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.
and my hope was, that his present place had not changed his former
understanding.

To whom though I truly unfolded the whole business, and acquainted him with
all circumstances thereunto belonging, yet his Grace seeming to favor Calvin's
opinion (but how conscionably, it shall be now referred unto the judge of all
the world; and he will reveal it in the appointed time) put me of with
continual delays.

But his Grace had just reason to expect a strong resolution in me; since I did
appeal unto him to do me justice only; and much more to give his verdict upon
the doctrine it self. For, otherways, no favor, nor benefit whatsoever could
yield contentment unto my greived soul.

I leave it unto others to consider, how his Grace stands affected unto
truth; as for me, I trust, that I have given a sufficient demonstration, on my
part, that I would rather loose my liberty of speech, then that she should
want my uttermost defense.

Here the indifferent Reader may also conceive with me, that if my doctrine had
been liable unto a just censure, then surely his Grace would have made no stay
to condemn it in solemn manner; especially since it was so publicly taught,
so earnestly defended by me; and since I did now entirely desire him to do me
justice without any favor.

But since this Doctrine was not subject unto his condemnation, why then had
his Grace so little reverence unto the eternal truth of God, and so small
respect of me, that he would suffer it to be so indignely censured by his
vicegerent, and leave me helpless from such injurious oppression? his
pretenses to the contrary (if he have any) are nothing but smoaky euaporations.

I am nothing, and worse then nothing. But I pleaded for justice. In what? In a
point of faith. When? being violently oppressed. Before whom? my most proper
judge, to whom the decision of these things does most fitly appertain. For
what end? the honor of God, and his gospells sake; which I truly delivered,
and for which I was shamefully entreated.

ANSWER.

THis 12 and last motive serves rather to fill the number, then the matter,
wherein is a Rhapsodie of insolent indiscretion and malapart irreligion,
wronging the living memory of a dead monument of most honorable and reverend
estimation, the late worthy Chancellor of this University, who being
appointed for the conservation of truth and justice, did justify the
proceedinges of his worthy and only Vicechancellour: and therefore you call in
question, his Truth first, and then his Justice. For any aversenes in him from
Calvinisme, (by which you mean the Protestants religion) it is (to say no more
of it) a biting slander, unfit to proceed from the mouth of a Minister. In
another man, it is a double sin against his own soul, and does prove him
guilty not only of malicious slander, to revile the innocent: but of impudent
and infamous libelling, to dishonor the name of a personage, so truly
reverend. But in a Minister, it is not only (...), as Philo speaks, not a
twofold, but a manifold offense, bad in intent, in act, in example, in
consequence, etc. His works follow him: his judgment proved him to be sound,
by his preferment of those that were sound; by his government repressing the
opinions and censuring the Authors of any positions unsound; by his dear and
near respect of those, that he foresaw were like to stand in the gap
courageously and victoriously, against the Popish Philistims. Truth has lost a
defender, and the Church a father: the one he maintained by precepts and
constitutions; the other, he defended not only with prayers and petitions, but,
as Paul spoke, cu^ lachrymis and suspirijs, with sighs and lamentations, to
see how the venomous Gangren of Atheism does infect this age, some flying
from the religion of the church, others stealing from the possession of our
Church, thereby incurring that curse of eradication to be rooted out of their
possessions, whereas otherwise their days might have been long in the land
which the Lord their God had given the^. The most Reverend, but now deceased
much lamented Prelat, did not by change of place change his thoughts: your
intimation is base and false, to make the world believe any other affection in
his Grace toward Religion, then what God and man approved openly, and so by
the sequel of your business it is manifest. Where in your second limb (of that
monstrous accusation,) is against his Justice, his approbation of the
University censure, was as much as another condemnation of you: pretenses his
grace needed not for maine reasons wanted not: his experience of the truth,
knowledge, wisdom, judgment and government of his vicegerent, and the worlds
experience of his Graces prudent, and eminent carriage, in all his high and
honorable employments, do free them both from your imputations, and return
you your smoaky evaporations (a Phrase lent you from the sulphurous fume of
the bottomless pit.) But you conclude that you are nothing, and worse then
nothing. The (...) of your book, shows that you are somewhat more then
nothing: the only argument to serve your turn, to prove the Pope to be God, is
because he can make something of Purgatory which is nothing. I could turn this
upon you, but I forbear, and only return to your own figure. How pleaded you
for Justice? With stubborn, tumultuous, quarellous disobedience. In what? In a
point derogatory to the Justice, and Law of God. When? Then, when you oppressed
truth, rejected your faith, disobeyed your Judge, began to forsake your
Church. Before whom? In the open face of heaven, in the presence of God, men,
and Angels, in the holy place, the pulpit, in the best place, on the best day.
For what end? the dishonor of God, the disgrace of his law which you accused of
insufficiency and imperfection. Thus you did delude, and were deluded: and for
this these Revere^d Doctors have been by you injuriously traduced. That I may
truly say, no Revolter ever did offer more scandal in general to our Church;
or slander in particular, to so many, worthy members thereof.

Mr LEECH. TO M. DOCTOR KING DEANE OF Christ-Church in Oxford, and
Vicechancellour of the University, H. L. wishes health and salvation in
Christ JESUS.
SIR, though your will was your law to punish me without my offense, yet it
shall not be your sanctuary to defend your self, without more sufficient
reason.

For as you convented me before a selected Calvinian assembly, so now I convent
you, and them, before all men in the assured confidence of my good cause, and
in the comfortable peace of my sincere heart.

And since you dealt with me as a Magistrate, by the strength of your
authority, you must give me leave now to deal with you as a Scholar, by the
validity of arguments.

Finally; because I wish your future happiness, I cannot omit to acquaint you
with your present misery, which I will lay forth before your eyes in
Syllogisticall manner and then I will refer you unto the consultation of your
own heart.



But the doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels is founded upon Scripture,
according to the conformable opinion of the ancient Church.

Therefore the Doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels is a point of Catholic
faith.

The Mayor is a maxim in all Christian schools.

The Minor is proved by the ensuing testimonies of the Fathers: whose uniform
verdict in this behalf is the judgment of the Church.

Whosoever does obstinately impugn any point of Catholic faith, he is an
heretic.

But Doctor King, D. Aglionby, D. Airay, D. Hutton, D. Benefield etc. do
obstinately impugn a point of Catholic faith.

Therefore D. King, D. Aglionby etc. are heretics. De haeres. ad Quod-vult D.
in perorat.


The Mayor is granted by all men of judgment, and is confirmed by S.
Augustines rule.

The Minor is proved by their own proceedings against me in this particular.

Every heretic is bound to recant his heresy, or else he is liable to the
punishment, decreed in the Canonical law

But D. King, D. Aglionby etc. are heretics.

Therefore D. King, D. Aglionby etc. are bound to recant their heresy, or else
they are liable to the punishment decreed in the Canonical law of the Church.

The Mayor is clear of it self.

The Minor is proved already.

And because it shall appear yet more sensibly, I pray you to consider, that
whosoever rejects the joint consent of Fathers in a point of doctrine (as D.
King does herein) he is an heretic: and this I will breefly declare by four
evidences.

FIRST: Epist. 1. ad Leon. cap. 1.
by the testimony of Flavianus Patriarch of Constantinople, saying: Haeretici
est praecepta Patrum declinare, and instituta eorum despicere.

In Council. Chalced.
SECONDLY: by the testimony of Eudoxius admitted in a general Council: qui
non consentit sacrosanctorum Patrum expositionibus, alienat se ab omni
sacerdotali communione, and a Christi praesentia.

See Sozom. l. 7. c. 12.
THIRDLY: by the proceedings of the most Christian emperor Theodosius against
the proud, distracted Hetikes: who would not submit themselves unto the
judgments of the venerable Fathers.

See Vincent. Lit. cap. 41.
FOURTHLY: by the practice of the Ephesine Counsel against Nestorius: who was
judged an heretic, not only in regard of the matter itself, Veterum
interpretum scripta perdiscere dedignatus est. See Socrat. l. 7. c. 32. NOTA.
wherein he erred damnably, but in regard of the manner and trial by the holy
Fathers, which his contemptuous spirit did utterly decline. Many also of those
Fathers by whose testimony the cause was then handled against Nestorius, are
the very same, whose verdicts I shall now produce against D. King, and against
his abettours whosoever.

ANSWER. TO Mr. HVMFREY LEECH, LATE Minister, now Revolter.

SIr, it is Salomons counsel, in the 4. verse of the 26. Chap. of Proverbs, not
to answer some sort of me^: yet in the next verse, he advises to answer such,
lest they TRIVPMH in their own eyes. Upon the instruction of the former verse,
this worthy Deane, intends to conte^ne rather then answer: and yet wishes you
less presu^ption, greater knowledge, less sophistry, and more honesty: but
upon the direction of the ensuing verse, I, the weakest of many, yet strong
enough for this cause have upon reasons, of some importance, undertaken to
confute your calumnies, to clear the truth, and to confirm the faithful. In
Christian Policy you were to be answered, and in common charity you are to be
counseled, hereafter to care what you write, and whom you revile, so to rule
your pen, and order your tongue, that you be not judged either in this world,
or in the future, or in both, for a prostituted conscience if not a hardened
heart. In that presumptuous speech (that will, was the law to punish you without
an offense, and yet shall not be the sanctuary, to defend that Reverende
Governor that censured you) you are much offensive to truth. It was your
ignorance that betrayed you, the offense condemned you, the law did ce^sure
you. Now you are far of, you ve^t your gall like unto Gall his reproach against
Abimelek when he supposed him far enough from him; Who is Abimelek? and who is
Shechem, that we should serve him? Your threats be blasts, he needs no
sanctuary, that has so many in the ears and hearts of the most honored and
best affected of this land. And though you presume, to Co^vent him, yet at
this time, a far meaner man shall discharge him: You desire leave to deal as
a scholar: it is well you will ask leave, that you neglect not all duty to your
Master: but I assure you it is generally believed, that if any thing in your
whole book be truly your own, it appears in the validity of these arguments,
framed so sophistically, as if you had only learned logike by that rude
prescriptio^; Discere si cupias Logicam, discas Titlemannum;
Ille Sophistarum crimina pandere vult.
Mr Wright complains that none of our Protestants answer breefly and
punctually: you shall not need to complain so. In two words I answer your
three arguments: Negatur minor. For, ever you affirm as a Principle, the
things to be proved, which manner of argumentation, 2. Prior. c. 16. 8. Topic.
13. 1. soph. 5. 2. Soph. 12.
Aristotle reckons for a fallacy in many places, and terms it by this name
(...) a begging to have that granted, which in the beginning was the maine
controversy. So Archimedes, would move the whole earth, if he could obtain a
seperat standing from the earth, which might not be. And this is the dealing,
of all your Champions: first they take this, as granted, that the Church of
Rome is the Catholic Church; and then conclude, that we are the Heretics,
which is the especial point to be proved.

In your first syllogism, your presumption rather the^ assumption is faulty;
But the doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels is founded upon Scripture,
according to the conformable opinion of the ancient Church. Was there any hope
that this might pass uncontrolled? being the maine controversy of all? But it
is proved, (say you) by the ensuing testimonies of the Fathers: but it is
disproued say I, both by that which has been said in this Tract, as also in
particular answer to every Father by D. Benefield, that except you be more then
perversely obstinate, you will undertake no more such challenges. The minor in
both your other syllog^smes assume that D. King, D. Aglion by etc. obstinately
oppugn a point of Catholic faith, and are heretics, and therefore must
recant etc. And your poor proofs be their proceedings against you in this
particular. Alas do you boast of reading Fathers, and Schoolmen: Children,
and Schooleboyes would be ashamed of such arguments, which I easily return
again in this manner:

Whatsoever doctrine is not founded upon scripture etc. Eua^gelical Counsels is
not founded etc

Therefore the doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels is not a point of Catholic
faith.

The syllogism is good in the first figure, by the rules of Logic, though
the Minor be negative, because the Mayor is convertible.

The Minor is proved before in the right interpreting of the testimonies of the
Scriptures and Fathers which you manifestly wrested and perverted.

Whosoever does obstinately maintain any point Catholic faith, is etc.

But Mr Leech does obstinately maintain a point of doctrine contrary to
Catholic faith.

Therefore Mr Leech is an heretic.

The Mayor is granted by all men of judgment, and it is taught by the same
rule of Austin.

The Minor is proved by his own proceedings in this particular.

Every heretic as in your own words, etc.

But Mr Leech is an heretic etc.

Therefore Mr Leech etc.

The Mayor is clear of it self.

The Minor is proved already, and your four evidences that follow, are
evidently turned upon your self. Thus Baals Priests lance themselves, and
Saul falls on his own sword. And in full satisfaction, that it may appear
to all men, that we suppress not the truch, we rejected not the Fathers, for
though by the rule of Vincentius and the grant of Bellarmin, and all learned
Papists, we are only to receive the uniform consent of the Fathers, yet in
this you have neither all, nor the most, nor any places pregnant for Fathers.
To your fourfold evidence: In praef. com. lib. Mosis.
I might return. First, the authority of Cardinal Caietan thus, God has not
tied the exposition of the Scripture unto the sense of the Fathers. Andrad.
defens. fidei Trid. lib. 2.
Secondly, the judgment of Andradius, that they spoke not Oracles when they
expounded the Scriptures, and that the oversights of the translation, which
they followed, must needs cause the^ to miste sometimes the right meaning of
the holy Ghost. Turrecrem. In c. sancta. Romana d. 15 nu. 4. Possev. Bibl.
select. l. 12. c. 23.
Thirdly, what Turrecremata has delivered herein thus, At this day there be
many things found in the Fathers deserving no credit. Fourthly, what Possevine
concludes, somethings in the Fathers wherein unwittingly they dissented from
the Church, are judged and condemned.

I could urge for your four, forty of your own, that do disclaim the
authority of Fathers: your grand Jury is answered so fully by D. Benefield,
that as no man can say more, so I hope it will make you say much less. I
denied not these 4 authorities you here bring but I deny that they be applied
to the present, for in all the course of your testimonies we denied no Fathers,
but interpreted all.

And now Mr LEECH, let me tell you, your undeceivable Judge does see you, and
we both must receive our censure at another bar. Once, one church held us in
an honorable function, one University in a loving Communion, one Town the
flowrishing and happy and chief Town of our Shire, in a kind participation
of all good offices. But you are departed. Now you are gone: you have broken
all these leagues, nay more, broken your covenant with God in the Ministry of
his Church. Shame the Devil, forsake your stepmother, satisfy the world, and
save your soul. We shall wish you, but not miss you, and weep for you, but not
want you.

Understand not amiss, good reader, for nothing is so contrary to the will and
consent as error. Had these offers been proposed, these propositions had never
been refused.

First he only proposed out of a Popish, peevish writer these extracted, or
rather extorted authorities and would never condescend to answer the point as a
scholar in disputation.

Secondly, it was disproved by a public lecture, and it was maintained against
him, by the Reverend Doctors his Judges, that neither Scriptures nor Orthodoxe
fathers were for him.

Thirdly, it was manifest that to preach Perfection in this life (especially
Angelical integrity) was at the least Pelagianisme heresy, condemned by the
Fathers and Ancient Church.

Fourthly that this doctrine being the ground of works of supererogation,
merit, etc. was plainly against the position of our Church, as Doctor
Benefield in private conference offered to prove.

The scandals therefore be full of iniquity, which you impose on the Reader, if
he believe your advertisement. I wish you may find more acceptance before God
in the day of retribution, then your words are like to find with any True
hearted Christians. Seeing error conceived them and humor produced them.

FINIS.
CHristian Reader, this book was long since promised, my attendance was the
cause of the stay, but at length it is finished. I had rather with Cato crave
pardon for my fault, in doing this, then keep my self clear from committing
this fault: for I have herein satisfied the importunity which imposed it, on
me, and the necessity of the cause which drew me, to it. In the Triumph, that
is proved true which Tully spoke of Athenagoras: Of his offense he spoke
nothing, but complained of his punishment. There was small cause of the Authors
flying, less of his reviling. His reproachful terms, defiling and
besmearing those many and worthy Divines, I could have returned in the same
language: hardly can any that shall answer him, avoid it, without calumny, or
so pay him his own, without note of infamy. But in these labors, nothing is
to be more prayed for, then a sanctified spirit, and therefore I have as much
as possibly I might, avoided any thing that may seem contumelious or malicious.
It rests, that I find Christian, and brotherly interpretation, in this labor,
by those that shall pervse it. My have may betray the manner of my writing, not
the matter. And it may be, I shall find some such readers, Hier Prooem. in l. 2
co^met. in Osea^.
as S. Hierom did: Alij (says he) quasi parva contemnunt, and quicquid
dixerimus contractare despiciunt; alij magis aliorum silentium, quam nostrum
studium probant; quidam in eo, se disertos arbitrantur and doctos, si alieno
operi detrahant. If such Readers meet with my book, I fear not. If my book
meet with such, I care not. The better sort I hope to find, and leave
attentive, and will pray for all means of their instruction in this world, and
salvation in the better world.

Errata.
Read Children. p. 40. l. 16. metonymiam, p. 113. l. 30. some acknowledge some
deny. p. 126. l. 10. Aetnam, p. 131 l. 9.. quo seniores, eo saniores 193. l.
5. Ambigne. p. 195. l. 15. quod. 227. l. 4. editions. p. 336. l. 19. Norris. l
24.


