THE CLEARING OF THE SAINTS SIGHT.

A SERMON PREAched at CVNDOVER near the Religious and ancient Town of
SHREVVSBVRY.

By SAMPSON PRICE Batchelour of Divinity of EXETER College in OXFORD.

2. KING. 20 5. I have seen thy tears: Behold I will heal thee. LONDON,
Printed for JOHN BARNES dwelling in Hosier Lane near Smithfield. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, truly religious, my very good LADY, the Lady OWN,
wife to the worthy Sr ROGER OWN.
MADAM: I can not more fitly salute you then in the phrase of Divine S. John:
Grace be with you, 2. ep. Ioh. 3.
mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. This
Sermon preached before you was attentively hearkened unto, and the copy
required after the speaking of it. My hasty return from the Country to this
eminent City gave me not time then to yield unto that religious request. But
now I have sent it in a more public form, that others may receive comfort if
they have need of such balm. I am sure God has provided for every one some
cross: ELI in his children, DAVID in his enemies, Dr. H^ll.
JOSEPH in his brethren, LAZARUS in his body, JOHN in his liberty, JOB in all.
Pli: hist: not: l: 7.
No creature comes weeping into the world but man, and no creature weepeth so
much being entered into the world as man. Tears are the beginning and argument
of life, so hold some Philosophers, and some Lawyers, life by weeping, holding
that if the child were heard cry, it is a proof of his living. Aug: cons: l.
10.
The Eyes are the chiefest hurt of the senses, the best windows for Satan:
not evil in themselves but in the effects, the heart corrupting them: and
therefore have tears. Mr. Greenham in his counsels
Hearing is the sense of learning, but Seeing is the sense of certainty. A
Christian compassed about with infirmity may say as one did: Greg:
Thomas doubting has more profited me then Mary's believing, yet now if we
stagger, Ioh: 1.46.
a voice will call us, Come and see. Our eyes must be lifted up, for our
redemption is above: worldly objects dazzle the sight in the corny valleys,
Pe^r^ch. dial. ^6.
airie mountains, shadowy groves, flowrie banks, clear fountains, crystal
rivers, green meddowes, and beautifullest faces: as at other times in filthy
dunghills, heaps of dirt, misshapen monlers, rotten carrions, they are loathsome
to the sight. The sight of the wicked to flourish is greenous to the godly, in
regard whereof Pigmelius a grave Roman Prelate, not long after the Primitive
Church being fallen blind was wont ^olemnely to thank God, that by that means
he was freed from seeing the enemies of his Church, and especially Julian the
Apostate. But our comfort is that our sight shall be cleared, and no such
objects shall offend us; for all occasion of tears shall be taken away, and
our eyes wiped with Gods own hand. He shall anoint our eyes with eye-salue
that we may see. Rue: 3.18.
A toy which can not (elect Lady) be expressed with paper and ink, 2. ep: Io:
12.
but when we see God face to face. In the mean while our tears must be
moderated, and we must wait patiently for this change. This is the aim of my
poor meditations in my Sermon, and being much bounden to your worthy and
learned Husband, upon your religious desire of the Copy, I commend it unto
your good Ladyship, and to all the lovers of the truth who shall read it. And
so leaving this memorial of my respect unto your Ladyship, whom I know to be
zealous for the truth: with my devotions for your honorable Husband, virtuous
Self, and hopeful issue, I rest

Your Ladyships in the Lord, SAMPSON PRICE.

LORDIESVS BEGIN AND END.
REVEL: 7.17. God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
HOw glorious the nature of man was in the beginning before his fall, may
appear in his creation, GOD created man in his own image, Genesis 1.27.
Gen: 1.27. Not that he took upon him an humane shape when he created man; as
some erroneously collected: Eugubinus.
Neither is that image to be ascribed only unto man; and the woman excluded as
others defend. Theodoret.
It was true of the male and female, they were made in Gods own likeness,
which may be understood either of their dominion over the creatures, Basil.
or of their immortality of the soul, or of their freewill: or because as all
things are originally in God, Aug. l. de qu: ana: c: 2. Damasc. l: 2. d^^ide c:
12.
so also man does participate with the nature of all creatures, of plants in
growing and increasing, of beasts insense and moving, of Angels in
understanding; or rather as Saint Paul speaks: This new man was created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24.
Ephesians. 4.24. What was then wanting unto him (says Bernard) when he was so
warmely clothed with sour virtues? Ber. sup. cant.
Mercy kept him, Truth instructed him, Justice ruled him, Peace nourished* him.
But man being in such honor forgot the goodness of his Maker, and since has
remained miserable in his posterity: who finding themselves to be but men,
naked, poor, and to be pitied, Iament that they are men, Ber. decensid. lib.
2.
blush that they are naked, weep that they are borne, and murmr that they
are at all: when their bodies weak with sickness do remember them of their
mortality, Aug. contra Julian: l. 4. ^ 14. and 15.
especially when their minds are distracted with cares, dejected with fears,
faint with labor, and addicted to pleasures; A meditation able to make men
sink under the burden of discontent, if we knew not that much better things
are provided for us hereafter. This is one part of Gods image, to be renewed in
knowledge, Col. 3.10. Exodus 7.17. Os. 14.9. Ioh. 17.3. Ioh 1.29.
Col. 3. To know God to be the Lord, Exodus 7. To know him and to trust in him,
Of. 14.9. To know him to be the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, Ioh. 17. to know that he is the Lamb which takes away the sin of the
world, Ioh. 1. the Lamb before whom the four beasts and four and twenty
Elders fall down with their harpes, and golden viols full of odours; because
he was worthy to take the book, and open the seals; because he was slain and
redeemed us unto God by his blood; because he has made us unto our God Kings
and Priests, Chap: 5. verse: 8.9.13.
as we find in the 5. Chapter of this Prophecy: the Lamb unto whom every
creature which is in heaven and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as
are in the sea, ascribe blessing, glory, and power; the Lamb who as he was
careful to charge Peter to feed his lambs, Ioh 21.15.
Ioh. 21. so is he here described to provide for his Saints in heaven: to array
them with white robes, that is his own righteousness, called white raiment
chap: Verse. 14.
3.5. and washed robes made white in his own blood. They shall hunger no more,
for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne shall feed them; neither
thirst any more, for he shall lead them unto living fountains of waters,
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat, for God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, all faculty of weeping shall be taken away from
them.

The whole Chapter contains the estate of the Church to the end of the world
distinguished into two times; the first, wherein the true worshippers are
defined by a certain number; the second wherein they grew infinite. In the 1.
verse four Angels hold the four winds, by which some understand Hypocrites
with their impostures, Balaus and Marlor.
Papists with their traditions, Tyrants with their persecutions, and ungodly
Rulers with their corruptions. Others four bad spirits, of Luxury, Pride,
Gluttony, Ardens hom. Brightman in verse: 1.
Avarice: others four works of darkness, contention arising from the East,
ambition from the West, heresy from the South, War from the North. But if
these were foul Angels and ready to hurt the earth by not suffering the
Northwinde, and the Southwinde to come and blow upon the Lords garden that the
spices thereof might flow out, Chap: 4.16.
that is upon his Church to purge it from filth, and that the voice of the
Turtle might not be heard in the Land: Chap. 2.12.
neither on the Sea, that is, on consciences which by temptations have their
souls melted, reeling to and fro, Psalm. 107.26.
staggering, and being at their wits end, and crying unto the Lord, when the
waves of death compass them, 2. Sam. 22.5.6.17.
the floods of ungodly men make them afraid, the sorrows of hell compass them
about, and the snares of death prevent them, till the Lord send from above,
take them and draw them out of many waters: neither on any tree, that is, those
who are planted in the house of the Lord, and desire to bring forth good fruit,
and be known by their fruits, to bring forth fruits meet for repentance,
Math. 12.33.
to spread out their roots and have their leaves green, Math. 3.8.
knowing that if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, Ier. 17.8.
in the place where it falls there it shall be: If they were foul Angels,
yet John saw another Angel saying hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the
trees till we have sealed the servants of God in their forehead, that as God
prepared an Arc for Noah and his family before the deluge came, Mr. Foot the
in c. Genesis 6.
and as he caused Lot with his wife and two daughters in their lingering to be
pulled by the hand before Sodom was burnt, Genesis 19.16.
and blood to be sprinkled upon the two side posts, Exodus 12.13.
and on the upper door post of the houses of the Israelites for a token that
he would pass them over, and the plague should not be upon them to destroy
them, when he smote the land of Aegipt: Ez 9 4.
and the man clothed with linen, which had the writers inkehorne by his side
to go through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the forheads of
them that sighed, before the rest were to be smitten. So here one good Angel
suppresseth four bad from executing their fury till the number were sealed:
Exodus 4.23. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
the number of all the Tribes of the children of Israel being an hundred forty
and four thousand: twelve thousand of the Tribe of Judah, so many of Reuben,
Gad, Asser, Nepthali, Manasses, Simeon, Leui, Issachar, Zabulon, Joseph and
Benjamin. The Jews were sealed first because Gods eldest Sons, his first
borne, a special people unto himself above all people upon the face of the
earth; and after them an infinite number of other nations, kindreds, people,
and tongues: all which are described, by their habit v: 9. by their doxologie
v: 10. by the Angels worshipping of God with them v: 11.12. by a Seniours
question v: 13. and his answer containing their description. These are they
which came out of great tribulation v: 14. their habitation, therefore are they
before the throne of God: their freedom from all evil v: 16. and their
fruition of all good, when God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

Which words of my Text are taken from a prophecy of Isai: Is 25.8.
one who was the most eloquent Prophet for Hebrew in the old, Ier: ep: ad
Paulinum.
as S. Paul the most elegant Apostle for Greek in the New Testament: He was of
the blood Royal and brought up at the Cour: He seemed rather to write a
Gospel then a Prophecy: Bulli: praef. in Is:
Demosthenes and Tully come short of him in their Orations. He describes the
joys of the elect by a banquet Is: 25. that as God prepares a table for us
here in the scripture, where is doctrinalis sapientia, Bertrand: in Eua: Dom:
2. post Pentecost.
and in the Church where there is sacramentalis Eucharistia, and in the devout
soul where is spiritualis laetitia, so hereafter a table in glory, where is
immortalis sufficientia. In this life he feasteth us with doctrine in the
wisdom of the word, with thanksgiving in the Sacraments, and joy in the
spirit; but there is no true sufficiency till we come to the mountain where
the Lord shall make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wine on
the lees, of fat things full of marrow, of wine on the lees well refined: he
will swallow up death in victory, and wipe away tears from all faces, and the
rebuke of his people: God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

The sum of which words is an assurance that God will one day take away all
occasion of forrow, and fill his with perfect joy. Gen: Note in Is: 25. Ribera.
Or here we learn that howsoever this world be a valley of tears, yet we
shall have a place of reioyeing. It is a similitude from mothers, Viegas and
Paunonius.
who when their little children cry, give unto them fair speeches, embrace
them, and wipe their faces: can a woman forget her sucking child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet
will I not forget thee. Is. 49.15.
Is: 49 As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall
be comforted in Jerusalem. Is: 66. Is. 66.13.
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

So that we may call this scripture, The Mourners reward, or The glorifying of
the eyes, or The clearing of the Saints sight.

In which observe 1. The Author of this comfort who he is, God. 2. The Act what
he does, shall wipe away all tears. 3. The object to be cleared, from their
eyes.


The first contains him that is summum bonum the chief good.

The second remoueth summum malu^, the greatest misery, weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

The third cures stillantem oculum, the dropping eye.

In the first we have a powerful and omnipotent Majesty.

In the second, a ready and willing help in the greatest extremity.

In the third, a mauifest and clear assurance of glory.

These are the bounds which confine my meditations: He that has eyes to see
let him watch, and every one that ever had any portion of true sorrow, let him
so learn that he may go away with that livery of the disciples: Blessed are
they that mourn, Mat. 5.4.
for they shall be comforted.

When Origin a man of immortal wit, Ier: catal: and ^apol: adu: Ruff: Orig:
hom: 7. in Ios.
and most learned in all secular knowledge, whose knowledge of the scriptures
Ierom wo^dred at, was to expound the word Iubilate, he professed that he felt
himself inwardly touched, he knew not by whatsecret and extraordinary motion,
to search into the secret meaning of it, hoping there to find, as Chrysostom
spoke in another case, Chrysostom. hom. 15. in Genesis
Thesaurum magnum in parua dictione, some great treasure couched in that little
word: I am sure there is no word more full of store then the name of God here,
in Greek (...), rendered by Beza and Tremelius Deus: Ludouicus Viues observed
truly, De veritacefi. le^. l: 1.
that Iudaisme and Mahometisme, and all other superstitious devotions are but
like unto the glass which is brittle and cannot endure the hammer, but the
Christian faith is like the gold, whether melted, or rubbed, or beaten it still
shines the more orient: so is the doctrine of the true God, it fears not the
touchstone, but has meditation enough in it to busy the curiousest searcher
of the world: A mystery which made Trismegistus call God ineffable, Trismeg. ad
Tatium.
one that could not be pronounced, and the Jews so superstitious that they
consessed this name to be (...), inenarrable; ineffable, not to be expressed:
and Arnobius that Qui se putat magnitudinem Deinosse, Arnob. l: 8.
minuit, He that thinks he knows the greatness of God, lesseneth it as much
as he may. It is impossible to know his essence: He has need of the Logique
of God himself that should give a perfect definition of him; M: Cartwr: ca
tech. p. 3.
yet how much have many labored in this secret? The Rabbines observing that
the name Jehovah has four letters of rest, to signify that the rest and
tranquillity of all the creatures in the world is in God alone: Steuchus
thinking that none can interpret it; Paulus Burgensis that none can translate
it: Zanchius and others, that it is a name of 4 letters in all languages; in
the Roman Deus, the Spanish Dios, Zan. de natura Dei, l. 1. c. 13.
the Italian IDIO, the French Dieu, the German Got, the Persian (...), the
Magi pronouncing it Orsi, the Dalmatians Bogi, the Mahumetans Abgd, the new
found world Zimi, the Assirians Adad, the Aegiptians (...), the Arabians (...),
the Hetrusci (...), as if they knew that God is not the God of the Jews only,
but of all the world besides. His name is I AM, Exodus 3.14.
Exodus 3. importing the eternity of his essence, the same yesterday, and to
day, Heb. 13.8.
and for ever, and the existence and perfection of all things in him, Non quod
illa sunt quod est ille, sed quia ex ipso, says Bernard: Ber. in Cant. ser. 4.
Not that they are the same that he is, but because of him, and through him,
and to him are all things. Therefore did Plato call him (...), that which is:
Romans 11.36. Zan. de natura Dei, l. 1. c 13.
and in his Timaeus reprehendeth those which attribute unto him either the
future or the preterperfect tense, forasmuch as neither of those tenses did
agree with him, but the present tense only. Therefore Thales answered, being
demanded what God was: Quod principio and fine caret, That which wants
beginning and ending. And upon the doors of the Temple of Delphas the
inscription was in capital letters E I, veram, certam, Plut. mor. part. 1. de
E I apud Delphos.
solamque soli conuenientem ei appellationem qua esse dicitur, tribuentes;
giving him thereby a true, a certain, and only appellation of existing alone.
Gr Naz Orat. 38.
This name Nazranzene called an infinite and boundless Ocean: and Austin tells
us, Quo intellectu Deum capit homo qui ipsum intellectum suum quo cum vult
capere nondum capit? With what understanding can man possibly conceive God, who
cannot conceive his own understanding? Yet because Est in Deo quod percipi
potest, si quod potest velis; Hill. de Trin. l. 10.
There is in God that which may be perceived by us, if we endeavor that which
may be; as there is in the Sun that which may be seen, if we will see what
we may: but often men lose what they may see, if they endeavor to see more then
they may see. Let us look upon his works, Dionys. de diu. nom. c. 1.
for Dei nomen mirabile nomen, super omne nomen, sed sine nomine; The name of
God is admirable, above every name, not to be expressed by any name. Were all
the land paper, and all the water ink, every plant a pen, and every other
creature a swift and ready Scribe, they could not set down the least piece of
his greatness. He is length in respect of eternity, Ber. de consid.
breadth in regard of charity, height for his majesty, depth for his wisdom.
He has much more then the Poet found in Jupiter.

Estque Dei seeds, vbi terra, and pontus, and aer,
Et coelum, Lucanus 9.
and virtus, superos: quid quaerimus vltra?
Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moueris.
He has Heaven for his throne, Matt. 5.34 35. 1. King. 8 27.
and the Earth for his footstool, nay behold the heaven and heaven of heavens
cannot contain him: there is not an herb, flower, tree, leaf, seed, fruit,
beast or worm, wherein we see not the power of his Deity. All Thrones are
but pieces of his footstool: he is a God before whom there was no God formed,
neither shall there be after him; the Lord, and besides him there is no
Savior. Is. 43.10.11.13.
He will work, and who can let it? Here is the Sphynx of divinity, if I may
so call it, to look upon this Majesty unto whom the Rabbis have given
threescore and ten names diuersified in ten sorts, making in all seven hundred
and twenty names; but I must confess as Justin Martyr did, Just. Mart. l. 1.
confess fidei.
that it is a mystery which is rather to be received by faith then conceived
by reason: yet as men when they desire to see the Sun in an inter position
do look into the water, and as that Geometrician, Lips. polit.
finding the length of Hercules foot upon the hill Olympus, ghessed at the
proportion of his whole body, and because howsoever the divine nature be in
comprehensible, yet we should not wholly desist from searching it, Just. Mart.
de Trin.
consuming our time in idleness; we must look upon God in his works, and
acknowledge that he is a God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, a mighty
and terrible, Deuteronomy. 10. Deuteronomy. 10.17. Mar. 27. 1. Cor. 8.6. Romans 15.5.
a God only forgiving sins, Mark. 2. one God of whom are all things and we in
him, 1. Cor. 8. the God of patience and consolation, Romans 15. here comforting
his Church after their tribulations, hungring, thirsting, and weeping: whence
we may be directed to this useful observation.

That God is the Author of the only and true comfort unto his servants. Doct.


A truth confirmed plentifully in the Scriptures. This was the encouragement
that the Lord gave unto Isaac when he appeared unto him, either awake as some
hold, Lippoma. Toslat.
or asleep as others: I am the God of Abraham thy father, fear not, for I am
with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham's sake, Genesis 26.24.
Genesis 26. The Heathens had their national Gods which were no Gods, the
Assyrians Belus, Peter in Genesis
the Egyptians Isis, the Tyrians Baal, the Athenians Minerua, the Samians
Juno, the Lemnians Vulcan, the Romans Quirinus, etc. But our God is the
peculiar God of Abraham and of the faithful. Genesis 28.15.
He thus heartned Jacob, Genesis 28. I am with thee, and will keep thee in all
places whither thou go, I will not leave thee: so he promised, Genesis Genesis
46.4.
46. I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also suroly bring thee
up again: which was performed when his body was carried to be buried in
Canaan as he had charged Joseph with an oath, Genesis 47.31.
because that was the place which the Lord chose for his people to dwell in; or
the Patriarchs desired to be buried in the land of promise to testisie their
faith that God would bring their seed thither: or as having the same hope of
the resurrection, or foreseeing that the Messiah should be borne there; but
most of all the promise was performed in his seed, whom the Lord brought out of
Egypt under the hand of Moses and Aaron. God kills and makes alive, Deuteronomy
32.39.
wounds and heals, Deu. 32. He gives the former and the latter rain,
Joel 2.23.
Joel 2. Except he build the house, they labor in vain that build it: Psalm.
1 27 1.
no house is a fortress if unarmed of this weapon, ser. 22.15.
though of Cedar. Excopt he keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain.
Does a man eat and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor? Eccl.
2.2^.
This is from the hand of God. How many have varieties of meats, and cannot
eat, being troubled with a (...), that when they are chastened with pain upon
their beds, and the multitude of their bones with strong pain, their life
abhors bread, Job 33.19.20.
and their soul dainty meat? How many have been slain as the Amalekites
while they were spread abroad upon the earth, eating, and drinking, and
dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken? 1. Sam 30.16.
Hane men riches, and wealth, and the power thereof, to take their portion and
rejoice in their labor? This is the gift of God; Eccl 5.19. Job 21.16.
others gather riches to their own hurt, vel inde superbiendo, Hago.
vel non praestando, etc. either growing proud by them, or not being good
stewards of them, not suffering them to sleep, Eccl. 5.12. being as much
troubled to keep them as ever to get them, fearing losses, or thinking upon
unlawful gain by usury, and other sore evils. Amb. in Ps. 1.
Have men been preserved from their enemies, and triumphed in the victory?
God teaches their hands to war and fingers to fight. God made all, and
rules all; Psalm. 144 1. Chrysostom.
and as a ship without a governor is for no service, as a body without a
soul of no power, so the World could never be created as it was, nor continue
as it is, nor come to that it is to be, without this God. No being, no living,
no comfort is without him. He works sometimes without means, as he created
the world of nothing in the beginning, not to receive any happiness by the
things created, Aug. de genesis co. plan. c. 4.
without the which he was happy, but he made the world to manifest his glory
and declare his mercy: so without means he preserved Moses on the mount forty
days and forty nights, Exodus 34 28.
he did neither eat bread nor drink water; Deuteronomy. 29 5.
he led the Israelites forty years in the wilderness, their clothes and
shoes not waxing old: so often in tempests at sea when men look every hour
to be cast away, when the keele be it never so strong, the ribs be they never
so stiff, the cleets and clamps of iron be they never so fast set on, are like
to fly in pieces, or if a joint crack all is hazarded, if a planke shoot up,
all is like to be gone, when they mount up to heaven, and go down again to
the depths, Psalm. 107.
their soul being melted because of trouble, they reele to and fro, and
stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits end, God makes the storm a
calm; so in extremity of sickness, when Physicians and all give a man off,
Job 16.2.
that he cries out as Job, Miserable comforters are ye all: in dangerous
childbirths, when women have with Rachel hard labor, Genesis 35.16.
and in other extremities when we see no means of help in the world, God
commenth in with his helping hand, and makes the waves still, turns deadly
sickness into a safe recovery, sorrowful travails into joyful deliueries,
bitterness into sweetness, and that immediately.

God works comfort sometimes against means, as when the Israelites passed
over upon the dry ground in the midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall
unto them on their right hand and on Exodus 14 22.
their left, Exodus 14. in the division of Jordan for Elijah, in the standing
still of the Sun for Joshua, in the not burning of the three children, in the
hungry Lions not devouring Daniel, in the Viper not hurting S. Paul.

Sometimes God works by means, as by Angels, appearing either visibly as
they did to Jacob when he went on his way, Genesis 32.1.
which he called Gods host; or not seen at the first, but afterward, as
Elisha praying that his servants eyes might be opened, and behold the mountain
was full of horses, and chariots of fire round about Elisha, 2. King. 6. which
were Angels: 2. King. 6.17.
or most commonly not seen to men, yet always in a readiness for Gods
service and his childrens preservation, encamping round about them that fear
him, Psalm. 34.7.
and delivering them, being all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.14.
Besides these, God comfort men with his other creatures, those two great
lights, the Sun to rule by day, Psalm. 136.8. which Anaxagoras held much
greater then Peloponesus a country in Graecia, Anaximander as big as the
earth, the Mathematicians exceeding the earth 166. times: Clauius.
the Moon to rule the night; Job 38.31.32.
such are the influences of Pleiades bringing the spring, the bands of Orion
bringing rain, Mazzaroth in his season, and Arcturus with his sons. He
hears the heavens, they hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn,
Os. 2.2^.
and the wine, and the oil. He is with Kings is their kingdoms, Bishops in
their churches, Peers in their consultations, Judges in their judgments,
Captains in their battles, ever ready to comfort when the help of man is
vain. Is. 50.3.
He that can cloth the heavens with blackness, and make sackcloth their
covering, can also stretch them out like a curtain to cover himself with
light as with a garment. He that can send out a great wind into the Sea till
it work and be tempestuous, Psalm 104.2. Io. 1.4.11.
and the waves thereof toss themselves, Ier. 5.22.
can also stay them that they prevail not thought they rore and smite through
the pride thereof. Instrumenta sunt tota creatura Dei, all the creatures of God
are ready at his command to attend the elect for their good, Job 26 12. Wigand.
Syntag. V^t. Test.
and the reprobate for their hurt. He is the best comforter: others may
deceive, a friend his friend, as Achitophel did David, a Counselor his client,
as Abimelech the Schechemits, the wife the husband, as Dalilah did Sampson, the
daughter leave the mother, as Orpah Naomi: but God never fails; and therefore
as Demosthenes held that no man could be miserable which laid temperance and
continency for a foundation of wisdom; so much more may we hold him to be
most comforted which has the Lord for his God; and as that Emperor Marcus
Aurelius often professed, that he would not leave the knowledge he might
learn in one hour for all the gold he possessed, receiving more glory from
the books he read and wrote, then all the battles he won and kingdoms he
conquered, so may we resolve that this only makes us happy, that God does
comfort us.

Use. 1.
How wretched then is the estate of them which oppose themselves against this
God of comfort. Such are the Atheists of this age, whose Patron was Diagoras
(...): in plain terms denying that there was any God at all, and Epicurus
trampling upon religion: They are Infidels in heart, Blasphemers in tongue, the
greatest Traitors to their Prince, Rebels to their country, a poison to their
houses, plague to their friends: causing the earth upon which they go to be
cursed, the air where they speak, to be infected, and Satan where they enter
to be possessed. Strange it is, that either Grecian or Barbarian, Turk or
Christian, any one whose seet tread upon the earth, or whose eyelids are opened
toward heaven, should not in their lives proclaim the comfortable Majesty of
this God: but as it is supposed that Anaxagoras would never have affirmed snow
to be black, but that he was stark blind of both his eyes: so these would
never so much err, but that they are blinded in their understanding; more
insensible then the creatures void of reason; for the star confessed the son
of God, and led the wise men to Christ; the sea and winds did obey him: the
Ass did bear him to Jerusalem: the Fishes at his command came into the net,
and one brought money to pay tribute: the Sun at his death was appalled, the
earth did tremble, the stones did cleave asunder, and the graves did open: they
are more obstinate then the Devil, Mar. 5.6.7.
seeing Jesus a far off, he came and worshipped him, crying with a loud
voice, that he was the Son of the most high God: Jesus he knows and Paul,
Acts 19 15.
but these acknowledge neither God nor Jesus, nor any true Prophets sent from
God, but the time shall come that the eyes that sin has shut, damnation
shall open, and they shall know that this God is not unfitly called by the
Graecians (...), for the sharpness of his sight, and swiftness of his course,
seeing all, and ruling over all in a moment, (...) as that whereby all things
are caused to be (...) for that he gives life and motion to all, Aristed: in
hymno in Iouem. Diog. La^r^. c. el: Rhodig.
and (...) in reguard of his goodness: whither should I send the foolish
Naturals which never look upon the God of Nature, but to the creator of all,
which fashioned all. Nature it self is nothing but a power placed by this God
in his creatures. Hugo.
Quis disposuit membra pulicis and culicis, who has disposed in order the
limbs of the flea and gnat, they have their life and motion, flying death,
loving life, seeking after that they delight in, shunning that which troubles
them, having sense and quickness in motion. This God made them: Qui fecit
Angelumin coelo fecit vermiculum infecta: He that made the Angel in Heaven
made the little worine on the earth: Aug super. Psalm. 148.
Totum attend, totum lauda, consider all the order of Gods works, thou shall
see cause enough to praise God for all: Thou art without excuse, for the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen being
understood by the things that are made. Romans 1.20.
Witnesses against thee shall be, that the Lord has done good for thee and
given thee rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling thy heart with food
and gladness, beside the express testimonies of the word, Acts 14 17.
open prophecies of things to come thousands of years before they came, and
infinite miracles: O reason not as the besotted Epicure: How does God know, can
he judge through the dark clouds? Job 22.13.
thick clouds are a covering to him that he sees not, and he walks in the
circuit of Heaven: God is every where, and there is no evasion from him, no
corner in hell, no mansion in heaven, no cave in the top of Carmel, no fishes
belly in the bottom of the Sea, no dark dungeon in the land of captivity, no
clouds of the day, darkness of the night, secrecy of a friend, or a more
secret conscience, nor any like evasion can hide thee or thy actions from this
God. He makes the fields have eyes to see thy deeds, the woods ears to hear
our proiects, the walls of our bed chambers mouths to witness against us. He
can use thy self as an instrument against thy self, and thine own mouth to
testify against thee, either unawares to disclose thy faults, or in sleep by
a dream to make them known, or in sickness to rave at the sight of them, or
else in some frenzy to vomit them out, or in the torment of conscience to
confess them all. To the wicked this God at the last day shall appear
terrible, his face as a flame of fire, his voice thunder, his wrath horror. He
shall meet them riding upon the wings of the wind, raining upon them snares to
entrap them, fire to devour them, hailstones to kill them, a smoke to smother
them, a stormy tempest to terrify them, the stinck of brimstone to annoy them,
and hot thunder bolts to shoot them through, and then send them to the great
jail of hell, where there is no desire but revenge, no devotion but cursing,
no blessing, but blasphemy where they may be removed from place to place, but
never either be eased of pangs or freed of pains: where there shall be famine
for gluttony, thirst for drunkenness, burning for lust, madness for swearing,
want for ill gotten goods, staruing for cruelty. But to the elect he shall
bring joy, peace, and all comfort: 1. Cor. 15.28.
He shall be all in all to them.

How should this encourage us now to be known to this God of comfort, Use.
to believe him to be, and to conceive him rightly, to remember his presence
and consider his providence: to love him above all to hold on his side against
all, and to be subject to him before all. He foreseeth all our troubles before
they be, wisely orders them, and preordaineth what shall be the end. O that
all were so wise to consider and think upon this, then would not some in a
desperate discontent make their own hands their executioners, others upon
crosses be carried violently from their wits, others ever be wishing for death,
though unprepared for it, others murmr against God because their reward is
not otherwise for serving God, others upon a sting of conscience seek for
merry and profane company, sumptuous and rioting feasts, reuelling and
unlawful games, wanton and unchaste songs, the sound only of the viol and harp
to drive away care, whereas earth can never redress that which came from
Heaven. Expect of thy stepmother nothing but discontent. The world is an ocean
of troubles, here is no firm land, mischiefs must strive for places lest they
lose their rooms; He seeks us that made us, let us not bite the stone, but
look up to the hand, and then as Moses feared not his rod though it were turned
into a serpent, Exodus 7.9.
no more shall we all the crauling and hissing scourges of this life. Does any
now droop under a feigned cuill, or augment sorrow through impatience, or fear
danger yet far off, or being distracted with the passions of the mind and
haunted with sin, sit down and weep, and refuse comfort contrary to that rule;

Fortianimo mala fer, nec bis miser esto dolor. Behold here is a cordial,
Aquacaelestis, water from heaven, a preservative against the poison of any
discontent: other helps may make us like glowwormes, which cast a fire, but
being pressed, there is nothing but a crude moisture; they are seeming and only
shining comforts, but God is a true and only comforter; he comforted David
when he was weary with groaning, I sai 6.6. Isa. 38.14,
Isai when he chattered like a Crane, or Swallow, mourned like a Dove, and his
eyes failed with looking upward, Job. 42.6.
Job when he abhorred himself, and repented in dust and ashes; Manasses when
he was taken among the thieves, 2 Chro. 33.11 Psalm. 42.5.
bound with fetters, and carried to Babylon: Why then should we cast down our
souls and be disquieted within us: we should rather imitate Luther that
heroike spirit, who when the world stood against him, he caused that Psalm to
be sung, the title whereof is: Psalm. 46.1.
The confidence which the Church has in God: God is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble: we should be glad and rejoice in the Lord our
God, Lel. 2.23.
and as the Heart pants after the water-brookes, so should our souls pant
after God, Psalm. 42 1.
for he has not only anointed others to preach good tidings unto the meek,
to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, Isa. 61.
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, but he himself looks
upon the mourners in Zion, giving unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy
for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, and he shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes: It is his own Act, which is my second
part.

THE true Church out of which there is no salvation, Pars. 2.
is compared to many glorious things to a Dove for her loveliness, to a Vine
for her fruitfulness, to a mount for her safenesse, to a Priesthood for her
holiness, to a Queen for her royalty, to a Tower for her glistring; yet she
does but soiorne, and while it is upon earth, is subject to the scorching of
the sun: the whole world is but a low moorish watery ground, and the Elect here
are like the children of Israel, lifting up their voices and weeping because
they are in Bochim: Fle^^^^: Tremel. Iud. 2.5.
i. a place full of weepers, they are usually either in blacks mourning, or in
red persecuted, yet glorious in this apparel, Isa. 63.
traveling in the greatness of their strength being dipped in blood.

This life is a seede-time and will be louring, Post nubila sudum, Revel. 19.13.
we shall have a calm harvest. We are travelers, and shall use many hosts
though we shall find few friends: our days are spent either in seeing or
doing or suffering evil. Greg: Naz.
Every one has his roll spread before him written within and without;
Lamentations, and mourning, Ez 2 10.
and woe: some put singing for mourning, so that tears sometimes may have
rejoicing, as Cyprian speaks of some, Gaudium pectoris lachrymis exprimentes,
Vulg carmen.
they expressed the joy of their hearts by their tears: Cyp Gen 43.30.
such were the tears of Joseph seeing his brother Benjamin, his only brother
by the mothers side, his bowels did yerne, and he sought where to weep, and
he entered into his chamber and wept there: Iunius.
such were the tears of Jacob when Joseph made ready his chariot and went to
meet him to Goshen in the City of the Nobles, Septuag. Genesis 46.29.
and presented himself unto him, he fell on his neck and wept on his neck a
good while; so did that father at the return of a prodigal, Luke 15.20. but
usually tears are the juice of a mind pressed with grief. The father weepeth
for the death of his son, as David for Absolon as he went up to the chamber
over the gate, 1. Sam. 18.33
as if like Aeneas he had cared for none else but Absolon.

Omnis in Ascanio chari slat cura parentis. Virg.
O Absolon my son, my son. Nothing can be dearer unto a man then his son,
except it be his soul. Hannah begd a man child of God, ^. Sa. 1.11.27.
and she had her petition given. Pithius Bithinius seeing his son murdered
by Xerxes, buried him, Texoff.
left his kingdom to his wife, and spent the rest of his life in the same
grave with him. The mother weepeth for the daughter as Rachel for her children
with great mourning; Mat. 2.18.
she brought her children into the world in much pangs, to the half killing
of her self, yet cares for them to be washed and swadled, Ez. 1^.4.
sometime laughing to hope what they will be, sometimes distressed with fear
of what they may be, ever tender and dear unto them, and beloved in their
sight. Pro. 4.3.
O that we were half so tender of our souls as our mothers have been of our
bodies. Their tears are ready in life and death. The son sheddeth tears for
the father, as Joseph did for Jacob when he had made an end of commanding his
sons, gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost; Genesis 50.1.
Musculus.
Joseph fell upon his face, and wept upon him, and kissed him. It is Stoicall
to hold that a wise man should be without compassion or affection. Genesis 42.24.
He wept at the sight of his brethren aloud, that the Egyptians and the house
of Pharaoh heard, but his tears were more violent for the death of his father:
Genesis 45.2. Eeel 3.11.
no marvel, for the glory of a man is from the honor of his father. The
child sheddeth tears for the death of the mother, Sara.
and perhaps continues mourning as long as Izhak did for his mother, D. Willet
in Genesis
3. years, when she had lived 127. years, the only woman whose whole age is
recorded in Scripture. The mother bears the child nine months in her womb,
longer in her arms, for ever in her heart: she bears with many childish
infirmities, and when no other eye pittieth, she weepeth and batheth, Ier. ep.
de susp^cto contubernio.
and suffers much hearty trouble: she so uses the children as if they were
her parents, Aug. conf. l. 9. c. 9.
as A. Austin writes of the tender affectionate care of his mother Monica over
him. The husband sheddeth tears for the death of his wife, as Abraham who was
140. Peter.
years old at the death of Sarah: Genesis 2.18.22.
man and wife are but one flesh. The woman was made to be an help meet for
man: she was made of the ribbe of man, not from the earth, but from the side
of man; neither out of his head, lest she should be too proud; neither out of
his feet, for she is not a vassal, but from his side, that the man knowing the
woman to be taken out of him, might more firmly set his affection upon her,
being flesh of his flesh and bone of his bones; Muse:
from his left side where his heart lay, to show the love that must be betwixt
them. It was not of a monstrous superfluous part, but a ribbe above the usual
number of ribs, created of purpose by the Lord as necessary for the creation of
woman. A good wife is a consummation of other pleasures: Calu:
Nullius boni sine socio iucunda est possessio; No good thing can be possessed
pleasantly without a companion: no companion can be so dear to man, which made
Euphrates a Philosopher upon the death of his wife to cry out, O tyrannous
Philosophy, thou command to love, and if we lose the things beloved thou
forbiddest us to be sorry for them. The brother sheddeth tears for his
brother, Ber. pro si atre Gerardo.
as Bernard for Gerardus; we were but one heart and one soul, but now the
sword has pierced it, fetching one part to heaven, and leaving the other upon
the earth. The friend weepeth for the friend, as Christ did for Lazarus, and
David for Jonathan, Ioh. 11.35.
I am distressed for thee, very pleasant have thou been unto me: and Gregory
Nazianzene for Basil; Monod. in Basil.
As for my self, now I am bereaved of such a man, what shall I do, but either
die, or live in misery? which way shall I turn me? what shall I do? what
counsel shall I take, now I have lost him that was my comfort? But howsoever
it be lawful to mourn and shed tears, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
yet not as without hope. Mourning for the dead and remembrance of them is
lawful, else Deborah Rebekkahs nurse had not been buried so carefully, and
the place expressed and called Allon Bachuth, Genesis 35.8. Genesis 35.20.
the oak of weeping: else Jacob had not set a pillar upon the grave of Rachel,
else Israel had not mourned for Josias, the faithful for Stephen, and women
for Dorcas. Ennius the Poet would not be weeped for:

Nemo me lachrymis decoret, Tully. Prudent.
nec funera fletu. No more would Laurence the Martyr: but Solon commanded that
the Commonwealth should mourn for his death, and we must shed some tears
over the dead Saints, because by their departure we may seem to suffer
harms: Ecc. 38.16.
we had comfort by their presence, which we want by their absence, because they
did much good to the Church and Commonwealth. The world was blessed by them;
worse usually succeed: the wicked will grow more obstinate, and we may fear
some judgment to follow: Is. 57.1.
for their death is a prognostication of some evil to come; as when Noah
entered into the Arc, the world was drowned with the flood; and when Lot
departed out of Sodom, it was burnt. The godly need not to fear as Herod, who
being ready to die, Ios. ant. l. 17. c. 9. and de bello Iud. l. 1. c. 21.
and thinking that his death would be a joy to many, shut up in prison some
Noble men of every Town, and required his sister Salome and her husband Alexa,
that as soon as be was dead they should kill those Noble men, and then all
Indaea would lament his death. The Lord causes them to be lamented, as he did
Ambrose in Italy, Austin in Afric, Luther in Germany, and others in other
places, sending extraordinary judgments immediately after their deaths. But
our comfort should be, as Cyprian speaks, Cyp:
that they are but gone before, and we shall follow after: that we must not
lament them overmuch, who by the call of God are freed from misery: that they
are but gone a journey, we must look for their return; they are sailed into
a strange country, and will if we wait come again; that their deaths are not
funerals, but triumphs; that as life without Christ is death, Ignat:
so their death with and in Christ is life; that love commands our tears,
Isid:
but faith should rule our passions, and prescribe a moderation; that as Jerome
spoke to Eustochium concerning her mother Paula, Ier. ad Eustoch. Epitaph.
Paula.
we should not so much mourn because we have lost such, as give thanks that
we have had such, yea rather that we still have such, for all live unto God,
and whosoever returns unto the Lord is reckoned in the number of the family;
that we shall all meet at the last and there shall be no more occasion of
sorrowing, sighing, sobbing; for as the spirit here tells Saint John, when
we appear before the Lamb, God shall wipe away all tears, and there shall
be no more occasion of mourning: which directs to this doctrinall
proposition,

That after the end of this life God will free all the elect from all miseries.

It is prophesied of by Esaias, c. 57.2. Doct.
He shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in
his uprightness: so in Psalm. 126.5.6. They that sow in tears shall reap in
joy. He that goes forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
come again with rejoicing, bearing his sheaues with him: a truth repeated c.
21. of this prophecy v. 4. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes,
and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall
there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away. Here tears
often are helpful to expel grief: as the Poet desired to be wept for, it
would do him a pleasure.

Fle que meos casus, On: l. 4. Trist.
est quaedam slere voluptas:
Expletur lachrymis, egeriturque dolor.
But hereafter there shall be no occasion of tears: as was to Josiah weeping
at the denouncing of a curse, 2 King. 22.19. 2. King. 20.3. Neh. 1.3.
to Hezekiah weeping sore at a message of death, to Nehemiah weeping because
the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire,
Job 30.25. Is 22.4. Ier 9.1.
to Job for him that was in trouble and the poor, to Isai for the spoiling of
the daughter of his people, to Jeremy for the slain of the daughter of his
people, to Elisha the man of God weeping for Israel, whose strong holds were to
be set on fire, their young men to be slain with the sword, their children to
be dashed, and their women with child ripped; 2 King 8.12.
to Phaltiel weeping because his wife Michol was sent for away from him by
Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 3.16. Genesis 21.16.
to Hagar when all the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast her child
under the shrubs, and sat down a good way off, as it were a bow shoot, that
she might not see the death of her child: Mat. 26.75.
or to Peter weeping bitterly for denying his Master. The way of all holy
Kings, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, and Saints has been by the
weeping cross. Their colors have bin persecutions. Christ has been
persecuted, John 25.20.
so must they be. Their combatings are their many afflictions, but the Lord
delivers them out of all. Psalm. 34.19.
They perform no devotion more pleasing to God then their hearty tears which
they pour out so plentiful, that they cause their beds to swim in tears, to
be their meat day and night, Psam. 6.6.
and to be botled up by God himself, Psalm. 42 3.
who shall wipe them all away.

Use 1.
How terrible is this message to the obdurate sinners that never shed tears for
sin: Bar.
For Deus non infundit oleum misericordiae nisi in vas contritum, God poures
not the oil of his mercy, but into a broken vessel. The obstinate sinner has
no tears and therefore can hereafter have no comfort. Ier. 19 10.
They are not humbled unto this day: Christ wept for the sins of others, but
these will not weep for their own. Christ shed his blood for the least sins,
but they shed not one drop of water for the greatest sin: Eccl 12 5.
they are worse then those hired mourners going about the streets which would
lament and cut themseleus and make themselves bald for a little reward, making
this their whole trade.

Vt flerent oculos crudiere suos. But Heaven cannot draw these, worse then the
Heart, for if he be compassed with dogs, Pliny.
he will weep and mourn, but these will not though set about by many sins
and as many Devils. No sacrifice can be accepted without an humble heart,
unless a man has a poor, Isa. 66.3.
a contrite, a trembling spirit, if he kill an Ox he is as if he slew a man,
if he sacrifice a Lamb, it is as if he cut off a dogs neck, if he offer an
oblation, it is as if he offered swines blood, if he burn incense, it is as
if he blessed an idol, Amb. de paeni^. ^c^ 4.
our prayers must have tears, God expects them that he may send relief.
This is our violence that we must offer to the Lord. Prayer does mollify, but
tears do compel. Aug. Ser.
Exhortations to others must have tears. If we would have them to weep, we
must shed tears our selves, therefore Origin after his fall taking that text,
and reading it in the Church: Psalm. 50.16.
But unto the wicked God says, what have thou to do to declare my statutes,
or that thou should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thee: being not able to speak for
tears set all the congregation a crying, so effectual is the silence of a
touched weeping heart: the Saints have grace in their words and in their very
faces. Chrysostom.
Hear the word never so zealously, yet unless thy heart be melted, it is but
like the strokes of an hammer upon an anuile. But if with David we make a Bath
of our tears, a Cauldron of our bed, an Altar of our heart, a Sacrifice, not
of unreasonable beasts, but of our own bodies, a living and reasonable
sacrifice, we shall have comfort hereafter: Have thou been omnium notarum
peccator, a sinner soyled with every sin, be now then omnium horarum
paenitens, a penitentiary every houte for sin: weep for thy self, and after
for the sins of others, else thou must immediately after this life is ended
be cast into that place where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth:
Woe be unto thee if thou do nothing but laugh, it shall be turned into
mourning. Mourning for friends cannot raise them again, though men should
weep their eyes out of the holes of their heads, Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch, hem.
15.
but godly sorrow for sin will help, and purchase us that which Achsah got
of her Father Caleb, the upper and the nether springs, Ios. 15 19.
a spring of comfort here, and hereafter a spring of the water of life: all
tears shall be wiped away.

Use 2.
Here then may the thirsty soul come and drink freely of this comfort: God
helps the mourners with his own hand: Never did Augustus Caesar so much
honor unto groaning Virgil and bleare-eyed Horace, as God to the poorest of his
mourners, wiping away all their tears: He breaks not a bruised reed, he
quenches not smoking flax. Mat. 12.20.
The more humble and sorrowful we are before him, the nearer we come unto
him, worldly sorrow brings gray hairs on the head, and wrinckles in the
face, but a godly weeping turns old age into youth, and sickness into
health: Behold how they wrought a miracle for Mary Magdalene, she is called a
woman, she is not named either for her honor, Luke 7.37.38.
because as Christ covered her sins, so the Scripture concealeth her name: or
for her dishonor, as if she were not worth the naming: sometimes the name of
sinners is used with an abbreuiation Dumah for Idumaea, Isa. 21.11.
Ram for Aram, Pasdammim for Ephesdammim, Ruth. 4.19.
sometimes their name is concealed, as in that real parable of the condemned
churl, 1. Chapter 11.13. 1. Sam. 17.1.
his title is but homo quidam dives: Herod has no other name allowed then a
Fox, Luke 16.19. Luk 13.32. Amos 4.1.
the Princes which oppressed the poor, Kine of Bashan in the mountains of
Samaria. or she is namelesse to teach men that howsoever they here strive to
make their houses continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all
generations, calling their lands after their own names, Psalm. 49.11.
yet God remembers them not: She was a city sinner, which had added wound
to wound, corruption to corruption, stench to stench: In that city where
Christ had raised the widows son, does she expect salvation, she came with
an Alablaster box of ointment wherewith she used before to perfume her self;
or least by the stench of her sins she should offend her Savior, or to
prepare him with a gift, she stood at his feet behind him weeping, washing
his feet with tears, she feared punishment and therefore stood behind; she
washed with tears, By divine grace she opened the conduits and sluices of her
eyes, she bewailed all her sins, she wiped his feet with the hair of her
head: Her sins which were many were forgiven, for she loved much. Verse 47.
Bar. Annal.
Baronius says, he found in an old manuscript that she came with Lazarus and
her sister Martha into Britain: If it be so, her example is more proper for us
of great Britain: Happy are they that follow the smell of this ointment and
the tears of that little vine: For as Pharaoh and his chariots were drowned
the red sea, there remained not so much as one of them: so the spiritual
Pharaoh and all his stratagems shall be drowned in the Sea of our tears: Exodus
14.28.
Illi in fluctibus, isti infletibus, marini illi amari isti: The Egyptian
Pharaoh and his Chariots were drowned in the salt waves of the red Sea, so all
our crosses shall be drowned in the salt tears of our eyes, Ber. ser. 39 in
Cant.
which are made red with weeping. Let then some hold weeping to be childish,
we can never enter into the kingdom of heaven, except we become in this like
little children. Let others think that the custom of shedding tears, dasheth
all joy as they in the Poet:

Parcite lachrimis vrbis festo laetoque die. Se^. in Octauia.
We can never be truly cheerful, unless we accustom our selves to these.
Let other think that it is their greatest dishonor to be buried privately, as
it is storied of Clodius, that he was cast out, sine imaginibus, sine cantu,
sine ludis, ^ic. pro Milon^.
sine exequijs, sine lamentis, without any solemnization of his memory by
picture, song, play, funeral, or mourning: but this is the heauiest of all
plagues to have dry hearts that cannot melt, that are sensible of no true
sorrow. The watery eye is the surest of continuance upon earth, and shall be
surely glorified in heaven, as these last words manifest that God shall wipe
away all tears, from their eyes.

Pars 3.
IN that prophecy of Jacob, when he told his Sons what should befall them in
the last days, God had this blessing: A troop shall overcome him, Gen 49.19.
but he shall overcome at the last: Genesis 49.19.
which is not to be understood of Iephte his good success against the
Ammonites as Caietan would have it, neither of the Gadites marching with the
rest of the tribes against the Canaanites, and there returning back to Jordan,
as Ierom and the Chaldee Paraphrast defend, but of the diverse conflicts which
the Gadites had with the Hagarens, I^r. and Mecar.
with Iehur and Nephish, and Nodah when they carried away of their Camels 50.
thousand, and of Sheep 250. thousand, and of Asses two thousand, 1. Chr. 5.21.
and of men an hundred thousand. It is true of all the elect who seem here to
be dejected and overcome by crosses, sorrows, and tears: for the world
holds that vita non est viuere sed valere: It is more comfortable to dye
quickly then to live sickly. Search we the Scriptures, we shall find some
Lepers who were to live alone, and marked out by torn garments, bare heads,
covered mouths and an outcry of uncleanness: Leu. 13.45.
Mephibosheth was lame of his feet by falling from his nurse as she made have
to fly. 1. Sam. 4.4.
In the time of Christ you shall find one deaf and having an impediment in his
speech; Mark. 7.32.
another Lazar lying at Dives gate; another at the poole of Bethesda; another
at the beautiful gate of the Temple: you shall find here a woman whose young
daughter had an unclean spirit, there a women with a bloody issue: here the
house vntiled by the sick of the Palsy his porters, there the graves haunted
by men possessed of Devils, Nescias vltrum appelles vitam mortalem, an mortalem
vitam: We cannot says S. Austin tell what to call our life, whether a dying
life or a living death: but amongst all infirmities the want of sight makes
many to cry as Tobit in his blindness when he could not go without
stumbling, Tob. 11.10.
having white filmes upon his eyes which the Physicians could not cure: command
my spirit to be taken from me, that I may be dissolved and become earth, for it
is profitable for me to die rather then to live. But says August: Tob. 3.6.
Aug. conf. 10.34.
O the light which Tobias saw, when his carnal eyes being shut, he set his son
notwithstanding into the right way of life, and trod out a direct path before
him as a guide. Blind men may be and often are necessary to the Church and
Commonwealth, Izhak, Ge. 27.1
and therefore God has made way for them, and forbidden a stumbling block to
be put before them. Leu. 19.4.


Plut in vita Coriolani.
The Romans imposed upon some of their chief Families the surnames of Coeci and
Claudi, blind and lame, that the people should not scorn at those
imperfections, and contemn excellent gifts of the mind residing in such
bodies. So did Jews the eight of that name think, instituting a College of
three hundred blind men, upon occasion that so many of his soldiers were
taken in wars against the Moors, and sent home with their eyes put out,
which College stands to this day in Paris, and devoted to the same use. So
did judicious Hottoman affirm that blind men may supply the places of
Magistrates, Hot ^^^quaest. il^ust q. 25.
though blind from their birth. And Seneca of Priesthood, proposing the
question whether Metellus a Priest, Sen. l. 4. contr. 2.
who was become blind, could notwithstanding retain the Priesthood, salueth
the doubt, that Lex integrum grum ad animum refert, non ad corpus, the Law
looks to the blindness of the mind, not of the body. They may be famous in
many things for all their blindness, else blind Isacius and Constantine the
sixth amongst Emperors, Robert Waucop a Scot by birth among Archbishops, Carrion
Ann. 1551. Corpus Christi Coll. in Oxford.
Fox an honorable Founder of a flourishing College among Bishops, venerable
Bedt and Zanchie that purely-refined Schooleman among Schoolmen, Lycurgus
among Law-giuers, Zisca among Generals had never been so famous: D. Hakewill
in his learned Treatise of the vantie of the eye.
else Philip, Hannibal, Antigonus and Sartorius had possessed more then four
eyes: Appius Claudius for a Statesman, Caius Drusius for a Lawyer, Thamyra and
Stesicherus for Poets, Aufidius Pratorius for a Historiographer, Tuse. 5.
Dioderus the Stoike, who lived in Tullies own house, for a Mathematician,
Didymus for a Preacher, Ier. ep. 33. ad Castrutium. Granaten in Luc. 18.
whom Anthony persuaded not to be grieved for the loss of those eyes which
were common to him with flies, and mice, and gnats, but rather rejoice in those
which were proper to Saints and Angels. These are proofs that the want of
corporal eyes does not debar men of happiness: Passeratius de coetitate.
nay to many it is diuinum bonum, a divine good thing, albeit humanum malum, a
seeming evil to men. But the eyes of the godly, though now never so dim and
bleare, shall be cleared with Gods own hand, when once we appear before him,
and then shall we have no discontent.

So that we may safely fasten upon this last lesson:

That no member or part of man shall be unglorified by God, Doct.
but especially the eyes.

The resolution of many Saints proves this doctrine. Was not this the
restoratiue of the fainting soul of Job, the blessing and sap in the vine of
the deadest winter of affliction, the couch to lodge his distressed and
diseased bones upon, his helper when his wife molested him, and his best friend
when his friends forsook him? Did not he call for the enrolment of this happy
argument, for books of the longest continuance, and pens, the books to be of
lead in the rock for ever, and his pen of iron? Though after my skin worms
destroy this body, Job ^9:26.27.
yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes
shall behold. He knew for earthly matters that after his dissolution his eye
should no more see God, Job 7.7.8.
that the eye of him that saw him should see him no more, i. to return to
earth, but he should see God. In his extremity he wished that no eye had
seen him; 10 18.
his eye was dim by reason of sorrow, 17.7.
and all his members were but as a shadow; this was his comfort, that God would
one day glorify him. This made him to covenant with his eyes, to be eyes to
the blind, 31.1. 29.15. 16.20 Psalm. 119 82.18.
and with his eye to pour out tears unto God when his friends scorned him.
This caused David to confess unto God, Mine eyes fall for thy word, saying,
when will thou comfort me? and to pray, Open thou mine eyes. There ore Christ
praying God for his power at the grave of Lazarus, Ioh 11.41. 17.1.
lifted up his eyes, as he did a little before he was betrayed. This caused
S. Paul to pray for the Ephesians, Ephesians. 1.18.
that the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened, to know the hope of
their calling, and the riches of the glory of his inheritance. The eyes of the
body are opened three ways, either when the blind are made to see, as Christ
caused Bartimaeus to see, or when he that has eyes sees more then he saw, as
Balaam saw the Angel, or when they which see discern that which they
perceived not before, as the Disciples discerned Christ in the breaking of
bread: so are the eyes of the mind when we are brought from ignorance to the
knowledge of Christ, when we are brought by affliction to know our selves, as
the prodigal, when a man's sin presents it self upon the committing of it,
as to Adam, and to Judas. But our eyes at the last shall be open to see God as
he is, 1. Ioh. 3.2. Psalm. 27.13.
and to be glorified: without this refreshing we are ever ready to faint.

Use 1.
Which strikes horror into the hearts of reprobates: Job 21.17.
for their candle shall be put out, and God shall distribute sorrows unto
them in his anger. They admit nothing but poison into their eyes, either of
covetousness, when having neither child nor brother, yet there is no end of
their labor, neither is their eye satisfied with riches; Eccl. 4.8. 2. Pet.
2.14. Genesis 39.7.
or of adultery, that cannot cease from sin, as Putiphars wife cast her eyes
upon Joseph, saying, Lie with me; or of drunkenness looking upon the wine
when it is read, Pro. 23.31. Mat. 20.15. Aug. l. 3. de genesis ad lit. c. 24.
and gives his color in the cup; or of envy, their eyes are evil because
the eyes of other are good. The eye set apart from the other parts of the body,
is fair and well favored in it self. Orpheus called it the looking-glass of
nature, Aphrodiseus the casement of the soul, Blemor the Arabian too too
grofly, the mansion of the soul. But how subject is it to infirmities and
diseases? Charron reckons 120. L. 1. c. 11. de Sap. L. 7. c. 20.
Coelius Rhodiginus many more, Laurentius durst not undertake to number them,
but we may sum up all with that lesson: Death enters in at the windows.
Ier. 9 21. Psalm 112.10.
The eyes of many are full of malice, grieuing at the good of others; of
gluttony, Eccl. 31.14. Tr^m^l^e
stretching whithersoeuer they look; eyes of pride and superstition, beholding
the Sun when it shines, Job 31 26.
and the Moon walking in brightness; eyes of idolatry, to look upon images,
and after these to go a whoring: Number. 15 39. Eccl. 31.13.
so that nothing is created more wicked then an eye. therefore it weepeth upon
every occasion.

The Heathens dedicated the ears to Minerua, the tongue to Mercury, the arms
to Neptune, and the eye to Cupid; but now lust draws all other sins by the
eyes. To all such who tremble not to behold with the same eyes with which they
look upon their adulterous beds, lying idols, and such like, the sacred Table
where the Sacrament is performed, who enter into the Church not looking to
their affections, who labor not for good eyes, I must say as Christ does, If
their eye be evil, their whole body shall be full of darkness: Matt 6.23.
as is their sense of sin, so and much more here after shall be their sense
of sorrow. Their eyes shall fail, and they shall not escape, Job 11.20.
and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. The light is sweet,
but they must go to darkness, Eccl. 11 8.
for ever to houle there, when the elect shall have all tears wiped away from
their eyes.

Use 2.
A Medicine then hence may be applied to all sicknesses, a salve to every sore,
and a plaster for every wound, 1. Cor. 15.53.
that we shall be thus changed, that this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality, that our vile shall
be a glorious body, that there shall be no more singing of Lachrymae, but of
Hosanna and Halcluiah.

It was the encouragement of God unto Jacob in his going down into Egypt:
Genesis 46 4.
Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes: it is to be understood of Joseph's
closing his eyes when he had given up the ghost. Muse:
Men commonly in dying open and lift up their eyes to heaven: and this duty is
performed by those who are dearest and best beloved of the dead, as Joseph was
of Jacob: but behold Gods own hand is here promised to be upon our eyes, to
wipe from them all tears, and then we shall see the glory provided. He
gives a taste of it to some in this life, never suffering them to depart
comfortless. Number. 27.12.20.28.
Moses saw the land of promise before he died, Aaron his son Eleazer in his
room before he died, David Solomon his successor before he died, Ezekias
his house in order, Christ his transfiguration on the mount. Stephen saw the
heavens opened, Act 7 56.
and the son of man standing on the right hand of God. Thus had M. Deering a
taste a little before his death, being raised up in his bed, seeing the Sun
shine, and being desired to speak, said: There is but one Sun that gives
light to the world, but one righteousness, one communion of Saints: As
concerning death, I feel such joy of spirit, that if I should have the
sentence of life on the one side, and the sentence of death on the other side,
I had rather choose a thousand times (seeing God has appointed the separation)
the sentence of death then the sentence of life. Thus had another holy Saint a
taste of it a little before death: M. John Holland.
What brightness do I see? and being told it was the Sun shine, Nay, says
he, my Savior shines: Now farewell world, welcome heaven: The day star from
on high has visited my heart: Preach it at my funeral: God deals familiarly
with man, I feel his mercy, I see his majesty, whether in the body, or out of
the body, I cannot tell, God he knows, but I see things that are
unutterable. How much more happy then are they that are dissolved from the
flesh, that depart hence in the Lord, that be in joy and felicity, that rest
from their labors, that have all tears wiped away from their eyes. O then let
mourning and tears be our mark and badge, whether we look upward to God
whom we have offended, or downward upon hell which we have deserved, or
backward upon our sins committed, or forward upon judgments to be feared,
or without us upon the deceitful world which we have loved, or within us upon
our conscience polluted. The Spirit helps our infirmities, Rom 8.26.
and if we shed tears here of contrition till we know that our sins are
forgiven us, tears of devotion for that sudden joy we receive from God, tears
of compassion for the wants of others; we shall eat when the wicked shall be
hungry, drink when they be thirsty, rejoice when they shall be ashamed, sing
for joy of heart when they shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for
vexation of spirit. If. 65.13.14.
Thus shall God even our own God bless us. To him and his Son and Spirit be
glory for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

