HONORS FAME IN TRIVMPH RIDING.

OR, THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE LATE HONORABLE EARL OF ESSEX.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Fleet-streete, near the Conduit. 1604.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE EARLS OF SOVTHHAMPTON and Devonshire, and the Lord
KNOVLES, Baron of Grayes, R. P. wishes all increase of honor, and endless
happiness.
RIght honorable, and worthily renowned Lords, such is the mutabilitye of times
unconstant motion: as that things well done cannot challenge, to themselves, the
certainty of their event, nor without suspect of evil (misconstrued
inputation) build their hope. And when the well meaning actions of mighty men
cannot (in permanent stability) stand cleared from the after-rays'd-vp misty
Meteors which may encomber them: what then should I expect (being no other
then poverty it self) but that this work, by me adventured should with my self
dangerously run upon uncertain hopes? although the vprightnes of my conscience
vows, I have not herunto bin lead by any particular inuectiue spleen or
turbulent affection: only a private consideration made me think, that it might
now be a time in which the praise of honors worthiness might have his place,
and not any longer by a violent imposition be taxed with undeserved evil. It
were inhumane tyranny, to forbid the virtues of the dead to be commended: and
no less cruelty to charge the deceased with vnco^mitted offenses. There are
certain politicians in this age, not unlike the Grecian Orators, which Diogenes
called (...), thrice double men: their tongues and pens are miserably valiant:
they may well be termed three times thrice double minded men: their ayery
statio^s tottering stands aloft; like windmils placed upon a mountayns top,
whose sails can turn themselves to embrace the benefit of each variable
blast: but, being climbd unto an extraordinary height, are often times by an
unexpected storm suddenly thrown headlong down, and broken at the mountains
foot: leaving their recuerlesse ruins to remain vnmoaned monuments of their
presumptuous mounting. Some goulden money mouthed eloquence, that uses a
detractors Oratry, may stop the unequal current of his fine wits most gross
engendered flux, by fetching from the Tyrant Nero a very well prescribed
docume^t. For plainly thus his affirmation says: that it is no part of a wise
man thence to draw credit to himself, from whence proceeds discredit to his
friend. Is it not marvel that a rhetorical politician should be less wise
then wicked Nero was? and that his sentence should directly call him fool?
yet thus it happens, when with the change of time, Time seruers use to say,
Hac non successit: alia aggrediendum est via.

When honor and unstained nobility, by ill advise and inconsiderate thoughts,
untimely falls into some dangerous accident: then though the law, in robes of
justice armd, with quick pursuit does follow evils amiss: yet should no mind
on such dependence dwell: as if his wished* for time of triumph were embraced,
when he might glory in honored virtues fall: and like a lump of proud
degenerate brazen insolence, even in the gall of envy, hate, and malice
steept, scornefully impugn the honor of a Lands renowned nobleness. God, with
my soul, an vncontrowled witness bear: I not desire to speak against the
justice of the law, nor any honorable magistrate in place of Council or of
government: only my words may nearly glance at such whose proud demeanor, and
insulting violence, made to the world an apparent demonstration that they were
most joyful actors in a mournful tragedy: but now the justice of the heavens
decree has most justly thrown themselves unto the stroke of the self same
judgment. And now, my honorable Lords, when I look back unto my own
unworthiness, my Muse does sound retrayte, and bids me stay the further
occurrence of some other things, which would most willingly be issuing forth.
And for this little work already done by me, with low submission I entreat
your pardon: and do solemnly protest, that the unfeigned love I bear unto the
late Honorable, and yet still honored Earl of Essex, has with an inevitable
force caused me to make this brief description of his life and death. And
though I desire to be freed from a Poets name; yet because the music of a
mourning verse does best consort with sorrows passion, I have made choice
thereof, in hope your L L. will be pleased to excuse my unpolished, rough,
vnsmoothed Poetry. My greatest study with religious care has sought to build
my words upon the ground of truth: and having brought my labor to an end, I
knew not better unto whom to dedicate the same, then to your Honors. Not for
my sake then, but for his, whose virtues I desire should live, be pleased to
receive this well meaning work into your loves protection: and thus, with all
submissiue humbleness, a soldier humbly throws his lives service at your
Honors feet.

Yours, in all dutiful obedience, R. P.

To the Reader, health.
ALthough, right courteous Reader, my former writings have not so imbouldned
me, as that I should again adventure to bring my self unto so miserable a
punishment, as the third time to endure the press: yet choosing rather to die,
then not to manifest my love unto an honorable deceased Earl, I have, out of
the affection of an honest mind, desired to set before your eyes the fame of
honor, in his Triumph riding: and do hope, that for his sake, whose living
virtues I labor to commend, this work of mine shall bring it self into your
kind acceptance. And as you desire that the plants of honor, now established,
should flourish with a glorious dignity, do not choose out any one particular,
whose fame and praise you will desire to follow, with the generality of a
popular estimation: nor inuolue the person of a noble man in the ayerie clouds
of your intemperate Aue: least the honor, which you most desire to preserve,
be untimely poisoned by your breath: of which event, this after following
brief description contaynes a mournful spectacle. Read therefore with re*
spectiue diligence, and have great regard, you do no injury, by setting any
imposition in his wrong place: which you shall directly do, if you bear my
words against any, which do now continue in place of honor, honorablye
deserving: for unto them the Author does ascribe all honorable estimation.
Thus the good opinion of each well affected reader he desires, whose heart
prefers their content before his own, whose life is ready in a soldiers
place, unto the last article of death, to manifest the unfeigned love he bears
unto his countries public benefit. Vale.

Honors fame, in Triumph riding.
FRom forth the dust, my lines desire to raise
bright honors fame, in triu^phs state to ride,
Whose living worth did so adorn his praise,
as that his glory shall to the world abide
The only Mirror of a valiant mind,
Whose Honors thoughts, not to base wealth inclined,
Do make him live, though long since dead,
And crowns with bays his buried head.
Whilst breath gave strength, unto his warlike arm,
he did vphould the pomp of Englands state:
He strove to shield his native soil from harm,
and did the pride of proudest foes abate:
A kingdoms eyes once saw his faithful trust,
And did account his actions wise and just:
Great Majesty, and wisdoms Queen,
Would say his like was never seen.
Even from his youth, till years of riper strength,
in virtues school, a studious life he spent:
His Honors thoughts desired and gained, at length,
Mineruaes food the sweet of his content:
Apollo decked his Muse in siluers shine,
And wrapped in gold his goulden thoughts divine:
Honors wonder, wisedoms mirror,
In his brave breast lived together.
When creeping time had brought to manhoods years
this honored bud al glorious in his spring,
Then as the sun from forth a cloud appears,
and does his light with greater brightness bring:
So did this prince: his thoughts maiesticall
Made him to be great Lesters General;
Brave troops of horse he bravely led,
And thus at first his fame was spread.
But when to France his warlike mind had brought
him self, well armed, upon baye Traces back:
The king and Lords his love and favor sought,
nor gold nor coin that valiant prince could lack.
I saw his sword all bathed in Foemans blood,
A broken lance in Traces breast there stood:
French king and Peers did dignifie
This Peerlesse warriers Cheualry.
But when he went to fruitful Portingale,
for to inthroane a mournful bannisht king,
How did his deeds his praise to heaven exhale!
his honors worth you sacred Muses sing.
Spaines Chronicle, and Lisborne gates can tell,
His warlike arm deserved wondrous well:
His foes themselves keep in record,
That none durst combat with that Lord.
When Sunburned Spain in heat of angers toil,
Did with his Lords in sollome counsel set:
Vowing to work fair Albions utter spoil,
Against whose state his breast with spleen did fret:
This news no sooner unto Albian came,
But this brave prince, was thought the worthiest man:
And as Spain meant to work our woe,
He thither went, and used them so.
Let Cales tell forth the honor of his deeds,
His valiant prowes, and his justice such:
As who so but their own description reed,
Will say of truth, that he deserved as much
As ever any noble Conqueror did,
His Conquering sword was with such mercy led:
As datelesse time shall speak his fame,
And blaze the honor of his name.
In field, in Court, in peace, in war, he stood
Environed with honor and desert:
From him did flow the streams of virtues flood,
He doubtless had a sound and faithful heart,
To Prince and States, and for the public weal,
The things amiss he always sought to heal:
Thus did he stand beloved of all,
And yet the Fates decreed his fall.
Unhappy time that sent him from this land,
Unhappy wars that his employment sought:
Unhappy broiles raised by rebellious hand,
Unhappy cause that foul suspicion wrought:
Unhappy all, for all unhappy be,
Unhappy those that wished his misery:
Unhappy means that did direct,
The cause to work untrue suspect.
His noble self, had he been fortunate,
Irelands peace had well effected bin:
Without mistrust of danger to the state,
But when to march his army did begin,
Some miss there was, directions all not kept,
Envy roused up, that winkt but never slept:
Advantage took, when harmeles thought,
To good effect would all have brought.
In course of war, a Prince both wise and just,
Must not by book his march and battles make:
To each occasion turn his hand he must,
And as offense is given, so wisely take
Advantage of the cause, the time and place,
Precribed rules will else procure disgrace:
These paper plots wantes judgment right,
To teach an army how to fight.
But this I think, and heavens me witness bear,
Though ill success upon his Troops did wait
His honors mind, still kept a princely care
Wars work to do without corrupt deceit,
And willingly he never did intend
His force against his countries good to bend:
But seeming ill was ill approved
By them who not his honor loved.
Harmless in thought when he a peace had made,
He back returns to his beloved Queen,
Thinking to rest secure under her shade,
To whom she had a gracious mistress been:
But wanting warrant for his back return,
Displeased anger softly began to burn:
And some that did a flame desire,
Threw flax and oil into the fire.
This action thus when it at first begun,
And he restraind from Court a prisoner sent:
In Ireland shinde fair Englands golden Sun,
Whose valiant mind to virtuous actions bent:
With wisdoms care and honored labor sought,
The means whereby rebellions land was brought:
Unto that peace which first was framde,
By him whom some unjustly blamde.
The Queen of justice hearing what was done,
That perfect honor with an humble mind:
With low submission to her Throne did run,
And craved he might her mercies favor find:
Her Princely heart contentments joy embraced,
And in her love, loves Lord again was placed:
Then was there hope rhat shortly he,
To place in Court restorde should be.
But Envy, why did thou again conspire?
Abusde occasion, why did thou displease?
Suspicion, why did thou inflame new fire?
Were all agreed bright honors crest to seize?
What secret action did inact the thing,
That discontent to Mercies Queen did bring?
She was appeasde, what new sown seed,
Brought forth such fruit her wrath to breed.
Was all things well, and all things ill so soon?
Was no mistrust, and now mistrust abounding:
Wa'st then a time to light a torch at noone?
Was honor the^ self-honors course confounding?
Why this was strange, from Court to keep him still,
It Was not amiss to doubt some farther ill:
Such worshippers of policy,
Commits most foul idolatry.
But by this means true honor was restrainde,
From her the mistress of his life and death:
He found himself of base-bred grooms disdainde,
In passion then he sight forth sorrows breath:
The presence of his Queen whose sight most ioyd him,
Had given him life, the want thereof destroid him.
Oh that a Loyal heart should be,
Shut from his Sovereigns clemency.
Let but the man of honor and renown,
That is adorned with his Sovereigns love:
Whose heart is sound unto the State and Crown,
Whose thoughts do always faithful motions move:
If exilde from his King he should remain,
And as a Traitor bear dishonours stain:
What would he think, or what course take?
Let noble minds the answer make.
From hence at last greefes boundless Ocian flows,
Turning woes streams into a flood of sorrow:
And to such height sad coffeehouse grows,
As that it seeks some means of help to borrow:
Hope tells a course, that's crossed, an other sought,
This urged occasion his confusion wrought:
Still to his Queen he strives to go,
Kept back afresh, begins his woe.
Thus months and years in restles harbor tossed,
A patient hope indures a raging storm:
Bright honors ship did find it self near lost,
His Cable burst, and all his tacklings torn:
Through rocks, through cliffes, through walls of brass,
His noble mind did then resolve to pass:
For if to Thetis get he could,
Save life, and men, and ship he should.
Thence did proceed the rigor of that day,
When haples life to live did helpeles strive:
Despair enraged did bear too great a sway,
Hope could not at his wish for haven arrive:
Revenge, mistrust and hate, prevention wrought,
With bloody mouths, they his destruction sought
From evil to worse, poor Earl he fled,
So was he to the slaughter led.
Guarded with friends, untimely forth he goes,
To raise a force so strong his part to take:
As that he might remove his settled foes,
And to his Queen a quiet passage make:
But faithles hate did presently devise,
Proclayme him traitor, out aloude he cries;
The name of traitor killed him dead,
So he alive was murdered.
Doubtless I think he had no Traitors heart,
Against Queen and State he did no treason plot;
No more did they that then did take his part:
He only strove against them that loved him not:
But yet the Law their act did treason make.
Such hostile arms no subjects up must take.
Thus when he thought an evil to shun,
A greater evil by him was done.
The Law has past, Justice his stroke has struck,
And he is dead, yet shall he still survive:
Upon his honored Virtues will I look,
And make them live as were himself alive:
He did for treason; yet no Traitor. Why?
The Treason done, he did it ignorantly.
Intent and purpose in the act,
Is that which makes a Traitors fact.
But God forbid such Action should be good,
As rashly into rude Combustion throws
A Kingdoms State, and wraps her breast in blood;
Where peace in pomp with glorious plenty grows.
And for this cause, I think that Justice meant,
To make his death a mournful President:
His trial could example give.
Why did not Mercy let him live?
Because that Mercy not arightly knew
His heart, whom she disloyal did account,
Report did feed her taste with Gall and Rue;
For by his fall, some other up must mount,
And so they have the Gallows top unto;
For ever so may such like Mounters do:
But God is just, so shall they find,
That lay their plots with bloody mind.
With humble lines to Englands honored State,
A Soldiers passion does desire to fly,
Who never sought that Lord to ruinate,
Nor chase him with bloodthirsty cruelty.
True honor? No, some baser stuff it was,
That sought to bring that stratageme to pass:
For in that time Peers were no men,
They walked about like shadows then*
Yet in the rank of Honor, Honors grace,
Reverend, renowm'd, religious, virtuous, learned,
Grave, sober, chaste, vpheld a Primates place,
Whose godly wisdom Englands eyes discearnd,
His soul divine was to that Earl a friend,
Whom froward fate bequeathed to fatal end:
But now their souls in purest love,
Live with their Christ in heavens above.
Then Honors Seat, and Wisdoms fountain pure,
Judgment approved, the rule of Conscience sound,
His grieved thoughts did woes extreme endure,
As did his love: so did his griefs abound.
A Justice Chief, an equal love preferres:
No kingdom has two worthyer Iusticers:
Both these did mourn when Honor fell;
For both were known to wish him well.
And in my mind of Lords and Earls I view
A mourning troup, whose looks all downward thrown,
Told to the world, that they were mourners true;
They reapt the fruit that sorrows seed had sown:
Ladies wise, fair, and chaste, they weeping went,
Sad time sad cause procured their discontent:
Though Law strict course of Justice kept,
The most and best of all sorts wept.
Then Noble minds will help my Muse to mourn
The loss of him, whom Honor did advance,
In their sad thoughts, have Sable robes bin worn,
They sigh to think of that sinister chance,
Whose bloody hand with fatal death snatched hence
That honored Earl, true Honors Excellence.
Do him this right, and Honor gain,
Pluck from his Hearse false rumors stayne.
Oh how I grieve! Report does wound my soul:
So many treasons against that Earl objected,
Who whilst he lived, could those reports co^troule;
And but in one, that last, and least detected:
Kill him no more, too well we know he is dead,
Whose life would now a joys content have bred.
No paper-powder raised up smoke,
Can Fames true honored virtues choke.
It Is false, to say, he would a King have bin:
From faith and honor he made no such digression:
His heart was clear from such so foul a sin,
He always stood for this approved Succession,
Which happily does now the Throne possess:
Heavens mighty God protect his Mightiness.
Dead Earl, amidst bright Angels wings,
Amen thy heavenly Spirit sings.
Damme up your mouths, foul Enuies insolence,
Fill not the world with monstrous mouthed lies,
Of hate and malice you are the Instruments,
Though smoothly you can closely temporize:
Wrong not the dead, nor living honor wound:
Let not one fault all virtues worth confound.
To make the best of things misdone,
Has always greatest honor won.
No cause there was, that in his lucklesse fall,
So proudly some should triumph as they did,
Against an Earl to spit impoysoned gall:
But bloody thoughts were made in blood so red
As heat and rage too much himself forgot,
And boldly spoke, he cared not how, nor what.
No vp-start groom sprung from the Cart,
Should brave the honor of a lands desert.
So use base minds in greatness to forget
The place whence first they their beginning had,
Their proud disdain the noblest breast would hit:
The fall of honor makes them wondrous glad.
So was it: or else he rather would have wept,
Then proudly such a ruffling coil have kept:
In this I joy, his Prophecy
The time has turned to foolery.
He was not last, though last that so shall end.
We have a Bud, sprung from that honored Branch:
God, in thy love do thou that Earl defend,
And so his state by virtues steps advance,
As he may grow an honor to his King,
Whose mercy did his youth to honor bring:
And he that dressed his fathers dish,
Lord, let his end be worse then his.
England, bear witness, deceased Honor did
Rich in thy Love, his Love was pure to thee,
Not for his gain; but for thy good he tryde,
To do what might become his Dignity:
He hated Bribes, Extortion he defide,
Gain by thy loss, his noble heart denyde:
To do thee good, he spent his wealth,
His Joy consisted in thy health.
The Church of God, Divine religious Grace
Was graced by him, his heavenly sanctity,
Unto the written Truth of God gave place,
His heart did love the reverend Ministry:
All Popish trash, and Romes inventions vilde,
Were from his Soul, as hateful things exilde.
Good men from foes he did protect,
The poor he never did reject.
He was no Churl, nor wretch-like covetous,
His noble Breast, as dross, base gold esteemd,
Valiant, Liberal, Wise and Virtuous,
His honor more then all worlds wealth he deemd.
Some could in print his honored Bounty scorn,
That largely bare from him great sheaues of corn.
Such tricks as these Time-seruers use.
What Virtue will they not abuse?
He faithful was and constant to his friend,
In Love and Justice always permanent,
His Honors Word, who did thereon depend,
Found, that true Action with his Promise went,
No purse nor pocket could that Lord contain
Who gives most. Fie, he scorned such hateful gain.
No partial eye made bad things good;
T'wixt both, that Prince uprightly stood.
He was not hollow, like the Vaults of hell,
His soundness fled from base hypocrisy,
He fetched no rules from hel-borne Machiauel,
His learning was divine Philosophy,
His word and deed without a false intending,
In Honors List went on, the Truth commending;
His virtues steps to Truth enclinde,
Close subtle falsehood vnderminde.
In deeds of War, he was a Soldier tryde,
True Fortitude dwelt in his valiant breast,
The hope of England on his Sword relyde,
Amongst our Worthies let him stand for best:
When he was armde in wars Habilliments,
His Glory seemde a matchless Excellence;
His person, as his virtues rare,
Might Peerless with the world compare.
His Wisdom, Learning and his Eloquence,
His well-grac't speech and flowing utterance,
His quick conceit and Wisdoms comprehence:
All these rare Gifts his honor did advance,
And made him live the Mirror of our time,
Beyond whose worth, no worthier step could clime.
God and Nature did consent,
To make his Substance excellent.
He was not proud, but humble, courteous, meek:
Ambitious then, who rightly term him can?
From Articke Pole to the Antartike seek,
But never find a brauer Gentleman:
Cross all the Zoans, and in no Clymate dwells
A Virtue, that his Virtues worth excells:
But he is dead, yet shall he live,
Fame to his praise shall honor give.
Where Is now the heart of Flint or Marble stone,
That mournes not for the loss of him so dear?
The Flower of a Kingdoms pride is gone:
No Time, no land brought forth a worthyer Peer:
No King nor Queen a better servant had,
No Subject more did make his country glad:
And for his fault, to mourn with me,
Millions of weeping eyes I see.
Who so beheld the choice of natures art,
with noble presence and Maiestick steps,
When from his chamber honor did depart,
to place preparde a fatal death to fetch,
Might there have seen shine in a princely eye,
The beams of honor and nobility:
Valiant prowess, resolution rare,
Undaunted thoughts to death did bear.
He like himself in roabes of honor clad,
with countnance clear and looks heroical,
Went on as if in heart he had been glad,
to meet his friends at some great feastiuall.
His noble mind the path of death did tread,
As if it did unto some triumph lead.
And thus by this think in thy thought,
Thou see him to the scaffold brought.
Nay weep not yet, read on, an Earl behold,
as constant as is heavens celestial frame:
See how he mounts with valiant courage bold,
in blood to write the letters of his fame.
Upon the scaffold see him walking now,
To deaths spectators does he humbly bow:
Oh here is a sight yet comes a worse,
To make the world that time to curse.
The oracle of godly wisdom then,
with silver sound, these speeches forth did send:
My Lords, and all you worthy Gentlemen,
that comes to see the period of my end.
I not deny, but this confess I must,
My trial has been honorably, just:
And so the law my cause did try,
As justice doomed me thus to die.
Yet in the presence of that all Creators sight,
before whose throne I presently shall stand:
Against the state I never bent my might,
nor against my sovereign reard a traitors hand,
Some private foes my sword would have displast,
By whom I thought my honor was disgrast:
From that intent grew my amiss,
For which offense death welcome is.
With things below I have not now to deal,
my peace twixt God and conscience must I make*
And that my Christ his wounds my wounds may heal
pray all with me that God for Christ his sake,
Would in his death intombe my sins most vilde,
That dying, I may dye his faithful child:
So kneeling down, zeal, sorrow, faith,
To God a heavenly prayer says.
Not any tongue more heavenly graces spoke,
not any heart more godly sorrow felt:
Not any Prince a wiser prayer could make,
not any soul with God and conscience dealt
More plainly, nor made better testament,
That from this world his soul to glory went,
With gracious spirit he begins,
And graciously his prayer ends.
Then rising up, with vnstainde glory still,
he does himself for stroke of death prepare:
Off goes his gown, and with an humble will,
his band thrown hence, his neck holeaueth bare.
His doublet next, his honored self lays by,
with smiling looks, and cheerful majesty,
To read, and weep, is order kept,
With him that sighed, and writ, and wept.
The hand that then should send him to his grave,
he calls to see, fear plays the hangmans part,
But Nobleness, a noble welcome gave,
my friend said he, why faints thou in thy heart.
Resolve to do thy office cheerfully,
The deaths man kneeling, does for pardon cry.
Honor bids rise, why should thou fear,
Thou art but Justice minister.
Thus nobly did the life of honors breath,
a conqueror like all worlds respects subdue:
So did he triumph in the gates of death,
as if he then no such like danger knew.
Oh let his fame unto the world be spread,
Whose fortitude was never conquered:
Let thy conceit his action see,
And read, and sigh, and weep with me.
Now takes heleaue of all the standers by,
his comely grace was virtues ornament:
Grief then drowned up each sad beholders eye,
whilst his blessed soul was wrapped in sweet content.
Then kneeling down, all prostrate flat he lies,
With neck on block, his blood to sacrifice,
And to his deaths man say he did,
Strike when thou see my arms are spread.
There might you see how Honor down was thrown,
and yet his eyes from earth to heaven ascends:
His youth was like a lofty Ceder grown,
but now his death his soul to heaven co^mends.
My Christ says he, I come, thy arms unfold,
My soul do thou in thy imbracements hold:
And thus he bids the world adue,
And then his arms abroad he threw.
Stay, pawse, think, sigh, weep first, and then read on,
now comes a sight to rend woes heart in sunder:
No mournful eye did ever look upon
a woeful work performed with greater wonder.
Resolved honor now perceive you may,
All fearles for the stroke of death does stay:
His eyes, his looks to heaven commends,
The place to which his soul intends.
Base wretch, whose hand true honors blood should spill,
deaths axe did first into his shoulder strike:
Vpreard again he strikes a blow as ill,
nor one nor other were directed right.
Honor never moved, a third blow did divide
The body from the worlds admired pride:
Was that the way to lose a head,
To have an Earl so butchered?
From gaping wounds pure streams of blood gusht forth
from azurd veins the food of life distild:
Wisdom, love, faith, renown and honor both,
were all at once thus hackt, thus chopped, thus killed.
There was a sight to send forth sorrows flood,
A Swanny whitenes wrapped in robes of blood:
But think you saw him, and for his sake,
Then let your tears woes period make.
Thus masacard in strength of lusty youth,
was Englands Earl, whose worth the world admired
His life till now had proved his honors truth,
untimely was his fatal death conspired.
If any read, whose hand was stained therein,
Let some vild death, make known his damned sin,
The rest that mourn, let sorrows tide
Make honors fame in triumph ride.
Go to the Courts of Denmark, France and Spain,
and sadly tell his doleful tragic seane:
And mark what sighs your words will entertain,
and see what tears from honored eyes will stream
In any place within earths compass round,
This tale but told, may sighs and tears be sound:
Fair Ladies they with drowned up eyes
To honors fame will sacrifice.
And when report has told his sorrows story,
his life and death, and actions done by him:
Then reard up hands will wonder at his glory,
each hearer seems in sorrows floods to swim,
And then they say, would not his Queen forgive
His fault that such a peerless prince might live?
Yes, had she known as much as they,
He had not then been cast away.
Her Royal breast was falsely often accusde,
of cruel deeds but She was mercies child
For honors death She well may be excused,
by private tales rough work was smoathly filde.
Could he but once Her glories sight have gaind,
And unto Her, his wrongs and woes complaind:
Then had he lived, and that they knew,
Whose hate her heart from him withdrew.
But could her eyes these weeping lines peruse,
her princely tears would show her sorrows grief:
Her self would say, they did her grace abuse
, that in that action were the actors chief.
And truth to say, I think her Majesty:
Was chiefest mourner in that tragedy,
Though now a fluent nimble wit,
Can bouldly play the polliticke.
I do not strive Inuectiuely to speak,
nor have I will, a wilful harm to do:
A peace confirmed I would by no means break,
yet can I not like fawning flatterers woe.
Let truth be truth, and free the dead from wrong,
And blame him not that sings this sorrows song,
For him who did a soldier love,
Whose death a soldiers grief does move.
Unto his Country, his honors blood he gave,
which for his Country, more better had bin spent:
Unkind his Country, that worthy blood to crave,
which was for her, and for her service bent.
His mother England having slain her son,
The world will say it was unkindly done:
Though justice may with this dispense,
It wanted mercies influence.
This Iron world has Angel mercy left,
worlds worldlings they that virtue hence have driven:
This rotten age is of that grace bereft,
that mercy now is only placed in heaven.
And thither is the ghost of honor fled,
Through ayerie orbs by heavenly angels led,
Unto that place where joy excels,
And there the soul of honor dwells:
Where God and Christ, and holy ghost combinde,
inuironde are with glory more, then if
Ten hundred thousand suns at once all shinde,
and clearly should their radient splendence guise.
Amidst that glory the soul of Essex stands,
In endless joy vpheld by Angels hands,
Then mourn no more, heaven has his spirit,
Whose life on earth such praise did merit.
But now heavens God, King, Queen and Prince and state,
inuiron round within thy loves protection:
Let Britons Monarch like the worlds triumph rate,
rule still in peace, ruled by thy laws direction.
His Nobles bless, and let no private hate,
Procure the means our peace to ruinate:
And thus my Muse his farewell gives,
And tells the world Fames honor lives.
Upon the Author and his subject.
THou that true Honor from the grave do raise,
And on Fames golden wings do make it fly:
Who with thy Pen the never dying praise,
From ground do lift up to the Starrie sky,
Of that brave Earl, whose life the greatest glory,
Whose death to Britain yeeldes the saddest story.
Oh give me leave thy faithful heart t'admire.
Which suffrest not thy love with him to dye:
But with thy Muse do make affections fire
To shine most bright, now he entombed does lie.
And as thy sword while he inioy'd his breath,
So now thy Pen does serve him after death.
Thy work I cannot say does match his worth,
For heaven and earth does equal that no more:
It Is praise for Prickets Pen, if it prick forth
Some gowned Muse his fortunes to deplore.
Scholars and Soldiers both were to him bound,
Why should they not be both like thankful found:
All those brave Romans whom the world admired
So much for their high magnanimity,
With morrall virtues were not more inspired,
Besides his clear light of Divinity.
All his life's morn he like a Roman led,
At noone like a Divine went to deaths bed.
Epita. There sleeps great Essex, dearling of mankind,
Fair Honors lamp, foul Enuies pray, Arts fame,
Natures pride, Virtues bulwark, lure of mind,
Wisdoms flower, Valoures tower, Fortunes shame:
Englands sun, Belgias light, Frances star, Spaines thu^der,
Lysbones lightning, Irelands cloud, the whole worlds wonder.
Chapter Best. Arm.


