DAVID HIS OATH OF ALLEGIANCE TO JERUSALEM.

THE SERMON PREACHED ON ACT SUNDAY LAST IN THE MORNING, IN St. MARY'S IN OXFORD.

BY DANIEL PRICE Doctor in Divinity.

PSALM. 137.6. Let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief joy. AC: OX

printer's device of Joseph Barnes

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1613.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, PRINCE CHARLES DVKE OF CORNWAILE AND YORK,
THE GREAT BLESSING OF GREAT BRITAIN.
ILlustrious Prince, your Gracious favor and Princely bounty, shining this
Act upon two of us, the late Servants of your blessed Brother, has given life
and motion to this which I presume to present unto you. It is a Princes vow,
made to Jerusalem, the virgin of the East, and beauty of the earth, it is
hearty for the manner, holy for the matter, fit for these times, wherein because
in Jerusalem, (Church and Court) some do vow to Babylon, Court and Country may
observe what our Prophet sitting by the waters of Babylon, did vow to
Jerusalem, Religion is our Jerusalem, be you her Prince, we have sat lately,
and lamentably at the waters of Babel, mourning and mourning, and would not be
comforted, because HE was not, who was as truly Gods servant, as his servants
earthly God.

Your Highness is now the Phoenix, the dawning, the morning, the day star,
the sunshine, and light and life of the newly cleared firmament, O then grace
her, who will bring you to further glory RELIGION. Be her Patron, that she
weep not, be her Champion that she bleed not. Let no Popish Philistin come
near the chair, much less, the ear of your greatness, to disgrace truth,
or wrong faith, and at all times prefer Jerusalem in your song. So shall all
eyes, hearts, hopes, be fixed upon you here, and all glory, joy, and happiness
be fastened upon you hence. For which purpose ever shall be offered ^p the
humble devotions of

Your Highness servant, DANIEL PRICE.
Exeter Coll. July 27.
PSALM. 137.5. If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning.
THe lamentations of David were as doleful as plentiful for Jonathan, and
Absolon, for his friend and for his son; yet more for his friend then for
his son, because Absolon his son was his foe, but Jonathan his foes son,
was his friend. But neither for friend or son, is he so passionate, as for
Jerusalem: all the floudgates and cataracts of affections empt themselves upon
this subject. His passions those internal acts and operations of the soul,
linked in that inviolable league of love, with the joy of the earth Jerusalem,
urged him so far, that foreseeing the storm, though he lived in a
sunneshine, affection enflamed his heart, and his heart resolved into incessant
tears: he smarteth though untouched, Lyr. Carth Ahulensi^, almost all the
Fathers that interpret the Psalms judge this to be David's.
and being unhurt lamenteth, not his own case, but Jerusalem Calamity. And in
three Psalms, as Lyra and Carth^sian teach, he deploreth, the threefold
sacking and ransacking of Jerusalem* which was to be performed by those Nymrods
of the earth, that which he foresaw last he lamenteth first: destruction by the
Romans, whereupon his 74. Psalm. O God why art thou absent from us so long, O
think upon thy congregation, think upon the tribe of thine inheritance;
deliver not the soul of thy turtle dove to the multitude of the enemies: as
also that former desolation by that plague of men and Scourge of heaven
Antiochus which occasioned the 79. Psalm, O God the heathen are come into thy
possession, thy holy temple have they defiled and made Jerusalem a heap of
stones: and before either of those the captivity of Babylon by Nabuchadonosor,
that thistle which burned up the Cedars of Libanus, which occasioned this
sorrowful Psalm, the emblem of their sighs and sum of the sorrow of that
desolation. The first miracle done in the old Testament is in the 1. of Genesis
the 2. Genesis 1.
Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas. The first miracle in the new Testament
is the same, Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas, The spirit of God moved on
the waters Ioh. 2. when our Savior turned the water into wine: I say not that
there is a miracle here, but sure I am, Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas,
the spirit of God, by the spirit of Prophecy, was with the Prophet when he
sat by these waters of Babylon, describing and deploring Edoms cruelty,
Isreal's misery. Ezechiel received his prophecy by the river of Cobar, Daniel
by the river Tigris, John Baptist by the river Iordane: but by the waters of
Babylon rivers of confusion and desolation our Prophet seateth himself, and
these rivers be rather of oil the^ water, they increase the flame of his
affection, and rather nourish then diminish his grief: his eyes are as those
in the Canticles like the eyes of Doves on the rivers of waters, his eyes like
the eyes of Doves, and his voice like the voice of a Dove, Turtur no^ canit sed
gemit, says Isidor: the Dove was sent out by Noah and was a messe^ger of
Comfort in returning in those waters, the Dove came down upon our Savior and
was a messenger of joy in desce^ding into those waters, but the waters of
Babylon have no Dove near the^ but David, and my text is the voice of that
Turtle heard in that la^d, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, then let my right
hand forget her cunning.

Votum est, says Calvin, certe votivum quiddam est, Calv. in Ps. 13.
says Carthusian, they be words, or if you will vows, or rather more then
words or vows: they receive fire from the altar of his heart, and the fire of
his love lives yet in them* neither the distance of the place, nor continuance
of the time, since they were uttered, can quench them but that their sound is
gone out into all nations, the sighs of the Prophets soul, and the billows
of Babylons water yield no other woeful warbling murmur but the Echo of this
Text, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, then let my right hand forget her cunning.

If I forget] Memory is more cha^geable the^ the moon, it is a glass placed
behind in the head, man's fall brake this glass: since, it is crazed, dashed,
dazeled, of all the faculties soonest decaieth: at the best, it is but sorrows
store house and sins table book, it records our woes and represents our
wants, it is a room hung with the maps of all themiseries we endured. But our
Prophet by a devoted confirmed sanctified memory does possess himself with
the representation of the place of Religion. The motions and resolutions of all
the the terrestrial spheres cannot disturb much less destroy his meditations
upon Jerusalem. This as a swift winged Seraphin, is fled up to heaven, and
there recorded, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, the joy of the earth, Queen of
the nations, City of God, beauty of the whole world, thee O Jerusalem, seat or
the Temple, Princess of the Provinces, chair of the Monarch^e, throne of the
kingdom, Golden head of the picture. No, Israel may forget Egypt, Simeon and
Levi forget Israel their father, the mother may forget her child, and the
child exenterate his own mother, but Jerusalem, the apple of Gods eye, the
signet on his finger, the Virgin of the East, beauty of the earth, his fair
one, dear one, little one, only one, shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. The best
exterior member of the body, the hand, the best use of the hand cunning: but
let hand and cunning perish, the right and best use of the right hand perish,
let neither his tongue stir, nor his hand touch his harp, nay let his eyes
fall into the holes of his head, and all his faculties fail, rather then he
fail to remember Jerusalem.

Which few words show the much love of the Prophet to the place of Gods
service: and as Reverend Calvin upon the words notes, Calvin in 137.
, Testantur Dei cultores adhibita imprecatione memoriam sanctae vrbis cordibus
suis, semper fore infixam,, neque vnquam deletam iri quicquid acciderit: the
true worshippers of God do seal with an imprecation the remembrance and
reverend regard of Religion, never to be rooted from their souls, to be their
song day and night, their morning and evening sacrifice, their (...), their
meat and drink, the very light of their life, and breath of their nostrils,
never to be separated, never to be divorced from them; every man saying, as our
Prophet, If I forget thee O Jerusalem, then let my right hand forget her
cunning.

numbered the words, let us go to the sikle of the Sanctuary, and there weigh
them. 1. The supposition or exaggeration of his vow: If I forget thee. The
second, the place, or subject, or object occasioning his vow: Thee O Jerusalem.
Thirdly, the obligation, and imprecation, or if you please, his oath of
allegiance to Jerusalem: then let my right hand forget her cunning. All of them
be as the ingredients for the holy incense, sweet smelling savours unto God:
first a fervent and vehement vow, holy for the matter, hearty for the manner.
second the most holy place of the most high, the Parallel of lost Paradise, and
figure of the hope for heaven, a resemblance of every faithful man's soul, and
the representatio^ of the militant and triumphant Church. let my right hand
forget her cunning.

And now Ho: Reverend, all beloved, lend your ears to that subject, to which
David the type of Christ, and Christ the son of David lent their tears.
Babylon has friends every where, Jerusalem wants Religion, I mean expects
that you will stand to her, otherwise, vt quid statis hic otiosi, why stand you
here idle? but per silentiu^ consensum video, Acuanus spoke in the same kind,
Acuanus in Psalm.
I see your consent by your silence, and hope your faithfulness will never
entertain forgetfulness, especially of goodness: which profession, was
David's practice and my first part.

Forgetfulness, 1. Part. Bon. in Psalm. 119.
by the schools is defined to be Memoriae lubricatio, and so Bonaventure
speaks on the 119. Psalm, it is a slippery inconstancy of the memory whereby
the best part of the mind, the understanding can neither fitly receive, nor
faithfully retain those species which are represented to it. It is like to
that swift Kishon which swept Sisera's soldiers away, it is a precipitate
torrent, the obliterating, and expunging of knowledge, the very index
expurgatorius of the understanding, the cloud of the mind, and ecclypse of the
memory. The fathers distinguish it into two parts: first a useful and
laudable: second an hateful and damnable forgetfulness. Bernard in Cant.
Bernard observes that the name Manasses signifies forgetfulness, and as the
tribe of Manasses dwelt part on the one side, part on the other side Jordan,
na^totus Manasses Iordanem non transiit, so there is a forgetfulness which
stays from passing Jordan, and another forgetfulness which leads through
Jordan, to the land of Canaan.

It is a wonder that Manasses should be the father of a Tribe: an Egyptian
bare him, Pharaohs Court was the place of his breeding, neither Nurse nor
Mother could give benedictionem patriae: when he came for Jacobs blessing
Joseph the father led him by the left hand, and Jacob the grandfather laid his
left hand upon him, neither father, nor grandfather gave him benedictionem
dextrae, the blessing of the right hand. When he came to term of
inheritance, the tribe was divided, Jordan divided them, half on the one side,
Spedi geneal. ante Biblia.
the other on the other, no tribe so divided as Manasses, neither had
benedictionem terrae. Manasses was but nephew to the Tribes, and lost his
birthright as Esau did. Gedeo^ was of this tribe, whose sons were all
slain, Zelophehad of this tribe, who had no sons but daughters. Many
monuments of orbitancy, of defection, and oblivion in this tribe; and yet many
Princes, many Prophets, were of it.

I follow St Bernard his allusion, that Manasses the eldest son of Joseph,
should be forgetfulness, Bernard.
It is much, Joseph was now a Prince in Egypt, who had bin a prisoner in Egypt,
Joseph whose feet they hurt in the stocks, that the iron entered into his
soul, Joseph from the state of a Prisoner to be a Prince, his first fruit to
be forgetfulness, it is very much. Adams first fruit Cain to be a murderer,
Jacobs first fruit Reuben, to be incestuous; Aarons first fruit Nadab, to be
contumacious; David's first fruit Ammon, to be adulterous; Salomons first fruit
Rhehoboam, to be Idolatrous; shows, that these holy men did not offer their
firsts fruits, their eldest sons unto God: but Joseph almost the lest and
youngest of his brethren, saved from the pit, saved from the prison, now a
Prince in Egypt, and Manasses, forgetfulness, his first son, enforces that
all that are dignified and magnified, are most ready to forget the state, from
whence God has brought them. They are the sons of Joseph, not of Jacob; he
wanne by yielding, and was honored by his halting, by his humbling says
Chrysostom, the lower he stoups to the earth, the nearer, the better his
advantage for this blessing, Chrysostom.
felices hi ex tribu Manassis qui humilitatem induunt, authoritatem exuunt, Leo
gives the reason, Humilitas animi sublimitas Christiani, happy is their
forgetfulness, the stars of whose firmament, being great, yet seem less then
the earth, this fargetfulnesse is virtus honorata, says Bernard, an humble
mind in an honorable place, Bernard.
it is a lowly valley sweetly planted, and pleasantly watered, a royal Argosy
with a low fail, a holy temple with a low roof. He is a true Israelite, more
then a Nathiniel, he is of the band of the Centurion, or rather the Centurion
himself, Jacob. Manasses. David. Esdr. Centurion. Paul. John Bap.
who in the Gospel cries Domine non sum dignus, which is the voice of 4 in
the old Testament, and 3 in the new, happy sons of the tribe of Manasses,
blessed practices of forgetfulness.

In the second legion of Manasses, passing over Jordan, J place those, who in a
charitable forgetfulness forgive all wrongs done to them It was Peter his
question, Mat. 18. How often shall J forgive my brother? How often in a day, as
Luke adds, the answer is 70 times 7. Ierom.
that is, says St Ierom 490 times, if there may be so many ebbings and
flowings in the sea of thy passion. St Austine gives the reason, Austin.
why seaventie times seven, from Adam to Christ there were seaventy
generations, and when Christ came, he forgave all the transgressions of
mankind diffused into so many generations: so also should a Christian remit as
many offenses as in the compass of his life can be committed against him.
Tully of Caesar, and Ambrose of Theodosius, Tully. Amb.
restify that they forgot nothing but injuries. Happy is he that so conquereth
himself, as that wrongs cannot conquer him; he is above nature, when he
seems below himself, for not to resist being urged, is more then Heroical.
Theophrastus gives him this character, he is Gods best witness, Natures best
child, Theoph.
the surest friend, the latest enemy, the greatest conqueror. So far
forgetfulness is useful, and the posterity of Manasses fruitful. But the
forgetfulness, against which David with an execration voweth, is a neglect
bred by the corruption of nature, nourished by the eclipse of grace, whereby
Gods blessings be either not remembered or not regarded. This is the rust of the
senses, and Canker of the soul, man's worst inmate, sins greatest associate.
Accipiendis est indignus, qui fuerit acceptis ingratus; Eern.
man hereby enjoys not those he formerly received, not receaueth those which
futurely he expects: Our Prophets resolution is otherwise, If I forget.

In Deu^ no^ cadit oblivte, says St Austin, man may forget, but God will not,
cannot forget. Th 1.2.
Aquinas puts it among those actus Deo inco^venientes. Yet as the just be
had in his eternal remembrance, so the wicked be forgotten, that is, caused
to be forgotten, utterly obliterated from the earth. David and Ahab prove this:
Bern.
the ouenant made to David is, that for ever there should be a light in Israel.
Rhehoboam sinned, Rhehoboam. 1 King 11.
to tribes were cut of yet the kingdom shall not utterly be taken way, Erit
lux Davidis in Israel, 1. Kings 11.34. Abijam his son, ditionum and vitiorum
haeres, as Lyra names him, actuates and augments his fathers sins, the axe is
laid to the root of the tree, the Scepter begins to wither, the Lord is ready
to destroy him, yet he remembers his Covenant, Erit Lux Davidis in Jerusalem 1.
King 15.4. Abiiam. 1. King. 15.4.
Iehoram ioineth with Ahab, whose posterity woe and vengeance was to
undermine; all Iehorams children are slain, now the light of Israel was to be
extinguished, but the Lord remembers his covenant to David, though all the
seed royal of Judah was thought to be destroyed, yet Ioash is saved,
preserved from the horrid massacre, hid in the bed chamber, the Covenant
continues, Erit Lux Davidis in Jerusalem 2. Chron. 21. It is a speech usual
in the Kings and Chronicles, Iehoram. 2. Chr. 21.
Erit lux Davidis in Jerusalem, the Lord would continue a light in Israel, so
did the Lord until he came, who was the light of the Gentiles, and the glory
of his people Israel, a continuance, a succession, an emanation of the root of
Iesse. David's seed shall remain among the posterities, impij autem non sic, it
is not so with Ahab, he and his shall be forgotten, God has forgotten him, he
turns his face from him, and there is none to help him: a little vineyard
rooteth, eats, obliterateth him, and all his. They were al like those that
perished at Endor, and became the dung of the earth, Psalm. 2. King 21.17.
Ahab is accursed by Eliah, his wife, and children cursed, vengeance dogs him
to his end, Ahab is slain in battle, dogs lick his blood, Iehoram his
son wounded in battle, after slain by Iehu, 2. King. 22.
dogs lickt his blood, Iezebel his wife cast down from the window is slain,
Ahaziah her son fell from the window, 2. King. 22.
is slain. Dogs lickt but the blood of Ahab, but they eat the body of
Iezebel: 2. King. 1.
his two sons both Kings, cast out as filthy carcases, and yet the Tragedy
not ended, vengance has another scene, seaventie of his sons were slain.
Athaliah sought to destroy all the blood royal, 2. Chr. 22.
and feminine cruelty exceeds masculine, says the Historian, Lamprid.
but Athaliah could not destroy Ioas, one remains. Iehu slew two and forty of
Ahaziahs brethren, and none remained, but this number is almost doubled, 2.
King. 10.
seaventie sons all of their blood royal derived from vena basilica of Ahab
all slain, yet not an end, for an Epilogue, as if destruction were come to a
perpetual end, and the memorial of them perished with them, Psalm.
Iehu slew all his great men, all his Captains, all his kinsfolk, all his
Priests, all his servants, til he left him not one remaining, 2. Kings 10.11.
These might say, 2. King. 10.11. Psalm. 10.11.
as those in the Psalm Ps. 10.11. God has forgotten them, he turns his
face from them, and there is none to deliver them. But this forgetting is
effectus irae, not defectus memoriae, in God it is a note of his punishing, not
of his not remembering, it is the effect of his wrath, not a defect of his
power. He sees all, knows all, remembers all, only God may truly say, I
will not forget.

Moses led the Israelites many days journey out of the way in their passage
to Canaan, Philo.
my iourny is to Jerusalem; Pardon this last necessary outroad. I come nearer
to our Prophets meaning and remembering: whose hearty resolution leads us to this
holy position. 1. Doctrine.
It is the duty of a true Christian always to remember, never to forget the
blessings, that his God has bestowed upon him.

Natures impotencie by sins obliquity has shipwrakt all the faculties of the
soul, the understanding is blind, the will mad, the mind lame, the memory,
as the man between Jerusalem and Jericho, sore wounded. Grace as the good
Samaritan cures and recovereth these. Seneca.
Nihil facilius putrescit quam amor, says Seneca, nothing decaieth sooner the^
love, Putrescit, senescit beneficium, a benefit soon antiquateth and
putrifieth. Of all the powers of the soul delicata, tenera, maxim fragilis
memoria, in quam primu^ senectus incurrit: white hairs be not more present
harbingers of old age then the tender, delicate, britle memory, which soonest
waxes old: no faculty sooner then memory, no apprehe^sion of memory, sooner
waxes old then a benefit. Men forget those favors, the authors whereof be
their daily objects, how easy then to forget God they see not! When all the
world sits as at the poole of Bethesda, Grace as the Angel descends and
heals the many proclivities to forgetfulness of those that be Gods children.
Tully.
Tully compares Lucullus and Hortensius to gither, both of wonderful memories,
but prefers Lucullus before Hortensius, because he remembered matters, the
other but words. But the excellentest obtect of all others, either for the
memory to account, or for any part of the soul to conceive, is the meditations
of the Lords blessings. Happy is he that makes a custom house in his soul in
this kind, that sets down all the blessings of God that came into his
haven, that remembers the Lord, as he has remembered him, that names the^
over often, and as God reckons the stars and calls them al by their
names: and though he can not in that number and order, that God has bestowed
them on him, because they be more then the hairs of his head, yet with David
sums then up, Quidretri buam, Psalm.
what shall I give to the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me? Bern.
ep.
Renumeratio haec Remuneratio quaedam, this is continual incense of the soul,
gratiarum ascensus, gratiae descensus, says Bernard. It was Jonas indiuiduus
comes, Ion. 2.
when my soul fainted I remembered the Lord: when his soul was not only
distempered, but almost overwhelmed, he cries out, I remembered the Lord. The
Disciples only on the sea in the boat, eve^ with salvation it self, cry out,
Master we perish, the mast of their faith was shaken, the anchor of their hope
almost broken, Master we perish! But Jonas not in a boat on but in the sea, in
the womb of a Whale, in the bottom and belly of the sea, I remembered the Lord,
says he. David may forget his own people and fathers house, forget the wife
of his bosom, and the fruit of his loins, yea forget to eat his own bread,
yet his memory never fails him in this service, to reach to the true object,
the faithful continual meditations of Gods mercies, the ingeminated
eiaculations of remembering and thanks giving. God has been bountiful in
mercies, David will be plentiful in these holy meditations.

Doctrine is to incite and encourage us to be exercised in the continual
meditations of Gods continued mercies. It is the faithfullest conjunction of
the soul with God, coelestis est mercatura, says Acuanus, Acuanus in Ps.
it is a celestial trade, between God and man, when man becomes remembrancer
to God his great benefactour. O the^, blessed brethren, practice David's holy,
and daily exercise herein! Look upon the kingly Prophet, upon the bended knees
of his soul, lifting up eyes, hands, Ps. 22.
heart to heaven in 22. Psalm, Thou O Lord art he that took me out of my
mothers womb, thou wast my hope when I hanged on my mothers breasts, thou art
my God from my mothers womb. In this great and honorable assembly now we are
all met, for cause of reioicing and comfort we are hereby remembered, what God
has done for us since the time he made us, that he has created us out of the
slime of the ground and put living and reasonable souls into us. It is Jobs
question, Why died I not in the womb, why gave I not up the ghost, when I came
from the belly, why did not the knees prevent me, Job. 3.
or the breasts that I might not suck? we may ask in a thankful awful
fear, as he asked in a wilful woeful fury. The Lord has nursed us up in a
civil and well manerd country, has redeemed us with the blood of his Son,
visited us with the light of his gospel, justified us with the power of his
grace, and filled our garners with store, and our baskets with increase, and
has raised up many of us, when we were lowly in our own eyes, and has
prevented us with the blessing of good things. Who so is wise will ponder these
things, and never forget the loving kindness of the Lord.

But alas! we are not more unable, to help our selves the^ unapt to
acknowledge the help of God. Some Critical Sceptick may tell me, this is too
popular too vulgar an argument for this Comitial assembly. But let him look
into David's practice; I will praise thy name in the great congregation. The
temple was called the house of thanksgiving, the daily sacrifice was the
oblation of thanksgiving; once a year there was a solemn general feast of
thanksgiving, and now the great Sacrament of the Lords Supper is Eucharistia
the sacrament of tha^ksgiving. Erasm.
Sluggishnes was indorsed upon the doors of the Sybarites, forgetfulness is
fastened upon ours, it sticks to us, as the leprosy of Gehezei. O that every
one would put his hand into his bosom, to see how leprouse he is! Psalm.
this Epidemicall Contagion is as water in our bowels and like oil in our
bones. There was a time, that I may speak as Hierome did, Debora sedebat sub
Palma, Hier.
the Paragon of mortal Princes, Debora the woman after Gods own heart, the
virgin Queen of the earth, the glory of the Christian, and envy of the infidel
world, like unto whom we never had king or Queen before her; ELIZABETH lived,
and like a gracious mother daily blessed us: most of us were borne in her
golden days, all of us blessed by Peace within her walls, and plenteousnesse,
within her Palaces, by that noble Progress of Religion, within all her
kingdom, all her time. But we forgot this, and therefore when Nature had given
her fullness of days, virtue fullness of grace, providence fullness of riches,
estimation fullness of honor, Debora deceased, and how soon was she
forgotten! she was gathered to her fathers, and as happy in her life, so holy
in her death, she went to rest with the greatest token of divine favor,
maugre that horrid fury of Parsons, the curse of his name, and plague of his
nation, who in his last gaspes, as if he had learned Iobes wives counsel, to
blaspheme God and die, brake the impostume of his then poisoned, cankred, now
(I fear) damned soul, and left that infection in papers behind him to
engaster the name and memory of that blessed Queen, in life more then Saint,
and now equal with Angels. How soon was she forgot! After her decease the
darkest dawning of a day, that ever our Country saw, al eyes streaming with
tears, all hearts breaking with sighs, our firmament full of clouds, the sun
rose in the North, as gl rious as ever before, in the East, the entrance of our
day star was, roseo cu^sole, Infinite blessings of union and Religion, by our
Sovereign, Infinite deliverances of David and his seed, the foundation of
posterity and prosperity laid, all clouds removed. Solomon the Prince renowned
through the Christian world, al beams of expectation reflexed upon him, the
lines of the whole circumference met in Prince HENRY as in the Center, the eyes
that saw him blessed him, the ears that hard him gave witness to him, all
acclamations sound this, blessed the womb that bare thee, and the pappes that
gave thee suck. But we forgot this, we all admired his person, his deportment,
his wisdom, his grace with God and men, but we forgot to be thankful to God,
that had given such a Prince to men: our unthankfulness slew him, that renowned
plant, as the first flower of the fig tree, in the prime and blooming of his
age, was translated to heaven. Religion wept, virtue bled at his death and the
Christian world was ready to expire, yet gracious Prince HENRY is forgot, the
Jewel of Nature model of grace, religions Champion, humani generis deliciae,
the light and life of mankind is already forgot: so senseless and stupid and
horrid is our unthankfulness. If we had no other sins but forgetfulness,
and no other forgetsulnesse then of renowned Q. Elizabeth, and blessed P.
Henry, this were enough to shake, nay to sink us: it is not a worm or moath
upon us, but a viper hanging on our hand, an emblem of our destruction.
Wherefore to land this point, Ho: Reverend, and blessed Christians, set up
pillars of remembrance in the faculty of your memory, for all the blessings God
has showed to you. Be meditating of the Lords mercies from day to day, let
body and soul be free from the plagues, that fall upon both, by neglect of
remembering the blessings to both. But I leave this, least I forget my second
part Jerusalem; and If I forget thee O Jerusalem, then let my right hand forget
her cunning.

Many glorious things are spoken of thee thou city of God, says the Psalmist.
Jerusalem was the Elect city of God, Psalm.
holy and most glorious, Villalpand. in Ezekiel.
built upon the holy mountains, this exceeding all other cities, as their
Temple all other buildings. It was situated in the midst of the world, and by
rude and polite, divine and profane authors styled the center of the earth,
and the midst of all nations. Strabo thinks that Moses built it, but that
Scripture contradictes: but Scripture is plain that Jacob dwelt there, Genesis
33.18. It was built, Genesis 33.18.
as Josephus records two thousand twenty and three years after the creation.
Melchesedech was the first founder and king of it 50 years, and called it
Salem, which as some think, is that which is by Homer called Solyma. Let, in
Psalm.
The Iebusites, Cananites possessed it eight hundred twenty four years, then
David rooted them out, and the city continued in perfect beauty, as Josephus
accounts, four hundred seaventie and seven years, in compass, says
Strabo, six miles, 2 hundred and fifty paces. In the old Testament it was
seven times besieged by Shishak K. of Egypt, 1. King. 14. 2. King. 4. 2. King.
18. 2. King. 19. 2 Chr. 33.11. 2. King. 24.
1. King. 14. by Ioas king of Israel, 2. King. 4. by Reshim king of Aram, 2.
King. 18. by Senacherib king of Ashur, 2. King. 19. by the Assyrians in the
time of Manasses, 2. Chro. 33.11. by Pharaoh Necho in the time of Iehoiakim, 2.
Kin. 24. Lastly in the time of Zedekiah, by Nabuchadonosor that scourge of
heaven, which fatal, though not final, desolation was foreseen in this Psalm.
The original is Ieruschalaijm in the duall number, for there were two cities,
Salem and Syon, both sisters, Judah dwelt in the one the great and kingly
tribe, Benjamin in the other, the least and youngest tribe. It was never
perfect til Solomon's time, for Melchisedech was their King, but wanted
succession; then the Iebusits invaded, and possessed it, Ioshuah sets against
the Iebusites, kills their king, but obtaines not the Castle, the fort of Syon;
David conquereth them, and obtains the Castle. Yet there was no Temple all this time. A praefiguration of the Temple there was long before. Abraham in the
2 thousand and twenty year of the world built an altar here, on the mount
Moriah, but sacrificed not Isaac, for which he built the altar. David about the
two thousand eight hundred year of the world built an altar, and sacrificed on
the same mount, but the altar had no Temple. After this Solomon built the
Temple, and the altars in the Temple, and offered 20 thousand Oxen, and a
hundred and twenty thousand sheep. Yet the Temple was not perfect, there
lacks the Priest. The Priest himself was crucified, the sacrificer
sacrificed: and where Adam was buried, as Epiphanius testifies, Epiphanius
apud Kemnitium de Traditio.
there was Christ on the edge of Moriah on Calvary crucified. Now the city is
perfitted and consummated, but here consummatio consumptio est. Jerusalem in
her infancy was in a kind of innocence, Et si non Innocentia a peccatis tamen
innocentia a scandalis, et si non libera a peccati macula, tamen a peccandi
malitia. She was a choice chaste virgin, Gods own daughter, nay his deareling,
as the apple of his eye dear unto him. All his messages were then endorsed,
Tell the daughter of Syon, al his Prophets come as Amos to Hesekiah, the
virgin, the daughter of Syon, the daughter of Jerusalem: Grace was nurse to
this virgin in the time of the law, the dew of Hermon was her milk,
Melchisedech, a King and Priest was her father, David a King and Prophet was
her foster father in her infancy Jerusalem was the Kings daughter, al glorious
within, her clothing was of wrought gold, the daughter of Tire was there with a
gift, kings daughters were among her honorable women, all her garments smelt
of Mirrh, Aloes, and Cassia, the King had pleasure in her beauty, she was
brought to the King in raiment of needle work, the virgins, that were her
fellows did bear her company. Jericho a City of Palm trees, Tyrus rich in
purple, Samaria the throne of Israel, Egypt the womb of Nilus and all other
Tributary, subsidiary daughters to Jerusalem, she was great among the Nations
and princess of the provinces. Lam. 1.
The sun did once shine upon all the rest of the world, yet Egypt, only Egypt
was dark; but now all the rest of the world was darkness, and the sun only
shined upon Jerusalem, There was no beauty to the beauty of the daughter of
Syon, the Lord kept her as a match for his own ^o^^e, sent many messengers to
her, to win, to woo he^, but she was turned harlot and entertained lust, last
preferred murder to the service of Jerusalem, murder slew all the messengers
that came: yet God, as desiring the match, forbear yet to be angry and his
prophets lamented her: you may hear Jeremy in his own words, Ier. 14.17.
Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease, for
the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a grievous blow. And Amos among
others, as commiseratly, Hear the lame^tation, O house of Israel! Amos. 5.2.
O the daughter of Israel is fallen! And the lamentations are so full of
condolements for Jerusalem, that her gates sunk, her bars broken, the stones
of her sanctuary scattered in every corner in the street, her mountains
desolate, houses fiered, temple destroyed, Virgin violated, and all turned to
ruin and rubble. Such are those lamentations, that if their Echo can pass by
the ears of any man, and leave not lamentation and passion behind him, I say
his heart is a strong castle for the devil, it is harder, then the nether
millstone. Well, Jerusalem is defloured and disfigured, Civitas sa^cta est
meretrix, facta est adultera, the virgin is turned whore, civitas sanctitatis
is become Civitas sanguinis, says Acuanus, The city of peace is become the
city of blood, Acuanus.
the joy of the earth become the shame and shambles of the earth, the Academy
of the prophets become the Aceldama of the Prophets; Jerusalem a lodge in a
garden of cucumbers, a den of thieves, a cage of unclean birds, the cave of
unclean beasts, habitatio^ where Zym, Iim, the ostridge, the schritchowle, the
Satyr do inhabit: yet God continues his love, and sends his son to this f
nfull City, and when HE came, sure he loved her dearly, for he wept for her
bitterly: Mat. 23.
but she like a deceitful harlot first dissembleth, and the^ betraieth him,
one day kneeleth before him, the next accuses him before Pilate, one day comes
to attend him with Palms another day gathers to apprehend him with staves, one
day worships him, another day crucifies him. He that came to preserve her,
she goes about to destroy him, and preferring him, that slew the living,
before him that raised the dead, they crucified the Lord of life, Supplicium
quo nullum maius! opprobrium quo nullum vilius! Ratisbonens. de Pass. Dom.
Jerusalem crucified her Savior Jesus: yet the Lord forbeareth Jerusalem, and
yet thou remainest holy, O thou worship of Israel. When he had been crucified
and risen again, and they denied his resurrection, and he ascends to heaven,
and they regard not his ascension; He, in his last words that ever on earth he
spoke to his disciples commands them, Act. 1.4.
not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the father, the
coming of the spirit among them in Jerusalem. I find some of the ancients
amazed at this love of the Lord of life. Oecum. Theod. in Act Apost.
Poor disciples, children of the bride chamber, their eyes streaming with
tears and hearts breaking with sighs, must they yet continue in Jerusalem?
With that sinful nation, that people laden with iniquity, Esaias. 1.
seed of the wicked corrupt children, with the^ that had so provoked the holy
one of Israel to anger: why not in Ephrata? where the Lord was born, why not in
Galily? whence they were chosen. Of all places, why in Jerusalem? the most
odious of al places, in murdrous, adulterous Jerusalem stained with blood, and
for ever branded with the blemish of treason against her Lord: why in
Jerusalem? against which all the Prophets, had shot of vollies of woe, and
heaven sent down thunderbolts of vengeance: why in Jerusalem? where they were
as odious, as obvious to Herod's Court, Pilats pleading place, to Pharisees,
soldiers, to al, that were famous for infamy. The Prophets had been slain,
John Faptist murdered, and the Savior crucified in Jerusalem: what less, could
they here expect? the disciple is not above his Master, it had been hateful,
and how could it be less then hateful, to them, to be in Jerusalem? I omit
many reasons; most of the Greek fathers differing herein, Chrysostom. in Act. 1.
noluit Christus equos suos absque auriga prodire, Oecumenius giving another
reason: ne si cito digressi essent resurrectionis Christi veritas esset
suspecta, Oecumen. in Act 1.
says Oecumenius. Isaiah and Micah give a better reason, Es. 2 3.
de Syon exibit lex and verbum Domini de Jerusalem, it was not the city, or
seat, or sight of Jerusalem, though the loftiness of the situatio^,
temperature, and moderation of the heaven, fruitfulnes of the soil, all be
honored and so mentioned by Josephus, Strabo, Pliny, Tacitus, though it was
totius terrae vmbilicus, the center and very vertical point of the whole
earth, in qua^ Natura omnes vires essudisset, Livy.
as Hormisda spoke of Rome. Yet all this is not the cause of their slay, or of
the scriptures honoring, of Jerusalem, but because, it was the place, to which
the covenant, was made, that hence the word of the Lord, should pass into al
lands, it was the type, and representation of the elect Church of Christ; It
was the place of Gods service, the temple of sacrifice the house of prayer, the
consecrated holy place of the most high. And therefore the Parallel of the
Church, and Jerusalem being measured with Ezechiels line, we shall find, that
as Jerusalem was built on a rock, so the Church upon Christ the rock: as
Jerusalem was surrou^ded with hills, Comp Ierusal. cum Ecclesia ex quam plurimis
Rabbinis.
so the Church compassed with Gods protection: Jerusalem could not be conquered
from the Jebusites, but by David, nor the church redeemed from Satan and sin
but by Christ: Judah the seed of bleere eied Leah, inhabiting of the one side,
signifi's the church of the Gentiles, Benjamin the fruit of fair Rahel, on the
other side the hill Moriah figureth the church of the Jews: both had a part in
Jerusalem, both belong to heaven: Jerusalem built on the South, had the sun
most orient shining therein, the church has the son of righteousness, most
gloriously illuminating it: Jerusalem, the vision of peace, the Church the
family of peace: All the Tribes came to Jerusalem, all nations come unto the
Church: in Jerusalem was the continual worship of God, in the Church the
continued service of God: here he was more particularly, not only per
essentiam, as he is in all creatures, or per potentiam, as he is even in hell,
sed per residentia^, says Altensteg; Alt ensteg. diction.
and this caused the Prophet so much to recall, and record, the remembrance of
Jerusalem. Which leads to this position, 2. Doct,
that Religion only is that, which adds grace and honor to place a person.

Religion, as the heathen confesses, is (...), it is not only the band betwixt
man and man, Plutarch.
the knot of all communion, and consociation, but is the sweet ointment, and
holy ornament of the place, where it is. Shiloa, is honored for the poole of
Shiloa, but more for that the Tabernacle stood in Shiloa. Bethel is honored
for the Well of which David desired the water, but much more for that Christ
the son of David, was borne there. Jerusalem honored for her Temple, but much
more for the worship of God, in the Temple. For the Eunuch in the Acts, as S.
Chrysostom observes, came not to see the Temple but to perform worship in
Ierulalem. And while this worship continued, God called Jerusalem, Chrysostom. in.
Act.
Domus mea, but when this fire was gone out, Domus vestra. Syon is my hill,
says the Lord, Jerusalem my city, the Temple Domus mea: but when they forsook
him, he forsook them, when their Religion expired, he the^ departed, they
change the property, he forsook the patronage: it was Domus mea, now Domus
vestra, once Domus mea, per amoris antiquitate^, now Domus vestra, per peccati
iniquitatem, as a Gloss notes now when the life of their lives, and blood of
their souls, Religion ceased, it is become Loruhamah, Loamint, Domus vestra, a
den of thieves. Fearful is that place of the Apostle, Heb. 10.38.
if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.

David was borne in Bethlehe^, anointed in Bethlehe^, yet he prefers
Jerusalem in his song: it did rejoice him, when they went to Jerusalem, that
his feet might stand in thy gates O Jerusalem. O pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, let them prosper, that love thee, Peace be within thy walls,
plenteousnesse within thy palaces. The honor of Bethlehem in Micah is much,
thou Bethlehem Ephrata, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet
out of thee he shall come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel. Observe
the continuance, and perpetuity of honor, done to little Bethel: Mic. 5.25.
The 1 covenant made by God to Abraham, Genesis 12.8.
and the first altar made by Abraham to God was in Bethel. Near the same place
Isaac his son built his first altar, and the Lord first appeared here to
Isaac. In the same Bethel, Genesis 26.24.
Jacob his son receaueth his vision, God makes his covenant with him. In the
same Bethel, Genesis 28.20.
God commands Jacob to build him an altar, and here Jacob gives it that name
the house of God. In the same Bethel, David of the line of Jacob was borne, and
anointed, and in the same Bethel, Gen 35.15. 1. Sam. 16.
now the city of David, was Christ, of the seed of David, borne. Lo, thus
shall be done to the place, that the Lord does honor, thus shall be done to the
place where God his name is called upon. It is not the loftiness of the
building, the aspiring of the towers, the multiplicitie of their turrets, the
seats of judgment, houses of the High Priests, schools of the Prophets,
th^cknes of their senced vault round about the city, in which were one hundred
and fifty thousand men, which Strabo makes to be two hundred, and fifty
paces, nor those 400 catechizing houses, which the Ribbins mention in the city,
nor the Palaces of the Princes, nor the sepulcher of their kings, nor the 11
orders of the city, or the 9 fountains, or 12 gates, or ninety turrets, which
Villalpand describes, Villal. in Ezekiel.
or the mountains above it, or valleys about Jerusalem, no not the Temple it
self, that was 7 years building by the daily labor of a hundred fifty three
thousand men: but it was the worship of God, Religion that gave the grace and
countenance, Josephus.
that made it the golden head of the picture; Lady of the world, seat of the
Monarchy, Virgin of the East, joy of the earth, so dear to our Prophet, as
that he cries out, If J forget thee O Jerusalem, then let my hand forget her
cunning.

Doctrine, that should be as fearful for terrifying, as powerful for
instructing, all those places, and persons, that the Lord has blessed, by
placing his name, and word among them. Tyrus Purple, or Iericho's Palms, or
Samariahs kings, or Ninivehs buildings, continue not; Canker and Corruption
has utterly consumed them, not a stone remaining on a stone, they are
forsaken, because by them Religion is forsaken. Quinzay in the east, Mexico in
the west, Millaine as it is, Antwerpe as it was, Paris in her late glory,
Venice in her now beauty, cannot continue, because Religion continues not. The
prime city of this land, the heart of the kingdom, and chamber of the king,
has been often swept, her foundation has been shaken, the multitude of her
offenses, has consumed multitudes of her inhabitants, and that Nabuchadonosor,
the plague has kept visitation in her, Senec. Trag.
Iuvenesque senibus coniungens, and gnatis patres funesta pestis, and why have
these ecclipses often hindered the sunshine of her Citizens, but for their
neglect of Religion. Wherefore my beloved, seeing that religion, this day makes
a proclamation unto you, as wisdom in the Proverbs, entertain her, let her be
the bracelet, tablet, frontlet, of each Christian: when the names of the great
ones shall rot, their bodies rot on the earth, Pro. 1.
and their souls rot in Sheol, and their memories rot among the posterities,
thy name to thy posterity, if thou be religious, shall be a happy patrimony.
David is more honored in Scripture for being a Prophet the^ a King, Solomon
more regarded for being a preacher then a Prince, Job not honored for his
Camels, his sheep, Job 1.
his oxen, his riches, but because he was a righteous man. Abraham's religion
and obedience, gat him the title of father of the faithful: military men may
remember the faith and religion of the Centurion, honored not for his band or
command, that he had power to bid one come and he came, another go, and he
went, but for his word, non sum dignus. Citizens and Townsmen may be
remembered by Simon the Tanner, Courtiers by the Eunuch, women by Lydia, young
men by Titus, servants by Onesimus, who ever thou art, thou art not left
inexcusable, o man, examples, precepts, blessings for the practice, curses for
the neglect of religion, are offered daily to thy meditation. The praises of
Religion should not only incite, but astonish thee, Kings her nursing fathers,
Queens her nursing mothers; for louelines she is a Roe, for fruitfulness a
vine, for holiness a priesthood, for brightness the morning, for safety mount
Syon, for Royalty a Queen, for beauty the Sun, for privileges, the godly
and religious in themselves, they be blessed in the city, blessed in the
field, blessed in the fruit of the body, Deuteronomy. 28.
blessed in the fruit of the ground, in the fruit of the cattle, in the
increase of the kine, and in the flocks of sheep, blessed in the basket, and
the store, blessed, when thy go in, and when they go out, and blessed in
every thing they shall put to their hand. For their Family, and the
preservation thereof, thousands shall fall before him, ten thousands at his
right hand, it shall not come nigh him, no evil shall come near his dwelling.
For his children, the seed of the righteous is blessed, I have been young,
says David, and now am old, Ps. 37.
yet I never saw the righteous forsaken or his seed begging their bread. Mark
this ye Parents, ye, to whom, your children, be as dear as your lives, ye
whose whole life is only for the continuance of your posterity, ye, whose long
travels, troubled meals, short sleeps, great cares, nay great sins be only
to maintain your name and family, let Religion be the foundation, godliness
the gain, sanctity the legacy you bequeath to your children, no moth shall
corrupt it, no thief shall steal it, no Pyonerlike advocate shall undermine
it, your generation shall remain among the posterity. Let Religion, be the
season of their childhood, the guardian of their youth, and then it will be the
guide of their age, the garland of their life, and their good Angel to glory.

At alia est religio Iudaeorum, alia Samaritanorum, alia Gentium, Chrysostom.
says Chrysostom, Jerusalem had a temple, but Samaria a grove, Bethel an
Idol, how is the true religion to be known, men cry here is Christ, there is
Christ. I answer first with Jeremy 6.16. stand upon the ways, be hold and
ask for the old way, that is the good way, Ierem. 6.16.
walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Per Scripturam etenim
Deus loquitur omnia quae vult, Greg.
says Gregory: secondly avoid that way, which devises to keep thee in
ignorance, that is a godless religion, devout impiety; buy the truth, and sell
it not, let only that, which scripture teaches, evince thy conscience,
convince thy understanding. Aug. cont. Dona
It was holy Augustines position, audi non quid Donatus, aut Vincentius, aut
Rogatus, aut Hilarious, sed quid dicit Dominus, be desirous to hear, careful
to prove, faithful to retain, that is truth: so thou shall be blessed, if
thou be thus, the religious man, that fears the Lord.

At in Jerusalem Christus ipse a proditore proditus, Bosq. de Tempt
why but there is no such privilege to place, to time, to person, but there
may be an eclipse, and even the best sighted understanding, may fail to find
by outward reason, the inward power of religion, for person the most sacred,
the worlds Savior was tempted, for place not only in the desert, but on the
pinnacle of the Temple, for time not only when he fasted, but after the
greatest feast, that ever he kept, for he was betrayed at the passover. I deny
not Beloved, but when that the children of God, came to present themselves,
before the Lord, Satan also came to present himself; when the whole world,
had but so many persons as it has parts, but 4. there was a Cain, when there
were, after the flood but 8. there was a Cham, Lucifer among Angels, Judas
among Apostles, Nicolas among Deacons: I know that in Paradise a snake may
lurk, and in Samaria, when the Church was established, Simon Magus appears,
even in all ages, there wa^ted not a Demas, a Diotrephes, some agent for the
Devil, to betray religion, some that sow with mingled seed, plough with an ox
and ass, wear garments of diverse stuffes, worship at Salem, and yet sacrifice
at Sheche^, who with blended, doubled, poisoned hearts, do in these or the like
holy places come with old scraps, as the Gibeo nites deceived with oldshooes,
who being ungrounded in their first elements of learning, prove vnsou^d in
Philosophy, and rotten in Divinity, be ever learning, and never come to the
knowledge of the truth. If ever there were any such moates or mothes about the
Candle of this place, I wish the^ to consider the fearful story of those two
false Prophets in the time of Jeremiah. Hananiah and Shemaiah did both Prophecy
to the people, neither of the^ were taken for Baals prophets, yet both, says
the holy Ghost, did propehcy lies, the judgment upon Hananiah is Ier. 28.16.
Thus says the Lord, I will cast thee of, from the face of the earth, this
year thou shall die, because thou have lied against the Lord. Against Shemaiah
the judgment is pronounced, Ier. 29.32. Thus says the Lord, because Shemaiah
has prophesied, and I sent him not, and he caused them to trust in a lie, I
will punish Shemaiah and his seed, he shall not have a man to dwell among this
people for ever. Blessed be the Lord! that so hearty and holy is the Jealousy
of us for Religion, that now we may say inverting Gregory's words, Tinea
sonitum fecit damnum non fecit, though the mothe made some sound, yet it left
no soil, and is now silenced; we may say as Augustine discoursing upon him,
who in the time of Christ's betraying fled naked, and left his linen garment
behind him, certe hic non discipulus, Diog. Laert. in vit. Biantis.
sure this man was no^e of the disciples, or as S. John spoke such were (as
Bias spoke of sailers, neque inter vivos nec mortuos) with us but not of us,
and such bastard Eagles dare not endure the sunshine of scripture, no marvel
then, quia, says Bernard, qui in vita perfidi, Bernard.
in doctrina infidi: false Israelites speaking Ashdod and hebrew, false
Balamites that curse and bless, false Ephramites baked on one side, dough on
the other, false Grecia^s neither faith full to Achilles nor Hector, false
Laodiceans neither hot nor cold. And again; Blessed be the name of our God,
that as that honorable mother, and fruitful twin our sister Cambridge, may
rejoice in the happy fruit of her womb; so we in those many in all ages since
Popery first engastered religion, who nobly have resisted it, and have nobly
run all the suns course, with more light then the sun, as Grosthead,
Wickliffe, Bradwarden, Burley, Scotus, Occam, Jewel, Humfreys, Rainolds,
Hooker, Holland, our many worthies now among us, and the sun and moon of our
present church government those peerlesse unparalleled Bishops. And the religion
that this our Jerusalem, has ever maintained, is that Religion, which not only
Sleidan calls Protestant, Sleid. Com. Augad Bon. com. ep. 50.
but even that religion, which S. Austin calls Protestant religion; his words
be plain, ad Bonifacium Comitem, de coercendis haereticis, where he calls
the religion of his time by the name of ours, protestationem Catholicorum, the
protestant religion of the Catholics, which ought to be as dear to us, as
ever Jerusalem, was to David. But, I have kept you too long in Jerusalem, yet I
was to follow the command, of the Prophet, walk about Syon, go round about
her, tell the Towers thereof mark well her bullwarkes, consider her palaces,
and tell it to them, that come after. I will now lead you out of Jerusalem, as
the Angel did Ezechiel, and I will quickly measure out the rest that
remains; else let my right hand forget her cunning.

library of interpretations, whether Dextra be Christ, as Lyranus, or vita
aeterna, Lyra, Carth. Moler. in Psalm.
as Carthusian, or opera virtutis as the gloss, or divinum auxilium as
Mollerus, the sum of all is, the sense of all, all one, he wishes knowledge
and mercy to forsake him, if he forget Jerusalem. It was not a word blown
from his lips and lungs, but his bowels did yearne, and his very inwards did
yield, his soul sent out, with extraordinary vehemence, this holy and hearty
imprecation. Innocentius, Lor. in Ps.
brings 7. notions of the interpretation of the hand, pro filio dei,
potentia, gratia, auxilio, protectione, operatione, vindicta: The Optics
honor the eye, the Romans the hand; it is the whole bodies agent, it is the
sensorium of the touch only, but the emblem and resemblance of five several
senses and their faculties. Obliviscatur aextra; does he wish himself to loose
his right hand? vehementer certe se co^stringit, atrociter se obligavit, says
Austin on this Psalm. The loss of the right use of the right hand, Aust. in Ps.
117.
whether ye take it for the loss of mercy as Acuanus, or the loss of
protection, as Albinus, or the loss of cunning, or skill, or knowledge, as
Mollerus on this Psalm. Surely the loss of the right hand in a spiritual
sense is a curse: the greatest curse, that David could wish his enemy is, that
Satan might stand at his right hand Psalm. 109.6. And the greatest imprecation
against himself is, Ps. 109.
that his right hand may forget her cunning. The diverse gifts, that God has
bestowed upon the sons of men, enabling them in knowledge to excel, be to be
esteemed, their author to be acknowledged, their excellence to be admired, and
their end to be employed to the glory of the giver, otherwise men have the
right hand, and not the use of the right hand. He that abuses his knowledge,
his right hand, like the hand of Jeroboam will wither, knowledge then
flourishes, when diligence planteth it, and grace waters it, then God gives
the increase. Of all the trees in Paradise, the most principal was the tree of
knowledge, knowledge is the fiery pillar to lead us through the wilderness of
our wills, it is the Manna of the worlds desert, the beacon in danger, the Lamp
in darkness. Cyprian complains ad Demetrium, Indies deficit in agris
agricola, etc. Cyp. ad Demet.
There is a daily defection of all knowledge, in the husbandman in the field,
the mariner at the sea, innocence in the Court, justice in judgment,
workmanship in trades, discipline in schools. All these fail, and will vanish
like smoke, and wither like the grass, until they be directed to their true
end and scope, the service of God, which makes plain this position, That,
There is a worm under that Palm, a northwind shall blast it, it is like the
spiders nest in Job; it is a Meteor, a Cloud, an Ignis fatuus, a Cymbalum
tinniens, Job. 9. 1. Cor. 15.
a well without water, a curse, not a blessing to the possessions thereof, and
shall consume away as a moth fretting a garment, as the untimely fruit of a
woman, it shall never see the sun. Jerusalem and Israel found this true, 1.
King. 10.
that angelical and blessed harmony of music, consecrated by David,
established by Solomon, continued till the deportation into Babylon, was lost
in Babylon, never returned again they hanged up their harps, but never took
the^ down, this imprecation fell upon them, vere sic contigit, says St Austin
on this Psalm, Aug. in Ps. 137.
quod optavit, praenunciavit, their right hand forgot her cunning, their harpes
and Pipes, Lutes, Trumpets, Cymbals, their well tuned, loud sounding Cymball,
never returned again, the voice of musical rejoicing was never heard again in
their congregations, and sie peribit omnis scientia quae cu^ a Deo procedit,
Ambros. Ep.
ad Deum non recedit, says Ambrose.

Doctrine most fit for this place and time, and nearly concerns us all, who
by the mercy of God, and the blessing of our honorable mother the University,
at this time, how unworthily our souls best know have received encouragement,
for our proceeding in knowledge, virtue, and godliness of living, how many or
how few soever our talents be, that we make the best of them for the good of
the Church, and the glory of our God. It is ever observed, that the children of
darkness, are wiser in their generation, the^ the children of light, I mean the
Jesuits, who as if by some monopoly or impropriation they had challenged, all
learning and knowledge to themselves, are so earnest and forward in their
studies, that they blind and besot the world with an estimation of them, as if
the tree of knowledge grew only in their gardens: whereas the gleanings of
Ephraim are far better then the vintage of Abiezer, and the Jesuits
themselves, are but the Collectors for the poor, and as if they made no
conscience of that commandment, thou shall not steal, they cunningly have
purloined whatsoever is good in them, out of our men. It is an ancient
complaint that they had their Hebrew from Reuclin, Greek from Budaeus, Latin
from Erasmus, and that As has been proved by blessed D. Rainolds, Keckerman,
and others.
Villavincentius has stolen a whole Tract from Hyperius, and printed it in his
own name. What is there, in the whole Bulk of voluminous Bellarmine, but that
which he has heaped up out of Kemnitius, Calvin, Jewel? what has Lorinus in
his large, rather painful, then faithful, Commentaries, but what our hiues
and helps for interpretation have afforded him? What has Clavius in his
Mathematics, but that which Melancthou, or most of them, for their method but
what Ramus has delivered them? To use Bonaventure his words in the preface
Lo^bard to, Compilatores sunt non authors: yet this I say their industry must
edge ours, if, they do the Devil and the Pope such diligent service, how
diligent should we be, to please our God. An illiterate opinion, there is in
some, not only to neglect, but condemn the use of arts and sciences, I am sure
our Prophet did it not, nor his son, who was so skillful though a preacher,
that he wrote of all creatures, from the Cedar to the Hissope on the walls.
Worthy was that saying of Mirandula, si turpe sit bonas liter as colere, mallem
agnoscere quam deprecari culpa^, If it be an opprobrious thing, to embrace good
letters, I had rather acknowledge my fault, then ask pardon, for it. It is
worthily observed by one of the glorious lights of our Church, that Moses was
learned in the wisdom of Egypt, Daniel skillful in the knowledge of Chaldea,
Job not inexpert in Astronomy, Jeremy skillful in the common laws of his time,
David in music, Paul in Poetry, and in all the knowledge both of Jews and
Gentiles, and those holy Martyrs, and fathers, the great lights of the
firmament, Cyprian, Austin, Hierome, and the rest, have come laden out of Egypt
with the treasures, and spoils of the Egyptians instructed for the better
service of God with help of sciences and profane learning: and therefore they
are to be pitied rather then envied, qui suae patrocinantur ignorantiae, faith
Erasmus, Erasm. scholia in Ier. ad Pam. Bucer. Aemil. Prob. loc. 151. Pomer. in
1. ad Cor. 2. Call in 1. Cor. 15
plus inscitia sua fidunt and superbiunt quam alij eruditione sua, says Bucer,
rudes et degeneres su^t, says Pomeranus, nay Mr Calvine is so absolute for
this, as that his words upon the 15. of the 1. Cor. are, Colligimus hos esse
superstitiosos.

Wherefore beloved, all you of the younger sort, that are to be flowrishing
plants, in particular societies, or are to be transplanted from this Eden of
God, and to pass into the functions and Sanctions either of Church or Common
weal; first stay at Jerusalem, til the spirit be sent you. The gift of
tongues, was only given at Jerusalem: it is morbus comitialis, that at our
proceedings after the first or second degree some most rude, think themselves
most ripe, and forsake the University never to return again. I say again, so
long as God, and friends and any means may be had, stay at Jerusalem till the
spirit be sent you. When you go hence, take knowledge with you, exercise your
talent, to the honor of your Master, that the retributio^ may be, good and
faithful servant, thou haste been faithful in a little, I will make thee
ruler over much. Otherwise, your right hand shall forget her cunning.

Honorable Lawyers, I give you but that title, that your own glorious Emperor
gave you, how ever, the fat kine have eaten up the lean, and the law has
almost devoured your law: yet in your knowledge, which is more honored in all
parts of the Christian world, then is our own land, let it be seen, that your
knowledge and practice turn to the good, not the disgrace of the Church. Church
and Churchme^, have enemies more then friends. If a poor Prophet or Levite
came before the Doctors of the law, among the Pharisees, the word was, Go in
peace: Jf ever you come to place of authority, and a poor Minister come before
you, let him have countenance, far be it, that your learned laws should be
snares to good minds, or quirks for mercenary wits: lex et prophetae, your Law
and Prophets are ever joined in Scripture, divide not, divorce them not, least
your right hand forget her cunning.

Learned, and Honorable Physicians, I give you that title, that the son of
Sirach gives, it is but Apocrhypha; direct your knowledge, the right hand of
your knowledge, to the right use; let prayer go before, Religion be an
ingredient in all your practice, let it not be observed as Innoce^tius once
said, and yet in some places, though not here, yet in the great city of this
land is frequently and lamentably to be found that dum corpus medici reficiunt
aegrotorum animas inficiunt, that while irreligious, Ephraimiticall,
Hypocritical, popish Physicians cure the body, by some Idolatrous dram, they
infect the souls of their unhappy rather them unhealthy patients. Remember
donum sanationis was given only to the Apostles practice with care, with
knowledge, with conscience, lest your right hand forget her cunning.

My dear, and Reverend brethren in Divinity, you know what your Savior said,
be ye not called Doctors for there is but one Doctor which is Christ, that is,
Calvin and Iunius giving allowance to this interpretation, be not Pharisaicall
Doctors, neither idle, nor idol Doctors, not factious, not ambitious, for
otherwise, posuit Christus alios Doctores, alios Pastores, alios Prophets in
Ecclesia, though the painted Pharisees of this age envy you this honorable
degree. The contempt we are liable unto is much, even by those whose fathers,
says Job, I would not place with the dogs of the heard; Divinity has long
been kept on foot, cogitur ire pede, yet blessed be our God, since the first
hour of reformation unto this time, Above 40 sons of anciently descended
knights students in divinity, and most of them already ministers now in Oxford.
never were so many and so worthy sons of the Prophets many worthily, some
honorably among us descended and consecrated hereunto. Archippus look to thy
charge, watch, stand fast in the faith, pray, exhort, rebuke, with all power,
with all authority. Preach in season and out of season, let no man despise ye.
Cave nedum vita tua mala no^ sit per nequitia^, Austin.
videarur mala per negligentiam, Sit vestra cura no^ nummorum sed animaru^,
says Bern. seek not so much the church goods as the churches good, lest your
right hand forget her cunning.

All of you, Ho. Rever. blessed, and beloved brethren, all of you that are come
hither, to this great Comitial assembly, that are come to this Jerusalem, as
Joseph and Mary to find Jesus in the midst of the Doctors, remember Jerusalem,
Religion and knowledge, the mother and the daughter, nobile par, the Naomi and
the Ruth, the blessed pair of Cherubins over the Mercy seat, let them both
have your best wishes, and partake of your best works, in that ye do any
thing to these, ye do it to Christ. All posterities, shall bless the name of
those, our worthy present founders, whose works be aspiring, and quoru^ iam
maenia surgunt. The blessing of Judah, the blessing of Levi, the blessing of
both testaments, of both life's, shall be upon them and their posterity
forever. Their names shall be honored, their examples imitated, and their
works shall praise the^ in the gates, and their right hand shall never forget
her cunning. When we shall all meet in the higher Jerusalem, in that great
assembly of all Saints, we shall see these rewarded, with Palms in their
hands, and Crowns on their heads, let us therefore, my beloved, covet these
spiritual things, let us do some service to Religion and truth here, that mercy
and glory may crown us hence. Which that we may obtain, the Lord grant us,
all such measure of his spirit of his grace, that abounding here in faith and
good works, we may receive the reward promised, Come ye blessed of my father,
receive the kingdom provided from the beginning of the world.

To God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Spirit, be all praise, all
Power, all honor, this day, and all the days of our life in this place and
all Congregations of his Saints for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

