THE PSALMS OF David, TRVLY OPENED AND explaned by Paraphrasis, according to
the right sense of every Psalm. With large and ample Arguments before every
Psalm, declaring the true use thereof.

TO THE WHICH IS ADDED A brief Table, showing whereunto every Psalm is
particularly to be applied, according to the direction of M. BEZA and
TREMELLIVS.

Set forth in Latin by that excellent learned man THEODORE BEZA. And
faithfully translated into English, by ANTHONY GILBIE, And by him newly
purged from sundry faults escaped in the first print, and supplied with the
principal points of every Psalm, summarilie set down in a Table at the end
of the book.

PSALM. 22, 5. Our fathers called upon thee, and were delivered: they trusted
in thee, and were not confounded.

Printed by Henry Denham. 1581

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY KAtherine, Countess of
Huntingdon, mine especial good Lady: Grace and peace in Jesus Christ our
Savior, al sufficient.
RIGHT honorable my singular good Lady, I can write no pleasant things, the
which the great states much desire, neither any eloquent terms which this
world does require: but as your honor does know my rude simplicity (yet
through Gods great mercy always grounded upon his infallible verity) it
pleases your honor to give me leave sometimes to write unto you. And now
having gathered some profit my self, by a book of that excellent man
Theodore Beza, written in Latin, and dedicate to my most honorable Lord: so am
I bold to put forth some part of the same into English, which I thought most
expedient for you, and to present it to your honor with this short preface.
The which though it be short and rude, yet do I beseech your honor to consider
it, as a preparatiue to move your godly mind to the more diligent meditation
of these Arguments of the Psalms, which are very profitable, and to this
Paraphrasis, which is a brief and a plain declaration of the meaning of the
holy Ghost, who did endite the Psalms, and set them forth by his
secretaries, David and others, as shall appear in their places. First then I
beseech your Honor to consider the state of our time, and compare it with
former times, that we may see what is like to come upon us, unless we do watch
and pray, and bring forth the fruits of unfeigned repentance. We do read in
the histories of the Kings of Judah, who were the dear people of God, how that
after the death of Manasses, that idolatrous and cruel King, who had brought in
idolatry again after that his father Hezekias had reformed religion, Amon
reigned but two years, when God in mercy stirred up good Josias, who restored
the religion, and brought it again to full perfection, and made a covenant
betwixt the Lord and the people, and all the people stood to the covenant, 2.
Kings. 23, 3. the which true religion was continued 31. years, even all the
time of Josias, yet is it written in the 2. Kings 23. verses 25, 26, 27. Like
unto Josias was there no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law
of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him. Notwithstanding, the
Lord turned not from the fearcenes of his great wrath, wherewith he was angry
against Judah, because of all the prouocations wherewith Manasses had provoked
him. Therefore the Lord said, I will put Judah also out of my sight, as I have
sent away Israel, and will cast off this City Jerusalem, which I have chosen,
and the house whereof I have said, My name shall be there. Again 2. Kings 24.3.
Surely by the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, that he might put
them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasses, according to all that he did,
and for the innocent blood that he shed (for he filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood) therefore the Lord would not pardon it. The which terrible
words and threatenings against Gods chosen people, when I read them, they cause
me to tremble and fear for our state here in England. And I do earnestly
request your honor, and all that fear God, diligently to meditate these and
such like places of the holy histories, which I omit for brevity sake. For
besides that our religion is not yet brought to full perfection in these 22.
years (the which thing I fear will be laid to our charge) the horrible sins
of former times are not yet purged with true tears of repentance. For many do
yet carry their idols in their hearts, many do wait for the occasion to show
the like cruelty that they did before: few do feel how horribly they did
offend Gods sacred majesty in erecting of idols, contrary to Gods holy
commandment, especialie in kneeling down and worshipping that wafer cake, the
vilest and weakest idol that ever was imagined upon the earth, both for the
smalnes of the substance, and the huge heaps of errors therein maintained.
The most part make that their reuolting unto Antichrist, and renouncing of the
Gospel of Christ in Q. Mary's time, but a laughing matter. Two or three or
none, do worthily lament their fall with Peter. Wherefore I can not but fear I
say, least the like punishment will come upon us for the like sins committed
in the days of Q. Marie, for all our outward show of religion, as came upon
Judah for their former sins committed in the time of Manasses. Therefore have
we great cause to pray unto the Lord our God to be merciful unto us, to our
Queen, and Country: that so by earnest prayers, either we may turn away his
fearce wrath from us altogether, or at the least with our Hezekias (our
gracious Queen I mean) to obtain that it come not in our days.

To this purpose is this Book of the Psalms most necessary for every
Christian, not to read them for fashion and custom only, either in a known
or unknown language, which were to take the name of God in vain: but to
meditate them in their hearts, and so by earnest and continual invocation and
hearty prayers to move the Lord our God to mercies, as his holy servants have
by the like means always found mercy before us. For whereas al other
scriptures do teach us what God says unto us, these prayers of the saints do
teach us, what we shall say unto God, and how we must prepare our selves to
appear before his majesty, both in prosperity and adversity: and therefore
are they daily to be used with great reverence and humility. And surely
these Arguments, and this Paraphrasis of the psalms, set forth of late by that
great learned man Beza, do so lively paint forth the zealous and fervent
prayers, which both the whole Church generalie, and the saints of God
particularly have used from time to time, that we have great cause to praise
God, that has given us such patterns and examples at this present, to stir
up our dull hearts to the sense of our sins, to fear Gods judgments, and to
seek for mercy betimes. And if it please God to give us this grace, thus to
do vnfeignedlie, and without al hypocrisy, of this are we sure, that though we
can not turn away the general plagues that are threatened and seen to hang
over England: yet that al we that can be stirred up with like affections with
these saints of God, our fathers and brethren of old, to utter our misliking
and loathing of our own sins, and of the sins of the people, and so seek
for Gods mercies, shall be marked to salvation, when the plague comes, as God
himself has promised. Ezekiel, 9. Yea, though the perusing of these Psalms
can work no more in us, but to cause us to consider how far we are from that
zeal of Gods glory, that desire of building his house, that comfort of his
word and sacraments, that vprightnes of life, that faith, hope, and patience in
afflictions, that was in David and the other servants of God, that made these
Psalms, and so bring us to some more earnest desire, and longing for the same
virtues: yet will they be very profitable unto us, to be diligently read and
well weighed in our minds. And these Arguments and Paraphrasis giving the true
sense of the psalms in so plain words (as no man has done before) will
greatly further us to such godly meditations. Now as the latin Psalms of
Beza belong to my most honorable Lord by right, as dedicate and sent unto him
from far: so these english Psalms translated at home by one of your servants
(who is wholly my Lords and yours in the service of the great Lord) do by as
good right pertain to your honor, who but by some such means of translation
can have small commodity of the others, although you have some property
therein, because it is my Lords your husbands, to whom if mine old forworne
rude simplicity, unfit for this fine world could have brought forth any thing
worthy his honor, I would not have bin so long silent. But I humbly beseech
both your honors to take thus in good part this poor mite, as that of the
widow, which did testify her great good will in a right small matter. And as I
am most bound, I will pray for you both, that God our merciful father, for his
Christ's sake, would vouchsafe to grant you to read the Psalms of David, and
to meditate them by the same spirit with David, whereby ye may feel true
comfort in all troubles of mind and body, as did David, and so in the end be
crowned in the heavens with David, and reign for ever with Christ our
spiritual David in everlasting glory, Amen. Ashbie 7. of March. 1579.

Your Honors most bound always to command in the Lord, Anthony Gilbie.

THE EPISTLE TO the Reader.
SEEING among humane affairs, those men which have good causes and sound
reasons for their enterprises, are of greater authority, and more able to
persuade a reasonable man, than they that can render no other account, but
either their own affectionate opinion for a cause sufficient, or their self
will, how unreasonable soever, for an invincible argument, or in a word, their
headie rashness for a law that may be in no wise gainesaied. Therefore the
Translator thinks meet to show some reason of his doings, that that thing
which was most forceable to draw him to this translation, (who otherwise for
his age is very unfit to take such pains) might somewhat prevail, both to
move other that are more apt for such matters to do the like, and thee also the
Christian Reader to a more attentive consideration of those things, that are
most diuinelie set forth in this Book. Wherefore these two causes especially
brought him to take this work in hand. First love to his unlearned
countriemen. Secondly, the excellency of the work it self. For considering
that the Psalms in English are in many places read rather for task as it
were, and for fashion sake, than for good devotion and with understanding,
which the spirit of God commands in all parts of divine service: and because
that to read that which a man neither yet understands, nor seeks ordinary
means whereby he may understand, is a plain contempt of the thing that is
read, in that it notes want of care, and therefore defect of love, and
consequently the hypocrisy of him that serves God carelessly. Again (such
is the miserable state of our nation) seeing that every congregation has not
a sufficient pastor to explane and interpret these Psalms, (as also other
places of scripture) with lively voice of man (the principal and chief way
that ought to be in the Church to edify the conscience, and to build the
faith,) therefore the Translator receiving this Book, which was come from
far, even from a strange Country, and in a language unknown to the
multitude, he was moved none otherwise than as a loving friend is wont to
impart to his lovers that thing, which he knows may be profitable to many,
and so set forth in our vulgar speech that thing whereof otherways they that
have greatest need, should have reaped the least commodity, in so much as now
even the simplest poor man for a small piece of money, may by diligent reading
in this Book of that rare man THEODORE BEZA, atteine to a better understanding
of these holy Psalms of David, than in old time (by the report of the
ancient) the great learned men were able, by the perusing of many of the great
Doctors of the Church. Further, since we see this also by daily experience,
that what so ever we know, whether it be in flieng news touching this or that
matter, whereof man's mind is so desirous, or else even in the Arts and
Sciences which are gotten by great exercise and long practice, a man takes a
little or no pleasure in them, so long as he keeps them to himself, and
makes no man privy to them: but so soon as he utters them to others whom
he loves, then his joy and pleasure increases, and he accounts his own
knowledge so much the greater, the more that he has participated it unto
other. Even so this Translator, having viewed this Book through out, could not
be silent, but receiving so great comforts himself thereby, took in hand (God
giving thereto good success) to make it manifest also to the common sort, that
they might al rejoice together in the Lord, having found so precious a jewel,
which has before time been hid from our forefathers, and is in our days
revealed unto us by the goodness of God. And he thinks his labor well
bestowed, and his knowledge and comfort greatly augmented, and abundance of
fruit redounding to himself, if his godly purpose be well accepted, that is,
if it be generalie received, and reverently embraced (as by right it ought) of
them of whom chiefelie in his travel he had respect. Now as concerning the
matter that is translated, we need not speak many words, it of it self
being plentifully garnished with most heavenly sentences, as with most
precious margarites, and furnished with all things necessary, either for
instruction touching this present life, or for a preparation to the world to
come, is sufficiently able to commend it self to the godly Reader: only
this I say, that whereas there be two special kinds of explaning the
Scriptures, one in long Commentaries, another by Paraphrasis, that is, by
giving the full sense and meaning of the holy Ghost in other words, as
briefly as may be, this later is very ancient (as we may see by that most
ancient Chalde Paraphrast, who seems to have written before any of the
Hebrew Rabbines) and most safe to certify the consciences, when every thing
appears plainly to answer the very text and original, and must needs be
most profitable, because it gives that matter in few words, which many times
can not be learned by long Commentaries. Therefore I do exhort you, good
Christian Readers, deeply to consider, and thankefullie to receive this
Paraphrasis of that great and godly learned man THEODORE BEZA, as a most
profitable Book for the understanding of the Psalms. So shall both your own
knowledge reaped of the labors of others be much augmented, and many to take
the like pains will be encouraged, when they shall perceive a godly commodity
arising, to counteruaile and recompense their travel employed for the increase
of the kingdom of Christ, whom I beseech to direct al his poor flock in the
whole time of their pilgrimage, to cleave unto him their shepeheard and safe
keeper, and that he would send it comfort sufficient, to strengthen the hearts
of his children against all the miseries and calamities that may befall, Amen.

THE PSALMS DIGESTED INTO A brief Table, and brought to certain principal
heads, according to the direction of M. Beza.
The general matter of this whole Book of PSALMS, concerns Doctrine only,
as Psalm,
1.14.15.19.24.29.32.36.37.45.49.50.53.73.77.87.90.95.107.110.125.127.133.134.
Doctrine Political, as Psalm, 72.101. Ecclesiastical, as Psalm, 78.
Domestical, as Psalm, 128.
Prophecy, as Psalm, 2.117. Doctrine and Prophecy, as Psalm, 40.97.98.
Prayer, as Psalm,
3.5.6.7.12.13.17.20.25.26.28.31..35.38.43.44.51.54.55.56.57.59.70.71.74.79.80.83.84.85.86.88.89.109.115.119.120.123.130.132.140.141.142.143.
Prophecy and Prayer, as Psalm, 22.69. Consolation, as Psalm,
4.11.27.39.42.52.58.93.94.99.102.106.112.121.122.131.137.139.
Prayer and Consolation, as Psalm, 10. Thanksgiving, as Psalm,
8.9.21.23.30.67.75.76.81.82.92.100.103.104.105.111.113.114.116.118.124.126.129.135.136.144.145.146.147.148.149.150.
Doctrine and thanksgiving, as Psalm, 34. Thanksgiving and prophecy, as
Psa, 16.18.96. Victories or Triumphs, as Psalm, 46.48.


The residue of the Psalms, which be not particularly applied to any of the
former heads by BEZA, have this relation by TREMELLIVS, to Doctrine, 62.91.
Prayer and Doctrine, 63.64. Prayer, 60.61.108. Prayer and Praise, 41.138.
Praise, 65. Thanksgiving and Praise, 66.


AWAY FRO ME, YE WICKED; FOR I WILL KEEP THE COMMANDMENTS OF MY GOD. Psalm, 119,
verse. ii5


THE PSALMS OF the princely Prophet David, as they are set forth by that
most excellent man of this age Theodore Beza.
PSALM. I.
The Argument.
This Psalm is a declaration of man's chief felicity, whereof these be the
principal points: 1 That they go far astraie from the mark of true
blessedness, as many as go the way that men commonly walk, because men are
evil of their own nature, and of evil become wicked, and at the length they
grow to be contemners of the Lord himself. 2 That we must learn that right
way of God alone, and that out of the doctrine which he has given us, wherein
we ought to meditate day and night. 3 That very many and mighty storms and
tempests do assail him, which is entered into this way: but he is like a
goodly fair tree, planted by the river of waters, which being watered with
continual moistnes, is always green, and brings forth fruit in due season,
and al things turn to his commodity. 4 On the contrary part, that the wicked
are like unto chafe, which even the least blast of wind scatters abroad. 5
That then this difference shall truly appear, when God sitting on his
judgment seat, shall give unto the just eternal bliss and felicity: but as
for other, they shall not be able to abide the sight of the Judge, neither shall
they stand in the assembly of the righteous. 6 That it stands for a
certainty, that God is just, and therefore aloweth the manners of the godly:
but the way of the wicked brings them to everlasting destruction.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BLESSED is the man that neither asks counsel of evil men for the framing
of his life, nor stands in that way that is used of the wicked, nor sits
with those that deride the Lord.

2 But whose whole delight is fixed in the law of the Lord, the which he
considers in his mind day and night.

3 Such one is like to a tree planted by the river of waters, which bears
fruit in due season, and never fades or corrupts: and whatsoever he does,
has a prosperous end and success.

4 The wicked are in a far other case, being like to chafe, which the wind
drives here and there.

5 For neither the ungodly shall be able to stand before God the Judge, nor the
wicked in the assembly of the righteous.

6 For God approoueth and aloweth the life of good men, but the life of the
ungodly leads them to perdition.

PSALM. II.
The Argument.
This Psalm undoubtedly is a prophecy of Christ under the figure of David,
as the Apostles do expound the same, Acts 4, 15. and 5, 33. and Hebr. 1, 5.
and 5, 5. declaring and prophesieng, that like as David, after many and long
battles, at the length atteined the kingdom promised, the borders thereof
being far abroad dilated: even so is Christ very God and very man,
appointed by his father to be the king of the whole world. Yet shall al sorts of
men, high and low, conspire and band themselves together to hinder that
decree: but in a moment they shall be overcome, and he shall be crowned in the
very city of Jerusalem, even upon the throne of his cross, and shall arise
again and overcome death, and shall spread the borders of his Empire to the
uttermost coasts of the world. Wherefore they shall al perish, who so ever shall
not willingly come under his obedience: and they shall be most blessed, who
shall embrace him with due reverence. This Psalm then does apperteine to every
member of the Church, in as much as all the godly must be conformed to Christ
their head.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WHY do the heathen rage, and the people mutter vain things?

2 Why do the Kings and earthly Lords assemble, and the Princes consult
against the Lord, and against the King that he has appointed?

3 Let us break their bonds, say they, and shake off their yoke.

4 But he that inhabiteth the heavens, derideth them: the Lord, I say, will
mock them and deride them.

5 Then in his wrath will he call unto them, and terrify them in great rage.

6 For I, shall he say, have anointed this my King to reign upon my holy
mount Sion.

7 And the King shall say again, I will declare what the Lord has decreed of
me, when he thus spoke, Thou art my son indeed, this day have I begotten
thee.

8 Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession.

9 Thou shall break them with an iron scepter, and crush them into pieces like
potsheards.

10 Now therefore be wise, o ye Kings: be learned, o ye Judges of the earth.

11 Worship the Lord, and do him reverence, and rejoice in him with fear and
trembling.

12 Worship this his son, least he be angry, and ye suddenly perish, even
when his wrath shall flame forth: o then shall they be blessed that trust in him!

PSALM. III.
The Argument.
This third Psalm was made by David, when by the sudden conspiracy of his
son Absalom, being driven forth of his city and kingdom, he seems
utterly undone: and he teaches by his example, that even then, when God does
punish our sins, yet we must call upon him with earnestnes and faithful
confidence, even in our most extreme dangers, resting partly upon his power,
partly upon his love declared unto us in the Gospel.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 HOW many do vex and trouble me, o Lord? how many do rise up against me?

2 How many do say of me? His God can not help him.

3 But thou Lord art my shield on every side, my glory, and the lifter up of
my head.

4 I called upon the Lord, and he heard me out of his holy hill.

5 I lie down therefore and take my rest, and awake again: for the Lord
defends me.

6 Though many thousands be assembled, and compass me round about, I will not
be afraid.

7 Come forth, o Lord, save me, o God: doubtless thou have smitten al mine
enemies upon their jaws, and have broken their teeth.

8 It is the Lord that delivers his people, and this is now thy people that
feels thy blessing and mercy.

PSALM. IIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm does teach the whole Church, and every member of the same, that
when the wicked do rage, we ought not only not to despair, or be discouraged:
but rather boldly to reprove our adversaries, resting upon the power of God,
whereof we have had so often experience: and trusting to the goodness of our
cause, and chiefly to the most assured promises of the life to come, upon the
which we must always have our eyes bent, and never depend upon the transitory
commodities of this world.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Answer me when I cry and call, o Lord, the judge of mine innocence. O thou
that have brought me so often out of distress, have mercy upon me, and hear
my prayers.

2 O ye sons of men, how long will you labor to distaine mine honor,
reioicing in vanity, and take counsel of things that shall never come to effect?

3 For be ye sure, that it has pleased God to exalt me above others, and to
embrace me with his special grace and favor. The Lord will hear me when that I
call upon him.

4 Tremble ye therefore, and sin no more, ponder these things in your minds,
and meditate the same with your selves in your beds:

5 And worship the Lord with due worship, and trust in the Lord.

6 Many do say, How shall we grow unto wealth and riches? But we desire, o
Lord, that the light of thy countenance may shine unto us.

7 For far greater is this inward joy which thou give unto me, than is
theirs, when their vintage and harvest are most plentious.

8 I will therefore quietly lie down and take my rest, for thou only, o Lord,
do keep me in saftie.

PSALM. V.
The Argument.
This Psalm is also a prayer, and teaches these rules of prayer, when any is
unjustly afflicted. That is to say, that we must pray earnestly, and set
this against al doubt of Gods good will toward us, or of his power, that he is
our God and our King: and our impatience is to be bridled with this
consideration, that the nature of God can not suffer the wicked unpunished:
wherefore the more cruel that the enemies appear, the more near and more
certain is their destruction. Finally, that we ought not herein to consider
the punishment of our enemies, neither our own commodities: but only the
glory of God in our prayers, as he for this cause will not fail to bless us.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Hear what I say, o Lord, understand mine inward meditation.

2 Give care unto my cry, my King and my God: for thou art he to whom I do
present my prayers.

3 Hear my voice earelie in the morning: for daily in the morning will I
prepare my self to pray unto thee, and as out of a watch tower wait for thee.

4 For thou art not he, o GOD, which delightest in wickedness, neither will thou
allow any wicked person.

5 The proud shall not stand in thy presence, thou hate al them that are given
to wickedness.

6 Thou destroiest al liers, and abhorrest, o Lord, all the cruel and deceitful
persons

7 Wherefore I trusting in the greatness of thy goodness, will enter into thy
palace, and I will worship thee in thy holy place with fear.

8 Therefore thou o merciful deliverer of al thine, rid me that am oppressed
from mine enemies, and make straight the way wherein I may walk safely
before thee.

9 For none of them does speak any thing sincerely and vprightlie, they have
a thousand fetches in their hearts to do hurt, their throat is like an open
sepulcher, their tongue with fair words does only flatter.

10 Condemn them, o Lord, and cause them to fail of their purposes: cast them
down for the multitude of their wickedness, and their rebellion against thee.

11 Then shall they al rejoice that fly unto thee for succor, and in that thou
do defend them, they shall triumph for ever: and all that fear thy name shall
praise thee with joy.

12 Because thou have showed thy favor to the innocent, o Lord: and have
defended him with the shield of thy mercy.

PSALM. VI.
The Argument.
This Psalm contains a prayer of a diverse argument from the former. For
before was described the conflict of the godly vexed unjustly by men only:
but here is an example set forth of a man so sore oppressed of his enemies,
that he wresteleth principally with sin and death, and with the very sense
and feeling of Gods wrath: the which battle is far the greatest and most
dangerous. And these things are chiefly to be noted in this Psalm, that the
fruit of sin is most bitter, wounding most greeuouslie both soul and body:
and that the remnants of sin do still remain in the very saints, for the
which God does chastise them sometimes most severely: and that there is no
remedy left, but this only against this incurable wound, that is, the free
mercy of God in Christ: and that the saints are brought unto this grace, by an
earnest abasing, and casting down of themselves with a true knowledging of
sin, that they may obtain forgiveness in Christ, apprehended by faith, by
fervent and continual prayer. Finalie, that all this conflict shall turn in the
end to the glory of God, and most great commodity of the saints, so that the
other part of repentance, which is the amendment of life do follow: and that we
must desire to be delivered from those evils, to this end, that we may be the
instruments to set forth the praise of God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath.

2 Have mercy upon me, o Lord, that am utterly without al strength, heal me,
o Lord, for my very bones are shaken:

3 Yea, and my soul is utterly amazed, but thou, o Lord, how long?

4 Turn again, o Lord, and behold me, deliver my soul, save me of thy free
mercy.

5 For the dead can not remember thee, neither can he set forth thy praise in
the grave.

6 I am weary with sighing, my bed swimmeth every night washed with my tears.

7 Sorrow does consume my face, I wax wrinkled and old, by reason of the
miseries wherewith I am oppressed.

8 Hence from me al ye wicked, for the Lord has heard my lamentable cry.

9 The Lord, I say, b^^h heard my prayer, the Lord has received me his humble
suppliant.

10 Let al mine enemies be ashamed and dismayed, and fly away suddenly
confounded.

PSALM. VII.
The Argument.
Whereas reprochful slanders do most trouble men, so that it is hard for them
therein to bridle their anger, and other evils that follow, especialie when we
can find no comfort in the lawful defense of the magistrate, we are taught in
this Psalm to set the defense of God against men: but so, that we commit
without al outrage of affections, the defense of our innocence unto God alone,
the most severe punisher of slanderous tongues. And the circumstances and
causes of the writing of this Psalm are diligently to be considered, whether
it be referred to Saul, or to Semei: which history is written 2. Sam. 16. or
to any other of Saules kindred, that we may learn, how that in the most
grievous slanders and accusations, wherein both our good name and our life
also is dangered, that we must yet keep this moderation of mind and brideling
of our affections. And this doctrine does chiefly apperteine to the whole
Church, and the governors thereof, whom Satan and his ministers do chiefly
strike with these darts.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Trust in thee, o Lord my God, preserve me, and deliver me from al those
that persecute me.

2 Let him not devour me alive like a Lion, and tear me in pieces, having
none to deliver me.

3 O my Lord God, if I have committed this wickedness, if my hands have
committed any such mischief:

4 If I have rendered evil to any man, yea if I have not delivered this same
man from danger that does persecute me without any cause:

5 Let the enemy pursue me unto death, let him take me and cast me down, and
spoil me of my life, and bury al mine honor and credit with me.

6 Arise, o Lord, in thine anger, and come down with thy power against al mine
enemies: awake, o Lord, for my sake, to execute that judgment that thou have
appointed.

7 Let the assembly of people come about thee, and turn thee unto them from
thine high throne.

8 Lord execute judgment among the people, judge me, o Lord, even as I am
innocent and giltles.

9 Let the wickedness of the wicked I beseech thee come to an end, and establish
the just. For thou, o just God, do search the hearts and inward thoughts of
man.

10 My defense is in my God, who defends the upright in heart.

11 God does deliver the just, and the same God is daily angry.

12 So that unless this wicked man repent, God has sharpened his sword, he
has bent his bow and made it ready.

13 He has also prepared his deadly weapons, and shoots his arrows against
them that do so hotly persecute me.

14 Behold he traueleth with mischief, he has conceived within himself to
molest me, but he shall bring forth nothing.

15 He has dug a deep pit, but he shall fall into the pit that he has
dug.

16 The evil that he has devised against me, shall fall upon his own head, and
the hurt that he has wrought against me, shall fall upon his own pate.

17 I will praise the Lord as he justly deserves, and I will sing praise to the
name of the Lord most high.

PSALM. VIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm is a thanksgiving unto God for two most excellent benefits
bestowed upon mankind, that is, for our creation in Adam, and our restoration
and redemption in Christ. And although that man, by his own fault, did fall
from that high dignity, wherein he was created: yet there do remain certain
notes and marks of that dignity and excellency, both in that he is the Lord
over all the beasts, and has a certain power of life and death over them, and
also in that singular providence wherewith God in mercy orders mankind: but
that other state whereunto the eternal son of God has exalted man's nature,
being assumpted into the unity of his person, all the infirmity thereof laid
aside, that he might make all that believe partakers of his excellent glory (to
whom only also he grants this, that in this life they should have the
light of the true wisdom, and that they may use all the creatures of God in
this world with safe conscience) is the chief end of this Psalm, as the holy
Ghost does interpret it. Matthew. 21, 15. 1. Cor. 15, 27, and Hebr. 2, 8.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord our God how excellent is thy name throughout all the earth! advancing
thy glory above the very heavens?

2 The very mouths of infants and sucklings confirm thy power, so yt al they
that oppress others, or do rise up against thee, shall come to naught.

3 For when I beheld those thy heavens the work of thy fingers, the Moon and
the Stars so cunningly set in order.

4 O what is man, say I, that thou art mindful of him! that he being borne of
mortal parents, thou should regard him!

5 Thou have made him little inferior to the Angels, and have crowned him with
glory and honor.

6 Thou have made him Lord over all the works of thine hands, thou causest al
to serve him.

7 Al sheep and cattle, and the very wild beasts.

8 The fowls fleeing in the air, and the fishes swimming in the seas.

9 O Lord our GOD how excellent is thy name throughout all the earth?

PSALM. IX.
The Argument.
The Prophet does teach the Church in this ix. Psalm continualie to give
thanks for the benefits received at Gods hands, which do testify both his
infinite power and singular favor, and by these examples both to comfort
themselves in present miseries, and to confirm them against imminent
calamities, which will assured he fall upon al them that vex the Church.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Will praise the Lord with my whole heart, and I will show forth al his
marvelous works.

2 I will be ioiful and rejoice in thee, I will sing unto thy name, o God most
high.

3 For that mine enemies are turned back, are fallen down, and perish at thy
presence.

4 For thou have maintained the right of my cause, and sitting upon thy throne
of judgment, thou have declared thy self to be a just judge.

5 Thou have rebuked the multitude of the heathen, and thou have destroyed them
for ever.

6 O enemy, the destructions that thou did threaten, do no where appear,
(thou say forsooth) that thou will destroy cities, and the memory of the
inhabitants shall together be abolished with them.

7 But the Lord has an everlasting dominion, and sits always to give unto
every man his due right.

8 It is he only that rules the whole world righteouslie, and governs the
people with equity.

9 He is an high tower to the oppressed, and a safe refuge to the afflicted.

10 Wherefore all that know thy name will trust in thee, for thou never
forsakest, o Lord, them that seek unto thee.

11 Sing praises to the Lord which dwells in Zion, declare unto the people
his worthy acts.

12 For he makes inquisition for bloudshead and murder, never unmindful of
his people, neither forgets he the cry of the oppressed.

13 Have mercy upon me o Lord, o thou that have delivered me from deaths
door, see what violence mine enemies do use against me.

14 That I may show forth al thy praise, and entering into Zion may with joy
declare that thou art my savior.

15 The multitude of the enemies are drowned in the selfsame ditch, which
they have dug for me, and they are snarled in the selfsame snares the
which they have hid for me.

16 The Lord is known by executing his judgment, by catching the wicked in
their own wiles and crafts.

17 The wicked shall fall backward into hell, and al they that forget God.

18 Neither shall the poor be always forgotten, neither the hope of them that
are oppressed shall fail them for ever.

19 Rise up o Lord, let not mortal men prevail, let these wicked people be
punished by thine appointment.

20 Cast them down o Lord, let them al know that they be but men mortal.

PSALM. X.
The Argument.
The cruelty of the enemies of the Church is lively painted forth in this
Psalm, and their careless security: and they are described to be much like
the Giants called of the Poets Cyclops, yet al their enterprises in the end
shall come to naught, because God will never forsake his Church, nor suffer them
to go unpunished.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WHY departest thou far off o Lord, and why withdrawest thou thy self when
most need is, in the time of troble and calamity?

2 The wicked with cruelty does rage against the good, cause them to be snared
in their own crafty counsels.

3 For the wicked delights in his own lusts, and the covetous man does
therein count himself blessed, and contemns God himself.

4 He walks with a proud countenance, and cares for nothing, and thinks
alwaie that there is no God.

5 Al things fall out prosperously unto him, he puts away thy judgments
far from his sight, he casts down his adversaries as with his only
breath.

6 He thinks in his heart alwaie that he shall never be moved, neither suffer
any adversity.

7 His mouth is full of cursing, grief and injury do lie under his tongue.

8 He lies in wait in the villages to kill the innocent in secret places, and
with glieng eyes he watches for the succourlesse.

9 He lies in wait in secret, as the Lion does in his den, he lies in
wait (I say) that he may spoil the poor drawn into his net.

10 He crowcheth and lies down, so that heaps of the poor fall as a pray
into hi^ teeth and nails.

11 He imagines with himself, that God forgets these things, and does not
behold them, or at the least does not always mark them.

12 Rise up o Lord, lift up thine hand, o most mighty, and forget not the
poor.

13 For why should the wicked advance himself against God, persuading
himself that thou will never call these things to accounts?

14 But thou surely do behold these things, thou do observe, if any man
hurt or vex an other, that thou may apprehend him, and set him before thy
judgment seat: the poor do rest upon thee, and thou have taken upon thee to
defend the fatherles.

15 Break thou the power of this malicious and wicked person search out his
wickedness, that he being destroyed suddenly be seen no more.

16 God the eternal King will cast down and destroy the wicked out of his land.

17 O Lord thou hear the desires of the poor, thou comfortest their heart,
thou bendest thine ear unto them.

18 Deliver the fatherles and the oppressed, least these earthly wretches do
exercise a continual tyranny over them.

PSALM. XI.
The Argument.
The Prophet does here teach, that the godly are in this world like unto
birds, which are compelled to wander to and fro without certain habitation,
for the foulers snares: yet are not they to be heard, which think that a man
should leave his calling, either imagining that things are lead by fortune, or
that the godly otherways should perish. For the end will declare it self,
that al and every particular thing is governed by Gods providence, who will
never forsake them that trust in him, neither will suffer them unpunished that
despise him. And it seems that David made this Psalm, when the courtiers
labored, under the color of friendship, to drive him out of the Court, as
though otherways he should be slain by Saul: the which thing he counted not
meet to do, unless he were constrained by extreme necessity.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 IN the Lord put I my trust, how say ye then, as men careful for my life,
Flee away into your mountains.

2 For lo, say ye, the wicked have bent their bow, and have laid their
arrows upon their string, to shoot at those privily that are of upright
heart.

3 And whereas the very foundations are shaken, what can the righteous do?

4 The Lord sits in his holy temple, the Lords throne is in the heavens,
his eyes do behold al things, and he tries mortal men with his eye lids.

5 The Lord tries both the good and the bad, and he utterly hates and
abhors him that is given to wickedness.

6 He will rain upon the wicked, coals, fire, and brimstone, and stormy
tempests, this is their portion appointed.

7 For the just God loves righteousness, and he always beholds them that do
right.

PSALM. XII.
The Argument.
When the Church is sometime brought into this extremity, that al men may be
bold to do al things, either by force or by craft, so that al things may seem
desperate, this Psalm does teach us notwithstanding, to call upon God with
assured confidence. For seeing that both his will and his promises are most
certain, we must needs conclude, that he does hear the sighings of them that
are his, whom he will comfort in due time, and likewise that he well knows the
wickedness of the wicked, which he will avenge at his good time.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Help o Lord our savior, for there is not a godly man left, and the
faithful are failed from among the children of men.

2 They speak deceitfullie every one to another, even though he be his
friend, flattering with their words, with double and deceitful hearts.

3 Cut off, o Lord, these flattering tongues, boasting themselves so proudly.

4 They say, We can bring to pass what we will with our tongues, we may speak
what we list, who is Lord over us?

5 But the Lord now at the length says, I will rise up for these so pitifully
oppressed, and for the mourning of the miserable, and I will set in safety
those that they have snared.

6 The words of the Lord are pure words, even as the silver tried and fined
seven fold.

7 Therefore o Lord keep them every one, and preserve them for ever from this
wicked kind of men.

8 For the wicked do wander on every side, when the worst men are exalted into
the highest place of honor.

PSALM. XIII.
The Argument.
The Prophet does teach us, the more desperate that the state of the Church is
in this world, the more earnestly must we pray unto God, and believe in him
more steadfastly, for that the prayers of the Saints shall never be made in
vain.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 HOw long o Lord will thou forget me? how long will thou turn thy face from
me?

2 How long shall I carefully consult with my self, and torment my soul? how
long shall mine enemy gape over my head?

3 Behold me, and hear me, o my God, restore lights unto mine eyes, that I
sleep not in death.

4 Least mine enemy say, that he has overcome me, and they that oppress me,
rejoice that I am fallen.

5 But I trust in thy mercy, assured that this my heart at the length being
delivered by thee, shall be replenished with joy, and I will praise thee o Lord,
of whose loving kindness I have had so good experience.

PSALM. XIIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm sets forth a most sorrowful description of the natural man, or
of the man not regenerate, as Paul himself does interpret it, Romans 3.10. The
which corruption both of the understanding and of the will, does chiefelie utter
it self in that deadly hatered, which has bin from the beginning, whereby
the world does persecute the Church. Howbeit, the Prophet bids the true
Jsrael to be of good courage, resting upon the hope of the coming of the
Messiah. Wherefore we ought much more to be of good comfort, seeing that Christ
is come already, and has fulfilled the whole mystery of our salvation: whose
latter coming yet we do look for with the old fathers, when at the length we
shall be brought home into our own true undoubted country.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THAT men are so doting mad, to persuade themselves that there is no God, it
is manifest hereby, that they are al so wicked: al do make themselves
abominable, and not one of them does lead his life aright.

2 The Lord himself, from whom nothing is hid, beholding men from heaven, to
see if any would know him, or seek after him,

3 Does find, that al are turned away from him, that they are altogether
filthy, and that there is not one at al which orders his life aright.

4 Are not these mischievous men altogether mad, which devour the holy people
of God, as it were bread, and never call upon God?

5 But the time will come, when they shall be as fearful as they are now
careless. For God does defend the generation of the just.

6 You make a mock at the counsel of the poor, whom you oppress: but the
Lord is their refuge.

7 Oh that now at the length that savior of Israel would come forth out of
Zion! for then in deed Jacob should rejoice, then shall Israel be full of joy,
when the Lord shall bring again his captives.

PSALM. XV.
The Argument.
The Prophet having declared in the former Psalm the manifest and apparent
enemies of the Church, now he shows who those be that are judged of God: the
true Citizens or inhabitants of the Church, or of the eternal kingdom of
heaven, and such as shall never be cast out, opposing them against hypocrites,
who though they be conversant in the very bosom of the Church, and that
sometime also they have authority and government in the same, yet are they
not of the Church, howsoever they both deceive themselves with a false opinion
of godliness, and other with a lieng show of religion. He teaches therefore,
that the true worshippers of God are not discerned by those things that are
common to good and evil men, that is to say, by the observation of the outward
worship, but by those things that are only proper to good men, that is to
say, by an upright mind to God, and an upright dealing toward men without al
dissimulation, both the which they must testify with an holy and just life.
Finalie, he teaches certain precepts of an holy and just life after this
sort, that a man must be far from al theft and deceit, that he may slander no
man, to abhor from hurting any man, to hate false accusations, to detest the
wicked, to join himself with those that fear GOD, to set more by his oath,
than by all the world, never to seek gain by the damage of an other, to
exercise judgment incorruptlie: finalie, he adds a sure and evident promise,
that they shall never be forsaken of God, but shall have everlasting felicity
with him, who so ever do keep this course of life.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Pray thee o Lord, which of so many as bear a room in thy tabernacle,
shall remain for ever in thy holy hill?

2 He that walks with an upright heart, and works righteousness without al
deceit.

3 Which slandereth not with his tongue, which neither hurts his neighbor by
open violence, nor by craft.

4 Who abhors the wicked, and makes much of them that fear GOD, who will
rather willingly suffer damage, than to break his promise.

5 Which does not lend his money to the hinderance of an other, neither
condemns the innocent being corrupt by reward.

6 Who so ever thus does behave himself, he shall enioie most certain and
unchangeable bliss and felicity.

PSALM. XVI.
The Argument.
David in this Psalm, being as it were ravished in spirit, acknowledges the
kingdom which he enioied, to be given him of God without his deserving, by
whose (...) help he was able to rule and govern it orderly and rightly.
Furthermore, whereas men, for the most part, are wont to abuse such dominion
unto riot, he sets before him two far other marks, that is, the true and
earnest restoring of the worship of God, by taking away al show of idolworship:
secondly, a careful defense of the godly. Then he witnesses that he is
mindful of another everlasting kingdom, promised unto him, and that he will
ever turn his eyes unto it even in very death, and so by this hope he will go
down comfortablie into the very grave. For he trusting upon the power of
Messiah, which must die in deed, but shall live again before he feel any
corruption in the grave, so also shall he himself rise again, and be made
partaker of his eternal blessedness. Therefore this Psalm, amongst others, is
plainly written by the spirit of proph^sie. For it contriueth an excellent
doctrine of the original of magistrates, of their authority and office, and
does manifestly reprove the Pharisaical doctrine of the merit of works, even
following faith: as also it describes Christ's resurrection and his power, in
raising us again from death (as Peter does interpret it, Acts 2.25. and
Paul, Acts 13.34.) not as a Prophet, but as an Evangelist. And where he
calls Messiah Chasid, that is (as I interpret it,) The man upon whom the
father has powered forth most abundantly al his mercy and bounty which we
draw out of him alone by faith, he seems by one word to have contained the
sum of the doctrine of the Gospel.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Preserve me o Lord, for thou art he in whom I do trust. O my soul say thus
unto the Lord.

2 Thou verelie art my Lord, yet am I able to do nothing that can profit thee.

3 But I do most gladly wait, how I may comfort those saints and excellent
men, which are with me upon the earth.

4 Doubtless they are most miserable that seek to any other God, be it far
from me therefore that I should be partaker of their cruel and bloody
sacrifices, the which I am afraid once to name with my mouth.

5 Thou o Lord art my portion, thou art my wages, thou alone art unto me al
sufficient.

6 And surely a most pleasant place, and a most beautiful portion of
inheritance is fallen unto me.

7 I do thank thee o Lord, and will give thanks unto thee, for that thou have
given me this counsel, and because thou do teach me inwardly every night.

8 I have thee o Lord, and will have thee before mine eyes: for so long as thou
stand by me, I shall not be moved.

9 Therefore my heart leapeth, and my tongue reioiceth: yea, and this same my
body, being in security, does not fear very death.

10 For thou will not leave me in the grave, because thou will not suffer thy
most dear beloved, upon whom thou have powered forth al thy bountiful mercy,
to feel corruption.

11 Thou will open unto me the way to that true life: for the joy wherewith
the mind can rightly be satiate, is set in the sight of thy countenance, and
it belongs only unto thee, to grant everlasting joy.

PSALM. XVII.
The Argument.
This Psalm does teach us, when the tyrants do persecute either the religion
it self, or the godly professors of the same, that we should yet keep a safe
conscience, and pray to God for deliverance. It teaches also that thing,
which Christ declares in the parable or history of that glutton and poor
Lazarus full of sores, that is, that the wicked rich men are fed in this life,
but in the other they shall perish: howbeit on the contrary, the Saints are
here pressed with miseries, that they may learn to hope for better things,
which hope shall never deceive them.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Hear o Lord that which is just, hearken unto my cry, bend thine ears unto
my prayers, which I power forth of an unfeigned heart.

2 Let thy sentence be for me from thy judgment seat, and declare that thou
alowest the things that are right.

3 For thou thy self have searched my heart in the night, thou have tried me,
and have found no fault in me, nor that I am otherwise minded toward them,
than my mouth does testify.

4 Concerning these men, I have so behaved my self as thou command, I have
carefully avoided the path that the oppressors tread.

5 Strengthen thou me therefore which walk in thy ways, that in my walking I
do not wander.

6 I call upon thee, hear me my God, give attentive ear, and hearken unto my
words.

7 Show forth all that thy marvelous mercy, thou that art the savior of them
that trust in thee, against such as stand up against thy power.

8 Keep me as the apple of the eye, and defend me under the shadow of thy
wings.

9 Against those wicked men that would destroy me, the enemies I say that
gape over me, with such greedines round about.

10 Fatnes covers their eyes, and they speak cruelly.

11 They watch our steps on every side, having their eyes only bent how they
may cast us down to the ground.

12 For he is like a Lion gaping for his pray, and like a Lions whelpe, lieng
in wait in his den.

13 But come thou forth o Lord, that thou may prevent him, and cast him
down, and preserve my life delivered from this wicked man, by thy sword.

14 Deliver me I say, by thy hand o Lord, from these mortal men, these mortal
men I say, that flourish so long, which think of nothing, but of this life,
whose life thou do so fill, even as it were with delicates drawn out of thy
store, that they have abundance to leave to their children, and also to their
posterity.

15 But I now being unjustly oppressed of him, shall once have the full fruition
of thy countenance, and when I shall awake and behold thee, I shall be satisfied.

PSALM. XVIII.
The Argument.
At what time this triumphant song was written by David, it appears by 2.
Samuel 22. and by the plain and evident title of the same, when he declared,
after he had overcome al his enemies, and had not only established his
kingdom in his own country, but far abroad in other places, that he was
bent upon this thing only, to declare that he reigned not for his own cause,
but for the glory of God alone. And we must needs grant this, that we have
no writing extant of any Poet, that flourished most in wit and eloquence, to
be compared with this Psalm, if we do but only look to the phrase, But
concerning the matter it self, he so describes those his so dangerous perils,
that he that reads them, shall think himself almost to behold the things
with his eyes. And so does he paint forth the glory of God in executing
judgment, and his divine Majesty, with such a high style, that he that
reads it, may thank the heavens and the earth yet still to shake. And he does
so set forth his victories, that we may think we see his triumphs before our
eyes. And he does so attribute those things only unto GOD, that he takes no
praise at al to himself. And also being assured of his prophetical spirit,
that this kingdom, how flourishing so ever, was but only a figure and pattern
of that eternal kingdom of Messiah, who should be borne of him: therefore
does he extend his speech thereunto, and prophesies that al people of the
earth shall receive him for their King, as the Apostle Paul does interpret it,
Romans 15.9, 10, 11, 12.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord my strength, I do love thee from the bottom of my heart.

2 The Lord is my rock and my fortress, my deliverer, my God, my mount, my
refuge, my shield, the horn wherewith I drive away the enemy, and my high
tower of defense.

3 I have praised the Lord, and called upon him, and he has delivered me from
al mine enemies.

4 The bands of death had compassed me round about and bound me, most wicked
men like most raging floods made me afraid, enuironing me round about.

5 I did lie as it were wrapped in my winding sheet, even snarled with the
snares of death.

6 I called upon the Lord in these extremities, I called upon my God I say,
and he heard my voice out of his high palace, and received into his ears the
cry that I made unto him.

7 Then began the earth to quake and tremble, the very foundations of the
mountains to shake and shudder.

8 And he breathed out smoke from his nostrels, spitting forth fire out of his
mouth: yea, casting forth even coals of fire.

9 He bowed the heavens and came down, the darkness being spread al abroad
under his feet.

10 He did ride upon the wings of the Angels, and was carried with the wings of
the wind.

11 Black darkness environed his tabernacle round about, and he was covered
with most dark and thick clouds.

12 Until his glistering brightness did break those clouds, and the flames of
fire did flash on every side.

13 At the length he thundered from heaven, and filled al places with his
mighty sounding voice, and with hailestones and lightnings.

14 He shot forth his fiery darts, and increasing his lightnings, he
terrified mine enemies and destroyed them.

15 Then the deep bottomes of the waters appeared, and the foundations of the
world were discovered at thy rebuke o Lord, and at the blustering wind of thy
wrath.

16 So then has he, stretching his right hand down from the heaven, taken me
and drawn me out of the bottom of the deep waters.

17 From that mighty enemy I say, and from the other enemies, by whose power
I was oppressed.

18 For they verily had almost cast me down and destroyed me at the sudden,
but he was my staff that stayed me.

19 And he has drawn me out of these straights, and placed me in an open and
large place, because it so pleased him, without my deserving, to favor me.

20 For he had regard in deed of me that was oppressed of these men without
cause, and granted these things to me being guiltles.

21 For I have followed the way that the Lord has appointed me, howsoever
these men vexed me, neither could I be drawn by any of their injuries, that I
should fail from my God as the wicked use.

22 For I had al his laws before mine eyes, neither did I put his statutes
forth of my sight.

23 But I behaved my self without hypocrisy with him, neither did I follow
mine affections, which else would easily have carried me forth of the way.

24 Therefore had the Lord regard of me that was oppressed of them without any
cause, and favored me the innocent party.

25 For thou o Lord wilt show thy self good unto the good, and upright to
them that deal vprightlie.

26 And as thou show thy self sincere with them that deal sincerely, so
the crafty men shall perceive thee to be more cunning.

27 For although many times thy servants be sore vexed, yet do thou
preserve them, and do cast down those that behave themselves so proudly.

28 Hence have I my light, whereby thou causest me to shine, and driuest away
my darkness.

29 Thou have made me to overcome these dangers easily, and to leap over the
walls and lets that were in my way.

30 For the way whereby God leads us is plain, the word of God is most
pure, the Lord does defend all that trust in him as with a shield.

31 For who is God but the Lord? and who is mighty but our God only?

32 He has girded me with power, and has made my way safe.

33 He has made me as swift as the Hindes, and has placed me in most high and
safe places.

34 He has taught mine hands to fight, and he has given me so great strength,
that I am able to break a bow of brass with these mine arms.

35 Thou have preserved me with the protection of thy shield, and thou have
stayed me with thy right hand when I was ready to fall, through thy great
mercy.

36 Thou have caused me to go safely without danger, and thou have stayed my
sliding steps.

37 Therefore have I pursued mine enemies, and taken them, and I have not
turned back, til I have destroyed them.

38 I have so beaten them down, and trodden them under foot, that they were
not able to raise themselves again.

39 For thou verelie have given me such strength, that they which have risen
against me, have fallen headlong at my feet.

40 Thou have given me power to strike off their heads, and that I might
destroy them that pursued me.

41 Yet Lord I grant they cried unto thee, but thou have not delivered them,
neither would hear their cry.

42 Therefore did I beat them small like the dust, that the wind scatters
abroad: and I did tread them like the mire, which is trampled under the feet
of them that walk the streets.

43 Yea also thou have delivered me from domestical and inward troubles, and
thou have given me dominion over ye nations that I never knew before.

44 Unknown people I say obey my commandment, and strangers be compelled for
fear to submit themselves unto me.

45 The hearts of the strangers have failed, so that they fall down for fear
in their strongest forts.

46 Let the Lord live, and let him that is my defense be knowledged and
worshipped of al, as he worthily deserves: let God my deliverer be praised
euerie-where.

47 Even God I say, who is mine aduenger, who has subdued so many people
under me.

48 Thou have saved me from mine enemies, thou have delivered me from them that
rose up against me, especialie from that cruel man.

49 Therefore will I praise thee, even among the profane nations, and I will
sing unto thy majesty.

50 For verelie thou have marvelously preserved thy king, and not only David
himself whom thou have anointed king, but also thou have showed singular
favor to his seed that shall remain for ever.

PSALM. XIX.
The Argument.
This Psalm does teach us the sum of al true divinity, the end whereof is,
that we have that knowledge both of God himself, and of the worship due unto
him, whereby we may become partakers of everlasting life. Wherefore he says,
that men are taught the glory and majesty of God, that is (as Paul
interprets it, Romans 1.10.) his eternal power and godhead, by the beholding of
the heavens, by the orderly changes of days and nights, but specialie by the
golden beauty of the Sun, which shines over the whole world with an
unspeakable course, so that no man can pretend the ignorance thereof. The
which place the Apostle treats, both in that Chapter cited before, and also
in the Acts, 17.27. But the Prophet adds, that men do lack a far more
perfect declaration, which may show forth both those same things, and besides
them the will of God: to conclude, which may quiet our consciences that are
greeuouslie vexed with the deadly wound of our sins, as the Apostle teaches
plentifully 1. Cor. 1.21. and afterward. And he affirms that these things
are not taught us any otherwhere, than by that doctrine which is given us of
him from the heavens, it printing in our hearts that true wisdom, not in
words alone, but in deed also, that it might comfort us with everlasting
gladness. And seeing this power belongs wholly to the Gospel, it is manifest
that David speaks principalie of this part of the written word of God, and
that he treats of that free forgiveness of sins, which at that time was
shadowed with the ceremonies of the law, but now is expounded and uttered unto
us most fully and manifestly, both by Christ himself, and also by the
writings of the Apostles.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THE heavens declare the glory of God, and this wide stretched frame of the
heavenly spheres, called the firmament, does plainly testify, that they
could not be created by any other but by God himself.

2 The interchangeable course of day and night, does minister occasion to
draw out the power of that most wise creator, by that most ample and never
ceasing race, as it were out of a lively ever running fountain.

3 Yea the heavens do also speak as with an high sounding voice, which may be
understood of al people, of al manner of languages.

4 For that same their most cunning workmanship, and the orderly moving by
most constant and certain spaces, wherewith chiefelie the Sun is carried
about, by that huge body compassed and covered with the heavens, as with a
tabernacle, calls as with a loud voice upon al men, from the one end of the
world to the other.

5 For the Sun it self like a bridegroom coming forth of his chamber,
glistering with gold and precious stones: or like a mighty champion stretching
himself to run his race,

6 Does run forth from the one uttermost border to the other, without any
wearines, and with a course incomprehensible, and there is none that can be hid
from his heat.

7 But we have an other far more excellent schoolemaister and teacher of
this wisdom: yea, one that is perfect in deed, even the doctrine declared
unto us from heaven, and appointed of God, which does fully restore us to
perfection. By the which the Lord has opened unto us plainly all that
appertains to our salvation, and does teach al men true wisdom, so that
they knowledging their want of wisdom, should show themselves willing to be
taught.

8 The doctrine, I say, ordained of God, which teaches the true way of
felicity plainly and evidently, and does comfort the minds with true joy,
and lighteneth the eyes of the mind with true light.

9 For this is it which declares the pure and unchangeable worship of God, and
the manner how to worship God most rightly and sincerely.

10 A thing more precious by much than al gold, how pure so ever: and more
sweet than any honey comb.

11 For hereby thy servants o Lord, are taught which way they should walk,
and they that walk this way, shall feel thee in the end most merciful.

12 But ah! who can understand his faults? wherefore I beseech thee mercifully
to deliver me from these faults, that I can not by any means understand.

13 And suffer not me thy servant to be overcome of these unbridled
affections: but rather grant that I may lead this life upright, and free from
wickedness.

14 That I neither speak any thing, nor think any thing in my heart, which
may not be acceptable unto thee in whose sight I stand, unto thee I say, o
Lord, my defender and deliverer.

PSALM. XX.
The Argument.
Here is an example of the prayer of godly subjects, for the preservation of
their magistrates, especialie in the chiefest dangers, such as this was, which
is supposed to have bin the cause why this Psalm was made, as is declared 2.
Sam. 10. and 1. Paralip. 19. Out of the which prayer these principal points of
doctrine are to be gathered. 1 That God is the author and preserver of
policies. 2 That policies are established by Gods help, not by fortune, nor by
the mere and alone wisdom of man. 3 That some kind of warfare is both just
and necessary. 4 That there is great difference betwixt the confidence and
trust of the wicked, and of the godly.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THE Lord hear thee in these dangers, and being called upon by thee, place
thee in safety.

2 The Lord come down from his sanctuary to help thee, even from ye mount Zion
to strengthen thee.

3 Let him declare that thine oblations are acceptable unto him, consuming thy
burnt offerings with fire from the heaven.

4 And grant unto thee that thy heart desires, and accomplish al thy purpose.

5 That we may triumph, being delivered by thee o Lord, and that we may
celebrate thee our God with banners displaied, which have granted all the
petitions of our king unto him.

6 For doubtless now thou have preserved in deed the king that was anointed by
thee, thou have heard him now out of thy heavenly sanctuary, and have
defended him that trusted in the power of thy right hand, which brings
salvation.

7 For they do trust in their chariots and in their horses, but we do only
remember thy name.

8 Wherefore they are broken down and fallen, but we stand upright.

9 Assist us o Savior, let that King hear us, when we call upon him.

PSALM. XXI.
The Argument.
This Psalm depends of the former, and namely it contains a thanksgiving
for a notable victory which was gotten, the which victory the Church imputes
to the bountiful clemency of God alone, who promises it the selfsame help
in all other distresses.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THou have given cause of new joy unto thy king, o Lord, which acknowledges
himself preserved by thy power, reioicing therein with all his heart.

2 For thou have given him his hearts desire, and thou have granted unto him
that which he requested in his prayers.

3 Yea, thou have prevented him with thy benefits, and thou have crowned his
head with a crown of most pure gold.

4 He required this thing only of thee, that he might escape alive and safe
from this battle, but thou have granted unto him a life that shall never fail.

5 So great glory has he atteined by this thy defense, and so great is the
glistering of this honor wherewith thou have crowned him.

6 For surely thou have made him to be a singular and everlasting example of
thy mercy to al men, and thou beholding him with thy pleasant countenance,
have wonderfully comforted him.

7 Seeing therefore the king does trust in the Lord alone, and does depend
wholly of the mercy of the most high God, surely his throne shall never be
shaken.

8 Thine hand has taken thine enemies, o King, thy right hand I say shall
apprehend thine enemies that hate thee.

9 Thou in thy wrath shall cast them into the flaming furnace, that the Lord
may consume them, and utterly destroy them by the heat of his wrath.

10 Yea, and thou shall utterly destroy their children, that they shall never
appear among men.

11 For thou art he against whom they have intended al these evils, against
whom they have invented that which they could not bring to pass.

12 Thou shall cause them to turn their backs unto thee, by directing thy
darts against their faces.

13 Grant, o Lord, that thy mighty power may appear, which we may sing
forth with thy great praise, and celebrate in Psalms.

PSALM. XXII.
The Argument.
Whereas we can never sufficiently consider that battle of Christ, whereupon
our victory depends, and wherein only we may plainly behold both how
horrible a thing it is to fall into the hand of God our judge, and how great the
mercy of God is toward his Church, and finally, how high the mystery of the
wisdom of GOD is: surely this Psalm among others is worthy never to be out
of our hands and memory. For it so painteth forth the abasing of the son of
God, that we may almost see him with our very eyes, and hear him with our
very ears, as yet hanging upon the Cross, and casting forth those most
sorrowful sighs, in that conflict with Satan, with our sins, and with death,
and as it were wrestling forth out of the very bottom of the helles:
Furthermore, this Psalm describes plainly and evidently also the famous
victory of his resurrection, and the everlasting office of the eternal Bishop
and Doctor, which he shall exercise unto the end of the world, by his
Ambassadors, for to gather his Church out of al nations, and to preserve it:
and thus do the four Evangelists interpret this Psalm in the history of
the Passion, and the Apostle also in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 MY God my God, why do thou forsake me, and withdrawest thy self so far
from my cry, that thou should not deliver me?

2 I cry, o my God, in the day time, yet do thou not hear me, although I
also cry in the night season without any ceasing.

3 Howbeit thou art that same holy God that do inhabit that sanctuary,
which is appointed for Israel to set forth thy praises therein.

4 For thou art he in whom al our fathers have set al their hope, and not
without cause: for thou have delivered them.

5 For they have cried unto thee, and thou have delivered them, neither failed
they at any time of their hope.

6 But I am so miserable, that I may be called a worm rather than a man,
euerie-where exposed to the mocking of al men, and to contempt.

7 All that behold me mocked me, and wagged their heads, skoffinglie deriding me:

8 Go to now, say they, he rested upon the Lord, let him deliver him, let him
save him, if he do so favor him.

9 But thou art he that have drawn me out of my mothers womb, and have had a
special care over me, so that thou have caused me to look up unto thee, when I
did hang on my mothers breasts.

10 So soon as I came forth into the world, I was committed unto thee, even
then thou did declare thy self to be my God.

11 Now then, when so great misery does approach unto me, be not thou far
from me, which am destitute of al manner of succor besides.

12 For mighty bulls do enuiron me, great bulls and cruel do compass me
about.

13 And they run upon me with gaping mouths like raging and roaring lions.

14 I slide away like water, al my bones are wrested out of joint, my heart
melts like wax within me.

15 All the comfortable moisture of my body is dried up, so that I am like a
dried potsheard, my tongue cleaves to the roof of my mouth, and I seem now
to lie in the dust of the grave without life.

16 Dogs stand about me, and bark against me on every side, I am compassed
about with multitudes of most wicked men, they have stricken through my hands
and my feet.

17 One might easily number all the bones of my body so stretched out, the
which thing they behold carelessly and with pleasure.

18 Moreover, they parted my garments amongst them, and cast lots for my robe.

19 But thou o Lord forsake me not, but rather thou that art my strength hasten
to help me.

20 Deliver my soul from this their rage, and rid me out of the power of these
dogs, which is forsaken of al.

21 Deliver me I say out of the jaws of the lions, and from the horns of
these most cruel beasts.

22 Thus I being preserved by thee, will declare thy renowned power (whereof I
have had experience) unto my brethren, and I will praise thee with these words
in the midst of their assembly.

23 Al ye that worship the Lord come hither, all the seed of Iakob praise him,
all the posterity of Israel, I say, glorify and reverence the Lord.

24 For he has not cast away nor despised a man most miserable of al others,
neither has he turned away his countenance from him, but rather has heard
him, when he called unto him.

25 I will praise thee, o Lord, in the most populous assembly, and I will pay
my vows in the sight of al them that fear thee.

26 Then the most miserable, whosoever they be, shall be fed with meat
abundantly: then they that seek the Lord shall be refreshed, not for a moment
only, but shall praise him, receiving the inward comfort of everlasting life.

27 Al men, even to the uttermost coasts of the earth, shall make mention of
him, and being turned unto the Lord, whom they had forgotten, al nations, I
say, shall worship thee o Lord.

28 For then shall the Lord challenge unto himself ye authority of his kingdom
over al nations.

29 Finalie, then the mightiest of al men shall hasten to his feast, and worship
him, even they that are ready to die, and whose life was thought past
recovery, shall fall down and worship him.

30 Neither shall this benefit be ended by their life, but their posterity also
shall serve the Lord, whom he will reckon in his family from age to age.

31 For one sort succeeding another, shall decla^e the righteousness of the Lord,
and they shall testify unto their posterity, that shall be borne after them,
that he only is the author of this marvelous work.

PSALM. XXIII.
The Argument.
David of a shepeheard being made a most mighty king, (contrary to the error
of the Epicures, which do dream that all that they have, comm^th unto them
either by fortune, or by their own industry, and so abuse all the good things
that they have unto al filthiness) does attribute al those things to the
liberality of God alone: using two similitudes, one of a shepeheard that
provides for his flock with great carefulnes, the which similitude is most
apt for David being once a shepeheard: and it also admonishes the kings, that
they ought to be the shepeheards and feeders of the people. The other
similitude is taken from them that keep good hospitality, which most
liberally receive those trauelers that come unto them: the which thing also
does admonish us of our state, and shows how al things are sanctified unto us
by the word of God and thanksgiving, whatsoever the Lord ministers unto us
for the use of this life. Last of al it teaches us, that we ought to rise from
those transitory benefits to those everlasting and heavenly blessings,
seeing that godliness has the promises both of this present life, and of the
life to come.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THE Lord is my shepeheard, I need not to fear any famine.

2 He lodges me in green pastures, and leads me to the pleasant rivers of
waters.

3 He restores me to life being ouertyred, and does lead me in a plain and
pleasant way, deserving thereby everlasting praise for his mercy.

4 Therefore, though I should go by most dark and dreadful valleys of death, I
will fear none evil, trusting upon the rod and shepeheards hook of my
shepeheard.

5 Thou, in the very sight of mine enemies, do prepare a deintie table for
me, thou do anoint my head with oil, and give me a full cup.

6 And surely thy goodness and mercy shall follow me, to cause me to dwell in
thy house all the days of my life.

PSALM. XXIIII.
The Argument.
This most sweet Psalm does teach us, that as God is the creator of al
things, so is he the Lord of al, howbeit that he has chosen unto himself out
of the multitude of men, some certain persons, whom only he accounts for
his subjects, and whom alone he has appointed to everlasting bliss.
Furthermore, he declares who these are, and by what works the true members of
the Church may be known, that we may understand that they are not al of the
Church, who are outwardly conversant in the Church. But because there was but
one certain nation as yet comprehended under the covenant (the Israelites I
mean) and there was but one place certain, in the which the Church was bound
to assemble (that holy mountain I mean, in the which the Temple was then to
be builded:) therefore does David chiefly make mention hereof, and does treat
by the spirit of prophecy, of the magnificent building of the Temple. Yet
does he exhort the people, that they should not only regard the outward
building, and the outward rites and sacrifices: but that they should chiefly
give their hearts unto him that promised to dwell in the Temple. And this same
doctrine does even now at this day declare the true use of the sacraments, and
does much more appertain unto us, unto whom the truth is plainly revealed,
all the shadows of the law being abolished, than it did to the old fathers.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GOD is the Lord of the earth, and of al things therein contained, even of the
whole world I say, and of all that dwell therein.

2 For it is he that built the earth upon the sea, and placed it to appear
above the floods, as we see.

3 Howbeit he has chosen unto himself a certain mountain, into the which,
lo, who shall ascend? and who shall stand in that place consecrate unto him?

4 Even he, whose hands are not polluted with wickedness, that is of a pure
heart, which gapeth not for vain things, neither swears deceitfullie.

5 Such a man shall receive blessings of the Lord abundantly, and in the end
shall find him a savior, as he, that can not lie, has promised.

6 And this is thy true seed o Iakob, even the generation of men, that seek
God, and present themselves before thee o Lord.

7 O ye gates lift up your posts! mount up, I say, ye eternal gates, that the
King of glory may enter!

8 Who is this glorious king? That same Lord strong and valiant, that mighty
warrior.

9 Lift up your head posts o ye gates! mount up, I say, you gates, that this
King of glory may enter!

10 Who is this glorious King? The Lord of hoastes, he is this King of glory*

PSALM. XXV.
The Argument.
This Psalm teaches a form of prayer daily to be used of the whole Church,
and of every one of the saints of God: wherein three things are requested
even by faith, regarding the promises already made unto us, and confirming it
self by the experience of former benefits. The first is, the free
forgiveness of sin. The second, that we may be governed by the holy Ghost,
in the whole course of our life that remains. The third, a defense from the
injuries of our enemies: the which three do answer to the petitions of the
Lords prayer, wherein we require to have our sins forgiven, and that we be
not led into temptation, and to be delivered from evil.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 UNTO thee, o Lord, I lift up my whole heart.

2 O my God, my hope is only fixed in thee, let me not be repulsed, I beseech
thee, and put to shame, and so be derided of mine enemies.

3 And surely, thou will not suffer them that depend upon thee, to be put to
shame: but rather must these faithles persons, that persecute the innocent, be
brought to shame.

4 Grant, o Lord, that I may understand in these so great perplexities and
extremities, what way thou appointest thine to walk, and teach me thy paths.

5 Guide my steps in thy truth, and teach me continualie: for thou art he, o my
God, of whom I do look faithfully for my deliverance.

6 Be mindful o Lord of thy mercies, which thou have showed so often to thy
servants, and of thy manifold goodness, which thou have declared in all ages.

7 Contrariwise, o Lord, forget all the folly of my youth, and al my
trespasses, and remember me, o Lord, of thy sin^ular mercy and goodness.

8 And why should not I thus hope? seeing the Lord is merciful and true in his
promises, therefore does he call again into the way, the sinners that go astraie.

9 He also, after they be humbled and made meet to learn, does teach them
gently and meekelie, and declares how lovingly he uses to govern his.

10 Which way so ever the Lord does lead his, his mercy appears, as also
how constantly he keeps his promise to them that keep his covenant, that he
has made with us, as the singular testimony of his mercy.

11 I beseech thee o Lord therefore, for thy great mercy, and for the honor
of thy holy name, forgive me my sins, the which I acknowledge to be great
and manifold.

12 O how happy is he that fears the Lord! for he will teach him the way
that he ought to walk.

13 His mind enioieth a continual rest, a blessing shall alwaie follow him,
whereof his posterity shall be partakers.

14 These are they, to whom the Lord does reveal his counsels, which are
otherways hid from us, even that his covenant I say, to them that fear him.

15 Wherefore I have mine eyes always bent upon the Lord alone, for he in the
end will rid my feet forth of these nets.

16 O look upon me, and have mercy upon me, for I am very miserable, and
forsaken of al.

17 Sorrows oppress my heart on every side, deliver me from these miseries.

18 Behold how miserably I am vexed and tormented, and put away my sins,
which are the very cause of al these miseries.

19 Behold how many do hate me, and how bitter hatred they bear against me.

20 Defend me and keep me from shame, for in thee only do I trust.

21 Grant that I may be preserved safe in simplicity and integrity, the
which I do wait for of thee.

22 Finalie, o God, deliver thou Israel out of al troubles.

PSALM. XXVI.
The Argument.
It is a very hard thing in the Court to retain true religion, and vprightnes
of life and conversation, chiefelie when wicked men do reign: and there
flatterers do rage, partly by open violence, partly by false accusations: and
an other sort does sing in their ears, that they must frame their wits to
serve al turns and purposes, even as the fish called Polypus does change
himself into the color of the stone whereunto he cleaves, so that some do
altogether leave their vocations, providing for their own commodities to the
great damage of the common wealth: others do by little and little fall to the
Courtly manners like the rest. And some there be, who for the wicked life of
certain others, do either abstain from the holy assemblies, or gather unto
themselves apart private conuenticles, as did the Catharians, and the
Nouatians, and many Monks that went into solitary places, and the
Anabaptists of our time. But David contrariwise, though his state was no
better in the Court of Saul, yet does he persevere in his place and vocation,
and does the more diligently frequent the holy assemblies that were polluted
with no idolatry, whiles he is driven from them by violence: neither when he
is driven thence does he repent of his constancy, but being always one man,
he does commit his cause unto God, and still continues to abhor the counsels
and the examples of the wicked, and plainly testifies that he will make a
true profession of his faith, and that he will live an upright life, resting
upon the promises of the most merciful and most mighty God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O LORD, judge thou my cause, for surely according to my power, I have
endeavored my self to walk vprightlie, and I settling al my confidence in thee,
o Lord, am minded to continue without wavering.

2 Thou o Lord prove me and try me, and search the secret of my heart.

3 Surely mine e^es are alwaie bent upon thy goodness, and I have appointed thy
truth to be the guide and leader of my life.

4 I have carefully avoided the company of these most vain men, and I have
fled away from these deceitful dealers.

5 I hate the assembly of evil men, neither do I accompany the wicked.

6 I do present my self before thine altar, not only with my hands washed in
water, but rather purified from al wickedness.

7 That I may openly set forth thy praise, and celebrate thy wonderful works.

8 For there is nothing that I love more dearly, than that temple, wherein
thou have set thy seat, even the house of thy Majesty.

9 Wrap me not in I beseech thee with these wicked persons, neither account me
with these cruel men.

10 Who do speedily put in execution their wicked devises, and whose hands are
full of bribes.

11 But I have walked vprightlie to my power, therefore have mercy upon me,
and deliver me.

12 That I do stand upright in the way, I do attribute it to thee, o Lord, and
will magnify thy name in the public congregations.

PSALM. XXVII.
The Argument.
Whether we say that David did write this Psalm, when he was now delivered,
or when he was in the midst of his dangers, it is no great matter. But here
are opened unto us, even when al things seem most desperate, three lively,
and never failing fountains, whence we may draw assured comfort. One is, to
take hold of the power of God by true faith, and oppose it against all the
bragges of the enemies. The second, a continual desire alwaie of the glory of
God, keeping evermore a safe conscience, and using diligently the means,
whereby our faith may be confirmed, that is to say, the hearing of the word
preached* and the use of the sacraments: if so be that we may have them: if
not, yet must we have a continual meditation of them. The third is, earnest
prayer, with faith and patience.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord, seeing thy will does manifestly appear, like a most bright light
unto me, in this so great darkness to deliver me, whom shall I fear? seeing my
life stands upon the strength of the Lord, of whom shall I be afraid?

2 I speak of experience: for so often as those wicked tyrants, mine enemies,
did run upon me, as though they would devour me with their teeth, they fell
down void of their purpose.

3 Hereafter therefore, though the enemies come forth with their armies set in
araie against me, yet will I stand without al fear: yea, though they enter into
battle against me, I will hereof take the occasion of more confidence.

4 Neither do I yet herein provide for mine own private commodity, but I beg
and crave this one thing of the Lord, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord,
and lead my life with him, even to spend my whole life in beholding the
beauty of the Lord, and to meditate in his holy temple.

5 For there truly, under the roose of his house, will I lie hid, when any
storm comes: in the secret place of his pauilion shall I be hid, whilst that
I be set upon an high and safe rock.

6 Yea, even now already like a conqueror I mount up, listing mine head above
mine enemies that compass me about: wherefore I will offer sacrifice ioifullie in
his tabernacle, and I will sing and praise the Lord.

7 Receive therefore, o Lord, the voice of my cry, have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

8 My heart does continualie meditate that same thy commandment, Seek ye my
face, that is, even as I now open my self: wherefore I do obeie thee, o Lord,
and I do seek thy face.

9 Turn not away o Lord, neither reject thy servant in thine anger: thou will
yet help me, leave me not, neither forsake me, o my savior.

10 Though I be destitute of al man's help: yea, even forsaken of my very
parents, yet thou, o Lord wilt succor me.

11 Teach me the way that I should walk, and make plain the pathway unto
me, against whom so many enemies do lie in wait.

12 Give me not up to the lust of mine enemies: for they are risen up against
me, which are not ashamed to lie, or to commit any wickedness.

13 Yet I trust that I shall be safe, and comfortablie enioie the Lords
benefits.

14 Go to David, wait upon the Lord with a courageous and constant heart,
wait upon the Lord I say.

PSALM. XXVIII.
The Argument.
David in this Psalm susteining the person not of a private man, but of a
public, even of a king appointed by God himself, prays for himself, and
for Gods people, with such confidence (although he could not live safely, no
not as a private person in the kingdom of Saul) that he gives thanks for his
petition granted already. And he adds certain prayers, vndoutedlie by the
spirit of prophecy, against al such as persecute the Church, not by ignorance
or sudden affection, but of set purpose and obstinate malice. Whereunto
appertain those things that are written 1. Sam. 23.17. and 24.21.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Call upon thee o Lord my defense, be not deaf at my cry, for if thou
keep silence, I shall differ nothing from them that die, and are laid in the
earth.

2 Hear my prayers therefore whilst I may cry, and regard me that stretch up
my hands to that thy most holy sanctuary.

3 Count not me o Lord amongst these wicked men, who rejoice in wickedness, who
will offer in words al duties of friendship, and to be at commandment, but in
their hearts they have most wicked devises.

4 Give unto them their worthy reward, even that which their wicked deeds
deserve: recompense them, I say, according to their desert.

5 For seeing they hinder the work that thou have determined to bring to
pass, both willingly and wittinglie, certainly thou will destroy them, o
Lord, much less will thou increase them with thy blessings.

6 I give thanks therefore unto the Lord, which has heard my prayers.

7 The Lord is my strength and my shield, this is he in whom my heart does
rest, having experience of his support, he for full conclusion comfort my
heart, him will I praise.

8 The Lord strengthens his servants, neither will thine anointed trust to
any other.

9 Deliver thy people, o God, and declare thy favor toward them, whom thou
have chosen peculiarly to be thine: feed them, and extol them up for ever.

PSALM. XXIX.
The Argument.
Whereas no men commonly use to be more proud, and to show themselves in the
end despisers of the very majesty of God, than they, to whom God has made
others subject, to be governed by them, so that they challenge unto themselves
to be honored as gods, and suppose that they may do what they lust unto
others: this Psalm teaches Kings and Princes peculiarly, by the comparison
of their power (how great soever it be) with that infinite power of GOD, which
does utter it self in the terrible thunders, and other tempests, and their
effects, to remember rather how far they are abased under his power, and of
whom and upon what condition they have received their authority, rather than
to be proud that they are above a few mortal men for a little season. Again,
seeing that the kings themselves are oftentimes sotted and demented by the
flattery of the people, he admonishes them that be of God, that they be
content to obey their magistrates, as Gods ministers: yet that they learn to
depend only of God, and to wait for all good things from him.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Ye kings, and al ye of power, give place unto the Lord, give unto the
Lord, I say, the honor of al glory and power.

2 Give unto the Lord the majesty and glory due unto his name, and fall down
and worship him in that his most beautiful temple.

3 This is that Lord, whose voice thundering forth of the midst of the waters,
does witness himself with such a loud sounding voice to be the very God of
glory, even by that voice, I say, which breaks forth of the midst of the
clouds driven by tempests.

4 The voice of the Lord is very mighty, the voice of the Lord is full of
majesty.

5 The voice of the Lord breaks the most high Ceders of Libanus.

6 And he plucketh them up by the roots, and causes them to skip like a
wanton bullock, and he causes those most mighty mountains to tremble and to
shake.

7 The voice of the Lord does cast forth fire stricken out of the very clouds.

8 The voice of the Lord does shake the horrible wilderness, and the high rocks
of the Arabians.

9 The voice of the Lord causes the hindes to cast their calves, and makes
the woods bare, by casting down their trees with terrible noise: the godly in
the mean season praising him in his temple.

10 By him comes the horrible floods of waters, but ^o, that he sits as
governor over them: for the Lord is King for ever.

11 This is he that gives power to his people, even the Lord that blesses his
people with continual benefits.

PSALM. XXX.
The Argument.
It is very probable that David made this Psalm, when Abshalom and Sheba were
slain, and he returned into the city, as it is declared, 2. Sam. 20. when he
would purge his house, and as it were consecrate it a new unto God, that was
polluted by the incest of his son, and other wickedness: wherein there
appears some ceremony to have bin used, as appears by the history of
Nehemia, in dedicating the walls of the city, and by dedicating the house,
Deuteronomy. 20, 5. And he gives great thanks therefore unto God, to whose only
mercy he does give the praise of this his restoring to his kingdom so sudden,
even done as it were in a moment. And he does also confess, that it came to
pass by his own foolish security, that GOD did break off the continuance of
public peace, and other his benefits.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Will magnify thee o Lord my deliverer, which have not suffered mine
enemies to triumph over me.

2 I have cried unto thee o Lord my God, and thou have saved me that was ready
to die.

3 Thou have delivered me o Lord, from the very grave, and have restored life
unto me, who should else have gone down into the pit.

4 Sing with me unto the Lord, al ye that are received to his mercy, and
celebrate his memory with perpetual praise.

5 For in one moment does his anger end, but his favor endures to the end of
our life: so that if we go to bed in the evening with sorrow, in the morning
comes some cause of reioicing.

6 Howbeit I sleeping in security, when I was in prosperity, did fully
think that no change could come unto me.

7 For thou o Lord assuredly had fortified my hill wonderfully of thy
singular goodness, but as soon as thou wast offended with my foolish security,
thou turnedst away thy face from me, and I was suddenly stricken, and fell
down.

8 Then I called again upon thee o Lord, and prayed with these words:

9 I beseech thee o Lord, if I be slain, and go down into the grave, what
good will come thereof? can this my body made dust, sing praise unto thee? or
can it declare that thy constancy in performing of thy promises?

10 O Lord hear me, have mercy upon me, o Lord help me.

11 And lo, thou have turned this my mourning into most full joy, so that
suddenly casting away sackcloth, I came forth most ioifullie.

12 Therefore this tongue shall never cease to sing thy praise, but shall be
wholly consecrate to set forth thy glory: o Lord my God I will praise thee, I
say, for ever.

PSALM. XXXI.
The Argument.
Even as there be diverse and sundry circumstances of the calamities and
afflictions, whereby God does try and chasten his servants: so is it
necessary in the reading of the Psalms, in the which are contained prayers
framed and set down by the holy Ghost, to consider what is common to them al,
and what is peculiar and proper to every one, that we may use them aptly to
our commodity. This Psalm then was written by David, as it is manifest, in
respect of that time, when he being a little before in great authority and
dignity, and was next unto king Saul in the kingdom, was suddenly brought
into extreme misery by the unjust hatered of the king, and the envy of
certain that stirred up the kings rage against him: by the which and such like
sudden alterations, an infinite number of men, in other things very constant,
being suddenly stricken, have taken most vile counsels, and fallen most
shamefullie, as it appears by histories. But David on the contrary part
confessing his double fault, both that he did forget this mutabilitie and
unstableness of the wo^^^, when he was in his prosperity, and that he did
almost despair when this sudden storm of adversity came upon him, does pray
unto God so much the more earnestly, trusting upon the promises which he had
learned of Samuel, and of his own upright conscience. Furthermore, he does set
before him those most excellent promises of God, confirmed by most manifold and
plain examples, whereby God does show himself then to have most care for his
servants, when things seem in deed most desperate. Finally, he gives
thanks unto God, that he may teach all the godly, by his example, that such
manner of prayers are heard, whether it were that he was by his faith assured
that it should so come to pass as he prayed, wherein he was nothing deceived:
either that he did write this Psalm after his deliverance.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THou art he o Lord, to whom I fly for refuge, deliver me I beseech thee
from this horrible shame, even for that thy righteousness, whereby thou always
performest thy promises, deliver me.

2 Hear me and make haste to deliver me, for in thee alone is al my safety,
and al my defense is set in thee.

3 Thou art my fort and most strong rock of defense I say, lead me therefore
and guide me through the mids of these stormy tempests, not for my
deserving, but for thine own glory sake.

4 Grant that I may escape forth of the net that they have laid privily for
to take me, for I trust only in thy power.

5 I commend my soul into thy hands, whom I have alwaie to be my savior, and
mindful of thy promise.

6 Thou also can testify again for me, that I have hated the crafty
persons, and the liers, and have depended only upon thee.

7 Therefore do I fully trust of thy goodness, that I shall fully rejoice
therein, that thou have acknowledged and regarded me so miserable, and brought
into such extremity.

8 Neither have thou suffered me to be enclosed and intrapped of mine enemies:
but rather have brought me forth into a large place at liberty.

9 Therefore Lord have mercy upon me so cruelly vexed, that not only my face
and my bowels within me, but my very soul is consumed.

10 For certainly I can scarcely draw my breath for sorrow, I wax old with
mourning, so that the very bones being weakened, al my strength fails.

11 For the multitude and the authority of mine enemies causes me to be
abhorred of al, even of my very neighbors, so that they that know me well, if
I do meet them abroad, they fly forth of my sight.

12 Finally, I am forgotten of al, as though I were dead, and I am counted
more vile than any broken earthen po^sheard.

13 I do hear the reproaches and railings that al they of power do cast out
against me, which make me wholly to tremble, whiles they take such crafty
counsels against me.

14 Howbeit, o Lord, I trust in thee, for I have thus concluded within my
self, that thou art my God.

15 And surely, the term of my life, it is not in their hands, but in thine:
deliver me therefore from the hands of mine enemies, and from all that persecute
me.

16 Refresh me thy servant with the brightness of thy countenance, and for thy
mercy sake deliver me.

17 Grant I beseech thee o Lord, that I be not put to shame that call upon
thee: but rather, that death may stop their mouths.

18 That they may cease to make lies, which slander me being innocent, so
bitterly, proudly, and disdainefullie.

19 O how manifold is that thy mercy! whereof al have had experience, that
fear thee: whom no fear of man can drive from the true profession of thy
glorious name.

20 For thou have secret places ynow, wherein thou can hide, and secretly
keep them safe, from the proud bragges of the wicked, far away from the
poisoned and cursed speakers, and wilt preserve them in safety in thy
tabernacle.

21 Therefore I praise thee o Lord, having experience of that thy marvelous
goodness, whereby I was defended, as with the most mighty walls of a strong
city.

22 Yet I confess, that I being cast down headlong with such a sudden
tempest, did unadvisedly think in my heart, that I was utterly cast off from
thee: howbeit, thou notwithstanding have heard my prayers, when I cried unto
thee.

23 Wherefore al ye that feel this goodness of the Lord, being admonished by
mine example, love the Lord more and more: for he most constantly preserves
them that love him, and most abundantly rewards the proud doer, according to
his deeds.

24 Be strong, I say, and encourage your selves more and more, whosoever have
settled your hope and confidence in the Lord.

PSALM. XXXII.
The Argument.
This most precious Psalm does teach the chief and principal article of the
Christian faith, as the Apostle does testify, and interpret it, Romans 4.6.
that is to say, that al our blessedness does consist in the free forgiveness of
our sins. For all other religions do deceive men in this point chiefelie, that
they teach them to seek salvation at their own righteousness, which can no --
where be found. But in the Gospel only, Christ that our only mediator is
declared unto us to be made righteousness of God his Father. The Prophet does
also teach in th^^ Psalm, that this doctrine does not bring in a foolish and
careless security, as the Papists do falselie slander it, as though the free
imputation of the justice of Christ should abolish the care and endeavor to do
good works. For he contrariwise does declare, that the spirit of regeneration
is always annexed with the gift of righteousness by imputation, which is
received by faith, which does kindle in the hearts of them that are justified
an earnest loathing of sin, hope, true obedience, and other virtues. Whereof
this follows, that the conscience being pacified, does enioie a true and
perpetual joy, what storms soever do arise. Therefore this Psalm does differ
from the first, because it shows the chief effects, whereby a man may be
known to be blessed: but th^^ does declare the cause of that blessedness, and
also of the effects, and by this consideration may Paul and James be
reconciled.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BLessed is that man verily, whom being oppressed with the burden of his
sin, the Lord does raise up, and whose offenses are covered by Gods mercy.

2 That man I say verily is blessed, to whom the Lord does not impute that
which he has done amiss, and whose heart is free from falsehood and hypocrisy.

3 I do speak by experience, for by dulling mine own conscience, and
deceiving my self, at the length I came to this point, that I did fall down,
consuming whole days in mourning in vain, and al my strength was wasted.

4 For the weight of thy hand did oppress me day and night more and more, so
that I being as it were burnt up with the heat of the Sun, did lie parched,
and as it were without life.

5 At the length therefore o Lord, I fully determined with my self, to
confess my self willingly and plainly guilty before thee, and to declare
my sins, and disclose al my wickedness, without any dissimulation, the which
thing so soon as I had done, thou have forgiven me al mine offense.

6 So must al they do, whom thou receiuest to thy favor, even to ask
forgiveness of thee, taking the opportunity of time, when thou may be found:
for so shall it be, that the floods of great waters, although they rage, yet
shall they never come near them.

7 Thou therefore art my refuge, under the which I being hid, do fear none
evil, that I being safe under thy defense, may praise thee my Savior.

8 Come hither therefore, whosoever desire to be blessed, I will teach thee
what way thou ought to walk, and I will direct thee faithfully, and never
remove mine eye from thee.

9 Take heed ye be not like horses and mules, beasts without reason, striking
with the heels, whose mouths your selves do use to bridle with bittes and
snaffles, least they rage against you.

10 So are they in danger of infinite punishments, whosoever go on in their
sins: contrariwise, al they that turn to the Lord, are compassed about with
his goodness on every side.

11 Wherefore be glad and rejoice in the Lord al ye righteous, al ye, I say,
that love righteousness, sing forth his praises.

PSALM. XXXIII.
The Argument.
Nothing can be spoken more notably than this Psalm, wherein we are
admonished to consecrate our whole life to the singing and setting forth the
praises of God, the which thing if men were persuaded to do, nothing were more
happy upon earth than man's life, as by the contempt of the which doctrine it
comes to pass, that nothing is more miserable than it. But chiefly the
order of this Psalm is marvelous: for first it teaches that sacrifices of
prayers are not acceptable unto God, except the purity of the heart do go
before the word of the mouth, to the which end also the laws of outward
purifiengs tended: it adds afterward, that God is to be praised, not for
fashion sake, but seriously and earnestly: then it brings most weighty
reasons, as wherewith almost the very stones ought to be moved, much less that
men, for whose sakes all this whole world was made, should not do their duty.
Wherefore it sets forth, in the beginning, the wonderful wisdom and
gracious goodness of God, which appears three manner of ways, in the
workmanship of the world: namely, both in the creation thereof, and also in
the order of every part thereof, and lastly in such a marvelous governing of
it, so that al creatures, especially man, that is endued with reason and
understanding, ought almost to tremble, when he considers these things.
Furthermore, it goes to a peculiar consideration of the providence and bounty
of God, in the pres^ruation of mankind. For although troublesome men do
infinite ways seek to destroy and overthrow themselves, yet God continues
to defend them, hindering and bringing to naught the endeavors and practices of
those that are seditious. And the prophet does join also some sentences
against the madness of those men, which stick in secondarie causes: and against
the doting folly of others, who dream that al things are carried about by
fortune, to the which things they bind the providence and mighty power of
God. But the third place is especialie to be noted, wherein he speaks of that
peculiar love, wherewith he does most mightily pres rue, through his mercy,
his Church, most desperately assaulted by mighty and most cruel enemies,
against al calamities that do invade them: and again, he expresses in few
words which is the true Church, that God will never forsake, that is to say,
even the assembly of those which worship him truly, and boast of no merits
of their own, but possessing their own souls in hope and silence, do look
to his mercy alone.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 YOU that love righteousness, magnify the Lord: for it is meet that he be
praised altogether of them that love justice and goodness.

2 Praise ye the Lord therefore, and sing unto him with all kind of instruments.

3 Sing hymns, I say, and psalms one after another, and testify your joy
with most cheareful and loud voices.

4 For this most beautiful order of the whole world, made and appointed by his
word and ordinance, whereof every part does manifestly testify how great
both his power and constancy is, does require the same of you.

5 Again, I beseech you consider, what just and due order, and moderation, is
manifestly to be seen in his government of the world: so that the whole
earth is full, and does abound with his goodness and bounty.

6 Furthermore, that al these things began to appear, and have their being of
nothing, only by his word and commandment: even that great compass of the
heavens, how wide and unmeasurable so ever, together with that infinite number
of stars, and both the great lights of the Sun and the Moon, wherewith he
has beautified that frame of the heavenly firmament, as with a great army
set in most comely order, was formed and made by the commandment of his
eternal word, and by the unspeakable power of his spirit also, which
proceeds from him.

7 Now, to come unto the creatures more near unto us, it is the selfsame
power that hangs over us, that liquid and ever flowing element of water, and
heapeth it up in it self, and holds it enclosed in certain secret gulfes,
and does keep it back, that it does not drown the world again.

8 Go to then, let al them that dwell in the world fear and reverence such a
workemaister, and tremble at his works:

9 And learn to follow the examples of those things, though they want both
sense and understanding, who yet, so soon as he had spoken the word, they
stood forth, and were obedient unto him, and do now still remain at his
commandment.

10 It is he the same also, although very many, not only particular persons,
but also whole multitudes, conspire together outragiouslie to their own
destruction, and labor to bring al things to utter confusion, that yet does
overthrow and break their wicked practices and crafty counsels, because he
is the mainteiner and preserver of civil policy and natural equity, whereby
mankind is kept in safety.

11 For it can not be, that any thing that the Lord has determined, can at
any time be made frustrate and void, but rather must always and in all ages
remain stable and immovable.

12 But o most blessed and happy nation! to whom the Lord shows himself
their God before others, even by taking a singular and peculiar care over them.
O thou truly art an happy people! if thou did know thine own blessed
state, whom he has chosen to himself, as his peculiar heritage.

13 For God is not an idle beholder of the things that he has created, neither
does he suffer them to be carried at al adventures: but he does behold al
things with a watchful eye, and most chiefly does he observe al mankind.

14 And from his most hie throne he does behold all the inhabitants of the
world, wheresoever they are placed.

15 God forbid that we should think, that he that has created the hearts of
al men, and has put into them the power of affections, and of reason, could
not consider and understand, what they think and enterprise.

16 Wherefore, they are doting mad, how proud and mighty soever they be, who
dream that they are able to do any thing by their own power, seeing that al
kingdoms are planted and subverted by Gods only appointment.

17 Wherefore their hope is deceivable and vain, who abusing the means given
them by God, do depend of any other thing, than of his power alone: not
unlike to the horsemen, who trust to the strength of those horses, which have
oftentimes overthrown them.

18 So then, they perish through their own fault: but contrariwise, them does
the Lord behold, assuredly keep and defend, which fear him, and have only
regard unto his mercy.

19 For although al things seem to threaten their destruction, being destitute
of al other help, and sometimes both heaven and earth deny them their bodily
food, yet the Lord preserves them safe and sound: and does minister unto them
in due season, sufficiently to pass thorough the course of their life.

20 Let us therefore earnestly run unto the Lord alone, as he worthily
deserves, being our only defense and succor.

21 And surely our expectation shall not fail us: for undoubtedly it will come
to pass, that after some sharp assaults of these miseries, he will comfort us
with most certain and true ioies. Therefore let us never cease to rest upon the
promises that he has revealed unto us, and never fail at any time to call
upon his holy name.

22 And thou again, o Lord, defend us by thy mercy, that we have so often felt
from the heavens, as thou command us to hope, and we trust that thou will
perform.

PSALM. XXXIIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm was written by David, as the title declares, for the wonderful
deliverance forth of the hands of king Achis by dissembling madness, as is
written, 1. Sam. 21. And it declares what is our duty when we have received
Gods benefits, that is not only to give thanks unto God, and to confirm our
selves in faith and hope against other temptations by such like experience, but
also to exhort others to do the same, by setting forth these examples: that
they may believe that these deliuerings from dangers, are not special
privileges granted to any one man, but that they are so many preachings as
it were, and sermons, which do appertain both to the whole Church, and to
every memb^r of the sam^. Howbeit, the Prophet does ad this one thing, that
these benefits yet do appertain to none other, but unto them, who after they
be delivered forth of dangers, do repent of their sins, and do fear God
more seriously. Also he admonishes, that we should join the deliverance of
the godly, with the destruction of the wicked, that we make not God, as the
mockers and scorners do, only to see of the one side: and so to be merciful,
that he should forget his judgments. Finally, this Psalm is so furnished
with eloquent words, and so great glistering of most grave sentences, that
amongst others, this is well worthy to be committed unto memory by all the
godly.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Will give thanks unto the Lord without ceasing, and I will never leave off
to have his praise in my mouth.

2 I will extol the benefits of the Lord, I say, from the bottom of my heart,
that all the afflicted, when they hear this, may be thereby comforted.

3 Go to then, praise and magnify the Lord together with me, and let us
altogether extol and praise his name as he deserves.

4 For I have sought the Lord, and he accomplishing my desire, has delivered
me from all that troubled me.

5 Therefore shall they be bold also, moved by my example, to turn their eyes
unto him, and to make haste to run unto him, and shall not be repulsed.

6 For, Behold (shall they say) this miserable man was heard, when he called
upon the Lord, who delivered him out of al his miseries.

7 And this is a sure case, for like as they that fear God, are assaulted of
every side, not only of other men, but also of Satan and his angels: even so
the Lord again does camp about them with the invincible armies of his Angels,
that they may so be preserved.

8 I beseech you therefore, do not carelessly behold this great goodness of the
Lord, but rather think upon it again and again, and taste his most
comfortable sweetness, and cry together with me: O blessed is that man that
trusts in the Lords protection!

9 Fear ye the Lord therefore, so many as he has separate and consecrate to
himself: for nothing shall be wanting to them that fear the Lord.

10 Behold, I pray you, the lions, and al such beasts as live by ravening and
cruelty, how often they die, being destitute of their pray: this is the
resemblance of the wicked, which seek riches and power by the oppression and
spoil of the poor, always greedy, whilst they perish miserably. But of
the contrary part, unto them that fear God, there wants nothing that is for
their commodity.

11 Come hither, my children, hear you me, and I will teach you the right rule
of godly life.

12 Is there any that desires that most blessed life heaped up with all true
felicity?

13 First of al, regard that thou abuse not thy tongue to hurt any man, or to
deceive any.

14 So abstain from evil, that thou do that thing which is good. Be thou
careful to keep true peace and concord, so that, though it seem to flee from
thee, thou still do pursue it. And though, whilst thou followest this way,
thou must sustain many battles, yet be not discouraged.

15 For the Lord with open eyes watches over them that love justice, and has
attentive ears unto their cries.

16 Contrariwise, he beholds them with a terrible countenance, whosoever
rejoice in wickedness, that he may root them out, and the remembrance of them
altogether.

17 Wherefore, the just do cry, I grant, and not without cause, but the Lord
hears them, and delivers them forth of al miseries.

18 For even then, when they seem to be brought to the greatest extremities,
he is most near unto them, to comfort their heavy hearts.

19 Finally, they that would live justly, are subject to many miseries, but
the Lord delivers them out of al.

20 And though the enemies do seem to be ready to break their very bones in
pieces, yet the Lord will not suffer the least of them to be broken.

21 But their own wickedness shall destroy the wicked, and al they shall perish
that hate the just.

22 For the Lord does redeem the souls of his servants, neither shall any of
them, that flee unto him, be condemned, or perish.

PSALM. XXXV.
The Argument.
This Psalm does minister a goodly example of prayers, both for the whole
Church, and for every member of the same, against such as flatter good men,
and counterfeit friendship, when they are in prosperity: but when there comes
any change of their state, they do kindle the unjust wrath of Kings and
Princes, with their slanderous accusations, and so do inflame their rage,
whereof they are ready to be the executioners. Wherefore, the Prophet teaches
the godly, to flee unto God* in these difficulties, who both has sufficient
power to destroy these wicked flattering courtiers, and also a ready mind to
preserve his. Howbeit, least we abuse these prayers, first of al we must take
heed, that we maintain a just cause: secondly, that we carry a mind not
willing to aduenge our own private injury, but desirous to restore and set
forth Gods glory: finally, that we lash not forth any word by the motion of
the flesh, but by the guiding of Gods holy spirit.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 DEfend mine innocence, o Lord, against the^ that oppress me with slanders,
and set thy power against them that fight against me.

2 Arise, o Lord, to help me, bring forth all that aromur, whereby I may
sustain their rage.

3 Set upon them, o Lord, both by casting thy darts a far off, and also
encounter with them, hand to hand, that persecute me. Grant, that this poor
soul may hear thee, bearing it witness, that thou art the savior thereof.

4 Cause them, I say, that seek my death, to be destitute of their purpose,
and to be ashamed, even those that imagine so much mischief against me, to be
put to shame, and not bring their matters to pass.

5 Send thine Angel down from heaven, that may drive them to and fro, even as
we see the chafe driven with the whirlwind.

6 Cause, that whither soever they go, they may be doubtful, as men wandering
in darkness, and stumbling in slipperie places, fearful and careful, whiles
thine Angels do pursue them.

7 For without any cause have they laid wait for me, and have dug, as it
were, a pit, in the which they would catch me, and kill me.

8 Let him rather fall at unawares, and let him be cast down, and snared in the
same net, that he has laid for me.

9 But I, o Lord, being preserved by thee, reioicing with an holy joy, will
praise thee my deliverer.

10 And my very bones, o Lord, will cry, that there is none like unto thee,
who do deliver the afflicted from them that oppress them by violence, and
set at liberty the poor and miserable from the rage of the tyrants.

11 The same do stand up as witnesses against me, which offer me this
violence, and they lay such things unto my charge, as never came into my mind.

12 And whereas I have deserved well at their hands, they do me evil for good,
and are ready to take my life from me, unless thou do stop them.

13 Yet when I did see them in distress, I changed my garment, I pined my
self with fasting, and bowed me down, and prayed for them.

14 Finally, I went so heavily, and with sorrowful countenance testified I my
grief none otherways, than if they had bin my near kinsfolk, or if I should
have mourned for mine own mother.

15 But they contrariwise, when they did see me stagger, they took counsel
together against me: they conspired, I say, against me, suspecting no such
thing, even the most vile men make none end of railing against me with open
mouth.

16 They have joined themselves to iesters and parasites, and they have al whet
their teeth against me.

17 O Lord! how long will thou behold this? when will thou correct them?
deliver me from them that rage so fearcelie against me, and deliver this soul,
wanting al succor, from these most cruel lions.

18 Deliver me, I say, that I may set forth thy praise in the assembly of al
thy people, and in the audience of them al.

19 Suffer not, I beseech thee, that these faithles and ungrate persons
rejoice, that they have overcome me, either that they which hate me without
cause, with glieng eyes deride me.

20 For they are inflamed with a deadly hatred, and though the earth open
underneath, and threaten ruin, yet think they of nothing, but how with most
crafty words they may hurt every one.

21 Wherefore they gape and laugh, saying, Ah! ah! We see now at the length
that we have so long desired.

22 Thou see both me and them also, o Lord, do not, I pray thee, pass these
things over in silence o Lord, neither depart thou far from me.

23 But rather awake and come forth to deliver me, o Lord my God, and defend
my just cause.

24 O Lord my God, seeing thou art just, defend mine innocence against them,
and cause that they do not rejoice over me.

25 Neither let them say unto themselves: Oh! now at length we have whereof to
rejoice, and triumph together: saying, Lo! now at length we have devoured him.

26 But rather let them be ashamed and confounded together, who take the
occasion to rejoice by my miseries, and let them be covered with shame and
confusion, which lift themselves up against me so despitefullie.

27 Of the contrary part, cause them comfortablie to rejoice that favor my
just cause, and when they see me preserved by thine assistance, that they may
judge in their hearts, and testify openly, that thou art worthy of most
great praise, who have declared in deed, that thou have a great care for the
preservation of thine.

28 And I will sing forth both day and night this thy mercy in saving thine,
and thy justice in the aduenging of thy self upon the enemies of thy name.

PSALM. XXXVI.
The Argument.
There is nothing that greeueth good men, and them that fear God so much, and
that worthily, as the life of profane and wicked men, who do openly
testify, that they neither fear God nor man. But the Prophet does admonish
us, when we behold these things, that we may not gather hereby, that God cares
not for such matters, but rather to rise up into a more high consideration of
the infinite goodness of the most merciful and mighty God thereby, cum toward
them to whom he is not bound any way: for neither may we measure Gods
justice, nor his counsels, by our small capacity. Afterward he teaches, that
the providence of God does most manifestly shine forth in these so great
confusions, both because he does preserve notwithstanding this universal world,
which would perish in a moment, if the wicked had their whole swinge: and also
does defend his Church continualie, the which though it be marvelously
oppressed, yet does it never want abundance of present comforts, so much as is
necessary: and is furthermore refreshed with a sure hope of a better thing,
even the everlasting felicity. Wherefore, this one thing remains, that we
fly to Gods protection, who continues to defend us, assured that they al shall
fall in the end, which delight in wickedness.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THE whole life of the wicked does tell me in my heart, that they have cast
away al fear of God.

2 For they are so far from being touched in their conscience with any
grief of sin, that contrariwise they flatter themselves, inuenting new and
new sins, that at the length they make themselves abominable unto al.

3 For all their words tend to this end, that they may hurt either with fraud or
force, neither can they be brought once to receive into their hearts, to lead
their life so, that they may profit others.

4 They consume the whole nights in inuenting wickedness: they continue
obstinately in evil doing, no wickedness is so great that they abhor.

5 Wherefore, seeing thou, o Lord, do suffer these things so patiently, we
must confess that thy goodness is higher than the very heavens: and that thou
art most true of thy word, which do not suffer the unworthy: yea, even the
breakers of thy covenant, to be without the experience of thy goodness.

6 Neither is there any cause yet, why thou should be counted unjust
therefore, because thou do also show thy goodness to such manner of men: for
the height of thy justice is incomprehensible, and thy judgments are more
profound than the deepest gulfes of the sea, that no man is able thoroughly to
search them, and to consider them: and this thy unsearchable moderation does
shine forth, not only in ye preserving of mankind in such a troblesome state,
but also in other living creatures.

7 Howbeit, there is an other thing, wherein chiefly thou declarest, how great
and precious thy goodness is, to wit, in the salvation of those men, whom thou
receiuest to thy special favor, and couerest as with the shadow of thy wings,
being separate from the number of other men.

8 For, besides those transitory good things, which thou do not hold back
from thy very enemies, thou do feed them with the everlasting deinties of
thy house, and give them of thy most sweet waters to drink abundantly.

9 For with thee alone is the spring of true life, and we do attribute it to
the benefit of thine only light, that we have any light.

10 Continue therefore to show thy goodness unto the true worshippers of thy
Majesty, and grant that those, which love righteousness, may perceive thee
their revenger and deliverer more and more.

11 Suffer not the proud to tread me under their feet, neither let the
wicked lay hand of me, to cast me down.

12 Doubtless, in the due time and place that thou have appointed, they that
rejoice in wickedness shall fall: and me think, even now I see every one of them
to be thrown down by such violence, that they can never rise up again.

PSALM. XXXVII.
The Argument.
This Psalm contains the same Argument with the former, but more largely
treated. For there be two circumstances added, to wit, that profane and wicked
men do not only rage and oppress others without punishment, but also do
abound with plenty of al things: and contrariwise, that good men seem most
miserable. And it is evident, both by other Psalms, and by other Prophets, and
by experience, that this temptation is most grievous: whereunto we are taught
thus to answer in this Psalm, first to think, as it is most true, that we
are deceived, when we do account the prosperity of the wicked to be good, and
the afflictions of the godly to be evil: seeing that not only the end of
these things, but also the course of this present life does declare, that they
are most miserable, even then, when they seem most happy: and of the
contrary, that these are most blessed in their greatest misery: neither will
the very nature of God suffer the matter to go any otherways. Wherefore this
one thing remains, that every one resting in that most just providence of
God, in that state that God has appointed him, ever calling upon God that
never forsakes his, wait patiently and constantly, whiles he verelie reach
forth his hand unto his servants, and call the wicked to account, who have
abused his goods: the which thing he will surely do in due time, though not at
our pleasure or appointment.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WHen thou beholdest the prosperous state of the wicked, be not offended with
their prosperity, neither envy them for it.

2 For all their felicity vanishes away as suddenly as the grass cut down,
by loosing his moisture does straight way wither.

3 Rather hold thou fast thy confidence fixed upon God alone, and continue in
the exercise of virtue, so shall thou pass over this life, and safely enioie
the commodities thereof.

4 Let thy pleasure be only in the Lord, who will never fail thee, calling
upon him.

5 Commit unto him the end and issue of al thy deeds and thoughts, and
unburden al thy cares into the bosom of the Lord, and doubt nothing, but that
he will bring al things to pass for the best.

6 For although they that lead a godly and upright life, seem for a time not
only to lose their labor, but also to work themselves sorrow: yet surely it
will come to pass, that like as the darkness of the night being driven away,
the light springing forth by little and little, at the length does lighten the
earth with full brightness al abroad: so can God, at his time, make thy justice
and vprightnes evident unto al men.

7 Give up thy self therefore with silence to be governed by him, and looking
up unto him, suffer boldly what soever shall come: neither disdain nor fret,
because al things seem to go after their hearts desire, which imagine that
they may do all that they lust.

8 Bridle, I say, this fretting and grudging, least thou being overcome with
impatience, be also brought unto sin.

9 For of necessity the wicked must once be cut up, and of the contrary,
whosoever does patiently wait for the Lord, shall stand safe and sure.

10 Surely, if thou will but suffer yet a little while, the wicked shall
perish, and that with such a sore destruction, that though thou search the
place most diligently where he abode, thou shall yet no where find him.

11 But the meek and quiet men shall remain, and lead their life in great
tranquillity.

12 For this is true in deed, that the wicked never cease to practice many
things against the just, and to gnash their teeth against him.

13 But he again, under whose power al things are, deriding their vain
enterprises, which shall not come to pass, does in the mean time appoint their
day of destruction.

14 Yet they, with drawn sword, and their bow bent, are herein wholly
occupied, that casting down the poor and miserable, they may slaie those that
live godly and vprightlie.

15 But those same their swords, which they draw against the just, shall strike
through their own hearts, and their bows shall be broken.

16 Some man here will object unto me the poverty of the just: howbeit, here
he must remember, that that little which the just man has, is better, than all the riches of the mighty.

17 For all that mighty power of the wicked shall be broken down, but the just
are established by the hand of the Lord.

18 The Lord having a watchful eye for their salvation, does account every
day of the life of the just, that he may establish them more and more, even
for ever.

19 Hereof comes it, that what storms soever do arise, yet are they never
driven sorth of hope, and made ashamed: yea, in the time of most sharp famine
also, they have enough to suffice them.

20 But contrariwise, the wicked do perish, and all the enemies of the Lord are
like the smoke of a fat sacrifice, which blown here and there consumes.

21 Yea, and also the just have in this their poverty, whereby they help the
poverty of others, by giving unto them mercifully. But the wicked, how rich
soever they be, are compelled to borowe that which they never will pay.

22 And no marvel, if a man consider, that the right and comfortable course of
the leading of our life does not depend of the great abundance of things, but
of the blessing of God. Wherefore it goes well with the just in this life, how
poor so ever they be, if they be compared with those rich men, because verelie
God blesses their poverty: but contrariwise, they are al brought to naught
whom God accurseth.

23 For because the life of the just is pleasant unto God, therefore does he
guide their paths always, whither soever they walk.

24 And though they sometime slide, yet do they never fall down, because the
Lord does hold them, and raise them up with his hand.

25 Do thou require an example? Behold, I have bin brought up in this schole
of a child, and now am old, and I could never see my self walking justly
forsaken, neither my children brought to beggerie.

26 Nay, I never wanted something to give, and something to lend unto others,
and this bounteous liberality of God is also powered down upon my children.

27 Only then take heed of this, that thou endeavor thy self to hurt no
man, but to profit al men: and doubt nothing, but that thou shall safely
pass over the course of this life, under the mighty hand of God.

28 For the Lord has his delight in the upright and the just, neither does he
forsake them, whom once he takes to his love, but he does preserve them
rather the whole time of their life: but the wicked, and al their posterity
shall perish.

29 The just also, I say, only are the true owners of the commodity of this
life, and they only do rightly enioie the benefits thereof.

30 Now these are such men, not only as pretend the name of the just: but they
only, which both think and speak of God reverently, and as becomes them,
both to instruct themselves and others, and do declare them selves upright and
sincere in all their dealings.

31 Who finally do carry that law of God graven in their hearts, by the rule
whereof they lead their lives without any wavering.

32 Yet do the wicked notwithstanding practice their death, either by craft,
or by violence.

33 But the Lord does never leave them to the lust of the wicked, neither does
he suffer them to be oppressed and condemned by wicked judgments.

34 Go to then, look thou unto the Lord, and wait upon him, and never turn
from the way that he has appointed. The which thing if thou do, be thou
assured, that he will raise thee again, and thou shall remain safe, and behold
the destruction of the wicked.

35 For I have seen many such most proud and cruel men, which even spread
their boughs abroad on every side like a broad tree.

36 Who vanished yet in a moment, and passed away, so that, though I
diligently sought their steps, they no where appeared.

37 Doubtless, whosoever diligently considers them that are of a godly and
an upright life, he shall find the end of their life to be prosperous and
blessed.

38 Of the contrary, whosoever despising the law of God, give themselves to
wickedness, do in the end perish miserably.

39 Now then, that I may conclude al in few words, the Lord is the strength of
the just, the which thing does chiefly appear in their extreme dangers.

40 For he does then help them, and does preserve them, when they fly unto
him alone, and delivers them from the hands of the wicked.

PSALM. XXXVIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm, besides that it shows an excellent example of an earnest
prayer, which the Saints may follow, especialie in their most extreme torments
both of body and mind: it does also teach us many lessons, the knowledge
whereof is necessary to confirm our faith, and to continue us in patience.
First, that our sins are the very cause (although neither only nor always)
of the miseries wherewith we are vexed, so that there is no cause why we should
murmur against Gods judgments. Secondly, that their sins undoubtedly are
freely forgiven to al them that believe in Christ, both concerning the fault
and also the punishment: but yet, that this forgiveness is not streightwaies
felt, no not always in the hearts of the Saints, and therefore, that there
remains even in them for a time, a most grievous temptation of distrust: the
which yet in the end is overcome, by an earnest acknowledging and loathing of
sin, and by constant and continual prayer for Gods mercy. Furthermore, that
there do remain great and grievous temporal punishments, even after the sins
be forgiven: howbeit, not for that by them any satisfaction can be made to
Gods judgment: but by the which we being chastised and tamed, may learn to
wax more wise, and more and more diligently, than before, in fear and
trembling to accomplish our salvation. Finalie, that the Saints of God,
praieng for deliverance, do not so much regard themselves, as the glory of
God, to this purpose, that his mercy may ther^in appear: and least the
wicked, if they should see the godly forsaken, and altogether oppressed,
should be confirmed in their impiety.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 AH, Lord! I do not refuse to be reproved and chastened: but I do require
this one thing of thee, that thou do not correct me in that thy terrible and
hot burning fury.

2 Neither do I thus pray without cause, for I do see, that I have not to do
with man, but with thee especialie, with whose arrows I am stricken thorough:
and by whose hand laid heavy upon me, I do lie prostrate.

3 Therefore the sense and feeling of thine indignation, worthily kindled
against me, does so thoroughly strike me, that I seem wholly devoured, my
very bones consuming for the multitude of my sins.

^ For mine iniquities, as also the just punishments, wherewith thou chastisest
me, do rise up from the soales of my feet, above the crown of my head, and
ouerwhelme me, being unable to bear so great a burden.

5 My black and bloody wounds, which thou have worthily given me, being mad
and senseles, do power forth filthy woore and madder.

6 I go crouching, and altogether stooping, with sour and heavy countenance,
scarce trailing my body.

7 My reins do burn with intolerable pain, neither is there any part of my
body void of grief.

8 I do wholly languish and faint, broken with so many strokes, the which do
compel me to roar from the bottom of my heart.

9 Thou, o Lord, upon whom wholly I do depend, do know what I desire, and
it is evident unto thee what al my sighs do seek.

10 My miserable heart tossed to and fro, fails me, al my strength is gone, I
am bereft not only of my sight, but of my very eyes also.

11 And also they, whom I accounted my most friendly companions, al do behold
me thus wounded a far off, neither will any of my neighbors once come at me.

12 And for all this, as though so many miseries were not enough to kill me,
there wants not such as lie in wait for my life, and that have such a bitter
hatred against me, that they cease not to invent most wicked ways to destroy
me, and mutter their subtlety amongst themselves secretly.

13 But I behave my self as though I were deaf, and keep silence as though I
were dombe.

14 I refrain my self, I say, as though I heard none of these things, and as
though I had nothing to answer their slanders.

15 For Lord, I wait with silence for thy succor, nothing doubting, but that
thou will answer me in due time which call for thy help.

16 For as I may not dissemble with thee, I do think that I am in great
danger, least they triumph over me: for they desire nothing more, than to see
me overthrown utterly.

17 And I do now waver in deed, like one that should streightwaies fall,
neither do I feel my self free from grief one moment.

18 And I grant verelie, that these things are worthily laid upon me for my
sins, the which how great they be, both thy chastisements, and the anguish
wherewith I am tormented, do declare.

19 But mine enemies in ye mean time do flourish, and increasing in power,
wax more cruel: they wax mighty, I say, yt hate me without any cause.

20 Yea, for my benefits, they requite me with injury, and only hurt me
for this cause, that I would live well and godly.

21 Forsake me not, o Lord! o my God, be not far away from me!

22 Thou Lord my salvation hasten to help me!

PSALM. XXXIX.
The Argument.
The drift and end of this Psalm, is the same that the 36. and 37. is, but here
that is spoken particularly, which in the other places is set forth more
generally: that is to wit, by what reasons we ought to be erected and
confirmed, when as in a good cause we are vexed of wicked men, God after a sort
winking at our miserable afflictions. Therefore the Prophet does teach us
chiefly by his own example, that in such like cases our affections are to be
bridled, even for this cause, for that otherwise the furious rage of the wicked
is wont, for the most part, rather to be increased, than diminished: of the
which thing Paul does admonish us, Romans 12, 19. and 1. Pet. 3, 13. But if our
enemies do not cease to abuse our meekenes, and some danger there is, least our
patience should be overcome, then must we turn our mind unto God, and oppose
or set these arguments against our wicked thoughts: That this life is
transito^^e, and therefore this strife cannot be long, neither can any thing
be taken from us by our enemies, but that which of it self is frail, and
ready to fade away: furthermore, though we be afflicted with adversity, yet
we are not hated of God, who favoring and defending us, there is no cause of
doubting, but that al things will turn to our commodity at the length: and
also, even that the sins, which we have committed, do deserve greater
punishments: fourthlie, since nothing comes to pass unadvisedly, neither
any thing done of God but justly, it is most meet, that we settle and rest
our selves in his will, that does thus righteously punish the disorder or
confusion of mankind. Lastly, we must set before our eyes the example of other
most holy men, whom the Lord has thus also exercised, and yet has not
neglected, or despised them. And the Prophet does throughout this Psalm, mix
prayers full of affections, that he might teach us, that these things are not to
be disputed coldlie of us, as though we were in Philosophers schools: but we
must use most vehement and earnest prayers, whereby we should ask of God, both
to have our afflictions eased, and our faith continued.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THe wicked, lo, stands up: but I lie down trodden under his feet, and in
this my so great trouble, what can I speak, but unadvisedly, and without al
order? and therefore what other thing can I do, if I speak, than by
trespassing with my tongue, to bring more grief upon me? wherefore I have
wholly purposed to be silent, and to bridle my mouth.

2 So therefore I determine with my self, and have performed that which I
determined, so that I did not once mutter: yea, I did abstain from speaking
those things, which I might with most good right have brought forth for my
defense.

3 But when I pe^ceiued my sorrow to wax more bitter, and my heart, the more
that I did bridle it, so much more did it boil within me, at the length fire
did burn forth, and turning my mind from mine enemies unto my God, I began to
speak that, which I had conceived within me.

4 O Lord, cause me more and more seriously to understand and consider, how
momentanie and transitory this life is, and call into my mind the shortness of
this life!

5 For behold, thou have made the days of this my life, scarce one
hand-breadth long, which is almost nothing in thy sight: neither are they,
whose state seems most constant and flourishing, any other, but a most vain
thing. Wherefore then am I so sore troubled, for the hazarding of a thing of so
small importance? as though either they should rage against me for ever, or I
should fight any long time with these evil persons.

6 Doubtless, men do walk in the shadow of things, not seeing the things
themselves, making great stirs for the most part, for things of no value: by
the which their cares, if any man do get any thing, yet does he not know
for whom he gathers it in the end.

7 God forbid therefore, that I should be careful for this trash! I do rather
depend of thee, upon whom only I do fasten my hope, who, seeing thou art my
Lord, can not despise thy poor servant.

8 And why should I, lo, complain of thee, which knowledge my self a sinner?
Wherefore, I do not murmur against thy most just judgments, but I rather
desire this of thee, that of thy mercy, forgetting al mine iniquities, thou
would grant unto me, that I be not a jesting stock to foolish wicked men.

9 Finally, why should not I hold my peace? why should I speak one word?
seeing al these things come unto me, not by chance, but by thy knoweledge and
pleasure, who doubtless art most good, and most righteous.

10 But I beseech thee, take thine hand a little space from me, which wounds
me continualie, so that I wholly do faint and fail.

11 Yet do I not deny, but that thou do worthily punish mankind with these
thy most just punishments, so that whom soever thou touchest, al his beauty
and comlines must waste and consume immediately, as though a moth had eaten
it: to be short, every man in himself is nothing but vanity it self.

12 But thou, o Lord, hear my prayers and cries, and having pity of these my
tears, make answer unto me. For thus have thou done to my forefathers whom
thou did love, unto whom thou see me most like, even a stranger and
pilgrim in this world.

13 Cease, o Lord, and grant me some space to recover my life, before I do
utterly perish!

PSALM. XL.
The Argument.
Although this Psalm does contain a thanksgiving, yet for the most part, it
is of doctrine and instruction, and has also a singular prophecy, concerning
the abolishing of the old covenant, and of the office of Christ: therefore
David, by his example, does teach us these things. First, that the efficacy
and force even of our prayers, which are heard of God, are deferred, the which
doctrine is necessary in the contention that faith has with distrust and
impatience. Secondly, that this deferring, turns both to the glory of God,
and our own commodity. For so it is made more evident to al men, out of how
great dangers, the Lord does deliver his servants: and also, this is made more
certainly manifest, how far they are deceived, who either being drawn away
through evil examples, or being overcome by impatience, do fall from God.
Thirdly, that we must attribute this, that we are heard of God, and delivered
from dangers, to no sacrifices of the law, nor satisfactions of our own, but
to the free reconciliation in Christ alone, which was then to be fulfilled,
when David wrote this, but is now wholly fulfilled, and finished: and therefore
we are heard, not that we should take liberty to sin by the mercy of God,
but rather that we should consecrate, and offer up our selves wholly unto him,
both before him, and before men, openly and without al dissimulation and
hypocrisy. Fourthlie, that this change does not proceed from us, but is
wrought in us, by the grace of God, who pearceth our ears, to make us perceive
his word, and works in us, both to will, and to do. Fiftlie, that the written
law of God, is the only rule of true obedience. Sixtlie, seeing that in this
life, there is continually a certain interchangeable course of temptations,
we must join with our thanksgiving for present benefits, prayers against
miseries which may hereafter follow: and we must do our diligence, that being
confirmed by the experience of things that are past, we may wholly depend upon
him. And forasmuch as David was a figure of Christ, Christ himself is brought
in, speaking in the 6, 7, and 8. verse, and testifieng, that he was made of his
father our priest, not to offer the sacrifices of the law: but that by
offering himself, he might finish the old figures, and being obedient to his
father, even to the death of the cross, he might be unto us perfect
righteousness and redemption, as the Apostle teaches abundantly, Heb. 10, 5.
and afterward. But we must remember, that these things are so to be
attributed to the person of Christ, that they are to be applied far otherwise
to Christ* than to David, that is, to the truth it self, and the figure: this
only excepted, that Christ, especially in his agony or conflict, did bear
in deed our person, and therefore he that is our redeemer, in as much as there
was no sin in him, so may he be said the first that is redeemed of himself,
forasmuch as our sins were laid upon him.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Have waited for the Lords help a very long season, but with good
success: for he has given ear unto me at the length, and has declared in
deed that he has heard my cry.

2 For he has drawn me forth of the most deep pit, and most tough mire, and
has set me upon an high rock, where I walk most firmly.

3 Wherefore he has ministered unto me the matter of a new song, even to set
forth the praises of our God, whereby all that look upon me, set forth as an
example of his mercy, may learn to worship God, and to fear him, and to
trust in him.

4 O blessed is that man, who putting al his confidence in the Lord, turns
away from men that are puffed up with most vain and deceitful confidence!

5 O Lord my God! how many and marvelous are thy works? who is able to
comprehend in his mind, or to declare and utter thy thoughts toward us, seeing
they are innumerable?

6 Howbeit, this does chiefly set forth the greatness of thy benefits, that all this does proceed freely of thine unspeakable mercy. For thou have not
required of me the oblations and sacrifices of the law, as though I could
satisfy thee by them, which were a madness for any man to persuade himself:
but thou have required this one thing for all manner of oblations and offering,
that I should hear thee, the which thing also thou have granted unto me,
making me apt and ready to hear thee.

7 Wherefore I, trusting to this thy grace, have streightwaies again answered
within my self, Lo, I am here: for in the very beginning of the book of thy
law, I do hear my self thus called, when thou say: Hear, o Israel.

8 Neither do thou command us, o my God, to hear thee for any other cause,
but that we should obeie thee when thou speak. Seeing thou have granted
unto me, o Lord, this will, I have testified my will, and that thy law is settled
in the secret of my heart.

9 Neither have I done this dissemblinglie, for I have openly declared thy
righteousness, neither will I ever cease to declare it, for fear of any peril:
of the which my will; thou art witness, o Lord, unto me.

10 I have not kept secret, I say, thy righteousness, which I did know in my
heart: but I have most plainly professed how faithful thou art in thy promise,
and that al our salvation does consist in this thine only goodness, and I have
testified thy mercy and truth also, before all the assembly of thy people.

11 Now thou again, my God, seeing that new enemies do arise, continue as thou
have done hitherto, to have mercy upon me, and join near unto me those thy
faithful keepers, even thy mercy and fidelity in keeping thy promises.

12 For innumerable troubles do again hang over my head, and so many, and so
great punishments due unto my sins do press me, that I can scarcely behold
them a far off with mine eyes: for they are above the number of the hairs of
mine head, and my very heart fails me.

13 Let it please thee therefore, o Lord, to deliver me! o Lord, I say, make
haste to help me!

14 Cause them to be confounded, ashamed, and frustrate of their expectation,
that seek my death: and let them be turned back with shame, void of their
purpose, which bend themselves wholly to hurt me.

15 Let them suffer the same blot of infamy for a reward of their wickedness,
wherewith they would have spotted me, which cried, Ha, ha, in my misery.

16 But contrariwise, let all that seek thee, being confirmed and comforted by
mine example, rejoice, and they that have set al their hope of salvation in
thee: let them exhort one another to praise thee. I was miserable, and
destitute of al men's help, but the Lord provided for me, and mine affairs.
Thou wast my helper, thou wast my deliverer: and now, o my God, I beseech thee,
make no delaie.

PSALM. XLI.
The Argument.
This is a most grievous temptation, which was the occasion of the making of
this Psalm, treating the same matter with the book of Job, wherein this
question is handled, to wit, whether (seeing God is just, and all the miseries
whereunto men are subject, do come for our sins) we may determine of the
wrath of God, and of the condemnation of any, by the present miseries
wherewith they are oppressed. For it is the common judgment of the world,
supposing of the contrary, that they are in Gods favor, which do abound with
the commodities of this life. And both these are false, as God himself does
decide the controversy between Job and his friends: and Solomon also, in his
book called Ecclesiastes. Now this temptation is most grievous, for it opens
the door to blasphemy and desperation: and this evil judgment is the more
grievous, when it proceeds from faithless and churlish persons, of whom
chiefly we looked for comfort. Thus was David maruellouslie vexed of them, who
liked not his sincere and upright dealing, and severity of discipline, as it
appears by the history, that the son was drawn away from his father, by the
practice of wicked Achitophel, and others, and driven to that horrible
conspiracy. Moreover, these faithles persons had an horrible disease in their
hearts, which increased the desire of alteration in them: for they supposed,
when David should be taken away, that they could raise up one, who would
satisfy their lusts, and would set them at more liberty. David therefore
grieved with so many sorrows, acknowledges himself a sinner, and both by
faith resting upon God, and upon an upright conscience toward these traitors,
flies unto God, and wishes well unto them that had a better opinion of him,
and powers forth most fervent prayers for the safety of himself, and his
kingdom: of the good issue whereof he is so sure, (as he might well be, having
a particular promise of God) that he gives thanks for the performance of the
same. And herein there is a marvelous figure, both of David compared with
Christ, and of Achitophel with Judas, as the verse of this Psalm is cited,
John. 13, 18. For like as David, being betrayed and chased away by his son,
d^d yet recover the kingdom: even so, Christ betrayed of his disciple, and
nailed upon the cross, by the malice of his own people, did then verelie
begin his kingdom: and both the traitors had the like, and the same end.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BUT well may it be unto you that judge more vprightlie of me, being in most
great misery: for surely the Lord will deliver me forth of this calamity.

2 The Lord will not fail to provide for me, and will restore me to life again:
yea, whatsoever these do prattle, God will again bless me, neither will he
suffer mine enemies to satisfy their lusts upon me.

3 The Lord rather will strengthen me, though I be thrown down with the
greatness of my sorrows, and he will go about my very bed.

4 For I have called upon him with these words, which cannot be frustrate: I
knowledge, o Lord, that I have sinned against thee, and am therefore punished
most justly: but thou, having compassion upon me, heal me, being wounded much
more in mind, than in body.

5 Behold, these churlish and faithles persons do not cease to curse me, and
wish nothing more, than my destruction. When, say they, shall he once perish,
and his name be wholly extinguished?

6 If any man come unto me, under the color of friendship, he may well
testify amity in his words, but he means in his heart to hurt me, casting
many subtle fetches in his mind: and when he goes from me, he utters al to
the men of his faction, that he has found out of me.

7 And then, when they have diligently commoned, and consulted together, they
pronounce the sentence of death against me.

8 For* say they, He is found guilty of a horrible, and mischievous
wickedness, that there is no hope that he can escape from these miseries.

9 Yea, that same my most familiar, who being in safety, I hoped for all
prosperity, and of whom I looked for all kind of friendship, even he, whom I
took to mine own table, has lifted his heel against me.

10 But thou, Lord, have mercy upon me, and make frustrate their desires, and
raise me again, that according to the office and authority that thou have
given me, I may justly punish their infidelity.

11 But oh! Wherefore should I use many words unto thee? doubtless I now know
that thou do not hate me, even by this, that thou have not suffered mine
enemies to triumph over me, as they verelie hoped: and by man's judgment, it
seems so in deed.

12 Behold then, I do yet stand safe and sure through thy defense, and I know
that thou will always care for me.

13 O Lord, the God of Israel, everlasting praise be given to thee: even so be
it, I say, so shall it be.

PSALM. XLII.
The Argument.
This Psalm does set forth a singular example of true faith, together with a
marvelous care of the exercise of religion. For David being now an exile, and
not only spoiled of al his honor, but of al his goods, and also fought for
unto death, by most cruel enemies on every side, does yet testify that he
does not despair. Furthermore, he says, that he does nothing regard so great
loss of al other things in comparison of this one thing, that whereas before
time, he was wont to go before others, that usually came up to the Tabernacle,
he was now compelled to want those helps of faith appointed by God. For this
most holy man did understand, that although he had God present with him,
whither soever he went, and had profited so greatly in the knowledge of God,
and his duty, as no man like him: yet did he know that there was profit to
be taken of the holy public assemblies, and that there is not any man that
does not need the hearing of the word, and the comforts of the sacraments. Let
them mark this chiefly, who think themselves so wise, that they wilfully
despise the holy assemblies, and the sacraments, and they much more, who for
the commodity of the transitory things of this world, do refuse the holy
ministry. Finally, they also, which had rather he still in the dunghill of
idolatry, than to be accounted of the Church of Christ.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 LIke as the Heart, long and sore chased with the hunters, panting and
braieng, does most greedily seek the fountains of waters: even so, I
miserable man, whom these men never cease so many years to persecute, do
cry unto thee, o God, with my whole heart.

2 Neither do I desire again the honor that I have lost, or the riches, or
my wife, or my kinsmen and friends: but I am consumed wholly rather with
thirst, and desire of thy lively and everlasting fountain, o God. Ah then!
when shall it at the length be granted unto me, most miserable man, that I may
behold thee in thy house?

3 I feed my self with tears day and night, hearing these wicked men
vpbraiding me, as though I were forsaken of thee, asking daily, Where is my
God?

4 O how bitter unto me is the remembrance of the former times! when I consider
how great a multitude I was wont aforetime to lead unto thy house, which
caused the very fields to sound forth thy praises with their songs and danses.

5 Go to yet, my poor soul, Why art thou so amazed, and troubled so greatly?
wait thou, whilst God that thy deliverer do come. For he, I know well, will
bring to pass, that I shall appear again in his sanctuary, and shall give
thanks unto him for my deliverance.

6 But, oh my God! I do lie down overthrown, both in the strength of my
body and mind, thinking of thee so far absent, being chased unto Jordan, and
lieng hid in the tops of the mountains, Hermon and Mizar.

7 One deep follows another, and calls me to destruction, thy streams
breaking out with horrible sounding, and the conduits of the clouds rolling
down upon my head, and all the floods powered forth to destroy me at once.

8 Be it far from me yet, that I should despair: for surely the Lord will
provide for me in the day time, through his goodness, and in the night time,
he will give me cause to sing forth his praise. Finalie, I will never cease to
pray unto God, the only author and preserver of my life.

9 I will say unto God, unto whose only protection I trust: Can it be, that
thou should be unmindful of me? and suffer that I, being oppressed of the
enemy, should lie for ever in sorrow and misery?

10 Will thou never regard me? nothing moved with the loss of those things,
whereof I am most unjustly spoiled: but wounded to the heart with those wicked
words of mine enemies, when I hear them oftentimes speak in derision, asking,
Where that my God is?

11 Go to then, my seely soul, why art thou so amazed? and why art thou so
disquieted? wait rather whilst the Lord come, for he will grant me, that I
being again delivered, shall give him thanks. Thus he delivering me, shall
cheer my countenance: he, I say, is my God.

PSALM. XLIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm is a portion of the former, repeating the prayers whereby he
prayed to be restored to the Church.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Maintain my right, o God, and defend my just cause: deliver me from this
unmerciful multitude, and from the deceitful and wicked man.

2 For I trust to thy power alone, o my God: wherefore do thou refuse me,
and suffer me to go heavily, being oppressed of mine enemies?

3 Grant, I beseech thee, that thy mercy and truth may shine unto me, which
may bring me unto that holy mountain, even to thy tabernacles.

4 O God! I will there witness my joy with my voice, coming forth unto thine
altar: and I will praise thee, o God my God, upon the harp also.

5 Wherefore art thou cast down my soul, and so sore disquieted? wait upon
God, for it will come to pass, that I shall praise him again. For this is that
my God, who delivering me, will again comfort me.

PSALM. XLIIII.
The Argument.
This is also a Psalm of prayer, but full of most grievous lamentations, the
author whereof is supposed of many, not to be David, because these
complaints seem not to belong to his time, therefore other do refer it to
some other time: but I do think, that that which is spoken in the 18. verse,
and afterward, does much less agree to any time, than to those times, which
came after David, and the slaughter of his people. I therefore rather suppose,
that it was written of David, and even in those times that were betwixt the
death of Saul, and the anointing of David in Hebron. For the Philistines being
at that time conquerours, and civil war being raised up, though David behaved
himself very moderately: yet it is manifest, that the affairs of the
Jsraelites were very sore vexed, and no doubt, many captives were carried
away from sundry places, and sold: and yet the history does not record, that
any thing was then changed in religion. But the circumstance of this time does
marvelously commend David's faith, and his mind, for the establishing of the
kingdom of God, not thinking of himself alone, but inditing these prayers for
the whole Church. And as concerning the matter it self, this Psalm teaches
us that, which we ought especially to know, that is to say, that the Cross
is annexed with the doctrine of Christ crucified, not for the trial of this or
that man alone, but also of the whole body of the Church, as the 22. verse of
this Psalm is recited of the Apostle, Romans 8.35. Although then, that to suffer
for righteousness sake, is a sure testimony of our conformity and likeness with
the son of God, for the which Christ commands us to rejoice: yet seeing we
are not iron hearted, but the same Christ does bid us to suffer together in the
private afflictions of our brethren, and much more in the public calamities of
the Church, it is needeful that our faith should then chiefly be kindled to
prayer, by pouring out sobs and sighs into the bosom of our father, of the
which prayer, this Psalm ministers unto us a most notable example. For it is
an other thing to murmur against God, as unjust and deceivable (as they use to
do, which receive the promises of God after a sort for their own commodity)
than to do as he does, not as one particular man, but as the whole Church,
declaring and acknowledging the benefits of God already received, that we may
determine, though these inferior things be changed, yet God will always
remain like himself constant, and that we so complain both of the cruelty
of the enemies, and of these alterations, that we still remaining in faith, take
occasion thereby to pray so much more earnestly.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THis our present most miserable estate calls into our remembrance, o God,
those former times, of the which we have heard of our elders: for they have
declared unto us, how many and how great things thou have done for our sakes
of old.

2 To wit, that thou have driven out by thine own hand the people, which
possessed this country, that thou might place them here: and moreover
also, that thou have broken and consumed all that remained of those nations,
that this stock or lineage of our elders should spread far and wide.

3 For surely there was no cause why they should ascribe the atteining and
winning of this country to their own weapons: or wherefore they should
imagine, that they have resisted so many and so mighty people by their own
power: naie, all this praise is thine, because it so pleased thee, of thine
only mercy, to strengthen us by thine arm, and thy right hand stretched out,
and by the brightness of thy countenance.

4 Neither did thy mercy cease here, for it failed not to govern us
afterward: and, oh that thou would continue to deliver us! as al things are
obedient at thy commandment.

5 For of old it is plain, that we did drive away our enemies: neither did
any rise against us, whom we have not repulsed by calling upon thy name.

6 For neither by the trusting in our own bow or sword, have we obtained so
many victories.

7 But thou thy self have delivered us from our enemies, and have put them to
shame.

8 And we, o Lord, daily praise thee therefore, and set forth these thine
innumerable benefits.

9 But now, o God, what alteration of our state and sudden change is this? now
do thou reject us, whom thou did defend: now do thou shame us, who
did before fill our enemies with shame and confusion: now do thou forsake
us, who before wast our captain, to go before our armies.

10 Hereof now it comes, that we that have so often chased away our enemies,
whilst thou wast our captain, have now fled from our enemies following upon
us, and have bin exposed to their lust and spoil.

11 Thou give us up then unto them, to be devoured like sheep, and they
draw us into bondage, and scatter us amongst them.

12 Thus have thou sold thy people for most vile price, and without any
chapman to increase the price, thou have sold them to any that would buie them.

13 Thus have thou given occasion to our enemies to rail and jest upon us, so
that of every side we could hear nothing of those people that dwell about us,
but scoffings and reproaches.

14 To conclude, we are a common talk unto al men, and we are mocked of the
profane nations which wag their heads at us.

15 Neither is this for one day, but no day passes, wherein we do not behold
these things, so that we dare scarcely look up for shame.

16 Whilst on the one side, reproaches and railings are increased: and of the
other side, our most cruel enemies gape over us.

17 Notwithstanding yet, though we be stricken with so many and great miseries,
we are not unmindful of thee, neither do we forsake the covenant that thou have
made with us.

18 We have not turned away our heart and love from thee to any other,
neither has any cruelty drawn us away from the worshipping of thee, as
thou have appointed us.

19 Although thou have cast us away, as it were into wildernesses full of
dragons, and have overwhelmed us, as with the shadow of death.

20 But if it be otherways, and that we have forgotten thy name, o our God,
and are known to have worshipped any strange or feined God:

21 Thou, o God, that beholdest the very secrets of the heart, go to, call us
to accomptes for this wickedness.

22 Therefore, for thy sake alone are we killed every day: neither are we in
any better condition than sheep appointed of butchers to ye slaughter.

23 Now then, o Lord, rise up at the length! for how shall we say that it
comes to pass, that in so great misery of thy people, thou seem to
sleep? awake, o Lord, neither put us away for ever!

24 Should thou turn away thy face from us, that are thine? should thou
have no regard of this our misery and oppression?

25 Surely, we are cast down upon the earth by the burden of our miseries,
and lie down flat, cleaving to the earth.

26 Come forth therefore and help us, and for thy singular mercy redeem us.

PSALM. XLV.
The Argument.
This whole Psalm is altogether allegorical, and has the selfsame argument,
that the song of Solomon has: but I cannot consent unto those, which think it
to be the marriage song of Solomon, and the daughter of Pharao. For, besides
that the Hebrew inscription or title would not have omitted that: I see, that
that marriage is plainly and worthily condemned of the holy Ghost, 1.
Kings. 11. so that, me thinks, it is a great absurdity, to suppose that it
was a figure of so great a matter. And that same spiritual conjunction of
Christ and the Church, is in this Psalm most diuinelie described by an
allegory borrowed of common marriages, the which the prophets afterward have
oftentimes opened, and Paul himself, Romans 7.2. Cor. 11. and Ephesians. 5. But we
must mark, that as in marriages among men, first contracts are made, and then
the marriage celebrated: so Christ, the husband of the Church, is to be
considered after a sort in a twofold state, that is, in a state of weakness,
which we may compare with the contractes: and in the state of glory, which he
obtained after his resurrection, being now the true and the glorious husband of
the Church, even though it continue as yet in part upon the earth: and in this
Psalm he is set forth as glorious, and that has entered in marriage with us.
Christ therefore is that King, the husband of the Church, than whom there is
nothing more beautiful, as he that wants al blemish. And what the force of
this persuasion is, it does not only appear in entising, but also in changing
men's minds through the preaching of the Gospel, and the unspeakable power of
the same. The same Christ, in as much as he is man, received the spirit, not in
measure, but most abundantly, so that it redoundeth to all the saints: he
has a sword given him, not for ostentation, like an insensible idol, but that
he must draw it forth, and this is it that pearceth to the separation of the
soul and of the spirit. Also, he is furnished with arrows, wherewith he
strikes through al his enemies: wherefore exceeding praise and singular
excellency, both in preserving his children, and in confounding the proud, is
by good right due unto him. Again, afterward he is brought in, carried upon
three horses, to wit, the truth, meekenes, and righteousness, which are governed
of the word, as of the only directer of the course: for the declaration of the
which most divine allegory, according to the weightines and worthiness of the
matter, we had need have a whole book. But by a contrary this may briefly
be understood, if a man do consider, how the kings and princes that are led by
a contrary spirit are wont to be carried f^r otherwise, not upon horses, but
upon most savage and cruel beasts: namely, ambition, arrogancy, fiercenes,
cruelty, riot, and horrible oppression of subjects. And we must carefully
note that which follows, that howsoever the world does impeach and slander
this government, being both most righteous, and most moderate: yet this just
King rules al things prosperously, and the more he is resisted, the more he
shows forth his power, both in that so just, and so safe defense of his poor
flock, and also in wounding his enemies to death, inwardly by his heavenly
power: that is to say, when he gives them up into a reprobate sense, so that
they become the instruments of their own destruction. And though al these
things do fall out daily, whiles this King defends al his elect, that none of
them do perish, and reuengeth their enemies, as pleases him: yet that which
seems here to be noted, appeared plainly in the very beginning of this
marriage, that is solemnized in deed, when as he did terriblie punish the
thankeles synagogue with those rods that as yet endure: but yet preserving a
remnant of his elect, through a certain rare mercy, which he used toward so
rebellious a stock of Abraham. Having now gotten the victory, this King is
placed in his throne, the which is said to be eternal, that it might be
signified not to be of this world, not only because (as Solomon says) justice
establishes the seat of a king, but also for that this King is both the true
and the eternal God, and the very son of David according to the flesh: and
to whom, in that he is placed above every name, even in that he is man, al
power is given both in heaven and in earth, as this verse is cited. Heb. 1.8.
so that neither there are more kings, (for that one wife can not have many
husbands) neither yet is he so to be understood God, that he is not man: (for
thus he were no meet husband for this Church, which consists of men) neither
also is he man in such sort, that he is not the eternal and very God: for then
the Church should not have one husband sufficiently able to defend it. After
this, the most holy government of this kingdom, that is to say, of the
Church, is added: for the Church of God alone is ruled by the true rule of most
upright government, in all public and private vocations, because there the
spirit of God reigns, instructing the judgment of the godly, and brideling
their affections. And the cause of this saying, which follows, is very
weighty, to wit, that this King (both concerning his very person, and also
the heavenly gifts) is anointed above his fellows, that is to say, he is
exempted out of the number of other kings. For the most excellent kings, even
David himself, was infected with many and grievous sins: but in this King
nothing at al is wanting. Finally, those things that are spoken of his most
precious apparel, do partly belong to the voice of his father, In whom I am
well pleased, wherein is signified, that the father was reconciled unto us, both
by the perfect integrity of the person of our Immanuel, and likewise by this
most sweet smelling savor of his obedi^nce, even to the death of the cross:
and partly to that saying of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 2.14. We are the sweet savor
of Christ, who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, 1. Cor. 1.30. And out of his iuorie tabernacles: namely, his
heavenly seat, from whence he does behold us, he does after a sort power down
al these things, and even himself upon us. Now follows, after the description
of the King, the husband, a most perfect description of the Church his wife,
and of the princely marriage: wherein other her companions are joined to the
hol^e Israelites (who have the title of the Queen) that are themselves kings
daughters: all the which being appointed to one husband, do in very deed
bear the person of one Catholic Church, but yet are distinguished from her,
as from the princess or wife: because the holy Jews, Prophets, and Apostles,
and the other natural branches have the first place: by whom, even we are
brought into this Kings chamber, through the gold and beauty whereof we also
shine and are beautified. But this is chiefelie to be marked, that these
Queens are not said to have taken al these ornaments out of their own
wardrobe, but to have taken them of the king himself, that we might acknowledge
al our goodness to proceed from his bountiful mercy, that has covered our
nakedness, and therefore that that is to be counted the true Catholic Church,
which goes crowned amongst her fellows with the only righteousness of Christ
f^eelie imputed unto her, although also an other righteousness begun in us, does
consequently fellow this justice, and separateth the children of light, from
the children of darkness, the which thing is by a like allegory shadowed of
Christ himself. Matthew. 11.22. These things being declared, wherein almost all the mysteries of our salvation are contained, the Prophet turns his speech to
the Church it self, or rather to every member thereof, exhorting it to study
how to approve it self more and more to her husband, of whom she is loved so
tenderly: and he also shows by what means she may do it: namely, if
hearing him diligently (for faith comes by hearing, without the which we can
not please God) and turning unto him (that is, continually beholding his will
in the glass of the law) she cast away al corruptions, either engendered in
her nature, or taken from her elders, or continued and confirmed by long
custom, that she may learn more and more to obey this her husband alone, as
her head and Lord. There is annexed an exhortation, which has respect to the
very infancy of the Christian Church that first began in Iewrie: for we may
know by the very history it self, how slender, poor, and miserable the
Church was concerning the flesh, consisting only of an hundred and twenty
persons, and those very poor and needy. He does therefore comfort it,
foreshewing that at length they of Tire also should join themselves unto them,
by the which name, he understands the Gentiles, comprehending even the
princes themselves: but yet so, that he might warn us, that all the beauty, of
the which he spoke, and which is by infinite degrees more excellent than all the
ornaments of al Queens, how precious soever they be, is inward, and now in
deed is not to be seen of fleshly eyes, but shall in the time appointed
appear so bright and glorious in the Queen, and in her whole nursserie, that
it shall pass al men's capacity: even then, when as the Apostle says, we shall
go to meet Christ, and shall be for ever with him, being entered into his
palace. But what (say thou) in the mean time shall be done? Doubtless this
Queen shall bring for^h children for her husband, and al those shall be worthy
and true Kings, and shall reign euerie-where, like those their elders that were
the ancient Patriarchs, having brought Satan, sin, death, and their own
selves into subjection. Hereof it comes to pass, that this same marriage
shall be perpetual and everlasting.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 MY heart so boileth within me, that it must needs burst forth that which it
has conceived, even a magnifical song of the King, consecrated to the King
himself, and that with such zeal and feruencie, that no pen may seem to be
able to attain unto the voice of the speaker.

2 Doubtless thou art the most beautiful of al men, an incomparable eloquence
and grace of speech is in thy lips: for God has adorned thee most bountifully
with all these gifts, which shall never be taken from thee.

3 Come forth now, o most mighty champion, girded with the sword, and show
that thy beauty full of majesty!

4 Come forth, I say, and do al things prosperously, carried upon thy
triumphant chariot, even the word, as a governor directing it, and let truth,
mercy, and justice draw it. O how great and marvelous things do I see, that
thou shall bring to pass by this thy mighty power!

5 Yet shall thou not want such, o King, who shall resist thee: howbeit, I do
see thee again armed with sharp arrows, wherewith thou will wound the hearts
of thine enemies, and so cast down al people.

6 For thy throne, o God, is for ever and ever, and as nothing is more stable
than thy kingdom, so is thy scepter righteousness it self.

7 For thou love righteousness, and hate what so ever is against it: for, o
God that our King, God that is thy God, has powered forth upon thee al his
bounty, that no man is able to be compared unto thee.

8 For when thou come forth of thy iuorie palace, a most fragrant odor of
thy garments does spread it self, than the which, nothing can be more
pleasant: therefore do al men run together with prease unto thee, to declare
their joy.

9 Yea, and the kings daughters beautified with thy gifts do come also,
amongst the which, the Queen being present, sits at thy right hand, bearing
a crown of most pure gold.

10 Hear therefore, o daughter, consider diligently unto what manner of
husband thou art coupled, learn of him alone what he requires of thee, that
thou should forget thine own nation, and thy fathers house, and al other
things, when thou come under the authority, and into the family of this
husband.

11 So will it come to pass, that thou shall be more and more in his favor, to
whom only it is meet yt thou should be subject as to thy Lord.

12 And thou shall be again honorable, even to strange people, of whom even
the most rich honoring thee, shall desire thy friendship.

13 But at home chiefly, even with thy husband, thou shall sit most richly
decked, clothed altogether with garments broadered with gold.

14 Thus shall thou then be set before the King, with such and so precious
apparel, the virgins thy companions, waiting and going with thee unto the King:

15 Whilst that you altogether, with most great joy and reioicing, enter into
the palace.

16 Here shall thou see thy children, whom thou have borne unto thy husband,
flourishing, and nothing inferior unto those thy most noble elders reigning
over the provinces of the whole world.

17 Therefore, o King, I will praise thy name in all ages for ever: and the
people with me shall sing praise unto thee world without end.

PSALM. XLVI.
The Argument.
Jiudge* that this and the 47. Psalm was written of David, or of the sons of
Corah, after those great victories which they had over so many and so mighty
enemies, whereof mention is made 2. Sam. 8. And two principal commodities, of
such like victories are set forth unto us in this triumphant Psalm: the one
is, because the glory of God is by this means amplified, with the care
whereof, the saints are much more touched, than with their own profits
whatsoever: the other, for that thereby it may be seen in deed, that the
Church alone is in safety, though it be most fiercely assaulted by Satan and
the world, and utterly destitute of man's aid, the which thing the Prophet does
set forth with marvelous words and figures, ioining also thereunto a prophecy
of the calling of the Gentiles.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WE have proved sufficiently, by due experience, that God is our defense and
strength in our dangers.

2 Therefore we will not fear at al, though the earth be shaken from her
foundations, and the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea.

3 Though all the storms of waters sound about us, with most horrible noise,
and mounting up do shake the very mountains.

4 Yet the city of God, which the most high has consecrated unto himself for
his habitation, does rest in the mean time safe, and comforted with his most
gentle and pleasant rivers.

5 For, seeing that God himself does dwell in it, how can it be subverted? nay,
as often as need is, he will wake early in the twilight, and will help it.

6 Behold, the nations did rage on every side, and the kingdoms had prepared
battle euerie-where against us: but as soon as he thundered out his voice, al
their fiercenes, although they filled the land with their multitude, did fall
down, their hearts melting for fear.

7 For the Lord, having far other armies, is on our side: that God, I say,
of Jacob, is our defense.

8 Come hither, I pray you, if any doubt of this matter, or negligentlie
regard these things, and consider with me the works of the Lord: namely,
what destruction and desolation is now come upon those countries, which did
rage so mightily against us.

9 Behold how sudden these battles and tumults are ceased on every side!
behold how he has broken the bows, and has cut in sunder the spears, and
burnt al their chariots with fire!

10 Hear the Lord himself finalie setting forth this example, and thus
calling upon your enemies: O ye mad men! leave off these things, and learn at
the least by these your miseries, that I am GOD, whom ye have wounded by the
sides of my people, and whose name ye labor in vain to abolish. But, it is so
far from your power to do this, that contrariwise, I will once dilate my
glory wide and broad throughout the whole world.

11 Finalie, let us conclude this fully, that the Lord being furnished with
innumerable, and most mighty armies, stands on our side: and that that God
of Jacob, is a most sure defense unto us.

PSALM. XLVII.
The Argument.
The very order of this Psalm, and chiefly the fifth verse, seems unto me
manifestly to declare, that this song was written by David, full of most
fervent zeal, and sung of the sons of Corah, in that pomp most full of
majesty, wherein he brought the Ark of the Lord at the length into the city,
which was called after his own name: the which excellent story is set down,
2. Sam. 6, and 1. Chro. 15. And this song of praise does teach four principal
things. 1 With how fervent zeal we are bound to seek the glory of God. 2 How
careful the princes chiefly ought to be, to establish the public holy
ministry, and to amplify it. 3 What great difference there is betwixt the
people chosen of God, and other nations, proceeding only of the mercy of God.
Last of al, that other nations also in the end shall be partakers of this so
great mercy. Of these four, there is no part, which does not much more
appertain unto us, than to the old people, now when this prophecy is
fulfilled at length, and Christ him self is come unto us.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Al ye people being gathered together, clap your hands, and praise God with
most ioiful voices!

2 For this is that Jehovah, not closed up in this Arc, for he is higher than
the very heavens: notwithstanding, he sets before our eyes this testimony
of his presence and mercy: this, I say, is the King, showing himself terrible
against his enemies, this is the Lord of the whole earth.

3 This is he, that will bring into subjection the people that lie near unto
us, over whom we shall have authority.

4 This is he that has given us that most excellent heritage, by whose power
we may worthily glory of our dignity and honor, and that by his singular
benefit: for none other cause, but that it has pleased him to receive us into
his favor.

5 Behold, God comes up to his holy mountain with triumph, the Lord comes
with sound of trumpets.

6 Sing unto God, sing, I say, sing praises to our King, sing praises.

7 For this is the greatest King by far, even the Monarch of the whole world,
sing al you that can sing.

8 Praise God, I say, who is not only our King, but the King of al people,
sitting upon his holy throne.

9 For the very governors of the people shall submit themselves to the people
of the God of Abraham: for he is only the Lord of the whole world, and the
preserver of the same, far higher than al powers beside.

PSALM. XLVIII.
The Argument.
There is the same argument of this Psalm, and of the 46. although it seem to
have been written long after, in the days of Josaphat, as may appear, and is
to be referred to the story, which is written, 1. Chron. 20. there is added
therefore the praise of the city of Jerusalem (which was a figure of the
Church) by the beautiful situation, and by the strength of the walls and forts:
whereby yet the Prophet does not say, that the safety thereof does stand, but
by God alone, the Lord of the city, that we may understand, that the Church is
preserved by the same only defense, although so often as it so pleases God, it
is not destitute of man's armor and defense.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Doubtless the Lord does show himself great and most worthy of al praise
euery-where, but this is seen chiefly in that his own city, which
knowledgeth him for their God, and worshippeth him in his holy mountain.

2 For this is that mount Sion, of most pleasant situation, looking toward the
north, the ornament and joy of the whole earth, the city of the great King.

3 For there verelie God dwells, as in his palace, and there is he knowledged
again, to be the only defense thereof.

4 Neither need we to fetch any far proof of this most plain thing: for
behold, the kings associate together, were about to set upon it.

5 The which, so soon as they did behold, being stricken with the admiration of
it, fled away speedily.

6 For so wonderful terror, and so sudden came upon them, as the pangs of a
woman that trauelleth with child:

7 And as the most raging violence of the wind uses to shake the ships,
sailing in the deep seas.

8 Therefore we our selves have seen the woonders which we heard of our elders
of old, that were done by God to deliver them, done also in the city of the
most mighty Jehovah, the city, I say, of our God, the which being now
defended of him, he will from henceforth also preserve for ever.

9 Surely, o God, thou have not disappointed us, calling for thy mercy in thy
palace with full confidence.

10 And the fame of this thing, whither soever it shall come, shall stir up al
men, even to the uttermost coasts of the earth, to set forth thy praise: for
even this one sact does plainly declare what great fidelity thou keep, in
preserving thy servants.

11 Therefore let the whole mount Sion break out into gladness: o ye damsels of
Judah, rejoice you of the just judgments of God!

12 Compass Sion round about, account her towers.

13 Consider diligently her walls, and her bulwarks, and set forth the praises
of her palaces, so that ye may spread forth the memory thereof, even to the
posterity.

14 And let al men understand that this is God, and will for ever be our God,
which will not leave us, no not in the last minute of our life.

PSALM. XLIX.
The Argument.
The Prophet does use a most grave preface in this Psalm, and that not without
cause, seeing that it contains a doctrine necessary to the nobles and
commons, to the rich and to the poor: to this purpose, that the one should not
be so insolent and proud, and the other should not be discouraged or carried
away with the desire of riches, beyond the rule of righteousness: therefore this
Psalm contains the same argument in substance with certain Psalms that
went before, and that do follow. Wherein the vanity of the fading goods of
this world is described, especially when they be gotten with craft and deceit,
or their owners do abuse them. But a peculiar and certain special matter is
regarded in this Psalm: namely, of those rich men, which oppress the godly
poor, which poor men, the Prophet does comfort chiefly with two reasons.
One, that there is nothing more vain, than the pride of the rich men, as the
thing it self proves in the end: whereby it solloweth, that these proud men
are not to be feared, as though they had like power to hurt, as they have will
to do it. The second, that the certain hope of a better life, is to be set
against al those cogitations, which use to come into our minds in such
temptations, and that we must fully determine, that they are more like
beasts, than men, who being increased with honors and riches, do not
understand how to use them, much less that any wise man should envy them.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Al ye people, hear what I shall say: give ear, al ye inhabitants of the
earth.

2 Both noble and simple, both rich and poor.

3 For I will speak of things, which who so regards, is very wise: and I
have meditated with my self, things that al men ought to understand.

4 I my self will diligently consider, that I have determined to teach unto
others, even great and most hid things, that this my harp may be perceived to
have sounded, not only unto others, but unto my self also.

5 For why should I tremble? though I be never so much oppressed, and be set
round about with my mighty enemies compassing me, and following my very
footsteps.

6 They trust, I grant, unto their riches, and are proud, resting upon their
great wealth, as though it were lawful for them to do what they lust.

7 But, I beseech you, what is more vain than this momentanie confidence? for
the use of riches doutles is no longer durable, than the life it self, which
is most short, although a man should possess them to the last minute of his
life. For no man can redeem another, much less himself, with his riches,
neither can he make any covenant with God for the restoring of life.

8 For the price of the life is greater, than that it can be paid by any man,
much less that a man should get immortality to himself by any riches.

9 Naie, no man can obtain unto himself the prolonging of his life by any
sum of money.

10 For the very experience of al ages does teach, that al men must die, be
they wise, be they foolish: and that there is no difference in this thing,
either of kind, or of age, or of state of the person: and that those goods,
which they leave when they die, do commonly go unto others, even whom they
know not.

11 Yet notwithstanding, such is the foolishnes of many, that they so lead
their life, as though they should never depart hence, whiles a fained
imagination does occupy their minds, as though their families remaining for
ever, and their fair houses that they had built, should continue always upon
the earth in their name.

12 Howbeit, there is nothing more vain, than the madness of these men, seeing
man does not remain long in this worldly honor: so that they which live thus
minded, are not much differing from the beasts.

13 For their life is nothing else but mere foolishnes, and yet their
posterity, being no wiser tha^ they, praise their example, and follow it.

14 Howsoever it is, and howsoever these men do please themselves in these
fantasies, yet like beasts shut in the night in the stable: so these men, when
the evening of their life comes, are gathered into the grave, where death
does eat and devour them, as it does others: Contrariwise, although they must
die also, which walk the right way, yet another light shines out in due
time, at the rising whereof it shall appear, how much more excellent these be,
than those mad men. For that shadowed power of them shall streightwaies be
changed into the grave, the which shall devour them caught away from these
their glorious buildings.

15 But God contrariwise, will bring the godly from the prisons of the grave,
and will receive them to himself.

16 Therefore I will thee to be quiet, and not to be discouraged at the sight
of any proud rich man, howsoever thou see him to abound in riches.

17 For the time shall come, when his dead body shall lie in the grave, spoiled
of all this dignity, and his glory shall not follow it so far.

18 Wherefore, let them delight themselves, and please themselves as they list,
and judge none other to be happy, but them that give themselves to pleasure
after their example.

19 Yet, if thou consider their great grandfathers, of whom they boast, and al
their continuance, thou shall find, that they are buried with an everlasting
death, the which does manifestly condemn the foolishnes of their posterity.

20 Finally, although any man be increased with riches and honors: yet if he
want true wisdom, he is to be counted to differ little or nothing in this
life from the beasts, which wholly perish.

PSALM. L.
The Argument.
Like as God has given unto man a spiritual soul, and a visible body: so
would he always, and will be worshipped with them both, even with the inward
and outward worship: and as he would have the external actions to be the
witnesses of the inward, so has he diligently admonished men, that both
twain should consent and agree together. Furthermore, least men depraved by
nature, should go out of the way, either in the one, or the other part of the
worship of God, he has given commandment most fully unto the people of
Israel, by written laws, both for religion and manners, how he would be
worshipped, both inwardly and outwardly. There was also another chief end of
the ceremonies, (that is, of the outward worship) that they might behold in
them, as in a certain table, both the guiltines of their own sin, and also
the promises of taking away sin, which should be performed in Christ: and so
being admonished, should continually remember their duty again, what they
did owe unto God, and what unto their neighbors. None therefore, did more
abuse the outward worship of the law, than they that dreamed that they had well
done their duty, if they had diligently observed those outward ceremonies,
neglecting their chief end. Therefore does the Prophet Asaph reprove this
most wicked error (which the Pharisees afterward did most stubbernlie defend)
in this most divine and godly Psalm: the which thing also afterward the other
Prophets did not cease to inculcate: and he brings in God using most strong
arguments, both from his own nature, and from the condition of those things
which were offered unto him. And this doctrine is to be retained in the Church
of God alwais, because men commonly stumble at this stone. But chiefly it is
necessary for this our time, in the which, not only that old error is
restored, whereby the sacraments are transfourmed into so many idols, by
taking away the difference of the signs, and the thing signified, and the
doctrine of the worthiness of the work brought into the Church: but also men
are come to this point, that the Pharisees of our time do apply to their
inventions, that thing which the holy Ghost damneth of manifest impiety, in
the abuse of the outward worship appointed by God himself.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 HOW long, o ye hypocrites, will ye abuse the patience and long suffering of
God? how long will ye despise us, that speak unto you of the true worship of
God? Go to, let God himself come forth, and speak unto you. And lo, behold, I
say, even God, that same Jehovah, that is above all the powers and potentates
of the world, does come forth, not only calling you, but also all the
inhabitants of the world from the sun rising, to the setting of the same,
that the whole world may be a witness of your madness.

2 And least you should think, that any thing here should be spoken against
the ceremonies appointed by God, he being about to treat of this matter,
sets his glorious throne of judgment in very Sion, the most beautiful
place of the whole earth, and best beloved of him: it is so far from him,
that he will forsake it.

3 Behold, I say, that same our God comes, and will be no longer dumb, with
flames of fire going before his face, which shall consume all that stand against
him, and with thundering tempests on every side, that he may show himself
such one now in declaring the meaning of the law, and in bringing it to the
right use, as he declared himself of old, when he gave the law.

4 Yea, and also he cites the heavens above, and the very earth beneath, to
be present at this his judgment, that he has determined against you, being
his rebellious and stubborn people.

5 Hear you therefore him that cites you in these words, by his apparitours:
Call unto me, says he, these people, upon whom I have bestowed my singular
favor and mercy above others, and with whom I have made this covenant of
sacrifices.

6 The very heavens shall be witnesses against you of the just deciding of this
controversy. For God himself will sit as judge, least you imagine, that ye
have to do with any mortal man.

7 Then said he, Art not thou that people, whom I have chosen to my self?
that Israel, whom I have embraced? Wilt not thou hear me, being God, even thy
God, I say, reasoning with thee by this authority?

8 And I do give the definitive sentence of this controversy, by these plain
words: I have commanded in deed, laws of sacrifices, which I would have to be
offered unto me daily, but these, as they are offered of you, I do nothing at
al regard: neither is this the cause wherefore I expostulate with you. For I
behold those things daily, more than I would.

9 For, I pray you, whom do you think that I am? Am I such a one, as must
ask bullocks out of your herds? or goats out of your foldes, if perhaps I
need them?

10 Do you forget that I am the Lord of all the beasts, which feed in the
woods and mountains?

11 And that I, which have created them, do know all the fowls, and all the
wild beasts, which live in the field anie-where?

12 Therefore, if I were hungry, why should I ask them at thy hand? seeing it
is plain and evident, that the whole earth, and whatsoever is contained
therein, is under my power alone.

13 Again, what madness is this of you? do you think, that I do eat the
flesh of bulls? or drink their blood?

14 Do you not know what sacrifices I require? even praises due unto me, and
the payment or your vows.

15 The calling upon my name chiefly in adversities, from the which, thou
being delivered, may give thanks unto me, for the benefits received, and
may testify thy self in thy whole life, to be desirous of my glory.

16 But, o ye wicked and vnpure men! how much soever ye dissemble holiness with
the multitude of sacrifices, hear with what words the Lord himself does
rebuke you. Dare thou be bold to talk of mine ordinances? either to make
mention of my covenant?

17 Which wilt not suffer thy self to be corrected, despising al my
threatenings, and casting away my commandments behind thy back.

18 If thou see a man that steals, that is he whose company thou most
desire: if thou know an adulterer, thou give thy self streightwaies to be
partaker of his wickedness.

19 Thou speak nothing, but that which is naught: thou sharpenest thy tongue,
to forge al kind of deceit.

20 Thou slanderest and backbitest even thine own brethren, the brethren, I
say, borne of the same mother, much less will thou abstain from hurting
strangers.

21 These are thine exercises, these are thy manners: the which wickednesses,
because I have dissembled a little while, through my long sufferance, do
thou therefore account me to be like thee, and to allow these things? Nay, I will
deal with thee more severely, and set every one of thy faults before thine
eyes: and I will cause thee to perceive by experience, that I have not
forgotten, nor put out of my memory any one of them.

22 Know ye this therefore, and weigh this diligently and earnestly with
your selves, so many of you as forget God, that if I once in mine anger take
you away, there is none able to deliver you. Finally, hear ye what I at the
last conclude of this matter: he that offers his heart unto me, studious and
careful of my glory, it is he only that offers unto me an acceptable
sacrifice: he that directs his manners after the rule of my commandments, him
verelie will I deliver from al perils, and make him partaker of everlasting
felicity.

PSALM. LI.
The Argument.
This Psalm was then written of David (as the Hebrew title does declare) when
he was most sharply rebuked of the Prophet Nathan, for that his most horrible
adultery, joined wi h manslaughter, as is witnessed, 2. Sam. 12. It is one of
the principal Psalms of David, containing a notable example of repentance,
which must go before remission of sins. I say it is notable, whether thou
respect the person it self of David, or else his sin, or lastly the very
matter, that is, every part of repentance. For first, here is set forth unto
us an example of a most mighty King, and of a most holy Prophet, and such a
one, who (as much as any man could) had well deserved of the Church, even to
this end, that we should learn, that kings have none other God, than poor men
have: and the higher that one is in authority among men, the more evident and
infamous is his sin, and for that cause he must labor the more carefully, to
give unto other an example of repentance. But now concerning him, of whom here
we have to speak, I know not whether (h^uing consideration of the
circumstances of David's person) any monument be extant of so many and heinous
crimes proceeding out of one fact: whereof we perceive how great weakness there
is, even in the best, and most excellent men: and again we learn, what
exceeding mercy the most gracious and most mighty God does show to every one
that do repent. But if we carefully ponder that which is the principal point,
I can not tell whether ever there were any example heretofore of such a
repentance. For, as concerning the inward acknowledging and abhorring of the
sin, which they call contrition, J see not what can be required as wanting in
it: since David confesses, that he was guilty of eternal damnation, even from
the first moment of his conception, and most exquisitelie searches forth all the circumstances of his offense: so far is he from seeking any excuses to
cover it, and from dreaming of any recompense for his deserts. But if we
consider the outward confession of the sin (which is another part of true
repentance, the which commonly they confound with satisfaction) what a rare
example is this of so great a king, and so worthy a Prophet? that laieng aside
al humane respect, either of his roial majesty, or private reputation, did not
only suffer the story of that his crime to be put in writing: but even he
himself wrote a perpetual testimony of his acknowledging of the fact, thereby
to satisfy the whole Church. For the holy man knew that we must be ashamed of
sin, not of repentance, or turning from sin: and that a skarre that is
seared, or a blot that is printed in us by sin, is not increased by such a
public confession as is made before the Church, but rather is cured up and
taken away. David so far differs from the deintie men of our age (that had
rather bear any thing, than the yoke of this discipline and government) that
though he were a king of great power, yet he willingly submits himself
unto it. Finally, the commodity of true repentance does here also most
evidently appear, in that God does never forsake those that are truly
penitent: but contrariwise turns even their very sins, both to his glory,
and their amendment and comforts. And there are joined in this Psalm also two
principal points of true religion: the one, of original sin: the other, of
the abuse of sacrifices: as though the purgation of sin consisted in that
outward ceremony, whereas on the contrary part, the sacrifices that proceeded
from vnpure men, did not please God, and therefore forgiveness of sins must go
before, which afterward should be sealed in the hearts of the believers, by
the sacrifices which are made and offered by faith.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WHat excuse shall I bring, o God? what pretense shall I make? None at al. I
only beseech thee most merciful GOD, to have mercy upon me most miserable
sinner. And whereas this one wickedness of mine contains many sins, that
thou would grant unto me, not one mercy, but thy whole mercies whatsoever,
that my sins may be done away at once.

2 Certeinlie, this fault is so foul, and this blot sticks so sore unto me,
that I can not persuade my self, that it can be washed away of thee, but by
great difficulty: wash me therefore, o my God, again and again, and
oftentimes, whilst the filth of so great wickedness be utterly washed away.

3 For I do not deny or lessen my fault: but I detest and abhor my most
grievous sins daily set before mine eyes.

4 For though I have greeuouslie offended men, yet have I chiefly to do with
thee. For unto thee, unto thee have I peculiarly offended: and though I went
about to deceive men, yet could I not deceive thee, a most evident
eie-witnesse, and my judge. Therefore I neither desire to be justified, neither
can I desire it, seeing thou have decreed most justly those things that thou
have pronounced against me, and I confess plainly, that nothing is faulty
in thy judgments toward me.

5. Yea, and though I had not committed these horrible factes: who am I but a
mortal man most worthy death and destruction? being even then corrupt and
guilty, when my mother conceived me: and polluted with sin even then, when
she nourished me in her womb.

6 And why should I allege the sacrifices offered unto thee by me, and such
other things? for thou do only allow that righteousness that rests in the
secret of the heart, the which this same thing yet declares that I wanted:
notwithstanding, I confess that thou have taught me that thy wisdom, not as
thou have done every one, but as one of thy household privately and most
familiarlie.

7 Wherefore I stand here before thee, the greatest of al sinners, but do
that, which thou only can do: purge me o God with that thy true hysop, and
al my filth shall straightwaies vanish away: wash thou me, and I shall suddenly
be whiter than snow.

8 Comfort me with the testimony of thy holy spirit, which may bring unto me
that most comfortable and most ioiful message of the forgiveness of sins, so
shall thou suddenly refresh the bones which thou have worthily broken.

9 Do not, I beseech thee, do not behold my sins, but rather raze out of
thy tables at once, all the wickedness that I have committed.

10 Begin again, o God, that thy very work, which thou had begun in me,
and is left off, because I have let it: namely, the pureness of my heart, of
the which thou art the only author and creator, and renew those holy motions
of my heart within me.

11 Ah! do not cast me away out of thy sight, though I be worthy to perish:
neither spoil me at once of the gift of thy holy spirit.

12 Restore unto me rather that unspeakable joy, wherewith they are endued, who
being delivered by thee, from the bonds of sin and death, are received again
into thy favor: and let thy holy spirit that true comforter grant unto me,
that I may willingly give my self henceforth wholly unto thee.

13 Then shall I teach other wicked men also by mine example, that howsoever
they have been turned from thee, they would return again unto thee.

14 O God, the God of whom al my salvation depends, deliver me from this
crime of so bloody murder, that my tongue with joy may praise thy justice, in
performing thy promises with continual songs.

15 Open my mouth, o Lord, which my wickedness has caused to be dumb, that I
may set forth thy praise.

16 For, as concerning the offering of sacrifices, I know they will not be
acceptable unto thee, offered of these vnpure hands: neither that the taking
away of sin, which I require, is set in the blood of beasts, or else I would
have laden thine altar already with burnt offerings.

17 But behold, I do offer sacrifice, wherewith, o God, I know thou art
delighted, even a mind broken with the true feeling of sin, earnestly
repenting and abhorring himself and his sins: the which offering, I know
well, thou will not despise.

18 Finally, my God, let not these my sins so much displease thee, that they
should hinder the course of that thy free mercy toward Sion: but continue
notwithstanding to build the walls of thy city Jerusalem.

19 Then surely, when I am fully reconciled unto thee, thou will acceptable
receive al kind of sacrifice duly offered unto thee, and then will I lode
thine altar with sacrifices.

PSALM. LII.
The Argument.
That outrageous cruelty, which Saul did show against the innocent priests by
the counsel of Doeg, the which history is written 1. Kings 21 gave occasion to
the writing of this Psalm, as the Hebrew title does testify. For when David
had received this message, it may easily be coniectured in what sorrow he was,
both for his singular piety, and also because he might seem after a sort to
have given the occasion to this murder: therefore he comfort himself with
this Psalm, written against that most cursed false accuser: first of al,
threatening him with the just judgment of God, then confirming himself, and
the whole assembly of the godly, with the sure faith of Gods promises,
whereupon the safety of the Church rests, which then doubtless was sore
stricken with that slaughter of the priests. And in the end, he gives thanks
unto God, because he had delivered him from so great danger. And this Psalm is
now also very profitable, seeing there never want Princes, who do persecute
the godly, and specially the pastors of the Churches, with all kind of
cruelty: and there has bin always a great number of flatterers, which have
inflamed their rage with diverse false accusations, a most heavy example of the
which wickedness, more cruel than that of old, we have seen of late in the
kingdom of France.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BUT dare thou boast, even of this thy most cruel mischief? (a valiant man
forsooth! which have slain so many unarmed men, not once resisting thee)
howbeit notwithstanding, thou shall never be able to destroy the assembly of
the godly, for whose safety, that most merciful and mighty God does daily
watch.

2 Thou art then wholly occupied in this, o mischievous man, that thou may
invent false accusations, and devise new sleightes, by the which, like a sharp
rasour, thou may murder the godly at a sudden.

3 Al vprightnes is loathsome unto thee, in regard of wickedness: and thou
appliest thy self to deceit, despising al justice.

4 Thou seek out desirouslie false accusations, whereby thou may devour
the innocent, and thou do exercise thy tongue busily to deceive.

5 And think thou, that thou shall do these things unpunished? nay, that
most just God will destroy thee utterly, he will pull thee out, I say, of this
thy tabernacle, in the which thou now so carelessly do delight, and he will
even pluck thee out by the roots.

6 And then, as thou have delighted thy self in destroieng the innocent: so
they, considering that God does punish thee justly, will worship him in deed,
and fear him, but they will deride thee with these words:

7 Behold, this man, who as though his life did not depend of the strength of
God alone, trusting unto his great riches, has imagined himself to be safe
and free from al dangers by his own wickedness:

8 But I, whom thou chiefly couetest to destroy, shall continue like a green
olive tree, in that same house of the Lord, whose ministers thou have
murdered. For that goodness of God, which stands sure in all ages, can not
deceive me, upon the stabilitie whereof I do rest.

9 I will praise thee undoubtedly o God for ever, who have delivered me
marvelously from this danger; and I will wait for whatsoever shall come
henceforth with a quiet mind, whilst thou sendest help, the which never
wanted unto them, whom thou have received into thy favor.

PSALM. LIII.
The Argument.
This is the same Psalm, and written with the same words, with the fourteenth
Psalm, except the last verse save one. There fetch the argument.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THat men are al so doting mad, to persuade themselves that there is no God,
it is manifest hereby, that they are also wicked: al do make themselves
abominable, and not one of them does lead his life aright.

2 The Lord himself, from whom nothing is hid, beholding men from heaven, to
see if any would know him, or seek after him,

3 Does find, that al are turned away from him, that they are altogether
filthy, and that there is not one at al, which orders his life aright.

4 Are not these mischievous men altogether mad, which devour the holy people
of God as it were bread, and never call upon God?

5 But the time will come, when the same thing shall terrify them, which now
they fear least of al. For God shall so destroy them, which have camped
against his people, that he will even break their bones: and thou shall inwrap
and fold them in shame, because God will make them vile and contemptible.

6 Oh that now at the length that savior of Israel would come forth but of
Sion! for then in deed Jacob shall rejoice, then shall Israel be full of joy,
when the Lord shall bring again his captives.

PSALM. LIIII.
The Argument.
David wrote this Psalm, when his secret holds were betrayed to Saul by the
Ziphims, the which danger, beside the very circumstance of the treachery, is
to be seen how great it was by the 1. Sam. 23.19. And whereas he was twice
betrayed of the Ziphims, J had rather refer this Psalm to the former
betraieng. And it is very profitable to understand, that not only the Saints,
and such as are in chief favor with God, do fall into these extreme perils,
brought upon them by such as should do nothing less: but also, how
wonderfully they have bin preserved: and again, how great faith and
constancy they had, that we may know, that we ought not to dispute of the
cross vainlie, and as of a thing that were only in imagination: but faithful
pastors must look even for the same conflicts of domestical enemies, as we
have experience in this age: and yet that such neither come by chance, neither
that they are forsaken of God, whom he seems to lay open to the lusts of the
enemies.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THou thy self, o God, save me, deliver me being an innocent by thy power:
whom else no mortal man can save.

2 Hear, o God, my prayers: give ear unto the words which I power out of my
mouth.

3 For, as thou see, these unkind men, and traitors both to me and to
themselves, have risen against me of the one side: and of the other, most cruel
men, thinking of nothing less than of thy majesty, do seek to kill me.

4 But God forbid that I should be discouraged, for he is my defender, and he
is present with them, whom he has raised up to be the supporters of mine
innocence.

5 Those snares that are set to entrap me, shall undoubtedly fall upon their
own heads. For thou shall cut them down, because thou neither wilt, nor can
break the promise that thou have made with thy children.

6 And I, being delivered, will in sacrifices willingly perform the vows
which I have promised unto thee, and will celebrate thy praises, seeing there is
nothing more excellent, or more bountiful, than thou alone.

7 Namely, for that thou have saved me from al distress, and with these mine
eyes I shall see mine enemies justly punished.

PSALM. LV.
The Argument.
Whether we say that this Psalm does pertain to the infidelity of the
Keilites, which is described 1. Sam. 23. or rather unto the flieng away of
David, being driven out by his son Absalom, which seems fully to agree
with these words, Divide their tongues: and with those things which he
rehearses of the infidelity of a certain man, whom he names not, as this
history is written 2. Sam. 15, 31. and 16, 23. and 17. there is one and the
same argument, and the same use of this Psalm as of the former. And concerning
the imprecations, it appears that they did not proceed of a mind desirous of
vengeance for private injury, by that mercy which David used at the same time
toward Saul, as is written 2. Sam. 16. and toward his son, although
unnatural and most wicked, 2. Sam. 16, 19. Furthermore, if a man consider the
wickedness of the authors of this conspiracy, and chiefly of Achitophel, he
shall perceive that David did not power out such prayers unadvisedly, but as
against men utterly desperate, the which also the end it self has proved to
have bin so many prophesies.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Hear now, o God, if ever thou heardest my prayers: and do not refuse me thy
suppliant.

2 Give ear unto me, I say, and hear me so greatly troubled, that I am
compelled with lamentation to turn my self hither and thither, and
marvelously to toss to and fro.

3 For what does not mine enemy threaten me? what does not this vile man
practice to oppress me? with what rage and hatred, he being inflamed, does he
invade me?

4 Wherefore, my heart does tremble within me, and I am stricken with the terrors
of most present death.

5 I tremble altogether for fear, and am horribly afraid.

6 Finally, I am compelled to break forth into these words: Ah! who can give
me wings, as it were of a dove, being thus beset on every side? whereby I may
fly away, and find rest in some place:

7 Behold, I will fly most far away: and I would not cease to fly still,
whilst I should come into the wilderness to remain there:

8 And would deliver my self from this outrageous tempest with all speed.

9 But thou Lord devour them, and move discord amongst them, disturb their
counsels and assemblies, as their wickedness deserves. How miserable is the
state of that city at this present? al things now are there full of oppression
and contention.

10 Such are their manners now, which watch their walls day and night: there is
nothing heard within them, but mutual oppression and injuries.

11 Al places are filled with wickedness: guile and deceit does rule in their
streets.

12 Furthermore, which is the most grievous thing of al, he does not me this
injury, to whom I have bin an enemy (for if it were so, I could better bear
it,) I say it is no open enemy, which does thus rage against me, of whom I
might have taken heed:

13 But thou, my companion, thou by whose counsels I was governed, thou my
chief familiar friend:

14 With whom I did always consult, which went by my side, when I did go to
the house of the Lord.

15 Let death therefore come suddenly upon them, and punish them: and let the
grave swalowe them alive at unawares, seeing that they are altogether full of so
great wickedness.

16 But I will cry unto God, and the Lord, no doubt, will save me.

17 I will not cease to whisper with my self, and pray morning and evening,
and at middaie, I say, whilst I be heard.

18 And surely, me think that I am now delivered, and wholly restored,
although these men, neither few nor weak, do make a sore battle against me.

19 For doubtless, God will hear me, and will oppress them. For he sits as
the judge of the world from the beginning: specially, seeing these men
continue in their wickedness, and have cast away al fear of God.

20 For that wicked man has assaulted him, of whom he never received any
injury: therefore he is guilty of great infidelity.

21 For his words were in deed softer than any butter, but he fostered
nothing within himself but war: and a man would have said, that his
communication was sweeter than oil, and yet he thought to give me my deadly
wound.

22 Go to then, my seely soul, why do thou torment thy self any longer?
cast off all this thy burden upon the Lord, which will provide for thee, and will
not suffer, that the innocent shall always continue overthrown.

23 Therefore, o God, cast these men headlong to be consumed in the bottom of
the grave: let these men, that are so desirous to shed blood, and faithles, be
cut off in the mids of the race of their life: but I will fly unto thee.

PSALM. LVI.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title does signify, that David did take the occasion to write this
Psalm, when he was intercepted by the Philistines, the which history is set
forth 1. Sam. 21. Howbeit, this appears by the course of the Psalm, that it
must be thus understood, not that he made these prayers, when he was conversant
amongst the Philistines, and fained himself out of his wits: or that he cast
forth these saiengs against the Philistines: but rather, being delivered from so
great a danger, he did thus complain unto God of Saul, and of them that moved
him to that cruelty: by whose rage (to avoid their crafty snares) he came
into so great danger. Howsoever it be, this Psalm does show unto us the
example of a singular faith and constancy, especially if we consider the
person of David, and from how great dignity, without any fault committed of
him, he was thrown down into so miserable condition.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 AH my God! have mercy upon a man most miserable: how near was it, that he
should swalowe me? neither does he yet cease to beset me round about, and to
bring me to extremity, as if he would devour me.

2 These men, I say, whither soever I remove or go, lieng in wait most
diligently, have a mind to devour me, and a great multitude do fight against
me, o God most high.

3 Notwithstanding, when fear comes upon me, I fly unto thee.

4 And why should I not glory of that thou have spoken unto me most boldly?
Wherefore, I trust in thee, o God, and will not be afraid. For what can these
mortal men do against me, that rest upon the power of God? who has testified
his good will unto me.

5 They are wholly bent upon this, that whatsoever I intend, I speak, or do,
they may pervert it, and thereupon take occasion falselie to accuse me.

6 They go together closely, following me at the very heels, seeking this
one thing, how they may take my life from me.

7 Notwithstanding, yet they hope by their crafts to escape thy hands: but
thou, o Lord, how many soever they be and how great soever their conspiracies
be, cast them down, I beseech thee.

8 I know, that thou have al my wanderings to and fro in a reckoning: I
beseech thee, gather my tears into thy bottels, they are, I trust, registered
in thy counting books.

9 Wherefore, so often as I shall call upon thee, mine enemies shall be put to
flight. For I know this assuredly, that thou art of my side.

10 For I have the word of God, whereof I glory: the word of God, I say,
whereof I will glory.

11 Wherefore, resting upon God, what should I fear? and what can any mortal
man do against me?

12 O how greatly do these so many, and so great benefits bind me unto thee!
but I will pay that, which only I am able: namely, the continual magnifieng
of thy mercy.

13 For thou have delivered my life forth of the most present doors of death,
and thou have raised me, when I was cast down: and that I live now, I may
only thank thee.

PSALM. LVII.
The Argument.
Another most great danger, much like to the former, which is s^t forth, 1.
Sam. 24. gave the occasion of writing this Psalm: whereof we may gather, that
it lies in the hand of God, not only with how great, but with how long
miseries (yea, even by wicked men) he will exercise his servants, and therefore
that we must pray continually, as well for the gifts of constancy, and
perseverance, as for the gift of faith. Jn other things this Psalm is to the
same purpose, as certain other that went before, and written of like occasion.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 NOw at the length, o Lord, it is high time that thou either look upon me:
or else I am undone. Wherefore, have mercy, have mercy upon me, I say, o
God: for this my soul does only trust in thee, and I fly only unto thee,
under the shadow of whose wings, I may lie hid so long, whilst these great
calamities do pass over.

2 I cry unto thee, o God most high, that thou would finish that, which
thou have begun in me.

3 And so doubtless will it come to pass. For the Lord will send help from
heaven, because I find none in the earth: and he will not suffer me so
shamefullie to be devoured. For there will come down from the heaven, to
deliver me, two invincible helps for defense, even his mercy, and that most
high and sure faith, which he declares in the perfourming of his promises.

4 In the mean season, I grant my self exposed of the one side to the paws
of the lions, and the cruelty of most outrageous men: and of the other side,
to ye false slanders of most shameless accusers, whose teeth are like unto
spears and arrows, and their tongue more hurtful, than most sharp swords.

5 But thou, o God, declare that thou dwell even above the heavens: and
cause that thy glory may be published throughout the whole world.

6 Whither soever I move my foot, their net is spread to take me, I do lie,
as it were, thrown down upon the earth: I see before mine eyes the pit, into
the which they hope to cast me down headlong, but the matter will go
otherways. For they contrariwise shall fall into the selfsame pit.

7 Therefore, o God, I being now prepared, with my whole heart, with my whole
heart, I say, have great desire to praise thee, both with my voice and harp.

8 Go to, my tongue: go to, both lute and harp: awake with me in the morning.

9 Even the gentiles, most far distant, shall hear me declaring thy praises,
the people shall hear me sing unto thee.

10 For surely, thy goodness extends it self unto the heavens, and thy truth
unto the clouds.

11 Declare thy self, o God, to sit above the very heavens, and show forth
thy glory to the whole world.

PSALM. LVIII.
The Argument.
It may be collected of this Psalm, that Saul, that he might have some excuse
to cover his hatred against David, did gather a council of the states, whereby
he procured him, being absent, to be condemned as a public enemy: now, there
is no greater injury than that, which does oppress under the cloak of law:
wherefore, David comforting himself, and appealing to God, does paint forth
those most corrupt judges, in their own colors, as one that knew them very
well: and also does pronounce the sentence against them, in the name of God
himself, not as a private man, but as a Prophet, and as a king already
allowed of God: and he uses similitudes most agreeable to the covetousness
and ambition of such manner of men. For where they have this purpose chiefly,
that they may set themselves aloft, and their children by these practices: yet
God does oftentimes cut them off in the mid course of their covetous desires:
and furthermore, their posterity, clean contrary to the opinion of their
fathers, does either consume away by little and little in the sight of al men,
or is destroyed by some sudden rage.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Ye states and senators! tell me, I pray you, if there remain any
sparkle of conscience in you. Is this to decree just judgment? O ye mortal
men, of how great dignity soever ye be, do ye judge aright?

2 Naie surely, seeing the matter it self declares, that inwardly ye devise
al manner of wickedness: outwardly and openly in all men's sight, ye do weigh
nothing but injury in your balance.

3 Neither is this now the first time, that ye do so: for I know that ye have
been enemies to justice from your beginning, and that you were borne unto al
falsehood, from your mothers womb.

4 I say, these men swel with poison, even by their nature, as the very
serpents do: neither will they suffer this poison to be drawn out of them by
any persuasion.

5 In this point being like the adder, which stops her ear against the
inchanters, be they never so cunning.

6 But thou, o God, unto whom I appeal, pull out the teeth forth of the
mouths of these most cruel persons: break the jaws, o Lord, of these lions,
that they do not devour the innocent.

7 And I pronounce in very deed, that it will so come to pass. For all their
power shall vanish, and flow away like water, and though they bend their bows
with all their force, whereby they may strike the just, their shaftes, no doubt,
shall break in pieces.

8 They shall be brought to naught, even like the snailes that mealt away in
their own shells: and like the untimely fruit of a woman that dies and is
borne together.

9 And their posterity, even worthy children for such fathers, like thorns
growing out of the bush before they grow to sharp pricks, so shall they be
destroyed with sudden death, carried away, as it were with a whirlwind.

10 But the just, beholding this just judgment of God, and imbrued with the
blood of the wicked, shall rejoice.

11 And every one shall say, Surely he loses not his labor, that loves
righteousness: Surely there is a God in the earth, that does also give to
every man his own.

PSALM. LIX.
The Argument.
David did write this Psalm, when his house was beset by the commandment of
Saul, that he might be taken, and slain, as the Hebrew title imports: the
history is read, 1. Sam. 19. and the same use is of this Psalm, as of the
former of like argument: but it has this excellent sentence amongst others,
That it is oftentimes expedient, that God should not beat down the enemies of
his Church at one moment, but by little and little, that his judgments might
thereby be more evident and plain: of the which doctrine, there comes much
profit, especially to bridle our impatience.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Deliver me, my God, from mine enemies, and even taking me up, as it were in
thine own hand, rid me from these men that rise up against me.

2 Deliver me from these men that live in mischief and murder.

3 For lo, they partly lie in wait for my life: and partly the most mighty
of them do gather their power against me, though I be guilty of no fault.

4 They come on heaps together, and they strengthen themselves against the
innocent more and more. Consider these things, o God, and come and help me
being in danger.

5 I beseech thee, o Lord the very God, to whom the heavenly armies do
obeie, God of Israel, rise up, and punish these profane people, and spare them
not, being given up willingly to al wickedness.

6 For, after that they have spent the whole day in lieng in wait for me, they
return at night, and run through the streets of the city, barking like dogs.

7 Furthermore, in the dark of the night (for who, say they, shall hear us?)
they bark out the wickedness conceived in their heart, and sound nothing but
slaughter and blood, being wholly bent how to take me.

8 But thou, o Lord, wilt deride their threatenings, and wilt have al those
profane men in derision.

9 Surely, his strength does depend of thy pleasure: wherefore, as these do
lie in wait about my house, so again I will diligently wait for thy help. For
thou verelie, o God, art my fortress.

10 For thou have embraced me verelie with so great favor, even preventing my
prayers, that thou will grant me, that I shall ioifullie behold mine
aduersareis to have their just punishment.

11 Yet slaie them not, o my God, least peradventure this people, whom thou
have appointed to be governed by me, if thou take them away so suddenly,
either do not consider this thy judgment, or forget it by and by: but scatter
them, being thrown down by thy force: and throw them down by the same
power, by the which thou will defend me.

12 Surely, there needs none other witness, but their own words to convince
them of wickedness: grant therefore, that they being convicted by their own
arrogancy, may be punished. For they have none other thing in their mouth, but
cursings and slanders.

13 Wherefore, at the length, when thou have set them forth as a sufficient
example, whereby thy servants may be taught, consume them wholly: consume
them, I say, being most justly angry with them, that al men may know, unto
the uttermost parts of the world, that thou art that true and only God, which
gouernest the family of Jacob.

14 But what will they do in the mean time? even lie in wait for thy servant
about his own house: and returning in the evening, they will bark like dogs,
and run about the city, least I escape any way.

15 And they will seek their supper, where soever they can get it: but though
they do not find enough to fill their greedy guts, yet will they watch about
my house, for to take me.

16 But I will declare thy power, and will show forth thy praise early in the
morning, because thou have defended me, and wast my refuge in extreme danger.

17 For all my help rests only in thee: therefore though I be now closed in
on every side, yet will I declare thy praise upon the harp, which have set me
in safety, o God, to whose only free mercy, I attribute my deliverance.

PSALM. LX.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title declares, that the history which is written, 2. Sam. 8. and
1. Chron. 23. has ministered the occasion for this Psalm, that is to say, the
battle that he had with the Assyrians, and the king of Zobah, whom David
overcame, as he did also all the people about him, as he prophesied before, by
the power of the spirit in this Psalm. For the order of the text seems not
to suffer, that we should say, that it was written after those victories. And
we learn, amongst other things, by this prayer written in the name of the
whole people, that though the Church seem sometimes to be utterly lost, as it
came to pass often in the time of the Judges, and chiefly when Saul was
slain, that God yet mindful of his covenant, does raise up the banner of his
word afterward more high, than ever before, stirring up men endued with
heroical spirits. But we must remember, that th^se things are now to be
applied rather to the spiritual enemies of the Church, than against the armies
that fight with outward weapon, although God also does defend his from them.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O God, thou verelie art worthily angry with us, thou have beaten us back,
and delivered us to the rage of the Philistines: yea, and thou have set one of
us at war with another, but now turn thee again unto us.

2 For what have we not suffered? For thou have shaken the very earth, so that
it does even crack and gape: therefore fill the clifts thereof, and restore it
being sore shaken.

3 Thou have caused us thy people to taste most heavy things, and have made us
to drink, as it were, a cup of giddiness.

4 But now again of the contrary, such is thy mercy, when thou give unto
us, being converted unto thee, thy standard, and thy truth to go before us, and
command us to follow our captain, and bring forth the army.

5 Defend thy beloved, and by stretching out thy right hand hear them, and
preserve them.

6 And why should we dou^t, I pray you, that this thing should so come to
pass? seeing God has spoken unto us forth of his sanctuary: wherefore, I do
wholly rejoice, being certain already of the victory. For God will grant
unto me verelie, that I shall compose and set my kingdom in order, ouer-comming
al mine enemies. I will divide therefore the fields of the Sichemites, and will
measure the vallie of Succoth.

7 I shall obtain my Gilead and Manasseh beyond Jordan peaceably, the Gentiles
round about being chased away. Ephraim shall be the chief part of mine army,
I will place in Judah the throne of judgment.

8 But the strangers, how fierce soever they be, shall do al servile work unto
me, the Moabites shall hold the basen to wash my feet, I will cause the Idumites
to take up my shoes being shaken off, and cast upon their heads, and thou
proud Palestina prepare triumphs for me, and ioiful songs, as thou have a
little before triumphed over us.

9 But by what captain shall I win so many strong cities? and by what power
shall I be strengthened to come unto Idumea?

10 Verelie thou being my guide, and trusting to thine only power, my God,
although thou have beaten us back hertofore, and have refused a great while to
go forth before our armies.

11 Therefore be present with us, o Lord, after the miseries of so many
years: for that help is vain, which is hoped for of men.

12 We trusting unto thee, o God, shall do valiantly, he alone will tread under
foot al our enemies.

PSALM. LXI.
The Argument.
David being an exile, declares by this Psalm, that like as there is a
continual battle betwixt the world and the saints, James. 4.4. so that the hope
of the saints is nourished by a continual remembrance of former benefits, for
the decree of God, concerning the preservation of his, is not changeable: yet
here be some things, which do rest upon the singular promise of God, not common
unto al men, as those things which David does promise to himself, for the
atteining of the kingdom, and for long life: trusting verelie to the word of
God, as is written, Psalm. 89, 11. etc. and 130, 11. and most fully, 2. Sam. 7.
Notwithstanding, so far do these promises belong unto every one of the
saints: that they are sure generally, that godliness has the promises both of
this life, and of the life to come, and so may cast their care of particular
events of their affairs only upon God. Furthermore, that which the Prophet
promises unto himself, of the eternity of his kingdom, seeing it is
referred unto the kingdom of the Messiah, which is both the son and the Lord
of David, which kingdom is not of this world, as it is applied by the Angel
Gabriel, Luke. 1. it brings great comfort, and most certain to the Church,
and to every member thereof in all miseries, how sore and extreme soever,
because that the honor of the king can not stand, but in the safety of the
subjects.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Hear my cry, o God, and give ear unto my prayers, seeing the greatness and
multitude of my dangers do so require.

2 For though I be driven far away from thy sanctuary, and do carry a
mind oppressed with cares: notwithstanding, I cry unto thee, requiring that
thou would now take me into that high tower, whither I cannot come by any
means, but by thine only power.

3 For hitherto thou have been unto me a most safe refuge, and a most sure
tower against the enemy.

4 Therefore I doubt not, but it shall come to pass, that though I be now far
absent from thy tabernacle: yet at the length, I shall be placed again therein,
and I shall rest there, under the defense of thy wings.

5 For thou, o God, have granted my desire, and have appointed me the king of
thy holy people.

6 And also thou will bring to pass, I know well, that prolonging the life
unto the king, whom thou have appointed, his age shall be, as it were, doubled.

7 Yea, this his throne shall be eternal, before thee: but, I beseech thee, give
unto him two keepers, upon whom he may only trust, even thy mercy, and thy
truth.

8 I then, being restored again, will praise thy name for ever, and will pay my
vows daily unto thee.

PSALM. LXII.
The Argument.
David being cast from his throne by the conspiracy of his son, and being
compelled to fly with an handful of men beyond Jordan, as may be gathered by
the 8. verse, striving with a most grievous temptation: namely, by so great
and sudden a change of things, tempted either to prove unlawful things, or to
fall to desperation, does conclude, that he will notwithstanding, persevere and
continue constantly in waiting for the help of God: and he confirms those
that did cleave unto him by his example, and that with so great, and so lively
a courage of heart, whereunto the very words and sentences do answer, that
whosoever has this Psalm in memory, it seems, that he can be overcome with
no kind of temptation.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Howsoever it is, and what thing soever, and after what sort soever it
seems to threaten me, my heart does rest nowhere else, but only in the
power of God, and his will declared unto me: and for a full conclusion, I will
wait for deliverance from him alone.

2 Furthermore, whatsoever comes unto me on the contrary, God is my
fortress, my salvation, my tower: and I know this, that though I be tossed
long and much more and more, yet shall I never fall.

3 But ye, o wicked men! will ye never cease to conspire altogether against
me, with incessant fiercenes? and to drive me down, whom ye account like a
wall ready to fall of it own accord, or an heap of stones sliding down?

4 For these men are afraid, least I be raised up again, and therefore they
are wholly occupied in this, that they may utterly cast me down: and there is
no craft, which they do not invent against me, faining friendship in their
words, but devising destruction against me, as appears in very deed.

5 But go to, my seely soul, look up unto God, and quietly rest in him: for
I do depend wholly upon him alone.

6 Finally, with what weapon soever I am invaded, seeing he is my rock, my
salvation, my tower, I cannot fall.

7 My health depends on him alone, although I be forsaken of al men: he will
exalt me into the highest place of honor, whom these men covet to cast
down: he will receive me, which am assaulted of al, into his high and
invincible tower. This is he, in whom only I have settled my hope.

8 Power forth therefore unto him all the cares and griefs of the mind, al ye
people, following mine example: trust in him, if you be wise, both in
prosperity and adversity, seeing he alone is the most safe refuge unto us.

9 For men are but mere vanity, and nothing is more deceiuable than the men
even of most might: yea, if thou would weigh in balance nothing it self
with mortal men, and withal that is in their power, nothing would weigh them al
down.

10 Dream not therefore, as mad men use to do, that you can grow more great
by force, or by deceit: and if riches fall unto you, set not your minds upon
them, and so be deceived with vain hope.

11 But rather set this before you, that God has testified so plainly, both
with words, and by the end of things, and I my self have proved oftentimes by
experience, that al power remains in God.

12 Oh Lord! as thou art the greatest, so art thou far the best, and most
merciful: therefore it cannot be, but thou will give due punishment unto the
wicked as they deserve, and thou will comfort thine that love righteousness, for
thy great mercy sake.

PSALM. LXIII.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title of this Psalm does refer the argument thereof unto the time,
when David wandered miserably and full of sorrow in the wilderness of Herith, 1.
Sam. 22.5. and Engaddie. 2. Sam. 24. Now the greater that these dangers were,
so much the more excellent example of faith and constancy does this Psalm
show, as some other before, and following after. But this is chiefelie to be
observed, that he being cast down so suddenly from so high dignity, does
lament for nothing that was taken from him, but only, that he had not liberty
to go into the tabernacle of the Lord: the which is a most grievous accusation
of them, who either do despise so good a thing being present, especially
contemning the use of the sacraments, either caring for nothng less, than that
they should be counted in the Church: yet does he comfort himself in this
thing, that he wants this great commodity neither by his fault nor
negligence.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 AH God, my God! though I do want the sight of thy house, most sore against
my will, be it far from me yet, that I should not remember thee: naie, the
farther and longer that I am absent, so much the more my soul is inflamed with
desire to seek thee daily in the twilight: and I wholly desire thee in this
dry ground and thirsty, wanting chiefelie thy waters.

2 Unless the rage of mine enemies had let me, I do testify, that I desired
nothing more, than to behold thee in thy sanctuary, and therefore would have
hastened speedily to those visible signs of thy power and Majesty.

3 For doubtless, this thy goodness, that offers itself as it were there to be
handled, is more sweet by far than life it self, the which also I would set
forth with all my power.

4 Wherefore, I would lead my life there, in setting forth thy praises: there
would I lift up my hands with others, and openly call upon thy name.

5 There would I sound forth thy praises with loud voice with my heart,
satisfied with the fatnes and marowe of thy most holy delicates.

6 But seeing that this thing is now denied unto me, most miserable man, and I
am compelled to change my place every moment, I do that thing which only I
am able: to wit, whithersoeuer I come, I cease not to think of thee, and I do
even consume the nights without sleep in the meditation of thy benefits.

7 And why should I not do so? having experience so often of thy help: therefore
do I now not only rest safely under the defense of thy wings, but also I
rejoice and triumph.

8 For I am far absent in deed in my body from thy house, but without any
fault of mine: yet do I cleave unto thee in my heart wholly, as thou do
strengthen me again, which am weak, with thine inward strength, though I be
destitute of those thy daily helps.

9 But these contrariwise are wholly bent to cast me down, yet shall they be
cast into the very lowest places of the earth.

10 I forewarne, I say, that the edge of the sword shall consume him, and they
shall be torn of wild beasts.

11 But I, o God, to whom thou have appointed the kingdom, will rejoice and
praise thee, unto whom, they that do worship thee truly and deuoutelie, will
join themselves as companions with me: but these men that bear thy name in
hypocrisy, shall then have their mouths stopped at the last, and keep silence.

PSALM. LXIIII.
The Argument.
By this Psalm, as by many other, we may evidently perceive, how David did
not power out so many complaints for naught, and how great his constancy
was: of the which examples how great the commodity is, those only know, to
whom it is given, not only that they should believe, but also that thy should
suffer for Christ's sake.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 VErelie, o God, to whom besides thee shall I fly? thou then hear me
pouring forth just complaints with a loud voice, and preserve me sore stricken
with the fear of the enemy, and brought into most present danger of life.

2 Cover me against the crafts of these wicked men, and against the assemblies
of mischievous persons.

3 For they have sharpened their tongue like a sword against me, and most
bitter slanders, as it were arrows laid to the string:

4 That they might wound me by subtle trains, though vnguiltie: and that
they, neither fearing God nor men, might strike me through suddenly at unawares.

5 Neither do they this lightly, or by error: but they harden themselves more
and more in these most wicked purposes, and do with all diligence lay snares
for me, and that so boldly, that they say, that their crafts can be
perceived of none.

6 For they have searched out most hid things, and there is no craft so
subtle, and lieng so deep in the heart of any, which they have not
thoroughly searched out.

7 But what have they prevailed? for God will strike them through with a most
certain and grievous wound, which streightwaie shall follow.

8 And they shall be perceived in the end, that they have called down upon
themselves, by their cursed speech, that evil which they thought to bring upon
me: this shall be done in the sight of al men, standing amazed at their just
punishment.

9 They shall be, I say, a gazing stock unto al men: and there shall be no man
which shall not commend, and have in admiration this work of God.

10 But the innocents, whom these men without cause labored to oppress, shall
more ioifullie praise the name of God, and shall fly unto him more boldly
hereafter: al, I say, that be of good conscience, shall take occasion of a
certain holy boasting and glorieng hereby.

PSALM. LXV.
The Argument.
This Psalm or hymn written to the praise of God, first teaches us, that his
benefits are never any where rightly knowledged and praised, but only in
his holy congregations. Then he bids us to mark three special things, and
to praise God for them. One, and that for the greatest, that God does gather a
Church unto himself, in the which he will be praised, where he hears them
that do pray, where he does forgive sin, the which finally he never
ceasseth to bless with the multitude of his benefits, and most mightily to
defend. Secondly, that he does maintain the society of m^n, by appointing
and preserving the policies and gouernements in the midst of so great
hurlieburlies. Thirdly, that he does minister, from heaven, al things that are
necessary for this life so abundantly and liberally.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THou certeinlie art only he, to whom once uttering thy pleasure, al men
must worthily yield: but this praise, o God, is given unto thee in the only
mount of Sion, where only vows are paid unto thee aright.

2 And thou again there do despise the prayers of none that fly unto thee.

3 There do thou purge the sins, wherewith else we being utterly
overwhelmed, durst not lift up our faces before thee.

4 O blessed is he therefore, whom so ever thou so fauourest, that thou
command him to come unto thee: and whom thou feedest abundantly with those
true good things of thy house, and most holy palace, after thou have received
him into the number of thy household servants!

5 For although no men seem to be more in danger, yet experience it self does
declare, that none are more sure, whiles that thou in very deed do declare
thy self terrible to al their enemies, for the perfourmance of thy promise, so
often as they call upon thee: so that, even to the utmost coasts of the earth,
and the farthest part of the sea, the same of thy name being spread, al men are
compelled to look up unto thee.

6 Thou art he, by whose power consists whatsoever is high in the world, even
by thy might, which as it establishes these mountains, which we see, and the
kingdoms also and the policies, whereby mankind is preserved:

7 And like as thou do calm the storms of the sea, and the sounding
tempests: so also thou do break and bridle the fiercenes of the raging
multitude.

8 By these testimonies of thy most mighty power, the inhabitants of the earth
being convinced, do tremble and keep silence: and thus peace being restored,
thou causest that men again do lead their life both day and night in
comfortable peace and tranquillity.

9 For thou take care of the earth, even from the heavens watering it, and
making it fruiteful with plentious showers (which are thy very gift) wherewith
it being soupled and prepared, does retain the seed committed unto it.

10 Afterward, thou waterest the sorrows of the fields, thou breakest the
clots, thou mollifiest the ground with mild and timely showers sent down from
above, thou cherishest and bring forth the seed with their buds.

11 Finally, thus thou crownest the earth most bountifully with all kind of
fruits yearly, the fatnes dropping down from above, from thy steps which
way soever thou walk.

12 Yea, and the pastures of the wilderness do thou cherish with dew, and
thou fillest the high hills also with gladness.

13 So are the pastures clad with sheep, the valleys are clothed with corn:
finally, al places do sound together with ioiful shoutes and songs.

PSALM. LXVI.
The Argument.
This Psalm, and also certain other, do seem to be written for the perpetual
use of the Church (although they have some private occasion) partly to renew
the memory of so many old deliverances, and partly to give thanks unto God,
so often as any occasion does offer it self either privately or publikelie.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Al ye inhabitants of the earth, sing unto the Lord a triumphant song.

2 Praise his name with songs, praise him with glory and majesty.

3 Say in his presence: O how terrible and fearful do thou show thy self
in very deed! for even thine enemies, overcome by the greatness of thy power,
are compelled to acknowledge thee, and to dissemble at the least that they
fear thee.

4 Therefore shall all the earth worship thee, it shall sing praises unto thee, and
celebrate thy name.

5 Go to, come hither al you, behold the things that God has done, and with
how great miracles he has declared himself terrible to mortal men.

6 This is he that dried up the sea in a moment, and made the flood passable
unto our feet, for the which benefit, we his people, even at this day do
rejoice.

7 This is the almighty Lord of the whole world, beholding from heaven all the
nations scattered throughout the world, not suffering them that forsake him, to
exalt themselves at their pleasure.

8 O praise the Lord, o ye tribes and kindreds consecrate unto him: sound forth
his glory far and wide.

9 For he has restored our life when it was lost, and he only has stayed
that we should not fall with sliding steps.

10 For thou would not have us to be lost, o God: but only have tried us,
and fined us, as the silver put in the furnace.

11 Thou have snared us, and cast us bound with chains into most straight
distress.

12 Thou have suffered that our enemies, having overcome us, did abuse us with
reproaches and scoffs, as though we had bin beasts: we have tasted the heat
of the fire, and the force of the water, but thou afterward have sent comfort,
and refreshed us.

13 Wherefore, I am present in thy house with offerings, to perform my vows:

14 Which I have fully vowed in my misery, and spoken them with my mouth.

15 Therefore have I determined to offer unto thee fat offerings, even the fat
of rams, and bullockes, and goats.

16 And you also, al others that fear God, come hither I pray you with me,
and give ear unto me, rehearsing the benefits bestowed by him upon me.

17 I have called for his help with my mouth, and have praised him with my
tongue:

18 And that with a mind free from al evil imagination, for else he would not
have heard me.

19 Therefore the Lord has heard me, and gave ear unto my prayer.

20 Praise then be unto God, who refused not my prayers, neither did withdraw
his mercy from me.

PSALM. LXVII.
The Argument.
The Prophet does attribute unto the only mercy of God, both the spiritual
blessings which are peculiar unto the Church, and also the corporal, whereof he
desires the continuance: and also does prophecy the spreading of the Church,
that should be under Messi^h, and so exhorts all the godly to give thanks,
and to celebrate the praise of God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GOD, from whose mercy so many benefits do proceed unto us, continue to
bless us, and chiefelie do cause his pleasant countenance to shine upon us.

2 That his way, which he has declared unto his people, may be known as far
as the borders of the earth are extended: and that al nations may embrace the
salvation promised by him.

3 Let al people praise thee, o God: let all the people praise thee.

4 Let the people be glad and rejoice. For the time will be, when thou shall
govern the whole world with most just and righteous judgment.

5 Let the people praise thee, o God: let all the people praise thee.

6 Command the earth also to bring forth her fruits: and continue o God, our
God, to heap thy benefits upon us.

7 Continue I say, o God, to bless us: and let all the world again
acknowledge and worship thee.

PSALM. LXVIII.
The Argument.
David being about to carry the Arc of the covenant (which was the visible
testimony of the presence of God, and of his mercy) into the tower of Sion,
when he had ordained a solemnity, whereof he himself was the ringleader, than
the which there was never any in this nation more famous, which is written
plainly 1. Chron. 15. he made certain Psalms, undoubtedly by divine
inspiration, wherewith he inflamed both himself and others doubtless to praise
God marvelously. And amongst other, he did write this Psalm also, than the
which nothing could be written more diuinelie, more full of majesty, or more
eloquently by any man: and he repeateth and calls to memory the former
benefits of God, and adds marvelous artificial colors, rather painting it
forth, than writing it. But we must diligently mark this thing further, that
the Prophet stood not fixed only in that matter, which was then in hand, but
by divine inspiration did insinuate mystically, as the times did then suffer,
the most excellent secrets of the kingdom of heaven: and therefore by that Arc
is mystically understood, that the son of God (in whom the fullness of the
Godhead remains) has put upon him our flesh: by Sion is meant the
tabernacle, not made with man's hand: by bringing in of the Arc, the ascension
of Christ into heaven: by leading away of the captives that Satan, sin, and
death, are overcome: lastly, by the temporal blessings continually powered
upon Jsrael, the spiritual and everlasting gifts of Christ daily bestowed
upon the Church, by the holy ministry and work of the Gospel, is here
figuratiuelie described, as Paul witnesses, Ephesians. 4, 8. and almost
throughout the Epistle to the Hebrews.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to, let God only arise, and in a moment al his enemies shall flee away,
wandering and scattered abroad.

2 For all the ungodly must none otherwise vanish away at his sight and
countenance, than the smoke, which being driven with the wind, is dispersed,
and the wax that is laid before the fire, is melted.

3 But on the contrary, the righteous, being marvelously refreshed by his
countenance, shall rejoice, and shall leap for gladness.

4 Go to then, celebrate the Lord with songs, sing unto his name, prepare the
way to him that has long wandered in the wilderness, and coming now unto
us, praise him, I say, who is eternal both in name and in deed, and rejoice
before him.

5 For he that is the father of the fatherles, and the defender of the widows,
has now chosen amongst us, holy and stable habitations unto himself.

6 This is he that has made fruiteful those barren persons, of whom we had
our beginning: who has losed us from bonds, being oppressed with most cruel
bondage: who has cast out the rebels into dry and desert countries and
regions.

7 For thou, o God, when thou wentest before the people, and leddest them by
the horrible wilderness,

8 The earth it self did tremble, and the heavens being afraid by feeling of
thy majesty, were dissolved as it were in a sweat, and dropped down, when
thou, o God, the God of Israel, did sit presently upon the top of mount
Sinai.

9 Furthermore, thou have not failed to water the country, in the which thou
have placed thy people, with the rain of thy large liberality, and to refresh
it when it was barren:

10 Even that thou might feed therein thy flocks, to whom thou have given
it, and might strengthen thine, which else should have perished through
hunger.

11 And also thou have given the cause to the great multitudes of our virgins,
to rejoice and sing of thy victories, which should otherways have bin
unthankful, unless they had praised thee with hymns.

12 Behold the mighty, even the kings compassed about with their armies, have
fled away: they have fled, I say, and the women that used not to come out of
the house, have divided the spoil.

13 O ye damsels! ye have lived hitherto amongst the soote of the pots, even
sitting at home: but now ye may come forth, shining and glittering no
otherwise, than the doves as white as snow do cast forth a certain golden
glistering as they flee in the air.

14 For when the strength of the enemies was scattered by the power of GOD, a
most clear brightness did shine unto the earth, even like the snow that lies
upon the top of Salmon, which dazeleth the eyes of them that look upon it,
with the brightness thereof.

15 O mount Basan! thou verelie art very fat, and art seen to have many tops
of thy hills: but what can thou do? God has not chosen thee, but the mount
Sion unto himself.

16 Why then should ye be proud? why should ye lift up the tops of your hills?
for God has chosen unto himself this hill far lower than you: in the which he
will dwell, the Lord has consecrated unto himself this seat for ever.

17 Here verelie he is carried in his chariots, the which two millians both on
this side and that side do draw, and being environed with these armies, as he
did sit upon the top of Sina of old, so now he enters the possession of this
his holy place.

18 Now therefore, o God, thou do verelie exalt thy self, carrieng away
thine enemies captive, and taking the spoils that thou may give to thine,
even thus taming thine enemies, how rebellious so ever, and going up to the
tower of Sion, that thou may settle thine everlasting habitation there.

19 Wherefore, everlasting praise be unto thee, o Lord: o God, I say, our
savior, which do heap upon us thy continual benefits.

20 For this is that God, who has declared himself unto us to be the God our
savior, after a thousand sorts: and the Lord has approved in very deed,
that deliverance from death is set in him alone.

21 Therefore, so often as need is, that same God will break the very head of
his enemies, and will cast down the wicked, which arrogantlie hold up their
long shagged hair.

22 For he has promised to do the same thing again, which he did of old, when
he preserved our elders, putting to flight the kings of Basan, and brought them
through the deep streams of the sea.

23 Wherefore then, o people, thou did walk through the midst of the
heaps of thine enemies that were slain, dogs licking their blood.

24 Then, o God, our elders did see thee going: o my God, they did see thee
going, I say, within thy holy tabernacle, o my King.

25 The singers went before thee, the trumpetters following thee, the company
of damsels also did play upon the timbrels on every side, one sort exhorting
an other by course with this manner of song:

26 Go to, praise God with courage, praise the Lord by course, ye that come of
Israel.

27 Benjamin on the one side, which was the youngest, has mightily overcome
the enemy: Judah on the other side has destroyed them with stones: also the
valiantnes and noble victory of the princes of Zabulon and Ephraim is famous.

28 And as we knowledge all this power to have proceeded from thee alone, so
disposing it: so do we now pray, o God, that thou will confirm it more and
more unto us.

29 And we doubt not, but thou will so do, much more hereafter, than ever
before, forth of thy holy palace, which thou have chosen unto thee at
Jerusalem, whither the very kings also shall once come, and shall offer gifts
unto thee.

30 Repress therefore and bridle, with thy terrible rebuke, those cruel
beasts, that break forth of their holes and dens, fierce ranks of bulls, and
scatter the people that are like wanton calves, that go proudly decked in
silver, even the people that covet wars.

31 Surely, the time will come, when the princes of Egypt shall run hither unto
thee: and the Aethiopians with great haste shall hold up their hands humbly
unto thee.

32 Go to then, ye kingdoms, scattered through the earth, praise God with
melody, and sing unto the Lord:

33 Even unto the Lord that sits upon those most high heavens, from al
eternity, as it were upon a chariot, and makes a terrible and most mighty
sound from thence.

34 Acknowledge ye his power, the majesty whereof does no less shine forth in
Israel, than the thunders sounding in the clouds.

35 For this is that sanctuary, o God, out of the which thou declarest thy
self terrible unto thine enemies: but unto thine, o God of Israel, thou will
minister power and strength: therefore al praise and glory be given unto thee
for ever.

PSALM. LXIX.
The Argument.
Although this Psalm is altogether agreeable with the 22, Psalm written in
the form of a prayer, and no doubt by the occasion, which either the flieng of
David out of the court of Saul seems to offer, when the chastity of his
wife was not preserved safe unto him, who was married unto an other husband,
much less did they spare his goods (to the which opinion I do incline) or the
treason of Absalom: yet is it certain, that the holy Ghost did so govern the
mind and the hand of the Prophet, that he seems to have regarded those things
rather, whereof he was a figure, than himself, if not in every place of the
Psalm, yet surely in the most part thereof. So then is Christ our mediator
rather brought in, complaining unto God of the cruelty of his people, which
could be overcome by none of his benefits, than David complaining of his
enemies: and he also wishes and forewarneth those punishment, which the people
of the Jews did worthily suffer for their ingratitude, wherewith we also now
see that they are punished: of the which mystical interpretation, we have most
clear witnesses, Matthew. 27, 48. Luke. 1, 20. John. 2, 18. and 19, 28. Last of
al, Paul, Romans 11, 9. and 15, 3. And seeing the members must be conformed unto
the head, it follows, that there will be great use and commodity of this
Psalm, so long as the Church shall soiourne upon earth.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Deliver me, o God, even now ready to be swallowed with these streams of
water.

2 For I am now cast down into the most deep mirie pit, where I can by no
means fasten my foot, and I am drowned with most deep waters, flowing upon
me on every side.

3 I am wearied with crieng, my jaws are pained with hoarsenes, and also mine
eyes have failed, while I earnestly wait for my God.

4 Furthermore, I may more easily tell the hairs of mine head, than the
multitude of mine enemies, which hate me causeless: yea, and the number of
them that hate me deadly, is increased daily: and, which thing is most
grievous of al, those that spoil my goods, deal so with me, as though I had
first spoiled others.

5 But thou, o God, know very well, whether I have behaved my self
vprightlie and wisely, or no: and whether I be a wicked man, as these do
slander me.

6 What then if I be forsaken of thee? verelie they must needs also be ashamed,
who have joined them selves with me, trusting to the promises that thou have
made unto me. O most mighty Lord, stay thou this thing, that it come not to
pass: neither suffer that they fail of their hope, which seek thee the God
of Israel, in the defense of my cause.

7 For doubtless, whatsoever they pretend, they would wound, not me, but thee by
my side: and for thy cause alone am I so railed upon, and do lie down covered
with reproach.

8 Neither am I forsaken of strangers only, but also my kinsemen, and mine
own brethren do despise me, as an unknown person, and as I were not joined
unto them with any bond of consanguinitie.

9 For, even so often as I perceived thy glory to be diminished, I burnt with
sorrow, the which thing, I neither would nor could dissemble, and I accounted
my self to be wounded with the reproaches cast out against me.

10 Wherefore I, being in great heaviness, have absteined even from my meat for
sorrow, the which my care, these men had in derision.

11 I laid down my garment, I say, and took unto me hair cloth, the which
thing these men turned into scoffs.

12 So that in the public assemblies also, they ceased not to prate on me: and
feasting merrily, they made songs of me.

13 What shall I do then? Verelie, o Lord, I do notwithstanding, power out my
prayers unto thee, being nothing afraid either of the power, or of the pride of
these men. For though thou have now loosed the raines to their dissolute
wickedness, I do know, that thou have appointed a time again, when thou will
bridle them, and wilt declare in deed how much thou love thine. Wherefore, I
beseech thee, o God, by that thine infinite mercy, that of thy great and most
assured goodness, thou will hear me, when I cry.

14 Deliver me, I beseech thee, from this devouring pit, least I be wholly
swallowed up: deliver me from mine enemies, and from the flood of so many
miseries.

15 Forbid, I beseech thee, least I be overwhelmed utterly by the abundance of
waters, least this most deep stream swallowe me, least I being devoured in
this deep pit, no hope of deliverance be left unto me.

16 Grant, o Lord, of thy great mercy, that I may prove that my prayers were
heard of thee: and seeing thy mercies are infinite, declare them by having
regard of me.

17 Do not withdraw thy self, I beseech thee, from thy servant oppressed
with so many miseries but hasten, o Lord, rather to hear me, and to deliver
me.

18 Come unto this my most miserable soul, that thou may deliver it, calling
for thy help: and redeem me from this multitude of most cruel enemies.

19 Thou know more than al men, with what and how false crimes I am charged,
and with what injuries and reproaches I am vexed, neither can any of mine
adversaries escape my sight.

20 Ah! how sore do these things vex, trouble, and torment me? especially,
seeing I have so long waited, but in vain, that some man should stand up,
which should be moved with so many injuries offered unto me: yet can there be
found nowhere any man which would comfort me, most miserable man, with one
word.

21 Yea moreover, they labor to increase my miseries so much as lies in them,
feeding me with most bitter gal, and they have given me vinegar to drink:
they are so far from comforting of me, most miserable man.

22 But cause thou again, that al thy benefits may turn to their destruction,
that they may be snared like beasts, which are deceived by the baits of meat
set before them, and let them find death there, where they gaped for mirth and
joy.

23 Take from them all the light of reason, and understanding: and cut, as it
were, al their sinews, that they may neither think, nor perform any thing
that is good.

24 Power forth upon them thine indignation, and in the heat of thine anger
correct them with just punishment.

25 Destroy their fair houses to the ground, and waste al their dominion
utterly.

26 For they are so far from having any compassion on him, whom it has
pleased thee to afflict so severely, that they have also tormented him more
greeuouslie: and they have laid new strokes, one after another, upon him, that
thou had so greeuouslie wounded.

27 Withdraw therefore al thy help again from them, that they may heap
wickedness upon wickedness: neither give them at any time the spirit of
repentance, to receive them into thy favor.

28 And although that they, insomuch as they are borne of those holy fathers,
may seem to be counted amongst the number of thine, to whom thou have
appointed the gift of the true life: yet raze thou out their names forth of
thy book, neither count them amongst the just.

29 Let this then be the lot of those most wicked men: but I, o God, now being
most miserable, at the length shall be delivered of thee, and shall be exalted
again.

30 Wherefore, I will then sing of thy name: then will I set forth thy praises
with great majesty.

31 And this, I know well, shall be more pleasant unto the Lord, than the most
great offering, having horns and hoofes.

32 And all that are likewise vexed, being comforted by mine example shall
rejoice: and flieng unto God, by mine example, shall be restored unto life.

33 For the Lord, shall they say, will hear the needy, and does not despise
them, who are bound in the chains of miseries for his cause.

34 Go to therefore, let the very heavens, and also the huge lump of the
earth, the very seas, and what things soever creep in the waters, let them
set forth the praises of the Lord.

35 For God will preserve his Sion, and will build up his cities appointed unto
Judah, and will there assign everlasting habitation for his people.

36 For the fathers shall sit over this heritage unto their posterity, and this
shall be the everlasting possession of the servants of God: namely, of those
that seek his glory carefully.

PSALM. LXX.
The Argument.
This Psalm does contain a prayer, which it is like that David used in his
banishment most commonly, and has prescribed it unto the Church afterward, as
a form of daily prayer: seeing that there never wants such enemies unto the
Church, or at the least to many of the members thereof, as are here described.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 COme speedily, o God, to deliver me: make haste to help me, o Lord.

2 Put them to shame that seek my death, command them to turn back, and to
be covered with shame, which desire nothing more, than to see me destroyed.

3 Let them turn home with shame for a recompense, being disappointed of their
purpose, which have vaunted against me, as though I had been utterly undone.

4 And grant thou of the contrary, that not I alone, but al they also, that
have a desire to worship thee, and wait for an end of my miseries, may be
ioiful and rejoice, and that they may give solemn and everlasting thanks and
praises unto thee, who have delivered me.

5 In the mean season, I stand here, poor miser, destitute of al succor:
make haste therefore, o God, to help me. For I depend upon thy help alone, o
God, my deliverer: o Lord, I beseech thee, delaie no longer.

PSALM. LXXI.
The Argument.
This Psalm, though it be without title in the Hebrew, yet does it seem to be
made by David, and written at that time, when he now being aged, was with so
sudden and so great rage, driven from his roial seat, and chased even beyond
Jordan, chiefly by the treason of Achitophel, and of his son, whom he so
dearly loved. And it is full of most grievous and just complaints: and it does
also set forth an example of excellent constancy, and of an invincible faith.
And seeing the good servants of God can look for none other condition or
state, it is profitable often to meditate this Psalm: both least they should
fondly promise unto themselves, after they had overcome many troubles, that
their old age should be quiet: and also least they should despair, when they
shall be likewise vexed, not only of strangers, but also of them, whom they
have cherished in their own bosom: but that they go forward in their vocation,
whilst they atteine the garland, following the example of David and other
Prophets, and of the Apostles, as also of very many other faithful Bishops.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Fly unto thee alone, o Lord, suffer me not to be overwhelmed with shame
for ever.

2 Deliver me rather from this calamity, as I have had experience that thou
art just and mindful of thy promises: hear me, and deliver me.

3 Be thou unto me also in the steed of a most strong tower, into the which I
may always fly. For seeing thou have once already received me into thy
defense, where else shall I rather seek for succor?

4 Therefore, my God, grant that I fall not into the hands of this most wicked,
and most crafty enemy, which rusheth upon me with so great rage.

5 For I depend wholly on thee alone: upon thee, I say, o Lord, I have set al
my hope, from my first childhood.

6 Thou art he again, who have fostered me being shut in my mothers womb,
that have brought me forth or the bowels of my mother, as it were the midwife,
the which thy benefit I have always published, and will publish.

7 Wherefore, having had experience so often of thy goodness, although very many
of them chiefly that are in authority do abhor me now, as though I were a
monster, yet do I look up unto thee, and trust to thy most assured strength.

8 And surely I do not doubt, but thou will minister unto me occasion to
celebrate and set forth daily thy praise and glory.

9 Go to then, thou that have defended me, when I was strong, and in the flower
of my youth: forsake me not now being aged, but rather the more that other
strength does fail, help thou so much the more readily.

10 For the enemies do talk what they lust of me, and they that lie in wait
for my life, are assembled together against me.

11 Yea verelie, as though thou had determined to destroy me: and as though
they had conspired together my destruction by thine authority, they exhort one
another, and say, God has forsaken him, therefore pursue him now flieng
away, and take him, being destitute of all help.

12 But thou, o God, be near unto me: o God, I say, make haste to help him
that is in distress.

13 Neither only keep me safe from their fury, but grant also, that these
my deadly enemies may be utterly destroyed with shame, and that they may be
overwhelmed with reproach and al kind of infamy, which would destroy me.

14 But I doubtless, whatsoever these attempt, do nothing regard it. For I will
never leave off to trust in thee, and to praise thee more and more.

15 This my mouth, I say, shall declare that thou art just, and mindful of thy
promise: neither will I keep silent, that I have been delivered by thee a
thousand times, and comforted with innumerable benefits.

16 Yet in the mean season, though I be in extreme age, and destitute even
now of al other help: yet will I go forward, o Lord God, boldly trusting to
thine only infinite power, and I will confirm my self with the only
remembrance of thy justice.

17 For thus have thou taught me to do, o God, from my very childhood, unto
this age: and to set forth thy marvelous works, whereof I my self have had
experience.

18 Therefore forsake me not now, which am come by thy benefit even to this
age, and graie hair: least peradventure those praises, wherewith I have
determined to testify thy power unto the age following, and to all the
posterity that shall come after, be broken off by my misery, or else by my
death.

19 Verelie, o God, when I ponder with my self what way and order thou do
take, in showing thy mercy, I must needs confess, that thy counsels are more
high, than that any man is able to atteine unto them, and that al which thou
do, does testify thy most excellent majesty. Finally, o God, who is like
unto thee?

20 Therefore thou have lead me about by most sharp and manifold dangers, and
by so many deaths, even for this purpose, that when thou shall restore me
again into life, and raise me again being drawn forth, as it were, out of
the most deep caves of the earth, the example of thy power will be more famous.

21 For I nothing doubt, but that thou will not only restore me unto my former
dignity, whereof these men have spoiled me: but also that thou will increase
mine honor, and wilt turn again unto me, and comfort me.

22 Wherefore, I will praise thee again, both with voice, and with instruments:
and I will praise thy truth with Psalms, my God, even thee, I say, which art
the holy God of Israel.

23 Neither will I sing unto thee with the mouth only, as hypocrites use to
do: but I will testify thee to be my redeemer, with praise that shall proceed
even from the deep bottom of my heart. Finally, when these my deadly foes
are overwhelmed with shame and ignominy, I will daily sound forth thy
righteousness, both in preserving thine own, and in punishing the wicked with
just punishment.

PSALM. LXXII.
The Argument.
David doubtless made this Psalm, that he might leave it as a most precious
jewel unto his son Solomon newly crowned king. For it contains al things
that apperteine to the office of a true king, to govern both godly and
honestly them, whom the King of kings has committed to his government. And
he declares, that he has need of wisdom given him of God thereunto, like
as such kings also are the excellent gifts of God, whereof very few are to be
sound in the very family of David. He adds a short rehearsal, but if thou
consider the things themselves, a most clear reckoning of those benefits,
which come unto the people that have such magistrates, and that they should
know, that they deal for their own profit, when they pray for their
magistrates: the which argument Paul uses, 1. Tim. 2, 2. Finalie, seeing this
earthly kingdom of David was a figure of that heavenly and everlasting,
which was promised to that eternal King, the true son of David Jesus Christ,
as the Angel Gabriel does interpret it, Luke 1, 32, 33. so does he describe
the majesty of the kingdom of Solomon, and the most flourishing state thereof,
that giving eternity unto it by the spirit of prophecy, he rises up fro
Solomon unto Christ, that is to say, from the figure to the thing it self,
even as the promise made by God unto David contains both Solomon, and also
Christ, as though they were almost one and the selfsame person, 2. Sam. 7,
13, 14. and 1. Chron. 22, 10.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O God, without whose wisdom no kingdoms can stand, who of a special
consideration have ordained this kingdom in the family of David, teach the
king, whom thou have appointed, the rules of right government: teach, I say,
the son of this thy David, whom thou have chosen to thy self, the rule of
righteousness:

2 That he may justly govern, not his people, but thine, especially that he
may defend the poor against the injuries of the mighty.

3 Thus the people being scattered here and there in the mountains and hills,
being safe under a just government, shall abound with all the commodities of
peace.

4 Grant this unto him, that he being far from al tyranny, may be a sure
refuge to the poor, that he may comfort the families oppressed with poverty,
that he may keep under the false accusers with most sharp punishment.

5 So will it come to pass, o God, that the state of the kingdom being ordered
by thine authority, al men, as it is meet, shall acknowledge and fear thee,
and that not for any short continuance of time: but that the Sun and Moon
shall sooner cease their course, than thou shall fail to be worshipped.

6 And thou again wilt power down upon thy people from heaven al good things,
like a shower coming down upon the new mowne meadows: and none otherwise,
than thou use to water the earth with showers in due season.

7 Whilst he reigns, the just shall flourish, and great peace shall be so
continued, as is the firm course of the stars.

8 And the king himself shall have dominion from the one sea to the other, even
from Euphrates to the farthest coasts of the earth.

9 The inhabitants of the countries of the desert shall come under his yoke,
falling down under his feet: and his enemies falling down before him, shall
lick the dust of the earth.

10 The kings of Silicia and of the Islands, shall offer presents unto him, the
Aethiopians also and the Arabians shall bring him gifts.

11 Finally, al kings shall worship him, al nations shall serve him.

12 For his righteousness shall be praised throughout the whole world: for that
he hears the cry of the poor, and does defend the needy, forsaken of
others.

13 He has mercy on them that are needy, and he refreshes those that are in
danger of their life.

14 He defends the poor against the injury of the mighty, neither does he
suffer the violence done unto them to be unrevenged.

15 God also will keep him safe, and gold shall be brought unto him out of the
midst of Arabia: al men shall make prayers for his life and safety, and shall
daily wish al prosperity unto him.

16 Then shall wheat be shorn euerie-where with full handfuls in the very
mountain tops, the corn growing as high as the trees of Libanus: and there
shall be such a multitude of inhabitants in the cities, that they may almost
seem like plants springing out of the earth.

17 Therefore, his memory shall be for ever, even durable as the Sun: and
this king shall be an example of al felicity unto al nations, which shall
account him blessed.

18 But unto thee, o Lord, the Prince of the heavenly company, the Author of
al things so wonderful, let al praise be given.

19 The same of thy glory be praised for ever, that it may fill all the earth:
so, even so shall it be.

Here end the prayers of DAVID, son of Jshai.
PSALM. LXXIII.
The Argument.
That which is written in the end of the former Psalm, is not so to be taken,
as though the Psalms of David were al ended here, as it is evident, seeing
that diverse of them that follow, have his name set before them, and some of
them that go before, are without any title: but those 11. that follow, are
attributed to Asaph, an excellent Prophet and Leuite, one of the singers, of
whom mention is made in many other places, and chiefelie 2. Chro. 29, 30.
unless we had rather say, that there were diverse men of that name, or that
his posterity were called by that name. And in this Psalm is d^scribed the
victory of the spirit against the flesh, the which the Sophisters and Papists
do falselie imagine to be that which is taught by the Philosophers, when they
dispute of the strife betwixt reason and the affections: whereas yet in those
things, which peculiarly belong unto God, there is nothing that strives more
against the true wisdom, than does the very reason of man, as he is natural
and not regenerate, yea even then, when he has granted the true principles: so
true is it that the Apostle says, even that man's wisdom does end in
foolishnes, as appears also in this Argument. For man's wisdom does judge,
and rightly judges, that if men be governed by the providence of God, it must
go well with good men, and evil with evil men. But where it gathers thereby,
that therefore men are not governed by the providence of God, and that their
pains and travel is in vain which seek virtue, because the life of wicked
men f^r the most part flows with prosperity, but the life of the godly is
contrarily full of calamity: herein it shows it self to be most foolish.
For it should rather have bin gathered by that same principle, that we must
determine otherwise of the ends of good and evil things, than men use to do,
because God does bestow, even upon evil men, certain commodities: his
providence is not therefore abolished, but rather his infinite goodness and
patience commended. And that good men are exercised with diverse calamities in
this life, it comes to pass, partly that they should not abuse the mercy
of God, partly because they stand in need of chastisement, and also that they
may learn to hope for better things: and the more hard battles that they
suffer, so much the more excellent might the power of God appear in their
victories, and the soldiers themselves might be rewarded with so much the
greater reward. Finally, which is the chiefest of al, that it shall never go
well with the evil men, and that by their own fault. Contrariwise, that it shall
never go evil with the good, and that by the singular mercy of God. For unto
the evil men, good things are turned to evil: and on the contrary, unto the
good men, even evil things turn to good. This is a very precious doctrine,
which is handled oftentimes both in other Psalms, and in diverse places of the
scripture, especially in Job, and the Prophet Abacuc, but above al in this
Psalm: the which doctrine, Asaph worthily says, that it must be sought only
in the sanctuary of God: whereas bare, slender, and sometime foolish things
are taught in the schools, of the difference of good and evil things, and of
the virtues, and of their causes and effects, even among those Philosophers,
which did count virtue their only meede, and did judge only the wise man to
be always blessed.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BUT whatsoever things are now brought on the contrary, it must needs be
true and inviolable, that God can not be but favorable unto Israel, that is,
to them that worship him purelie and devoutly.

2 Howbeit, I confess, that I could scarcely wrestle out at the length from
contrary cogitations, so that I was very like to fall: and scarcely could I
stay my self, least I should fall down headlong.

3 For I was wholly set on fire, beholding mad men so proud, and puffed up with
prosperity.

4 For they are lusty, so that thou would say, that they were free from
diseases, and almost from death it self, they are of so strong health.

5 When others are in trouble, and oppressed with manifold miseries, these men
have the comforts of this life in readiness, whereby they avoid these miseries.

6 Therefore are they haughty, and testify with how great pride and fiercenes
their heart swells, by the very apparel of their body adorned with chains,
with gold, and precious stones.

7 And their fat panch does declare, with what and how great delicates they
abound, and their eyes stick out with fatnes: and if they desire any thing,
they obtain also more than they desire.

8 They speak openly of oppressing others, being of dissolute life, and
despise others, looking down as it were from the top of heaven, and they
terrify al men with their proud speech.

9 And also they set themselves against the heaven, as though they would
prescribe laws to God himself, and hold in subjection al things upon the
earth at their pleasure.

10 Thus comes it to pass, that not a few of the very people of God,
wearied by their long miseries, do join themselves unto them.

11 For how, say they, can we think, that God knows these things? or that
there is any God that cares for man's business?

12 Whereas we, even the people of God, are assaulted with continual
calamities, and these wicked men abound so long with good things, and their
riches are increased more and more.

13 Have not I therefore endeavored my self to godliness in vain? and kept my
hands pure from al injury?

14 Being always miserable, and severely chastised every day, if I trespass
in any points?

15 But contrariwise, how can I so think, or speak, but I must sin most
greeuouslie? for if the matter went so, what should become of the sons of
God: yea, and how great injury should I do unto thee, their most merciful
Father: and unto them borne of thy spirit, and preserved by thee so many ages?

16 Therefore I thought again, that I must more diligently consider the whole
matter: howbeit, I could not rid my self of these most troublesome cogitations:

17 Whilst that I entered into thy house, the house of most holy and most true
wisdom, and did learn of thee, what is the end of this so great prosperity
of the wicked.

18 For there I learned, that they, whose condition I thought to have bin the
best, were so far from standing in that most slipperie place, that they were
always by sliding steps ready to fall, not only because al these things are
vanishing and transitory, which thing, even the profane men, taught by very
experience, do confess: but (as we are taught in thy schole only) because
they, abusing thy benefits, are cast down headlong by thee into that deep
pit.

19 Neither do thou defer always thy judgments unto that time, so far out
of our sight. For how many do we behold, brought into extreme and
unrecoverable miseries in a moment, from that top of shadowed felicity? how
many, say I, do we see suddenly taken away, being horribly cast down with
sudden terrors?

20 Wherefore, their state is like a dream, that vanishes when a man awaketh.
For thus, o Lord, do thou shake off al imaginations, as things most vain,
and do also waken their vain security.

21 Wherefore did I then so sore boil, and was inwardly pricked?

22 Surely I was mad: and I was not a man, but a beast, without understanding
and reason, when I thus doted, and willingly wearied my self.

23 But I know that it is come to pass by thy singular benefit, that I
always notwithstanding stood of thy side, even because it pleased thee to
reach me out thy right hand, who else should have fallen.

24 And thus no doubt thou will direct me in thy wisdom, whilst by thy gift
I may obtain a glorious victory by ouercomming my self.

25 Farewell earth: oh that it were so! and that I were now in heaven with thee,
o God! For what is there in the earth, that should retain me never so little
space?

26 I have experience how carnal and fleshly, and how vain al things are that
mortal men do think of themselves. Thou therefore, o God, be unto me a true
and sound wisdom, wherein I may only and wholly rest.

27 For howsoever al things are tossed up and down: whosoever depart from
thee, shall perish: and whosoever do forsake thee, that is to say, whosoever do
trust in any other but in thee, are destroyed by thee.

28 Therefore I do thus determine with my self, neither will I suffer my self
at any time to be drawn from this judgment, that then shall al things go well
with me, when I shall not depart one foot from God, which way soever he
leads me: o Lord God, al my hope is set upon thee alone, and I will bestow al
my life in praising thy great works.

PSALM. LXXIIII.
The Argument.
Where this Psalm does manifestly speak of the subversion of the temple,
either that same Asaph is to be supposed to have spoken of it before by the
spirit of prophecy, and to have indicted this prayer for the captives that
should be so long after carried into Chaldea: or else this Psalm must be
referred to some other of his posterity. And it contains most fervent
prayers against the spoilers of the Church, whereof we have too many at this
day, which do not only as foraine enemies most cruelly fight against it,
but also within the bowels and bosom thereof, do vex and torment it. But the
Prophet does set before God, first of all that everlasting covenant, which is in
deed the stay and foundation of al our prayers: then does he touch the
cruelty of the enemies, and their wicked words, and the greatness of the
present calamities, and chiefelie the ceassing of the prophecy. He does also
rehearse the benefits bestowed upon the people of old, and beseeches him to
continue his accustomed goodness, bringing in manifold examples of his power, to
prove that he can do what he will. Finally, which is the greatest argument of
al, he does testify, that the matter does not stand so much for the
deliverance of the people, as for the glory and majesty of God to be
maintained against the wicked enemies: all the which things how they do agree to
our times, it is most evident every day.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Shall we suppose, o God, that thou have utterly cast us off? and that thy
wrath is kindled against thine own flock, without any hope of reconciliation?

2 Naie rather, remember that multitude, which thou have redeemed and purchased
to thy self so many years ago: and be mindful of that heritage, which thou
have measured out unto thy self, namely, of this mount Sion, in the which
thou have built an house for thy self.

3 Come forth speedily, and cast these men down headlong, that they never
rise up again, even as these thine enemies have left nothing safe in thy
sanctuary.

4 For they openly professing themselves to be thine enemies, roaring against
this thine own house, have brought in their banners, even their profane
ensigns.

5 And lo, a man may behold them like the wood fellers in the woods, so hewing
with their axes, and cutting down that thine excellent building, built and set
up with so great cunning.

6 And they were so far off from spareing the vawtes, and most fine carved
works, that they brake them down most violently with axes and with maules.

7 And what more? they have also burnt up with fire, that thy secret sanctuary
most full of majesty, and most holy, least any part of thy house should
remain vndestroied.

8 Finally, they not being thus contented with the destruction of thy temple,
when they had thus determined to spoil al things at once, that there should be
no monument of us at al remaining, they burnt up all the other buildings, that
we any where had built for the hearing of thy precepts, and to set forth thy
praises.

9 At the least, o Lord, we should now see, some of those our old and
accustomed signs: and we should have some one prophet, who might comfort us,
and might signify unto us what end would be to these calamities.

10 But how long, o God, shall these enemies rail against thee? shall this
enemy never cease to reproach thy holy name?

11 And will thou for ever hold in thy right hand, whereby only we can be
delivered? will thou turn it away from us? and never draw it out of thy
bosom?

12 But thou art he, who have taken in hand to govern me so many years ago,
and have saved me so often, al they beholding and fighting against me.

13 Thou, by thy power, have made the sea passable for our sake, and have
broken the heads of the mighty men of Egypt, being like dragons within the
waters.

14 Thou have broken the head of that huge and cruel whale, and thou have given
their carcases to be devoured by the beasts of that wilderness.

15 Thou, even contrary to the course of nature, breaking the huge rock,
did bring forth a river out of the veins of the flint stones: and
contrariwise, thou did dry up suddenly the deep chanel of that most
raging river.

16 Thou art the Author and Ruler both of day and night, which have set in
order the certain and unchangeable motions of the light, and of the Sun.

17 Thou have divided the whole compass of the earth into their borders, thou
have appointed the course of summer and winter.

18 And how much more easily can thou restore thy people, if thou please, in
what desperate case soever they be? only therefore be mindful of that thy
covenant: yea, though thou could forget thy people, yet doubtless thou can
not forget thine own self. And what reproaches has not this enemy cast
forth against thee, o Lord? and what railings have not this mad people used
against thee?

19 Ah! do not forsake nor give up this thy most dear turtle dove, counted to
be forsaken, mourning unto thee, unto these most cruel beasts: neither commit
the congregation of thy miserable people, to perpetual oblivion.

20 Remember rather thy covenant, o Lord: for the whole land is now nothing
else, but a den of thieves and robbers.

21 Let not the prayers, we beseech thee, of thine, being so sore beaten, and
vexed with so many reproaches, be vain and frustrate: but rather give occasion
to them that are oppressed and destitute of al succor, to praise thee.

22 Arise o Lord, and plead thine own cause, and do not forget the reproaches
of these outrageous men, which they daily cast out against thee.

23 Forget not, I say, the outcries of thine adversaries, but declare in
deed, that the brute of their tumult is come up unto thee.

PSALM. LXXV.
The Argument.
Whether this Psalm were written by Asaph, in the name of David, or it were
written by David himself, and after delivered to Asaph the singer and chanter,
it does wholly agree unto those times, when David reigned in the city of
Hebron, when he was ready to receive the kingdom of the whole nation by the
common consent of all the tribes: and it contains three principal points, to
wit, that God is the Author and governor of al just policy: again, that
these be the two principal duties of the magistrates, even to be a terror to
those that be evil, and to cherish them that be good: finally, that this is
the chief and final end of al, namely, that glory be given unto God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WE praise thee, we praise thee o God, and that most worthily, whose power
we do feel present, and shall find hereafter, and so shall we again set forth
thy wonderful benefits.

2 And I will surely care for nothing so much, when I shall have the people by
thy goodness committed unto me, as to institute an holy and righteous
government.

3 For as the case now stands, all the bonds of laws being broken, the whole
kingdom is disordered: but I will again establish the pillars thereof, which
are removed forth of their places.

4 I will bridle the proud and dissolute persons, I will terrify the wicked,
that they shall not lift their horns so high with these words:

5 O ye mad men, do not henceforth exalt your selves, neither answer you so
stoutly and proudly as ye are wont.

6 For (as ye may well perceive) which way soever a man does turn him, it is
not in his power to mount to higher dignity:

7 But it belongs to God alone, the most just governor of al things: and it
is in his power and authority to cast off whom he will, and to exalt whom he
pleases.

8 Wherefore thou do not resist me, but God himself. And the Lord does
carry in his hand a cup full of troubled wine, and full of dregs, the which he
will give to all the wicked, to suck up, and to drink to the very dregs.

9 Thus then, I diligently praising the God of Jacob, and singing unto him
continually, will cut off the horns of the wicked: but I will increase the just
with honors.

PSALM. LXXVI.
The Argument.
J do take it to have the same Argument, and the same occasion to be of the
writing of this Psalm, as of the 46. and this is most notable in them both,
that he distinguishes plainly that knowledge of God, whereby the Gentiles
are rather convinced, than taught and converted, from that wisdom which
Christ says, that it can not be perceived of flesh and blood, which is only
peculiar to the Church of God, and whereby only the true Catholic Church may
and ought to be known and distinguished from the residue of mankind, and
especially from the false and fained apostatical Church, which only
delights in ignorance.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THAT true God of Israel is only known in Judea who he is, and he does
there only declare himself in deed, how great, and what manner of one he is.

2 And though he fill both the heaven and the earth, yet does he not dwell
euerie-where, but in Salem, as his tabernacle witnesses, which is placed in
Sion.

3 And experience it self does declare this to be a most manifest testimony
of his presence: seeing it is he, who has there broken in pieces the bows and
arrows, the shields, the spears, and all the instruments of war of the enemies
of his people at once.

4 Thus then has he set forth his own glory, and he has declared himself
to be more mighty, than al those spoilers, people, or kings, how proud soever.

5 For they, how fierce or famous so ever they were, are bereaved of their
weapons and spoils: neither were they able to bring forth their wepons and
armies, no more than they, which lie sleeping in a most deep trance.

6 But both the chariots and the horses, being stricken with slumber at the
rebuke of God, could not remove from their place.

7 Therefore thou art very terrible: and who is able to abide thy sight, so
soon as thy wrath is inflamed?

8 For thou have declared thy self plainly, bringing things to pass by thy
divine power, above al order of nature, that thou do reign in heaven, and
causest the very earth to tremble and to quake:

9 When thou did arise to destroy the wicked, and to preserve thine, who
were of every side oppressed.

10 Thus, the more that men do rage, so much the more does it appear, who and
how great thou art: and if any do yet remain, and begin again to rage, thou will even bind them, as it were, in one bundle, and destroy them at once.

11 Go to then, al ve that are preserved by the marvelous power of the Lord
our God, standing round about this your Emperor: pay unto him the things that
you vowed most worthily, and bring your offerings unto him that is so
terrible, with all diligence.

12 For this is he that cutteth off all the courage and strength of the very
kings, as a gardener does twist his vines: and does declare himself terrible
to the most mighty princes of the earth, for his Church sake.

PSALM. LXXVII.
The Argument.
It may be perceived, by many most dolorous examples, and even by the grievous
agony of Christ himself, how horrible the battle is of the conscience,
touched with the sense of Gods wrath, whereunto yet we said, that even the most
holy men have been subject, Psalm. 6. and by this Psalm, as by certain
other, we understand the same. Therefore it is worthy the marking, yea, and
very necessary to know, by what weapons those valiant champions have also
shaken off these fiery darts of Satan. This Psalm therefore does teach us, in
this most dangerous temptation, to apply these remedies: even continual
prayers, although the very mind be unwilling to pray, and though the very
thinking of God do terrify us: and a meditation of the former testimonies of
Gods good will toward us, which is joined with his unchangeable purpose, how
that he never puts away for ever, him whom he has testified to have
chosen, seeing that these his gifts are without repentance: and that his mercy
is infinite: and that he has the most high power in ruling the course of al
things, and times: finally, the remembrance of the marvelous works of God,
both in trieng and in preserving of his Church. And it is very meet for every
man to have such examples in good remembrance, and to apply them unto him
self particularly in such manner of temptations.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Have cried unto God, I have cried, I say, and have lift up my voice unto
God, whilst he heard my cry.

2 The more greeuouslie that I was oppressed, the more earnestly I sought the
Lord, so that I prayed in the very dark of the night, holding up my hands
without ceasing, although my very heart refused al comfort.

3 For the remembrance of God was so far away from pacifieng mine unquiet
mind, that contrariwise nothing did trouble me so much, so that I did lie
wholly oppressed with sorrow.

4 Neither could mine eyes take any sleep, nor my heavy heart breath: nor
finally my mouth could speak one word.

5 But at the length I began to call to memory those excellent things, which
thou have done in the former ages, whereby thou have declared that infinite
mercy toward thine from the beginning.

6 Then came those comfortable songs into my memory, which I heretofore have
sung of thee: all the which things I reuoluing with my self in the night, and
considering continually in my mind:

7 Verelie, think I, although it seem that thou art utterly undone, yet how
can it be, that that God whose will is unchangeable, should now cast thee away
for ever? and that he should be now unto thee an enemy, never to be
reconciled, whose fatherly love thou have so often tried?

8 Shall I judge that his mercy can be clean spent? or do his decrees and
promises at the length vanish away by continuance of time, as mortal and
humane things are wont to do?

9 Shall I say, that he has cast off that nature most ready to have mercy?
and in displeasure has shut up his compassion, which before was spread over al?

10 Furthermore, I said thus also within my self: Verelie, this thy wound is
now of it own nature deadly: but the change of things depends in thy hand,
that is, in the hand of the high God.

11 And here I began again to consider, how often thou have showed forth that
thy wonderful power in times past, by delivering thine through extraordinary
means.

12 I began, I say, to meditate those thy mighty works, and to ponder them in
my mind, by the examples whereof I might lift up my mind, that did lie down
prostrate.

13 For it appears no where more evidently, what thou art able to do, than
in thy sanctuary, where in deed thou declarest thy self what one thou art:
and can any other god make himself equal with thee? although those false gods
were such, as other nations imagined them to be.

14 Thy works, o God, are in deed marvelous: and thou have abundantly showed
to al people how mighty thy strength is.

15 For, I pray thee, with what incredible power have thou delivered thy
people out of Egypt? I mean, the posterity of Jacob and Joseph.

16 Then the very waters, o God, saw thee present: I say, they saw thee,
and were astonished, and even the depths of the sea were moved, when they felt
thy presence.

17 The clouds powered out floods of waters, the heavens thundered horribly,
thy fiery darts went euerie-where abroad.

18 A terrible noise of thunder was heard throughout the circuit of heaven, the
world shined with glittering lightenings, the earth shaked and trembled.

19 Finally, the seas made passage unto thee, and thou have opened a way to
thy people, going thorough the midst of the waters, leaving no steps of this
passage.

20 Lastly, thou have thus lead into these pastures thy people, being brought
forth as a flock, committing them to faithful pastors, Moses and Aaron.
Wherefore then should I despair? as though thou either would not, or could
not behold me.

PSALM. LXXVIII.
The Argument.
It may be collected by this Psalm, what manner of sermons the Prophets made in
the Church of Jsrael, when the histories were declared in their synagogues. And
surely this ancient monument of the holy antiquity is to be had in great
reverence, as certain other Psalms also, and the sermon of Stephen in the
Acts of the Apostles, and that sermon of Paul made at Antioch, Acts. 13. And
hereby we learn also, with what profit we may read the holy histories,
which are set forth unto us in this Psalm after two sorts: to wit, to bring us
into a deep consideration of the constancy of God, always continued in the
performing of his promises: and of the other side, of his wrath against the
obstinate and stubborn breakers of his covenant. The Prophet then does declare
this, by this long and diligent rehearsal, both of the chief benefits, which
God has bestowed upon this people, even from the first adoption and choosing
of them, even unto David, and also of the punishments which the people caused
God, even as it were unwillingly, to execute upon them. And would to God, that
al men could mark in their minds, how necessary this doctrine is in our
times: and how woonderful examples God has set before us to both these
purposes, by the space of these forty years, even as great as ever before.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Hear the master teaching, o my people, and give ear unto him that will
speak nothing unadvisedly.

2 I will speak forth most grave matters, and I will bring forth things to be
called into memory, even from the ancient times.

3 The which, though we have heard by report, yet know we that they are most
certain, and not fained by our elders, which have delivered them unto us.

4 And as they had regard of us, so is it meet that we should have regard of
our posterity, that the praises of the Lord, and those woonderful acts,
whereby he has testified his power unto us, may be continued unto al
posterity.

5 For God has established a certain doctrine by his singular goodness,
whereby he testifies his will to the offspring of Jacob, even to Israel, and
has commanded our fathers, that every one should declare it to his children:

6 And they again to others their children, that by this means the knowledge
of the true God, and of the worship of God, might be continued from the fathers
to the posterity, by the order of their generation:

7 To this purpose, that every one, mindful of so great benefits of God, might
be taught to believe in God, and to obeie his commandments:

8 And that they should not follow those their elders, a stubborn kind of
men, grievous unto God himself, unconstant, dissembling, and unfaithful.

9 The Ephramites for example, being cunning archers in deed: yet when they
came to the battle, they turned their backs,

10 Unmindful of the covenants of God, and disdaining to walk the way that he
appointed,

11 Forgetting his noble and wondrous works.

12 For this is he that wrought so many wonders before their elders in Egypt,
and in the fields of Zoan:

13 Who lead them through the waters, divided here and there, heaped up like
mounts:

14 Who lead them in the day time with a cloud going before them, and in the
night by a flame glistering in the air:

15 Who brake the stony rocks, and gave them waters most abundantly to drink:

16 Drawing forth rivers, even forth of the flint, that running streams did
flow from thence.

17 Yet did they not cease to offend him for all this: naie, they continued to
provoke that high God.

18 Yea, and they durst try his power, whether he were able to satisfy their
lust.

19 For thus spoke they against God, Is he also so mighty, that he can
intertaine us with a deintie feast in the wilderness?

20 For he has stricken the rock in deed, whence so many waters do flow,
that they are in abundance: but can he also give us bread, and can he give us
here delicates?

21 The Lord hearing this, was very angry against Israel, and that very
worthily:

22 Because they believed not God, neither gave themselves wholly to be
governed by him.

23 For he had commanded the clouds above, that they should feed his people,
and he had opened the gates of heaven.

24 And the clouds being commanded, did rain down manna, a most pleasant and
heavenly bread.

25 And he did give to every one of them, even his belly full of bread, so
delicate, that no prince, be he never so mighty, has any better.

26 Wherefore, he commanded by his authority, that the east wind should blow
on the one side, and the south wind on the other:

27 And behold, he rained down even quails, those deintie birds, with such
abundance upon them, that they were like in number to the dust, and sand of the
sea,

28 So that all the tents within, and al round about them were filled with
birds, falling down from heaven on every side.

29 These then they did take and eat with all greedines to their fill, God
giving them most abundantly that which they desired.

30 But behold, whilst they did eat, and whilst they did yet chawe the meat:

31 The wrath of the Lord burnt against them, and he destroyed all the most
excellent and chosen men amongst them.

32 Yet could they not be amended with these plagues, nor brought to trust in
him, whose infinite power they had so often tried.

33 Wherefore, he disappointed their hope worthily, and destroyed them
trembling with continual terror.

34 For they then sought him, when he threatened them with death, and coming
early did entreat him.

35 They acknowledged that God was unto them a most safe tower, and they called
him the high God, and their deliverer.

36 But al these things were only vain flatterings, nor any other things,
than words full of falsehood.

37 For they did not speak with an upright heart, but such as showed
themselves nothing more faithful than before, in perfourming the conditions of
the covenant.

38 Yet he pardoned them through his infinite mercy, neither proceeded to
deal with them rigorously: and though they continued to provoke him to anger,
yet powered not he al his wrath upon them.

39 For he remembered, that men are endued with a fleshly lump that passes
and vanishes away, and that their present life is like to a blast that passes
by, and never returns again.

40 Ah! how often provoked they him in the desert? how often were they troublesome
unto him in the wilderness?

41 How often, by returning to their old manners, have they tempted God,
distrusting his power and mercy, whereof they had so often experience? how often
have they limited the bounds to the holy one of Israel?

42 For they had forgotten his unspeakable power, which he had declared by
delivering them from the most cruel bondage of the Egyptians.

43 When he did so many miracles in Egypt, and so many woonders in the
fields of Zoan.

44 For he turned their floods into blood, so that al Egypt, which is full of
pooles, had no water to drink.

45 He brought upon them swarms of al kind of flies and worms, wherewith they
were destroyed: and frogs, wherewith they were consumed.

46 He gave all the fruits of their fields to the caterpillars, and their
fallowe grounds to the grasshoppers.

47 He destroyed their vines with hail, and their wild figtrees with
lightenings.

48 He killed their cattle with hail, and their beasts with thunderbolts.

49 Finally, he powered forth al his fury, and that his terrible wrath upon
them, that there was no calamity, wherewith he did not strike Egypt, by those
his wicked spirits,

50 Converting himself, now on this side, now on that side, being full of
wrath, and both slaieng men, and consuming their cattle with pestilence.

51 And he did also kill all the first borne of Egypt, that no head of the
family did remain alive in the tabernacles of Cham.

52 But he lead his people like sheep brought forth of the folds of Egypt,
even like a heard through the midest of those wildernesses.

53 He carried them, I say, safely without al fear of danger, covering their
enemies with the multitude of waters.

54 Neither ceased he, whilst that he had brought them into this land
consecrate unto him: yea, and placed them in this mountain, which he prepared
for himself by his own power alone.

55 For it is he, which cast out the people that resisted them, out of these
countries, which he divided afterward to the tribes of Israel by lot, and
placed them in their habitation.

56 But behold again, they heaping sin upon sin, tempted and provoked to
wrath that high God, by breaking his covenant.

57 They turned away from him, following the infidelity of their fathers:
they turned themselves aside contrary from the mark, as deceitful bows use
to do.

58 Finally, they maruellouslie provoked him by no light error and crime, but
with altars built euerie-where in the high mountains, and which is the far
greatest wickedness, they placed there their graven idols.

59 God hearing these things, was most worthily displeased, and wonderfully
loathed Israel.

60 And he did willingly forsake that tabernacle that he had set in Shilo,
that house, I say, which he had chosen unto himself amongst men.

61 What should I say more? he delivered into the hands of their enemies, to
be carried into captivity, that Arc, his most sure pledge of his presence,
and of his power, even that his honor and dignity.

62 And also he cast away his people, and gave them to their swords.

63 The flame of his wrath consumed the flower of their youth, and the virgins
being unmarried did remain without their marriage songs.

64 Their priests did fall, given up to the sword: and their widows had no time
to mourn their husbands.

65 Notwithstanding, he being mindful of his covenant, was awaked with a great
cry, as it were a mighty man raised from a deep sleep after his wine.

66 When his enemies did seem to pursue him like conquerours, he contrariwise
did wound their hinder parts with a sore disease, unto their shame in all ages.

67 Notwithstanding yet, that he might mix some severity with his mercy, he
did not return to the tabernacle of Joseph, which he had forsaken, neither did
he prefer the tribe of Ephraim, as he had done before:

68 But he did choose the tribe of Judah, and did embrace the mount Sion with a
certain peculiar love.

69 For he determined not to have his abode here for a while, as in former
time: but he built unto him a sanctuary, as a most strong tower, as stable as
the body of the earth.

70 Finally, it pleased him to call David from the sheepefold, whose service he
would use,

71 And so to appoint him to feed the posterity of Jacob, even his most dear
Israel, who followed the ewes with young, and led them to their pastures, which
was not yet the chief shepherd of his fathers flock: so that he could never
rejoice that he was brought to his dignity by his own endeavor or power: and
that you should honor him, as a man set over you by God.

72 In the which government of your pastor, there neither wanted integrity and
vprightnes in taking of counsel, neither wisdom in perfourming of his
enterprise.

PSALM. LXXIX.
The Argument.
There is the same argument and use of this Psalm, as of the 74. the which
none of the godly can read without great comfort, neither any of the enemies
of the Church without horrible terror.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O God, the profane nations, even the enemies of thy name, have invaded
thine inheritance, they have polluted thy holy temple, they have overthrown
Jerusalem, and made it an heap of stones.

2 They have cast the dead bodies of thy servants that are slain, and whom
thou have embraced with singular favor, to be devoured of wild beasts.

3 They have powered out their blood like water on every side, and there was
none found which would commit them to the burial.

4 Moreover, it was so far off that we could find any where those that would
comfort us in so great miseries, that we were exposed even to the reproaches,
mockings, and slanders of the people round about us.

5 O Lord, will thou be thus angry with us for ever? and how long shall the
fire of thy wrath rage?

6 Power forth rather thy wrath upon a people that know thee not, and upon
the kingdoms which worship not thy name.

7 For these are they which have devoured thine Israelits, and have spoiled the
possession that thou have given them.

8 And we verelie, I grant, have heaped sin upon sin of old, but call not
these to account, we beseech thee: rather hasten those thy great mercies,
before we utterly perish, for we are almost wholly consumed.

9 Help us, o God, our deliverer, neither consider what we deserve, but what
thy glory requires: deliver us, and forgive us our sins, for the honor of
thine own name.

10 For, why should thou suffer these profane people any longer to ask us
in derision, Where is that your God? Naie rather, bring to pass, that in our
sight al these Gentiles may know in deed how severe punishment thou use to
execute, for the shedding of thy servants blood.

11 Hear the captives laden with bonds, mourning before thee, which remain of
so many slaughters, whom also they have appointed to death, and keep them by
that thy mighty power.

12 And repaie seven fold upon their heads which are our cruel neighbors, who
cease not to reproach thee o Lord.

13 But we are thy people, and the sheep, whom thou please to seed: we will
celebrate thee for ever, and set forth thy praise to the worlds that shall come
after.

PSALM. LXXX.
The Argument.
J judge that this Psalm (wherein the beginnings, the increasings, and also
the calamities of the Church of Israel are most elegantlie described, under the
similitude of a vine) may very aptly be referred to those times, which either
went a l^ttle before, or followed soon after the anointing of David, the which
Psalm, Esaias Cap. 5. does apply unto other times: and Christ, after him, to
the very destruction of the city, and cutting off the boughs. Matthew. 21, 33.
Mark. 12, 1. and Luke. 20, 9. and there is the same use of this Psalm, as of
the former.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THou shepherd of Israel, and leader of the flock of Joseph, hearken: thou
that sit upon the Cherubims, show forth who and how great thou art.

2 Be present unto Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, and declare thy power in
preserving us.

3 Restore us, and command the brightness of thy countenance to shine upon us,
and forthwith we shall be saved.

4 O Lord the God, mighty in battle, how long will thou forsake us that pray,
breathing forth anger at thy nostrels?

5 Thou have fed us with tears, as with bread: and given us tears to drink
with great measure.

6 Thou have brought to pass, that the people that are our neighbors, do now
contend amongst themselves, for the partition, and dividing of our ground, and
that we are become a mocking stock to our enemies.

7 Restore us, o God mighty in battle, command the brightness of thy
countenance to shine unto us, and forthwith we shall be safe.

8 For this is the vine, which being translated even from Egypt, thou have
planted, having cast forth the inhabitants of these regions.

9 Thou thy self have dressed it, and have caused it to take root, that it
springing up suddenly, should cover the earth.

10 It has shadowed the very mountains, the boughs thereof have grown up
like the high Cedars:

11 And this way truly it spread forth branches unto the sea, and that way
unto the river.

12 Ah! why have thou taken away the hedge? why have thou made it open to
every one that iournieth?

13 The boares breaking forth of the forests, do lay it waste, the wild
beasts do eat it up.

14 Look upon us, I beseech thee, o GOD of hosts, turn thine eyes out from
heaven, regard us, and behold this thy vine.

15 Behold, I say, the vineyard that is planted by thine own hand, and the
branches that are carefully dressed by thy self for thine own use.

16 It is burnt up, it is destroyed, al things have perished at thy rebuke.

17 But thou, o God, defend with thy hand that man, whose endeavor thou have
determined to use to restore it, that man, I say, whom for thy purpose thou
have endued with power and constancy.

18 And we, having our life restored by thee, will never decline from thee, but
will call upon thy name.

19 O Lord God of hosts, restore us: show us thy face, and we shall streightwaie
be saved.

PSALM. LXXXI.
The Argument.
J do embrace their opinion, which say, that this Psalm, as the 8. and the
84. were applied unto the feast of the vintage, that was of the tabernacles,
the which is signified by the Hebrew title Gittith. And me thinks, that in the
third verse of this Psalm, three feasts of the seventh month are distinctlie
and planelie noted. It contains a solemn thanksgiving, for the which this
feast was institute. Notwithstanding, there is a most grave admonition, and
very convenient for the time of this feast, to wit, that if the year be
fruiteful, the Israelites should understand, that all that is to be given to
Gods mercy: if it be not so, that they should not accuse God, but their own
selves.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to, stir up your joy with songs, but void of al wantonness: so that
your joy may tend to the glory of God your only strength, and celebrate
your God, I say, with trumpets:

2 And join unto your songs the timbrel, the harp, and the viol.

3 Proclaim the feast of the new moon with trumpets, that day which is
institute for the covering and purging of our sins: finally, declare these
our feastful days.

4 For the God of Jacob has commanded this unto Israel, and has appointed
this rite and solemnity to his honor.

5 He has inioined, I say, this sign of subjection unto the posterity of
Joseph, when he did rise up against the Egyptians for their sake, at the which
time also he called upon us with such a terrible voice, as was never heard
before.

6 I have shaken off the yoke laid on thy shoulders, and I have removed thy
hands from making the brickes.

7 Thou have called upon me in thy misery, when thou wast oppressed: and
again, I heard thee, thundering a far off out of the darkness of the clouds,
howbeit afterward at the water of Meribah, I had experience what thy
disposition is.

8 Then again I did speak unto thee in this sort, Hear my people, for I will
now call upon thee o Israel, if thou will hear me.

9 There shall be no strange god with thee, neither shall thou bow down before
any strange god.

10 For I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of Egypt: go to, prepare
thy self to receive my benefits, and open thy mouth most wide, that I may fill
it.

11 Howbeit, though I did speak thus most mercifully, and promised al things
most bountifully, my people did not obeie, Israel did despise my words.

12 Wherefore, I gave them up to be governed by the wickedness of their own
hearts, utterly forsaken of me, whereof this thing followed, that they did live
according to their lusts.

13 O that my people had rather obeyed me! and Israel had continued in the way
appointed by me!

14 His enemies and oppressors, turning my hand against them, would I
suddenly have destroyed.

15 I would have subdued unto him his enemies and mine, neither should his
tranquillity have bin interrupted with any manner of adue^sitie.

16 I would have fed him with most fine wheat, and rather than they should
have wanted any thing, I would have given him honey most abundantly out of
the hard rocks.

PSALM. LXXXII.
The Argument.
The lively image of the divine Majesty amongst men, is expressed in the
magistrates, unto whom therefore God does attr^bute that name, not of his own
proper essence and substance, but the name that signifies the power which he
has over al things. Howbeit, in this thing, as in others, there be many
faults committed, both by them that have the power of government given unto
them, and also by them that are their subjects. And this Psalm does treat of
the faults of the magistrates themselves, which are most great and dangerous.
For it can hardly be, but that where the magistrates do not their office, the
people also, in that neither the wicked are brideled, nor the godly confirmed
and comforted, full to utter ruin. Wherefore, the Prophet in the beginning of
the Psalm, does first open, and then shut up the fountain, whence all the most
grievous evils committed by the magistrates, do spring forth, bringing in the
person of God himself to speak: to wit, that they only beholding them, whom
they count as subjects, they forget him, who stands over their heads: who
has placed them, not in his own place and throne, but over certain men
only, and that upon this condition, that they should not have an infinite and
absolute power to do what they lust: but that their authority should be
limited by certain laws, and bound to a certain time. Neither does he use
them so as his deputies or vicepresidents, that he only should be present,
but also that he should rule and direct their judgments: and when they have
finished their time and course, whether it be by death, or by any other
means, that he will c^l them to an accounts of al their words and deeds, even
as he does al other mortal men. Afterward, he condemns another thing, wherein
they fault and fail most commonly, to wit, the parcialitie and favoring one
person more than another. Finally, because the Prophets had often preached this
to men that would not hear them: the Prophet prays, that that righteous King
would come to put an end to this disorder, the which thing also we did see came
to pass, when the political government of the Jews ceased, and was
abolished. Now in our times, and especially after the preaching of the Gospel
is restored, whereas we see these evils to grow above measure, so that in
many places there is no regard at al, either of Gods law, or the law of man,
what must we now rather desire, than that that last day should speedily come,
wherein the Lord may restore al things, as it is promised unto us by the mouth
of Peter, Acts. 3, 21.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 YOU sit indeed, I confess, in a higher place above other men that are your
subjects, but I, the most high God, am present in that your assembly, who have
not debarred my self of mine authority over you, neither am I present as an
idle beholder, but as your Judge also.

2 I pray you then, how long shall I suffer you thus to abuse this authority
given unto you by me, under certain laws and conditions? and to exercise
judgments, not by right and equity, but as you favor the wicked party?

3 But I have placed you in this seat, upon this condition, and given it unto
you in plain commandment, that you should relieve them that are spoiled by
violence, that you should defend the fatherles, and maintain the poor against
the injuries of the rich:

4 That you should deliver, I say, the miserable and the poor, from the hands
of the wicked.

5 But what has it auailed to have spoken these things unto you? I do see that
you do care for nothing less, than to know what is your duty, and therefore
are more unwilling to do your duty. Wherefore, al things are out of order, and
none otherwise confounded together, than if al men were in most extreme
darkness, so that the very foundations of the earth are moved forth of their
places. For what can remain safe amongst men, when the difference of right and
wrong is taken away?

6 Hear therefore ye kings and magistrates, who are so negligent, what
sentence is given upon you. You are honored in deed with that name, whereby
mine authority over al men is declared: and I have embraced you with special
favor, as a father his children.

7 Howbeit, I have not exempted you from my power and authority. Therefore you
are kings, I say, but mortal, even as other men: you shall die, o ye princes,
and you shall stand at my judgment seat, as every most vile and poor man, to
give account of al things.

8 O God arise! and seeing thou art the only Lord, by full right and
authority of al men, thou thy self govern the empires and the kingdoms.

PSALM. LXXXIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm seems then to be made, when David had begun to reign, and had
great wars against many nations, whereof mention is made, 2. Sam. 8. 1.
Chron. 18. And it declares, that there shall never want neither foreine nor
domestical enemies unto the Church, and by what weapons they are chiefly
overcome: the which doctrine how necessary it is to our times especially,
would God that al, to whom it belongs, would consider.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to now, come forth o God, neither keep silence still o God.

2 For those that are rather thine enemies, than ours, conspiring together,
were never more outrageous: neither did they ever rage with more fury.

3 They did never take more crafty counsels, and that against thy people, I
say, even them whom thou have received to protection, flieng under thine
only shadow of defense.

4 Neither do they devise any light assault against us, but exciting and
stirring up one another: Come, say they, and let us destroy these men al at
once, that we may abolish the name, and al memory of the people of Israel.

5 Thus then with one accord have they made a solemn league against thee.

6 The Edomites, I say, coming forth of their tabernacles, the Ismaelites,
Moabites, Agarens,

7 Gebalites, Ammonites, Amalekites, Palestines, and Tyrians,

8 And also the Assyrians confederate with the sons of Lot.

9 But thou, o God, so deal with these, as thou did with the Midianites of
old, and with Sisara and Iabin, at the brook of Kison,

10 Whom thou did destroy at the city of Endor, and made their lands
to be dunghils.

11 Do so to their princes, as thou did in old time to Oreb and Zecb, and
also to Zeba and Salmuna, the ringleaders of thine enemies,

12 Who, even as these men, had the same purpose, even to drive thee away, and
to occupy thy place.

13 Whurle them away therefore like a ball, and toss them like stubble before
the wind.

14 And like as the fire burning up some great wood, and the flame consuming
the tops of the mountains:

15 So fall thou upon them with a great storm, and pursue them, and terrify
them with thy whirlewinde.

16 Ouerwhelme them with infamy and shame, that they may be compelled against
their wills to ask, Who is this so mighty a Lord?

17 Cause them to be ashamed, and to tremble, seeing their purposes more and
more disappointed, and let them perish miserably in the end:

18 That al men may understand, that thou art both in name and in deed the
only Lord, which rulest from heaven far and broad throughout all the earth.

PSALM. LXXXIIII.
The Argument.
There is the same argument, and the same use of this notable Psalm, and of
the 42. For the Prophet does bewa^le and lament his miserable condition, that
for the rage of his enemies, he could not go with others into the house of the
Lord, and there enioie the commodities of the outward holy ministry. The
which thing he does testify to be more dear unto him, than al other most
excellent commodities: so far was he from following their example, who being
conversant in the very bosom of the Church, do despise the holy assemblies,
and the use of the sacraments, or else do willingly go into such places, where
they can not come together to the true worship of God. And in my judgment,
this Psalm was written by David himself, and after was delivered to the
Korites, to be sung chiefelie in the solemn feast of the tabernacles, that the
zeal and desire of the people assembling together, might be stirred up, by
this notable example oftentimes repeated: either that it was written of the
Korites themselves, of whom, as it is very probable, some did join
themselves unto David, after the Priests were slain by Saul, and were
partakers of his calamities, as was Nathan and Asaph, and others.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord mighty in battle, how amiable are thy tabernacles!

2 Wherefore, for the desire of the visiting of thy courts o Lord (which is
utterly denied me,) I am wholly consumed, coveting most earnestly both in
body and mind, to come unto thee o God, the author of life.

3 Oh alas! is my condition worse than that of the sparowes and swalowes? to
whom it is permitted to find some place, where they may make their nests: o
thine altars, Lord of hosts, my King and my God.

4 O blessed are they that are permitted to dwell with thee! and to set forth
thy praises continually!

5 O blessed is that man, to whom thou give grace to use those thy
sacraments appointed to strengthen their faith! and who, as he comes in body
unto thy sanctuary, carries thy laws graven in his heart!

6 Wherefore, me thinks I see the great multitudes of them that come unto
thee, to go thorough the dry mores and wild figtrees, afraid of no
difficulties by the way: who rather than they should leave off the journey
that they have undertaken, do partly dig pits with great diligence, to receive
the running waters: partly do make cesternes with great labor, to hold the
rainewater.

7 Neither do they cease, but continue and increase in constancy, whilst
that one band and multitude meeting now and then with another, they do come
unto thee, o high God, into thy presence, even unto Sion.

8 O Lord of hosts, hear my prayers: give ear unto me poor miser, o God of
Jacob.

9 O God our defender behold me, and regard the king whom thou have anointed.

10 For, how far better is it to pass one day in thy house, than a thousand
in any place elsewhere? therefore I wish rather my God, to be the porter in
thy house, than to have any manner of condition amongst the profane men
polluted with sin.

11 For in other places there are continual and horrible darkness, but light is
only with thee, which art the very true Sun it self o Lord, and nothing
is safe any where else: but in thee o God, the defender of thine, there is
most certain safety: and the abundance of thy blessings, which is appointed
to them that truly and sincerely worship thee, is infinite.

12 O blessed is he, Lord of hoasts, which sets al his confidence only in
thee!

PSALM. LXXXV.
The Argument.
This Psalm, having the Korites for the authors thereof, many do refer to
the time which followed their return from the captivity of Babylon, when yet
the building of the temple and the city was let by the Gentiles that dwelt
about them. But I leave it to be considered, whether it ought rather to be
applied to the beginning of the kingdom of David, so that by the name of
captivity, not the carieng away of them from their habitation, is to be
understood: but the miserable servitude of the people under the Palestines,
which had overcome them after the death of Saul. Howsoever it is, we
understand by this Psalm, that the Church is so pressed and vexed (even when
God seems most justly to be angry) that yet it is not oppressed.
Furthermore, this Psalm does teach us, with what weapons chiefly the enemies,
being conquerours, are repulsed, even by repentance, and by prayers proceeding
of faith, whereof we have here a most excellent example. Finally, there is
added a very clear prophecy of the sending of Messiah, in whom as Paul
says, all the blessings are ratified, that we may learn, which are the proper
and peculiar benefits of the Church, and of the spiritual kingdom of Christ,
and to whom we must attribute the benefit of public peace and tranquillity,
when God does grant it unto us.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord, thou have many times showed thy self merciful to the inhabitants
of thy land: and thou have restored the posterity of Jacob, from most
miserable bondage, unto liberty.

2 Thou have taken away the iniquity of thy people, thou have covered al
their sins.

3 Thou have put away al thy wrath, thou have suppressed thy wrath, I say,
that it should not utterly flame forth.

4 Continue now therefore, o God our deliverer, to change our miserable
condition, and command thy wrath wholly to depart.

5 I pray thee, will thou be angry for ever? and will thou continue thy wrath
unto al ages?

6 Will thou not rather restore us to life again? and give us occasion again
to praise thee with great gladness?

7 Ah Lord! grant that thy mercy may appear unto us, and that we being
delivered, may have experience of thy great benignity.

8 But why should I use many words unto God? surely it is better diligently
to hear what God our Lord answers unto me. For I nothing doubt, but he will
answer most gently, and promise al prosperity to that his people, toward
whom it has alwaie pleased him to use so great liberality, that they being
admonished may be wise hereafter.

9 For although al things seem desperate, deliverance is not far off from them
that worship him, and that time is near, when our land, now lieng in misery,
shall recover her former beauty.

10 For the mercy of God shall shine unto us, to whom also his truth shall join
in society. Furthermore, justice and peace, another noble match, meeting
together with mutual imbraceings, shall receive one another.

11 Then the minds of men being changed again from infidelity unto
faithfulness, truth coming down from heaven shall appear in earth, which the
spirit of righteousness shall make fruitful from above.

12 So will it come to pass, that the Lord will power out al kind of good things
upon us: and the earth shall bring forth her fruits abundantly.

13 Finally, al things shall be done in most due manner and order, and every
man shall frame his manners after the rule appointed of God.

PSALM. LXXXVI.
The Argument.
This Psalm of David does also contain a very notable example of most
fervent prayers, with most precious sentences adioined, partly of the will of
God declared unto us, and oftentimes experienced toward us, partly drawn
from his infinite power, whereby we may be comforted, even in the greatest
miseries and most desperate. Now, the prayer of David is of two sorts: one,
that he may be preserved in this life against his most cruel and most mighty
enemies, unto this end, that the name of God may be spread to the uttermost
coasts of the earth, namely, by the coming of Messiah, which should be borne
of him, the which promise should come to naught, unless God did bridle the
rage and madness of the enemies: another cause and the chief, is even as the
foundation of the former, that God should not suffer him (being broken with the
greatness of the dangers) to fall away, as it happens sometimes even to them
that are most strong, unless that God, by the power of his spirit, do
strengthen our wavering faith.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Give ear unto me, o Lord, and hear me, that am oppressed and poor.

2 Preserve the life of him that is promoted by thy benefit: preserve, o my
God, I say, thy servant that flies unto thee.

3 Have mercy upon me, o Lord, crieng daily unto thee.

4 Refresh the soul of thy servant, for unto thee alone, o Lord, my soul does
lift it self.

5 For thou, o Lord, art verelie good and merciful, and use great clemency
and kindness toward them that call upon thee.

6 Give ear unto my prayers, o Lord, and receive the words of him that prays
unto thee.

7 Neither do I cry without cause unto thee, but being in most extreme
misery: therefore thou will hear me.

8 For verelie, amongst al those feined gods, unto whom the mad men do
attribute so much, who is to be compared unto thee, o Lord? and who is able to
do like unto thee?

9 Wherefore, al nations in the end shall cast away their false gods, and shall
knowledge thee their creator: and reuerencing thee, shall give thee al praise.

10 For thou verelie art great, thou only art God the author and worker of
marvelous works.

11 Teach me, o Lord, the way that thou have appointed, that I may show my
self faithful and truly obedient unto thee, and cleaving wholly unto thee,
may set my mind to serve thee.

12 O Lord my God, I will praise thee with my whole heart, and magnify thy name
for ever,

13 Seeing I have the experience of thine infinite goodness in my self, and am
delivered from the lowest pit of the grave by thee.

14 Thou see doubtless how cruel and proud men do arise up against me: and how
such as regard nothing less than thee, do labor with all power to take my
life from me.

15 But thou, o Lord God, upon whom only I do depend wholly, art verelie
merciful and pitiful, and art not hasty unto anger: most merciful, I say, and
most full of truth.

16 Take care of me therefore, for thine infinite mercy, and help thy
bond-seruant.

17 Grant finally, that I may manifestly know that thou love me, that mine
enemies may be ashamed of themselves, when they see that thou do help and
comfort me.

PSALM. LXXXVII.
The Argument.
Many do apply this Psalm to the time of the second temple, but I had rather
to attribute it to that time of the kingdom of David, when he set up a
tabernacle for the Ark of the Lord, in that part of the city that bare his
name, even the mount Sion, whilst that the temple was builded. Howsoever it
is, (besides the prophecy of spreading the Church of God thoughout the whole
world) this Psalm does teach us with a marvelous and divine brevity, under
the figure of that earthly, either temple or tabernacle, either first or
second, that the work of the building of the spiritual temple of God, which is
made of lively stones, even the Church, is altogether divine: and that the
foundation thereof, is only the good pleasure of God: and that the Church is
not bound to one place alone, and that nothing is more stable and durable than
the Church: finally, that the true and everlasting joy does only there
remain, as having the promises both of this life, and of the life to come.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THe Lord minding to build unto himself a firm and stable habitation, has
chosen these hills, and consecrated them to himself.

2 And he has preferred the gates of Sion above all the habitations of Jacob,
because it so pleased him.

3 Wherefore excellent things are decreed of thee, o city of God.

4 For behold, says the Lord, I will account both Egypt and Babylon amongst my
people, so that they shall be no more enemies unto thee, and the very
Philistines, the Tyrians and Arabians shall be numbered amongst thy citizens.

5 Finally, men of al nations shall not be as aliens and strangers, but they
shall be the native citizens of Sion, the which God will establish from above.

6 For God accounting the people, will write them al in his book.

7 There shall al sound with singers and shawmes, there (says the Lord) all the
fountains of my benefits shall flow forth.

PSALM. LXXXVIII.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title does testify, that the writer of this Psalm was Heman, by
his country surnamed Esrait, a kinsman and fellow of Asaph, of whom most
honorable mention is made, 1. Chron. 6, 33. and 15, 4. where it is said, that
he was a Prophet to the king, and a singer, and of singular wisdom, 2. Kings.
4.31. So that I think they are deceived, who refer this Psalm to the time of
Joakim the last king of Iu l^ save one, who was captive in Babylon. And it
contains such a lamentation, as there is none more lamentable and pitiful in
the whole Psalms: the which the whole Church, and the families, and also
every private man may use, both in public and private miseries. Therefore was
this Psalm afore-time named amongst the penitentials, as they called them, and
was sung at the public confession of the excommunicate persons, the which
Psalms afterward we have seen to be applied foolishlie, and without reason,
to a daily and private babbling, without respect either of time or person.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord GOD, of whom I do wait for my deliverance, I call for thy help day
and night.

2 Let my prayers, I beseech thee, come unto thee, and give ear unto my cry.

3 My soul is full of misery, neither is my life far from the grave.

4 For I am more like to a dead, than to a living man, by the judgment of all that do behold me.

5 And as though I had no part with the living, I am now counted amongst the
dead, and amongst them that lie in grave, of whose life there is none account,
as those whom thy hand has cut off at once.

6 And I am cast by thee, as into the lowest, dark, and deep pit.

7 Thy wrath lies upon me, and thou have overwhelmed me with all thy floods.

8 Thou have put al my familiars from me, unto whom I am so loathsome, not
without thy knowledge, so that I keep my self within my house, as it were in
a prison, and dare not go one foot forth.

9 Mine eyes are consumed through sorrow: yet call I upon thee daily, o Lord,
spreading forth my hands.

10 And will there be time to exercise thy great power when men are dead? will thou restore them to life again, that they may give thee praise?

11 Shall they that lie in grave set forth thy mercy there? and shall they that
are dead, set forth thy truth again here?

12 Shall those that lie buried in the darkness of death, know thy woonderful
works? and they, whose memory death has blotted out from the living,
acknowledge thy righteousness?

13 Wherefore, I cease not to call upon thee, o Lord, and I do prevent the
morning light, in pouring forth my prayers.

14 Why do thou refuse mine oppressed soul, o Lord? why do thou turn
away thy face from me?

15 Ah! I am miserable and ready to die, how often have I been stricken with
terrors sent by thee even from my very youth? how often have I stood amazed?

16 Thy most bitter wrath has overwhelmed me, thy terrors have shut me in on
every side.

17 A flood of waters, as it were, ouerflowing al, and compassing me round
about, do close me in.

18 Thou have removed al my friends and companions far from me, that I see
nothing anie-where, but mere darkness.

PSALM. LXXXIX.
The Argument.
Ethan the Esrait, as also Heman, were named by their country as J judge, unto
the which Ethan, this excellent Psalm is entitled. It is the same, whose
genealogy (...) derived from Merari, 1. Chron. 6, 44. a man of singular
wisdom, 1. King. 4.31. And I do agree with them that think that he did live
after Solomon, and that he lamenteth in this Psalm, both the falling away of
the ten tribes from the house of David, and also that horrible invasion and
spoil of the land of Judah, and of the house of God, and of the kings house,
which was made by Zesak king of Egypt, as it is declared, 2. Chron. 12. It
contains a most grievous and pitiful lamentation, in the which yet he is not
discouraged, but in the very beginning, ouercomming by faith, he does
courageously lift up himself over infidelity: and though he seem sometimes
to languish and faint in the battle, at the length yet like a conqueror he
triumphs: he comes forth then as a valiant champion, armed with faith and
hope, both twain being grounded of most certain and sure foundations, even of
the immovable stabilitie of the decrees of God, first considered generally,
that is, in the adoption of the seed of Abraham, then particularly, in the
promise confirmed with David. And he brings forth two most certain
testimonies thereof, even the innumerable benefits, (verse 1.) and the very
frame of heaven, (verse 2.) in the which, he says, that God has engraven the
truth of his promise, not so much for the stable substance of the heavens, and
also most certain course, but much more, as I suppose, because the Lord making
a covenant with Abraham, would have the heavens, which he commanded him to
behold, to be as a sacrament of his covenant. But in the other part, that is,
in the league made with David of the eternity of his kingdom, he chiefly
labors, (verse 4. and 5.) and that worthily, because that the whole
foundation of the faith of the saints rests upon this son of David. For if
he be an eternal King, the Church also, which is the kingdom of heaven, must
of necessity be eternal and everlasting, and therefore without al danger to
perish The second foundation of this faith and hope, is the infinite power of
God, whereof he brings also a double testimony, one that sh^neth forth in
the government of things both above and beneath: the other declaring it self
in the manifold deliverances of the Church, (from the 6. verse. to the 15.) the
third foundation of these twain, is the nature of God himself, who must
needs be both merciful toward his, by the covenant of his gracious and free
promise, and a just aduenger of their enemies: the which place he does amplify
with an excellent poetical invention, borrowed of the thrones of kings, (verse
14, and 15.) these things being set down, as though the battle were finished,
he sings the triumph, verse 16. and in the three next following. But here
contrariwise, the enemy rebelleth, who seemed to have been overcome: and
verelie (which is strange) he uses the same weapons wherewith chiefly he was
overcome. For he granted the covenant made with David: yea, even so, that he
brings forth the very tables of the covenant, and requires every word of
them to be pondered, that he may gather thereby, by present experience, that
that covenant is frustrate, even because it was violated and broken by the
posterity of David, and therefore that their hope is vain, which rested upon
the stabilitie thereof. And this is the greatest battle of faith: namely,
whereas the promises are granted generalie, and the controversy is brought of
the particular application^ the assault of the enemy is contained, verse 20,
etc. unto the 46. verse. Finally, there follows a most fervent prayer, in
the which, he rising up, who seemed to be overthrown, resting still
notwithstanding upon those three things, whereof we have spoken: he concludes,
that it were a great absurdity, and that it is far from the will of God
revealed, that he should alwaie be angry with his, verse 47. then does he
lament the miseries of mankind, which perishes even of his own folly, verse
48, 49. and in the end he concludes the Psalm with a most godly triumph,
bringing in again, the league made with David, and declaring on the one side,
the greatness of the present misery: and on the other side, putting God in
remembrance, that it stands not so much of the preservation of the miserable,
as of the maintenance of his own glory.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 ALthough we be afflicted on every side with so great calamities, as we
think can come to any, yet God forbid that I should expostulate with him:
naie rather, I will celebrate with continual songs, how many, and how great his
benefits are toward us: and I will never cease to praise his everlasting
constancy, in perfourming his promises.

2 For although that thing be interrupted sometimes, which he has begun: yet
must we determine that that must always remain immovable, which he
promising of his great mercy, has said shall continue, taking the heavens
themselves to witness.

3 But the effect of this covenant does depend altogether of that, which I will
not let to declare by the voice of God himself. Thus then he says, Behold, I
do swear, that I will perform this my covenant begun with your fathers, unto
that same chosen man, even unto David this my servant:

4 That is to say, that a child shall spring out of him, whom I will endue with
eternity, and that his kingdom shall be perpetual.

5 And even that stable frame of the heavens that endures so many ages does
declare, that God will bring to pass and work that thing, which passes the
condition of mankind, and the state of al kingdoms, but especially that
company of holy spirits, which celebrate the truth of God.

6 For who in those regions that are above us may be compared with the Lord the
maker? and which of those most mighty spirits shall we say to be like the Lord?

7 For there is none of al these that stand about him, which do not fear at
the sight of God, and does not confess, that he is to be reverenced above al.

8 Oh Lord God, the emperor of those heavenly armies! who can say, that he
is equal to thee in power? and thy truth is no less stable than thy power is
mighty.

9 And that thou will do what thou art able for thine, thou have testified now
of old, when thou have bridled the raging sea by thy power, and have stilled
the most deep surges thereof, that there might be a passage to thy people.

10 And by the same thy mighty arm thou have cast down Egypt, even thine
enemies wounded to death.

11 And how can it be, but thou art able to do it? unto whom the heaven and
the earth, as to their only Creator, are subject:

12 And which have defended, with a certain special power, the land which thou
have chosen and given unto thine. For thou certainly have appointed the north
and south borders thereof, and have set Tabor at the west, and Hermon at the
east.

13 Wherefore, seeing thou have a power neither weak nor idle, surely thou will declare thy strength, and wilt lift up thy right hand.

14 Finally, thou will declare thy self in deed to be the King, whose throne
that most moderate equity, whereby thou gouernest thine assembly, and that
severity of judgment, whereby thou punishest thine enemies, and the enemies
of thy people, do hold up as it were two pillars, unto whom also sitting upon
this throne, mercy and truth are seen to stand before him.

15 O blessed is the people, who being stirred up with the sound of thy
trumpets, o Lord, does go forth, the light of thy countenance showing them the
way!

16 And praising thee daily, and trusting of thy justice does rejoice!

17 For thou art both the honor, and also the strength both of them and us:
and we lift up our head, trusting upon thy most merciful goodness.

18 For our defender, our king, I say, upon whom we set our eyes (who is
ordei^ed over us by thee, o Lord, which have consecrated and separated thine
Israel forth of al people unto thee) is stablished by thy power.

19 For thou, at what time it pleased thee to bestow this so great benefit
upon us, did appear unto men, whom thou louedst most dearly, and did
speak unto them in these words: I have raised up this most valiant man, chosen
out of the whole people, by whose power my people may be defended.

20 David, I sai^, has it pleased me to take only out of all the rest, whose
endeavor I would use in that business, and therefore have I consecrated him with
my holy oil to be the king.

21 Therefore, my hand shall establish him: with mine arm, I say, will I
strengthen him.

22 No enemy shall overcome him by subtlety, neither shall any wicked man
oppress him by force.

23 For I will destroy all that would oppress him before his face, and I will
stay al his enemies.

24 My mercy shall never fail him, my truth shall never forsake him, and he
trusting to my favor, shall lift up his head most high.

25 I will cause him to have one hand upon the sea, and another upon the floods,

26 And he shall name me his father, his God, and his safe tower:

27 And I will place him again as my first begotten son in the whole family
of the kings of the whole world, even in a throne most high above others.

28 I will defend him with everlasting mercy, and my covenant made with him
shall be stable for ever.

29 I will cause that his generation shall be eternal, and his throne as stable
and everlasting as heaven it self.

30 For though his posterity shall sail from my law, neither order themselves
by the rules of the law prescribed unto them,

31 But violate the ordinances that I have appointed, and keep not my
commandments:

32 I will then take the rod, and correct their faults, and punish their
wickedness.

33 But I will not suffer them to be without al sense of my mercy, neither will
I therefore break my promise:

34 Nor will violate my covenant, or will change any thing of those things that
I have spoken.

35 For I the holy one have once sworn by mine own self, If I lie at any
time unto David.

36 His generation shall stand for ever, and his throne shall be as the sun
before me,

37 And it shall continue even as the moon in all ages, they both being faithful
witnesses of this my promise in the heavens.

38 Thou have even promised these things of old, o Lord: how shall I now say
then, that it is come to pass, that thou being angry, have refused and cast
away this thy king?

39 Wherefore, I pray thee, have thou abrogated thy league made with thy
servant? wherefore have thou laid open to the reproach of al men his crown cast
upon the ground?

40 Al his forts being overthrown, and al his fortresses destroyed,

41 Thou have laid him open to be spoiled by all that pass by at their
pleasure, and to be derided of al his neighbors about him.

42 Thou have ministered power and cause of joy to al his adversaries.

43 Thou have made blunt the edge of his sword, thou have taken away al
courage from him, that he is not able to stand against the force of his enemy.

44 And thou have blotted out al his honor, and have cast down his throne
even unto the ground.

45 In the very flower of his youth thou have cut off his strength, and have
covered him with all shame.

46 Oh Lord! will thou withdraw thy self from us for ever? shall thine anger
thus like a most raging flame break forth against us?

47 Remember how short the space of man's life is, although it should be the
whole time continued. And shall we think that thou have made men for no
purpose, but to take them away suddenly?

48 What need any violence I pray you, to destroy us? seeing there is no
man who does not perish of his own self, and no man is able to exempt him
self from the grave.

49 Where are now those thine old benefits, o Lord, which thou have sworn unto
David, that they should remain for ever?

50 But to what purpose do I make these complaints? Thou know most
certainly the purpose of thy counsels: and be it far from me that I should
doubt of thy fidelity. Only I beseech thee o Lord, consider with thy self,
how thy servants are rebuked, especially how many reproaches, so many people
do vomit into my bosom:

51 Even what these thine enemies, rather than ours, have reprochfullie laid
unto thy charge, o Lord: and with what ieasting taunts they answer those
things which are rehearsed by us, of the king and kingdom that thou have
established.

52 Howbeit, o Lord, howsoever these men dote, and which way soever thou
leadest us to and fro, al land and everlasting glory apperteineth unto thee.
And so undoubtedly without al fail will it come to pass.

PSALM. XC.
The Argument.
Moses does here preach of the miseries of mankind, and specially of death,
whereof the Philosophers do teach many things, but falselie and foolishlie. For
they understood nothing of the creation of man, nor of his fall, much less of
the true comforts against all the miseries of this life. Hereof did these wicked
voices arise, that It was the best, either not to be borne at al, or to die
streightwaie: that Nature is a stepdame, and such like. Hereof came
innumerable blasphemous complaints powered forth in the mourning for the dead.
And they which sought a remedy against these things, either of the
immortality of the souls, as did the scholars of Plato (to pass over the
doting folly of them, who thought that the souls went forth of one body
into an other) besides that they did confirm it with very slender Arguments,
first of al, they believed, that the other part of man was extingu shed by
death: which caus^d the Atheniens to d^ride Paul, Acts 17, 32. and at the
judgment seat of Festus, Acts 26, 24. Again, setting the cause of blessed
immortality in the virtues themselves, the chief whereof they scars^lie knew
by name, and in those that they did know after a sort, yet being ignorant
both of the true causes and effects, it cannot be spoken how far they erred
from the mark. But Moses streightwaies, in the beginning of this sermon, even
in the first verse, arming men against al these evils, teaches, that though
men be mortal, notwithstanding there has bin always in this life one certain
company, whom the Lord has defended in all their mis^ries: whereof it
follows, that there is plainly in the Church a certain and sure remedy
against al calamities, seeing it has bin preserved from the beginning of the
world. Yet does he confess (verse 2, 3, 4.) that this same company is in the
same condition as other men are, that is to say, they are subject to very
many miseries: yea, and to the dissolution of the body by death: and that not
by chance, as the wicked Epicures imagined, neither by that principle of the
natural Philosophers, that Al things which are made, of necessity must be
dissolved (the which yet not always to be true, nor to be verefied
universally in it self, we may plainly see, both by the condition of man
before his full, and by the doctrine of the resurrection of the bodies to
remain afterward for ever, contrary to the Pelagians) but by the decree of
God, the cause whereof afterward he will declare to rest in the men themselves.
And he is so far from the diminishing of this most miserable condition (as they
use to do, who rather obstinately defend dark sentences, than prove them
with sound arguments) that contrariwise, he does paint it forth marvelously
with most excellent similitudes. Howbeit, he declares that the cause of al
these miseries is the sin of man, which the most just God cannot but correct,
hate, and also punish: all the which are contained from the 5. verse, to the 11.
Afterward, in the 11. verse, Moses does greeuouslie accuse the slouthfulnes of
men, who think of nothing less, than of the wrath of God: although they be
most severely accused both by their own conscience, and by the word of God.
For Moses does not preach to the profane people, but unto the very Church of
God: and there has bin always most frequent examples of this dull slouthfulnes
in the very congregations of the godly: wherefore, it is no marvel though the
Church it self must be also corrected with scourges. Howbeit, there is added a
most certain consolation, verse 12. that though al these things do proceed of
our sins, that God yet does not mean to destroy his, when he punishes
them, but rather correct^th them so, that our scourgings are schoolings: the
which thing yet, when it so comes to pass, may not be attributed unto our
selves, but rather to the goodness of God, that we may know that that same
sorrow, which is according unto God, as the Apostle speaks, is the excell^nt
gift of God: much less that true repentance should in any part at al proceed
of our selves. Finally, after that al these things are most briefly and
diuinelie declared, he sets s^^^th an example of pra^ers, whe^ewith it is
me^te that the Church, and every member thereof, he so comforted that in the
m^st outrageous tempests, without fear of sh^pwrack, God being their
goue^nour, they may s^fel^^ sa^le, vnt^^ they come into the v^rie hau^n.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THou, o Lord, have bin a safe haven, and habitation unto us, and to our
elders succeeding one another in order.

2 And thou truly, before the mountains were made, and before thou framedst
the world, yea even from al eternity, art God without beginning and end.

3 And men (being now most miserable creatures) as at the first they were
created by thee of an handful of dust, so as soon as this voice proceeding
from thee is heard, whereby thou biddest them return thither again, they are
forthwith resolved into a small quantity of dust again.

4 But though a man live even a thousand years, how little is this space,
being compared with thine eternity? verelie this is so much with thee as
yesterdaie that is past, or as a watch in the night.

5 Therefore, whether man's life be somewhat longer or short (for thou nothing
regardest it) thou take them away as a cloud that powers down rain, that
their life seems to be like a dream that suddenly vanishes away.

6 They grow up like the herb, which continues not in the same state: for
in the morning it flourishes, and by and by is changed: for it is cut down in
the evening, and withers.

7 Doubtless, even thus thy wrath does consume us, and we are astonnied at thy
displeasure.

8 Neither is this without cause: for the cause of all this does wholly cleave
in our selves, even our sins, the which seeing thou art a most just judge,
they must needs be seen and marked by thee: and although we labor never so
much to hide them, yet do thou with thy most sharp sight behold them.

9 This is the cause that thou being angry with us most justly, we lead a
miserable life: and all the time of our life does vanish away, even as a sound
spread in the air.

10 For if even the longest space of man's life be rightly counted, he shall
find it about threescore and ten years, or at the most fourscore in them
that are more strong: the better part whereof, and the chief, the man's state I
mean, is consumed with labor and sorrow: so comes it to pass that we
suddenly taken, fly away.

11 The which things seeing they are so, yet how few do consider the power of
thy wrath: and do so think how he may avoid it, that he may reverence thee as
is meet?

12 Grant therefore, o God, that we accounting oftentimes the days of our
life, may know how short it is, and that our mind drawn away by this
cogitation from most vain and troublesome cares, and also called away from al
those things, whereby we wander out of the path of the right way, may aspire
to true wisdom.

13 Return then o Lord, and favor us: for what measure else can there be of
thy wrath? and put thou on a more merciful mind toward thy servants.

14 Command after so long darkness of troubles, that thy goodness may shine
unto us like a most pleasant light: that we being satisfied with the most
comfortable sight thereof, may enioie the true and everlasting consolation.

15 And like as thou have corrected us with so many kind of miseries, so many
days and years: so again comfort us with thy bountious goodness.

16 Grant that it may plainly appear, which seems to have bin hid
hitherto, or at the least not so plainly known: to wit, that we are chosen
from other nations by thee, and taken into thy family, chiefly to be cared
for of thee: and let this thy glory shine forth to our posterity.

17 And let that thine honor beautify and adorn us, o Lord our God, and
govern thou our counsels from heaven, and al our enterprises: govern thou, I
say, our counsels, and al our enterprises.

PSALM. XCI.
The Argument.
J do consent with that godly and most learned man Henry Mollerus, who
supposes that that horrible pestilence, whereof mention is made, 2. Sam. 24.
ministered the occasion of this Psalm: for both the words and sentences do
agree unto this history, and both the people, and the king chiefly h mselfe,
stood in need of great consolation, for he brought this plague upon him and
his people wilfully. And whosoever shall weigh the worthiness of the words and
sentences of this Psalm, I hope they will grant unto me, that nothing can be
spoken either more substantiallie, or more eloquently: and that there shines
forth in it a singular example of divine eloquence. And whereas God has
scourged many countries about us, within these few years, with the
pestilence, and seems still to threaten the same plague, J would desire that
our Divines should not take in hand that disputation, which ought to be sent
unto the schools of Physicians, whether that the pestilence be contagious or
no: but rather to beat into the minds of men, the doctrine which is so
necessary and so godly set forth in this Psalm: in the which, not only
the general providence of God, but also the most particular, which governs all the second causes most justly and most orderl e, who watches also for the
safety of his, is set forth to be seen so l uelie, and is ratified with so
many and so plain sentences, even the person of God being brought in to
speak to them, that nothing seems more to be desired in this point. And
truly, I will not think much to declare unto the glory of God, what I have
proved certainly by experience. This is the one and thirty year, since by
the goodness of God, I have willingly forsaken my country, and all that I had,
that I might freely serve Christ: and it came to pass, at my first entry
into the public assembly of the Christians, that the company did sing this
Psalm, by the singing whereof, as though I had heard God himself calling me
particularly, I felt my self so comforted, that I have kept it since that
time most dearly graven in my heart: and I may truly witness this before
God, that I have received marvelous comforts by it, both in sickness and in
s^rowe, not only by meditating it when I was also smitten with the
pestilence, and the same plague had infected my family, even four times, but
also in other most grievous temptations.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to ye mortal men, and imagine so many shifts as ye lust: there is one
only safe and quiet refuge, even the shadow of the almighty God, unto al
them that run unto the hid covert of him that is most high.

2 Wherefore for my part, the Lord only shall be my refuge and fortress: he is
my God, in whom I have settled al my hope.

3 And whosoever thou be that shall follow my example, be thou assured that God
will deliver thee from the net of the fowler, even from the perilous pestilence,
how infectiue and dangerous so ever.

4 For he will defend thee, covering thee with his feathers, and receiving thee
under his wings: neither is there any buckler so strong, or shield so sure, as
the promises of God, who neither will nor can break the promise that he has
once made unto the believers: which were, to be a liar.

5 Wherefore, neither the terrors of the night, nor the darts fleeing in the
day time shall strike thee:

6 Even the pestilence spreading in the darkness, and the deadly plague that
makes such slaughter in the day.

7 And though a thousand fall on the one side, and ten thousand on the other:
yet the evil shall not come unto thee.

8 Nay, God will have thee to remain alive, that thou may behold the
punishment wherewith he auengeth the sins of the wicked.

9 Even because thou have set al thy strength in the Lord by mine example, and
have fled unto that tower of God, which is set in the most high and sure place.

10 For so will it come to pass, that no evil shall touch thee, and thou shall
be preserved safe and sure, without the shot of darts in this tabernacle.

11 For the blessed spirits have received a commandment from the Lord to
defend thee and preserve thee, so that thou keep the way appointed to thee.

12 Wherefore, rather than thou shall be hurt against any stone, they
themselves shall take thee up in their hands and bear thee:

13 So that, if there be any need, thou shall walk harmeles, even upon the
lion^ and the aspes, and thou shall tread upon the young lions and dragons
without danger.

14 For God himself shall say, Seeing that he does love me so fervently, I will
deliver him: and because he acknowledges me, I will exalt him.

15 He calls upon me, therefore will I hear him: and as though I were a
companion and partaker of his miseries, I will deliver him, and bring him also
to honor.

16 I will likewise prolong his life to the full, much less shall he die with
others: and in the end I will make him partaker of my true and everlasting
felicity.

PSALM. XCII.
The Argument.
Whereas the institution of the sabbath had diverse ends, to wit, one political,
even that some rest might be granted to servants, and to the cattle: an other
ceremonial, which is abrogate, together with other ceremonies: finally, the
third, which was the chief, and shall never cease before the end of the world
(although the seventh day be changed into the first) to wit, that other cares
being laid aside, solemn assemblies may be gathered to hear the word of God,
to use the sacraments, and to give thanks unto God. The title does declare,
that this Psalm was written, to admonish the people of this matter, that both
in the temple, and in the synagogues, and in the families, it being sung, a
rule might be set forth to sanctify that day. It sets out those divine
works, whereby we may be stirred up to behold Gods infinite power, and also
his mercy, which are considered first generally, and secondly, in the
government of the Church. And whereas the Saints are many times vexed, and the
wicked do flourish (which argument is treated in many other places) it
admonishes, least the godly should turn themselves to follow the wicked,
that we may not esteem the love or hatred of God by prosperity or adversity:
or that we should therefore deny the providence of God, as though any thing
came by chance, or yet be discouraged, but rather to adore the wisdom of God,
and his power also, who concerning the wicked, will recompense the delaie of the
punishment with the greeuousnes thereof, but will defend his, that is, those
that are grafted trul^e into the Church, even unto the end.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 HOw excellent a thing is it to praise the Lord? and to sing unto his most
high name?

2 And to rise in the morning earelie to praise thy goodness o God, and to
praise thy truth at the night, as we are admonished both by the morning and
evening sacrifices ordained by thee.

3 Upon the instrument of ten strings, upon the viol, and with song, and with
the harp.

4 For the works that thou have done, minister an argument of most great joy
unto me, that I can not, but with reioicing, have them in admiration.

5 For how wonderful are thy works o Lord? and how secret and hid are the
reasons of thy counsels?

6 Therefore, the foolish and mad men (who only seem to themselves and to
others to be wise) do not perceive what this thing means:

7 That the evil and most wicked men do grow up and flourish, therefore they
wickedlie condemn that which they do not understand, as though either the
state of men were governed by chance, or that God did favor wickedness: even
because they do not understand, that these wicked men are like herbs so
green and flourishing, that streightwaies they die up by the roots.

8 For although these inferior things be subject to marvelous changes, yet
thou the most wise and most just governor of al them, sitting on high, art not
changed, but art the same, and do remain like thy self o Lord.

9 What alteration then of things or time, soever do fall, yet must this end of
necessity follow, that thine enemies, thine enemies I say, o Lord, must
perish, and that al, which are obstinately bent upon wickedness (because those
are thine enemies) howsoever they flourish for a time, in the end shall be
scattered and vanish.

10 But thou contrariwise, wilt lift up this mine head, as it were of an
unicorn, being anointed by thee with fresh oil, and laden with new benefits
continually.

11 Wherefore, there will be a time, when we shall see and hear, that this is
come upon them which they deserve, who rising out of their ambushments, seek
to destroy us by all means.

12 But the just men do not only not faint under the burden of miseries, but
also they gather strength like the palm tree, and like those high cedars of
Libanus, which cannot be consumed with rottennes or age, but daily grow up
more great.

13 For they are planted in a most fat and wealthy place, even in the house of
the Lord himself, in the courts whereof let them flourish,

14 And that with such power, that they may be green, bud forth, and be full
of sap, even in their very age.

15 And this is the only end of these benefits, and the mark that we may
feel and profess the Lord to be our only tower, and the most righteous
governor in the world, who departs not one jot from that which is most just.

PSALM. XCIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm truly is very short, but it contains al in one word that is
necessary to confirm our faith, when he says that God reigns, that is to
say, that he is a King, not in name alone, but in very deed, the most
mighty defender of his, and the auenger of their enemies. And seeing that the
father has given al judgment to his son, even as he is man, John. 5.22. and
the Church is therefore called the kingdom of heaven, it is evident, that this
Psalm has respect unto Messiah, whose very true godhead is proved hereby
manifestly, that the name of Jehouah is attributed unto him.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Howsoever the wicked freat and disturb al things, as much as lies in them:
yet reigns the Lord full of majesty and power, which thing, the very sight
of the heavens do declare. Neither does he sit there idlelie, but if we
diligently consider with how great wisdom and also power he does govern al
things, howsoever they be disordered by the wickedness of men, he is always
armed with those weapons, wherewith he both defends his, and brideleth their
enemies. For how can he not do this thing? who vpholdeth this huge mass of the
very earth, by his only power, so balanced, that it can neither waver to the
one part, nor to the other.

2 Therefore is his kingdom much more stable and immovable, as it has
always bin, and shall be.

3 How great is the rage of the flowing waters? how terrible is the roaring of
the storms that do rise up, and beat one against another?

4 But al these, how loud sounding and raging tempests soever, are nothing
verelie, compared with the infinite power of Jehovah, thundering forth of his
high throne, and repressing all this tumult by his only beck: and how much
more easily can he calm selie men, be they never so outrageous?

5 And the assembly of the saints, which continues stable now from the
beginning of the world, declares the matter to be thus. For it is necessary,
that the promises made by God, should be sure, and altogether unchangeable.
Therefore, howsoever the world do sreat, and how great storms soever it do
stir up against thy house o Lord, that holiness full of most excellent beauty,
wherewith thou do adorn it, shall be everlasting.

PSALM. XCIIII.
The Argument.
This most excellent Psalm is a displaieng of the tyranny of Satan, by whose
furies the most mighty princes of the world being stirred up, do violate all the laws of God and man, especially when they rise up against the godly,
even as though there were no God, or that he had no providence at al: of which
horrible rage and wickedness, the chief kingdoms of Europa give us an example
at this day. But most effectual comforts are afterward annexed, drawn forth
of the unchangeable nature of God himself, and of his providence, and are
described with great majesty: and the godly are commanded to read and meditate
diligently the holy scriptures, that they may know these things, whereby
they shall understand, even by innumerabl^ and most certain testimonies, that
al these tempests and storms shall turn to the commodity of the godly, but
to the destruction of the wicked: the which thing, even the Prophet proves by
his own example, and the Church verelie never triumphed, but under the cross.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 SHine unto us in so great and horrible confused darkness, o Lord, the auenger
of wickedness, and most just judge.

2 Go up unto thy judgment seat, o thou judge of the world, and punish the
proud as they deserve.

3 For how long, o Lord, shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked rejoice?

4 If thou behold their words, they power out what they list tauntingly, and
the most wicked men do threaten cruelie, and boast themselves proudly:

5 But in their deeds, o Lord, they oppress thy chosen people, and waste the
heritage consecrated unto thee.

6 It is so far away that they should help the widows, strangers, and
fatherless, as the very laws of nature do require, and thy laws do command,
that they even kill them most cruelly.

7 Yea, and which is the greatest of al wickedness, these are their words,
whereby they inflame themselves to al mischief: God sees none of these
things, the God of Jacob knows not these things.

8 O ye most foolish, and most mad of al men! when will ye once wax wise?

9 Is he deaf, which has joined the ears unto man's head framed so
cunningly? is he blind, who has made the eyes with such a marvelous
workmanship?

10 He that spared not whole nations, will not he reprove you? does he
understand nothing, which gives the power of understanding unto men?

11 Yes verelie, he does not only know what they say and do, but also the
Lord fully knows what men do think, and is not ignorant how vain and
foolish their thoughts are.

12 What then shall we do in so great a disorder of al things? surely we must
know this of thee. O blessed is the man therefore, o Lord, whom thou
teach, by the doctrine that thou have delivered unto us!

13 That he having received of thee a quiet and peaceable mind in the midst of
these tumults, waits whilst the wicked may be perceived to have dug a pit
for themselves, wherein they are fallen.

14 For it cannot be possible by any means, that the Lord should cast away
his people: and that he should forsake them, whom he has chosen to be his
peculiar heritage.

15 Therefore it is of necessity, that this so disordered a state of the
world, which seems to be utterly void of justice, should be restored at the
last into that ancient most right order, that they may follow God with great
cheerefulnes, whosoever delight in righteousness:

16 And that al men may even now know, that the Lord does not fail his, and
that the saints are established by his power alone. Who amongst al mortal men
has helped me, being assaulted by these most wicked enemies? who has taken my
part against the wicked?

17 Verelie the Lord alone, who unless he had been present with me, very death
streightwaies would have put me to silence.

18 But when I thought with my self, that I was now overthrown, thy goodness,
o Lord, has stayed me, that I did not fall.

19 And when I was utterly amazed, and my mind distracted into diverse parts,
thou have comforted me with marvelous consolations.

20 For what has the tyrannical domination agreeable with thee, adioining
authority to most wicked laws?

21 Conspiring against the godly, and abusing the color of the law to
condemn the innocent?

22 But go to, let these men rage as they list for a space, and let them tread
under foot all the laws both of God and man: the Lord shall be unto me a most
safe fortress, and I will fly to the rock of my God.

23 For he will repaie unto the wicked, that which their wickedness deserves,
and their own malice shall destroy, shall destroy them, I say, o Lord our God.

PSALM. XCV.
The Argument.
It may he that the Church of Israel, whilst their temple did stand, did begin
their continual morning sacrifice with this Psalm: by whose example the latin
Church, when they set in order in old time the holy Church service, did begin
the morning prayers, and the memory of those that departed godly, which were
afterward most filthilie polluted with idolatry: and this Psalm was so used
not unworthily: for it contains a doctrine amongst others most necessary,
namely, the knowledge of that last end for the which men are created, and unto
the which, as unto a mark, all the actions both of the body, and of the mind
must be bent: and it has a most sweet exhortation adioined. Now this end is
the glory of God, both because the infinite majesty of the most mighty
Creator of al things, and most wise governor does require it, and also for the
infinite and singular benefits bestowed by him upon those men, who being
chosen out of the number of the residue, he has consecrated to himself. But
because many of those same, which will be counted in the Church, either use
negligentlie to regard these things, or else utterly to despise them, there is
added a rehearsal of a most famous story, wherein is set forth a notable
example of the unthankful mind of men, and of the most severe judgment of God.
As for the meaning of the last verse, and how these things pertain to the time
of the new testament, search in the Epistle to the Heb. 4. Chap.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 COme ye al, that we may celebrate the praises of the Lord together, and let
us sing altogether a song of triumph unto him that is the only rock of our
salvation.

2 Let us make haste to praise him openly, and to sing Psalms unto him.

3 For God is a great Lord doubtless, and a King far above al emperors, how
great soever.

4 For he has in his power as the Lord of al, both the low secret parts of
the earth, and the high tops of the mountains.

5 And also he has full authority over the whole sea, as he that has even
created it, like as he has made the mass of the earth also by his power.

6 Come therefore, that we may fall down and worship him, and kneel down
before the Lord our maker.

7 For he is not only our God, as he is of others, but after a peculiar manner,
as he that has chosen us, whom he will feed as his sheep, and lead by the
hand as his flock.

8 Therefore, so often as you shall hear his voice, and so long as he speaks
unto you, take heed least you stubbornly strive against his voice, as it did
fall out of old in those places, which thereof had their name Meribah and Massah.

9 Of the which matter, hear the words of God himself rebuking you: There,
says he, your fathers although they had so often beholden with their eyes what I
was able to do, yet ceased they not to tempt me, and to try my power.

10 Wherefore, I being grieved after so many sorts forty years long by this
kind of men, have in the end thus determined with my self: Seeing that this
people is wilfulie mad, and will not know me, although it has been admonished
so often, both with words and deeds,

11 I swear in my wrath, if ever they shall set one foot to take possession of
that rest, which I had promised unto them.

PSALM. XCVI.
The Argument.
This Psalm, and other four that follow, have neither the name of the
writer, nor the occasion of the writing set before them in Hebrew: but they
seem altogether to be written by David, which thing is noted in the Greek,
and that at the same time, when he brought in the Ark of the Lord into his
city, as it is written, 1. Chron. 15. whereof we did speak upon the Psalm
47. either verelie when he d^clared the building of the temple of the Lord, a
little before the death of Solomon, which history is written, 1. Chron. 29.
and it does contain the doctrine of the true use of the temple, and of all the
holy rites, wherewith both Messiah himself, and al his office was shadowed.
Therefore notable and plain prophesies are adioined of his coming, and of
that spreading of his spiritual kingdom throughout the whole world: so that
Christ did not unworthily admonish the senseless Jews, with these words,
Search the scriptures, for they bear witness of me.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 SIng unto the Lord a new song, sing unto the Lord, al ye inhabitants of the
earth:

2 Sing, I say, unto the Lord, give him thanks, show forth without ceasing
the salvation that he has wrought.

3 Rehearse unto the Gentiles, and to al people, his excellent and marvelous
works.

4 For the Lord alone is great, and no praise is sufficient for him, and he is
to be feared worthily: but not those false and feigned gods.

5 For they verelie are vain, though the people do worship them so devoutly:
but the Lord has created the very heavens.

6 Majesty and honor do go before him, shining forth in his works and it is
declared in his sanctuary, both how great his power and glory is.

7 Give therefore unto the Lord, al ye people assembled together, give, I say,
unto the Lord, the praise of power and glory.

8 Give honor unto the Lord due unto his name, and take an oblation, and enter
into the courts consecrated unto him.

9 Worship the Lord sitting in that his renowned sanctuary, al ye inhabitants
of the earth reverence his Majesty.

10 Proclaim on every side, o ye criers: Now is the Lord come to reign over
the whole earth, now verelie the world shall be established, now shall the people
be governed with a just and righteous government.

11 Let the heavens be glad, and the earth rejoice, and the roaring sea, how
wide soever it lies, testify her joy.

12 Let the fields leap for joy, and whatsoever is in the fields: finally,
let all the trees of the wood now rejoice,

13 Before the Lord: for lo, he comes, he comes to govern the earth, to
govern the world, I say, and all the people with the scepter of his justice
and truth.

PSALM. XCVII.
The Argument.
It falls out in the Psalms, as in a doubtful feast, that thou can not
easily judge which to prefer before another. This Psalm verily is most
worthy for all the godly to meditate most diligently, as a most divine and
brief sum of all the mystery of the Gospel, and these are the chief places
thereof. First, the divinity of Christ, by the repeating of the name Jehovah
six times, and by attributing al glory and power unto him, (verse 2, 5, 6, 9,
10.) finally, by worshipping of the very Angels, verse 7. it is most
manifestly confirmed, as the Apostle does interpret it, Heb. 1, 6. Secondly,
his humanity, as the same Apostle does interpret it: which thing is also
proved hereby, that here it is treated of that kingdom as it were first then
to be begun, (verse 1, 2, 6, 9.) whereby it is plain, that it cannot be
referred only to his godhead, but that it apperteineth necessarily unto the
King that should be borne of the stock of David which should so be God, that
he should also be man, and so also man, that he should be very God. Thirdly,
a plain prophecy of the spreading of the spiritual kingdom throughout the
whole world, (verse 1, 5, 6.) whereunto Christ himself had regard, Ioh. 5, 22.
Mat. 28, 18. Fourthly, the rebellion of very many, unto whom the Gospel
should be, and now is, the savor of death unto death (verse 2, 3, 4, 5)
whereunto Christ had respect. Luke 12, 49. For J had rather interpret these
things thus, than to apply them to the preaching of the law. Fiftlie, that
incredible power of the spirit of God, which should declare it self in the
ministry of the Apostles, (verse 1, 6, 7, 9.) the which thing Christ also
foretold before, John 12, 32. and 14, 12. Sixtlie, the exaltation of the very
person of Christ, verse 9. whereunto the Apostle manifestly alluded, Ephe. 4,
10. and Philip. 2.9. Seuenthlie, faith by bearing the word in the elect, and
the unspeakable joy of the conscience that shall follow thereof, verse 8.
Eightlie, the office of those that are justified and sanctified, verse 10.
Ninthlie, the cross is like a certain apparitor attending upon the promises
of the Gospel, which yet shall have a most ioiful end, verse 11. and 12.
Whereunto the Apostle most manifestly alluded, Philip. 4.4.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THe Lord being so long enclosed as it were within the small and narrow
bounds of one people, now at the length he begins his kingdom over all the
world: wherefore, let the earth rejoice, and al ye most great countries, even
beyond the seas, be ye ioiful.

2 For he is come, although very mild and meek toward his, yet to be
reverenced of his own, both for his divine Majesty, and also terrible to his
enemies, how fierce soever they be, even compassed about with the black
darkness of the clouds, and sitting upon a throne, stayed as it were with two
immovable pillars: namely, justice, which he shows in keeping promise with
his own, and defending them by his covenant: and most severe judgment,
whereby he punishes his adversaries.

3 A flaming fire shall then go before him, and shall take hold on his enemies on
every side.

4 The lightenings breaking forth from his judgment seat shall fill the world
with glittering light: they shall see this in the end, even against their wills,
which are most blind, and they shall tremble thoroughout the compass of the
earth.

5 The hills at the sight of the Lord, at the sight, I say, of the Lord of all the earth shall melt.

6 But unto others that are willing to be taught, and ready to obeie, he will
show himself so just, and minful of his mercy promised, that the very
heavens being astonished with so great and so glorious bounty, powered out by
him upon al people, as far as the heavens are extended, shall set forth this
so great a benefit, as it were with a sounding voice.

7 Go to then, be ye ashamed of your most filthy servitude, o ye slaves of the
idols: but, o ye even the very Angels, worship him as your Lord and King.

8 But who will hear these things? verelie the true Sion, who, with the residue
of the cities of her dominion, as a mother with her daughters, being for this
cause replenished with joy, and comforted with thy judgments, o Lord, will
rejoice.

9 Go to then, o Lord, sitting upon thy most high throne, rule thou the whole
earth, and exalt thy self above all that is aloft anie-where.

10 And ye that love the Lord, continue to hate that which is evil: and doubt
nothing, but that he which has freely embraced you with so great favor, will
defend you also most mightily, and will deliver you from the wicked.

11 And though this light of the mercy of God does not streightwaie shine unto
the godly, let them remember, that like as the seeds which are sown in the
earth do not forthwith spring up: naie, though they lie longer hid in the
bowels of the earth, yet they come forth more plentifully: even so the light
of righteousness is sown for them that love that light, whereby it shall wholly
come to pass, that al they that lead an upright life, are replenished with
incredible joy.

12 Rejoice ye therefore in the Lord, so great a King, o al ye just: and
magnify the holy remembrance of him continually.

PSALM. XCVIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm is the same almost with the ninety and six, and it contains
the prophecy of the spreading of the kingdom of the Messiah, and repeateth it
again: of the which prophecy, Simeon, Zachary, and Marie the mother of the
Lord, in those their most famous hymns, are most divine interpreters, using
almost the selfsame words. But this Psalm does teach three things of most
great importance, even in three verses. One, verse 1. that Christ our
mediator, in this work of our redemption, has no coadiutor at al, nor
partener: the which heavenly doctrine does confute that devilish dotage of the
merits of saints (as they call them) with what painted colors soever it be
intruded: and it gives to God alone his due glory, as well in the redemption,
as in the creation of man. The second, verse 2. that all this redemption
consists in the justice of Christ himself, which verelie can not be made
ours but by imputation. The third, verse 3. that all this benefit does flow
forth from the only free promise and truth of God himself.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 SIng unto the Lord a new song, for he has now showed forth all that his
marvelous power, by ouercomming al his enemies by his own right hand only,
and by his own arm alone.

2 And now in the end, he sets forth to be seen before al nations, this
benefit of so great a deliverance, which was so long looked for of our fathers,
and now at the length is performed, which did lie hid before, as in a corner,
even his own justice, wherewith they being endued, shall not only escape the
damnation, which their unrighteousness deserves, but also shall obtain the
crown of justice promised.

3 And if any demand what has moved him at the length to so great
bountifulnes? let him know, that all this proceeds from hence, that he is
mindful of the promise that he has made: and by the same mercy that he was
moved to promise it, by the same he is moved to perform it in deed, that he
might show himself most bountiful in very deed unto al men, to the uttermost
borders of the earth.

4 Go to then al ye inhabitants of the earth, blow up the trumpets unto God,
sound out the instruments, sing a triumphant song unto him, sing praises unto
him:

5 Sing unto the Lord, both with the harps and with voices by order and course.

6 Go before the King Jehovah, with sounding trumpets and shalmes.

7 Let the sea, how wide soever, sound again, and also the whole world, with
the song of all the inhabitants of the earth.

8 Let the very floods sound round about with their noise, and the very
mountains with triumphant songs,

9 Before the Lord that shall undertake the government of the world, and shall
govern the people most justly and vprightlie.

PSALM. XCIX.
The Argument.
This Psalm was set forth, that the people, what storm soever should arise,
turning unto God, should learn to set forth the promise of the Messiah,
against al terrors: of whom he so plainly speaks, as though he had been
now present at the same time, commanding al men even to behold him in the
visible sacraments set before them, because they were no vain signs of his
most present favor, being even the same in signification that ours are,
(seeing there is but one and the same Christ, whether he be to be showed, or
already exhibited) although their signs were differing from ours.
Furthermore, he adioineth the testimonies of three most godly men, Moses,
Aaron, and Samuel, whose office was to pray unto God for the people, both that
whilst that priesthood appointed of God should remain in authority, the
people should surely judge, that the same God should be present with them, who
was with them of old: as also they which desired to be heard, might follow the
same way of faith and godliness that they did, unto the which doctrine of the
public and ecclesiastical prayers, that is to be applied, which Paul writes,
1. Timoth. 2, 1.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 NOw, I beseech you, why should we fear the force or threatenings of any
man, seeing we have the Lord himself to be our King? let the people fret as
much as they lust: yea, let the earth waver, the foundations being shaken, it
is enough that he is with us that inhabiteth the Cherubims.

2 Verelie the Lord has declared abundantly the greatness of his power in
Sion, and all the people, nil they, will they, shall be subject to his power.

3 Let us therefore neither fear, nor yet doubt: but rather trusting upon the
most assured protection of God, magnify that his mighty and terrible name to
the enemies: for it is holy, and therefore al honor is due unto it.

4 For, is not this our King, as he is endued with most great power, so also
the lover of justice? wherefore we need to seek none other succor besides
him: neither need we to doubt, but that he will punish most sharply al them,
of whom we are unjustly oppressed. For it is not possible, that he should
suffer their wickedness vnaduenged, who is the author of equity it self, and
has set down the very rule of justice, unto the posterity of Jacob.

5 Go to then, praise ye the Lord our God, and falling down before his
footestoole, worship him, for he is holy.

6 For this cause did he consecrate Moses and Aaron of old, and set Samuel also
amongst them, who did exercise the office of the mediator for the people: the
which thing whilst they did, carefully praieng unto God, they were heard of
the Lord. Why then should we doubt, seeing that same priesthood is of force,
but that we following their example, should now also be heard?

7 And also, he did speak to those our fathers of old out of the cloudie
pillar, unto whom, because they should keep his commandments, he prescribed
the rites of his divine worship:

8 And thou, o Lord our God, giving ear unto them, have suffered thy self
oftentimes to be pacified by their prayers, although thou did not leave the
sins of some of them unpunished that were wicked.

9 Wherefore take courage, and extol the Lord our God with praises, and worship
at his holy hill: for the Lord our God is holy.

PSALM. C.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title does declare, that this Psalm, most short in deed, but
very excellent, both for the pleasantness of words, and the gravity of the
matter, was written for this cause, that it should be sung in the sacrifices of
thanksgiving. And it does rehearse two most great benefits, the one of the
creation (which is common unto al men) the other of the free adoption annexed
with the perpetual protection, the which unspeakable benefit is peculiar unto
the Church, which for this cause is called the work of God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 SOund out the trumpets unto the Lord, al ye inhabitants of the earth,

2 Come hither with joy, to give due worship unto the Lord, present your
selves in his sight, and offer prayers unto him:

3 Knowledge at the length this Jehovah to be the God. This is he that has
even made us, when we had no being of our selves: and, which is another
peculiar benefit of him toward us, even the far greatest of al: This is he, by
whose mercy we are a people consecrate unto him, and the sheep of his
pastures.

4 Come therefore, I say, to the gates of his house, to praise him: enter into
his courts to sing forth his praises, praise ye him, and publish his name.

5 For the Lord is good, of infinite mercy, and mindful of his promises
through al ages for ever.

PSALM. CI.
The Argument.
David, when he had received the promise of the kingdom, not thinking so much
of the great honor that was given him, as of the grievous burden that should
be laid upon him, and, as it is probable, beholding the faults of Saul, and
the disordered state of the whole kingdom, he would bind both himself and his
posterity as it were with a solemn vow before God, in this Psalm: wherein all the office of a king with a marvelous brevity is explaned, though generally,
yet very exactlie. First of al then, he binds the whole office of a king to
two principal virtues, even mercy and judgment, whereof the one causes, that
kings be rather loved than feared: and this other by the use of scripture
declares the severity, whereby the obstinate are brideled and kept in order:
and it is contrary to that softnes, which does not only give some release
from the bonds of the law, but does utterly dissolve them. Neither does he
treat of these virtues, after the manner of the Philosophers: but he will have
them both consecrate unto God, and therefore to be applied unto the laws
appointed by God himself. Then coming to the use of these virtues, he does
testify, that he will not arrogate unto himself the government of this
kingdom promised, but only receive it of the hand of GOD himself delivering
it unto him, (the which thing he did most religiously afterward observe.) He
treats first of the preparing of himself to perform this office: secondly,
of the right ordering of his own private family: and thirdly, of the very
office, charge, and duty of a king. Wherefore, in the second verse, beginning
the right order of government at himself, far unlike unto those, which do
nothing less than that they command to others, he makes a vow that he will
give great care to understand which is the right way, being mindful doubtless
of the words of the Lord unto Joshua: Joshua 1. 7. and 8. and that he never
declining from that way declared by God, he will learn by the right
government of his own family, to execute the office of a king, as is
convenient. Afterward, treating of the very public charge, and beginning
again at himself, he promises that he will neither take evil counsel
willingly of himself, neither that he will follow evil examples. And whereas
the Princes that have power in their hands to satisfy their lusts, do use to
invent infinite such things, either of themselves: or take hold of the same
most greedily, which they learn of others that are about them: David adds,
that he will most carefully eschew men of corrupt manners. Finally, whereas
Princes are compelled of necessity to use the service of many others, by
whose eyes both they must see many things, and hear by their ears, and stand
in need of their counsels: he promises that he will receive no man, whom he
shall know to be of an evil conscience, and that he will punish, even with
death, the false accusers, which are the poison of mankind, and that he will by
no means suffer the proud and the ambitious, and that he will use the counsel
and endeavor of men of fidelity and vprightnes, and will diligently search for
them: and either never call to counsel, or chase far away the crafty and
deceitful. Finally, he promising that he will be no less a seueare judge
against wicked men, than a merciful d^fender and foster-father of his own, he
declares the last and chief end of the civil government, which was unknown
of the Philosophers: to wit, that the Lord should be worshipped purelie and
sincerely in his City, that is, in his Church.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord, I being appointed king by thee, after such a manner of bountifulnes
as never was heard, do consecrate this song unto thee, both of mercy and
judgment: whereunto I do bind my self before thee to perform them, in the
government of the kingdom.

2 First of al then, unto that time that I be set over the kingdom by thee,
whom I determined never to prevent: I will give al diligence, that both I may
thoroughly know the right way appointed by thee, and may observe the same
purelie in my house.

3 I will never set before me to do any wicked thing, I will forsake them that
are of corrupt manners, neither will I take any such to me.

4 I will put far from me the authors of evil counsels, neither will I embrace
at any time the thing that I know to be evil.

5 I will destroy the slanderers and false accusers, I will not suffer the proud
and the ambitious.

6 I searching out on every side men that love the truth, will take them to be
my familiar companions: and I will not use, in doing mine affairs, any but
such as are trusty and faithful.

7 The subtle man will I thrust forth of my house, neither will I suffer those
that speak deceiptfullie.

8 To conclude, I will painefullie, and without any delaie, worthily punish
whomesoeuer I shall understand to be wicked, and I will purge the holy city of
the Lord from al wicked persons.

PSALM. CII.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title does insinuate, and the text it self especially, verse 14.
and 15. does much more evidently declare, that this Psalm does belong to
those times that were most miserable of al other, in the which, that captivity
of the seventy years was finished: so that it seems unto me to answer on
the contrary, unto that excellent prayer, which is contained in the 9. Chapter
of Daniel. And there be four parts thereof: one, from the 1. verse, unto the
11. does describe a most lamentable mourning of the Church, more like to a dead
carcass, than to a living body, even as it is resembled in Ezechiel, Chapter
37. adioining so lively and apt similitudes, that in my judgment, there is no
writing treating of the same argument comparable with it. The second part, from
the 12. verse, unto the 15. sets forth the arguments of most sure comforts,
partly drawn from the most constant nature of God himself, partly of the
oracle uttered by the mouth of I^remie, and other Prophets, concerning the
restoring of the City. The third part, from the 16. verse, unto the 23. is the
amplifieng of the second part, in the which, the ^r n^t^o and honor of the
second temple, that is to sai^, of the spiritual and eternal (whereof that
stony t^mple was a figure) that is, even of the Church, to be spread with most
great majesty through the whole world, under Christ the head, is described by
the spirit of prophecy. Fin^llie the fourth part, from the 24. verse, unto the
end of the Psalm, the Church as a conqueror sings a song of triumph.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Hear my prayers o Lord, and let nothing hinder that my cries come not even
unto thee.

2 Turn not thy face from me in such miserable times, but rather give ear,
and answer speedily to me that cry.

3 For behold, my life is consumed as the smoke, and I am withered, and without
al moisture, al my strength being consumed like the stone under the fire.

4 My heart is withered like the herb cut down with the sith, and loatheth
al meat.

5 My bones consumed with sorrow stick hard unto my flesh.

6 I am like the Pellicane or the Bitter dumping in the desert, and like the
Owl mourning in the wilderness.

7 I pass the nights like a bird under the house eaues, bereaved of her mate,
or spoiled of her young ones taken forth of the nest.

8 For mine enemies lie in wait for me poor miser, and with intolerable pride
they abuse the example of my calamity, if they wish evil, or curse any.

9 Wherefore, I being cast down upon the earth, can not tell whether I do eat
bread, or dust: and I mix my drink with tears.

10 For how can I do otherways, thou being so sore displeased with me, in
that thou may seem therefore to have exalted me, that I should fall with so
much sorer ruin?

11 Wherefore, to conclude al in few words, I vanish away like a shadow, when
the sun sets: and wither like the haie.

12 But thou, o Lord, upon whose power notwithstanding and promises I do rest,
continuest still the same: and thy memory, which thou have appointed to be with
us, must needs be eternal.

13 Therefore, seeing thou have so long bin as it were an idle beholder of the
miseries of Sion so many years, thou will arise I know well, and have
compassion upon it, when the appointed time shall come.

14 Neither shall thou want servants, which shall bear good affection toward
the rammel thereof, and have pity thereon, when it is beaten into dust.

15 Yea, it is so far off, that it should always lie prostrate, that
contrariwise, o Lord, the Gentiles, which in the former ages were alienate from
thee, shall now fear thy name: and all the kings of the world shall magnify thy
Majesty.

16 Because thou, o Lord, whose work this is only, have built Sion again,
and have showed thy self there, much more glorious than at any time before.

17 Not despising the prayers of thy most miserable people, but rather hearing
them in very deed.

18 For thou shall do a work worthy to be set forth in writing to everlasting
memory: and a new people created by thee, shall sing forth thy praises.

19 Because that from thy most high and holy throne, even from the heavens,
thou have looked down upon the earth:

20 To hear the mourning of the prisoners, and to loose them forth of their
bonds, of whose life it was despaired.

21 That in Sion again thy name o Lord, that thy praise I say in Jerusalem
may be published, many nations and kingdoms running together to worship thee.

22 Howbeit, thou in the mean season I grant, whilst this so great goodness is
waited for, do greeuouslie afflict us, and do as it were cut off the
thread of our life.

23 But in this extreme distress, o God, I did fly unto thee: and I prayed
thee with plain words, that thou would not take me away hastily, before
that I had run the race of my life.

24 And why should not I trust, that it will certainly come to pass that thou
have promised unto us? for thou art not like us, who are changed by time, but
thou abidest stable throughout al worlds.

25 And the very earth was most firmly established by thee long ago, when
thou made it: and this mighty compass of heaven stands unshaken unto this
day, which was framed by thine only hands:

26 But their stabilitie is nothing to that thine unchangeable firmitie, for
they also by little and little do fail, but thou endurest al one. Al these
things, I say, how stable so ever they seem, are worn by little and little,
as the garment is by long use, whilst that at the length they be changed by
thee from the form that we now see, as a garment cast off.

27 Yet thou art the selfsame altogether, subject to no term of years and
time.

28 Therefore, that thy kingdom, which thou have raised for thy self amongst
thy people, shall also be for ever: and that posterity of thy servants, with
whom thou have made an everlasting covenant, howsoever it be tossed with many
and most sharp tempests, yet it being staide by thy will and unchangeable
power, shall remain for ever.

PSALM. CIII.
The Argument.
David did write this Psalm, being ravished as it were out of himself into
heaven: in the which he stirs up, not himself only, but the very
heavenly spirits also, to sing praises unto God, taking the chief occasion of
that great and unspeakable benefit of God, which he bestowed on his Church,
by revealing both the right way of righteousness, and the free forgiveness of
sins: not forgetting his most abundant liberality, in giving us those things
most bountifully, which belong to this present life, which benefits he sets
forth with most excellent similitudes, and most sincete sentences, adioining
hereunto a most magnificent description of the divine Majesty.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to my dear soul, and mine inward bowels, give thanks unto God with all
your power.

2 Praise the Lord my soul, and declare thy self, that thou art mindful of al
his benefits.

3 For it is he alone, who forgiueth al thy sins, of his unspeakable mercy:
and so plaieng the part of a Physician, wiping away the woore of the deadly
wounds, wherewith thou wast wounded thorough thy sins, does cure the very
diseases themselves, to wit, even the original sins.

4 This is he, who when thou wast appointed to death, did redeem thee as his
own, and has adorned thee with benefits, as testimonies of his singular
goodness and mercy.

5 This is he, who uses to minister unto thee most abundantly meat to eat,
and to renew thee with giving thee new and new strength, like the eagle that
lives most long.

6 This is he, who being mindful of his promises, does defend the suppliants
flieng unto him for succor, and does punish severely those that do any
injury unto others.

7 This is he, who declared the way unto Moses, wherein we should walk: and
has preserved Israel, showing so many miracles.

8 This is finally that Jehovah, who ever was most ready to have compassion
upon the miseries of his people, and most ready to pardon them, most slow to
anger, full of goodness and mercy,

9 Even ready to forgive, and not retaining injuries in memory.

10 For surely, he has not so dealt with us, as our sins did deserve:
neither has he rendered punishment agreeable to our wickedness.

11 Naie, look how much more greater the heaven is than the earth, both in
largenes and in height: so much more does his goodness excel, and as it were
swalowe up their sins, who being penitent and sorrowful for them, do fear him.

12 So far as the east is distant from the west, so far has he removed our
sins from us.

13 With how great and how loving kindness the parents are moved toward their
children, being in any misery: with so great tender love does the Lord
embrace those that fear him.

14 For he knows that we are but earthen vessels, he knows that our
substance is made of the earth.

15 For I pray thee, unto what thing rather shall thou say that the life of
men is like, though they flourish never so much, than like a little plant, or a
little flower?

16 For when as even the least blast of hurtful weather does touch this flower,
it perishes, so that thou can not easily know the place it self wherein
it grew a little before.

17 Howbeit, thus flightsome then is man's life by it own nature: but the
everlasting mercy of God toward them that fear him, and that tender affection
to preserve his own, which is also extended to their posterity, does redress
this miserable condition,

18 Of them, I say, that keep his covenant, and apply themselves diligently
to observe the statutes that he has made.

19 Finally, to pass over al these his benefits toward us, what honor is
not the Lord worthy of? whose seat is set in the heavens, and whose dominion
is stretched forth over al things without exception.

20 Go to then with me you mighty spirits, being his apparitours, and the
diligent executioners of his will, so soon as ye hear him speak, celebrate ye
the praises of the Lord.

21 O ye mighty armies of his most obedient soldiers, praise the Lord, I say.

22 Praise ye the Lord, o al his works, in what place so ever of his dominion
you be. Finally, thou my dear soul, set thou forth the praise of God.

PSALM. CIIII.
The Argument.
There is only this difference betwixt this Psalm, and the former, that in
the other the particular benefits of God toward his Church, but in this his
general benefits toward al mankind, are rehearsed: namely, the creation of
the world, and of every part thereof, and the governance thereof for man's
sake: both the which things he so amplifieth, with such an excellency of
words, and gravity of sentences, that nothing can be thought to be spoken
either more elegantlie, or more learnedlie, than this heavenly poetical
invention.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise the Lord o my soul: thou surely my Lord God art full of majesty,
and art so accounted, declaring thine honor and glory, wherewith thou art
adorned in all thy works.

2 For the Lord shines wholly, as he were clothed with most bright light, the
heavens being spread round about him, as it were a most large and beautiful
pauillion.

3 He himself has built a chamber unto himself in the very waters, being
staid only by his power: he is carried upon the clouds, as in a chariot, he
is carried and walks upon the wings of the winds.

4 He uses the winds none otherwise than his messengers, and the lightnings
as his ministers.

5 Thou have established the mass of the earth also to be unmoved in her
foundations, by thy marvelous wisdom and power.

6 And thou had covered it wholly in the beginning with the deapth of the
waters, which ran over the very tops of the hills:

7 But so soon as thou did rebuke them, they fled away, and being afraid
by the terrible sound of thunder, they departed hastily.

8 Wherefore the hills then did lift up themselves, and the valleys contrariwise
did fall down, and go into the place appointed for them.

9 But thou did shut up the waters within their bounds, that they should
never return to cover the face of the whole earth.

10 Yet the fountains, and the rivers gathered of them, meeting together, came
forth, to run by the bottoms of the mountains at thy commandment:

11 Even that the cattle might drink of them, and the wild asses, and other
wild beasts might quench their thirst:

12 By the which the shril sounding birds should abide, and sitting upon the
boughs, every one should sing his own tune.

13 But on the other side, even from heaven, thou waterest the mountains,
pouring down rain from thy chambers: and by that thy benefit it comes to
pass, that the earth as it were drinking drink to the fill, does not deceive
the hope of the husbandman.

14 That selfsame power brings forth of the bowels of the earth grass,
and many kinds of herbs to nourish the beasts which are necessary for the
use of men: finally, it brings al kind of nourishment,

15 Even wine, wherewith the strength of man is refreshed: and oil, whereby
his face being anointed does shine: and bread, wherewith the heart of man is
strengthened.

16 And also the very trees of Libanus, which we behold so high, that it may
seem that God has set and planted them with his own hand, because they grow
so mightily, must attribute it unto the moisture, which the Lord does send
them most plentifully from the heavens.

17 There do the birds build, there the storke makes her house in the high fir
trees.

18 The tops of the most high hills also are for the goats, and the rocks are a
refuge for the conies.

19 He also has created the moon to change her form by certain seasons, and
the sun also to have the appointed time of his setting:

20 And so soon as he sets, the darkness of the night comes upon us, and
then verelie the wild reuening beasts creep forth of their dens,

21 Even the young lions searching their pray with roaring, and requiring their
meat as it were of God himself, who has kept them shut up in the day time
for man's sake:

22 But when the light returns again at the sun rising, they get themselves
into their dens again, as it were by a sign given from the heaven:

23 So that man may return unto his labors, which he had lest off, and
continue his travel safely unto the evening.

24 How marvelous therefore are thy works, o Lord? how wisely have thou made
al things? with what and how great riches have thou filled the earth?

25 And this wide sea how large is it? and how in numerable fishes are there?
how many living creatures, both of small bodies, and of monstrous greatness, do
swim therein?

26 The ships also do run there through the seas, and those huge beasts,
created of thee, do leap to and fro through the midst of the floods, as
though they would play.

27 And al these things, as they have received life of thee: so also they wait
for meat of thee, wherewith they are nourished in their due time:

28 Therefore thou give it unto them, and they receive it, and when thou
openest thine hands, they are satisfied:

29 But if at any time thou withdraw thy self from them, they stand even
astonished, whilst that thou, calling again that lively strength, which thou
had given them, they die at the length, and return to their dust.

30 Yet for all this, the kinds of things do not decaie: but whilst thou do
show forth that thy power, which creates and preserves al things, thou
causest that one of thy creatures coming into the place of another, the very
face and furniture of the earth is renewed.

31 Therefore, everlasting praise be given to the Lord: and let the Lord
continue to take his delight in his own works.

32 He is great, I say, and very mighty, at whose angry countenance the
earth it self does shake and tremble, and by whom the mountains being
touched, do cast out smoke and flame.

33 And as concerning me, I will consume al my life in praising him: and so long
as I shall remain alive, I will praise that my God.

34 And would to God that my songs might be so acceptable unto him, as I with
glad and cheereful mind do celebrate his so many and so great benefits!

35 And contrariwise, would to God that all the wicked that are stubborn
against him, might utterly be destroyed! But thou, my soul, praise thou the
Lord: and al ye others, praise ye God.

PSALM. CV.
The Argument.
It is evident by 1. Chron. 16. that the author of this Psalm was David, and
that it was indicted for Asaph, to be sung when the Ark of the Lord was carried
into the city: and there is the same use of this, as of the two former: but
the argument is diverse in this point, that he does celebrate two peculiar
benefits of the Israelites: namely, the free adoption of that people, and the
bringing in of the same into the land promised. Now, seeing we have a covenant
more excellent than the former, and our true Joshua is gone before into the
very heaven, we may well perceive, besides that now also the rehearsal of those
old histories is most ioiful and most profitable, so have we so many examples,
both of Gods mercy and truth, whereby we may confirm our faith, resting upon
the same foundations, and are bound also much more than our fathers, to
celebrate these benefits, and to continue in setting forth the same.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise the Lord, call upon him, and in the hearing of the people show forth
his works:

2 Sing unto him, praise him, set forth his marvelous acts:

3 Glory in his holy name, you also that seek the Lord rejoice.

4 Come ye unto the Lord, and diligently seek this visible sign and pledge
of his power and excellency: namely, this Arc.

5 Call to mind how many and how great miracles and wonders he has wrought for
your sakes: finally, what punishments he has executed is judgment of your
enemies.

6 For we are the children of Abraham his servant, and the offspring of Jacob,
whom he has chooses to himself.

7 And the Lord again is the governor in deed and Lord over all the earth: but
he is our God by a peculiar right,

8 Namely, for that he is mindful of that his covenant and word, which shall be
of force for ever by his commandment:

9 Of that covenant, I say, which he made first with Abraham, and after with
Isaac, which was confirmed with a solemn oath,

10 And further established with Jacob or Israel in these plain words, to
stand for an unchangeable and everlasting decree:

11 I will give you this land of Canaan as a possession by right of inheritance
measured out by me.

12 And that which he promised most freely, he has performed also most
faithfully. For though they were very few in number, and of no strength, and
lived in that land as strangers:

13 And changing their seats oftentimes, wandering from nation to nation, and
removed from one kingdom to another:

14 Yet was it so far off, that he would suffer any violence to be done unto
them by any man, that he also rebuked kings for their sakes:

15 And has written this decree, as it were in these few words, Let none touch
mine anointed, and consecrate priests, let no man hurt my prophets.

16 But afterward he sent a famine upon the earth, as it were called by him,
and he did break all the strength of bread, that they might al seem to be
ready to perish streightwaies.

17 But he sent a man before them, when they should go into Egypt long before,
by a most marvelous mean, far from al man's wisdom, who should prepare
them a place to soiourne in, even Joseph, who was first sold as a slave in
Egypt:

18 But afterward he was bound with iron fetters, no less chained in mind,
than in body,

19 Whilst at the last, at the time appointed, mention was made of him unto
the king, and the wisdom which the Lord gave unto him, did declare what manner
of man, and how excellent he was.

20 Then therefore the king and lord of the Egyptians did not only send
messengers, and loose him from his bonds:

21 But also made him the steward of his court, and so appointed the
government of al his affairs unto him.

22 Also an absolute authority was given unto him, over all the great princes
of Egypt, that he should govern the very magistrates of Egypt by his
wisdom and counsel.

23 Therefore came Israel at length into Egypt, and Jacob did soiourne in the
country of Cham.

24 And the Lord increased his family there maruellouslie, so that they became
fearful for this cause unto the Egyptians that hated them.

25 For God did change their minds against his people, that they began to hate
them, whom they loved so greatly before, and they now labored by subtlety
to circumuent them.

26 Yet did he never forsake them, but when their case seemed utterly
desperate, he sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen, to succor
them.

27 And they, as they were commanded of God, when they were sent, did work
those great signs and wonders in the land of Cham.

28 Wherefore, the Lord did send darkness upon the Egyptians, which came so
soon as the Lord commanded.

29 He turned their waters into blood, and killed their fishes in the very
waters.

30 Swarms of frogs came streightwaie forth of the earth at his commandment,
and went into the very chambers of their king.

31 At the voice of his commandment swarms of flies and lice came forth in all the coasts of Egypt.

32 He rained down stones from heaven, and horrible flames of lightnings did
run through al Egypt.

33 With these darts he beat down their vines and figtrees, and he did break
down all the trees that were set in those borders.

34 By his commandment grasshoppers and caterpillars being stirred up, came
forth without number, and devoured every herb, and consumed all the fruits of
the earth.

35 Moreover, he did slaie their first borne, that is, even the chief of al
their families.

36 Finally, when all this was done, he brought forth his people laden with
gold and silver, al healthful, and endued with strength.

37 Egypt was glad at their departure, which before was greatly afraid of
them.

38 He covered them as they went forth in the day time, with a cloud against
the heat of the sun: and in the night, least they should wander to and fro, he
went before them, and lead them with the brightness of a shining fiery pillar.

39 They desired quails, which were given at their desire, and they were
satiate with bread sent down from heaven.

40 God brake the rocks for them, whence water did flow: yea, even rivers did
run forth.

41 And this did he, even mindful of those things, which he the holy one in
times past had couenanted with his servant Abraham.

42 Thus then he brought forth his people, to wit, his elect, glad and ioiful.

43 Unto whom he gave those countries that were possessed of sundry people,
having obtained with great ease, whatsoever the inhabitants thereof had gotten
with great travel and pains.

44 Namely, that they being placed there, because that the former inhabitants
had profaned the land with filthy superstitions, and vile lusts, they should
observe the statutes and laws given them of the Lord. Praise ye the Lord
therefore.

PSALM. CVI.
The Argument.
J suppose that this Psalm, even as the 126. is to be referred unto those
times, when they which were brought from Babylon with Zorobabel, or else with
Ezra, and Nehemiah, prayed for the residue, who notwithstanding, were either
detained by cowardice, or were afraid by the difficulty of the journey, either
stayed there still, for other causes. And the Prophet begins at a
thanksgiving for the return granted unto that people: straight after he
descends to a plain confession of the sins of the whole nation, even from
the deliverance out of Egypt, expressing also the circumstances even of the
times and places, and fully answering unto that, which we read in the 9. of
Nehemiah, where also is repeated oftentimes that which is here set down in the
4. verse, the which would God in this our most miserable age, in the which we
almost see the patience of the most merciful and mighty God, as it were
overcome with such like stubbornnes: would God, I say, that many had rather
follow this example both publikelie and privately, than to be so ready to
tear one another in pieces.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise ye the Lord, and celebrate his name: for he is of most excellent and
everlasting goodness.

2 Who is able to set forth in words the wondrous works, which he has done
for us? who is able sufficiently to set forth his praise?

3 O blessed is that man, who at al times, and in what estate soever he is,
never declineth from vprightnes and justice!

4 But thou, o Lord, be mindful of me, of thine unmeasurable mercy, which thou
have always showed to thy people, and regard me, to make me partaker of thy
salvation:

5 That I being a witness of thy bounty toward thine elect, may joy and
rejoice together with that thy people, which thou have chosen for thy peculiar
heritage.

6 We verelie, I grant, even as our elders also have erred, have sinned, and
have done wickedlie.

7 For, to begin the matter from the first original, those our fathers neither
had any regard of so many miracles wrought in Egypt, neither were they
mindful of the multitude of thy benefits: for they did strive with thee at the
red sea.

8 Yet God (o the incredible goodness!) that he might provide for his own
glory, and testify his own power, has preserved them, though most
rebellious.

9 For he rebuked the sea, which incontinently dried up, and he led his by the
surges of the waters, even as by the dry ground.

10 So did they escape safe out of the enemies hands, God delivering them.

11 But their oppressors, being swallowed up with the waters, did perish: so
that not one of them remained alive.

12 And the Israelites, being overcome by this fact, began then verelie to
believe in the Lord, and did sing forth his praises.

13 But lo, when this was scarce finished, when they suddenly forgetting al
these things, would not suffer themselves to be governed by the will of God, and
his counsels:

14 But with immoderate lust desired flesh in the wilderness, and began to tempt
and try the power of the mighty God:

15 Therefore he granted unto them that thing which they so greedily desired,
but to their great hurt: for these delicates brought them leanenes and
consumption.

16 Yea, and they went about through envy to displace Moses himself, and
Aaron that holy priest of the Lord.

17 Therefore the earth gaped, and swallowed up Dathan, and covered Abiram with
the very tabernacles.

18 But the fire also beginning in the assembly of the rebellious, the flame
did burn them up together suddenly.

19 The same men made a calfe in the mount Horeb, and worshipped, when they had
molten it,

20 Changing that their honor and ornament, even the everliving God (o
miserable men!) into a dead image of a bullock that eats haie,

21 And casting away the memory of God the savior, which had showed so many
wonders in Egypt:

22 Who had declared so many miracles unto them in the land of Cham, and had
done so horrible things at the red sea.

23 Wherefore he was about to destroy them at once, but that Moses deerlie
beloved of him above other, setting himself before God in the midst of the
slaughter, restrained his wrath, that it should not be fierce to utter
destruction.

24 What more? when he was about to bring them into the country promised, they
not believing his words at al, did refuse the land, which ought to have been
most dear unto them:

25 And therefore disdaining to hear God speak, they stirred up a tumult in
their tents.

26 Therefore, he stretched out his hand worthily against them, to destroy
them in the desert:

27 And did scatter their posterity amongst the nations, and cast them so
into diverse regions.

28 For also they joined themselves with Baal Peor, that abominable idol, and
did eat the sacrifices that were offered to things that had no life.

29 Against the which wickedness, God being most justly angry, did fall upon
them, and strike them with a most grievous plague.

30 But Phinees rising up with great courage, did avenge that horrible fact,
and the Lord ceased streightwaie to strike them.

31 And Phinees was counted to have done that thing justly, and thereby did
obtain the praise that should remain to al posterity.

32 But they notwithstanding, provoked God unto wrath, at the waters which were
therefore called the waters of strife, to the great damage of Moses.

33 For they so stirred his mind, that he also spoke something unadvisedly.

34 And Moses verelie therefore died in that wilderness, but they that were
brought into that land of Canaan, were nothing more obedient to Gods
commandments than their fathers: for they spared the people, whom God had
streightlie commanded to be slain.

35 And they mixing themselves amongst them, did streightwaie learn their
manners:

36 And served their idols, to their most certain destruction:

37 Even coming to this madness, that they did slaie their sons and their
daughters unto devils:

38 That they offered, I say, the blood of their sons and innocent
daughters, and powered it forth willingly to the graven images of the
Canaanites, and defiled the whole country with most cruel slaughters.

39 Behold therefore their most horrible facts, behold the abominable
whooredomes, wherewith they of set purpose polluted themselves.

40 Wherewith God being most justly grieved, did so burn forth in anger
against this people in the end, that though he had chosen them unto himself
before, he now abhorred them.

41 He delivered them into the hands of the Gentiles, and laid them open to
the lust and pleasure of their enemies.

42 Wherefore they were after sundry sorts vexed by them afterward, and
oppressed at their pleasure.

43 Notwithstanding, he did deliver them again ofter than once, by the which
benefits yet it was so far off that they did recover any better mind, that
contrariwise, they following their own lusts, ceased not to provoke him to
anger, whilst that they being forsaken of him, consumed in that their own
wickedness.

44 And who would not here have in admiration the infinite goodness of God? For
lo, though he had profited nothing with them so many ages, neither by
benefits, nor by chastisements, yet heard he their cries in their distress:

45 And remembering his covenant, and of his infinite mercy suddenly changing
his mind,

46 He caused that even they, which had carried them into captivity, should
have compassion upon them.

47 Go to then, o Lord our God, finish the work that thou have begun, and
gather us at the length home unto thee forth of the Gentiles, that we may
praise thy name, and set forth thy praises for ever.

48 Let everlasting glory be unto thee, o Lord God of Israel. O al ye people
agree unto me! and say with one mouth, Amen. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CVII.
The Argument.
This Psalm, than the which nothing can be spoken more truly, nor more
eloquently, neither yet more diuinelie, does affirm the providence of God,
both general and particular, to be most just and also most merciful, bringing
forth and most elegantlie describing most goodly examples of those things
which come to pass, both by sea and by land, that of necessity we must grant,
their causes and effects wholly to be governed by God: either against the
wicked, which deny God utterly, or remove him from the government of the
world, as do the Epicures: or do think that he does regard the things that he
has made only generalie, as do the Peripatetians: or do bind him to second
causes, as do the Stoikes: as also against the superstitious persons,
confessing the truth in deed, but attributing to their feined gods, that which
belongs to the most mighty and merciful God alone. All the which lies being
worthily condemned, the Prophet does admonish the godly, and them that are
truly wise, that they should learn rather to have the works of God in
admiration, and to praise both his most excellent wisdom and moderation in
them, than to call them into doubtful question, and to dote with the wicked.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise the Lord, for his infinite goodness and everlasting mercy deserves
the same.

2 O you the innumerable multitude, whom God has delivered out of manifold
dangers, and forth of the hands of your enemies, acknowledge this thing with me!

3 For how many has he gathered from the beginning of the world, which were
scattered from the east and the west, from the north and south Ocean sea?

4 How many wandering in the waste wilderness, and seeking a city commodious
to dwell in,

5 Half dead, and killed with famine and thirst,

6 Crieng unto him in their extreme miseries, has he heard? and being drawn
forth of their distress,

7 Has he brought into the right way, and led them into commodious cities?

8 Let these men therefore set forth this his great mercy before the Lord
himself, and show forth his marvelous works to other men:

9 Who has refreshed them panting for thirst, and fed them so mercifully
being hungry.

10 How many also, being shut up in dark prisons, and even as it were in the
darkness of death, being chained in their mind with sorrow, and in their body
most streightlie with iron fetters?

11 And that worthily, because they did not obeie the commandments of God,
which are engraven in the minds of al men: but rather followed their own
lusts, than the counsels of God.

12 Notwithstanding, when the Lord had tamed their fiercenes so, and had
brought them to this point, that they could find no help in any,

13 He heard them crieng unto him in this their distress, and delivered them
from their misery:

14 And brings them from the dungeons of the prisons, and darkness of death,
breaking their fetters of iron.

15 Praise ye therefore this so great mercy of the Lord before him, and
declare his wonderful acts to other mortal men,

16 Who has broken the brazen gates, and has broken in pieces their iron
bars.

17 What shall I speak furthermore of them, who by their own foolishnes, going
in the way of wickedness, and being oppressed by manifold diseases, do suffer
the reward of their madness?

18 And loathing al manner of meat, are at deaths door.

19 Whom notwithstanding the Lord did hear, crieng unto him in this misery,
and he delivered them out of their distress.

20 And he speaking but one word, did take away all the cause of their deadly
disease, and restored them to health.

21 Let these men therefore praise this his so great mercy before the Lord
also, and publish his marvelous works before other mortal men.

22 Let them offer the sacrifices of praise unto the Lord, I say, and let them
rehearse with great joy what he has done for them.

23 But they which go unto the seas by ship, and there continue, and are
occupied in the waters:

24 They surely behold the great works of the Lord, and they may see with
their eyes how marvelous he does show himself in the mighty surges of the sea.

25 For so son as he speaks, the winds do rise, and streightwaies stir up
horrible tempests, and the seas do swel with the raging storms.

26 The mariners with their ships are now lifted up to heaven, and now rolled
down to the low bottomes, their minds fainting for fear:

27 The whirlewindes do toss them round about, they stagger here and there
like dronken men, so that neither their cunning, nor their strength has any
place:

28 Whom yet calling unto him in this distress, the Lord delivers from
these miseries, wherewith they were vexed.

29 For he, which had raised the storms, does calm them, and the raging of
the floods does suddenly cease.

30 But they, when the floods are assuaged, being ioiful, are at the length
brought by him into the desired havens.

31 Go to then, ye also set forth so great mercy of the Lord before him, and
declare unto other mortal men his marvelous works.

32 Let these men, I say, praise the Lord in the mid multitude of the people
standing about them: yea, let them praise him in the assembly of their chief
men.

33 For he the same, so often as he pleases, turns the wilderness into floods,
and the well warred places into a dry wilderness.

34 And he turns the most fruiteful countries into extreme barrenness,
provoked by the sins of the inhabitants.

35 Contrariwise, he brings in again springs of waters, flowing abundantly
upon the deserts and countries not inhabited for their dryness.

36 And he places there, men that live most miserably before, who do also
build most populous cities,

37 Do sow the fields, do plant vines, and do reap corn in abundance:

38 Even because he, of his singular mercy, does both multiply them, and does
increase their cattle marvelously.

39 And they again (so does he change the course of things) are diminished,
and oppressed with anguish, and are broken with all kind of calamity and
misery.

40 He also makes the princes, which were terrible to others before, by taking
aware al their authority, most contemptible and despised, that they know not
whither to turn them.

41 He also raises up the poor and oppressed, and spreads their families
like a flock.

42 Let al them therefore, which are of upright judgment, behold and mark
these things, and take great pleasure thereof: but contrariwise, let all the
wicked, which rail against Gods providence, being convicted, hold their peace.

43 Lo then therefore, whosoever is desirous of true wisdom, let him give
himself wholly to consider these things, that he may atteine unto the
knowledge of the infinite mercy of the Lord.

PSALM. CVIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm is gathered partly of the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, verses of the 57.
Psalm: partly of the 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, verses of the 60. Psalm,
where ye may seek the argument.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Being prepared with my whole heart o God to praise thee, desire to do it
both with voice and instruments: go to therefore my tongue,

2 Go to viol and harp, awake with me in the morning.

3 The nations most far off shall hear me publishing thy praises, the people
shall hear me singing unto thee.

4 For thy goodness surely has extended it self unto the very heavens, and
thy truth even unto the clouds.

5 Declare thy self o God, to sit above the heavens, and show thy glory to
the whole compass of the earth,

6 That they may be delivered whom thou love, save them therefore by thy
power, and hear me:

7 And doubtless it will so come to pass, God speaking unto us out of his
sanctuary. Wherefore, I wholly rejoice now of the victory: for GOD will grant
unto me, that I shall set my kingdom in order, and overcome mine enemies.
Therefore I will divide the fields of the Sichemites, and will measure out the
vallie of Succoth.

8 I will have in possession my Gilead, and Manasseh beyond Jordan, driving
away the Gentiles that are about them: Ephraim shall be the greatest part of
mine army, I will place the throne of judgment in Judah.

9 But the strangers, how stout soever, shall do my servile works: the Moabites
shall hold under the basen to wash my feet: I will command the Idumeans to take
up my shoes being put off, and cast upon their heads: I will triumph over proud
Palestina with ioiful acclamations, as she has triumphed over us before.

10 But by whose conduct shall I win so many strong cities? and what power shall
I rest upon to come into Idumea?

11 Verelie, thou being our captain, and trusting unto thy power, o my God,
though thou have forsaken us before, and have refused a long space to go before
our armies.

12 Therefore help thou us o Lord, after the calamities of so many years: for
the help is vain that is hoped for of men.

13 We trusting only unto God, shall do valiantly, he alone will tread down
our enemies.

PSALM. CIX.
The Argument.
This Psalm is written by David with such a terrible and fearful style, as
thou can scarcely find any example in the whole scripture like unto it:
wherefore it must be used in prayer, and also read with great judgment: yet
is there some use thereof, so that we add these cautions. Namely, first of
al, that we be not drawn with the spirit of v^ngeance or false zeal: but that
we seek rather the glory of God only, and that earnestl^e, and as he
himself commands: then, least we use these and such like prayers
vnaduis^dlie against certain persons, seeing that we can not easily know,
who do sin unto death: and we are bound to pray for the repentance and
salvation of al. For otherwise, that we may make prayers indefinitelie, and
with the exception of the s^cret judgments of God, being led with the true
zeal of God against the enemies, who of desperate malice yield their service
unto Satan, and persecute Christ and his members cruelly with an evil
conscience, that he will destroy those evil men as they deserve, it is plain
hereby, that Christ himself commands us duly to pray, that his kingdom
may come: the which thing verelie can not come to pass, but by the
overthrowing of the kingdom of Antichrist, and by destroieng all the desperate
enemies of the Gospel, and of the true Church. Yea, of such imprecations
conceived against certain persons, we have not only this example, and others
also in the Psalms: but also in the writings of Paul, as Galathians 5, verse
12. and 2. Timoth. 4, verse 14. and in Peter, Acts. 8, verse 20. although he
mitigate that imprecation afterward. And also the old Church did power out
these and such like prayers against Julian the Apostata, the which the very
end did prove that they were heard: and surely, unless sometimes we might
use them, it were in vain which is written 1. John. 5, verse 16. But these
things are not to be drawn into example: and, as I said before, we must take
great heed, least either for desire of vengeance, or false zeal, or
unadvisedly using them, we sin against either, or against both the tables of
the Law, and bring upon our own heads the thing that we pray against others.
As concerning David, and this Psalm, what bitter hatred he sustained, and how
cruelly he was persecuted many years by Saul and ^^s, it may be
understood by his own history: yet, that he did bear no private hatred
against Saul, it appeared by that, that he spared ^im so often: neither is it
read, that he did any thing cru^llie in that whole time of banishment.
Therefore did he ^egard the glory of God alone, and the restoring of the
^ingdome, trusting unto the promises of God. Further^ore, the end does declare,
that David did speak these things, wholly by the spirit of prophecy, and as
he was a figure of Christ himself, as Peter does teach us, Acts 1, verse 20.
The which agree with the history of Christ's death, and with the pun^shments,
which the miserable Jews do now also suffer: which things David does pronounce
of himself, and of his enemies in this Psalm. And although it can not be
certainly determined, against whom specially David cast forth these darts:
^et I judge their opinion to be most probable, which do refer them unto Doeg.
For they agree with his fact, which was most horrible: and the 16. verse of
this Psalm does point as it were with the finger, the circumstance of that
time, as also the 8. verse of this Psalm does make mention of his office and
charge. And although the holy scripture make no mention of Doeg afterward, yet
can it not be doubted, but these prophetical execrations did fall upon him, and
such as we see also conceived against him in Psalm 52. Finally, let them al
know, who following the example of Doeg, or Judas, do persecute the Church at
this day no less cruelly: and namely they, who exercising the same hatred,
that they have received of their Elders, have not ceased of late to stir up
the kings by them bewitched, to the most cruel murders of most innocent man,
and whose cruelty is not yet satisfied: let them know, I say, although the
Church do not apply these prayers preciselie against them, yet both they and
theirs (unless they repent, which J rather desire doubtless) have the same, and
peradventure more grievous punishments, even in this world, hanging over their
heads: as already is come to pass upon many of them.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O GOD mine only honor, and by who^ judgment I know I am allowed and
commended as innocent, whom these (...) do condemn as most wicked, keep not
(...) silence.

2 For thou see with how many most false sla^ders I am assailed by wicked,
deceiptful, and li^^ men:

3 With how great hatred they invade me, bo^ in word and deed, that I should
not escape an^ way: finally, how unworthily they fight again^ me.

4 For surely, they render unto me hatred for amity: and there remains
nothing unto me, b^^ only to flee to my prayers.

5 For my benefits I say, they render injury: and for love, hatred unto me.

6 Chiefly that most wicked man, who seeing he has abused his authority
against the good and the godly, cast him down again under some wicked man,
unto whose lust he may be subject, and cause him to have envious men again at
his elbowe, which may let his purposes.

7 Let him be drawn into the law, and let him never go out, but condemned:
and so many petitions as he shall make to the judge, let them bring upon him so
many penalties.

8 Let his life be short, and let another take his charge, when he is put
forth of office.

9 Let him leave his children fatherles, and his wife a widow.

10 Let his children wander from door to door to beg their bread, al their
goods being destroyed and wasted.

11 Let the cruel usurers snare him, and al his substance, with their most
intricate snares: and what soever he has gotten by sore labor, let it fall
unto men that pertain nothing to him.

12 Let none of them, which were his welwillers before, retain constant
friendship with him: let no man have compassion of his fatherles children.

13 Let his kindred utterly perish, and let him be destroyed in his next
posterity.

14 Let the Lord call unto memory, not only his sins, but also the sins
of his fathers, and of his grandfathers, and also let him call to memory the
sins of his mothers kindred, never to blot them out:

15 Yea, let them be always in Gods sight, whilst the remembrance of him be
utterly abolished.

16 For truly, his manners do deserve this, that his punishment should be
equal to his transgression, as one that has bin so far from al humanity, that
he has not only had no pity on me, but also has sought me unto death,
which am vexed for no deserving of mine own, and am forsaken of them that
ought not so to do, and one that am utterly astonished.

17 He delighted in cursings, the which rather let them fall upon his own head:
and as he was an enemy of al humanity, so let it depart far from him:

18 Yea, let al kind of calamity, joined together with thy wrath, cleave unto
him like a garment, and invade him wholly, as the drink received into the
body, enters into the bowels, and the strength of oil does pearse unto the
very bones.

19 And let him have perpetual misery to be covered therewith wholly as with a
cloak, and like a girdle wherewith he may be always girded when he comes
forth.

20 And let them have this reward of their wickedness of the Lord, which are
mine enemies, and devise my destruction with their deadly slanders.

21 But thou again o Lord God, grant unto me this thing for thine own names
sake, that thou will deliver me for thy great mercy.

22 For I am most miserable, and very poor, and most deeply wounded in my
heart.

23 I vanish away like a shadow when the light goes down, and I leap here
and there like a grasshopper.

24 My knees do fail for hunger, and my body is consumed, al juice being
wasted.

25 And, which thing is most grievous of al, they are so far off from being
touched with any drop of mercy, that contrariwise they take occasion hereof
to rail against me: and if peradventure they see me, they wag their head in
derision.

26 Help me o Lord my God, and deliver me for thy singular clemency.

27 She some notable work, that al men may confess that I am preserved, not
by humane power, but by thine only help and patience.

28 Go to then, let these men curse me as long as they lust, so that thou do
favor me: they will rise against me I know well enough, but in the end they
shall be ashamed of themselves, and I thy servant, wholly addicted unto thee,
shall rejoice.

29 Mine enemies, I say, shall be clothed with shame and reproach (which they
have wilfully called upon themselves) as with a garment.

30 But I praising God openly, will set forth his benefits exceedingly, and
will praise him before al people:

31 Who stands by the poor, that he may defend their life appealing unto
him, against unjust condemnations.

PSALM. CX.
The Argument.
J think that this most excellent and most precious Psalm, may aptly be
called an epitome of the Gospel promised, wherein truly (although the Jews,
which were given up into a reprobate sense, go about to cover light with
darkness) these thief points of our salvation are declared, both with a great
perspicuitie, and a marvelous brevity. First, the divinity of Christ, verse
1. as Christ himself does interpret it, Mat. 22, 42, etc. For the very
enemies of Christ did not doubt, but he should be man, and that of the stock
of David. Secondly, his humanity, with his everlasting power and kingdom,
both in heaven and in earth, and also with the name which is above al names
(the very Godhead being excepted) and therefore the unity of the person in
both natures, besides that presence of his divine majesty, which Eutyches
affirms, is in the same verse, in these words, Sit at my right hand as the
Apostle does interpret it, Heb. 1, 12. Thirdly, the battles of the same King,
and his victories against al his enemies, visible and invisible, in the last
part of the same verse, as the Apostles interpret it, 1. Cor. 15, 24. and so
forth, and Hebr. 10, 13. Fourthlie, from what time this King began his kingdom,
verse 2, as Esai does interpret it, Esai. 2, 3. and by the thief hanging upon
the cross, Luke. 23, 42. whereunto Pilate himself, though he thought no such
thing, did subscribe it in three languages Fiftlie, a plain description of the
true Church, that is to say, of them that are set up against the enemies of
this King, in the 2. verse. First, that they are a people which do obey
willingly, and without dissimulation. Furthermore, like as soldiers are known
by their liueries, or other cognizance, under whose standards they fight, even
so the armies of this most holy King are known by holiness: and this holiness
without al doubt before God, is Christ himself, who is made unto us wisdom,
justice, sanctification, and redemption: and in whom we are without spot or
blot. But before men, the very fruits of faith are the cognizance: the which
thing the prophet declares, borowing the manner of his speech, of the ornaments
of the priests and Levites, in the which chiefly, at their solemn feasts,
they came forth every one in their order. Thirdly, he signifies that this
beauty does now he had under the cross and miseries, whereunto the Church is
subject but that which we are, as is written 1. John. 3, 2. shall appear in
that day of the restoring of the Church, whereof Peter speaks, Acts. 3, 21.
and Paul, 1. Cor. 15, 28. In the fourth place, he compares the assembly of
the godly, how miserable so ever it is, with the army of most chosen young
men: that we may know, that the power of God is made perfect in our
infirmity, the which power chiefly appeared in the first infancy of the
Christian Church being newborn, even with the great shame of those that
succeeded afterward Finally, al these things, to wit, both the Church it
self, and all the gifts wherewith it is adorned, he says, by a most excellent
and apt similitude, that it is a dew falling down from heaven, as out of the
womb of the morning: that is to say, it is the mere and only gift of the
free goodness of the heavenly father. Sixtlie, a description most perfect of
another office of Christ, that is to say, of his eternal priesthood, confirmed
by an oath: repeating also under the figure of Melchisedech, the conjunction of
both the natures into one subject, verse 4. of the which thing, how many and
how great mysteries there be, it is declared in the 7. Chap. of the Epistle to
the Hebrews throughout. Seuenthlie, in the 5, 6, 7. verses, the battles
chiefly of Christ himself, and afterward even of the Church which sh^l
follow, from the beginning of the revelation of the gospel, unto the second
coming of Christ, against all the most mighty Princes, and chiefly against
Satan, the Tyrant of this world: unless by the Monarch, whereof he specially
makes mention is the 6. verse, we had rather understand the Roman empire, and
his image, even Antichrist. The which thing Daniel did expound in me plainly
afterward, Daniel 2, 44. and John in the Revelations: when the triumph shall be
so much more glorious, both of the captain, and also of the soldiers, as the
battle has more sore and longer continued.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 OTher fathers in deed are the lords of their children, but this son that
is promised unto me is my Lord, being verelie the eternal God: and in that he
is very man also to be borne of my kindred, he shall be so highly exalted of
Jehovah, (which has decreed this from al eternity) that he shall sit at his
right hand: that is to say, that he shall have rule and dominion over althings
created, without any exception. Yet will there not want many, and those most
mighty enemies, which will resist this King, but al their enterprises shall be
in vain. For the Lord will cast them down, and tread them al under his feet,
not one being excepted.

2 And Jehovah will give unto him in Sion this kingdom of everlasting
stabilitie over all the ends of the earth: yea, as I have said already, which
shall be extended even to the very right hand of God, of the which kingdom the
power shall be so great, that the more enemies it has, the more excellent and
more evident shall it be.

3 And the people which willingly and obediently offer themselves to be
governed by him, after infinite victories had over the enemies, in the day
that the King, when he has overcome al his enemies, shall muster al his armies
to make a triumph, shall appear before him also in garments of triumph, which
shall be holy, most pure, and most shining. Then, I say, o King, thou shall
behold the multitude of thy most chosen young men, which the morning of that
most heavenly light has brought forth unto thee, by pouring down her most
plentiful dew upon the earth.

4 And do not marvel that I have made mention of holy garments. For all things
shall here be most holy, and separate altogether from al impuritie: for they
shall be consecrate and made holy even by him, that is both a mighty King, and
a most holy Priest. For Jehovah has appointed him to be a Priest also, and
that with an inviolable oath, and has made him, not like Aaron and his
posterity, even mortal men offering transitory things, but an eternal Priest,
with a spiritual and most pure sacrifice, (to wit, himself) being once offered
to reconcile his unto God for ever, of the which eternal Priest, that great
Melchisedech was a figure, as he is set forth unto us by Moses.

5 Wherefore, thou holy assembly, with what storms soever thou be tossed, be
void of care, trusting upon so great a King and Priest. For he will alwaie be
present with thee, and will destroy in his anger those kings that strive
against thee, at the very time and moment, which he has most wisely
determined.

6 And he will bring into subjection unto his kingdom the people far and wide,
saving his own, and making an horrible slaughter of the rebels every where,
and he will overthrow that monarch that rules so far and wide.

7 Yet shall he himself drink also of the brook before these triumphs, and
shall suffer all the miseries of the most grievous battle, wherewith he may seem
to be swallowed and drowned: but it is so far off that he should hereby suffer
any detriment, that contrariwise by this same means, he shall lift up his head
most high, crowned with everlasting glory.

PSALM. CXI.
The Argument.
It appears that this Psalm, and certain other that fellow, which have a
common title Haleluiah, whether they were written by David, or by other
prophets and singers, were set fooorth for this purpose, that the people
coming together to the temple, chiefly at the solemn feasts, should
understand, that this is the end of sacrifices, and other holy rites, even to
praise God: not that the forgiveness of sins, and righteousness should be
sought in those works: but that every one being admonished by those visible
signs, should rise up by true faith to the very things signified, (namely,
to Christ, and the benefits promised in him) and so should set forth the
bountifulnes of God by an earnest confession of the same, which is the true use
even now also of the Christian assemblies and sacraments. And there be set
forth in this Psalm, the goodness of God, his wisdom and justice to be
considered: first, in the creation, ordering and government of the world:
then, in that marvelous deliverance out of Egypt, and other further
testimonies, whereby God did declare his singular favor toward this people in
diverse sorts: finally, this Psalm is concluded with a most grave sentence,
which is to be set against all the blasphemous words of wicked men, deriding
this most comfortable doctrine.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise ye the Lord with the whole heart, o ye people that be gathered
together and consecrate to him, to declare his benefits in this assembly.

2 For the works of the Lord verelie are great, but only known unto them,
which are delighted in the consideration of them.

3 For a marvelous brightness does shine forth in his works, compelling the
minds of al men that do behold them, to give him honor: and whatsoever the
wicked do prate, his most perfect justice does show forth it self to be
seen, in the government of them.

4 But especially, that most mild and merciful Lord has appointed for us this
solemn memory of his benefits.

5 For this is he, which has ministered that meat sent down from heaven, to
those that fear him, whole forty years long, and that orderly measured to
every family: for he is never forgetful of his covenant.

6 Furthermore, by taking away those countries from the inhabitants, and
giving them in possession to his people, he declared in deed of how great
power he is.

7 Certainly, those things which he wrought for us by his own power, when we
came over into these countries, do declare both his most constant fidelity in
performing his promises most manifestly: and also his just severity in
punishing wickedness: and they do prove, that al those things remain firm
and stable, whatsoever he decrees.

8 And we utterly grant, that these things, seeing they are directed by a most
certain and most right rule, are so established, that they can not once waver,
much less be altered or abolished.

9 Therefore he did not only bring in his people thither, but also did defend
them in all dangers. For he so couenanted at that time with his people, that he
did provide by certain statutes for the keeping of his covenant. Finally, his
name is holy unto his, but terrible to his enemies.

10 Therefore this is the chief point, and the very sum of true wisdom,
To fear the Lord. They certainly are truly wise, whosoever do obeie his
commandments: and his praise, though it be despised of the wicked, yet shall it
remain for ever.

PSALM. CXII.
The Argument.
Like as of necessity they were diversely affected, which went unto the
temple, either in the solemn feasts, or at other times: even so do we see,
that these Psalms were applied to diverse ends, like as also the Apostle, 2.
Tim. 2, 1. makes four kinds of public prayers. This Psalm therefore
pertains unto those prayers, wherein we pray for deliverance from those
things that do press us: although it is not written so much in form of
supplication, as of consolation, as though the Prophet should comfort and raise
up the miserable and careful, that notwithstanding, they should courageously
go forward, and not be overcome with the greatness of calamities, and so either
despair, or decline to wicked counsels, as it oftentimes falls out in such
distress. And the promises pertaining to the commodity of this life, are set
forth to be considered against those temptations, for two causes especially.
First, because we are very often tempted by Satan, by the loss, or by the
endangering of temporal commodities. Against the which temptation, are very
aptly opposed those promises which are directly contrary: furthermore,
because the old testament had those promises plainly expressed. But surely it
was never the meaning of the holy Ghost, to retain the minds of the faithful
in the waiting for these things, seeing they were the pledges only of
spiritual graces, and that with a condition annexed, so far as God did know
them to be expedient, seeing these temporal things are neither absolutely of
themselves, nor necessarily good. That great learned man Mollerus does write
very aptly, that this Psalm is a plain commentary of the saying of Paul,
1, Tim. 4, 8. Godliness has the promise both of the present life, and of that
which is to come.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Blessed is the man, though many think the contrary, who fearing the
Lord, does obeie his commandments willingly, and with all his power!

2 For his posterity shall flourish: for God favors the generation of the
just.

3 His family is filled with riches, and the things that he has justly
gotten do continue.

4 That meek, merciful, and just God, commands the light to arise unto them
that walk vprightlie, in the midst of the darkness of calamities.

5 A good man is also liberal, he lends, and governs his things vprightlie
and justly:

6 Wherefore he shall never fai, and his memory shall be for ever:

7 He shall be shaken with no slanders, neither with any evil tidings, but
settling his hope upon the Lord, shall constantly confirm himself.

8 By this means his heart being stayed, he will courageously wait, whilst
that he see his adversaries suffer the just reward of their wickedness.

9 In what state soever he is, he continues to be liberal unto the poor, and
remains just: wherefore, he is increased daily more and more with glory and
honor.

10 The wicked seeing this his felicity, will be greatly grieved, and will
gnash with their teeth: but they shall consume away, al their enterprises being
brought to naught.

PSALM. CXIII.
The Argument.
The Levites, which were appointed to sing, do exhort themselves mutuallie in
this Psalm, to praise the love of God toward man, testified by many
benefits, chiefly toward the miserable and poor, such as were Joseph, Moses,
David, and Daniel: unto the which examples, doubtless this Psalm has respect:
like as that which treats of the barren women, verelie is to be referred to
Sara, Rebeccah, Anna. But in the very beginning streightwaies we are
admonished, that these praises are then only accepted, when they proceed from
the servants of God, and are given to that true God, as he opens himself in
his word: for this is meant by the name of Jehovah. And seeing that the
Leuitical priesthood is taken away, and al we Christians are now consecrate to
offer this sacrifice of praise before the throne of God, it appears that this
exhortation does apperteine to al Christ's Church.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise ye, praise ye, I say, o ye servants of Jehovah, the name of Jehovah.

2 Let the blessed name of Jehovah be praised now and for ever.

3 For most just causes of praising and giving unto it al laud do declare
themselves, from the rising of the sun euerie-where unto the setting of the
same.

4 The Lord doubtless has a more high dominion than all the Gentiles, and also
he exalts his glory above the very heavens.

5 Is there any like unto the Lord our God, which sits most gloriously in
a most high place?

6 And yet does abase himself so low of his infinite goodness, that he
beholds and governs both the things that are done in heaven and in earth.

7 Wherefore this is he that raises up the abiects, and exalts the
miserable, lieng in the dunghils:

8 Whom he places among the princes, among the princes, I say, of his people.

9 Finally, he causes that they that were barren before, and without comfort,
suddenly being made mothers of many children, were filled with joy. Praise
ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXIIII.
The Argument.
It probable, that this elegant and excellent Psalm, was sung especially in
the feast of the passover, which was appointed peculiarly to celebrate the
deliverance out of Egypt, and the bringing in of them into the land of
promise: the which things, seeing they were the figures of that true and
everlasting deliverance by Christ, from the most miserable bondage of Satan,
sin, and death and of the bringing of us into the very heaven, it i^
plainly perceived how much more we, than the old people, are bound to
celebrate so great mercy of God, especially in our holy feast of
thanksgiving.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WHen Israel came out of Egypt, even the posterity of Jacob from that cruel
people,

2 The Lord did consecrate Judah to himself, and Israel for a people, over
whom he would chiefly rule.

3 The sea did fly at his sight, coming forth of Egypt, least it should
hinder his passage, Jordan driving her waters backward, made it self
passeable, that he might come over.

4 The very mountains (the tops of the rocks as it were the horns of rams
beating together) and the hills like lambs did leap.

5 And wherefore, o sea, did thou fly? wherefore, o Jordan, did thou
drive back the waters?

6 Wherefore ye mountains like rams, and why did ye hills like lambs so leap?

7 Verelie it was meet that thou, o earth, should^ tremble at the sight of the
Lord, going before his people, at the sight, I say, of the God of Jacob,

8 Who turned the rock into pooles, even the head rock into flowing waters.

PSALM. CXV.
The Argument.
This Psalm does contain an example of public prayers conceived with great
boldness for the preservation of the Commonwealth against profane nations,
though it is not evident what battle this was, and to what times this Psalm is
to be referred. I do apply it to the history of Iehosaphat, 2. Chron. 20. or
else suppose that it was indicted for the Church generally to some such use.
Now besides many excellent sentences, it contains a notable comparison of
the true God with the false: and it teaches furthermore very plainly, that
the last and chief end of our prayers ought to be, not any commodities of our
own, but the only glory of the true God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THat we desire deliverance out of this peril of thee, o Lord, be it far from
us, that we should ask it as due unto any righteousness of ours, neither that
any glory or dignity should arise thereof to us: but that rather thou
should provide for thine own name, that is to say, that it may appear
plainly thereby how liberal thou art in promising, and how true in perfourming
thy promises.

2 For I beseech thee, why do thou suffer these men any longer to ask in
derision, Where is their God?

3 Our God, o cursed men! of whom ye demand where he is, is in the heavens,
endued with far greater majesty than any earthly prince, by whose power, and
also most free will, al things were created in the beginning, and are even now
governed.

4 But your idols, if the matter be considered, are gold and silver, and
therefore dead things without al sense: but if regard be had of the
workmanship, they are made by the hands of men;

5 They have a mouth, and are dumb: what can they then answer you? they have
eyes, and are blind: what can they then see what is done here?

6 They have ears, and are deaf: wherefore then do ye power out prayers unto
them? they have noses, and smell nothing: whereunto then serves the perfume and
smell of sacrifices?

7 They have hands, but touch nothing: what can they then give you? they have
feet, and can not go: how then can they make haste to help you?

8 And to speak al at one word, what lets it, but that you your selves that
worship them, be as witless and senseless as the very stocks and stones in
whom ye trust.

9 But thou Israel trust in the Lord, the sure shield and defender of al them
that put their trust in him.

10 Thou chiefly the offspring of Aaron, which ought to go before others, both
in doctrine and example, trust in the Lord, the sure shield and defender of all that put their trust in him.

11 Finally, how many soever do profess to worship Jehovah, trust you in the
Lord, who is the shield and defender of them that fix their hope in him.

12 The Lord (doubt ye not) cares for us, he will bless, he will bless the
posterity of Israel, he will bless the kindred of Aaron.

13 The Lord is bountiful toward his true worshippers, both toward the noble,
and also the most abject.

14 He will heap you, even you, I say, and your posterity, with new benefits
more and more.

15 For the Lord, which has made the heaven and the earth, has received you
into his favor.

16 And he inhabiting those most high heavens, from whence he rules al things,
has granted the use of the earth, and of infinite good creatures, wherewith he
has adorned it, unto men of his singular liberality:

17 Even for this purpose, that they should publish his glory in the earth,
the which thing verelie the dead can not perform, unto whom death it self,
taking away the use of the tongue, has inioined silence.

18 Deliver us therefore, o God, that we may sing forth thy glory both now
being alive, and for ever. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXVI.
The Argument.
Whether we refer this Psalm unto David, whom we certainly know to have been
maruellouslie delivered oftentimes by the Lord, from most present death, and
also from most great anguish of mind, or to any other: it contains an
example of a singular thanksgiving, whereby we may understand how far sometime
the best, and most upright men use to be cast down, and unto whom in such case
we must fly: finally, how happy an end there shall be of al temptations, so
that we refrain our impatience by the bridle of faith.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 AL my love is in the Lord, hearing the voice of my prayer,

2 And giving attentive ears unto me: wherefore also I will call upon him so
long as I live.

3 Behold, I was bound in the chains of death, the very anguish of the grave
held me, being overcome with the sorrows of my heart.

4 Then I called upon the name of the Lord, I beseech thee, o Lord, said I,
deliver my most miserable soul.

5 And what else should I say here, than that which I streightwaies proved in
deed? verelie, that God is very mild toward his, and very just in perfourming
his promises, and that our God is most merciful:

6 And that the Lord finally does defend those that walk plainly and
vprightlie, because he did help me so readily, when I was brought to
extremity.

7 Go to therefore, o my seely soul, return now unto thy self, and take
rest, seeing that so notable a change of thy state is wrought by the Lord.

8 For thou, o Lord, have delivered my life from death, thou have stayed the
tears of mine eyes, thou have established my feet, that I did not fall.

9 So that I may walk now safe and sound before thee among the living.

10 For I believed the promises of the Lord, and therefore did I speak, even
my faith ministering voice and words to me, being most sore oppressed with
sorrow.

11 For I grant that I was so far cast down, that I knew not whither to turn
me: and finding no stay anie-where, did decline unto this, that I judged with
my self, that both the very men, and whatsoever they do, is nothing.

12 But, o Lord, this most dangerous temptation being overcome by thy power
(for how can that thing be vain, which is taken in hand by thine appointment?
or how can they be nothing with thee, upon whom thou have bestowed thy grace?)
what shall I give again unto thee for all thy benefits, which thou have
bestowed upon me?

13 Verelie I will take in my hands the cup of thankful sacrifice, and calling
upon thee by name, o Lord, I will testify openly, that I knowledge this
deliverance to be of thee.

14 And those things which I vowed unto thee, o Lord, when I was in danger, will
I now pay in the presence of all the people.

15 I acknowledge therefore, and profess as the truth is, that thou do not
despise those to whom thou have once bin beneficial, but love them most
dearly, and that thou will in no wise unadvisedly destroy them.

16 Verelie therefore I am thy servant, thy servant, I say, even thy bond
servant, and therefore have thou broken the bonds wherewith I was bound.

17 And I again, as is meet, do render unto thee this sacrifice of praise,
and call upon thy name.

18 I pay the vows unto thee, which I have promised, before the whole
assembly of the people:

19 And that in the courts of thy house o Lord, and in the midst of the city
Jerusalem. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXVII.
The Argument.
The vocation of the Gentiles is prophesied in this most short, but very
excellent Psalm, as Paul interprets it, Romans 15, 11. And also the sum of
the Gospel is declared, namely, the giving of the grace and truth, as John
does expound it, John. 1, 17. and the end also, namely, the worshipping of God
in spirit and truth, that we may know that the kingdom of Messiah is
spiritual. Finally, we are here taught, what is the office of the subjects of
this kingdom, and what good things they ought to wait for.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise ye now the Lord o al ye Gentiles, casting away al your fained Gods,
and al ye people set forth his praise.

2 For now at the length that his great mercy has overcome, and is powered
down upon us, and the truth of that eternal salvation promised of the Lord, is
now performed. Praise the Lord.

PSALM. CXVIII.
The Argument.
J do agree unto them that attribute this excellent Psalm unto David, and do
suppose that it was written at the first beginning of his kingdom, when the
nations about him were ready to invade him, either in the feast of passover,
or in the fe^st of the Tabernacles: both that he might give thanks to God,
after he had overcome so many difficulties, and also that they which had so
long resisted him, might know that they resisted God: and again, that the
whole people might so much the more willingly receive the king that was given
them from heaven. And it appears, that David so wrote these things of
himself, and of things that were past, that they did chiefly appertain to
the Messiah, of whom he was a figure, Esaie. 8, 14. and 28, 16. Math. 21, 42.
Acts. 4, 11. Romans 9.33. Ephesians. 2, 20. 1. Pet. 2, 7. And Jerome witnesses, that
this Psalm was thus expounded in the synagogues by the ancient Jews: the
which thing is manifestly confirmed by those ioiful acclamations of the
people, taken out of this Psalm, when as they received him at his last
entrance into the city: whom soon after, at the persuasion of the priests
and elders, they refused with so great outrage. And the same state that was
then of the head, must be now also of the members: so that it is no marvel,
though the godly professors of the truth be rejected as blasphemers and
Heretics, even of those which would be counted the chief builders of the
Church, and at length also to be delivered up to Pilates to be crucified: but
yet again, that corner stone can never be overthrown, nor yet the building
that is lud upon it, can by any force, policy, or subtlety, be destroyed.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 OH! acknowledge and declare ye openly that the Lord is good, for his
bountious goodness is for ever.

2 Let Israel now confess this thing, for his bountious goodness is for ever.

3 Let the stock of Aaron now confess this, that his loving kindness is
perpetual.

4 Let all the sincere worshippers of the Lord now confess this, that his
loving kindness is perpetual.

5 I doubtless, being a notable example of his unspeakable bounty, have not
ceased, as ye know, to call upon him, in my greatest extremity: and he (as ye
your selves see) having heard me, has exalted me into this most large room.

6 Wherefore, I having experience that the Lord works for me, and that he is
so near at hand unto me, God forbid that I should fear the power or the
threats of any man.

7 For the Lord himself is the chief leader of those that help me, so that I
can not doubt at al, but that I shall see with these mine eyes those enemies
which remain, justly punished of him.

8 Oh! how far better is it to trust in the Lord, than in man?

9 How far better is it to trust in the Lord, than in any men, how excellent
soever they be?

10 Behold, many nations compass me about, but I, calling upon the Lord, shall
most undoubtedly destroy them.

11 They compass me in, I say, they beset me round about: but calling upon
the Lord, I shall most undoubtedly destroy them.

12 Mine enemies in great multitudes compass me like swarms of bees, but I
shall forthwith stifle them, as though they were cast into the fire, and calling
upon the Lord, I shall most undoubtedly destroy them.

13 For in deed before, the most cruel enemy did so sore thrust at me, that I
seemed even now ready to fall: but as I was falling, the Lord supported me.

14 Therefore I account him mine only strength, I knowledge him to be my
savior, and praise him in my song.

15 Hereof come those voices of those that sing and rejoice together with me,
out of their tabernacles, Now doubtless the Lord has advanced the power of his
most strong right hand.

16 The Lord has now exalted that his right hand. Now the Lord has showed
forth the power of his most strong right hand.

17 Behold me then that am yet alive, and about to set forth the works of God.

18 For though he has stricken me very sore, yet has he spared my life.

19 I pray thee therefore, let that gate now at the length be open unto me,
which only the lovers of righteousness must go unto, that I being entered
thither, may praise the Lord.

20 For it is consecrate unto the Lord, therefore is it open to the just alone.

21 Here will I praise thee, o Lord, because thou giving ear, have delivered me.

22 For the stone which the very chief builden have so stubbornlie as yet
rejected as nothing fit, is not only now counted in the building, but even as
a principal, it vpholdeth the whole weight of the very building.

23 Verelie it is a work of God in deed, which makes all the beholders
thereof to be amazed.

24 Go to them, seeing the Lord has commanded this most ioiful day to shine
unto us, let us pass it wholly in mirth becoming Saints.

25 I beseech thee, o Lord, preserve the King that is given us from heaven: I
pray thee, I say, I pray thee, o LORD, give the King al prosperity.

26 Let him have prosperity and bliss, that comes to govern us in the name
and commandment of GOD, we wish prosperity to you also that are the nearer
inhabitants of the house of the Lord.

27 Jehovah is the only God, who shines unto us: bind ye the lamb with
cords that is brought to the horns of the altar.

28 Thou art my God, I will praise thee: thou art my God, I will sing thy praises
most loud.

29 Confess that the Lord is exceeding good, for his bountious goodness is
everlasting.

PSALM. CXIX.
The Argument.
This is the principal end of this Psalm (which the longer it is, the more
excellent it is: and it is written with two and twenty Octonaries, that is,
every part having eight verses, whereof every one begins at one particular
letter of the Hebrew alphabet) that men might be entised to the careful study
of the heavenly doctrine. And the whole treatise is set forth, partly
generally of absolute and certain positions or sentences: and partly of
special and more particular considerations, the Prophet setting down himself
for example to them that he teaches, and mixing prayers, complaints,
comforts, and thankesgiuings, throughout the Psalm. And the whole doctrine may
be brought to these four principal heads. 1 That those things are signified by
the name of the heavenly doctrine, which are revealed of God himself, and
comprehended in the holy scriptures: whether we understand that part which
commands that which we ought to do, and forbids the contrary, the name
of the Law being taken in a more straight signification: or whether we
understand that other part, wherein it is taught what we must believe to
salvation, the which we call the Gospel. 2 That this doctrine is declared from
heaven, not that we should comprehend it in our understanding only, but that
every one should follow it with an earnest care, without fainting, as the rule
of his whole life. 3 That we may be both willing and able to embrace and follow
it, we must of necessity pray for the spirit of God, which may both drive
away darkness from our understanding, and amend our affections that are wholly
corrupted. 4 Though the world being terrified, partly with the fear of
dangers, partly with the greatness of calamities, and partly also deceived
with a fained show of profit, does rather go some other way: yet they only
do wisely, which stick unto that way which is set down in the word of God,
what difficulties so ever do offer themselves in this life, so that at the last
they shall have the fruition of true and everlasting life.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octonarie. I.
1 O Blessed are they that are of an upright and blameless life, who walk
after the rule of the doctrine prescribed by the Lord!

2 Blessed are they, I say, who do observe that which he has testified to
please him, who do seek him sincerely and carefully.

3 Doubtless they are not given to wickedness, neither bend themselves to
unrighteousness, which follow the way that he shows.

4 For neither have thou, o Lord, commanded any thing unadvisedly, either as
things that we should only understand, or idly consider: but thou have
commanded that they should be observed and kept with all diligence.

5 And would to God that my manners might so be ordered by thy government,
that I might most constantly persevere in keeping most carefully thy statutes!

6 For then shall al things go well with me, when I shall turn the eyes of my
mind unto al thy commandments.

7 For then verelie shall I only worship thee rightly and purelie, when I do
not follow this or that manner of worship, but shall learn thy most just laws.

8 Therefore am I fully purposed to keep thy statutes: and thou never forsake
me when I am in distress.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. II.
9 I Pray you by what means can the youth, which of it self is headie to al
kind of vice, purelie and holilie direct his manners? even if he observe
diligently those things which thou have spoken unto us.

10 I certainly do seek thee with my whole heart, and thou which have
wrought this will in me, stay me furthermore, least I being drawn away with
any evil affection, do wander from thy precepts.

11 I do bear thy word that is laid up in my heart like a precious treasure,
least I offend thee in any matter.

12 But except thou thy self o Lord, that art greater than al praise, had
bin my master and instructor, truly I should nothing have prevailed:
therefore teach thou me thy statutes.

13 Then even I speaking openly, will show forth the laws that are set down
by thy most holy mouth.

14 I take much more pleasure of this one thing, that I may keep that way
which thou have testified to please thee, than if I had attained all the
treasures of al men.

15 Therefore will I meditate thy commandments continually, and will apply my
whole mind to observe thy ways.

16 I will delight my mind, I say, in thy statutes: neither will I at any time
forget thy words.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. III.
17 BUT thou, o Lord, continue to embrace me again thy most bound servant,
with the same favor, that I ouercomming al difficulties, may remain to
observe those things which thou have spoken unto us.

18 Roll away that veil, which takes away from the eyes of my mind all the
use of the true light, that I may behold those undoubted wonderful secrets,
which do shine forth of that thy heavenly doctrine.

19 For I am a stranger in the earth, striving to go to another place, even to
that better heavenly life: wherefore I beseech thee, hide not from me thy
precepts, which verelie lead us thither.

20 For I am so inflamed wholly with great desire of knowing and keeping thy
laws, both in prosperity and adversity, that this zeal consumes me.

21 Thou use to rebuke and to destroy the haughty persons, and such as
stubbornlie strive against thee: and they are worthily appointed to
destruction, whosoever refuse thy precepts.

22 But these notwithstanding use to reproach me with all kind of contumely, but
thou remove these things far from me, because I do follow thy will, that thou
have testified unto us.

23 For even the princes and the great men also, assembling themselves
together, do take counsel against me, and slander me: but I give my self
wholly to meditate thy statutes, whilst they thus deal with me.

24 These are my delights, these are the men whose counsel I use.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. IIII.
25 YEt I confess, that I can not be but tormented most greeuouslie, with so
many undeserved injuries, so that I may seem now without life, and fastened
to the grave: but restore thou life unto me, like as thou do promise this
thing by thy word, whereof only I ask counsel and comfort.

26 For I do use to open al mine affairs unto thee, and thou did never fail
me asking counsel of thee: therefore teach me thy statutes more and more.

27 Grant I say, that I may daily know in these difficulties, what way is
agreeable to thy commandments, and that I may rest in the consideration of
that marvelous wisdom which shines forth in them.

28 For it is necessary so to do, for I wholly melt away for sorrow: raise me
now up therefore that am fallen down, as thou have promised by thy word.

29 Remove thou far from me whatsoever things may draw me away from truth and
right, and rather grant thou me, that I may hold the way prescribed by thy
doctrine.

30 For I have chosen this as the true way, and I do prefer this before al
other things.

31 O Lord, I endeavor my self I say, to cleave fast unto those things which
are approved by thy testimony, of the which my purpose, grant I beseech thee,
that I do never repent.

32 And I being drawn forth of these streightes by thee, as it were into a
most broad place, will finish the whole course of my life by the direction of
thy precepts.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. V.
33 TEach me o Lord, the order of life set forth in thy decrees (of the which
I was not able of my self once to think) that I may keep it to the end.

34 Grant that I may thoroughlie know thy doctrine, the which I may observe
and keep with all my heart.

35 Direct me also that am entered into the way of these thy precepts, for
there is nothing wherein I more delight.

36 I beseech thee to turn my mind from filthy lucre, which of it self
would run a contrary way, and incline it to embrace those things which thou
testifiest to please thee.

37 Keep back mine eyes also, that they be not deceived, by the enticing show
of most vain things: but rather bring me into the true life, following thee my
guide.

38 And establish unto thy servant in deed, that which thou have promised in
word to them that fear thee.

39 Turn away that reproach, which I do not fear without cause: for thy laws
are good, and therefore it were wickedness to condemn the love of them in me.

40 Behold, I desire nothing more than thy commandments: and keep thou me
safe against al dangers, for the mercy that thou have promised.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. VI.
41 Grant o Lord, that I may prove by experience also, that thy manifold
mercy, and deliver me as thou have spoken:

42 That I may have what to answer them, who do therefore reproach me, because
I do depend upon thy word.

43 Suffer not, I beseech thee, that I being overcome with their injuries, or
with impatience, should speak any other thing, but that thy word: neither
suffer that I being destitute thereof, should utterly be dumb. For I do wait
whilst thou execute such punishment upon these wicked men, as thy laws do
threaten.

44 And whatsoever they do devise against me, I will keep the doctrine which
thou have given us alwaie and for ever.

45 Wherefore I, going as it were in a most large way, will live at hearts ease
with a quiet mind, being addicted wholly to thy commandments.

46 Furthermore, I will boldly dispute of those things, which thou have
testified unto us, even before kings.

47 And I will delight my self with thy commandments, a thing that is most
dear unto me.

48 I will hold with both mine hands thy commandments, which are most ioiful
unto me I say, and will never cease to meditate thy statutes.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. VII.
49 Grant that I may by experience perceive, that thou art mindful of those
things, which thou have spoken unto me thy servant, and have commanded me to
trust in.

50 For in all my miseries this is mine only comfort, even thy word, by the
help whereof, I being almost dead, am restored to life.

51 For although these arrogant men do deride me therefore, yet notwithstanding
I decline not from thy doctrine one jot.

52 And I calling to memory how thou have punished such kind of men, do take
great comfort thereof.

53 Yet do I greatly fear, when I behold these despisers of thy doctrine,
which have the same punishments hanging over their heads.

54 Furthermore, it is so far from me, that I being an exile should despair,
that contrariwise I am occupied in singing thy praises, taking the occasion of
thy statutes.

55 Yea, even at midnight also, setting aside al other cares, being mindful of
thy name, I do watchfullie think how I may keep thy doctrine.

56 And this do I attribute to this cause, that I labor to keep thy
commandments.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. VIII.
57 LET other men gape after what things they lust, I do account al my riches
to be set in this o Lord, that I may obeie those things which thou have spoken
unto us.

58 I do power forth prayers before thee without any dissimulation, and as
thou have promised with thy mouth, have mercy upon me.

59 I am not of their number, who have no regard whether they walk in the
right or wrong way before thee: but I have searched carefully what way I
should keep, and I have fastened my steps in those paths, the which thou have
testified to please thee.

60 Neither have I stayed, when I did know the matter so to be, but have
streightwaies bent my self to observe thy commandments.

61 And although the wicked have conspired against me, and spoiled al my
goods, yet do I not forget thy doctrine.

62 No, I do arise up at midnight, when others do soundly sleep: and I do call
to memory the examples of punishment, which thou have executed upon such
wicked men.

63 But if I do know any that fears thee, and that keeps thy statutes, I
join him to my fellowship.

64 O Lord, who leauest no inhabitants of the earth void of thy benefits, I
desire this one thing of thee, that I may learn thy statutes by thine
instruction.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. IX.
65 THou have dealt faithfully, I grant with thy servant, as thou have
promised by thy word.

66 Yet is there a further thing that I must desire of thee, even that thou
would teach me that true knowledge, joined with such a judgment, whereby I
may discern al things aright, as it were by tasting a sauourie thing: because
I depend of thy commandments.

67 Before I was tamed by thy rod, I was wanton, wandering to and fro: but now
have I learned to obeie thy commandments.

68 But again, I beseech thee, which art most merciful and liberal, that thou will teach me these same statutes.

69 Surely there is no kind of slander, nor any manner of deceit, which
these men of desperate boldness have not practiced against me, who could never
yet bring to pass, but that I endeavored my self to keep thy commandments
with my whole heart:

70 And they thus abusing their prosperity, and thy liberality, became
foolish and witless, even their senses as it were dulled with fatnes: but I
delight my self in the meditation of thy doctrine.

71 I grant therefore, that it was to my great commodity, that I being tamed
by these miseries, should prove more meet to understand thy statutes.

72 For the doctrine which thou have delivered by thy mouth unto us, is far
above al heaps of gold and silver.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. X.
73 THou, who once have made man, and formed him with thy hands, and therefore
can only restore him again, being utterly destroyed of himself, grant me
understanding, that I may learn al thy precepts.

74 For so shall it come to pass, that al which fear thee shall mightily
rejoice, when they shall see me resting upon thy word to have attained this
benefit of thee.

75 For I have learned by experience, o Lord, that thou do nothing
unjustly: and in that thou have dealt with me so hardly, thou have done
nothing repugnant to thy truth.

76 But I beseech thee, that thy mercy may be ready to comfort me, the which
thou have promised to thy servant.

77 Let thine unspeakable mercy, I say, be present, that I may revive,
seeing thine only doctrine delights me.

78 Let these cruel men be ashamed, and frustrate of their purposes, who have
dealt so frowardlie with me, and that without my deserving: and I will with so
much more willing mind wholly apply my self to meditate thy commandments.

79 So shall it come to pass, that they which fear thee, and which understand
thy testimonies, will join themselves to me.

80 Wherefore grant this unto me, that I may know and keep thy commandments
with a pure heart, that I be not ashamed.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XI.
81 AL my courage fails me, whilst I wait for the deliverance promised by
thy word, which is deferred.

82 My very eyes do fail me, whilst I lift them up to behold those things
which thou have spoken unto me: and oftentimes I break forth into this voice,
Ah alas! when will thou once comfort me?

83 Wherefore I became like a bottle dried in the smoke, through sorrow and
mourning: notwithstanding yet I have not therefore forgotten thy statutes.

84 Ah! how long shall these things endure? and when will thou once decree just
punishments against them that persecute me?

85 For they have even dug pits to catch me, the which thing thou have
plainly forbidden in the doctrine that thou have given us.

86 But whatsoever they enterprise, whether by force or craft, the thing it
self shall declare, that it must needs be stable and true, whatsoever thou have
commanded. Only help thou me that am most unworthily oppressed.

87 For although those men have cast me down to the ground, and almost brought
me to naught: yet have I not forsaken thy commandments.

88 Restore me to life therefore for thy singular bounty, that I may most
carefully observe those things that thou have testified by thy mouth.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XII.
89 ANd why should I doubt, oh Lord, of the certainty of thy promises? whereas
I see in that thing, in the which, though it be a most mighty work, yet is it
of far less importance, than the salvation of thy people, in the frame of the
heaven (I mean) that there is as it were engraven a sure stabilitie of that
thing which thou have once spoken. Wherefore, though the company of the godly
be tossed with infinite tempests upon the earth, yet shall it be firm and
stable, the which thing thou have opened by thy word, to be determined by thee,
of the everlasting rest thereof in the heavens.

90 Surely thy truth shall fail in no age: for even that body of the earth
does so remain, as it was established by thee upon her foundations.

91 And al these things do so continue, as they were ordained and appointed by
thee from the beginning, obeieng thee doubtless as their Lord.

92 But if I had not learned these things of the doctrine that thou have
delivered unto us (whereof doubtless I did take a marvelous pleasure) verelie I
had perished already, being overwhelmed with calamities.

93 Therefore be it far away from me, that I should forget thy commandments at
any time, unto whom I confess that I do owe my life.

94 Save me therefore seeing I am thine, and a diligent obseruer of thy
statutes.

95 For the wicked do labor for this with all their power, that they may
destroy me: but I give my self wholly to consider those things which thou
have testified unto us.

96 For I see all the most absolute and perfect works to come to an end, only
thy precepts are prolonged without measure, and without any end.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XIII.
97 O How do I love thy doctrine! surely I consume whole days in meditating
of the same.

98 And I do find by experience that I have not done this in vain: for I have
proved to be much wiser by thy precepts than al mine adversaries, of how great
dignity or authority soever: for I have obtained a wisdom that will never
forsake me.

99 Yea, thou have made me better learned than my very teachers and masters,
even because I have given my self wholly, not to man's inventions, but to
meditate those things only, which thou have given unto us for sound learning.

100 Finalie, I was more skilful than any of the ancient, even because I was
bent, not only to know thy commandments, but also to keep them indeed.

101 For I held back my feet, that I should not go the way that leads unto
evil, but that I should always rather hold the way, which thou have taught us
by thy mouth.

102 Neither did I turn from thy laws, but rested upon thee, my teacher and
admonisher.

103 And surely I felt thy words more pleasant and sweet to my mouth, than if
I had tasted honey.

104 Finally, thy precepts have taught me true wisdom, and therefore I abhor
the other rules of the order of life, as wicked and false.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XIIII.
105 WHerefore that thy word has been and shall be like a torch shining before
me as I go, and as a light showing my path unto me.

106 For so have I sworn, even by an oath, that I would do, and that I would
keep thy most just laws, the which thing I will perform in deed.

107 And thou again, o Lord, keep me safe which am maruellouslie vexed, as
thy word promises.

108 O Lord, let the vows and free promises of my mouth be accepted of thee,
and teach me thy laws more and more.

109 Behold, my life is exposed to al casualties, as though I did carry it in
my hand: yet have not I forgotten thy law.

110 The wicked have laid snares for me, yet have not I wandered from thy
precepts.

111 Those things that thou have testified unto us, are in the stead of an
everlasting inheritance that can never be alienate, neither do I take any
pleasure anie-where, but of them only.

112 Finalie, I have bound my whole heart for ever, even to my last gasp, to
observe thy statutes.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XV.
113 I Abhor the wavering and wanderers to and fro in religion, and I account
thy doctrine most dear.

114 Thou art my refuge, where I may hide my self: thou art my shield, whilst
I rest upon those things that thou have said unto me.

115 Hence from me ye wicked, that I may keep the precepts of my God, so much
more purelie.

116 Uphold thou me, o Lord, as thou have promised to do, (otherwise I perish)
and do not shame me, by making my hope frustrate:

117 But rather strengthen thou me, that I safely escaping, may apply my
self continually to thy statutes with great joy.

118 For verelie thou do tread under foot prostrate upon the earth, al them
that go astraie from thy statutes, and their craft does vanish.

119 Thou do cast away, I say, all the wicked (whereof this world is full)
like dross: therefore is nothing more pleasant unto me, than the testimony of
thy will.

120 Yet do I wholly tremble for fear of thee, and for that thy severity
against the wicked.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XVI.
121 LEt them shamelessly imagine what they lust, I have so behaved my self,
that no man can worthily complain of me, that I have committed any thing
against him contrary to right and equity: do not deliver me therefore, I
beseech thee, to the lust of the slanderers:

122 But rather laieng a pawn for my sake, regard that I be not oppressed by
these proud men.

123 For my very eyes do fail me, waiting for the deliverance already
promised unto me, and for the perfourmance of thy most just word.

124 Neither when I desire this, do I desire any thing that I have deserved:
but this one thing rather, that thou would have mercy upon me thy poor
servant, and teach me thy statutes.

125 Go to, I beseech thee, seeing I am thy bond-seruant, grant this unto me,
that I may understand and embrace those things that thou have testified unto
us, so as it is convenient.

126 For the time it self requires, o Lord, that thou lay thy hand to the
work, seeing that these men have utterly overthrown thy doctrine.

127 But contrariwise, thy precepts are more precious unto me than any gold,
how much soever.

128 For I do affirm, that al thy commandments are a most certain rule of
equity, and I abhor as a thing appointed to deceive us, whatsoever leads us
from them.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XVII.
129 OH the marvelous things that are comprehended in those words that thou
testifiest unto us! so that I have most justly given my self wholly to
consider them most attentively.

130 For unto them that enter within the threshold only to hear thee, a
certain unspeakable light does offer it self to be seen, not so much
dazeling the minds with glittering, as lightening them with a ioiful brightness,
and instructing them (that knowledge their own ignorance) with true wisdom.

131 Wherefore I have greedily swallowed thy precepts, as thirsty men use,
desiring them most earnestly.

132 Look upon me therefore, and have compassion on me that pant for breath,
as thou art accustomed to do to those that love thy name.

133 Direct me that I set not one step out of the way of thy words, and that
no affection striving against thy will do rule over me.

134 Defend and deliver me from the crafts and false accusations of the wicked,
that I being delivered from them, may apply my self to keep thy
commandments.

135 Command the light of that thy countenance to shine unto thy servant, and
teach me thy statutes.

136 Mine eyes verelie did swim with tears, when I beheld the contempt of thy
doctrine.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XVIII.
137 THou art just, o Lord, doubtless, and whatsoever thou decreest is right.

138 And thou have commanded worthily that those things, which thou have
testified unto us, should be known and observed as most just, and as the most
perfect rule of truth.

139 Wherefore I am wholly consumed, being inflamed with the love of thee,
because I see thy words despised of mine adversaries.

140 For verelie there is nothing more pure than thy words, wherefore I, even
thy servant, do embrace them with an incredible love and desire.

141 So that though I see my self to be counted vile and abject of these men
therefore, yet will I not cast away the study of thy commandments.

142 For that only rule of justice taught by thee is everlasting, and the same
is most true and most stable, whereas other both decrees and laws which man's
wisdom does set down, are subject unto change, and at length even do come to
naught.

143 And I have tried this by experience, getting not only great comfort, but
also delectation thereby, when I was in most great miseries and anguish.

144 That is the fountain of everlasting goodness, that it has pleased thee to
testify unto us by thy voice, but grant thou that I may understand it more and
more, that I may so live the true life.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XIX.
145 O Lord hear me crieng upon thee with my whole heart, and that am bent to
keep thy statutes.

146 Preserve me, I say, calling for thy help, and thinking on nothing more
than of those things which thou have testified unto us to be kept.

147 Thou know that I am accustomed to prevent the very twilight in the
morning with my loud prayers, even because I trusted to thy word.

148 Neither do any watchmen doubtless so carefully keep their watch, as I am
diligent in meditating thy words.

149 Hear my words therefore, o Lord, of thy singular mercy, and as thou have
promised to do in thy laws, restore me that am without life.

150 Thou see how near they assault me, which are continually given to
wickedness, and are departed most far from thy doctrine.

151 But I know well that thou cleauest more nere unto me: for it must needs
be, that the very truth remain stable, which thou have joined both to thy
threatenings, and to the promises in thy precepts.

152 And I have already tried in deed, that they are so ordained by thee,
that they can never be overthrown.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XX.
153 REgard, I beseech thee, how sore I am oppressed, and deliver me, which do
not forget the doctrine that thou have taught us:

154 Even thou, unto whom I appeal from the most wicked judgments of other
men, plead my cause and be my judge, and as thou shall determine of my right,
by the prescript rule of thy word, deliver me and preserve me.

155 For they are in greater danger than I, for salvation is further removed
from none more than from these wicked men, which refuse thy statutes.

156 Yet do not I trust in any righteousness of mine to desire thy help, but
whereas it is most evident that thou art most merciful, o Lord, keep thou me,
I beseech thee, after thy woonted manner.

157 For although they be very many and mighty, of whom I am oppressed, and
driven to extreme necessities, yet have not I declined from those things which
thou have testified unto us.

158 Naie, I never conceived more grief of any thing, than when I did
perceive these men to despise thy words so stubbornly and impudentlie.

159 Have regard of me therefore, unto whom thy commandments have alwaie been
most dear, and of thy singular goodness save me that do perish.

160 This is the chief thing in thy word, that it is infallible, and it is the
unchangeable rule of thy justice for ever.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XXI.
161 ALL the most mighty do persecute me, though I have deserved no such thing:
but I had rather to tremble at thy words than at their threatenings, and to
fear to offend thee rather than them.

162 And though I might seem to get great gain by the denieng of thee, yet
the joy that I receive of thy words, is better unto me than any pray, how
rich soever.

163 I hate and abhor deceits, and I embrace thy doctrine.

164 Yea, and I am so far off from following their example, that contrariwise I
beholding the excellent judgments of thy justice, seven times a day do
celebrate thy praises.

165 Certainly, most great tranquillity and true security, safe from al
casualtie, do come unto those men only, which are occupied in the study of
thy doctrine.

166 Therefore, o Lord, I cherish within my self the hope of deliverance,
which will come unto me from thee, being in the mean season bent to keep thy
commandments.

167 For I am determined to embrace with most great love, those things which
thou have testified unto us, and to keep them most diligently.

168 And how sincerely I do this, that is, how without al hypocrisy I apply
my self to thy commandments, and to al things that thou have testified unto
us, it is best known unto thee, who being my witness, and privy to my doings,
I do whatsoever I do.

THE PARAPHRASIS. Octo. XXII.
169 LET my cries come unto thee, o Lord, and grant unto me the understanding
of thy word.

170 Let my prayers, I say, come unto thee, and deliver me, as thou have
promised to do by thy word.

171 Then I being delivered, and being taught thy statutes, will power forth
thy praises out of my mouth, flowing as it were from a most abundant spring.

172 And I, sounding forth thy words with my tongue, will publish far and
near, that there is nothing more just than thy precepts.

173 But go to, help thou me with thy hand, who have preferred thy
commandments before al other things.

174 For of thee alone, o Lord, I wholly depend, and I seek comfort at thine
only doctrine.

175 Command therefore my life to be prolonged, that I being received into thy
defense, that art a most just deliverer, may sing everlasting praises unto thee.

176 Ah alas! as thou see, I do run wandering to and fro, like a sheep
going far astraie from the flock, lieng open to al dangers: but thou, o most
merciful pastor, seek up thy poor servant, which does not forget thy
precepts, and when thou have found him, restore him again.

PSALM. CXX.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title does call this Psalm^, and the other 14. that follow next in
order, the Psalms of Mahaloth, that is of degrees, as almost al men do
interpret it, meaning by that name the slaiers whereupon the Levites stood,
from whence they were sung. And that there were such degrees, it is eui^ent by
Nehemiah 9.4. J (be it spoken without the prejudice or hinderance to any man)
can not allow this opinion: but J expound them to be Psalms of ascensions,
which were peculiarly consecrated to celebrate the return of the Jsrael^tes
out of Babylon: and that they are called Psalms of ascensions in the plural
number, not ascension in the singular, because the people returned, not al
together, but some under Zorobabel, and other some after under Ezra, and
lastly other returned with Nehemiah: at the which time at the length, when the
worship of God was newly to be ordained again, and civil government to b^
restored, then is it supposed that both these Psalms, and the residue were
gathered by Ezra into one volume, and that these were appointed as most apt to
declare this benefit: the which also it is probable that they were afterward
wonted to be sung, chiefly of them that went up to the temple at solemn
feasts. For it is manifest throughout the holy scriptures, that they which
went up to Jerusalem, were said to ascend, both for the situation of the city,
and also for the woorthines of the temple, so that sometimes even the name of
Jerusalem is omitted, as Acts 18, 22. And why J should thus think, J am
principally persuaded by this reason, because (as I shall show in every
argument) these Psalms are so d^uided, that they seem to bring in the people,
first preparing themselves to go, then to be entered their journey, after that
to be come to the city, and busy to repair every thing: lastly, after that
the city and temple were restored, that they exhort and stir up one another,
both to the holy and civil offices. Neither is this any hinderance to my
words, that the 3, 5, 12, 13, 14. of these Psalms, are attributed to David,
and the 8. to Solomon. For this is no let, why these Psalms being written long
before, by some other occasion, or general argument, by them or by others, were
afterward applied peculiarly to celebrate this benefit, as may plainly be
proved by the 7. Psalm of this order. Wherefore the 1. of these Psalms
seems to me to represent the person of the people preparing themselves to go
forth of the country, and partly lamenting the misery of their long
captivity amongst the heathen nations, partly beseeching God that their
return being granted, should not be let by any slanderous accusations of
their enemies: like as we read, that when the people returned into Judea, the
building of the city was long let by these crafts: and he calls these
Gentiles, to wit, the Babylonians, and the Persians, not by their own names,
but by the names of the most cruel people of Arabia that dwelt by them: like as
if we should call at this day, very many people, whose cruelty is well
known, Turks and Scythians. And it is plain, that this must be taken so,
because the people of God was never carried captive into Arabia, neither can
these things aptl^e be applied unto David. And now also there is great use of
this Psalm, seeing that the godl^e are compelled oftentimes to flee into far
countries by the cruelty of the wicked. And if it chance at any time thus to
be, or if that in the midst of our own country, yea, and amongst our
kindred and friends, there be found Mezechites and Kedarens, as the state of
the Church is, whilst it is in the world: yet must we still retain godliness,
we must make continual prayers, we must search where there is any assembly of
the godly: finally, we must always take heed, least we howling with the
wolves, at the length we our selves become of sheep wolves.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Have therefore lifted up my voice unto thee, o Lord, in these miseries,
and thou have heard me at last.

2 But now furthermore, least this benefit be frustrate, this thing remains,
that thou would deliver me from the deceiptful accusations of lieng men,
who do hinder by such crafts that thing, which they can not obtain by force.

3 I pray thee, whosoever thou art that do so, what commodity or profit
can thou atteine of this deceit?

4 Yet I grant, that the darts of the deceiptful tongues are very sharp,
and that the wounds that are made through the burning thereof, are as hardly
extinguished, as the coals of juniper.

5 Woe is me, that I should continue so long banished forth of my country,
amongst so profane and cruel men of Meseck and Kedar.

6 Oh most long and most grievous continuance unto my soul with these men, so
far from al peace and tranquillity!

7 For I, though I seek naught but peace, yet the more I go about to pacify
them, so much the more do I kindle their hatred and enimitie.

PSALM. CXXI.
The Argument.
The people of God are brought in, in this Psalm, being entered into their
iornie, and turning their eyes to the moumtaines of Judea, in the which the
city did lie overthrown, after the example of Daniel, which is described
Daniel, 6. and furthermore, comforting themselves against the difficulties of
so long and troublesome a journey, by repeating a like example of the mercy of
God, when he did defend his people brought forth of Egypt, with a cloud in
the day time against the burning of the sun, and a pillar of fire against
the discommodities of the night. Now, seeing that al these things are the
figures of that spiritual help, wherewith the son of God does maruellouslie
preserve his Church traueling in this world, and also are so many pawnes and
pledges, that nothing shall want unto us in this life, whatsoever is required to
the necessity thereof, though in the most barren wilderness: it may easily be
perceived thereby, how necessary the doctrine contained in this Psalm, is to
all the godly.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Ye mountains, I turn mine eyes to you in these difficulties, otherwise
intolerable: I labor to come unto you, I say, from whence I only trust yt
help will come to me:

2 Even unto the Lord, who seeing he is the maker of the heaven and the earth,
he has not enclosed his kingdom within those mountains, as it were certain
bounds: but yet he has chosen those mountains unto himself, from whence he
might show forth unto us a sign of his presence and mercy.

3 Wherefore he will never suffer, that in this journey thou should so
stumble, that thou should fall, or be compelled to go back: and though many
do lie in wait for thy destruction, yet he preventing al dangers, will be our
watchful keeper.

4 For seeing that he has taken in hand freely, and of his own care, to
defend his Israel, he will not once slumber, much less will he be so deep in
sleep, that he will suffer you to be oppressed.

5 Therefore let this be as a thing certainly determined unto thee, and be
thou confirmed with this only hope in all distress, that the Lord is thy
keeper, that the Lord is a shadow for thee against al storms, and that he is
present by thee, and will never fail thee.

6 And as he was present of old, when thou returnedst out of Egypt, so now
also that he will be present with thee, against the heat of the sun in the
day time, and against the noisome humors which the moon uses to raise in
the night time.

7 Finally, the Lord will preserve thee safe against al discommodities, he I
say, will defend thy life.

8 And to conclude, which way so ever thou shall go, he will be with thee, when
thou go forth into one place: and will be with thee when thou go into
another place: neither in this journey only, but for ever, he will guide and
govern thee.

PSALM. CXXII.
The Argument.
The people of God are brought in, in this Psalm, reioising one with another,
for the reedifieng of the city, which either was streightwaies to be begun,
or else already begun, and thereunto drawing this Psalm, written by David
aforetimes, when as that city, which should be both the sanctuary of God, and
also the head of the kingdom, was first builded. And verelie this was the
double dignity of that city, so yet that the sanctuary was manifestly
preferred before the civil policy, seeing this was a benefit generally
common unto the Church of God, even with many profane people: but the other
was a proper and peculiar blessing unto the Church. Only (would to God) that
the cities and states, to whom that is given from God above in our memory,
would acknowledge, and carefully keep both these gifts!

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Happy and ioiful tidings! the house of the Lord shall be sanctified, into
the which we shall go.

2 We will go to visit thee, and will stand in thy porches o Jerusalem:

3 Neither shall thou now seem like a village dispearsed, thy houses being
scattered here and there, but built up with houses joined one to another like a
city:

4 But especially, that that people which is holy unto God, might assemble
together by tribes, after the manner appointed of God, to celebrate the name of
the God of Israel:

5 Furthermore, because that the tribunal seats, I mean the tribunal seats
are there placed of God for David and his posterity, to minister justice to
every one.

6 Wherefore, seeing the safety of the whole people seems to consist in the
preservation of this city: go to, let us pray for Jerusalem, and for the
safety and welfare of al them that love and favor it.

7 Be thou at peace within and without, and filled with all manner of good things
on every side round about thy towers.

8 Neither do I power forth these prayers for thy safety, without cause,
seeing the preservation of all the families of our nation is set in thee.

9 Finally, seeing the Lord our God has set his house in thee, that his pure
worship might be exercised there, I will labor to preserve and to amplify thee
with as great care as is possible.

PSALM. CXXIII.
The Argument.
The weak people of God is brought in, in this Psalm, praieng most earnestly
unto the most mighty and merciful God, against the infinite injuries of the
mighty governors of the countries about them, the which history is
abundantly written in Ezra and Nehemiah: and would God that the Church would
use the same counsel and remedy in these our times, most like unto theirs!

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 ALthough al things are contrary unto me in the earth, yet will I not
despair: but I do lift up the eyes both of my mind and body unto thee, that
sit in the heavens.

2 For unto whom should the servants rather flee, than unto the help of their
masters? and to whom should the handmaidens rather turn to desire aid, than
at the hand of their mistress? even so do we cast our eyes, and look unto the
Lord our God, and will not cease, before he have compassion upon us.

3 Go to yet, o Lord, have mercy, I say have mercy upon us: for truly
nothing can be imagined more contemptible than we.

4 And we are filled enough, and more than enough, with the scoffs and
reproaches of these mighty men, that are most proud.

PSALM. CXXIIII.
The Argument.
Like as in the former Psalm, the people as it were fainting under the
burden, did lament and sigh: even so now they are brought in reioising and
giving God thanks, being erected in faith, both for that they had received a
more comfortable message from the kings of the Persians, and also that they had
escaped the conspiracies of their enemies, by the prai^rs, wisdom, and
fortitude of Ezra and Nehemiah: and we have s^ne many such like examples of
the goodness of God in this our age, how miserable soever: and our posterity
doubtless in their time shall see the same.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 LEt Israel now confess, and frankly publish, that without the Lord, who
was present with us, that were destitute of al man's aid:

2 Without the Lord, who was present with us, that else were utterly lost,
when men rose up so speedily against us:

3 Doubtless, they had swalowed us up quick, their rage was so furiously
kindled against us:

4 I say, they had already overthrown us like most violent waters, and would
as it were have carried us quite away, being overwhelmed with the vehement
force of a swift stream.

5 The most tempestuous storms would even then have covered us that were cast
down.

6 Praised be the Lord, that has forbidden and let, that these savage and
cruel beasts, taking us in their paws, and tearing us with their most fierce
teeth, do not devour us.

7 Verelie our life is saved, like a bird that is delivered from the net of
these foulers: truly their snares are broken, and we are delivered.

8 And we must attribute this whole benefit to the bounty of the Lord alone,
who is the maker both of heaven and earth.

PSALM. CXXV.
The Argument.
The city being now at the length repaired, and the policy again
established, the people again is taught, upon what foundation they ought to
rest hereafter, by an argument drawn of the situation of the city, which was
a figure both of the power of God, and of his favor already declared, which
would move him, that he should mitigate even his severity with most moderate
correction. But this is added, that this thing belongs to them only, which
testify their religion in deed, whereas al other shall suffer just punishment,
none other ways than the heathen Gentiles, although they did dwell in the
midst of the city of God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 AS immovable as we behold the very hill of Sion to stand, through his great
and heavy mass: so certain do assure them to be (who so ever do trust in the
Lord) that they shall never fall down.

2 For like as we see the very city of Jerusalem compassed round about with
mountains: so the Lord stands round about his people on every side, and will
never forsake them.

3 And if at any time that iron scepter of cruel tyrants do lie upon the
shoulders of the godly, yet certainly it shall not remain upon them for
ever, (as we have oftentimes found by experience) least peradventure those that
before gave themselves to live justly, at the length, being driven thereto by
despair, be carried away also to live in sin licentiously.

4 But thou, o Lord, as thou have done hitherto, continue to defend the good,
and them that love virtue, and to bind them unto thee by new benefits.

5 And surely he will do so: but if any of those, whom the Lord does account
amongst his people, shall turn from the right way unto wickedness, let them
know that it will come to pass, that he will carry them away to just
punishment, howsoever they wrestle against it, none otherwise than he uses to
do to the profane, and other most wicked men: but the true Israel shall enioie
a stable and sure tranquillity.

PSALM. CXXVI.
The Argument.
The people of God being restored at the length from Babylon, does thankefullie
acknowledge such a notable new birth, and prays for the residue of the
exiles, which were more slack, and in the end were punished for their
slacknes: and he sets forth that there is now, and shall be hereafter, a
ioiful issue of those miseries, wherewith the Lord does chastise and try his.
So it becomes them at this day, which have escaped out of the bondage of
Antichrist, and are come to that place where the pu^e worship of God is
exercised, to pray for them continualie which stick still in that mire, and to
prepare themselves unto new battles cheerefullie when it shall please God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WE must needs grant in deed, that this benefit of God is so great, that
when the Lord did bring us out of this misery, and so long captivity, after
such a marvelous manner, and so above al expectation, in such a strange time, we
thought in our selves that we were in a dream.

2 Then began the mouth to be filled with laughter, then began the tongue to
testify gladness, then began all the people with admiration to say, Doubtless
the benefit of the Lord is marvelous toward these men.

3 And surely so it is: for if ever at any time before, this work of God is
marvelous toward us, neither do we rejoice without cause.

4 But thou, o Lord, that our joy may be full and stable, which thou grauntest
unto us, bring again the others also, and refresh them, being burnt up with
the heat of that most miserable captivity, even as though thou should send
upon the dry countries of the South, rivers of waters.

5 Howsoever it is, the thing it self declares unto us, that it is by thy
singular benefit, that they which do sow with tears, should reap with joy.

6 So see we it come to pass sometimes amongst the husbandmen, who when in
scarsitie they go to and fro in the field, sowing their seed, taken out of
their barnes not without tears: yet contrariwise, in the time of harvest they
go out, and return reioising, even laden with heavy sheaues.

PSALM. CXXVII.
The Argument.
Seeing that the Hebrew title gives this Psalm unto Solomon, it appears
that it was written, and delivered unto the people, after the temple was
builded, and religion established, that the people might acknowledge such a
benefit of God, by the establishing whereof, the whole safety of the nation
did stand, not in the stony temple, nor in the outward rites only, but that
every one should consecrate himself and his family unto God. Therefore was
it used again, after the return from captivity, and after al things were
restored, for just cause: that the people of God being newborn again, might
be taught which is the true foundation, both of the government domestical, and
political, and by what means that happy state might be preserved, whereunto
they were come after so great misery by Gods singular mercy. And this is the
flowne thereof, that families and cities do stand by religion, and the true
worship of God: neither that any handicraftes do profit aright without
religion, either yet any labors wherewith the citizens do exercise
themselves, and that the godly families are the true ornaments of the cities:
of the which matter, though both the Philosophers and lawmakers have taught
certain things, yet dare J affirm, that this only Psalm is to be preferred
before all the books of them al, even to be considered by man's reason, both for
the weight of the sentences, and the eloquence of the words: and oh happy
city, which do set forth this example unto thee! But where shall thou once
be seen in the whole world?

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BY the singular benefit of God verelie is the city restored, and the walls
thereof are repaired, together with the private houses: and we see the fields
tilled, and the villages and towns euerie-where erected: finally, we see the
families increased with children, but whereto serve al these things without the
true worship of God? wherefore it is necessary, that you turn the eyes of
your minds unto this thing, both publikelie and privately: for it is God that
must build both the families, which else shall fall to naught: and it is he that
must keep and defend the cities also, which else shall stand for a time to
their great damage, or streightwaies be destroyed.

2 For although the masters have wise, skilful, and diligent servants: and the
city be full of such men, which casting off al idleness, do al arise up to their
labors, as soon as it is light, and in the evening after most great labors,
take a niggardlie and slender repast (which is the just punishment of covetous
men:) yet is all this labor spent in vain, unless that God do favor those
labors, and the commodities which are taken thereby. But verelie, the Lord
does grant most mercifully as with pleasure, al things necessary unto his,
not yet being idle, but so laboring, that they neither torment themselves with
distrust, nor with covetousness, nor with any other affections, which are the
tormenters of man's life.

3 Hereof is that offspring of children, the seed of cities, not by chance, not
only by force of nature, not by labor or industry, but as the matter is
plain to them that are not altogether blind, they are given to the fathers by
the goodness of the Lord.

4 This is another benefit of GOD, when the children being given by God, are of
good health, and so strong in the flower of youth, that thou may account
them like darts, cast out of the hand of some mighty man.

5 Happy is that man that has his quiver full of such arrows, who shall not
want defense, if any make stir against him.

PSALM. CXXVIII.
The Argument.
This Psalm pertaining to the same purpose with the former, even that the
people of God being again restored, should understand and have set forth as
in certain tables, what was their duty, is wholly oeconomical, that is, for
private families: and it does teach two chief and principal precepts of the
right government of the family, to wit, the fear of God openly testified,
and diligent labor of the body: of the which twain, the one part does bind
all the godly without exception, but this later part is so to be taken, not as
though bodily labor were commanded to every one, but that we may know, that
idleness and slouthfulnes is forbidden unto al: not that every one has
strength of body or wit, particularly attributed unto him, whereby he may get
his living, or may use the thing rightly that is already gotten. But this
also is to be observed, that al men are here spoken unto, as though they were
married: because this is the ordinary vocation, from the which how unlawful it
is for a man unadvisedly to depart (much less to say, that the deuelish
vows are any where approved of sole life, either in the scriptures, or in the
example of any) the miserable condition of them does declare, which have
transformed the world into a Sodom and Gomorrha, or even into some worse thing.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 THis is the right way to lead a blessed life, that a man know the true
worship of God, and live accordingly.

2 For whosoever thou art that do thus, although thou be in so poor estate,
that thou must live upon thy handie labor every day, yet God will bring to
pass, that thou shall have a competent living thereby: and he will grant unto
thee, that thou shall so live well and happily.

3 Yea, he will cause thy generation to spread also, for thy wife shall be like a
fruitful vine in thy house, even bringing forth most pleasant fruit unto thee,
whom thou shall see placed in order at thy table, like olive branches.

4 Behold therefore, thus will the Lord bless al them that fear him.

5 The Lord, I say, will bless thee from the tower of Sion, whosoever do
thus behave thy self: and he will bring to pass, that thou shall see Jerusalem
flourishing, so long as thou do live.

6 And thou shall then behold both thine offspring to be spread abroad at home,
and also publikelie Israel to enioie great peace and tranquillity.

PSALM. CXXIX.
The Argument.
The people of God being restored after so many calamities, gives thanks unto
God for so great benefits, as the only author of them: and promising
themselves the same in time to come, does contrariwise foreshew, that a
certain destruction does hang over their enemies.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to, let Israel now say by just cause, These have vexed me oftentimes from
my very youth:

2 They have vexed me oftentimes from my youth, yet could they not overcome me,
as it is plain by experience.

3 For they verelie, I grant have wounded me, as it were plowing over me, and
drawing long furrows on every side.

4 But that most true and just aduenger of his, even the Lord, has cut in
sunder at the length, all the bands of the wicked.

5 Thus certainly all the enemies of Sion being filled with shame, shall turn
their backs, their enterprises being frustrate.

6 And they shall be proud in show, and flourishing for a little time, but they
shall be like the herb that grows on the top of the houses, which withers
before it come to the highest,

7 The which neither any man does sheare by handful, neither does he lay it
in order by handfuls which heapeth up the harvest:

8 Neither for the cause thereof shall the passengers at any time cry unto the
reapers, The Lord bless you from heaven with most plentiful harvest, and by
the power of the Lord let your labors have good success.

PSALM. CXXX.
The Argument.
The people of God being careful to retain the possession of their country
and city restored, yet trusting to the promises of God, and his mercy,
whereof they had experience, do comfort themselves in this Psalm, which was
counted aforetime amongst the penitentials, that is, amongst those Psalms
which they used to sing, when the penitent persons were publikelie reconciled
unto the assembly of the Church, the which afterward the Romanists applied
foolishlie to the prayers for the dead, by no more probable pretense, as I
think, than because it is said in the beginning, De profundis clamaui, that
is, Out of the depth have I called, so great was the power of the spirit of
error many years.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord I cry unto thee from the deep bottom of my heart, and from the
deep gulf wherein I am plunged.

2 Hear me, o Lord, that call upon thee, and give ear to my loud sounding
prayers.

3 I grant, o God, that I have deserved al extreme punishment: for what can I
else say? but if thou, o Lord, do mark our sins, who is able at any time
to abide thy most just wrath?

4 But the matter stands far otherwise: for else could there be no worship of
thee anie-where amongst men: therefore does thy mercy overcome the sins of
men. For thou have found out, and delivered unto us the means of attaining thy
favor, that thou may be acknowledged and reverenced amongst men.

5 Wherefore, though I be most wicked, yet wait I for the help of the Lord, I
wait assuredly for the help of the Lord, I say: for he has testified by his
word, that he will help me, whereunto I trust undoubtedly.

6 Therefore, there is no night watcher, no man, I say, that watches in the
night, that looks for the dawning of the day more desirouslie, or more
assuredly, than I do look for the coming of the Lord to help me.

7 Go to then, o Israel, wait upon the Lord with assured hope, upon the Lord, I
say, most merciful, and whom thou have experienced so often to be thy deliverer
and aduenger.

8 This is he doubtless who will deliver Israel now also, and forgive him al his
sins at once.

PSALM. CXXXI.
The Argument.
This Psalm compared with the history of David, whereunto it is applied in
the Hebrew title, does set forth plain example of true modesty, which they
commonly call humility, even of that man, which fearing God, and despising no
man, does remain within the bounds of his calling: and afterward this same
Psalm is appointed to the people being returned, that like as in the forme^
Psalm, they were admonished that they should not be discouraged in adversity:
so contrar^wise they sho^^d take heed unto themselves, least they should wax
pr^^d in prosperity.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Take thee to witness, o Lord, against the flanders of al men, that I
neither labored that I should be brought unto this dignity, nor th^^ I am now
proud, being promoted by thee thereunto, nor that I have bent mine eyes to high
things, nor that I have entangled my self willingly with great things,
whereby I might win unto me the opinion of excellency, or unto such things
as were above my capacity.

2 But contrarily, unless I have bin content wi^^ my state, and have stayed
my mind to depend wholly on thee, as they teach the weaned infant to forget the
nurse, and to regard the mother alone: v^lesse, I say, I have so behaved my
self, as the weaned infant, let me in deed be refused of thee.

3 So thou Israel also rest in the Lord alone, bo^^ now and afterward for ever.

PSALM. CXXXII.
The Argument.
Solomon consecrating the temple unto G^d, 2. Chron. 6. d^^ use three verses of
this Psalm in the last end of his prayer, even in the same words: whereby it
is plain, that th^^ Psalm^ was afterward very notorious and famous, the which
David their did write, when he had found a pla^ wherein he might build the
temple of God, and did set before him even then, that time, when the Arc was
to be brought into the temple it self being built. Wherefore, when the temple
and service of God was restored after their return, it was worthily used
again, and sang (as it is very probable) with the Psalms of ascension, both
before it and after it, in that solemnity which is described, Nehemiah 12. And
it contains a plain rehearsal, both of the promise of the kingdom of David,
and of building the temple, and of a most full setting in order of the Leuitical
priesthood: both the which, it is manifest to have been figures, both of the
kingdom and of the priesthood of Christ, even as David himself was a shadow
of very Christ: for the which causes this precious Psalm must always be used
in the Church, by whose testimony our faith also may be confirmed. We learn
further by this Psalm the visible notes of the tru^ Church, that is to say,
the worship of God, chiefly in two points: to wit, to consist in the sincere
preaching of the word of God, and the lawful ministering of the sacraments: and
again, which is the true word of God, and which be the very true sacraments:
even they, wherein Christ the true and only savior is set forth unto us,
even so as he himself has declared himself unto his Church, and all the will
of his father most fully concerning our salvation, both by himself, and by
his Prophets, and Apostles. Finally, we are taught by this Psalm^, that the
bl^ssings both of this life, and the other, are ordained for the godly by God,
and that all the enterprises of the wicked shall come to naught, and how
carefully we are bound to pray for the spreading of the kingdom of Christ,
and for the preservation of those Commonwealthes, wherein harbor is given unto
the Church.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O LORD, let it be seen that thou art mindful of the promises, wherewith it
pleased thee to bind thy self unto David, and out of what great miseries thou
have delivered him: not for this purpose verelie, that thou should destroy
him afterward, but that thou should perform the promises made unto him.

2 For he again has bound himself to thee with an oath, being the Lord and
mighty God of Jacob, and therefore a most severe punisher of perjury, even in
these plain words:

3 If I enter at any time into my house, if I shall at any time go to my bed,

4 If mine eyes shall take any sleep, or mine eielids wink.

5 Before that I have found out the seat of the Lord, which the mighty God of
Jacob may inhabit:

6 Behold then hitherto this seat has bin changed from time to time: for it
was sometime, as we have heard say, toward Ephrata, even in Silo, which is
now destroyed, and there was a time when we did find it in the field of Iaer.

7 But now, having found a place at the length, where it may remain, we will go
thither, and there will we worship him at his seat where he sits, even
falling down before his holy Arc.

8 Go to then, o Lord, come up into that place, i^ the which thou may make no
short abode as before: but where thou may remain as in a stable habitation,
even the Arc (which is a sure token o^ thy power) being there placed.

9 Therefore let the priests which be consecrate unto thee, and are beautified
both with pure doctrine and holy conversation, execute their office duly, and
those that have received benefits of the^ sing here a triumph unto thee.

10 Thou being mindful of thy promise made unto David thy servant, preserve
here the kingdom established by thee in his posterity.

11 For thou have sworn unto David, o Lord, by a sure and unchangeable decree
in these words, I will place one that shall be borne of thee in thy throne.

12 And if thy posterity shall keep my covenant, and the statutes which I shall
teach them, I will set upon thy throne their posterity also, as one shall
succeed another for ever.

13 For the Lord has chosen Sion unto himself, and has appointed it to be
his seat, (because it so pleased him) even in these plain words,

14 This shall be mine everlasting rest, and here will I dwell as in a place
acceptable unto me, because it seems so good unto me.

15 I will provide for her victuals most diligently, and if there shall be any
poor there, I will never suffer them to want food necessary for this life.

16 I will defend on every side my holy ministers chiefly, unto whom besides
no possessions are given, and I will daily give occasion of new joy to them
that I have taken in hand to defend.

17 There will I cause that the top of David's head shall be lifted up to be seen
more and more: and if at any time his strength be diminished, yet shall it
spring up again, the brightness of the kingdom that can not be extinguished,
which is there set up by me, shall shine like a firebrand, and shall once lighten
the whole world.

18 And al his enemies verelie shall be filled with shame, but his crown shall
flourish in the end with most great glory.

PSALM. CXXXIII.
The Argument.
David, unto whom this Psalm is attributed by the Hebrew title, did write it
undoubtedly, when after the civil wars of eight years space, all the tribes
came together to anoint him their king, 2. Sam. 5. 1. Chron. 11. even that he
might exhort them to lay down al discord, and to maintain mutual amity with all duties both public and private. So then was it thought good afterward by
the repeating of this same Psalm, to beat into all the people the desire of
peace, as a thing most necessary, seeing they were yet weak, and were
assaulted on every side, both by force, and by traitorous practices, by the
governors of the nations near unto them, which were most angry against them,
as appears by the histories of Ezra and Nehemiah. And it contains an
excellent and marvelous elegant praise, not simply of the natural love and
affection, not of common friendship, whereof the profane writers have spoken
many things also very well: but of that holy charity, whereof the holy
Ghost only is the author, which ioineth all the godly unto one heavenly
father in Christ, the first born among many brethren. The which knot also, not
every kind of commodity, in regard whereof, the poets did adorn peace with
marvelous epithetons, so that they counted it as a goddess: but all the
benefits of God, both of this life, and of the life to come do follow it, being
even powered down upon us from him, forth of whose fulness they are derived
down unto the under members, cleaving unto him. Wherefore this charity or
love is worthily compared with the heavenly dew, that we may acknowledge it
to be given us from heaven, and that freely: and also with the holy ointment
of Aaron, running down from the head unto the hem of his garment, because that
Aaron was a figure of Christ our eternal Priest, and that ointment did signify
the holy spirit powered forth without measure upon our head, that is upon
Christ himself, thereby sanctifieng his under members, that is, the whole
Church, by whose sweet smell also we are acceptable to our heavenly father,
according to that saying, Ioh. 14, 21. He that loves me, shall be loved of my
father, and I will love him, etc. John. 1, 16.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 BEhold how beautiful and happy this change of our state is: to wit, because
we see that brethren, which before were at dissension both in bodies and minds,
are now most friendly joined in hearts. Wherefore I would have you
continually to consider and mark, that there is nothing either more
profitable or more pleasant, than your brotherly amity. For, besides that God
would have us to be borne of one and the same father Abraham, the which reason
is of no small moment: he has further called and chosen us out into his
family, by the same his holy spirit.

2 Wherefore this brotherly unity is plainly like that sweet balm so
precious, which being powered upon the head of the high priest, and upon his
beard, did flow down, even to the hem of his holy garment.

3 And we may compare it with that most sweet and most fruitful dew, which
falls on the mountains both of Hermon and Sion. For where this concord is of
force, there, at the commandment of God from heaven, al commodities flow
down and remain for ever.

PSALM. CXXXIIII.
The Argument.
After the manifold speeches pertaining unto the people, at the length a very
good end is made unto that matter, by an exhortation directed unto the priests
and Levites, seeing the worship of God is the whole sum belonging unto the
Church. Therefore the Levites are admonished for what cause they are placed in
the Church, not that they should exercise dumb ceremonies, but that they
should bestow whole days and nights for the salvation of the people, that is,
in teaching, declaring the praises of God, and in praieng.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 LO, ye blessed company, whom the Lord has peculiarly chosen out of the
rest of the people, and whose ministry he uses whilst, ye appear in his
house before him day and night: first execute your office diligently in Gods
sight, carefully laboring to set forth his praises.

2 Pray unto the Lord, I say, lifting up your hands unto his sanctuary, and
praise him, which is the principal part of his worship, and the very end of
these ceremonies.

3 Then commend the whole assembly of the people unto God, sending them away,
after they have sincerely offered their sacrifices, and have been instructed
with holy doctrine, praieng that the Lord, who is the Creator of heaven and
earth, would enrich them al out of Sion with all kind of blessings.

PSALM. CXXXV.
The Argument.
The Prophet does chiefly exhort the priests and the Levites also in this
Psalm, as in the former, publikelie to set forth the praise of God: unto
whom yet he will have the people to join as to their ringleaders. And the
arguments of praise are taken partly of the general works wherein God sets
forth both his infinite power and goodness, even as it were to be groped, or
handeled of al men, partly of his special benefits that are bestowed on his
own people: and he adioineth an antithesis of the idols at large. And we ought
to confirm our selves at this day still with the same testimony, and to give
thanks unto God daily now for them also, seeing there has been always, and
is still one and the same Church, as there is one God and one faith, although
the covenant be diverse, in the manner and form of revelation, which God has
made with his.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Al ye that are peculiarly appointed to the ministry of the Lord, praise
ye, praise ye the Lord, as he has showed himself in deed worthily to be
acknowledged.

2 You, I say, which are appointed to stand and to appear, even in the house
of the Lord: and unto whom the keeping of these courts of the Lord is
committed.

3 Praise God who is very good, and praise his name, than the which nothing is
more pleasant.

4 For he has of his only goodness chosen Jacob to himself, as his most
chief treasure.

5 And to speak no more of these special testimonies of his favor, why should
not I affirm that thing, which is most plain and evident, that the Lord even
our God is very great: and although foolish men imagine to themselves gods, he
is mightier than al their gods, although we should grant that there were such
as they do dream.

6 For seeing that these men suppose that there are many gods, surely they
can make none of these almighty: and some do make them idle beholders of
things, others do bind them to inferior causes, others feign that most vile
things, and most wicked things are done openly by them: but the Lord, as he
has created the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all the depths thereof, so also
he uses them at his pleasure.

7 By whose commandments the clouds rising from the uttermost parts of the
earth, do minister the matter of the fiery flames, and of the raines which
burst forth thence together, and which brings forth the winds out of his
store.

8 And least any man should limit this infinite power of the Lord within the
bounds of natural causes, this is he, which destroyed in one night all the first
borne, both of men and beasts in Egypt, the which thing certainly can not be
attributed to the order of nature.

9 He also overthrew Pharao in Egypt, and all the Egyptians, over
dutiful-seruants to their king, with signs and wonders, whereof there is not
one which does not declare the infinite power of the Lord above al order of
nature.

10 Yea, and not Pharao only and the Egyptians, but he also miserably slew
many other nations, and their most mighty kings:

11 As Sehon king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basan, and all the
kingdoms of Canaan:

12 Whose countries given to them before, he delivered to be possessed of
Israel.

13 Wherefore doubtless, o Lord, thou have gotten unto thy self a name of
perpetual praise, neither shall the remembrance of thee be extinguished for ever:

14 And thou will chiefly more and more set forth thy glory in the
preservation of thy people, and in thy loving kindness that is so prone and
ready to pardon thy servants.

15 But even these most gorgious and precious images, which the senseles
nations do worship, are nothing else but gold and silver, made by the
workmanship of man in this or that form.

16 They have a mouth, and yet are dumb: they have eyes, but they see nothing
therewith:

17 They have ears, but can not hear: and have a nose, but wanting breath.

18 And verelie in this point the workmen and worshippers of them, differ
nothing from them.

19 But ye the stock of Israel, praise the Lord: ye the family of Aaron go
before others in praising the Lord.

20 Ye Levites praise the Lord, as many as profess his worship, praise the
Lord.

21 Let the everlasting inhabitants of Jerusalem sound forth the praises of
the Lord out of Sion.

PSALM. CXXXVI.
The Argument.
There is the same argument, and the same use of this most magnificent Psalm,
as of the other: but the benefits of God both toward the whole mankind, and
especially bestowed upon his Church, are here more plainly set forth, and
every where there is a singular verse often repeated, partly that we should
certainly judge these benefits only to come of the most liberal bounty of
God, partly that we should judge, not only that al things generally, but
also even particularly every thing is as a testimony and pledge of Gods
favor and mercy to our salvation: although this his liberality turn to the
destruction of the wicked. And it appears by 1. Chro. 7. that David was the
author of this song, the which was sung with most great solemnity, both in
their high feasts, and in their triumphant victories, ever repeating this
singular verse by course, as also the history of Iehosaphat does declare 2.
Chron. 20.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise the Lord for his great goodness, for his mercy endures for ever.

2 Praise the God of gods, for his mercy endures for ever.

3 Praise the Lord of lords, for his mercy endures for ever.

4 Who by his only power brings to pass marvelous things, because his mercy
endures for ever.

5 Who has created the heavens by his infinite wisdom, for his mercy
endures for ever.

6 Who has commanded the earth to stand up above the banks of the waters,
being appointed to sustain and give nourishment to the beasts of the earth,
and the souls of the air, for his mercy endures for ever.

7 Who has created those two great lights, for his mercy endures for ever.

8 The Sun to rule the day, for his mercy endures for ever.

9 The Moon and the Stars to rule in the night, for his mercy endures for
ever.

10 Who smote Egypt, slaieng their first borne, for his mercy endures for
ever.

11 And delivered Israel from thence, for his mercy endures for ever.

12 And that with a strong force, and as it were by lifting up his arm on
high, for his mercy endures for ever.

13 Who did part in sunder the Rushie sea (which is called the red sea) that it
should lie open unto the people, passing to and fro by multitudes, for his
mercy endures for ever.

14 And led Israel through the midst thereof, for his mercy endures for
ever.

15 And drowned Pharao and al his armies in the same, for his mercy endures
for ever.

16 Who led his people by the waste wilderness, for his mercy endures for ever.

17 Who stroke great kings with plagues, for his mercy endures for ever.

18 Who slew mighty kings, for his mercy endures for ever.

19 Sihon king of the Amorites, for his mercy endures for ever.

20 And Og the king of Basan, for his mercy endures for ever.

21 And gave their dominion to be possessed by others, for his mercy endures
for ever.

22 Even to be possessed by Israel his servant, for his mercy endures for
ever.

23 Who when we were oppressed, was mindful of us, for his mercy endures for
ever.

24 And delivered us from our enemies, for his mercy endures for ever.

25 Who gives food to al living creatures, for his mercy endures for ever.

26 Praise ye God, the Lord of heaven, for his mercy endures for ever.

PSALM. CXXXVII.
The Argument.
The holy Ghost would have this excellent Psalm to be extant, (which no doubt
was made by the Levites the fingers in the time of the captivity) that he
might teach us very notable things, and necessary to our comfort, to wit:
that there is a time of silence under the cross, when the power of darkness
has his time, notwithstanding that we must retain always our constancy, not
only in faith, but also in zeal, least we betraie the truth with our
silence, or forsake our duty for fear of men. The dogs verelie are unworthy
to have any holy thing offered to them, but this same thing is not to be
dissembled, that they are dogs, when it stands upon the glory of God, and
that the oppressors of the Church shall never carry away their wickedness
unpunished, and chiefly they which do inflame the cruelty of the mighty men
against the innocent.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 WE being carried away unto that profane Babylon, even avoiding so much as
lay in us the sight of the wicked enemies, did confess with most doleful
silence, even with abundance of tears, both our sin and our sorrow, at the
flood of Euphrates, being mindful of Sion.

2 And though we carried our harpes even to be our comfort in so great
calamity, yet seeing that it seemed unto us, that we should rather mourn than
sing in that time and place, we did hang them upon the sallowe trees, making no
noise in the sight of the Babylonians.

3 When they themselves, which had drawn us away into this most miserable
captivity, outrageouslie mocking our misery, did require of us, that we
should delight them with our songs, and take again into our hands the harps
that we had hanged up: speaking these words, Come off, sing unto us those tunes
of your Sion.

4 But we did not agree unto them, bearing most heavily this their derision,
as breaking out into the reproach of the Lord himself. For with what
countenance, or with what conscience, could we abandon the holy praises of the
Lord, to be derided of those wicked enemies?

5 But be it far away, and God forbid o Jerusalem, that though we be far
separate from thee, we should forget thee: but let rather every one of our
right hands forget al plaieng of instruments.

6 Let the tongue of every one of us rather cleave to the roof of our
mouths, than that it being unmindful of thee, should set forth thy holy name
to be derided of them: and unless so long as we shall be banished away from
thee, we do mourn so long: and again, that then we begin our joy, when we
shall be restored unto thee.

7 But thou, o Lord, do not forget these our unkind kinsmen, and with what
exhortations they have kindled the cruelty of the Chaldees, when they cried in
the day of the cruel destruction of the city, Raze it, raze it, even to the
very foundations.

8 But the time shall be also, when even thou o Babylon, shall be destroyed, and
this thy prosperity shall be given unto him, which shall deal with thee again,
as thou have dealt with us.

9 And blessed shall he be, that shall take thy young infants also, and dash them
against the stones.

PSALM. CXXXVIII.
The Argument.
When David had atteined to the kingdom, and brought the Arc into the city,
thinking also of the building of the temple, even prophesieng that it would
come to pass, that all the kings of the world should acknowledge and celebrate
this so great a benefit, which was fulfilled in the end in Christ the eternal
son of David. But because the instruments of Satan use commonly to lie in
wait for none more, than for them that are the chief in the Church of God, he
adioineth also prayers, as it becomes us to do in prosperity, to consider
the battle against Satan and the world never more carefully, than in the time
of truce. And he does pray, resting upon that certain foundation of our hope,
which is threefold: even that God beholds al things, that he cherishes the
oppressed, that he is the enemy of the proud, howsoever he seem to wink for
a time: that we are the work of God without repentance, and therefore of
necessity to be made perfect in due time.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Will praise thee with my whole heart, neither will I be ashamed to sing
forth thy praises also in songs, before the assembly of the mighty, and
before the very Angels that stand about thine Arc.

2 I will praise thee in the palace consecrate to thy Majesty, and I will sing
of thy mercy and truth: because thou have gotten unto thee, now at the length,
most great honor: for that thou have so marvelously performed unto me, that
which thou did promise in thy word.

3 For thou have deferred for a space my deliverance: notwithstanding, so often
as I called upon thee, thou ministering unto me an invincible strength of mind,
have streightwaies heard me when I cried.

4 And surely it will come to pass, o Lord, that all the kings of the world,
when they shall know what thou have promised unto me, and how assuredly thou
have performed thy promise made unto me, they will give thee praise:

5 Having in admiration chiefly this thing, that thou have fulfilled thy
promises, after such a marvelous manner above expectation, confessing therein
thy power and glory chiefly to appear.

6 In that thou have declared in deed, that though thou sit in a most high
throne, yet do thou behold all the base and most low things: and that thou
know a far off, those that proudly lift up themselves, although thou may
seem to wink at both twain for a time.

7 Doubtless, although I be inwrapped in the midst of most rough tempests,
thou will preserve me safe: and laieng thine hand upon mine enemies, how cruel
soever, thou will deliver me with thy right hand.

8 For thou, o Lord, thine own self wilt fully perform the work that I have
enterprised by thine authority: for this is thine everlasting mercy testified
by thy word, neither will thou leave the work imperfect, which thou have once
begun.

PSALM. CXXXIX.
The Argument.
This Psalm does teach us, when we are oppressed against right and equity, by
men of power, and chiefly for religion, we must always keep a good
conscience, and appeal to the judgment seat of God, who beholds the very
hearts, whose infinite power is described in this Psalm by David with great
majesty.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord unto whom I appeal, and whom I can not deceive though I would, I
am thoroughly known, and manifest unto thee.

2 For no part of my life is unknown unto thee, whether I sit or I rise: yea,
thou do even understand al my thoughts a far off.

3 And thou obseruest narrowly my walking and my lieng down, neither is any
of those things hidden from thee, which I go about.

4 For thou know even my words, o Lord, before my tongue pronounce them.

5 Thou hold me enclosed before and behind, and as it were compassed by thy
hand laid upon me.

6 Thy knowledge is so high, that no man can comprehend it, it does astonish me
assuredly with the admiration thereof.

7 Wherefore, if peradventure I be so mad, that I go about to flee away from
thee, whither I pray thee can I go, that thou should be ignorant where I
lie hid? and whither shall I fly from thy fight?

8 If I shall even go up and fly up into the very heavens, verelie there shall
I find thee: contrariwise, if I lie down in the close places of the grave,
behold again there shall I perceive thee.

9 If the sun it self arising up, should lend me his most swift wings,
whereby I might flee even into the farthest part of the west:

10 That same shall be even as though thou thy self did lead me thither,
and thy right hand will there find me out, and take me.

11 And if I were so mad, that I should persuade my self, that the darkness at
least should hide me, the night it self shall be like a light compassing me
about, that I shall be open unto thy sight.

12 For the very darkness does not so cover any thing, but that thou see it
fully: yea, the night does shine unto thee, none otherwise than light it
self, so that there is no difference of light and darkness with thee.

13 And no marvel, for even the very bowels within me, are thine own by right
and authority, because thou have made me, and covered me in my mothers womb.

14 And this work surely which I behold in my self, is so wonderful, that I
am utterly most senseles and unthankful, unless I praise thee for this
cause, and profess that thy works are exceeding marvelous, seeing I do
perceive that thing manifest so to be.

15 Even then the ioining of my bones was known unto thee, when I was formed
in so secret a place, and was fashioned in the dark cave, as it were with
needle work:

16 Even then, I say, thou did behold me, when I was yet an unfashioned
lump without shape: and all this my fashioning, and also the very time
appointed thereunto, was set down in thy book, before that any part of that
workmanship was made.

17 Therefore, o God, how do I prefer the consideration of these things before
al others? which are so great verelie, that no man is able once to account the
sum of them.

18 For if at any time I go about to rehearse them, I find them mo than the
small sands of the sea: and though sleep come upon me, thinking upon these
things, I never wake again, but a new matter and cause of praising thee does
offer it self.

19 And if thou, o God, determine to exercise thy power, and to destroy the
wicked utterly, then surely shall I be free from these cruel men:

20 From these men, I say, which speak wickedlie of thee, so great, and so
proud is the cruelty, not of mine enemies so much as of thine, for they abuse
thy holy name.

21 But I, as thou know, because they have hated thee, do therefore again
hate them, and do even abhor them, because I perceive them to rise up against
thee.

22 I hate them I say utterly, and count them for my greatest enemies: much
less will I join my self unto them, or can abide to wink at their wickedness.

23 I submit my self, o God, in this thing to thy trial, that thou may
thoroughly see my heart, and utterly search al my thoughts.

24 Finally, consider whether I have provoked them with giving any offense:
and as thou know me innocent, so preserve thou me, and govern the course of
my life with thy counsels.

PSALM. CXL.
The Argument.
This Psalm is of the same argument with many others, in the which David
being brought into great extremities, partly assaulted by slanders, partly by
open violence, does declare what is the state of the godly in this world, and
to whom we must flee for succor: adding most sweet sentences, whereby we may
perceive what we must stay our faith upon, and how the end of al these
conflicts shall be blessed in the end to the godly, but utter destruction to
the wicked.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 Deliver me, o Lord, from wicked men, preserve me from those that would do me
violence:

2 Who partly assail me by craft, devising many things with themselves, and
partly prepare open force against me.

3 Thou would think they were serpents, whetting their poisoned tongue
against me, and aspes that carry poison in their mouth to kill men at unawares.

4 But thou, o Lord, preserve me, that I do not fall into the hands of any of
these wicked men: defend thou me against them that do me injury, and are
wholly bent upon this, that they may cast me down miserably, and destroy me.

5 These proud men have laid snares privily against me, and have spread their
nets, and set their grinnes for me, which way soever I should go.

6 But I, o Lord, do hold this point firmly, that thou are my God, hear
therefore, o Lord, my voice, when I pray.

7 O Lord my Lord, thou art he, who both wilt and can save me, and who have
bin in stead of an helmet to my head, assailed with a thousand darts.

8 Permit not I beseech thee, the wicked to have their most mischievous
desires, neither to bring to pass that which they go about: for thereby they
will take occasion to be more and more proud.

9 But rather grant, that the captain of them that lie in wait so diligently
for me, and also they their own selves with their captain may be overwhelmed
with that evil, that they have intended against me by their slanders.

10 And surely I see it will so come to pass, that even burning coals coming
down from heaven, shall fall upon them: and they being stricken with lightnings,
shall be cast headlong into most deep pits, never to come out again.

11 For this is an undoubted thing, that the backbiters and slanderers shall
never continue: and al they that rage with violence, bring upon themselves
destruction by their own wickedness.

12 Neither can it be doubted, but that the Lord will help the poor and the
oppressed.

13 And the just, o God, shall praise thy name, and with what force soever they
be assaulted, yet shall they that love truth and equity, remain safe before
thee.

PSALM. CXLI.
The Argument.
In this Psalm also David, being most greeuouslie vexed, does pray unto God
with great confidence, after his accustomed manner: but he requires three
things chiefly in this prayer. One, that he may bridle his tongue, which unless
it be restrained, does many times make the matter worse. The second, that he
do not join himself to the wicked, being overcome with evil examples or
entisements. The third, that just and moderate reprehenders be not wanting unto
them.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 DEfer no longer, o Lord, I beseech thee, to hear my cry, but rather give
care unto me, when I cry unto thee.

2 Let my prayers be accepted unto thee, as the smell of the incense appointed
by thee: and let my prayers which I power out; lifting up my hands unto thee,
be as the evening sacrifice.

3 Stop my mouth, and lock up the doors of my lips by the power of thy holy
spirit, least I do speak any thing rashly or impatiently.

4 Give not up my heart to be governed with wicked lusts, least I give my self
wholly to evil, with those that are bent to wickedness, either being overcome
with the greatness of dangers, or entised by tasting their delicates.

5 But let the just men smite me, the which thing I will count for a great
benefit, and let them rebuke me: and let never that excellent baulme want unto
my head, wherewith it shall not be hurt. But what need mo words? for it shall
shortly come to pass, that I shall pray unto thee in the miseries of these
wicked men, even for them: much less shall I be swallowed up by them.

6 And when thou have cast down headlong the chief of them, others which are
now enemies unto me, shall receive my words with gentle minds, as acceptable and
pleasant unto them.

7 In the mean season, we do lie not only as dead men: but also even as the
hewers of stone do cut here and there the pieces of stones, so are we
scattered, and our bones cast to and fro, at the mouth of the grave.

8 But thou, o Lord, my Lord, when I turn mine eyes unto thee, being full of
hope, bring me not utterly to nothing:

9 But rather defend me, least peradventure I fall into snares, and into the
nets which wicked men have laid form.

10 And so doubtless it will come to pass, for they shall rather fall into the
nets of God: but I, as it has come to pass hitherto, so also always
hereafter, shall escape without hurt forth of their snares.

PSALM. CXLII.
The Argument.
The Hebrew title does signify, that this Psalm was made by David, when he
was closed in on every side by Saul, and fled into the cave of Engaddi:
whereby it may be perceived how great his faith and constancy was, as it is
declared 1. Samuel. 24. therefore this Psalm also contains an excellent
example of most fervent prayers.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Crieng, call upon the Lord: and crieng, pray unto the Lord.

2 I power forth al my mind before him, I declare unto him whatsoever does
trouble me.

3 And grief in deed does bring darkness upon me, but thou know what path
I should hold in these rocks of the wilderness, though they have set snares
round about me.

4 I look about me hither and thither, but I see no man which knows me: no
refuge appears anie-where, there is no man that thinks how to save me.

5 Therefore I with crieng seek thee only, thou art my refuge, and my
portion, keeping me alive.

6 Ah! hear the cry of a man most miserable and utterly consumed: deliver me
from these enemies much more mighty than I, which do persecute me so cruelly.

7 Deliver me from this prison, that I being compassed with the assembly of
just men, which rejoice that this deliverance is given me by thee, may sing thy
praises continually.

PSALM. CXLIII.
The Argument.
There is scarcely any other Psalm extant, wherein it is declared more
plainly, what moderation we should use when we are oppressed with slanders.
For although he that is unjustly accused that he has hurt this or that man,
be not guilty of that crime in his own conscience: as it appears that David
was banished without al deserving, as a seditious person, and guilty of high
treason (which causes him both in other places, and in this Psalm boldly to
appeal unto God, trusting to his innocence) notwithstanding, whereas the
conscience before the judgment seat of God does abundantly reprove them also
which are most innocent before men, it must needs be, that the conscience here
sustain a double person, both confessing it self guilty, and also setting it
self as innocent before the same judgment seat: and David does this thing
most manifestly in this Psalm, adding a sentence as notable as any is
anie-where in the holy scriptures, whereby al and every man without
exception, (besides him only which was borne pure without al spot) being
considered in themselves, are condemned of injury done unto others, and
therefore worthy of sundry punishments. Afterward there is added an excellent
description of the battle of faith with infidelity, whilst the one armeth her
self both with the invincible power of the most mighty and most merciful God,
and also with his most certain truth, declared in his written word: but the
other gathering strength of the greatness and multitude of the troubles,
whereunto it seems that God would never offer his: but faith overcomes in
the end, because as the Apostle says, We are not under sin, but under grace:
that is to say, in the regenerate, not the flesh, but the spirit does overcome.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O Lord, thou know the goodness of my cause concerning mine enemies,
therefore I beseech thee, that thou would deliver me being an innocent: but
again, when I consider who I am before thee, what shall I rather do, than
entreat thee to turn away thy most just wrath? hear me therefore that pray,
hear me, which pray earnestly, resting both upon thy truth in perfourming
thy promises, and of thy righteousness in defending thine own.

2 Howbeit, though I be innocent concerning these men: yet desire I this thing
earnestly, that thou deal not with me thy servant by judgment. For this is
plain, that there was never man, neither is there any man, who if he be set
before thy judgment seat, as he is in himself, can be found just.

3 But behold, I beseech thee, how these men account me: they have sought me
unto death, they have cast me down, so that scarcely my life remains: yea,
and I am counted of them already as a putrified carcass in the pit of the
grave.

4 And what shall I here do? whither shall I turn me my God? for I am in mind
utterly amazed, and I tremble being stricken in my heart, whether I do look
upon thee a severe judge, or upon these my cruel enemies.

5 Howbeit, when I call to memory how mercifully thou use to deal with
thine, and do not only remember thy promises, which of themselves are most
sure: but also with how many notable wonders thou have confirmed them, which
none was able to work besides thee, I take a wonderful comfort thereby.

6 Wherefore I come to thee with stretched out hands, requiring thee to send
down thy holy spirit upon me: none otherwise than the earth burnt up with
heat, and gaping euerie-where, does wait for the dew.

7 Hear me therefore, o Lord, and tarry not: for all my strength does fail
me: and now, when I am more like a dead man, than a living, do not withdraw
thy self far from me.

8 But grant rather, that thy mercy may speedily shine as it were a light
unto me, that fly only unto thee, which may govern me wandering in this
darkness, seeing that I depend wholly on thee alone.

9 Deliver me, o Lord, from these mine enemies, because I lie hid under thy
wings alone.

10 Finally, seeing thou art not only ye God which can save us, but also
art my God, that is to say, which have testified that thou will do this thing
for me, which thou can do: take me from these mine enemies, and continue
furthermore to teach me both to know, and also to do that which is acceptable
to thee: least that either my blind mind, or mine affections, which are by
their nature outrageous, carry me out of the way: but rather that thy spirit,
which works al goodness, may lead me in the right way the whole course of my
life.

11 Neither yet do I desire that thou should restore me unto life, which am
ready to die, and brought to deaths door, as though I did trust to my own
merits: but that thou may provide for thine own glory.

12 Therefore what will be the end? even that thou utterly destroy mine
enemies, by whom I am so unjustly vexed, for thy singular mercy, because I
am thy servant.

PSALM. CXLIIII.
The Argument.
David being renowned with noble victories, and that not without singular
courage and strength both of body and mind, as it is known by his history:
yet in this Psalm, which does wholly agree with the 18. he does so give thanks
unto God, that he does attribute no more to him self in warlike affairs, than
Paul does in the ministry of the Gospel, when he says, that He that
planteth, and he that waters are nothing: but that it is God only that
gives the increase. He teaches al men true humility of mind, what great
diligence soever they have used in the work committed unto them. And because
our battle is so long as our life lasts, he gives thanks so for the
victories obtained, that he desires new strength against new conflicts, which
are at hand, giving a singular admonition to take heed, least we being made
more negligent by prosperous success, be overcome at unawares by the enemy.
Finally, he does open the fountain, from whence al good things both public
and private do flow: to wit, the sincere worship of the true God, closing up
the Psalm with a most magnificent acclamation, the which would to God al
Commonwealths would earnestly meditate!

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 I Do render unto thee, o Lord, mine only strength, the praise of al these
victories by most worthy right. For I do attribute it unto thee, that these
my hands have fought so valiantly, and that my fingers have handled my sword
so cunningly.

2 For thou art he, by whose benefit I remain alive: thou art my defense, my
tower, my savior, my shield, my refuge: finally, thou art he who only have
subdued all this people unto me.

3 For, I pray thee, what manner a thing is man, that most miserable of al
living things, and most full of calamities? wherefore should thou regard him?
what have mortal men borne of those yt are mortal in themselves, that thou
should take care of them?

4 Certainly, he himself is most like a thing of naught, and his life is like
a shadow that passes away most swiftly.

5 Be present therefore with me, o Lord, without whose help I perish, and come
forth terriblie from thy heavenly tower, and testify thy presence with the
tempests following thee, and command the tops of the clouds being stricken, to
cast forth stormy whirlewinds.

6 Let thunderbolts follow, whereby thou may cast down their troops, let
lightnings come thick glistering like darts, wherewith thou may disorder
their whole armies.

7 Finally, stretch forth thy hand, and deliver me from these whirlepooles,
even from the hands of these strangers.

8 I do call them strangers, because that although they be counted in thy
family, yet do they nothing appertain unto thee, seeing their mouth is full of
falsehood, and their hands are defiled with a thousand deceits.

9 But even these also thou will drive away, therefore I will sing a new song
unto thee, both with my voice, and with mine instruments:

10 Unto thee, I say, which art the revenger of roial dignity, and the
defender of David thy servant, even now ready to be slain with the sword of
his adversaries.

11 Wherefore deliver me, and defend me out of the hands of these strangers,
whose mouth is full of falsehood, and their hands are full of deceit.

12 For thus (least I be thought to respect only mine own commodity) our
sons also shall be like the fair plants which grow up speedily at the very
beginning: and our daughters being of a tal and comlie stature, shall be like
unto pillars cunningly polished or carved, wherewith the entries of palaces
are sustained.

13 In our storehouses al kind of provision shall abound: many millians of our
cattle shall plentifully fill our streets.

14 Our herds shall be seen to be of a strong and well knit body, there shall
nowhere be any invasion of enemies, which should need to be repulsed with
armies: there shall no cry be heard throughout the cities.

15 O happy people, to whom thou shall give this thing! o blessed is that
people, which acknowledges the Lord to be his God, and whom the Lord likewise
acknowledges for his people!

PSALM. CXLV.
The Argument.
Even this one Psalm is most worthy, that al men should choose also as a
squire and rule how to give true praise unto God: for nothing can be spoken
either more gravely or more honorably, both of the wisdom, mercy,
justice, and power of God, testified in all his works, and especially of his
singular and excellent benefits toward his Church: so that this Psalm verily
is a perfect example of that same reasonable worship of God, which does
continue in the Church alone.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 O My God, my King, I will highly extol thee, and celebrate thy name for ever
and ever.

2 I will consecrate all the days of my life to set forth thy glory, and will
amplify thy name with songs that never shall have end.

3 For thou art great, o Lord, and no praise is sufficient for thee, neither
can any man attain to thy greatness.

4 For thy wonderful works endure not for one generation and age alone: but as
one age succeeds another, so likewise must some men commit the memorial of
them unto others, unless they will be negligent in doing their duty.

5 Wherefore truly be it far from me, that any thing should be of greater
authority with me, than that I should carefully think that the brightness of
thy Majesty, which shines unto us in the very daily use of things, and that
thy deeds are greater than can be comprehended by the admiration or by the
capacity of al men.

6 And doubtless, though very many be most blockish and wonderful thanklesse:
yet can there never be wanting some, which shall even against their wills
confess at the least thy terrible power: but admit that other be silent, yet
will I never cease to declare thy greatness.

7 But God forbid that I alone should labor to do this my duty: for verelie
there will be always some assembly, which will by all means testify the
remembrance of thy peculiar goodness, and thy most undoubted promises:

8 Namely, that thou art most merciful, and most ready to exceeding mercy:
and of whom a man may almost doubt, whether he be more slow to wrath, or more
prone to pardon.

9 For is there any thing, o Lord, void of thy goodness? naie, what is there in
this whole world anie-where, which does not testify thy clemency even in this
point, that thou do suffer so many ages this world that is defiled so
sundry ways?

10 Therefore, o Lord, thou have created nothing: nothing was done of thee,
since the world was first made, which does not even of it self set forth thy
glory: but only thy chosen people do acknowledge thee, and give unto thee
due and convenient praise.

11 For these alone do know and declare by experience what thy dominion is,
and what is thy power:

12 That is to say, the publishers of thy most valiant acts, committing the
glory of thy kingdom to their posterity.

13 For indeed, thy kingdom is not limited in any bounds of time, for that it
always endures one, and unchangeable from al eternity.

14 And how just and moderate this thy rule is, hereof it is evident, o Lord:
because thou do stay up every one, how unworthy soever, which else should
fall: and also liftest up those that are already fallen down.

15 And what manner of benefit is this of thine, which is common to al? that the
life of al living creatures is attributed to thee their creator and preserver,
and thou again give them nourishment in their due and convenient time.

16 For whatsoever has life, lives not by any other means than hereupon,
that thou bestowest upon every one, as it were willingly reaching forth
thine hand, and compelled by thine alone liberality.

17 Neither does both thy justice, and thy most bountious liberality less
appear in governing those things which thou have made, and directing them what
way soever thou will, to the end appointed by thee.

18 Yet thou manifesting thy self principalie, and with a certain peculiar
testimony of thy favor in defending them carefulie, which worship and
reverence thee with an earnest affection of the heart, thou do as it were
never depart from their sides:

19 Insomuch that they can ask nothing of thee aright, which thou do not
grant them, and always helpest them when they cry.

20 And even as thou safely keep al those that love thee, so thou
destroiest all the wicked.

21 Wherefore, by good right, o Lord, I will declare thy praises, even with a
sounding voice: and it becomes al men, to whom thou grantest the use of this
life, to do this thing diligently and continually.

PSALM. CXLVI.
The Argument.
The Prophet does exhort al men in this Psalm to set forth the praises of God,
which consist chiefly in this point: that al our confidence may be fixed in
him alone, as both in a most mighty and most moderate, and especially in a
most merciful Lord of al things, of whose both power and equity, and
clemency, he sets forth some notable examples, and those being proved by
very daily experience.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to yet my seely soul, praise the Lord.

2 For I have thus determined to bestow the whole time of my life in praising
the Lord, and to set forth my God so long as I live.

3 And this praise properly belongs unto him, that we fix our whole
confidence in him alone. For whom would thou rather trust? to princes,
whose glorious show uses to dazel the sight of foolish men? But seeing even
these mortal men be also borne of mortal parents, that is to say, having
neither firm strength, nor stable will: safety cannot consist in them.

4 For even their life consists in their breath, of the which, so soon as
they are bereaved, the soul departing out of their body, they are resolved
again into dust: and al their cogitations do vanish away together with them.

5 But, o blessed is that man, which trusts in the help of the God of Jacob,
and whose whole hope is laid up in the Lord his God!

6 For hereby it appears even to blind men, how good and how great his power
is, in that he created the heaven, the earth, the sea, and al things that are
comprehended in them: and his excellent goodness and fidelity is herein
evident, that he never breaks his promise:

7 That he does maintain those that are unjustly oppressed, he feeds the
hungry, and loses the prisoners from their bonds.

8 He opens the eyes of the blind, and of such as are vexed for want of
counsel, and lifts up those that faint under the burden of miseries:
finally, the Lord loves all that love righteousness.

9 The Lord does defend and nourish those that are destitute of man's help,
especially strangers and trauelers, the fatherles and widows: but utterly
overthrows them that live a wicked life.

10 Last of al, other dominions are truly transitory, and subject to
destruction: but the kingdom of the Lord alone is everlasting: thy God, I
say, o Sion, endures for all ages. Praise ye the Lord.

PSALM. CXLVII.
The Argument.
The people did in this Psalm celebrate that most high benefit of their
return from Chaldea, which was like a new birth of the Church: chiefly, if we
principally regard the worship of God, as it is convenient: and the
testimonies of the mercies of God are annexed, so elegantlie described, as
nothing can be more excellent, the which though they be general, yet do they
properly belong to the children of God, because they only know from whom
they proceed, and give unto God his just praise. Therefore in the end of the
Psalm he does make mention of that most excellent, and great benefit of al
others, wherewith God did bind his Church peculiarly unto him, even the
knowledge of his will, which brings salvation. And whereas that deliverance
from Chaldea, and the gathering together of Jsrael, as the city of Jerusalem
it self also were figures, the truth thereof is exhibited unto us in deed in
the Gospel, there is no doubt, but the Christian Church is much more bound
daily to set forth the benefit of our redemption, whereby we are brought into
the heavenly country, especially in these our last times, wherein God has
begun to gather his Church from the other occidental Babylon.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to, I beseech you, praise the Lord: for what should we rather do, than
to give thanks unto God? who, besides that he is God, and therefore has bound
al men unto himself by good right, has bestowed upon us so many peculiar
benefits: and again, what can be more ioiful and more to be desired, than such
a testimony of his fatherly love?

2 For behold, o God, thou restorest Jerusalem being cast down, destroyed,
subverted, and beaten into dust, contrary to the hope of al people, and do
gather together thine Israel being scattered full seventy years: the which
thing the work it self does testify, that thou wast only able to do.

3 Thou do comfort them that are utterly desperate, thou also do heal
the deadly wounds, that none could heal but thou:

4 Even because there is nothing which thou art not able to do: for thou
know the number of the very stars, the which as their Lord thou call out
by name.

5 O our great Lord, both of infinite power, and also of understanding!

6 And which does use his infinite power nothing proudly or immoderatly, but
even to help the oppressed, and to cast the wicked down to the ground.

7 Go to then, praise the Lord, that our God, both with voice and with
instruments:

8 Which covers the heaven with clouds, from whence he draws forth the
rain to water the earth, and to cloth the tops of the mountains with all kind
of herbs.

9 With this food he feeds the beasts, and nourishes the young ravens when
they cry, being forsaken of their dams.

10 Yet is there nothing in us, which should move him to embrace us: far unlike
to those which approve an horse, by beholding his beauty or courage: or that
do regard a man that runs for his swiftnes.

11 For what can he find in any man, which he has not given unto him before?
Therefore all the benefits, which are bestowed upon them that fear him, and who
have regard only to his mercy, do proceed of his liberality alone.

12 Go to then Jerusalem, praise thou the Lord: go to Sion, praise thou thy God.

13 For he does ward thy gates with bars: he does cherish and multiply thy
family, thy citizens I mean.

14 He brings thee into amity with thy neighbors, he feeds thee with the
fine flower of wheat.

15 For he needs none armies or engines of war: but so soon as he has
declared what his pleasure is, his commandment goes forth through the whole
world, like a most swift post.

16 He raineth down the flakes of snow as it were wool from the clouds: he
does sprinkle the earth also with the small hoar frost, as it were with dust.

17 He casts out the ise like morsels, and he binds together al things with
cold, that no man is able to abide.

18 And he also again, so soon as he commands, does melt the things that
are frosen, and the waters streightwaie flow forth again, as though their
bands were losed.

19 And these things verelie do testify most plainly, both his infinite
goodness and power: yet surely they are nothing in comparison of that benefit,
which he bestowed upon his Israel, when he delivered unto him the doctrine of
salvation, and the rule to lead his life both godly and honestly.

20 Neither is there any nation under heaven, with whom he has so dealt, but
he has left other men without this most true and most just doctrine.

PSALM. CXLVIII.
The Argument.
The scope and end of this Psalm most full of majesty, even written with a
heavenly feruencie, is (whereas there be extant so many most clear witnesses
of Gods wisdom, of his power and goodness, as there be things created) to call
upon al those things high and low, and of the middle sort, to set forth the
praise of God with common consent. For though many of them are without both
understanding and sense: yet they al, after their manner, although they be
silent, are said to sound forth the glory of God: though men which have
reason, and for whose cause they are made, ought properly both in their own
name, and in their name to do this duty: and chiefly the godly ought to set
forth continually that incomparable benefit, whereby they are chosen into
the fellowship of the son of God.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to, let them found forth the praises of the Lord, even from the most high
heavens.

2 O al ye holy spirits, the apparitors of his Majesty, which are divided
into innumerable garrisons, go ye before others in this his praise.

3 Thou Sun and Moon, and al ye Stars shining in the heavens, show forth
the praise of your Maker.

4 O ye most high spheres of the heavens, praise ye him, and ye vawts of
waters which hang on high.

5 Let al these things, I say, praise the Lord: for they began to have their
being by his only commandment.

6 And they are placed by his appointment in the same place and order where
they stand most stable: and they are set in order with certain spaces and
bounds, which they can not pass over by any means, though they would.

7 And let the earthly things again answer unto the heavenly, and the
creeping worms in the hollow holes of the earth, and also the depths of
waters.

8 And ye flames of lightnings also, hailes, snowes, vapors lifted up,
whirlewinds, and other tempests, which al have your being, and are moved by his
commandment.

9 Mountains and al hills, trees laden with fruits, the Cedars mounting up with
such marvelous height.

10 Ye wild beasts also, and ye that be tame, whatsoever creeps upon the
ground, and whatsoever flees through the air.

11 But chiefly both the kings and their people subject unto them, the princes
and the governors of the earth.

12 Young men and old, young maids also and children,

13 Praise ye the name of the Lord: for he alone deserves most high praise, as
he that is more deep than the very earth, and more high than the heavens.

14 But this becomes chiefly the people, whom God of his unspeakable favor
has consecrated unto himself, and brought them into the most high state of
dignity above others: therefore it becomes those that have received such
benefits of God, to set forth his praises, even the posterity of Israel, the
which people God has chosen to be his own family and household.

PSALM. CXLIX.
The Argument.
The interpretation of this Psalm seems to be more plain and more agreeable
to the holy history, if it be applied unto the kingdom of David, rather than
to the last times of the captivity of Babylon. Wherefore, in ny judgment, the
people recovering themselves from so many miseries, which they had suffered,
both in the times of the judges, and of Saul himself (both the religion of
God being first restored, and also the policy set in good order) is taught by
this Psalm to give thanks unto God, and not to abuse his so great benefits.
Wherein David himself gives them example, acknowledging the Lord God to be
the King together with them. And as concerning the musical instruments here
named, it was a part of the service of the law, which is abolished:
notwithstanding, no man, unless such a one as is worthy to be counted amongst
beasts, can deny, but that there is a great power both of music, when it is
sung, and also in instruments to move men's minds: yet the examples both of the
former Church, and the horrible abuses that streightwaies followed, do teach
sufficiently how unprofitable it is to bring in such music and instruments
into the Church of Christ, as has bin of late. And a prophecy is also added,
which the very end did confirm, so many victories being granted unto David,
and the bounds of his kingdom being spread, even unto Euphrates, that then the
promise was fulfilled at the length, which was made unto Abraham, as concerning
the figure: for it can not be doubted, but that these things were the figures
of the kingdom of Christ, and of his spiritual victories, and of that horrible
judgment, which shall be most fully in the end at the last day, and which now
and then God executes upon all the rebellious.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 GO to, al ye that have received benefits of the Lord, sing unto him a new
and excellent song, being delivered from so many, not dangers, but deaths.

2 Even thou o Israel, delight thy self in setting forth his praises, whose
work thou art as it were newly formed. O ye citizens of Sion rejoice ye,
trusting in the Lord your King and Governor, which belongs to none other
nation under heaven.

3 Set forth his praises far and wide, not only privately, but also
publikelie: not only with voice, but also with fluites and timbrels, and with all kind of musical instruments:

4 Even because it has pleased the Lord of his infinite mercy to consecrate
this people unto himself: and as the matter it self makes it manifest, when
they seemed utterly to be lost, to make them honorable, and of most high
dignity.

5 Wherefore these glorious people, upon whom he has bestowed so many
benefits, do now rejoice, and shall rejoice hereafter, and with great quietness
shall sing a triumph,

6 Praising the Lord indeed with their exclamations and cries, but armed with
double edged swords in their hands,

7 Wherewith they may punish the profane Gentiles, and avenge the cruelty of
the people,

8 And also may draw their kings and nobles bound in chains and iron setters,

9 Even to execute the judgment appointed and commanded by the Lord: and this
verelie is the dignity and the honor of al them, whom God has received to
his favor.

PSALM. CL.
The Argument.
It is probable, that the holy singing men of the temple did stir up one
another with this Psalm, full of marvelous zeal. We have spoken in the former
Psalm, how that it is not expedient that the use of this music should be
retained in the holy assemblies, which was a portion of the Leuitical worship
of the law, and whereof this fruit at the length did arise in the days of our
fathers, that the preaching of the word was changed into songs, not
understood of the singers themselves: and at the length, that grave and
plain singing of Psalms, which (as I think) has always bin in the Church,
has bin turned into a vicious curiosity.

THE PARAPHRASIS.
1 PRaise ye the most holy God, which sits in that high sanctuary, praise
him I say, that testifies his infinite power and strength, from that his most
stable palace.

2 Let the cause of his praise be unto you that his great power, declared in so
many marvelous works.

3 Let the trumpet sound out his praise, let the viols and the harps sound out
his glory.

4 Let the timbrels thunder him out, let the fluites whistle unto him, let the
virginals stricken with the fingers, and the organs blown with the bellows
praise him together.

5 Let the high sounding cimbals sing out his triumph, let the cimbals, I say,
sound unto him.

6 Finally, whatsoever has breath, let it set forth the praise of GOD.

FINIS.
A BRIEF TABLE, OF THE PRINCIPAL POINTS OF EVERY PSALM, WHEREBY Every man
may meditate in them, as his mind is most affected.
1 Psalm. Who are blessed, who are miserable. 2 A prophecy of the kingdom of
Christ. 3 A comfort in great troubles by the mercy of God. 4 He reproves his
adversaries, and staieth himself upon the loving kindness of God, not upon
worldly commodities. 5 God, our God and our King, will punish the wicked for
his own glory. 6 A conflict of the conscience with sin, and comfort in the
end. 7 We must set the defense of God against reprochful slanders. 8 A
thanksgiving to God for our creation and redemption in Christ. 9 A
thanksgiving for benefits received, and comfort against imminent miseries. 10
All the enterprises of the giants and tyrants against the Church shall come to
naught, for the Lord will hear the poor. 11 The Lord tries the good men, and
destroieth the wicked. 12 Call upon God when al things seem desperate, and past
al hope. 13 The more desperate that things appear, more earnestly must we
pray. 14 The corruption of the natural man chiefly uttering it self against
the Church. 15 Who shall be the inhabitants of the heavens. 16 An exercise of
the faithful soul. 17 A complaint of the pride and cruelty of the enemies. 18
Gods marvelous power in delivering his. 19 A brief sum of al godly knowledge,
with a prayer for the atteining thereunto. 20 The people pray for their king.
21 A thanksgiving for a victory, whereof all the praise is given to God. 22 Of
Christ's agony and grievous sorrow which he suffered and overcame for us. 23 The
Lord is my shepeheard, I can not want. 24 God is the Lord of al, but chiefly
of his Church, in the which we must pray, that God may reign and set forth his
glory. 25 A prayer for faith, forgiveness of sin, direction of the holy
spirit, and for Gods merciful protection. 26 A meditation for them that live
amongst the wicked. 27, 28, To the same purpose. 29 A necessary meditation of
the majesty of God. 30 A thanksgiving for deliverance from some great danger.
31 A prayer in great danger. 32 The blessedness of man is in the forgiveness of
sin. 33 Praise God with a pure heart. 34 A thanksgiving, and other
necessary doctrine. 35 Against the flatterers of the wicked, and false
accusers of the godly. 36 The wickedness of men, the providence of God, and his
mercy. 37 To the same purpose most excellently. 38 Sin is the cause of our
miseries, yet put away by faith, although temporal punishments do follow for
our amendment. 39 A meditation of the shortness of man's life, and his miseries.
40 Many godly lessons. 41 A comfort of the miserable against traitors. 42 An
earnest desire to be in the assembly of the Church. 43 A prayer for the
deliverance from the enemies to praise God. 44 An earnest prayer for help in
present miseries, by the consideration of former mercies. 45 The marriage song
of Solomon. 46 A thanksgiving for some great deliverance of the Church. 47 An
ernest exhortation to praise God. 48 God is chiefly to be praised for the
defense of his Church. 49 Outward felicity and worldly honor is nothing. 50
The worship of God is spiritual, and the outward ceremonial hypocrisy is
detestable. 51 A most earnest prayer for the forgiveness of sins. 52, 53, The
crooked nature, cruelty, and punishment of the wicked, with comfort to the
godly in the end of them both. 54 The saints being in great dangers, power
forth their prayer, and doubt nothing of their deliverance. 55, 56, 57, Against
traitorous enemies, with hope of deliverance. 58 Against wicked judges, he
appealeth to Gods judgment. 59 Against his cruel adversaries, with comfort in
the end. 60 Though the Church be afflicted, yet shall it be comforted again. 61
A zealous prayer with great faith and confidence. 62 By the example of David we
may confirm our faith in troubles. 63 To the same purpose, we must only
look unto God in troubles. 64 Against the wicked, with the godly. 65, 66, A
praise and thanksgiving unto God for the preservation of the Church. 67 A
prayer for spiritual and temporal blessings. 68 The great mercy of God toward
his people. 69 The complaint and anguish of David as a figure of Christ. 70 For
the deliverance of the Church, or any particular member. 71 For comfort and
constancy in the old age, when feigned friends do fail. 72 A prayer
containing the sum of godly government. 73 God is always favorable to the
godly, even in their misery: but the ungodly shall perish. 74 A fervent
prayer against the spoilers of the Church. 75 God is the author of al just
policy, the duty of magistrates. 76 God is known by preserving his Church,
and destruction of the enemy. 77 Comfortable considerations in the trouble of
conscience. 78 The marvelous works of God, both in trieng and preserving his
Church, and punishing of his enemies. 79 Against the oppressers of the Church
who fight against God. 80 A lamentation for the oppression of the Church. 81 An
exhortation to praise God for his benefits, and a reproach of their ingratitude.
82 A necessary admonition to all that are in authority. 83 A prayer against
the enemies of the Church. 84 The great zeal of David to be in the holy
assemblies. 85 In the midst of misery we must hope for mercy. 86 A fervent
prayer for deliverance forth of misery, that the name of God may be glorified.
87 That the Church after the captivity should be restored to such glory, that
every man should count himself happy, that is accepted as a member thereof.
88 A most doleful lamentation. 89 Another grievous lamentation, with great
consolation in the end. 90 An excellent prayer of Moses. 91 An assurance unto
him that puts his trust in God. 92 An exhortation to praise God, with a
comparison betwixt the wicked and the just. 93 The power of God and his
promises. 94 Against tyrants, with a comfort to the afflicted. 95 The praise of
God, and a terror to the unthankful. 96 An exhortation to praise God chiefly
for Christ's coming. 97 Christ dreadful to the rebels, but ioiful to the just.
98 An exhortation to praise God for his power, mercy, and truth, and for
salvation in Christ. 99 To the same purpose. 100 To praise the Lord for his
creation, redemption, and perpetual protection. 101 How a king should govern.
102 A lamentation, a consolation, a prophecy of the dignity of the Church, a
song of triumph. 103 An excellent thanksgiving both for corporal and spiritual
blessings. 104, 105, To the same purpose. 106 A thanksgiving for Gods mercies,
with a declaration of the stubbornness of the people, and a prayer for full
deliverance. 107 To praise God for his marvelous and woonderful providence in all manner of things. 108 David praises God with great confidence. 109 A most
terrible imprecation against the enemies. 110 An epitome of the Gospel. 111 A
thanksgiving and declaration what is true wisdom. 112 They that fear God
are blessed, al other shall perish. 113 God works above nature in his Church.
114 Of the deliverance from Egypt, a figure of our spiritual deliverance. 115
A prayer for deliverance, for the only honor of the true God, who is compared
with their fained Gods. 116 David protests that he will give thanks, and
acknowledges that he can render nothing else for Gods great benefits. 117,
118, To praise the Lord for his mercies in Christ. 119 A long and most fervent
prayer, for the true meditation and exercise in Gods holy word. 120 A prayer
against slanders, and a lamentation for his long abode amongst the wicked. 121
The Lord must only be looked to in troubles. 122 David reioiceth, and prays
for the prosperity of the Church. 123 Like the 121. 124 The power of God
only delivers from dangers. 125 The assurance of the godly in their
afflictions. 126 The people that were so wonderfully delivered, pray for them
that remained in captivity: so should we do. 127 The whole state of the
world, both in public and private, depends upon Gods only providence. 128
They are only blessed that fear the Lord. 129 The Church often afflicted, but
by the Lord delivered. 130 The faithful cry unto the Lord in their miseries,
they confess their sins, and are delivered. 131 Man may not exalt himself,
but wait upon the Lord. 132 The people pray for the posterity of David, and
for the building of the temple: that is, both for their spiritual King the
Messiah, and for religion. 133 A commendation of brotherly love and concord.
134, 135, 136, A thanksgiving to the Lord for the benefits bestowed upon his
Church. 137 There is a time of silence under the cross, so that neither faith
nor zeal decaie. 138 David praises God for things past, and assures himself
against troubles to come. 139 A most excellent Psalm daily to be meditated.
140 The state of the godly in this world, and the stay of their faith. 141
David prays for the brideling of his tongue, and that he join not with the
wicked: but that just men may admonish him. 142 An earnest prayer with great
confidence. 143 An earnest prayer for remission of sins, the cause of
misery. 144 He praises God with great humility. 145 He praises God for his
wisdom, mercy, power, and justice, and for his benefits toward his Church.
The other four Psalms are exhortations also to praise God chiefly for his
mercies toward his Church. And whereas musical instruments are named, they were
agreeable to that ceremonial time: but now al ceremonies being ceased, we must
worship in spirit and truth, and so sing Psalms with the voice, as our heart
may be most stirred up to praise and magnify the Lord our GOD.
FINIS.
1581

SVBLIME DEDIT OS HOMINI


Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater Noster Row, at the
sign of the Star.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


