THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH.

Delivered in the Act at Oxon. Anno, 1622.

By Dr. PRIDEAVX his Majesty's Professor for Divinity in that University.

And now translated into English for the benefit of the common People.

MARK. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Tygers-head* in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1634.

The Preface of the Translator, To the Christian Reader.
OF all the controversies which have exercised the Church of Christ, there is
none more ancient than that of the Sabbath: So ancient, that it took beginning
even in the infancy of the Church, and grew up with it. For as we read in the
Acts, Cap. 15.5.
There rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees, which believed, saying,
that it was needful to circumcise the people, and to command them to keep the
law of Moses; whereof the Sabbath was a part: Which in the general, as the
Apostles labored to suppress, in the first General Council holden in
Jerusalem: So did S. Paul, upon occasion of whose ministry this controversy
first began, endeavor what he could against this particular. Sharply reproving
those which hallowed yet the Jewish Sabbath, Gal. 4.10.11.
and observed days, and months, and times, as if he had bestowed his labor
in vain upon them. But more particularly in his Epistle to the Colossians, Let
no man judge you in respect of an holy day, Cap. 2.16.17.
or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days; which were a shadow of things to
come, but the body is of Christ. Sect. 4.
Both which expressions of S. Paul, are in this following discourse produced to
this very purpose. Yet notwithstanding all this care, both generally of the
Apostles, and more especially of S. Paul, to suppress this error; it grew up
still, and had it is patrons and abettours. Ebion and Cerinthus, two of the
wretchedst heretics of the primitive times, and after them Apollinaris, See
Austin de h^res^b. and Epiphanius.
are said to countenance and defend it; which, doubtless made the ancient
fathers declare themselves more fully in it, as a dangerous point; which seemed
to confirm the Jews in their incredulity, and might occasion others to make
question of our Saviors coming in the flesh. Hence was it, that Irenaeus,
Justin Martyr, Tertullian and Eusebius, men of renown for learning in the
primitive times (three of the which are cited in the Text of this following
discourse, and the fourth quoted in the margin) affirm for certain, Sect. 2.
That never any of the Patriarks before Moses Law, did observe the Sabbath:
which questionless they must have done, had that Law been moral, and
dictated by nature, as now some teach us. Afterward by the opposition made by
Epiphanius, in his confutation of the heresies of the Ebionites; and by the
resolutions of Theodoret, on the 20. of Ezekiel, Procopius Gazeus, on the
second of Genesis, by Damascen, and our venerable Bede (which two last are here
also cited, Sect. the 2.) concurring with the former fathers; all talk and
observation of the Jewish Sabbath vanished utterly; and the Lords day, which
had from the Apostles times been instituted by the Church, in the place
thereof, was hallowed, without any rival. Nor do I find, but that all
superstitious fancies about that day, were as wholly abrogated, as the day it
self. Epist. 3. l. 21.
Save that Saint Gregory tells us, how some in Rome were so superstitious in
this kind, that they would neither work upon the Saturday, no, nor so much as
wash upon the Sunday, But after, in the darker times, as it is thought by some,
Peter de Bruis the founder of the Petrobusians (he was burnt for heresy Anno
1126.) began to draw too deep on these lees of Iudaisme; which here our Doctor
intimates in the 7. Sect. where he joins the Petrobusian with the Ebionites,
who indeed were Jewish in this point. And possibly, from the remainders of this
Doctrine, Fulco a French Priest, and a notable hypocrite, as our King Richard
counted him, In Rog. Hoveden
lighted upon a new Sabbatarian speculation, which afterward Eustachius one of
his associates dispersed in England: I call it new, as well I may. For whereas
Moses gave commandment to the Jews, that they should sanctify one day only
of the week, viz. that seventh whereon God rested: They taught the people that
the Christian Sabbath was to begin on Saturday at three of the clock, and to
continue till Sunrising on the Monday morning: During which latitude of time,
it was not lawful to do any kind of work what ever, no not so much as to
bake bread on Saturday for the Sundays eating; to wash or dry linen for the
morrowes wearing. Yea, they had miracles in store* pretended to be wrought on
such as had not yielded to their doctrine; thereby to countenance the
Superstitious, and confound the weak. And which was more than this, for the
authority of their device, they had to show a letter sent from God himself,
and left prodigiously over the Altar in Saint Simeons Church in Golgatha:
wherein this Sabbatarian dream was imposed forsooth upon all the world, on
pain of diverse plagues and terrible comminations, if it were not punctually
observed. The letter is at large repeated by Roger de Hoveden; Anno. 1201.
and out of him, as I suppose, Anno. 1200.
by Matthew. Paris: who do withal repeat the miracles, whereby this doctrine
was confirmed. I add no more but this, that could I either believe those
miracles, which are there related: or saw I any now, like those, to countenance
the reviving of this strange opinion (for now it is revived and published:) I
might perhaps persuade my self to entertain it.

But to proceed. Immediately upon the reformation of Religion in these Western
parts, the Controversy brake out afresh; though in another manner than before
it did. Institut. l. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 33.
For there were some of whom Calvin speaks, who would have had all days
alike, all equally to be regarded; (he means the Anabaptists, as I take it)
and reckoned that the Lords day as the Church continued it, was a Jewish
ceremony. Affirming it to cross the doctrine of Saint Paul, who in the Texts
before remembered, and in the 14. to the Romans did seem to them, to cry down
all such difference of days and times, as the Church retained. To meet which
vain and peccant humor, Calvin was feign to bend his forces; declaring how the
Church might lawfully retain set times for Gods solemn service, without
infringing any of S. Paul's commandments. But on the other side, as commonly
the excess is more exorbitant than the defect, there wanted not some others,
who thought they could not honor the Lords day sufficiently, unless they did
affixe as great a sanctity unto it, as the Jews did unto their Sabbath. So
that the change seemed to be only of the day; the superstition still remaining
no less Jewish, than before it was. These taught, as now some do, Moralem
esse unius diei observationem in hebdomada, Ib. Sect. 34.
the keeping holy to the Lord one day in seven, to be the moral part of the
fourth Commandment: which doctrine, what else is it, (so he proceeds, and
here the Doctor so repeates it in his third Section) than in contempt of the
Jews to change the day, and to affixe a greater sanctity unto the day, than
those ever did? As for himself, so far was he from favoring any such
wayward fancy, that as John Barclay makes report, Paraen, lib. 1. cap. vlt.
he had a consultation once, de transferenda solennitate Dominica in feriam
quintam, to alter the Lords day from Sunday unto Thursday. How true this is I
cannot say. But sure it is, that Calvin took the Lords day to be an
ecclesiastical and humane constitution only, Quem veteres in locum Sabbati
subrogarunt, appointed by our Ancestors to supply the place of the Jewish
Sabbath: and (as our Doctor tells us from him in his seventh Section) as
alterable by the Church at this present time, as first it was, Institut. l. 3.
Cap. 8. Sect. 34.
when from the Saturday they translated it unto the Sunday. So that we see,
that Calvin here resolves upon three Conclusions: first, that the keeping holy
of one day in seven, is not the moral part of the fourth Commandment:
secondly, that the day was changed from the last day of the week unto the
first, by the authority of the Church, and not by any divine Ordinance: and
thirdly, that the day is yet alterable by the Church, as at first it was.

Neither was he the only one that has so determined. For, for the first,
that to keep holy one day of seven, is not the moral part of the fourth
Commandment, our Doctor has delivered in the third Section, that not Tostatus
only, but even Aquinas, and with him all the Schoolmen, have agreed upon it.
Nor was there any that opposed it in the Schools of Rome, that I have met
with, till Catharinus took up arms against Tostatus: affirming, but with ill
success, that the Commandment of the Sabbath was imposed on Adam in the first
Cradle of the world; there where the Lord is said to bless the seventh day and
sanctify it. Genesis 3.
Which fancy, by our Author is rejected, and the opinion of Tostatus justified
against him, though he name him not. As for the Protestant Schools, besides
what is affirmed by Calvin, Sect. 3. and 7.
and seconded by the Doctor in this following Discourse; this seems to be the
judgment of the Divines of the Low Countries. Francisc. Gomarus, one known
sufficiently for his undertakings against Arminius, published Anno 1628. a
little Treatise about the Original of the Sabbath, and therein principally
canvassed these two Questions: first, whether the Sabbath were ordained by God,
immediately on the Creation of the World: the second, Whether all Christians
are obliged by the fourth Commandment, always to set apart one day in seven,
to Gods holy worship: both which he determines negatively. And Doctor Ryvet,
Goma^. desensio sentent. c. 10.
one of the four Professors in Leiden, although he differs in the first, yet
in the second, which does most concern us Christians, they agree together:
affirming also jointly, that the appointing of the Lords day for Gods public
service, was neither done by God himself, nor by his Apostles, but by
authority of the Church. Investig. Sabb. cap. 4.
For Seconds, Gomarus brings in Vatablus, and Wolfgangus Musculus; and Ryvet
voucheth the authority of our Doctor here. For so Gomarus, in the assertion
and defense of the first opinion against this Ryvet; Cap. 10.
De quibus etiam Cl. and Doct. D. Prideaux in Oratione de Sabbato consensionem
extare, eodem judicio [by Ryvets information] libenter intelleximus. I will
add one thing only, which is briefly this. The Hollanders, when they
discovered Fretum le Maire, Anno 1615. though they observed a most exact
account of their time at Sea; yet at their coming home, they found, comparing
their account with theirs in Holland, that they had lost a day; that which was
Sunday to the one, being Monday to the other. Which of necessity must happen,
as it is calculated by Geographers, to those that compass the World from West
to East: as contrary, they had got a day, had they sailed in Eastward. And now
what should these people do when they were returned? If they must sanctify
precisely one day in seven, they must have sanctified a day apart from their
other countrymen, and had a Sabbath by themselves; or to comply with others,
must have broken the Moral Law, which must for no respects be violated. See
more hereof at large in Carpenters Geogr. p. 237. etc.

Next, for the second Thesis, that the alteration of the day is only an humane
and Ecclesiastical Constitution, the Doctor shows in the fifth Section, the
general consent of all sorts of Papists, Jesuits, Canonists, and Schoolmen;
of some great Lutherans by name; and generally, of the Remonstrant or Arminian
Divines in their Confession: whose tendries in this point, we may conceive
with reason not to be different from the doctrine of the Belgic Churches; in
that the four Professors of Leiden, in their Examination or Review of that
Confession, have passed them over without note or opposition. To these besides,
are added diverse of our own; and e nostris non pauci, as he speaks it in
the general; i. e. as I conceive his meaning, such as are neither of the
Lutheran nor Arminian party. Of which, since he has instanced in none
particularly, I will make bold to borrow two or three Testimonies out of the
Tractate of Gomarus, Cap. 3..
before remembered. And first he brings in Bullinger, who in his Comment on the
first of the Revelation calls it Ecclesiae consuetudinem, an Ecclesiastical
Ordinance; and after adds, Sponte Ecclesiae receperunt illam diem, etc. The
Church did of its own accord agree upon that day, for we read not any where
that it was commanded. Next Vrsinus, telling us that God had abrogated the
Jewish Sabbath; adds presently, that he left it free unto the Church, alios
dies eligere, to make choice of any other day to be selected for his service;
and that the Church made choice of this, in honor of our Saviors
resurrection. Zanchius affirms the same. Nullibi legimus Apostolos, etc. We
read not any where (says he) that the Apostles did command this day to be
observed in the Church of God; only we find what the Apostles and others of
the faithful used to do upon it, liberum ergo reliquerunt: which is an
argument, that they left it wholly unto the disposition of the Church. Aretius,
Simler, Dav. Paraeus, and Bucerus, which are all there alleged, might be here
produced, were not these sufficient; Add hereunto the general consent of our
English Prelates, the Architects of our reformation in the time of King Edward
the sixth; Anno 5. and 6. of Edward 6. cap. 3.
who in the Act of Parliament about keeping holy days, have determined thus,
together with the rest of that grand assembly; viz. Neither is it to be thought
that there is any certain time, or definite number of days, prescribed in
holy Scripture, but that the appointment both of the time and also of the
number of the days, is left by the authority of Gods Word, to the authority of
Christ's Church, to be determined and assigned orderly in every Country by the
discretion of the Rulers and Ministers thereof, as they shall judge most
expedient to the true setting forth of Gods glory, and edification of the
people. Which preamble is not to be understood of holy days, or of Saints
days only (whose being left the authority of the Church was never questioned)
but of the Lords day also: as by the body of the Act does at full appear.

Last of all for the third and last conclusion, that still the Church has
power to change the day, our Doctor, in the seventh Section, brings in
Bullinger, Bucer, Brentius, Vrsinus, and Chemnitius, aliisque nostris, with
diverse others not named particularly, as they are; which think no otherwise
thereof than Calvin did, and shows by what distinction Suarez, though
otherwise no friend unto the men, does defend their doctrine: now as the
doctrine was, such also is the practice of those men and Churches, devoyd of
any the least superstitious rigor; esteeming it to be as a day left arbitrary,
and therefore open to all honest exercises and lawful recreations; by which
the mind may be refreshed, and the spirits quickened. Even in Geneva it self,
according as it is related in the enlargement of Boterus by Robert Johnson, All
honest exercises, shooting in Pieces, Long-Bowes, Crosse-Bowes, etc. are used
on the Sabbath day, and that both in the morning, before and after the Sermon;
neither do the Ministers find fault therewith, so that they hinder not from
hearing of the Word at the time appointed. Dancing indeed they do not suffer;
but this not in relation to the Sunday, but the Sport it self, Heylius Geogr.
in France.
which is held unlawful, and generally forbidden in the French Churches. Which
strictness, as some note, considering how the French do delight in dancing,
has been a great hinderance to the growth of the reformed Religion in that
Kingdom.

Which being so, the judgment and the practice of so many men, and of such
several persuasions in the controverted points of the Christian faith,
concurring so unanimously together: the miracle is the greater, that we in
England should take up a contrary opinion, and thereby separate our selves from
all that are called christian. Yet so it is, I skill not how it comes to pass,
but so it is, that some amongst us have revivd again the Jewish Sabbath,
though not the day it self, Roger^ on the Article^. Art. 7.
yet the name and thing. Teaching that the Commandment of sanctifying every
seventh day, as in the Mosaicall Decalogue, is natural, moral, and
perpetual; that whereas all things else in the Jewish Church were so changed
that they were clean taken away; this day (meaning the Sabbath) was so
changed, that it still remains: and lastly, that the Sabbath was not any of
those ceremonies which were justly abrogated at Christ's coming. All which
positions are condemned for contrary to the Articles of the Church of England:
as in a Comment on those Articles, perused and by the lawful authority of the
Church allowed to be public, is most clear and manifest. Which Doctrinals
though dangerous in themselves, and different from the judgment of the ancient
Fathers, and of the greatest Clerks of the latter times, are not yet half so
desperate, as that which follows thereupon, in point of practice. Id. in the
Preface to the Articles.
For these positions granted, and entertained as orthodox, what can we else
expect; but such strange paradoxes, as in consideration of the premises, have
been delivered from some Pulpits in this Kingdom; As viz. That to do any
servile work or business on the Lords day, is as great a sin, as to kill a
man, or commit adultery; that to throw a Bowl, to make a Feast, or dress a
wedding dinner on the Lords day, is as great a sin, as for a man to take a
knife and cuts his childs throat; that to ring more Bells than one on the
Lords day, is as great a sin as to commit murder. The Author which reports
them all, was present when the broacher of the last position was convented for
it. And I believe him in the rest. The rather, since I have heard it preached
in London, that the Law of Moses, whereby death temporal was appointed for the
Sabbath-breaker, was yet in force; and that who ever did the works of his
ordinary calling on the Sabbath day, was to dye therefore. And I know also,
that in a Town of my acquaintance, the Preachers there had brought the people
to that pass, that neither baked nor rost-meat, was to be found in all the
Parish for a Sundays dinner throughout the year. These are the ordinary
fruits of such dangerous Doctrines; and against these and such as these, our
Author in this following Treatise does address himself, accusing them that
entertain the former Doctrinalls, everywhere, of no less than Iudaisme, and
pressing them with that of Austin, that they who literally understand the
fourth Commandment, do not yet savor of the Spirit, Section the third.

This when I had considered, when I had seriously observed how much these
fancies were repugnant both to the tendries of this Church, and judgments of
all kind of Writers, and how unsafe to be admitted; I thought I could not go
about a better work, than to exhibit to the view of my dear Countrymen this
following Treatise; delivered first, and after published by the Author in
another Language. The rather, since of late the clamor is increased, and that
there is not any thing now more frequent in some Zelots mouths, (to use the
Doctors words) than that the Lords day is with us licentiously, yea
sacrilegiously profaned, Section the first. To satisfy whose scruples, and
give content unto their minds, I doubt not but this following Discourse will
be sufficient: which for that cause I have translated faithfully, and with as
good propriety as I could: not swerving any where from the sense; and as
little as I could, from the phrase and letter. Gratum opus Agricolis: a Work,
as I conceive it, not unsuitable to the present times: wherein, besides those
peccant fancies before remembered, some have so far proceeded, as not alone to
make the Lords day subject to the Jewish rigours; but to bring in again the
Jewish Sabbath, and abrogate the Lords day altogether. I will no longer detain
the Reader from the benefit he shall reap hereby: Only I will crave leave,
for his greater benefit, to repeat the sum thereof; which is briefly this:
First, that the Sabbath was not instituted in the first Creation of the World,
nor ever kept by any of the Ancient Patriarchs, who lived before the Law of
Moses: therefore no Moral and perpetual Precept, as the others are, Sect. 2.
Secondly, that the sanctifying of one day in seven, is Ceremonial only, and
obliged the Jews; not Moral, to oblige us Christians to the like observance,
Sect. 3. and 4. Thirdly, that the Lords day is founded only on the authority
of the Church, guided therein by the practice of the Apostles; not on the
fourth Commandment, (which he calls a scandalous Doctrine, Sect. 7.) nor any
other express authority in holy Scripture, Sect. 6. and 7. Then fourthly,
that the Church has still authority to change the day, though such authority
be not fit to be put in practice, Sect. 7. Fifthly, that in the celebration of
it, there is no such cessation from the works of labor required from us, as
was exacted of the Jews; but that we lawfully may dress Meat, proportionable
unto every man's estate, and do such other things as be no hinderance to the
public Service appointed for the day, Sect. 8. Sixthly, that on the Lords day
all Recreations whatsoever are to be allowed, which honestly may refresh the
spirits, and increase mutual love and neighborhood amongst us; and that the
names whereby the Jews did use to call their Festivals (whereof the Sabbath
was the chief) were borrowed from an Hebrew word, which signifies to dance,
and to be merry, or make glad the countenance. If so: if all such Recreations
as increase good neighborhood; then Wakes, and Feasts, and other Meetings of
that nature. If such as honestly may refresh the spirits; then Dancing,
Shooting, Wrestling, and all other Pastimes, not by Law prohibited, which
either exercise the body, or revive the minds. And lastly, that it appertains
to the Christian Magistrate to order and appoint, what Pastimes are to be
permitted, and what are not, (obedience unto whose commands, is better far
than sacrifice to any of the Idols of our own inventions:) not unto every
private person, (or as the Doctors own words are) not unto every man's rash
zeal, who out of a Schismatic Stoicisme (debarring men from lawful
Pastimes) does incline to Iudaisme, Sect. 8. Add, for the close of all, how
doubtingly our Author speaks of the name of Sabbath, which now is grown so
rife amongst us, Sect. 8. Concerning which, take here that notable Dilemma of
John Barklay, Paraen. l. 1. cap. vlt.
the better to encounter those who still retain the name, and impose the
rigor: Cur perro illum diem plerique Sectariorum Sabbatum appellaetis, etc.
What is the cause (says he) that many of our Sectaries call this day the
Sabbath? If they observe it as a Sabbath, they must observe it, because God
rested on that day: and then they ought to keep that day whereon God rested;
and not the first, as now they do, whereon the Lord began his labors. If they
observe it as the day of our Saviors resurrection, why do they call it still
the Sabbath; seeing especially that Christ did not altogether rest that day,
but valiantly overcame the powers of death? This is the sum of all: and this
is all I have to say unto thee (Good Christian Reader) in this present
business. God give thee a right understanding in all things, and a good will
to do thereafter.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH. OR, A Speech, delivered in the Act at OXON. at
the proceeding Doctors, Of CHRIST. GREEN. IO. TOLSON. THO. IACKSON. THO.
BINSON. IO. HARRIS. In the year of CHRIST, 1622. touching the Sabbath.
LEVIT. 9.30. Ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the
Lord.


OF THE SABBATH.
SECT. I.
MY annual task ( learned and courteous Auditors) is (as you see) returned
again: whereto being bound (as I may say) like Titius unto Caucasus, I must of
necessity expose my self to so many Vultures. Divinity tossed with so many
storms, and by her own unworthily handled, has not (which was much feared)
as yet miscarried. Behold I and the sons which God has given me. Hebr. ^,
And though she do not glory, as before she has done, of a numerous issue;
yet she is comforted with these few, whose modesty does promise to supply
that want, and hide her nakedness. It is my Office (as you know) according to
the custom of this place, honestly to dismiss them hence, being now furnished
and provided; after all their labors. And being it is the seventh year, since
I first attained unto this place; and that there want not some litigious
differences about the Sabbath, which have of late disturbed the quiet of the
Church: I hope it will not seem unseasonable, ( Fathers and Brethren) to
speak unto you somewhat of this argument; and therein rather to explode their
errors, who either seem to tend, on the one side to Atheism, or on the other
side to Iudaisme, than any way to brand their persons. And that our following
discourse may issue from the purer Fountain, we will derive it from the 19. of
Levit. v. 30. (which doubtless, for the greater certainty thereof, is again
repeated, cap. 26. v. 2.) Ye shall keep my Sabbaths. Now for the first word
Sabbath, the learned in the Hebrew Language derive it not from (...), which
being interpreted, is Seven, but from (...), which signifies to cease, leave
off, or rest from labor: and seems to have affinity with (...), to set
down, and (...), to adore, and praise; all which do intimate unto us, as well
the use of the Sabbath, as the duties also of all those who are bound to keep
it. It is not my intent to lay before you such further Etymologies, as either
are afforded us from Plutarch, S^mpos. l. 4. sub finem.
and the rest of Greece; who fetch it from (...), to triumph, dance, or make
glad the countenance: or from (...), a surname of Bacchus; or at the least,
Lib. 7. cap. 15.
some son of his, in Coelius Rhodiginus, (whence Bacchus Priests are
frequently called Sabbi Moenades, or Saliares, in ancient Authors:) nor from
(...), which is the Spleen, from the distempers of the which (as Giraldus
thinks) the Jews, De annis and mensibus.
though very much thereunto inclined, were that day released: nor last of all,
from any foul disease in the privy parts, by the Egyptians called Sabba;
which Fl. Josephus worthily derides in his second book against Appion. It is
well known from what corrupt Channel these derivations have been drawn by
the elder Jews; who by their Bacchanalian Rites, gave the World just occasion
to suspect, that they did consecrate their Sabbath unto Revels rather, than
Gods service. As for these Sabbaths, Levit. ^5.
they either were the Weekly Sabbaths, or those which in the Scripture are
called Sabbaths of years: and these again, either each seventh year, in the
which the Earth lay fallow; or every fiftieth year, called otherwise the Year
of Iubile; wherein each man returned again to his own Possession, and
Inheritance, as the Law appointed. There were at least five other meanings of
this word, in holy Scripture; of which, consult Hospinian in his book de
festis Iudaeorum. Cap. 3.
But for the Weekly Sabbath mentioned in the Decalogue, being it is become to
many a Rock of offense; it will not happily be unwelcome to the wavering mind,
so to determine of the Point, that they may have something whereupon to fasten.
There is not any thing now more frequent in some Zelots mouths, than that the
Lords day is with us licentiously profaned: the fourth Commandment produced,
and expounded literally; as if it did as much oblige us Christians, as once the
Jews. And to this purpose all such Texts of the Old Testament, which seem to
press the rigorous keeping of that day, are alleged at once: and thereupon
some men most superstitiously persuaded, neither to kindle fire in the Winter
time, wherewith to warm themselves; or to dress Meat for sustentation of the
poor, or such as these: which trench not more upon the bounds of Christian
liberty, than they do break the bonds of Christian charity. Not so much
therefore to abate their zeal, but (if it may be done) to direct it rather; I
shall in brief, and as the time will give me leave, handle especially these
three things about the Sabbath: First, the Institution; secondly, the
Alteration of it; and thirdly, the Celebration of the same: that these my
Sons (together with the rest) may know the better, how carefully they are to
walk in this doubtful Point: neither diverting on the left hand, with the
prophaner sort of people; nor madly wandering on the right, with braine-sicke
persons.

SECT. II.
Institution of the Sabbath is generally referred to God, by all who are
instructed by the Word of God, that he created all things, and has since
governed the same. But touching the original of this Institution, Azor.
Instit. Moral. part. 2. q. 3.
and promulgation of the same, it is not yet agreed upon amongst the Learned.
Some fetch the original thereof from the beginning of the World, when God
first blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it. Whence well this question may
be raised, Whether before the publishing of Moses Law, the Sabbath was to be
observed by the Law of Nature? They which are commonly more apt to say any
thing, than able afterward to prove it; maintain affirmatively, that it was.
For what say they, Is it not all one, Hospin. de Fest. Ethn. and Iud. l. 3.
cap. 3.
to bless and sanctify the seventh day, in the beginning of the World, as to
impose it then on the posterity of Adam, to be blessed and sanctified? If all
the rest of the Commandments flow from the Principles of Nature, how is this
excluded? Can we conceive, that this only Ceremonial Law crept in, we know
not how, amongst the Morals? Or that the Prophet Moses would have used such
care in ordering the Decalogue, only to bring the Church into greater
troubles. Annal. sacri ad diem 7.
Add hereunto, that Torniellus thinks it hardly credible, that Enosh should
apart himself from the sons of Cain, to call upon the name of the Lord,
without some certain and appointed time for that performance. Nor were the
frequent Sacrifices, In Exodus ad Praecept. 4.
as Calvin thinks, performed by Abraham, and the other Patriarchs, without
relation to this day. Tell me (say they) who can, Wherefore, before the
publication of the Law of Moses, there fell no Mannah on the seventh day? Had
not the Sabbath, according to Gods first example, been kept continually, from
the foundations of the World. These are indeed such arguments, as make a fair
flourish, but conclude nothing. Tertullian, a most ancient Writer, maintains
the contrary: Doceant ADAM Sabbatizasse, aut ABEL hostiam Deo sanctam
offerentem, etc. Let them ( says he in a particular Tract against the Jews)
assure me, if they can, that ADAM ever kept the Sabbath; or ABEL, when he
offered unto God his accepted Sacrifice, had regard thereof; or that NOAH kept
the same, when he was busied in preparing of the Arc, against the Deluge; or
finally, that ABRAHAM in offering his son ISAAC; or that MELCHISEDEC, in
execution of his Priesthood, took notice of it. So he. Besides, Eusebius does
by this argument, maintain the ancient Patriarchs to have been Christians (as
we are) in very truth, though not in name; because that neither they nor we
observed the Sabbath of the Jews, Hist. lib. 1. cap. 4. And thereupon it is
affirmed by Justin Martyr, V. Damasc fid. O. th. l. 4. c. 24. Irenaeum, l. 4 30.
in his Dialogue with Trypho, and Bid in his Hexameron, that many of those
former times were renowned for sanctity, which neither kept the Sabbath, or
were circumcised. Which also is expressly held by Abulensis. In Genesis 2. q. 4.
It is true, that Torniellus does collect from these words of JOB, Ad d^em 7.
sect, 2.
Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the Earth, when the morning
Stars sung together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy, JOB. 38.4, 7.
that in the accomplishment of the Creation, the Angels did observe the Sabbath.
But then he adds, that the observance of it here upon the Earth, was not
till many Ages after. It is true, In Exodus (...) Praecept. 4.
that Calvin has affirmed, that it may probably be conjectured, that the
sanctification of the Sabbath was before the Law. But many of our later Writers
are not therewith satisfied: and therefore it concerns them who maintain the
Affirmative, to make it good by Texts of Scripture.

SECT. III.
weak proofs are they, which before were urged; God blessed the seventh day,
and sanctified it; therefore he then commanded it to be kept holy by his
people. In Genesis cap. 2. q. 4.
Moses, as Abulensis has it, spoke this by way of anticipation; rather to show
the equity of the Commandment, than the original. Enosh might call upon the
Lord, and Abraham offer sacrifice, without relation to a set and appointed
time; oftener, and seldomer, as they had occasion. And as for the not falling of
the Mannah on the Sabbath day, this rather was a preparation to the
Commandment, than any promulgation of it. For put the case, that Jacob on the
Sabbath had neglected Labans Flocks; and that the Israelites under Pharaoh, had
not made up their tale of Bricks; neither had he escaped a chiding, nor they
the insolent fury of their Taskmasters. And now, according to the Principles
of these Sabbatarians, what would you counsel them to do? Did they observe
the Sabbath? They were sure of punishment from man: Did they neglect it? They
were sure of vengeance from the Lord. Unto such straits are they reduced, who
would impose the Sabbath, as a perpetual Law of Nature, upon the consciences
of their poor brethren. Some men (perhaps) will say, that as the Fathers
before Moses, had Gods Word amongst them, although not written; and that it was
committed unto writing, when as their several Families were grown into a
National, and a settled Church: even so the Sabbath had a voluntary
observation, from the first Benediction of the same, in private houses; which
after, when the Church was grown, and released from bondage, was imposed
thereon, as a Commandment. Suppose it so: Yet still the observation of it, is
founded on the fourth Commandment; which, whether it be Natural and Moral,
or else Ceremonial, we must consider more distinctly: For that a mere and
perishing Ceremony should equally be ranked amongst Moral duties, which are
always binding, seems (at the first sight) not to stand with reason.
Therefore it is resolved on by the wiser sort, Calv. Instit. l. 2. cap. 8.
that there is in the fourth Commandment something Moral, Zouch. Tom. 4. l.
1. cap. 15.
and some things Ceremonial; the circumstances Ceremonial, but the substance
Moral. It is, as Abulensis has it, a Dictate of the Law of Nature, that some
set time be put apart for Gods holy worship: but it is Ceremonial and Legal,
that this worship should be restrained either to one day of seven, In Exodus
20. q. 11.
or the seventh day precisely from the Worlds Creation. A time of Rest, is
therefore Moral; but the set time thereof, is Ceremonial: Which is confessed
by those who have stood most on this Commandment, and urged it even unto a
probable suspicion of Iudaisme. ^. 2. q. 122. art. 4.
Aquinas also so resolves it: and (which is seldom seen in other cases, the
Schooleman (of what Sect soever) say the same. Whereby we may perceive, in
what respects the Fathers have sometimes pronounced it to be a Ceremony, and a
Shadow, and a Figure only. Three things has Calvin noted in it, Institut.
lib. 2. cap. 8. sect. 28.
of perpetual observation: first, Rest from labor at some certain and
appointed time, that God the better may work in us: secondly, holding of
public meetings and assemblies, for the exercise of religious duties: thirdly,
the ease and recreation both of our Servants and our Cattle, which otherwise
would be tired with continual labor. And three things also are alleged by
Abulensis, Vbi supr^,
to prove it an unstable and an alterable Ceremony: First, the determining of
the day to be one of seven, or the seventh day precisely from the Worlds
Creation; next, the commencement and continuance thereof, from Evening unto
Evening; and lastly, the precise and rigid keeping of it, in not kindling
fires, and such like. Which, howsoever they be true, and distinctly show, what
still pertaines to us in sanctifying the Lords day aright, and what is
abrogated by Christ's coming: Yet since the Word affords them not, they rather
seem to set down somewhat of their own, than produce any thing from
Scripture. For granting all that has been said, yet I will look upon the
Text apart, and ask precisely, what it commands us. First there presents it
self in the very front, the sanctifying of the Sabbath. What Sabbath? The
seventh day. How reckoned? From the first of the Creation. But this falls just
upon the day of the Jewish Sabbath: And so to urge this Commandment for
keeping of the Lords day, is to bring in Iudaisme. Whence truly said Saint
AUSTIN, Quisquis diem illum observat, sicut litera sonat, carnaliter sapit: He
that observes that day, according to the literal sense, is but carnally wise.
They therefore are but idly busied, who would so far enlarge the Sabbath, or
seventh day in this Commandment, as to include the Lords day in it; or so to
order their account, as that the Sabbath of the Jews should fall iumpe with
ours. As if there were an end of Christian Congregations, in case they were not
borrowed from the Jewish Synagogue; or that the institution of the Lords day
were of no effect, were it not strengthened and supported by the fourth
Commandment. Calvin is very round with the like false-teachers. Instit. l. 1.
cap. 8. sect. 34.
Such men (says he) as idly think the observation of one day in seven to be
the Moral part of the fourth Commandment; what do they else, but change the
day, as in dishonor of the Jews, retaining in their minds the former
sanctity thereof. And thereunto he adds: And certainly we see what
dangerous effects they have produced from such a Doctrine; those which adhere
to their instructions, having exceedingly out-gone the Jews, in their gross
and carnal superstitions about the Sabbath. But this, the changing of the
Sabbath to the Lords day (which is next in order to be handled) will more
clearly manifest.

SECT. IV.
institution of the Jewish Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, confirmed by the
example of God himself; and we have also noted, what is to be retained
therein, as Moral: it now remains to see, what there is in it Ceremonial,
and how abrogated. For if this be not made apparent, and by evident proofs;
the Conscience would be wavering, and relapse at last to Iudaisme. For who
(almost) would not thus reason with himself? I see a Precept, ranked amongst
other Moral Precepts, which does command me to observe the seventh day
precisely, from the first Creation: and since the others are in force, why is
not this? It neither fits the Church, nor me, to repeal the Law of God, at
our discretions; but rather to obey his pleasure. What then advise we to be
done? Not as some do; who urge the words of this Commandment so far, till
they draw blood instead of comfort. Our Savior best resolves this doubt, Marc.
2.27.
saying; The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath: and that
the Son of man was Lord of the Sabbath; and therefore had authority to
change it, for man's greater profit; as the Gloss notes it, out of Bid. But
here it is objected, That Christ came into the World, Matthew. 5.
not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it. To which, we say with the Apostle:
Do we destroy the Law by Faith? God forbid: we confirm it rather. Christ
then has put away the shadow, but retained the light, and spreads it wider
than before; showing thereby, the excellent harmony between the Gospel and
the Law. Saint PAVL, Romans 14. and Gal. 4. does generally tax the Jewish
observation of days and times: particularly he shows us, that the Sabbath
is abrogated, Coloss. the second: Let no man judge you (says he) in meats
and drinks, or in respect of an holy day, or of the Sabbath, which were the
shadow of things to come, but the body is of CHRIST. Let no man judge you; i.
e. Let none condemn you, if you keep them not: because those shadows
altogether vanished, at the rising of the Sun of Righteousness. As therefore
Nature requires Meats and Drinks; but for the choice thereof, we are left
free, to Christian liberty: So Reason tells us, that there must be some
certain time appointed for Gods public service; though from the bondage and
necessity of the Jewish Sabbath, we are delivered by the Gospel. Since then
we see the abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath; let us consider, by what right
the Lords day has succeeded in the place thereof: Wherein I must of force
pass over many things, which are at large discussed by others. For to what
purpose should I fall upon the Anabaptist, the Familist, and Swencfeldian? who
making all days equal, and equally to be regarded, instead of Christian
liberty, would bring into the Church an Heathenish licentiousness: Or else
exclaim against the Sabbatarians of this Age, who by their
Sabbath-speculations would bring all to Iudaisme. Josephus tells us of a River
in the Land of Palestine, De bello Iudaic. l. 7. cap. 24.
that is called Sabbaticus; which being dry six days, does on the seventh
fill up his Channel, and run very swiftly* Contrary, Pliny; Nature. Hist.
l. 31. cap. 2.
that it runs swiftly all the six days, and is dry only on the seventh.
Baronius takes Josephus part. Anno 31. n. 38.
The Rabbis (who would prove from hence their Sabbath) take part with Pliny.
Plainly Baronius was deceived, Exer^. 15. sect. 20.
as Casaubon has truly noted, by a corrupt Copy of Josephus. But howsoever,
for the Rabbis, they are thus silenced by Galatinus. Lib. 1. cap. 9.
Si fluvius ille dum erat, etc. In case (says he) that River whiles it was in
being, was a good argument that the Jewish Sabbath was to be observed; now,
since there is no such River extant, it is a better argument, that their
Sabbath is not any where to be regarded. Our fanatic and peevish spirits it
were best to send, to make inquiry for this River; while in mean time we do
unfold, and for as much as in us is, compose the Differences, which have been
raised in this Point, amongst wiser heads.

SECT. V.
Lords day succeedes in place of the Jewish Sabbath, affirm it either as
established by the Law of God, and of Divine authority; or introduced by
Ecclesiastical constitution. They which pretend the first, either derive their
arguments more weakly, from the Old Testament; or else more warily, from the
New: And from the Old Testament they produce two arguments; one, borrowed from
the sanctification of the seventh day, in the first Creation of the World; the
other, from the institution of the Sabbath, in the fourth Commandment. Of
those which build upon the constitution of the Church, some do affirm it
absolutely; as do the Papists and Arminians; as may be made apparent out of
the Jesuits, Bellar. de cult. Sanct. l. 3 c. 11. Estius in 3. Sent. d. 37.
sect. 13.
Canonists, and Schoolmen, and the Confession of the Remonstrants. To whom
add Brentius, on Levit. 23. Chemnitius, in his Common Places; and of our own
Writers, not a few. Others so fortify and corroborate this Constitution
Ecclesiastical, as if the Church did only publish and continue that, which by
the Apostles was first ordered. But (as it seems to me) these Differences
are of no great moment: save that the first Opinion inclines too much to
Iudaisme; and does too much oppugn (whether more impudently, or more
ignorantly; that I cannot say) the received Opinion of Divines. For who knows
not that common Principle of the Schoolmen, out of the seventh unto the
Hebrews: Verse. 12.
The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the
Law? Whence they conclude, that at this day the Moral Law binds not, as it
was published and proclaimed by Moses; but as at first it appertained no less
unto the Gentiles, than the Jews; and afterward, was explaned and confirmed
by Christ, in his holy Gospel, Zanchius does strongly prove the same (amongst
other things) out of this Commandment about the Sabbath. Si Decalogus quatenus
per MOSEN traditus fuit Israelitis, Tom. 4. l. 1. c. 11.
ad gentes quoque pertineret, etc. If the Commandments (says he) as they
were given by MOSES unto the Israelites, appertained also to the Gentiles; the
Gentiles had been bound by this Commandment, to sanctify the Sabbath with as
much strictness, as the Jews. But since it is most evident, that the Gentiles
never were obliged to keep that day holy; it plainly follows, that they
neither were nor could be bound to keep the rest of the Commandments, as
published and proclaimed by MOSES unto them of Israel. Nor do these
hot-spurres well observe, how they entangle themselves, by borrowing the
authority of the Lords day from the Law of Moses. For if they ground
themselves upon that Commandment; Why keep they not that day precisely, which
the Text commands? By what authority have they substituted the first day of
the Week, for the seventh day exactly from the Worlds Creation? What
dispensation have they got, to kindle fire, to dress and make ready Meat,
which was prohibited the Jews, Exodus 16.35.
by the same Commandment. In case they be ashamed of these and such like
beggarly elements, and tell us, that the Moral duties of the day are only now
to be observed; (not to say any thing of a distinction so infirm, and which
the Text affords not) they desert their Station; and will they, nill they,
join with them, who letting pass the veil of MOSES, seek for the original
of the Lords day in the Sunshine only of the Gospel.

SECT. VI.
boast, that they have found the institution of the Lords day in the New
Testament expressly; let them show the place. Our Savior oftentimes disputed
with the Pharisees, Matthew. 12.
Mark. 2.
Luke 6.
about their superstitious observation of the Sabbath day; Ioh. 5.
and many times explaned the meaning of that Commandment: But where is any the
least suspicion of the abrogation of it? Where any mention, that the Lords day
was instituted in the place thereof? Well. Christ ascended up on high, Acts
13.17.18. cap.
and left behind him his Apostles, to preach the Gospel. And what did they? Did
they not keep the Jewish Sabbath, without noise, or scruple? And gladly teach
the people, congregated on the Sabbath days? Nay, more than this: Did not the
Primitive Church design as well the Sabbath, Hosp. de sest. Christ. c. 9.
as the Lords day, unto sacred Meetings? These things are so notorious, that
they need no proof. The Papists hereupon infer, that the Lords day is not of
any Divine Institution, Montholon. prompt. in Sabbat.
but grounded only on the Constitution of the Church. A Civil Ordinance
(says Brentius) not a Commandment of the Gospel. And the Remonstrants have
declared in their late Confession, That by our Lord CHRIST JESUS, all
difference of days was wholly abrogated in the New Testament. All which accord
exactly with that general Maxim, which in this very Argument is laid down by
Suarez, and by him borrowed from the Schools: In Lege nova non sunt data
specialia Praecepta Divina de accidentalibus observantiis; De Relig. l. 2. cap.
1.
That in the New Testament there were given no special Precepts, or
Directions, touching accidental Duties. Yet notwithstanding this, even in the
Church of Rome, Azor. Institut. Mor. part. 2. c. 2.
Anchoranus, Panormitan, Angelus, and Sylvester, have stoutly set themselves
against these lukewarm Advocates, in affirmation of the Divine authority of
the Lords day. For, (as it rightly is observed by the defenders of the fourth
Opinion) it seemed a dangerous thing to the whole Fabric of Religion, should
humane Ordinances limit the necessity of Gods holy worship: Or that the Church
should not assemble, but at the pleasure of the Clergy, and they (perhaps) not
well at one amongst themselves. For what would men busied about their Farms,
their Yoakes of Oxen, and Domesticke troubles! (as the invited Guests in the
holy Gospel) would they not easily set at naught an humane Ordinance? Would not
profane men easily dispense, with their absenting of themselves from Prayers,
and Preaching, and give themselves free leave of doing or neglecting any thing;
were there not something found in Scripture, which more than any humane
Ordinance, or Institution, should bind the Conscience? Well therefore, and
with good advice, the Acts and practice of the Apostles has been also
pressed; besides, the constant and continual tradition of the Church: That so
it may appear, that in a thing of such great moment, Zanch. tom. 4. l. 1. c 19.
the Church did nothing without warrant from those blessed spirits. Three Texts
there are, which are most commonly produced, in full proof thereof. First,
Acts 20.7. Upon the first day of the Week, when the Disciples came together,
to break Bread, PAVL preached unto them ready to depart upon the Morning, and
continued his Speech till Midnight. Why is it said expressly, That the
Disciples came together, to hear the Word preached, and receive the
Sacraments, rather on this day than another; rather than on the Jewish Sabbath?
were it not then a custom, to celebrate on that day their public Meetings;
the Sabbath of the Jews beginning (by degrees) to vanish. The Fathers, and all
Interpreters (almost) do so conceive it: Though I confess, that from a
casual fact, I see not how a solemn institution may be justly grounded. Nor
may we argue in this manner; The Disciples met that day together* therefore
they gave commandment, that on that day the Church should always be
assembled for Gods public worship. Who marks not here a great and notable
incoherence? Look therefore next upon the first to the Corinthians, cap. 16.
verse. 2. where we seem to have a Commandment: Let every man (says the
Apostle) upon the first day of the Week lay by him in store: What? Collections
for the Saints: And why? Because he had so ordered it, in the Churches of
Galatia. Here then we have an Ordinance set down by the Apostle, to be
observed in the Church: But what is that he orders? Not that the first day
should be set apart for the Lords service; but that upon the first day of the
Week they make Collections for the Saints. The third and last, is Revel. 1.
and 10. I was (says the Evangelist) in the Spirit on the Lords day: And what
day is that? Had he meant only the Jewish Sabbath, doubtless he would have
called it so: If any other of the Week, not eminent above the rest, the title
had been needless, and ambiguous; and rather had obscured, than explaned his
meaning. What therefore rests? but that comparing this place with the former
two, Interpreters both new and old conclude together, that here the Apostle
meant the first day of the Week; whereupon Christ rose, and the Disciples came
together, for the discharge of holy duties; and Paul commanded, that
Collections should be made: as was the custom afterward, in the Primitive
Church, according unto Justin Martyr, who lived very near the Apostles times.
The alteration of the name does intimate, that the Sabbath was also altered;
not in relation to Gods worship, but the appointment of the time.

SECT. VII.
Lords day is founded on Divine authority? For my part, (without prejudice
unto any man's Opinion) I assent unto it: however that the Arguments like me
not, whereby the Opinion is supported. This inference first offends me, That
in the Cradle of the World, God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it;
therefore all men are bound to sanctify it, by the Law of Nature: since I both
doubt, whether the Patriarchs did observe it, before Moses time; and have
learnt also, that the Law of Nature is immutable. Next this distasts me, That
they would have the spending of one day in seven, on Gods holy worship, to be
perpetual, and Moral. As congruous, or convenient, all men admit it; but
cannot see so easily, that it should be Moral, and perpetual. Nor is it,
thirdly, without scandal, that the fourth Commandment should be so commonly
produced, to justify our keeping of the Lords day, by the Text thereof. If
they required no more, but the analogy, the equity, or the reason of that
Commandment, we would not stick to yield unto it: But whiles they stand too
close to the very letter, they may (perhaps) be justly charged with Iudaisme.
Fourthly, as little like I them, who promise much in proof hereof, out of the
New Testament, which the Text affords not. For where is any express
institution of the Lords day, in any one of the Apostles, or Evangelists? Yea,
or what Text is there, whence it may necessarily be collected, in case we
meet an Adversary, who must be dealt withal exactly; and will not easily
assent, but to solid Arguments? Nor lastly, am I satisfied with the bare
Ordinance of the Church; which with the same facility may be broke, as it was
enacted: Which absolutely to affirm of the Lords day, were too unadvised.
Therefore, amongst so (...) does distinguish with us, of Divine authority,
strictly and largely taken: that so, not that alone which is found in Scripture
may properly be said to have Divine authority; but whatsoever by good
consequence may be drawn from thence, either in reference to the institution,
or some example of it, or (at least) some analogy thereunto. And whereas
Calvin, Bullinger, Bucerus, Brentius, Chemnitius, Vrsine, and others of the
Reformed Churches affirm, That still the Church has power to change the Lords
day to some other: Suarez does thus distinguish in it, That it is absolutely
alterable, but not practically: that is (as I conceive it) That such a Power is
absolutely in the Church, though not convenient now to be put in practice. The
reasons of it, two: First, because instituted (as generally the Fathers grant)
in memory of our Redemption; made perfect on that day, by our Saviors
resurrection: Next, because not depending barely upon a Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Ordinance; but on the practice and express tradition of the
Apostles; who (questionless) were led into all truth by the Holy Ghost.
Which being so; if any waywardly shall oppose us, as if they would compose
some Sabbaticall Idol out of an equal mixture of Law and Gospel; they may be
very fitly likened to the Jew of Tewksburie, Fox and Stowe in vita Henr. 3.
mentioned in our Common Annals: who on a Saturday fell by chance into a
Privi^, and would not then permit himself to be taken out, because it was the
Jewish Sabbath; nor could be suffered to be taken thence the next day
following, because the Lords day, celebrated by the Christians: And so, betwixt
both days, he died most miserably, that understood not rightly the
celebration and true use of either. Of which, the celebration of this day, I am
next to speak.

SECT. VIII.
Praise waits for thee, O Lord, in Sion, Psalm. 65.
and unto thee shall the Vow be performed: O thou that hear prayer, unto
thee shall all flesh come. The life of Piety and Religion, is Gods public
worship; the soul of public worship, is the due performance of the same. They
which esteem not this as they ought to do, whether profane, carnal, or
schismatic persons, do not alone (as much as in them is) tear the Church
in pieces, which is the seamelesse Coat of CHRIST; but do renounce the
Heritage, bought for us at so great a price, and offered to us with so great
mercy. He that endeavors to pursue the several by-ways and dissonant
clamours of particular men, in this present Argument; enters into a most
inextricable Labyrinth. But generally, those things which others have
propounded in some obscurity, may be reduced most fitly unto these two heads:
First, that we mark distinctly, in the celebration of this day, what special
duties are commanded; and next, what offices are permitted. To the discovery
whereof, these words, Our God, our neighbors, and our selves, like a
Mercuriall finger, will direct our journey, amidst the several turnings of
this present World. These three are principally aimed at in those pious duties,
which on this day have been commended to us, or rather imposed on us, by the
Acts and practice of the Apostles. First, the Disciples came together, to
break Bread, and hear the Word: Which, without solemn and preparatorie
Prayers, were a faint devotion, Acts 20. This is the honor due to God.
Collections, secondly, are appointed, 1. Corinthians. 16. This is in reference to
our neighbor. And last of all, Saint JOHN was in the Spirit on the Lords day,
Revel. 1. This in relation to our selves: That so our pious contemplations,
borne by the wings of the Spirit, may ascend on high; even to those Hills, from
whence comes our salvation. Therefore upon this day, Gods people are to meet
in the Congregation, to celebrate Divine Service, and to hear the Word; Alms
to be given, and godly Meditations to be cherished with our best endeavors.
From whence arises that, as an Accessorie in the Gospel, which was a
Principal in the Law of MOSES, Rest from servile works, and from the
ordinary works of our Vocation. For since there is not extant either
Commandment, or example, in the Gospel, which can affixe the Rest of the
Jewish Sabbath to the Lords day now celebrated; and that our Christian liberty
will not away with that severe and Ceremonial kind of Rest, which was then in
use: we only are so far to abstain from Work, as it is an impediment to
the performance of such duties as are then commanded. Saint Hierome on the
eighteenth of the Acts, affirms, That Saint Paul, when he had none to whom
to preach in the Congregation; did on the Lords day use the Works of his
Occupation: In loc. Com. Perk. in Case of Consc. l. 2. c. 16.
and CHRIST did many things (as of set purpose) on the Sabbath, (so has
Chemnitius rightly noted) to manifest, that the Legal Sabbath was expiring;
and to demonstrate the true use of the Christian Sabbath: if (at the least) the
name of Sabbath may be used amongst us, which some distaste. To end in brief,
those things are all commanded, which do advance GODS public Service; and
those permitted, which are no hinderance thereunto. Of this sort specially, are
the works of necessity: as, to dress Meat, to draw the Ox out of the Ditch,
to lead our Cattle unto Water, to quench a dangerous Fire, and such as these.
Then works of Charity: First, in relation to our selves; and here we are
permitted Recreations (of what sort soever) which serve lawfully to refresh our
spirits, and nourish mutual neighborhood amongst us: Next, in relation unto
others; and here no labor (how troublesome soever) is to be refused, which
may accommodate our neighbor, and cannot fitly be deferred. Where we must
always keep this Rule, That this our Christian liberty be void of scandal;
I mean, of scandal justly given, and not vainly caught at: That we pretend
not Charity [to absent our selves from religious duties] when either
covetousness, or loathing, or neglect of GODS holy Ordinances, are underhand
the principal motives. Four properties there are (as one rightly notes) of
all solemn Festivals; Rob. Lo^u^ in ^ffig. Sabbat.
Sanctity, Rest from labor, Cheerfulness, and Liberality: Which very
things, the Ancients (by those names, whereby they did express their
Festivals) do seem to intimate. (...) derived from (...), which signifies to
meet, or to be assembled: (...) from (...), to rejoice, (...)
to dance: (...) from (...), to restrain from works that are an hinderance.
And so amongst the Grecians, (...) signifies an Assembly; and (...) denotes
Expenses: From whence, their solemn Festivals were so entitled. And unto all
these, whether Recreations, or Entertainments, Feastings, and other indifferent
Customs; it only appertains to the Religious Magistrate to prescribe bounds
and limits: Not to the rash zeal of every one, which out of a Schismatic
Stoicisme, not suffering people either to use a Fan, or to kill a Flea,
relapse to Iudaisme; nor on the other side, to every prodigal and debauched
Companion, who joins himself unto Belphegor, and eats the Sacrifices of the
dead.

FINIS.

