THE Doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper handled. And plainly laid
open out of the 1. Cor. 11.23.24. etc.

Wherein the nature of this Sacrament is faithfully discussed, the matter of
it, together with the necessity of often receiving, truly declared; the words
of consecration embowelled, and errors with the cauills of Papists soundly
confuted.

By Richard Preston Preacher of Gods word at Rushden in Northamptonshire.

Ho every one that thirsts, come.

Isay 55.1. LONDON, Printed by N. O. for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at
the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1621.

To the right worshipful, religious, and virtuous Lady, the Lady Alice
Pemberton, wife to the noble and worthy, Sir Lewis Pemberton of Rushden,
Knight, high Shriffe of Northhampton shiere, grace, and peace with all other
blessings accompanying salvation.
MADAM,
THere is an old Proverb used among us, and no less true then old, that
Wheresoever God builds his Church, there the Devil builds his Chapel:
This Proverb has been found true in every age, even from the beginning of
the world, and is found true at this present day: For as God began to build his
Church in righteous Abell, so likewise the devil began to build his Chapel
in wicked Caine, the brother of Abell; and as God in these our days, does
build his Church, in Christian Princes, virtuous rulers, holy, and reverend
Church governors, learned writers, and zealous Preachers, (whom the enemies of
God call Lutherans, Zwinglians, Caluinists, Heretics, Schismatiques, Teachers
of new learning, confounders of good order, etc.) So the devil cease not to
build his Chapel in the Papists, in the Adiaphorists, in the Anabaptists, in
the Arminians, in the Libertines, in the Epicures, and in other such horrible
monsters of wickedness: Nay more, in what field the good man sows his wheat,
Mat. 13.24.25.
in the very same field the envious man sows his tares: And albeit this
Sathanicall dragon by Luciferian limbs, and heretical Hypocrites, has ever
labored to enlarge his house; yet in this our age, (because his kingdom
draws to an end,) he carketh, and cares, rages, and roareth, and like a
right devil bestirreth himself, to make his Den of thieves more ample, and
large, not only among Infidells, but also among those that profess Christ;
which is lamentable to see and hear. I let pass to make you acquainted with
the great swarm of Sectaries, which almost cover the earth like Egyptian
flies, Ex. 8.21.22
being indeed those Locusts which came out of the bottomless pit. Reu. 9.2.3.
Neither need I recite how large, and wide a Synagogue the devil has built
him in the pernicious sect of the bloud-sucking Papists, who are the more
pestiferous to the Church of Christ, because, that being inwardly ravening
Wolves, Mat. 7.14.10.16.
they cloathe themselves in sheeps apparel. No sect that ever Satan brought
into the world, is more injurious to the blood of Christ, more despitefull to
Gods word, more cruel to the Saints of the Lord, more hurtful to true
Religion, then that sect of the Papists* They overthrow holiness of life, and
Gods power of remiting sins, by a distinction of venial sins, by a
conceited Purgatory, by saying over a Pater noster, an Aue Maria cortaine times
together; by Indulgences, Trentalls, Diriges, Pardons, and such like
trumperies* They make the obedience of Christ, of no force by their merits, his
sufferings of no value by their satisfactions, their penance, whippings,
eremitical progressions, etc. They ouerturne the institution of the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, by their idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass.

To instance in some particulars: Christ fare at the table when he instituted
his last supper, and turned his face to his Disciples the Papists stand at an
Altar, and turn their backs to the people. Christ spoke openly and in a
plain manner, the papists either whisper to themselves, or speak in such a
tongue as cannot be understood. Christ gave the Sacrament of his body and
blood to his Disciples for to eat and drink; the Papists (uncharitable
Helluones) give nothing to any man, but eat and drink all alone. Christ
ministered the mystery of his body in common bread, the Papists minister printed
waser-cakes. Christ ministered pure wine, the Papists wine (if they minister
any) mixed with water. Christ gave the sacrament into his Disciples hands; the
Papists put it into the peoples mouths, as if their fingers were too base.
Christ delivered the sacrament to his Disciples, saying, Take ye, eat ye,
drink ye: the Papists deliver it not, but say, Behold, honor, worship,
reverence your Maker here: and then they hang it up in a pixe, or a box, in so
much, that often in the interim of the priests absence, a mouse creeps into
the box, and eats up their great Creator. Christ gave the sacrament under
both kinds, the Papists but under one kind; they steal away the wine. Christ
commanded his Disciples to eat his Supper in remembrance of him, the Papists
say they have him already in their hands, in their mouths, in their boxes, in
their pixes, etc.

These, and other such errors (elsewhere met with-all) has the devil
brought into the Church of Christ by the Papists, about the doctrine of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: And (such is their impudency) they
shame not to father them upon the word of God, and ancient Fathers; when as
both the word of God, and the writing of ancient Fathers are extreme enemies
unto the^ I cease to speak how they hinder the liberty and dignity of the
Word; how they inuert the order of the institution of the Lords Supper, how
they pervert the meaning of our Sauiors words, how they trouble the Church with
a late devised, but not their least respected errors of Transubstantiation.
Your Ladyship cannot be ignorant how Satan by these his hellish instruments,
and by all means which they put in practice, endeavors to pull down the
sides of Gods house, that the walls of his own Chapel might be the bigger.

Who then must stand in in the gap, roll away this stone, prevent this evil,
stop those wide mouths, pluck the venom from under their tongues, and be
able to keep in Grace, the ordinances of the Lord, but you, and such as be of
your worth, rank, and profession? Therefore I have made the more bold to
prefixe your Ladyships name in the front of this my weak Infant, as a
Patronage of it against al its enemies. And though it be a recompense too mean
for your good word, and countenance toward me; yet it being the best gift that
my poverty can afford, I doubt not but according to your mild disposition,
you will accept of of it. The matter it brings, is the Doctrine of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, opened in a plain and familiar manner, not
suitable to the nice curiosity of our times, not elegant in words, and without
all affectation, unless of plainness, which in preaching I ever counted the
best eloquence: The naked and natural sense of the Text (if I be not much
mistaken) is truly and faithfully embowelled, and withal so thoroughly applied,
that Gods Church and people may thence reap much benefit.

Whatsoever it is, I thought good to publish it: and ^id many respects me
moving to commend the protection of it to your Ladyship. 1. In respect of your
zeal, and love to the truth: therein imitating that pattern of piety, the
virtuous, godly, and holy Gentlewoman, Mistress Mary Pemberton your husbands
mother, whom the whole country (as I have been told) has highly esteemed
for the soundness of true religion, and for her constant perseverance therein.
2. In respect of your conversation, which (I speak to Gods glory) is such as
may be accounted a mirror of virtue: for to your greatness you join
goodness, to your worthiness good works, to your knowledge Christian
kindness and benignity, etc. Besides, your care to bring up your sweet
children (the Lords blessings, and his rich inheritance) in the awe of the
Lord, is so great and continual, that no day ouer-slips you to sanctify them.
Other godly and heavenly carriages, whereby you have adorned your holy
profession, and wherein you have excelled many daughters that have done
virtuously, shall praise you in the gates. 3. In respect of your singular love
to al Gods Messengers, welcoming them like Angels, though but strangers, into
your house: hereby a good evidence is ministered to your own heart, that you
are translated from death to life. 4. Lastly, in regard of your countenance,
good will, and favor to me, which on my part is every way undeserved. I must
needs confess that I am so deeply obliged unto your Ladyship, that the
signification of my thankfulness does in equity belong unto you.

These are the motives that drew on this my presumption to dedicate this my
poor labor to your Ladyship. In publishing it I am sure to meet with the
censures of carping readers, who will tax me much of rashness: Yet let such
consider that at the making of the first Tabernacle, not only such as brought
blew silk, and purple, and scarlet, but even the poorest sort, that brought
Goats hair, and Rams skins, were accepted. How mean soever it be, if it
may any way benefit Gods Church, especially if it may be any small means to
further you to the right understanding of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and to build you up toward the Kingdom of heaven, I shall gain that I most
desire.

Thus craving pardon for my boldness, I commend your Ladyship to the Grace of
God, who protract your days and years, according to his graces bestowed on
you; and prosper and finish the good work that he has begun, by adding that
which is yet lacking to your faith and graces, till he have fitted you unto,
and filled you with glory and immortality. Amen.

Your Ladyships in all Christian duty to be commanded. RICH. PRESTON.
Rushden; March 19. 1621.
The Epistle to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, although I make little doubt but thou have often either from
thy own experience been brought to consider, or by the mouths of Gods
Ministers have bin instructed, how wise we are in casting for our temporal
commodities, and how careless on the other hand, in the matters appertaining
to God, and our own peace: Yet suffer thy self once again to be admonished
of this point, which may so beneficially be thought upon. A motive whereunto I
will not fetch any farther, then from what thy eyes look upon, and thy hands
handle. Here is a Treatise, the very title whereof does draw thy respect to it,
as dealing in a Theme so weighty, and needful, as is the meditation of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. This somewhat affects thee, yet nevertheless
thou are not over willing to part with thy silver to purchase it, unless thou
may have some good ground to buy a good pennyworth. Well, I discommend not
thy temporary wariness, but wish thee suitable circumspection in spiritual
businesses. Stick not, gentle Reader, to bestow two or three groates upon a
book bandling so worthy a subject as this present Tractate does. Let no
preiudicate opinion fore-possesse thee, when cursorily ouer-looking it (as
buyers use to do,) thou find not the margent, and bottom of the leaves taken
up with quotations of old and new writers, as if forsooth therefore it were of
no worth. Every laced, and guarded robe is not the substantiallest, neither is
every book be painted with allegations, most sound, and material.

The Author is far hence (as I am informed) and wants opportunity to
contriue his Epistle to the Reader: My self requested by the book seller,
according to the truth of my apprehension, will say a little of the book. Thou
shall therefore, Christian Reader, if I be not much deceived, find a portion
of Scripture familiarly, and soundly opened by way of doctrine, backed with
reasons, pressed on the conscience with applications able to move affections,
if the fault be not thy own. Thou shall find a great aim according to the
several matters on several occasions to build thee up in holiness, and to
pluck thee off from yielding to such corruptions as thy own evil heart, or the
wicked times may too much incline thee to. In a word, thou shall meet with
signs of some graces, and directions to other Christian practices; and (which
I would not forget) every where where occasion is offered, thou shall perceive
a true Protestant spirit breathing, as if the times too much charitablenes
toward Popery, had, by a certain antiperistasis, inkindled the godly Authors
devotion against it, so much the more. The numbers of men of which temper, the
Lord increase, granting for one such ten, and for ten an hundred, that many
hands pluckking a^, and shaking the lofty Tower of Babylon, at length it may
fall down (...) deserved ruins, and desolations. Thus not making any greater
preface, to no great book, I recommend thee, and al thy ways to our Lord Gods
merciful blessing in Jesus Christ.

Thine in the Lord, Ez. Chapter
March the 19. 1621.
A Table of the principal Doctrines contained in this book.
DOct. 1.Things amiss either in Church, or in the course of our lives may be
redressed, and amended by the word of God. page 2. Doct. 2.Gods Ministers
receive their orders from the Lord. page 24. Doct. 3.God alone is the Author of
the Sacraments. page. 36. Doct. 4.Ministers are Gods stewards. page 37. Doct.
5.People are to receive that which is taught them, as from God. p. 46. Doct.
6.God is careful that the Sacraments should continue in his Church. page 65.
Doct. 7.Treason is an odious sin. page 71. Doct. 8.It is the property of
wicked men to observe secret times for their wicked practices. page 78. Doct.
9.A Sacrament is an outward sign representing an inward grace. page 85. Doct.
10.Christ is the bread of life. page 92. Doct. 11.Christ is a full Redeemer.
page 98. Doct. 12.Christ is full and perfect nourishment. page 104. Doct.
13.The outward elements ought both of them to be administered. page 113. Doct.
14.God gave his Son to be a Mediator, and a Redeemer for man, being in
extre^^e misery. pa. 117. Doct. 15.It is the duty of all Christians to pray to
God for a blessing on the Sacrament, or any other Creature that they receive.
page 127. Doct. 16.Thanksgiving is a service that Christians owe unto God for
his benefits. page 136. Doct. 17.Christ took not only our nature upon him, but
he also suffered for us. page. 149. Doct. 18.Christ's suffering was a freewill
offering. page 163. Doct. 19.It is left no indifferent thing to come unto this
holy Table. page 170. Doct. 20.A Minister must not admit al alike to the Lords
Supper p. 178. Doct. 21.If a man have true faith, then as certainly as he
receives the outward elements into his hands, and after into his stomach he
receives Christ and all benefits with him at the hand of God. page 187. Doct.
22.Every faithful receiver is made a partaker of a blessed union with Christ.
page 193. Doct. 23.In receiving the bread, we receive not Christ's body, but a
sign of his body. page 202. Doct. 24.None but the elect have benefit by
Christ's death. page 236. Doct. 25.Those things that Christ commanded are
carefully to be performed. page 254. Doct. 26.The Institution of the Lords
Supper is imitatory. page 268. Doct. 27.We are very inclinable to forgetfulness.
page 280. Doct. 28.The Ministers calling is no idle calling. page ^92. Doct.
29.The Sacrament confirmethour faith. page 298. Doct. 30.We under the new
Testament have greater means of knowledge, and obedience, then the faithful
had in the time of the old Testament. page 310. Doct. 31.The mysteries of the
body and blood of Christ must be joined together, and are commanded both to be
received of every communicant. pa. 317. Doct. 32.The Supper of the Lord ought
to be celebrated and eaten often, and many times. page 323. Doct. 33.It is a
special thing required at our hands in eating of the Lords Supper, to show
forth Christ's death and passion. page 327. Doct. 34.At the last day, Christ his
second coming shall be from heaven. page 336. Doct. 35.Christ when comes will
visibly show himself in his manhood. page 346.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
1. Cor. 11. verse 23.24.25.26. etc. 23. For I have received of the Lord that
which also I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which
he was betrayed, took bread.

24. And when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is
my body, which is broken for you; this do in remembrance of me.

25. After the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying,
This cup is the New Testament in my blood, This do as often as ye drink it, in
remembrance of me, etc.


THe Apostle in the former part of this Chapter, having laid down certain
rules concerning comeliness and holy decency, touching the behavior of men
and women, especially in public places of Gods service and worship: (as that
the man should be uncovered, but the woman on the contrary, in a Christian
comelinesie, should be covered, etc.) He begins in the second part of the
Chapter, verse 17. to entreat of the Lords Supper unto the end of the Chapter.
And in the first place from verse 17. to this my prese (...) text, he
reprehendeth the Corinthians, for that they had ^bus^^h this holy Institution*
partly through Schism, and division, verse 18.19. partly through neglect of
love, one would not stay for another; and partly through gluttony and
drunkenness. Now in the second place, for reforming these abus^^, the blessed
Apostle draws the Corinthians to a consideration of the holy Institution i^
self, which is set down from the 23. verse, to the 27. verse.

Wherein consider these 3. things. 1 A preface before the words of Institution,
verse 23. 2 The Institution it self, verse 24.25. 3 The end and use of the
Institution, verse 26.


Touching the Preface, it is set down in the former part of the 23. verse, in
these words, That which I have received of the Lord; I delivered unto you. In
which words S. Paul justifies his administration of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and shows how he came to be a dispenser of such a great matter,
as the Lords Supper is: Not by any voluntary motion in himself, nor by any
want of maintenance urging him thereunto: neither was ambition, ease, or honor
his provocation to this duty; but it was a business and charge committed to
him of trust from the Lord: for the nature of the word (Received) in this
place, shows, (...)
that he was so far from undertaking this office of his own will, that it
was rather forced upon him, and given him in charge.

This Preface is a forcible reason to convince the Corinthians of their
division amongst themselves, and their small regard of the Lords Supper: albeit
they persuaded themseluies that the Apostle did deliver his own, and not the
will of the Lord Jesus, which made them so careless of this holy Institution;
yet here he tells them that hespake no otherwise, and delivered no other
matter, then that he had from the Lord Jesus: as if he might say, It may be
that the Sacrament is contemned of you, because you think that it is my own
invention; yet know you that whatsoever has been deliueted therein by me, was
not of me, but of the Lord Jesus* I spoke what was put into my mouth by his
Spirit, and delivered the same which he formerly instituted. This is the
meaning and sense of this Preface, and from thence we may gather these
observations:

First, in that the Apostle Paul labors to reform the disorders of the
Corinthians, by telling them, that the Message he delivered to them, was from
the Lord Jesus: we learn this point:

That if there be any thing amiss in the Church, Doctr. 1.
or in the course of our lives, recourse for there dress there of must be had
unto the Word of God. Here we see the Apostle being about to reform an abuse,
touching the Lords Supper amongst the Corinthians, he brings them to Gods
word, and tells them, that he has received another kind of celebrating
this holy Communion and Supper of the Lord out of the Word: That which I have
received of the Lord, etc. according to which he would have them to conform
themselves, and no more profanely (as they had done) abuse this so holy an
ordinance, and Institution of the Lord Jesus.

The same Apostle being about to confute the error of those that denied the
Resurrection, he brings Gods Word for his warrant, and tells them that their
opinion is false; for otherwise he had received of the Lord out of his Word, 1
Cor. 15.3 Esaias 53.5.6.
and taught them how that Christ died for our sins, was buried, etc. and rose
again the third day; and by consequence there shall be a resurrection of all
men, according to the Job 19.25.26.27. Esa. 26.9. and 65.18. Jonas 2.11.
Scriptures. So as the word of God is still apparent to be a touchstone for
the trial of all our actions and behauiours, and a special means for the
redressing of thing a miss: Psalm. 119.9
Wherewith shall a young man redres his way? In taking heed thereto according to
thy word. Adam at first made small reckoning of the word of God, Genesis 2.17.
when he told him, That in that day he tasted of the forbidden fruit, he should
die the death: but afterward when the Lord put him in mind of it again, Genesis
3.11. etc.
he reme^ bred both what God had said, and what himself had done, and so came
to reformation. Manasses was a wicked Idolater, 2. Cho. 33.2.3.
and caused the streets to swim with innocent blood, even from comer to
corner. The Gentiles were wicked people, walking in their own ways, Acts
14.16. carried away to dumb Idols, 1. Cor. 12.2. walking in the vanity of
their own minds, etc. Ephesians. 2.17.18. unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving
their lusts, Tit. gain Wantons, covetous, the eue^, drunkards, 1. Cor. 6.9.10.
ignorant of God, Gal. 4.8. dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1.3. and in a
word, the servants of all sins, Romans 6.20. When the word of God was taught
among them, they turned from Satan and their Idols, 1. These. 1.10.
to serve the living God:

Thus it is plain, that the word of God is a wonderful means, sanctified by
God, to redress things amiss, and to deliver a man from the evil way. Pron.
2.12.16.


The reason why men must have recourse unto Gods word, Reason.
and conform themselves to it, is, because herein God has revealed his will;
what in every thing he will have us do, and what to leave undone; and
therefore it is called his revealed will: yea, Psalm. 19.7.
a perfect law converting the soul, sufficient to correct, to instruct, to
comfort, and to make the man of God every way perfect.

2. Tim. 2.26.
out of the snare of the devil, at whose will they are now taken.

Hosius a wicked Father in the Council of Trent, tied up the Scriptures from
Laymen, making them beleene that their danger should be equal with the men
of Bethshemesh, 1. Sam. 6.
(looking into the Arc) if they should look into them. And Pius, the fourth
Pope of that name, to the end he might deter the Laytie from reading the
Bible, accounted it as a book prohibited, marking it in the forehead with this
stroke, Noli me tangere, God has not given the Bible to Laymen.

Deuteronomy. 31.11.12.
the learned. Thou shall read the words of this law before all Israel, that
they may hear it, and learn to fear the Lord: and he names there men, women,
children, and strangers, Deuteronomy. 31.11.12. Search the, Scriptures. John 5.19 Let
the word of God dwell plentifully in you, Col. 3.16.

Christ and his Apostles, who always taught in known tongues, that the people
might more easily come to knowledge; and whatsoever was written by them, they
did write it in a familiar, known, and vulgar sort, that every one might
learn it, and by patience, and consolation of the Scriptures might have hope.

Chrysostom faith, In epist ad Col. 3. v. 16.
Al secular, and Laymen, hear, and get Bibles to you, which are the soue
reign remedies of the soul. Ireneus faith the Valentinians fell into heresies
through their ignorance of the Scriptures. Contra Valentin. lib. 3. ca. 12.
And we read in Nicephorus of Paphnutius a Layman, Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 14.
so commended of the Fathers for his singular knowledge in Divinity, that he
was thought worthy to bear a part in the Nicene Council.

By all this we conclude, that these enemies of the Word, are deceivers of the
world, by detaining the written truth, and holding ignorance a maine pillar of
their religion, and a foster-mother of their devotion: needs must it walk in
blindness, when the means of knowledge are taken away, and in darkness, when
the light is hid in secret, and put under a bushel.

in reading over play-bookes, profane histories, and fables, which are
incitements to uncleanness: but that time which they pass in heating the Word
of God, or in reading the same, they think evil spent. These can take into
their hand the devils books, Cards and Dice, instruments of idleness, and
prouocations unto all manner of wickedness, as cursing, swearing, railing,
quarrelling, misspending of goods and time, drinking, bezeling, etc. but they
are loath to touch, or take into their hands the book of God to read, lest it
should cut them short of their liberty to sin, which they love as their lives.
Iam. 1.24.25.
But seeing thou art a forget full hearer, as S. James faith, and do cast
the word of God Ps. 50.17.
behind thy back, it is impossible for thee to be reformed and reclaimed;
and continuing so, thou heapest the wrath of God upon thee against the day of
wrath, when the Lord in the severity thereof will come against thee in flames
of fire, and against all those that would not obey the Gospel, 2. These. 1.8.
Luke 19.27.
nor suffer Christ to reign over them.

a light to shine unto thee, that thou slip not out of the way. If thou be in
ignorance, it will draw thee to understanding; if hard of heart, it is an
hammer to sosten thee; it is fire to purge and cleanse thee; and whatsoever
thou want, it is a storehouse of new and old things to make a supply.

And for this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, it will direct thee in every
particular thereof. It may be, thou know not what this Sacrament is; go to
the Word and it will teach thee, and tell thee, that it is an ordinance of God,
whereby Christ and all his benefits in external tites are represented, sealed,
and most certainly conveyed to every faithful Christian. It may be, thou
know not how Faith is nourished by this Sacrament.

Go to the Word again, and it will teach thee, 1. That Christ gave himself
for thee, Phil. 2.8. Tit. 2 14.
2. That the bread and wine, which thou do take, eat, and drink, are by
Faith, the body and blood of Christ, the only comfort and nourishment of thy
soul, and so thy faith may be confirmed. Ioh. 6.48.51.
It may be, that thou doubtest of thy self, and can not tell whether thou
art a worthy receiver of this Sacrament or no; Go to the Word, and it will
teach thee, that if there be, first, Repentance, Mark 1.15. Secondly Faith,
Ephesi. 3.16.27. Thirdly, Love, 1. Corinthians. 10.17. Fourthly, Thanksgiving, Luke
22.24. Then thou art a worthy receiver.

I might instance in other points of this Sacrament, but these are sufficient
to confirm us in this point, That recourse unto Gods Word, is the means to
help and further us to the knowledge of all points in this Sacrament. Psalm.
119.11.105.
Oh let us hide the Word of God in our hearts: Oh let not the Book of the law
depart out of our mouths, Ioshu. 1.8.
but let us meditate therein day and night; let us observe and do according to
all that is written therein. Never shall we be able to perform the duties that
God requires, nor avoid the sins that God forbids, till we bind the
precepts of the Word upon our heart, Prou. 2.16. Ps. 119.97.
and tie them about our necks that they may be our continual meditation.

Thus much of the first point. Again the Apostle says, he received of the
Lord, that, etc. He does not say that men sent him, or that any one taught him
how to speak or deliver his message, but he had all from the Lord Jesus. Hence
we learn, That

Gods Ministers receive their Order from the Lord, Doctr. 2.
they are fitted and qualified by the Lord to their Ministerial function. So
Paul speaks of himself, that he had nothing as of himself, but all was from
God, I received of the Lord, that which I delivered. And whenever God sent
any to his people, he gave him first his gifts, and graced him with heavenly
parts of wisdom, and endowments of spiritual knowledge; as may appear in
Esaias the Prophet, whom God sent forth to his people; one of the Seraphins
touched his mouth with a coal from the Altar, Esaias 6.8.
that he was sensible of the supply of Grace, and found himself ready to go
as the Lord would employ him. So likewise in Ezekiel, of whom it is said, That
the Word of the Lord came expressly to Ezekiel the Priest, Ez. 1.3. etc. 2.2.
and the Spirit into him to furnish him. Ths Lord encouraged Jeremy, when he
cried out, I am but a child, and told him, Behold, Ier. 1.6.9.
fear not, I have put my words in thy mouth. So our Savior Christ told his
Disciples, that he would make them fishers of men, that is, that they should
be fit for the service to which he ordained the^; Ioh. 20.22.
thereupon he breathed on them the holy Ghost, and endued them with power from
on high. Luke 24.24.
It is plain then that no Ministers do come from the Lord without his orders.

Pro. 10.26 Pro. 29.6.
so is the sloathfull to them that send him. No wise man will send a fool of
an errand, no more will God entrust a dumb greedy dog with his Embassage.

to commit sin, or add, or diminish his message; the fault would not so much
be laid on the messenger, as on God that sent him: therefore the Lord has been
ever especially careful to send forth none but such as have been well
qualified, and might deal truly with him in the delivery of his message.

Pro. 25.13.
Solomon tells us, that a faithful messenger refreshes the soul of his
master that sent him: how much more then will the Lord be delighted with, and
shall have his Name glorified by the diligence, prudency, and faithfulness of
those whom he sends abroad into his harvest, filled with all knowledge of
his will? 2. That his Church might thrive; for when the wholesome doctrine of
the Word is delivered by those that are furnished and prepared therewith, then
the graces of Gods people may be stirred up in them, and others may be added
to the Church thereby: and no marvel if the people thrive and grow, when their
Pastors give them their meat in due season, feed them with knowledge and
understanding. Ier. 3.15.
3. That they might gain reverence and estimation to their persons: They that
labor in Word and Doctrine are worthy of double honor. 1. Tim. 5.17.
Paul testifies of the Galatians, that they esteemed so reverently of him,
Gal. 4.14.
as that they received him as an Angel of God, that is, as a messenger sent
ready furnished to them of the Lord.

And the same Apostle when he sent Epaphroditus a faithful Minister, and his
companion in labor, to the Philippians, he bids them receive him with all
gladness in the Lord, Phil. 2.
that is, as one come unto them from God. These are the reasons to prove that
God will first fit and furnish his servants, before they shall go forth to
deliver his message. The Uses.

run before they be sent: Ier. 23.21.
such be no Ministers of the Lord, he has not put them into orders: though
they stand up in the Pulpit, yet they are none of his Preachers; they are
counterfeit Dogge-leaches, and pretenced Chyrurgions, they are idle and lazy;
they are covetous and flatterers; they are foolish and ignorant, etc. All which
provoke the Lord to refuse them that they shall be no Priests unto him.
Hosea 4.6.


Object. Object.
But the most unworthy of them are ever boasting of their calling: they are
called of the Church to be Ministers for God, and therefore they cannot be
disallowed.

Sol. Sol.
I confess indeed, that there is an ordinary calling of the Church, which is
necessary for the making of a Minister: But yet the outward ordinary calling of
the Church alone, is not sufficient to make a man a Minister of the Lord,
unless he be also inwardly called of God, and fitted with gifts (as with the
Spirit of God in wisdom, Exodus 31.2.3.
and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in workmanship, 1. Tim. 1.12 1 Samuel 10.9.
and in strength, and with another heart, etc.) to discharge the duties of the
place to which God calls him: And therefore whosoever takes upon him the
charge over a people, must look narrowly unto himself, and see whether he be
put into orders by God. Unless he have a testimony that God has called him
inwardly, as well as the Church outwardly, all is to small purpose; he is none
of Gods Ministers, he is crept into the Church of God by the window, and God
never set him apart to his holy service: but rather as a just Judge, will say
to him, Friend, Mat. 22.12.
how camst thou in hither?

Hence it was, that Tyndall that blessed Martyr did sharply reprove such
kind of Ministers, saying, Exposit. in Mat. 5.
In what case are they that have Benefices, and preach not? Verily, though they
stand at the Altar, yet are they excommunicate, and cast out of the living
Church of almighty God. And again, Priests that preach not are none of
Christ's, nor of his annoynting, but servants of the beast, whose mark they
bear. Oh that all ouer-hasty Ministers would well consider these things, and
rather undertake any other calling, then this so weighty a work, without
direction from the Lord. A notable president we have for them in the Prophecy
of Zechariah, where the Prophet speaks of some such Priests as pestered the
Church in his time, Zech. 13.4.5.6.
that They should no longer wear a rough garment to deceive: But he shall say,
I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman for man taught me to be an Heardman from my
youth. Then better it would be for Gods Church, she should be governed by the
men of God; and more comfortable to themselves, though their life be more
painful.

meat and drink, to do the will of God their Father that sent them: 3. If
they cry aloud and spare not; if they lift up their voices like trumpets, Isa.
58.1.
and show the people their transgressions and sins: Act. 10.33.
4. If they deliver nothing but that which they have received, and all that
which they have received: 5. If they deliver sound Doctrine, and the wholesome
word of truth: 6. If they divide the same word aright, and give every one his
own portion: Warning to the unruly, 1. These. 5.14.
comfort to the feeble minded, if they bind up the broken hearted, etc: 7. If
they study to approve themselves (their lives and hearts) unto God, 2. Tim.
2.15.
as men that need not be ashamed: 8. If their lips preserve knowledge: 9. If
they be ready to every good work, Tit. 3.1. Phil. 3.20.
and have their conversation in heaven, purging themselves as Christ is pure.
If these things be in them, then it may be truly said, that they are the Lords
workmen, that he has placed them in his watchtower, that they have received
gifts from above; that they are Ambassabours for Christ; that he has powered of
his Spirit upon them; and given them orders for the Ministerial function, to
discharge it.

Thirdly, the Apostle says, I have received of the Lord that which I
delivered, etc. I have not dealt deceitfully with you, to give you any
Sacrament of my own invention, but I have delivered that very same Sacrament
and words also that I received from the Lord Jesus Christ. From hence then in
the third place we learn: That

God alone is the Author, and appointer of all our Sacraments; Doct. 3.
whereby Gods inward graces are represented, sealed, and conveyed unto us. And
for this cause our Apostle here says, that the Lord Jesus, Godman, and
man-God, (not any man alone, nor Angel, nor Saint) took bread and wine, etc.
that is, he alone instituted this holy Supper. The like we may see in the
other Sacrament (for we have but two Sacraments under the New Testament, 1.
Cor. 10.1.2.3:) Christ alone gives commandment to his Disciples, and in them
to all his faithful Ministers, to Teach and baptize in the name of the Father,
Mat. 28.19.
the Son, and the holy Ghost.

Accedit verbum ad. elementu^, et fit Sacramentum: Aug. fu. Ioanne tract. 80.
Now God ordaines every Sacrament by his Sacramental Word, and this is due two
ways.

First, by giving a commandment; whereby he commands his Sacrament both to
be administered and received, Mat. 26.26. and 28.19.

Secondly, by making a promise, whereby he has ordained that the Elements
shall be instruments and seals of grace.

The reason why God alone must be the author of every Sacrament, Reas. 1.
is, because every Sacrament, which is but a sign of grace, can confirm
nothing, unless it be by the consent and promise of him, from whom the grace
promised must be received; But every good gift and good grace is from God
alone: Iam. 1.17. Mal. 3.1. Heb. 8.6.
therefore it must needs follow, that God is the author of the Sacrament.

ends, yet they are no Sacraments: For 1. They cannot confirm Faith: 2.
Neither are they so proper to the Church as Sacraments are: 3. Neither have
they any commandment of God to be Sacraments: 4. Nor his promise of being
signs and seals of grace.

Joseph did to come into Pharaohs presence. Now we know that the Sacrament is
a supper of the Lord Jesus his provision, he has prepared his chair, and
furnished his table, as Solomon says, Pro. 9.2.3.5.
and has given us a kind inuitation, saying, Come, eat of my bread, and
drink of my wine. Therefore we ought to examine our selves wherein we have
offended the Lord of this feast, that we may repent of our sins done against
him, and so we shall come prepared to this royal Banquet.

but otherwise upon our worthy partaking of them, all the benefits of Christ's
death and suffering shall be ours.

Fourthly, Paul goes forward and says, I have delivered; that is, I have done
my Lords will, revealed his counsel: or I have rightly disposed, and delivered
that to you all, which my master gave me in charge, I have not kept any good
back. Hence we learn, That

Ministers are Gods stewards, Doct. 4. Luke 12.42
the Lord has made them Rulers over his house, that they may distribute his
meat and allowance according to his mind. In every steward there is required
two things: 1. Wisdom; 2. Faithfulness. 1, Wisdom, to provide things
necessary before hand for after times: a wise steward stays not for the
morrow, to see what it will bring forth, but while it is said to day, he takes
the time. 2. A wise steward has a forecasting head, for he is ever plotting,
and contriuing how he may put forth his masters goods to the best advantage.
3. Lastly, a wife steward provides not dishes all alike, but of sundry sorts;
courses meats for servants then for sons: milk for weaklings and infants in
Christ, and strong meat for those that are grown up in Christ. This was the
practice of Paul, for he says, He gave the Corinthians milk to drink, and
not meat, 1 Cor. 3.2.
because they were not able to bear it: One and the same meat agrees not to
all men, Bread that strengthens the life of strong men, kills little
children; and honey that nourishes old persons, breeds gripings in the
belly, and knaweth the bowels of small infants.

2 Faithfulness is required in a Steward: 1. To distribute his masters meat,
according as his master pleases: that is, the pure word of God without any
mingling. He must deliver wholesome food, not poysonfull, infectious, or
heretical traditions of Popish Friars, Poets or Philosophers. He must not give
stones for bread, nor serpents for fishes; but as a good dispenser of Gods
Mysteries, if he speak, he must do it as the words of God; 1. Pet. 4.11
if he minister, he must do it as of the ability which God ministers; and if
he receive a gift, he must minister the same as a good disposer. This was the
practice of Raule, 2. Cor. 4.5.
We preach not our selves, but the Lord Jesus, and our selves your servants,
for Jesus sake. 2. He must deliver all his masters allowance, else he is an
unjust steward: he must keep nothing back, but deliver the whole counsel of
God, as S. Paul did; then if any one dye, the fault is not in the steward, who
faithfully gave him his portion, but in himself through neglect.

Postillars, Poets, and Philosophers, or else in ancient Fathers, then in the
wholesome word of God.

Secondly, all those that provide meats which are hard to digest, as vain
eloquence, bombasted and strange new coined words, which amaze their hearers:
these men show their small desire to convert souls to God. Affected eloquence,
as meat sweet at first in the mouth, may for a time tickle and delight the
care; but afterward it will go down like sharp gravel into the belly, or
else suddenly vanish away like the sound of music without fruit.

Thirdly, all those that provide unprofitable meats, that deliver Doctrine
neither wholesome nor tending to edification. Many take great pains to answer
foolish questions, that they have made to show their wit: to whom a man may say
when they come down from the Pulpit, as once Phauorinus the Philosopher said to
a proud and arrogant Grammarian, Sir, you have wearied your self and others
with an idle discourse.

Lastly, all those that provide good and wholesome doctrine, but do not
distribute it, nor apply it to men's consciences: Doctrine and application
should not be separated, for it is to take the life from the body: Application
is the very life of Doctrine. Hence it was that the Apostle made this the
principal end of preaching the word of God; namely, to speak to Edifying, 1.
Cor. 14.3.
to Exhortation, and to Comfort. And he exhorts Timothy to give attendance
as well to Exhortation, 1. Tim. 4.
as to Doctrine.

is a steward sufficient for these things: but he that is sent by the Lord, as
his labourer into his harvest, and watches in all things to do the work of
an Evangelist, 2. Tim. 4.5.
well gifted, and well qualified, and called of the Lord, is the Lords
Minister, and fit for his stewardship.



1. Cor. 4.1.
to wait and depend on them, for their meat and nourishment, even the word of
God, the food of their souls; as the Egyptians did wait on Joseph in the
time of famine, for the opening of the Kings Granary, that they might have
relief; and as the naked bird waits the coming of her damme, that she
might receive food from her mouth. So let all Gods people wait upon his
stewards in time of spiritual dearth, that they may receive relief to
satisfy their hungry souls. And thirdly, to call upon them for their portion
in spiritual things; for as servants, they may urge the stewards to
faithfulness, and look to obtain at their hands whatsoever portion their
Lord and master has allowed them.

5. We learn another point in this preface, the Apostle had spoken unto them
from God; and told them before, that they did not embrace him nor his message
as from God: and now in this place he urges it upon them, and tells them,
that for his part he delivered not any thing, but what he received from God,
which one would think might move them to receive his message that he
delivered. Hence observe; That.

As Gods Ministers are to deliver nothing unto his people, Doct. 5.
but that which they have from God; so the people are to receive that which is
taught, as from God. For if every faithful teacher must have a care that he
deliver nothing unto his people but that which he has received of the Lord,
then every hearer must be as careful to hear, and receive it as from the
Lord.

A notable example of this carfulness we find in the people of Thessalonica;
for whom the Apostle Paul gives thanks to God, 1. These. 2.13.
because They had received the word of God, not as the word of man, but as it
is in truth, the word of God, which works in all them that believe: They
respected not so much the earthen vessels, in which the heavenly treasure of
Gods word was conveyed unto them, as the Jewel of Gods word it self, and God
the author from whom it was sent. And hence it came to pass, as it follows
in the same place, that it did work for the salvation of so many as did
believe. And indeed, the word faithfully delivered, becomes unto the Elect,
2. Cor. 2.16.
the sweet savor of life unto life.

Paul speaks: We are Gods messengers; 2. Cor. 5.20.
entreating and beseeching you in Christ's steed, to be reconciled to God. Now
we know and see by experience; If a messenger come from a Prince, neither does
he his message in his own name, neither does the party to whom he brings it,
receive it as from himself, but as from him that sent him. Even so we that be
Ministers in the Name of God, in Gods steed, for your infirmity do entreat
you, etc. But the words we speak are not our own, but of the Lord.

Ob. 1. But it will be said of the Ministers, Object.
as once Corah and his companions said to Aaron, and Moses, You sons of Leuy,
Number. 16.3
you take too much upon you: What do you make your selves? Must your sayings
be received as Gods own Words? Who can bear it, that you should be so
presumptuous?

Sol. Sol.
Whereas we are thought to take too much upon us, because we reveal the
counsel of God, this is no presumption, but a mere slander; for we have
learned not to preach our selves, but Jesus Christ; 1. Cor. 3.5.
and to account our selves no more then the Ministers by who^ ye believe: and
albeit it has pleased God to call us his laborers, 2. Cor. 6.1.
and Co-workers with his Grace: yet we confess, that the whole increase of our
labor, and work does belong unto God.

Use 1. This serves to reprove those, that stop their ears, rerefusing to
hear the voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely: They never consider
that Ministers speaking by virtue of their office, are Gods messengers, which
is the cause that they turn themselves from hearing of Sermons, supposing them
to be nothing but matters of reproach.

2 All dull and drowsy Hearers may here justly be reproved, that hear, and
hear not. As Chrysostom. said of idle Priests; There are many Priests, and yet
but a few Priests: so we may say of Hearers, there be many Hearers, and yet
but a few Hearers that prick up their ears with reverend regard and
attention: they rather look for a fit place to sit easily, or else to fill up
the number in the congregation. If a man should ask account of them touching
their hearing, as David of Ahimaas touching his message, they would answer to
such a purpose as he did, 2. Sam. 18.29.
I saw a tumult, said Ahimaas, but I know not what: So these heard a great
noise, and many good words of God, but what they know not.

3 All itching ears may also be reproved, that listen rather to fables, 2.
Tim. 4.3.4.
then wholesome words, which are according to godliness. These nice Athenians
that hunt after novelties, and misshapen sentences, are like the dainty
Gentlewomen that cast off all solid and substantial dishes, and feed upon
nothing but forced dishes, and cook't conceits, though the ground of them in
comparison, be no better then a Boot-shanke, as we use to say.

If any man will be so frivolous as to pester his sermons with idle fabulous
stories, he shall sooner find attention in our people, then he that with
greatest Evidence of the Spirit, and power of Christ delivers the deep
mysteries of Salvation.

4 All those that reject the Lord in his Ministers may be reproved; their
scorns and disdainefull speeches are ascended up to heaven, and the Lord has
taken notice of them, to condemn the scorners and contemners of his Word; but
to comfort his servants in the contempt that is cast upon them: He that
despises you despises me: Luke 10.16
Paul also could say, that He which despises, 1. These. 4.8
despises not man but God. Let therefore Gods Ministers comfort themselves,
even as Aaron and Moses did, when the people began to repine against them: What
are we, Exodus 16.7.8.
say they, that ye murmured against us? Your murmurings are not against us, but
against the Lord. And if it be that the people deal fraudulently with them,
yet it will be said to the fraudulent dealers, as it was to Ananias and
Saphird, You have not dealt wickedly with man, Act. 5.4.
but with God.

they came not to hear man, but God. If Eglon an Heathen rose out of his
Throne when Ehud told him he had a message to him from God: Judge. 3.20.
Act. 12.22.
If Herod's words shall be accounted as the voice of God, not of man: Ioh. 19.8.
And if Pilate tremble when he hears of dealing with the Son of God: Much
more should we with all reverence, and fear, receive the voice of God
sounding in his ministers, considering the majesty, wisdom, and power of the
Author of that voice.

Q. But how may I know that God speaks in the Ministers?

Answ. First, by the searching power of the Word that he delivers: Heb. 4.12.
It diserneth the most secret thoughts and intentions of the heart, which man
himself cannot discry. In this respect thou can not otherwise choose, but
say, God is in us of a truth. 1 Cor. 14.25.


Secondly, by the no less then miraculous change, it works in the hearts of
men in whom God will have it effectual to salvation. Psalm. 19.
Thirdly, by the truth of it; there is no untruth in that which God delivers:
for his Judgments are truth, and his word is truth, John. 17.7
and God himself is the God of truth.

Fourthly by the majesty of it, though it be carried in base and slender
vessels, yet it preuailes to draw the mind to subject the very thoughts, 2.
Cor. 10.5.
and conscience to obedience and reverence,

Lastly, by the trembling awe, that it strikes the conscience with. Felix that
could, as we may say, have commanded a troop of men, and have made thousands
afraid; yet weak Paul, that lay fast in bonds, strikes this great Judge with
tre^bling at the hearing of Gods voice.

Oh therefore whatsoever the Lord shall command us by his Ministers, let us
resolve to do it; and whatsoever they shall deliver in the name of the Lord,
let us hear, and receive it: yea as the Prophet says, Isa. 66.2.
Let us tremble at the words of God. Thus much of the preface.

The Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread, etc.
NOw follows the Institution of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper it self,
and the celebration thereof: when the Apostle had delivered this Supper to the
Corinthians, and they had abused it, some by gluttony and drunkenness,
others, by hatred of their brethrens persons, others by making divisions and
debates, and others by a neglect of it, as if it had been the Apostles own
institution; then he was urged, and moved to make known the Author of this
Supper, the end of it, and the institution it self: wherein we may consider
these three things. 1. The time, when this Supper was instituted; The same
night in which Jesus was betrayed. 2. The matter of this institution, Bread,
and Wine, signifying the body, and blood of Christ. 3. The manner of this
institution: wherein also may be observed. 1. The works of Christ; 2. His
words.

1. His works, he took the Bread, and likewise the Cup. 2. He gave thanks.
3. He brake the Bread etc. 2. His words. 1. take. 2. eat, drink. 3. This is
my Body, this is my blood. etc.

First, (...)
for the time when the Lord Jesus instituted his last Supper, that is set
down, 1. By an emphaticall note, The same night. 2. By an accident that befell
our Savior Christ that night: he was betrayed.

The meaning of the words.
This word Night is used sundry ways: sometimes it is used for ignorance of
God, and want of knowledge, he Tnight is far spent,, that is, ignorance is
much decayed, Romans 13. Sometimes it is used for much affliction, night shall be
unto you, that you shall not have a vision, that is, much trouble shall befall
you, Mica. 3.6. Sometimes it is used for darkness. The night comes, when no
man can work, that is, darkness comes, Ioh. 9.4. And sometimes it is used,
and that most commonly for that time, that comprehends darkness, and
succeeds the day, and so it is taken in this place: The same night, that is,
that night wherein Judas the child of perdition fell from his Master, being
possessed of Satan, and betrayed him, that is, dealt treacherously with him,
seeming a friend before, but now proouing a traitor. In a word: that same
night, that wretched Judas betrayed his Lord, and Master, and delivered him up
into the hands of the Jews to crucify, in that same night did his Lord and
Master, even Jesus Christ institute his last Supper.

Quest. Quest.
But why did our Savior institute this Sacrament at night?

Sol. Sol.
First, that the type, and shadow of this sacrament, which was the Passover,
might be fully answered: Exodus 12.6.8.
That was instituted in the night that the Lord smote the Egyptians, and passed
by the houses of the Israelites: and therefore the Lord Jesus when he took
away the Passover, and gave us in stead thereof this Sacrament of his Supper,
he instituted the same in the night to fulfill that type.

2. That a fit name might be applied, and given to this Sacrament, it is
therefore called a Supper, because that it was instituted in the night.

3. It was then the time of the year, that the feast of the Paschall Lamb
should be celebrated, for at Easter the Jews did always eat the Passover:
our Savior therefore (who celebrated his own Supper in stead of their
Passover,) knowing what time of the year, and what night in that time they
observed to eat their feast, he as near as he could, took the same time
and night for the institution of this Sacrament, and for the eating of his
supper.

4. The night was the fittest time for the institution of this Sacrament,
because then the Disciples of Christ were gathered to gether to receive it,
whereas all the day long, they were scattered abroad, some in one place, some
in another, all of them doing the will of their Master Christ that sent them.

5. Lastly, it cannot be denied, but that our Savior Christ might have taken
the day, or another time for the institution of this his last Supper: but yet
he saw that the time was at hand, when he should be offered up a sacrifice for
his people, and therefore he instituted this Sacrament of his last Supper,
that they might shortly see that fulfilled in his body, which they saw figured
in outward signs Bread and Wine, the same night of the institution.

Quest. Quest. 2.
But may not we observe the night for the eating of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper?

Sol. Sol.
This is no moral action to be imitated, but a circumstance which cannot
bind. 2. Here is no commandment left by our Savior Christ to imitate him
herein. 3. Every Communicant must look to his preparation, and not come to
this Supper (repleto ventre) having spent the day in eating, and drinking. 4.
To the receiving of this Supper there is required a Congregation, which cannot
be so fitly gathered upon the night, as the day. 5. Unless we could be
proportionable to Christ in eating his Supper, it is not for us to observe the
circumstance; 1. he did eat but once: 2. he did eat to take away the
ceremony, to fulfill the thing signified, to answer the time of the
Passover, to manifest to his Disciples that presently he should be offered:
etc. 3. He did eat at the full end and conclusion of his days, and not
before. 6. Lastly, the night is a dull and drowsy time, and will oppress the
body and mind with heavy sleep: but the receiving of the Sacrament calls
for our quickest memories, and freshest meditations; and therefore it is not so
fit a time for the eating of so blessed a banquet, as the Lords Supper is.

Herein the Papists have much slandered our Church, as that we should give
allowance for observation of this time after the Imitation of Christ, and
should make this Supper of the Lord Jesus, a nightly feast of good cheer: But
the practice of our Church will show how unjust this stander is, and how
wrongfully they accuse us. The same night that he was betrayed he took, etc.
When Christ was ready to yield himself to the death, he institutes and
ordaynes a Sacrament. Hence learn, That God has had a special care, Doct. 1.
that as his Word, so also his Sacraments might from time to time be continued
in his Church. Before the fall in Paradise, God was so careful for the good of
man, that he gave him 2 Sacraments: 1. Genesis 2.9.
The Tree of Life, and 2. The Tree of Knowledge of good and evil; Afterward in
the time of the old Testament, he did institute the Circumcision, and Paschall
Lamb, Genesis 17.10. Exodus 12.3. Mat. 3. and 28.26.
and now in our time under the Gospel, we have Baptism and the Lords Supper.

Now God is thus careful, that his Sacraments might be continued in the
Church, both that they might strengthen our faith, and be notes and badges of
our Profession, whereby the members of his Church may be distinguished, Exodus
12.43.
and discerned from all Infidels, and Heathens; The Passover did belong to
Gods people, they might eat it, but strangers might not; and Circumcision was
of the Jews, for they were called circumcised; but not of the Gentiles, for
they were called the uncircumcised.

true unto our Lord and Master: let us adventure our selves in his camp
against all his enemies, and fight his battles.

The word Sacrament has his name from the use, and practice of soldiers in
war: For look as in ancient time the soldier did bind himself, by an
oath, solenni sacramento.
with his sword girded under his arm, to fight his Captains battles; So we
being partakers of the holy Sacrament, do receive the Lords badge, and bind
our selves for ever to fight his battles: let us not then (for shame) carry
his badge upon our sleeves, and take part with his enemy the Devil, by
continuing any longer in our sins, but let us arm our selves, and take unto
us the sword of the spitit; and manfully stand out in the Lords cause that we
may bring glory (...) God, and comfort to our selue^



Now follows the treason that befell our Savior Christ, and was plotted
against him that night, he did ordain his last Supper; which may be set
down both by the quality of it, and also by the time, when it was plotted*
the quality of it, is plain in these few things.

It was high treason against the King of heaven and earth, conspired under
shows of friendship and love: for the damnable traitor could speak Christ
fair in the face, Mat. 26.49
God save thee Master: A sin most haynons, if we mark the circumstances of
it: for first who was the actor of this treason? It was Judas, a servant of
Christ, an Apostle, Christ's steward, for he bate the bag. Secondly, against
whom was it committed? Against Christ the son of the living God, Mat. 16.16.
his Master whom he had followed; whose Sermons he had heard, whose kindness
he had received, and whom twice together he resused, and neglected: when his
Master (a little before the treason was put in practice) spoke in a wonderful
mild manner unto him; Friend (says he) wherefore art thou come? Mat. 29.50
And again when he came near to him to kiss him: Judas (says he) betrayest
thou the Son, Luke 22.45
of Manwith a kiss? These word^ might have broken an heart of brass, yet they
never moved him. Thirdly, by what means was it wrought secretly; for a little
after supper he went from his Master, and compacted with the Jews, who
forthwith took the advantage of the time, it being dark, when Christ could
not see to go abroad; and of the place, being so near them that he could
not flee from them. Fourthly, for what end did he treacherously seek his
Masters death? To enrich himself, and yet he obtained but a ^tifle, even
thirty pieces of silver: if he could have obtained any honor, or great
possession, or any great and high office by this treachery, it had been
something, but all that he got was a little filthy lucre; the wages of
iniquity, and the price of innocent blood: What should I urge this treason any
more in the circumstances of it, when the Scriptures handle it plainly, and
all men know it readily?

The truth is, Doctr. 2
that it is an odious sin, worthy all men's hatred: Haman though never so
secretly contrived mischief against the good Jews, yet his proper portion for
his intended mischief, was detestation: and so it was with Nabuch adnezzars
treacherous servants, that conspired against the three Children; when all would
not work well as they looked for, then they found their great Lords love turned
to absolute hatred. It is not likely that any wise man ca^ either speak well,
or wish well to a traitor that intends mischief.

Treason is odious, in respect of the authors of it, Reas. 1.
they are bloud-thirstie men, such as cast off all pity, and put off all
humanity, natural affections, and the bowels of compassion: they are fierce,
and cruel, furious, and full of rage, and always their out cry against Gods
Church is, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. Psalm. 137.^.


2 In respect of the effects, Reason
which are many; sword and slaughter, spoil and robery; It spares neither
life nor goods, but killes, and rifles all before it.

Rome is called an H^bitation of Di^^ells. R^u. 1^.^




Again, the Apostle says, The night that he was betrayed, observing that
Judas took the time of darkness to practice his treachery. Learn, That.

It is the property of wicked men to observe the closest times for wicked
practices: they love holes and corns, that their mischeiuous proiects may be
kept secret and close; Judas takes his fit time of darkness to work the death
of our Savior Jesus Christ* he was loath that his ^^llo^^ Apostles should be
acquainted ^^d with his intended treachery which makes him go so s^^^^tly to
work. And to ^^sist in some other particulars, we shall see that it has been
evermore the practice of all wicked men* to employ themselves busily in most
wicked and ungodly practices, when they are priu^te, or in dark. So Paul does
testify, 1. These. 5.7
that They who are drunken, are drunken in the night: and Job says, Job 24.15.
That the Adulterer waits for the twilight: The thief steals in the night:
Mat. 13.3.
The enemy sows Tar^s when m^n are asleep, and murderers come in darkness
to w^^cke then malic^ upon their enemies, etc.

1 Their deeds are evil, Reas. 1.
and they date not show them openly, like Owls under covert all day long; but
when night comes, they let them fly abroad like flinder mice, and bold Backs
in the air. Ioh. 3.20.
Every man (says the Evangelist) that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to light, lest his deeds should be reproved: These evil doers are
like bad shopkeepers, that trade in naughty wares: they commonly have dark
warehouses, and shops to keep their ware in, that the buyer might not
discern whether it be merchantable or vendible. The unclean person will not
act his filthiness in the brightness of the Sun, nor before any people, no
not before a little child, lest he should be discried, and his uncleanness made
known.

The year ^8. gunpouder plot.
when their heads ^^st out proiects for the destruction of Gods servants. Let
their own purposes speak for them, how much good they intended to bring to
pass by their exemption from humane society. This I dare speak for them, that
if the men of their confederacy, Obad. 7.
and they that were at peace with them, h^^^ not d^c^^^^ them, they had vtter^y
d^stroyed v^ and (...) ^and* and let me t^^^ them, that the Lord will one day
magnify his justice against them, (...) their ^^^^^tifull maintenance of their
secret ^^^^^ons: then neither th^^ t^n ho^^s, or Kings, nor the seven heads,
nor their power and bloody wars, their Spanish Inquisition, their ^assacres,
their two ^^aiterous ^olledges, Bulls, and E^com^^nications, not the Council of
Tr^nt, Order of Iesult^s, ^^gling of Images, false miracles, and Legends, lies
and equivocations, falsifying of authority, and Cloister policies, will uphold
their tottering state, but down it must with all their props and be burnt with
fire. Reu. 17.16.


wicked men, that work mischief in the darkest night, and closest place; the
Lord will one day lay open, and discover their close and mischeiuous practices,
when nothing shall be given them for their reward, but horror, shame, and
confusion of face. Consisider this thou hypocrite, thou parricide, thou that
give fair words, but obseruest the times of darkness for the work of
mischief, and to destroy thy best friend, as Judas did his Master: the Lord
has taken notice of thy wickedness, and will punish thee openly for it.
Consider this thou unchaste and lecherous person, An pudet id facere in
conspectudes, ac testibus Angelis, quod no^ pudet facere in conspe ^tu hominum:
Erasm.
that can^^^ o^ away with the light, but take thy pleasure in the closest
hooks and darkest nights; that blushest to sin before men, though not so in
the sight of God, the Lord will open thy sin also, and exclude thee out of
the Kingdom of heaven. 1. Cor. 6.3
Consider this you covetous Magistrates, that take close bribes, which for
fear of the law you dare not bring, to the light: 1. Cor. 4.5. Ad Lunae ^umina
visus eris.
The Lord that lightens things hid in darkness, will bring to light your
bribing, and close wicked dealing. Yet let all sinners, that have hitherto
committed sin in secret, consider, that if they run with Sisera into some
private house, or with Adam, into some secret bush, or compass themselves with
the dark hangings of the bed; or run with Sarah behind the door; or take
the midnight with the these yet the Lord will find them out, and at the last
day punish them in the view of the whole world.

Ioh. 3.21.
He that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds might be made
manifest; that they are wrought according to God. If we should fly the face of
God, and take the night for a mask, and darkness for a covering, 1. These. 5.5
walking not as children of the day, but as children of the darkness: the
light of the day would utterly shame us, and the beams of the Sun would
witness against us. Oh therefore let us so work while it is yet day, and
never fear to bring all our works to the trial of the day. Let us be bold in
this, Psalm. 139.23.
and say with the Prophet David, O God try me, and search my thoughts.

Thus much of the time of the institution of the Lords Supper: now it remains
to deliver the matter, and the manner of the institution, which things we
shall the better know and learn, if we lay down what a Sacrament it:
Definition of a sacrament. Sacrificiu^ visibile inuisibilis sacrificij
sacramentu^: Aug. de ciuit. dei. li. 10 c. 5.


A Sacrament is a visible sign of an holy thing, or a visible form of an
invisible Grace: but because in this brief definition there is some
darkness, and many Papists and unskillful men have bin deceived therein: take
this as a more fuller definition.

A Sacrament is an ordinance of God, whereby Christ and al his benefits, in
certain visible signs and external rites are represented, sealed, and most
certainly conuayed to every Christian believer. I say, that a Sacrament is the
Ordinance, not of man, but of God, in which by certain visible signs, and
external rites, Christ and his benefits are showed to every Christian. For
look as Gods Word is his own ordinance, to beget Faith in our hearts, whereby
Christ and all his benefits, as by a hand, may be apprehended and conuayed unto
us: Even so Sacraments are special Ordinances of God, whereby our Faith
(being ingendered and begotten by the operation of Gods Spirit, and the
ministry of the Word) may be further increased, confirmed, and strengthened,
to the end we may be made more fully partakers of Christ and all his benefits
to our salvation: for Christ and his benefits are offered to us in both; the
difference only stands in this: the word offreth Christ to our ears, that we
may hear of him, and his redeeming of Mankind: but the Sacraments offer
Christ to our senses, Seeing, Feeling, Tasting. As by the ministry of the
word we hear of Christ with our ears; so by the Sacraments we may (as it
were) see Christ with our eyes; feel Christ with our hands; and taste of
Christ with our mouths. Again, I add in the last place, that as Christ and
his benefits are represented to our senses, so he is also sealed, and most
certainly conuayed to every true believer. Here we may see three most
notable ends of a Sacrament.

1 That it is an outward sign to represent, and set before our eyes Christ and
his merits: as circumcision to the Jews, was a sign of that covenant God made
with them in his Son Christ; namely, that he would be their God, and they
should be his people, etc. So baptism and the Lords Supper are much more
evident signs to us that are dull of conceit, not only of the covenant, but
also of the Mediator of the covenant, Christ Jesus himself.

2 The Sacrament serves to be a seal, to confirm our faith, and to take away
all doubtings; and therefore it is called the seal of the Righteousness of
faith, Romans 4.11
because it certifies a man thereof, and puts him out of all doubts: As when
his Majesty's Highness sends forth his letters Patents, if we hear them
read, yet see not the broad seal, we are in some doubt; but if we ask for the
seal, and see it, then we are confirmed: Even so our highest Prince has sent
us his letters patents from heaven, notwithstanding oftentimes we have refused
them, and called them in question: but now in that he has together with the^
sent us his broad seal; yea, his great seals the Sacraments, we may then very
well rest our selves, and be confirmed.

3 The Sacrament is also an Instrument to convey Christ, and his benefits to
us; for we (like Thomas that would not believe) are not contented till we see,
and feel Christ: and therefore the Sacrament is a means to bring him to us,
if we have the hand of faith to receive him.

Here we are taught in the fear of God, Use.
not only to esteem highly the Sacraments, but to labor for a true use of
them, that by the means hereof, we may fully and assuredly be made partakers
of Christ. See the unspeakable goodness of God toward us, how desirous he is
(if we had grace and hearts to consider it) that we should not perish, but
believe, and so come to be saved. Has God contented himself only with
speaking, or sending us his word from heaven, that he will be reconciled to us,
if we believe and repent? (though this had bin sufficient, he being our King
and Prince, and therefore ought not once to call his Word in question.) No
verily, but to show his desire of our good, and to take away all excuse from us
if we do not embrace his mercy: he has caused this Word to be written in a
book for our learning, preserved it in his Church, and conuayed it from hand
to hand, from one generation to another; and now at last it is come to us, so
as daily we may read and hear of Christ.

And to take away all doubts touching the truth of this word, he has put to it
his broad seals, with the inscription, and Image of Christ; that every way we
might be made partakers of Christ, by Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, feeling, and
smelling: In so much that if we do not repent, and believe, God may justly
complain of us, as sometimes he did of the Jews, Isai. 5.4.
What is it that I should do, that I have not done already to this people?

Having laid down the definition of a Sacrament, what it is, we will in the
next place, speak of the things, whereof the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is
instituted: and they are Bread and Wine, resemblances and signs of the body,
and blood of Christ.

He took bread; here is the element of bread first mentioned, to signify to
us the Body of Christ.

Quest. Quest.
But why did Christ take bread, and choose it for this purpose, rather then any
other sustenance, or any other Creature.

Sol. Sol.
Bread comprehends under it, and signifies all manner of provision, and
necessary means, as meat, rest, sleep, Physic, recreation. etc. Genesis
43.25. Exodus 18.12. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Mat. 4.4. Marc. 3.20. Luke 11.3.

2. Bread of all other Creatures is most wholesome; other meats may have
compositions, and mixture, but this is called panis Azymus, Azymus
because it is without leaven, and clean; yea, pure, and good. 1. Cor. 5.7.

3. It is the easiest, and soonest come by: many people could scarce be made
partakers of other Creatures: either through their own wants, or scarcity of
the thing, when as this is ready at all times.

4. It is quickly broken, and when it is broken, soon it may be delivered, and
handsome to be carried in the hand, and shown to the Congregation: it is not
so with other creatures, that require cutting, or pulling.

5. Christ thought good to take the name of bread to himself, and to be
called Bread. Ioh. 6.32.33.50.51. etc.

6. The use of bread in the Law was holy: 1. For the consecration of the high
Priest: Exodus 29.23. Ezekiel. 44.7.2. For the offering of first fruits of Corn 2.
King. 4.42. and 3. For the high Priests own eating: Leuit. 24.5.9. This Bread
was called the face or shewbread Exodus 25.30. Because it was always in the
presence of God. It was a type of the true bread Jesus Christ, that came down
from heaven, and also shadowed forth the Eucharist of the New Testament.

7. There can be no full banquet where bread is wanting, though there be much
cheer; but where bread is, though other things be wanting, there may be a
full feast.

8. Bread strengthens and nourishes the body more then any other food, etc.
For these and such like reasons, it may appear that bread was chosen of our
Savior Christ to represent his body. From thence then let us observe, that
(seeing our Savior took bread, and appointed it an Element in this
Sacrament:) That Christ Jesus is the true bread of life, Doctr. 1.
which came down from Heaven, whereon our souls are to feed unto eternal
life: For by bread here is signified Christ, whereon we are to feed our souls
by faith, as we feed our bodies with our daily bread, for the preservation of
our natural life; For this cause our Savior teaches his Disciples plainly,
that Moses had given their fathers Bread from Heaven: meaning, Ioh. 6.31.33.
etc.
that heavenly Manna, whereof they fed in the Wilderness; Exodus 16.15
but now they have the bread of God which is Christ, that came down from
Heaven, Ioh. 6.48.51.
to give life unto the World; and to put al out of doubt, I am, says Christ,
the bread of life, he that comes unto me shall not hunger, and he that
believes in me, shall not thirst.

of his manhood, whole Christ, the manhood subsisting in the person of the
Son, and it has the virtue to feed, and nourish us, in that it is united to
the person of the Deity.

Christ is not a bodily food, or a corporal bread, but altogether a
spiritual, and heavenly food, to be received after a spiritual manner, not
by the hand, and stomach of our bodies, but by the hand, and stomach of our
souls, that is, a true, and lively faith.

Adam we were all dead, 1. Cor. 15.22.
so now in Christ we are all made alive.

Use. Use.
Here we may see the wonderful love of our Savior Christ toward us, in that
he was content of his own accord, to come from heaven, to unloose the bands
of death, and to quicken us, and give us life; Yea, not only so, but to feed,
and nourish us daily with his ownebody. The Pelican, when any of her young
ones are hurt of a Serpent, rather then they should die, she will pierce her
breast, and give them suck, and nourish them: So Christ Jesus rather then we
should perish, (so tenderly he loves us) was content to lay down his life for
us, that so we might feed upon his body, and blood to eternal life: Oh
therefore let all of us highly account of this love of Christ, embrace it, and
be thankful for it: otherwise our case is miserable, we are but dead persons,
and have no spiritual life in us; nay we should utterly sterue, and pine away
without it.

The second element is Wine, which Christ took into his hands, as may be
gathered out of these words, He took the Cup wherein the wine was: for no man
will dare to say that the cup was empty, seeing our Savior Christ says,
Mar. 26.29 Luk 22.18
I Will not drink of the fruit of the Vine any more, till the Kingdom of God
shall come. Wine then was the second element: Cyprian. lib. 2. Epistola 3.
contrary to the Aquarij, who supposed water to be in the cup: contrary to
the Lactei that used Milk in stead of Wine, Idem, de consecrat. distinct. 2.
Can. Alexander the first caused this mingling of water with wine.
and the Papists that mingle water with Wine, and that so absolutely and
necessarily, that they condemn those who do not receive it after the same
manner: but herein they overthrow themselves: First, because they go against
the example of Christ. Secondly, because they overthrow the example by denying
the use of pure Wine.

More might be alleged to confute their practices; but others have well dealt
therein and our purpose is to handle those things that be positiuely laid down.

Wine, this second Element, signifies the blood of Christ, Metonymice.
and offers it to the eye of Faith: This also we understand to be the Cup
figuratively, applied and given to Christ's Disciples for their refreshing, etc.
For as wine is to the body, so the blood of Christ is a refreshing to the
soul: And whereas Christ took, and gave not only the bread, but also the
wine, we learn, That

Christ is a full Redeemer: Doct.
His blood does purge us from all iniquity. 1. Ioh. 1.7.
This is the confession of the four beasts, and four and twenty Elders, who
fall down before the Lamb, Reu. 5.8.9.
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation. And so he is an all-sufficient ransom for us, 1. Tim.
2.6.
of greater power to deliver us from sin, then Adam was to bring us into
sin.

Take notice of the slavery and bondage wherein we were holden as captives;
and the fullness of our redemption by Christ will plainly appear.

First, Col. 1.13.
generally we were in bondage to the whole power of darkness, in such a
manner, that all our spiritual enemies had command over us.

Secondly, more particularly we were in bondage: first to sin, for so says the
Apostle, Romans 6.^6.
His servants we are to whom we obey, whether it be of sin, etc. Again, I am
carnal, Romans 7.14.
sold under sin. And S. Peter tells us of some that Promise others liberty,
and are themselves servants of corruption: For (says he) of whomsoever a man
is overcome, 2 Pet. 2.19.
even unto the same he is in bondage.

2 We were in bondage to the whole law, which exacted at our hands perfect
obedience; but Christ (says the Apostle) came to redeem them that were under
the law. Gal. 4.5.


3 We were slaves to eternal death, as God testified to Adam, In that day that
thou shall eat thereof, Genesis 2.17.
thou shall dye the death: And S. John says, 1. Ioh. 3.14
We know that we are translated from death, etc.

4 We were in bondage under Satan, so long as we were the children of
disobedience, Ephe. 2.2.
he wroght in us: 2. Tim. 2.25
We were in his snare, and taken at his will.

5 We were slaves to hell and condemnation, being by nature the children of
wrath. Ephe. 2.3.


There was never any slavery or bondage like this: The bondage of the
Israelites under Pharaoh; Exo. 1.11.14.
Of the seventy Kings under Adoni-bezeck; Judge. 1.7.
Of Sampson under the Philistines, Judge. 16.21.
bound with fetters, and made to grind like a horse; Of Zedekiah under the
King of Babell, who put out his eyes, bound him with chatnes, carried him to
Babell, Ier. 52.11.
and put him in prison till the day of his death; and of the believing
Christians under the barbarous Turk, Metellus Sequanus. Botholome-Casas a
Bishop in Spain. Mr. White in his way to the Church. digres. 50.
and blood-sucking Spaniard: these particulars are grievous to be borne, but
to this spiritual captivity they are nothing: For in these the very soul is
sore vexed. This was our slavery, and from this has Christ redeemed us, and
that not in part, but fully, from the power of darkness unto the light: he
gave us the voice of his Gospel to enlighten our understandings, Luke 4.18.
and preached deliverance to us poor captives. 2. He redeemed us from sin
unto holiness, John 14.
by leaving behind him his comforter in his Disciples, for our instruction,
and regenerating us by his blessed Spirit. 3. From the power of the Law; he
performed most exact and absolute obedience thereunto. Lastly, from Satan, and
eternal death, by paying a price, by giving himself a ransom, by yielding to
the death of the Cross, and suffering the sharpest sorrows, and deepest
agonies thereupon. Thus Christ Jesus by the bruising of his body, and the loss
of his blood, is become our perfect and full Redeemer.

the Name of God, who has done so great things for us, saying with Zachary,
Luke 1.68.69.
Blessed be the Lord God of Isaael, who has visited and redeemed his people:
And certainly howsoever this benefit be esteemed of carnal men nothing worth,
yet they that have once tasted the sweetness thereof, do contemn the wealth of
all the world, and count it but dung in comparison of it. And therefore they
are careful to stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ has made them
free, Gal. 5.1.
and having once escaped from the filthiness of the world, they are loath to
be entangled again therein. 2. Pet. 2.20


He has bought us with a price, 1. Cor. 6.20.
let us therefore glorify God in our body, and spirit: Great is the benefit we
have received by the shedding of his blood, much duty therefore we owe unto
him: He has looked on the poor estate of his servants. Let us therefore with
the Prophet David, cry unto him, Behold, Ps. 116.16.
I am thy servant, and the son of thine handmaid. He being the spotless and
immaculate Lamb, suffered not for himself but for us: Let us therefore
carefully avoid sin, Gal. 5 24.
and crucify the flesh with the lusts thereof.

Again, in that Christ took bread, and then wine, both bread and wine. We
learn, That

In Christ is full and perfect nourishment: Doctr. 3.
for as bread and wine are the full nourishment of the body, so the body and
blood of Christ are the full, and perfect nourishment of the soul of every
believer. Hence could the Prophet David say, Ps. 114.15.
Bread is given to strengthen the heart, and Wine to nourish it. No man can
desire more, this is full nourishment. Wisdom also calls for the simple,
and those that want understanding, Come, I have furnished my Table, Pro. 9.2.5.
eat of my bread, and drink of the wine that I have mingled. Here is also
full nourishment, and a Table richly furnished with good cheer: But our
Savior who is the wisdom of his Father, in plain terms speaks of
himself, Ho every one that thirsts, etc. Is. 55.1.2.
Why do you spend your money on that which is not bread? Come, buy, and eat
that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness, and drink
ye of the Cup that I shall give, it shall be be in you a well of water
springing up to everlasting life: Ioh. 4.14.
so as you neither shall hunger nor thirst any more. Here then we see that
Christ is perfect nourishment.

Ob. But how is Christ perfect nourishment, Object.
when as they that have tasted of his sweetness, hunger and thirst after him
the more?

I answer, that it is true, the more a man feels Christ, Sol.
the more he desires to be possessed of Christ; and the more grace he has,
the less he thinks he has. But for hunger and thirst, we must understand
them, either for want of meat and drink, or as desire after meat and drink:
Now he that has tasted of Christ's merits, and felt the sweetness of his body
and blood, shall never hunger and thirst; that is, shall never want, or be so
wholly destitute as he was before he tasted, though in the mean time he may
be said to hunger and thirst, touching his desire of Christ: and yet no sooner
shall he desire, Note.
but he shall be relieved and refreshed; for Christ (whom he has tasted
already) shall be in him a Fountain springing, and ready to satisfy him in
the midst of his desire.

1 This may teach us to hunger and thirst after Christ Jesus, Use 1.
being unto our souls both bread and drink; and to labor for a sense and
feeling of both. Men that are punished with penury, and want of food, meat,
drink, bread, etc. they are maruailously griped and pained at the bottom of
their stomach, they will not stick to go far to market to buy their
provision; yea, the pain of hunger is so great, that we read of some, who
against nature have eaten their own children, and the flesh of their own
arms* But the truth is, the most of us are not acquainted with this spiritual
hunger and thirst: we are like the Gadarens, that would have more swine and
hogs, and less of Christ; or like the Israelites, that hunger after the
flesh pots of Egypt, the things of this life, worldly meats and drinks, which
shall perish with the use thereof; and after riches, and wealth, Isa. 5.
how we may join house to house, land to land: If it were not so we should
feel the want of Christ our food: we would not loath it, as the Israelites
did their Manna: we would not keep away from it, though it were further off
us then it is; we would travail to it, and buy it, seeing it is offered
freely without money or money worth. Oh therefore, Isa. 55.
if we look to be saved, and to taste how sweet Jesus Christ it; let us
labor for this hunger and thirst after him: For unless we be touched with
the feeling of our own wants: 2. grievously pained for it: 3. and vehemently
long after Christ, he will never be our food and nourishment.

2 This may also serve for the consolation and comfort of Gods children, if
they ear this bread, Use.
and drink this wine; that is, if they be partakers of Christ by faith, then
they shall obtain with Christ, all things else; remission of sins, peace of
conscience, wealth, length of days, grace, and glory. THey shall drink to
satisfy, and shall not return to former drouth; for Out of their belly shall
flow rivers of water: Ioh. 7.38.
they shall eat, till they be able to say with the holy man, Pro. 30.8.
Lord I thank thee, thou have fed me with food convenient for me: They shall
so feed upon Christ, as that there shall be a storehouse of food* and a
fountain of living water within them.

3 It may be, that sometimes they may find cause to cry with the holy men of
God, in the sense of Gods wrath, O my leanness, my leanness, I am pained at
the very heart! or I am like the drouth in Summer, parched as the ground, and
scorched for want of moisture! yet here is comfort in this misery, that Christ
is in the^, their bread and wine, their meat and drink, that they should not
perish: he is a fountain and a treasury of living graces, springing up in
their hearts, to refresh and revive them. In him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Colos. 2.9.10.
and we are complete in him: He is that fountain that shall run out of the
house of the Lord, Joel 3.18.
and water all the valley of Sittim: Hither they may come to take their bread
out of the storehouse, and to draw with joy waters out of the wells of
consolation. Isa. 12.3. Ioh. 1.16.
In Christ is all fullness, for of him we receive grace for grace: Generally
the graces of Regeneration, and in particular all other graces: 1 Peace with
God, and our selves, Romans 5.1. 2, Entrance, and access unto the Father, Ephesians.
2.18. 3. The riches of wisdom, and understanding, Ephesians. 1.8. 4. Consolation,
and comfort, 2. Cor. 5. Eternal salvation, Romans 6.23. In a word, in Christ we
are blessed with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3. For of him, and through
him, and for him, are all things, Romans 11.36. And he is made of God unto us,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and redemption. 1. Cor. 1.30. All these
as food necessary, through Christ come unto all believing Saints, in the midst
of all pains and troubles of conscience for their consolation.

Lastly, in that Christ took bread, and then wine, not leaving the one without
the other, but joining both together to make a full Supper, Learn, that

These two Elements of bread and wine, Doct.
must be administered in this holy Supper. For now Christ being to depart from
his Disciples, did celebrate his Supper on this manner, delivering both bread
and wine, and left himself in this respect a president and pattern for his
Disciples, and all faithful Ministers, to be followed unto the end of the
world. And having commanded and instituted both these, it is not for any one of
us to add to, or take from them, or to alter, and change them; The time, or
place may be altered for order, or comeliness, but the elements themselves in
no wise must be altered.

Use. Here then we may see a Use.
gross abuse of this holy institution among the Papists: these elements of
bread and wine, which Christ has joined together, they have put asunder,
denying the wine to the Laytie, and common people; though their Massing Priests
receive both bread and wine, yet the people must not, Chron. Germa.
and why? Because the Chalice was too pure forsooth for the people to touch
with their naked and bare fingers; as Pope Sixtus the first judged: and
secondly, because a Council holden at Constance, did by a public Law forbid
the administration of the Lords Supper to the Lay people under both kinds,
when notwithstanding the commandment of Christ is far otherwise.

Ob. Ob.
But the Papists say, that in receiving of bread, we must consider Christ his
blood as in the veins, and therefore when men receive bread signifying the
body, they receive blood also contained in the veins thereof.

Sol. Sol.
But I answer; in the Lords Supper we receive Christ, not as in a maunger or
walking on the earth, but we receive Christ as nailed on the Cross, his body
broken, and his blood powered forth and shed abroad; we must not then receive
Christ as whole, but as he is wounded and pierced: and thus we have the blood
of Christ, not in the veins, but powered forth, and so it must be received.

Ob. Ob.
but there must be a difference between the Clergy and the Laytie; the Clergy
must receive both, but not the Lay people. Sol. Sol.
This is false; for in respect of Christ and the covenant, all have equal
title and right to him; which makes the Apostle Paul say, There is neither
Jew nor Grecian, Gal. 3.28.
bond nor free, male nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus: and therefore
consequently all, both Minister and people, have an equal right to bread and
wine, the signs whereby Christ his body and blood are represented.

Q. Quest.
How differs this bread and wine from our bread and wine, which we use at
our ordinary Tables?

Sol. Sol.
Surely, the difference stands not in the substance, quantity, or quality, but
only in the use, and signification, in that these by virtue of Gods
institution, do (besides their natural use) signify the body and blood of
Christ, and are instruments for the conueyance of him unto our souls. Thus
much of the elements of Bread and Wine, the matter whereon Christ's Supper was
instituted.

He took bread, etc. The manner of the institution follows, wherein we noted
the action of Christ, and secondly his words. The actions are, 1. Taking, 2.
Blessing, 3. Breaking, and pouring, etc. 4. Giving.

The first action expressed, is taking, He took bread into his hands; Doct.
from whence we take notice of the unspeakable love of God toward Mankind, in
providing a Mediator and Redeemer for man, being in extreme misery: For by
this action of taking Bread and wine, is signied that action of God, the
Father, whereby he set apart his Son from all eternity, to be a merciful
Mediator betwixt God and man: And for this cause it is said, that God the
Father has sealed him, Ioh. 6.27.
that is, made him fit, authentical and all-sufficient for this office. As
money first is sealed, and stamped, and then goes for payment; so Christ was
sealed, stamped, and appointed for this end. This is that inestimable gift of
God mentioned by S. John, He gave his only begotten Son; Ioh. 3.16.
that is, he took him, and then gave him for a Mediator, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Thus then we see that God commends his love to us, Romans 5.7.8
in giving his Christ to dye for us.

The ground of this unspeakable love is in God himself: Reason
he saw nothing in us that could be the moving cause of this so boundless and
bottomless love, but the cause was in himself, and may be his own pleasure,
and good will. Deuteronomy. 7.7.8.
The Lord (says Moses) did not set his love upon us, or choose us, because we
were more in number then any people, etc. but because he loved us.

Ps. 103.13. Isai 49.15.
far excelling the love of natural Parents: What father would take his son
and give him as a possession to his chiefest friend? But to take his son, his
heir, and eldest son; nay, his only Son, and give him to his enemy; yea, to
give him to death for his enemy: this is a love beyond all loves, and may
astonish all Angels and men. Great was the love of Abraham toward God, that
so commanded his natural affections, as to offer up his son Isaac at the
commandment of the Lord unto death, having but one son given him by a special
favor to comfort his age, and him whom he loved, being virtuous, and
religious, when he had no hope to have any more sons, and this being the
son of the promise, in whom both himself and the whole world should be
saved; that this child should not be banished from him, but put to death and
killed, not before his face, but with his own hands; this was a great love for
flesh and blood to fall into. But yet far greater is the love of God toward
us, who loving Christ a thousand times more then Abraham could love Isaac,
because between heavenly and earthly things there is no comparison, that God
(I say) should deliver him up, not to the whip, but to the gibbet; not by
commandment as Abraham did, but of his mere and voluntary love; not into the
hands of them that sorrowed to see him afflicted, but into the hands of
butchers, that cared not how cruelly they dealt with him: and this not for his
friends as Abraham did, who was called the friend of God, but for traitors,
that would have pulled the Lord out of his own seat: This does wonderfully set
forth the love of God: the fullness of it, and depth of it, being not to be
comprehended of all the hearts of men joined in one, though every one of the^
were wiser then Solomon. Let this love beget love in us again, that there may
be a reflection of our love in some measure; we cannot but requite love for
love.

nothing at our hands for this his great favor and love, but that we would
suffer our selves to be sealed and marked with the seal and mark of
Christianity, and so answerably glorify him, and do good to his Church: In
this respect Paul exhorts us, yea entreats and beseeches us to give up
our bodies as holy, Romans 12.
and living sacrifices acceptable to God. But notwithstanding all this, it is
far otherwise with most of us; Gods seal and mark is women out, we bear
but only the name of Christians, suffering our selves to be marked and sealed
with the marks and seals of the Devil; we abound in most sins, in pride,
Gal. 5.19.20.21.22.
in vanity of our mind, in self-love, covetousness, drunkenness, ignorance,
whoredom, profanation of the Sabbath, lying, swearing, etc. These are the
marks of the Devil, and by them will he mark us, as his own for ever, if
we do not repent. Oh therefore, if we would avoid his snares, and the eternal
torments in hell; if we would be sealed of God unto glory, let us take heed
of these marks and seals of the Devil, and receive Gods seals of an holy
and godly life.



Here then is comfort to those that are redeemed of Christ, notwithstanding al
their afflictions, and their tortures for sins: God has given his Son to the
death, that they might live: so as when they offer Christ to him, he cannot
but have pity on them. As Pilate presented Christ whipped to the Jews, with
his Behold the man, to move compassion, so must they present Christ crucified
to the Lord, to move his compassion; to the^: Behold what thine own hand has
done to thine own son, and say, It is enough. 2 Action, v. 24. He gave thanks.
In the Evangelists it is said: He blessed the bread and wine; not that Christ
thereby through a secret virtue in himself, did consecrate, and
transsubstantiate the bread and wine into his body and blood: but rather the
word, Bless, (...)
does signify a prayer, made by Christ, to his Father, for the sanctifying and
blessing the significant Creatures that he had in his hand; and his
thanksgiving for them, so does Erasmus turn the words. Mat. 26.27 Luke 22.17
The other Evangelists Matthew and Luke, and so Paul in this place, make the
words Blessing, and Giving of thanks to signify the same thing. Much deceived
are the Papists, the enemies to sound and saving doctrine, that ground their
consecration and means of transsubstantiation upon this action of Christ: He
gave thanks.

To give thanks, or to bless God, was a commendable custom of the ancient
Jews: they gave thanks before and after meat: which custom our Savior
follows in his Gospel, He took bread, and gave thanks. It is also the use
and custom of the neotericall and later Jews, Rab. Kim.
to call upon God for a blessing upon their Passover; and of all Christians to
desire God to bless the table and the meare thereon; not that any thing is
unclean in it own nature, as the Manichees held; or that the evil spirits
are mingled among the creatures, Orientales et Itali.
as they of the Eastern Country imagine, which defend the sprinkling of holy
water: for the creature of God is good, because all which God made is good; but
it is our own corruption and sin which defiles the creature. Prayer therefore
before the receiving thereof is necessary, that it may be sanctified, and made
wholesome for our use, and that we may use them soberly and moderately. Hence
we learn, first that, Doct.


It is the duty of Christians to supplicate, and make requests to God for a
blessing upon the Sacrament, or any creature they are about to receive and
taste. Our Savior would not venture upon his Supper, till such time as he had
desired of God a blessing upon it, for that use he instituted it. And it may be
gathered from Paul's words, The Cup of Blessing which we bless, 1. Cor. 10.16.
etc. that the Apostle made requests to God for the sanctifying of the
Sacrament to this end, that it might be a Communion. And in all things we must
call upon God for a blessing: It is not for us to eat our meat till we desire
God first to sanctify it. The people of Israel would not eat till Samuel came
to bless the Sacrifice: 1. Sam. 9.13
And the Apostle says, that Every thing is sanctified by the word and prayer.
1. Tim. 4.5.


The reason of it is because without the blessing of the Lord upon the blessing
of the Lord upon the Creature, Reason.
a secret curse goes with it, which sticks as close unto it, as the Leprosy
unto Gehazi; and makes all fullness to become a preparing of them that are
full to the day of slaughter: Ier. 12.3.
Albeit things increase upon them as they would, yet their fullness becomes a
very poison to them, their very ease slays them, and their prosperity
destroys them. Pro. 1.32.


Ob.But I see such as use neither prayer nor supplication, Ob.
nor any good means, prosper; and all their estate by robbing, stealing,
oppressing, usury, gaming, false wares, or false weights, yea all Creatures
that are in their hands, seem to be sanctified of God, and to have power in
them unto such persons: or else how could they live by them?

We must distinguish between the things themselves; Sol.
and the manner of possessing, and enjoying of them; the Creatures themselves
by a general word of God are sanctified, and set apart by God to feed, and
maintain good and bad, as well the wicked as the godly: even as the Sun, and
rain, shines, and falls upon the just, and unjust; the wickedness of a
particular person cannot alter Gods general decree. But if we consider the
manner of possessing, and enjoying the Creatures, that is not sanctified:
because the person is not in Christ, who restores our right unto us, and then
he is but an usurper, and bankrupt that possesses the Creatures, but has no
right thereunto. 2. As his person, so his course is accused; for the only way
to get a blessing from God on the Creatures, is to use Gods means, who has
commanded to seek unto him for it. 3. Though he has the Creatures, yet if
Gods word proceed not out of his mouth to sanctify them, they will rather
become his death then life; his bread shall be as poison, and rats-bane within
his bowels, bebecause he possesses it without Gods promise and blessing.

How can that be, Ob.
I never saw any such thing?

Many poisons are long a working, Sol.
but the end of such is death, and the more slowly they work, they more slily,
and certainly they kill.

And if the Lord does not inuert the order that he has set in nature, by
cursing the particular Creature, be sure he has in his justice reserved a
curse for the unjust person, and he shall not avoid it.

and so must this Sacrament: otherwise it turns to the condemnation of the
unworthy receiver. 2. All those may be justly taxed that fall upon their meat
and drink, and forget to call upon God by prayer to sanctify them: It might
be just with the Lord, that these Creatures should either choke them, or
poison them; to teach all, and every ravenous, and unmannerly person, to
remember his duty in this kind. But let them scorn the practice of prayer to
God in this case, and be ashamed of such an heavenly duty; yet I dare be bold
to tell them from the words of the Apostle, that al things shall be unto them
impure and unclean: Tit. 1.15.
they may receive the Creatures only as the fruits of Gods general
providence, and power, whereby he sustaineth them, the brute beasts, the
senseless Creatures, nay the very substance of the devils themselves: But not
as the gifts of God in Christ a provident Father, nor as tokens of his special
love; and therefore although the wicked man, and oppressing Tyrant bear
himself upon the love of God, because all things succeed with him, and he
thriues in his proiects, yet in truth he has no more cause, then the devil
himself has, because he is the God of the world, and Prince of the air,
mightily ruling in such disobedient children: nay he may have bread, and yet
want the staff of bread; put on clothes, but not be warm; get riches, but
want the fruition; earne wages, but put them into a broken bag; Hag. 1.5.6
and while the flesh is betwixt his teeth, before it be chewed, the wrath of
the Lord may be kindled againsh him, and he may be smitten with an exceeding
plague. Nu. 11.33.




Oh therefore let us consider that Gods blessing makes rich, Pro. 10.22.
that it gives wel-being to our souls, a comfortable use of all Gods
Creatures; that it gives force and virtue to the Creature, and is the prop and
stay of both soul and body; and then we cannot but move God by our prayers,
and make our supplications and requests daily known unto him. Phil. 4.6.


He gave thanks. Here learn again, That

Thanksgiving is a service, that Christians owe unto God. Doct.
This is manifest in the word of God, 1. by Testimonies; 2. by Examples. 1. by
Testimonies, Let us offer the sacrifice of praise always to God: Heb. 13.15
Psalm. 147.1.
It is a pleasant thing, and praise is comely: Psa. 33.1.
It becomes upright men to be thankful: Phil. 4.6.
Let your requests be showed unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving
of thanks: In all things give thanks, 1. These. 5.18.
etc. 2. By Examples, Melchizedeck after Abraham's victory slacked not this
service, Genesis 14.20
but gave thanks unto God: Exodus 15.1
Moses composed a song after the deliverance of the Israelites from the
Egyptians, and out of the Red sea. Deborah and Barak gave thanks to God when
Sisera was overthrown. Judge. 5.1. 1 Samuel 2.2.
Hannah praised God for her son: Isa. 38.9.
and Hezekiah also, for his delivery from the gates of death. Jonas. 2.9.
Jonas sacrificed to the Lord with the voice of thanksgiving, according to that
he had vowed: and the Samaritan returned back to give God thanks. Luke 17.15
All these show clearly, how requisite this service of thanksgiving unto God
is, if either we will harken to the testimonies and exhortations of the holy
Ghost, or do as we have the Saints of God, or our blessed Savior for
example. Reasons of this point.

Psalm. 92.1.
and a good thing to praise Gods Name, as the Prophet says.

Psa. 116.12 13.
and all that we are able to do, and yet as little as we can do.

Psa. 50.15.
etc. I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. And to this may be
referred that of the Lord to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 8.10
When being come into the Land, and have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall
bless the Lord thy God.



Use 1. This then may reprove two sorts of people; 1. Those that are altogether
unthankful. 2. Those that give thanks negligently, and after a slouenly
manner, or for things that are sins, and not thankes-worthy.

1 Here are reproved all unthankful persons: Luke 71.8
Such when they are any way pinched, they can crave at the hands of God for
present help, but when they have gotten their desires, they are like the nine
Lepers, that went away unthankful. Men can receive multitude of mercies, and
pay never a dram of thanks; as if God by duty were bound to give them gifts,
and they by a kind of Lordlinesse should forget him; in so much, that
nowadayes it is come to pass, that some sit down to their tables like brute
beasts, and so rise up again, never considering the Author of their meat and
drink, and the service and debt they owe for them. Others, in steed of
thanks, diminish and lessen the worth of Gods blessings, as the Israelites who
despised the good and pleasant land. Psalm. 106.24.
Others pass by the favors of God, and never take notice of them, as of Gods
favors, but rather as gifts of Nature: so do all Atheists, and Naturalists.
Others account Gods blessings as curses unto them; many wicked fathers when
their children (who are Gods blessings) will not do as they would have them,
are ready to say, they are curses and plagues to them: and so do many masters
speak of their Servants, and their Cattle. The Israelites, whom God
wonderfully blessed, when the least danger appeared unto them, made no
reckoning of Gods blessings, but esteemed death better in Egypt, Exodus 16.3
then life in the wilderness under Gods protection. And now many accuse the
preaching of Gods true Word, as the seed of sedition, and the cause of
division, and say, That there was never good world since so much preaching came
in.

If this sin of unthankfulness may be charged upon any people, then most of
all upon us, to whom God has been richest in bountiful bestowing of his
favors: He has been with us early and late; Lam. 3.23
he has renewed his mercies every morning upon us; he has given us gifts
private, public, secret, open, at home, and abroad, in company, and alone,
natural, spiritual, temporal, political, etc. But what have we rendered unto
the Lord for all these his benefits? Alas, we have been unmindful of the
Lords goodness, 1 Chro. 32.25.
and according to the reward bestowed: The song of praise and thanksgiving is
either as a strange and dainty song unto us, which we cannot tune; or an harsh
and unpleasant song, wherein we have no delight.

Secondly, such may justly be reproved, who give thanks formallie, carelessly,
or sinfully, Some give thanks, not unto God, but unto some Saints, as the
Papists. Some give thanks to God, as women when they meet together do, for
other men's children; You have a fair child, God be thanked, and not a word
more must be added, lest they should be thought too precise, and to smell of
the purity. Some give thanks to God for his blessings, but with all they run
a large discourse of themselves, I thank God for it; but if I had not labored
hard for it, and taken great pains about it, I could never have compassed
(...). These sacrifice to their nets. Hab. 1.16.


Some give thanks after the fashion of little children, who as they must be
called upon to say, I thank you, or to make a ^egge: so when they do it, it is
(...) a kind of have, with a look another way, as having more mind of their
play, then of their thanks. Some thank God for that they never had; such be
the boasting Hypocrites, that say they are holier then other men: such were the
Pharisees, I thank God I am no extortioner, unjust, etc. Luke 18.11
They praise God with their lips, but their hearts are far off. Some thank
God for that which he ever punished in whom he found it; namely, for their
wicked practices: as the adulterer, he gives thanks when he has satisfied
his lust; and so does the thief when he has obtained his prey, etc.

Some give thanks for their salvation, but they must merit it, and win it by
their works; these are the Papists, that give thanks to God for that which
they do themselves; This is needless: and some give thanks to God for their
ignorance and want of knowledge, as the vulgar people, that thank God they can
say their prayers, which are the ten Commandments, and the Creed, that have
not a word of prayer in them. All these are cold, superficial, and sinful
thanks, and the Lord takes no delight in them.

David, My soul, praise thou the Lord, Psalm. 103.1
and all that is within me, praise his holy Name. And that we might be stirred
up to this duty, let us take notice of these means:

1 The mercies of God in all their ranks, spiritual, temporal, natural,
civil, public, private, etc. and thou shall find the least of them
immeasurable, and of an infinite price. Thus did the Prophet, he set a price
upon Gods mercies as far as he could diue into them; but when he could not
reach to the bottom of the least of Gods mercies in particular toward
himself, then he breaks out into these gratulatory terms: What shall I give
unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psa. 119.12.13.14.
I will take the cup of salvation, and will call upon the Name of the Lord, I
will pay my vows, etc.

2 Remember thy self, how miserable thou art without Gods favor, and mercy:
and how soon (if thou art in health, wealth, strength, etc.) thou may be
deprived, and le^t destitute through ingratitude.

3 Consider thou art not worthy the least of Gods mercies, as Jacob did, Lord I
am less then the least of all thy mercies, Genesis 32.10
and lo^ing kindnesses thou have shown me. We cannot merit any mercy.

4 Consider Gods readiness to give, when we call in our present exigents and
wants, if we demand, and call in faith without wavering: Let us all consider
these things aright, and we shall find them to be good helps unto us for the
praising of God.

To conclude, seeing God at this time offers his Son Christ to our souls to
taste, and feed upon by faith, in whom is wrapped the whole storehouse of Gods
favors, and mercies: let this especially, yea more then al other mercies of
the Lord, provoke our thankfulness unto him. It is the greatest gift that ever
God vouchsafed to give, and therefore requires our greatest thanks, and
praises to the Lord.

3 Action, He brake the bread, and powered the wine: some understand this to be
the distribution of the signs; but surely it it is otherwise, for he did
first break the bread, and then power the wine, that he might fitly distribute
the parts. But to let pass this error, and that of the Papists, The Decree of
Pope Sergius, Anno 700.
who make a threefold partition in the breaking of bread; giving, and offering
the first to God and the Saints; the second to those that are among them; and
the third to the sick, when their necessity requires: we will handle this
Doctrine from this, that Christ brake bread, and powered wine, That

Christ took not only our nature upon him, Doct.
but he also suffered death for us; his body was broken, and his blood shed,
as appears by the signs of the^; he brake bread, and powered wine. Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our sins: and again,
Ephe. 1.7. Heb. 9.12. 1. Pet. 1.19.
Without shedding of his blood, no remission of sins: and, By his blood is
obtained eternal redemption for us. Bitter and vehement were those tortures
and pangs that Christ suffered, as may appear in diverse respects.

First, in respect of the burden of the sins of all believers, yea, of all the
whole world, that was laid upon his back at the same time: if the Prophet
David complain of his groueling, that he went as a man crooked under his own
particular sins, Isa. 53.5.9. 2. Cor. 5.21 Heb. 9.14. 1. Pet. 2.24
how much more might our Savior complain, when not his own sins, for he
was innocent, but the sins of all the world were upon his back at once?

2 In respect of those unworthy things, that he suffered. 1. All sorts of men
had a fling at him, Prince and people, Jew and Gentile, male and female,
strangers, and his acquaintance, his friends forsook him, Mat. 26.56
and fled: his good name was wounded with blasphemies, and his person rewarded
with shameful indignities; the high Priests scoffed, the passengers wagged
their head, the soldiers flouted him, nay, the very Thief on the cross,
could with his last breath blaspheme him.

2 All the senses and members of his body suffered: his head was wounded with a
crown of thorns: his face was defiled with the filthy spittings of the Jews:
his eyes were darkened and dimmed to behold the cruelties of his tormentors:
his ears were wounded to hear their curses and blasphemies: His mouth was put
out of taste with gall and vinegar: his hands and his feet were dug with
nails his sides and his heart were pierced with a spear.

3. Al wrong was offered to him, the soldiers stripped him of his apparel,
and shared them before his face, Mat. 28.41 and 39.40.
in stead whereof they clothed him with scorneful kingly robes, a reed was put
into his hand in stead of a Scepter, viniger mixed with gall was given him to
drink, and he was led away as a sheep to the slaughter, where between two
thieves, as the chief of all sinners, he was crucified.

3. In respect of the death and passion it self, which was ever accounted,
shameful, accursed, painful. Shameful, because it was ever inflicted upon
servants, and slaves, and such as had dishonested their kindred by vile, and
outrageous offenses. Accursed, Deu. 21.23 Gal. 3.13.
because God himself did brand it with a curse, as a spectacle of horrible
malediction: Painful, because thereon he was racked, torn, and his joints
stretched: besides his suffering continued, for leysurely by little, and
little, and with much lingering (the blood distilling out of the wounds of his
hands and feet, and other parts of his body that were pierced with a spear;)
and amidst most horrible pain of hunger, and thirst, he finished his life.

4. In respect of his conflict, and his wrestling with Gods wrath. He trod the
wine press of his fierceness, and wrath of the Almighty God: By reason
whereof, 1. Lu. 22.44.
He sweat drops of blood, that tricked down to the ground: 2. He made strong
cries to his Father, that if it were possible, the Cup might pass from him: 3.
An Angel was sent from heaven to comfort him. Luke 22.43
4. He inwardly felt that which made all the rest seem nothing in comparison
of it, namely his heart surprised with a sudden fear, that God had forsaken
him: Mat. 27.46
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Thus the Son of God suffered
insufferable pains, and torments: when he was thus punished both in soul, and
body: But why did he suffer his body to be broken, and his blood to be shed?

Isaiah does declare all things touching this passion so fully, Isa. 53.
that he seems rather an Evangelist, then a Prophet: The Prophet Zachary
makes mention of the piercing of his side: Zac. 12.10.
And the Prophet David does in a most lively manner express the malicious
hatred, the profane scoffs, the biting tauntes of beholders, the cruel
piercing of his hands and feet, Psalm. 22.8.16.17.18.
the vehement straining of his body, that the bones might be numbered; the
parting of his garments, and the casting lots for his seamelesse coat.

Isaac, Genesis 22.6.
carrying the wood, bound, stripped and laid upon the altar; and that of the
brazen serpent which Moses erected in the wilderness. Number. 21.8.




4. That he might be a pattern to all godly men, willing to suffer for his
sake, never to fear any kind of death, seeing he himself did undergo such a
death as was most ignominious, shameful, accursed, painful, and grievous.
Surely this was it that made all holy Martyrs to endure all kind of
punishments, that the wicked Tyrants and instruments of the devil could lay
upon them: some of the godly had trialls of mockings, He. 11.35.36. etc.
scornings, bonds, and imprisonment; others were stoned, others sawne asunder,
others slain with the sword, etc. Yet they remained patient in all these for
Christ's sake, and were boldened through him to say with Ignatius, Come fire,
cross, wild beasts, Eusebius. hist. Eccle. lib. 8. Chap. 7.
slaughter, tearing of bones, dismembring the parts of my body: yea, let all
the torments of the devil rush upon me, so I may enjoy Christ: better for me
to be a Martyr then a Monarch, my love is crucified.



Ob. Did not Paul say of himself, "Ob.
I rejoice in my sufferings for you, Col. 1.24.
and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies
sake, which is the Church? Here the Apostle suffered for the Church.

Sol. Such sense, Sol.
and meaning cannot be gathered from this place, as they have devised: so^
first, if it should be said, that the Apostle Paul fulfilled all the rest of
Christ his afflictions, as if some part of them had not bin fulfilled in
Christ, then this would follow. That something was wanting in Christ's passion,
and so the price of our Redemption was not fully paid: This is an absurdity;
the meaning is rather this: He fulfilled the rest of Christ's afflictions: That
is, he suffered with Christ, not equally nor as Christ did, nor yet to add
anything to Christ his afflictions, Phil. 3.10.
but to show the fellowship of his afflictions: Copula ponitur vice causalis.
Call.
And that in all his troubles and sufferings he had Christ as a companion to
bear a part with him: this is that the Apostle says in diverse places, Romans
8.17.
If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified with him. Whatsoever our
sufferings are, we do not suffer alone, but Christ suffers with us: And in
another place, 2. Cor. 1.5.
The sufferings of Christ abound in us. Our sufferings are not ours alone, but
they are Christ's as well as ours: By this that has been spoken we see that
the sufferings of massing Papists are of no value: And albeit they may brag of
their superabundance of merits, and sufferings, which are not laid upon them by
others, Flagellarij.
but by themselves in their scourgings, whippings, beatings, etc. yet they shall
do them no good: Romans 8.18.
I account the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the glory
which shall be showed unto us. Let us therefore cast off this cursed doctrine
of the enemies of God, and rely upon Christ's passion and sufferings,
acknowledging with the blessed Martyr: None but Christ, Martyr Lambert.
none but Christ.

Use 2. This ought to break, and bruise all our hearts with godly sorrow for
our sins: If Christ was grieved and broken for man's cause (being free from
sin himself,) much more ought we to be grieved and broken in heart for our
sins, which were the cause of his suffering, of the breaking of his body, and
of the shedding of his blood. Men must not take pleasure in sin, make a
spott, and pastime of sin, but mourn and lament for sin. The Prophet
Zachary tells us that the Church shall mourn for Christ: Zac. 12.10.12.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and lament for him, as a
father for his first borne; and mourning shall be in Jerusalem like that of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo: not for fear of punishment, hell, and
destruction, but for sins whereby we have pierced and wounded our most
blessed Savior. At his passion the Sun, Moon, and earth seemed to relent; how
can we then to whom all the benefits of his passion redounded, be so hardened
in heart like brass, but be touched with compunction? Oh then let it prick us
at the very heart to see him lie groueling on the ground in a bloody sweat; and
let our hearts rise up within us at the committing of the least sin whatsoever,
which has cast him into so strange an Agony and pain.

Use 3. This must teach us to endure many hardshipps willingly, and readily for
his sake; if we will be Christ's disciples, Mat. 10.38. Luke 9.23.
we must take up our cross and follow him: If the Author and Prince of our
salvation was consecrated by afflictions, Luke 24.26.
ought not Christ to suffer these things, and so to enter into his glory? Then
ought not we to think strange of sufferings as if some new thing happened to
us; 1. Pet. 4.12
but we must submit our selves to the whippe and scourge, as the Lords
appointment, and so enter into fellowship of Christ's kingdom: our Savior has
drunk to us in the cup of his passion, Mat. 20.22
(as he said to the two sons of Zebedeus) and we must pledge him when
occasion is offered, For unto us it is given, Phil. 1.29.
that not only we should believe in him, but also suffer for his sake.

4. Action, he gave the bread and wine, intimated and gathered from hence, that
he said, Take. He gave the bread and wine, and kept them not back as the
Papists do, whose Priests stand all alone at the Altar, and ^ate, and devour
all alone by themselves. And that which he did give it was willingly, and with
a free heart, no constraint egging and constraining him thereto. And in that
Christ did thus willingly give himself, we may observe, Doct.
That Christ's suffering was a free will offering: Isay. 53.10
He made his soul an offering for sin, and himself of no reputation, Phil.
2.7.8.
in that he humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death of the Cross.
And he testifies of himself, No man takes my life from me, but I lay it
down of my self. Ioh. 10.18.
This willing Sacrifice may be so noted by these circumstances. 1. When the
time was at hand that he should suffer, he tells his Disciples that he must go
to Jerusalem, and many things must be laid to his charge, which he must suffer
there. Peter wished him never to suffer any thing, but to favor himself; for
which labor, he called Peter, Satan, Get thee behind me Satan. 2. When he
was at Jerusalem, he never went about to withdraw himself from the Jews, as
he had formerly done, nor to seek starting hoses to hide his head in; but he
went to his accustomed place of prayer, a little beyond the brook Cedron, Ioh.
18.1.2
which place Judas knew well. 3. When Judas, and al his route came to apprehend
him, although they see his power in casting them all to the ground, yet he
resisted not, but offered himself unto them, saying, and. v. 3.4.5.
Whom seek ye? who made him this answer, Jesus of Nazareth, and he replied,
I am he.

4. When he was brought before the Judge, he denied no part of the truth, but
as one willing to yield his life into their hands, witnessed a good confession
before Pontius Pilate. 1. Tim. 6.13
5. Lastly, when he was brought to the place of execution, it is said of him,
that he sent out his soul, and gave up his spirit. All these testify this
truth, That Christ's passion was a free and an acceptable sacrifice, as God gave
him willingly, so as willingly did he bestow himself.

No penie, no Pater noster: Quid non Regina pecunia donat?
The souls in Purgatory that imaginary fire, wherein conceitedly they are
tormented, and endure shaddowed pains, cannot be released without money: if
that be present, all things shall be current; if that be wanting, their
sacrifice of the Mass will do no good.

then when a man bestows his life for his friends. Ioh. 15.13.
No man is able to express this love of our Savior, that so willingly he would
lay down his life for us, yea for us that were his enemies. Romans 5.8.
We read of certain men, that through their love to particular places and
people, have laid down their lives, as of M. Curtius that cast himself into a
dangerous lake for his Countries sake; as of Codrus the King of the Athenians,
who offered himself to the swords of his enemies, for the preservation of his
Kingdom: As of Decius the consul that devoted himself to death for the
Roman army: These testimonies are something, yet nothing in comparison of
Christ; they died for a few people, he for the whole world; they dyed not
merely out of love, but for vain glory; he willingly, and lovingly, without
al respect of ambition: they died for their Country, and friends, he for his
adversaries, and foes: they died men full of sin, he without any sin of his
own. Oh then admire this unspeakable love of Christ! the like we never heard
of, that a man out of his tendet love to his friends, yea to his enemies,
should shed the best blood in his heart, which here Christ has done for us.

3 The consideration of this love of Christ should teach us, in token of
thankfulness, to love him again, by offering up unto him our bodies, and
souls as acceptable services. This was Paul's practice, Gal. 2.20.
In that that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God,
who has loved me, and given himself for me. Thereby giving us to understand,
that the greatest and strongest reason why we should live to the Son of God,
is this; because he has loved us, and given himself for us; yea we should
hereby learn to give relief to the poor, and help them that stand in need
of us. Thus much of Christ's actions.

Take, eat, drink, etc. Now follow the words of our Savior Christ to his
Disciples. In which observe the actions of receivers, and the persons whom
Christ admitted to receive: The Actions, Take, etc. The persons, Ye.

Take and eat,] From the manner of Christ's speech used in this place, we
learn, That

It is not left a thing indifferent to come unto this holy Table: Doct.
so as we may at our own pleasure come, and at our own pleasure again
absent our selves from communicating at this holy feast with Gods Saints.

Take ye, etc. Now every commandment of the moral Law binds the conscience to
obedience; even so this commandment of our Savior Christ (which is indeed a
special part of Gods worship, included in the second and fourth commandment
of the moral Law) is to be obeyed, unless a man be prevented by sickness,
or be deprived of fit opportunity, by reason of persecution or imprisonment,
etc.

his holy Supper, to the end, that we by participation in his body and blood,
might be the more strengthened in this assurance, that Christ is ours with all
his benefits. And although Christ be well presented unto us by the preaching of
his Gospel, yet there are notable points in this Supper especially to be
observed: 1. In the Ministry of the Word, God speaks generally to all,
Repent, and believe, and so be saved: But in this Sacrament he speaks in
particular, and directs his promise (as it were by name) to every
Communicant: This is my body to thee; as thou tastest the bread and wine, so
assuredly thou shall taste and receive Christ by faith in him. 2. God is not
herewith contented, but furthermore with this his promise, for the further
confirmation of their faith, he gives them the outward Elements of bread and
wine, to be visible pledges of the ratification of his promise, saying to
every Communicant, Take thou, eat thou, etc.

2 By receiving this Sacrament, and presenting our selves thereunto, we make
(as it were) a public protestation, that we have no fellowship with
Idolatours, Heretics, Atheists, profane and ungodly persons of this world;
but that we take our selves to be the children of God, and have fellowship
with Christ; unity, love, and friendship one with another.

people should come flocking together to receive the Sacrament; Pope Zepherinus
institution and command.
or to speak in their own phrase, to take their Hushell, or to receive their
Maker: The Priest he persuades the simple people, that it is neither necessary
nor fit for them to receive often; and all, that he might fill his own panch,
Jude 12.
and glut himself: This is contrary to Christ's institution, and the practice
of the Primitive Church: Act. 2.46. and 20.7.
The Apostles brake bread every Sabbath day. Yea it is contrary to the Decree
of their Bishops; Durand. in Ration. Di. offic lib. 4.
For Pope Fabian commanded, that the Sacrament of the Lords Supper should be
received thrice every year; at Easter, Whitsontide, and Christ's Nativity. And
the Council of Agatha, Stella.
decreed; that whosoever did not receive thrice every year, should not be
accounted a Catholic.

therefore they cannot receive Well, these, and such like people commit an
horrible sin, they transgress Gods commandment, they deprive themselves of
that special assurance of Grace, which God offers in this Sacrament; they
are offensive to Gods Saints, and labor what they can to cut themselves off
from union with Christ, and fellowship with his Saints. That man that went a
journey, Number. 9.13
and neglected to keep the Passover, was cut off from the people: so may the
Lord deal with all such as willingly and wittingly absent themselves from this
royal banquet.

Oh therefore, it stands us in hand to receive, whenever just occasion is
offered: with what alacrity and cheerfulness do little children take their
paps? how hard do they suck? With no less desire let us come unto this table,
and unto the spiritual pap of this cup; yea, with a greater and more fervent
desire, as sucking babes; let us suck the grace of the Spirit: let this be
our only sorrow, our only grief, if we be deprived of this food. Receive
that daily, which may profit thee daily, (says one) and so live, that thou
may deserve to receive it daily. Ambros. lib. 5. de Sacra^.


Take, eat, drink.] Christ did not as popish Priests do, thrust the bread,
and cramme it into the mouths of Communicants, The decree of the Council at
Rotomag.
as though they were either so foolish or childish, that they could not put
meare in their own mouth; or so filthy and impure, that it may seem a thing
altogether unworthy, and intolerable, that a mystery so holy and so divine,
should be handled with the hands of impure and unholy persons; But Christ gave
it into the hands of his Disciples, and they took it with their hands: No
mauell of this Popish trick, seeing that their Laws forbid any of the Laity
to take the Lords Supper, Durand. lib. 3. diu. offic.
unless he be free from lying with his wife three or four days before, and
so shall continue five or seven days after.

2 Christ said, Take, eat, and drink ye all of this. The Priest he takes it,
and hides it in the Temple, according to the constitution of Pope Innocent the
third, and that so fast under lock and key, that no evil should happen unto it
(that the Laity should not receive it: Beatus Rhenanus in annot. lib. Tertul.
de Corona militis.
) or else he hangs it up in a pixe, or a box, that it might be reserved as a
necessary victual for them that go out of this world. But oftentimes, it
hangs so long there, that it mouldeth, rotteth, stinketh, and breeds worms
in it; in so much, that according to the Popes decree, he is compelled to
burn it, and reuerendly to bury the ashes thereof under the Altar, in the holy
place.

3 Christ says, Take, eat, drink) he says not, as the Priest says, Take,
and show it to the people, Heave it above your heads, Carry it like a puppet,
or a Pageant in your processions. Well therefore did one say; Erasmus.
Christ is in the Sacrament under the manner of meat, that it should be
received with great purity of mind: not that it should be showed abroad, or
carried abroad in plays and common pomps or pastimes, or yet borne about the
fields on horseback. This was not the custom in the primitive Church: But in
this point the foolish fantasies of the common people, have been too much
followed.

4 Christ says, Take, eat, drink) he did not heave up the bread, and the
Challice, as the Priest does, saying, Behold your Maker, down upon your knees,
worship him, reverence him, call upon him, offer Sacrifice unto him, and give
him thanks. But we need not marvel at this blind devotion of the people,
when the words of the Sacrificer (as we read in the Canon of the Mass) are
on this manner, I worship thee, I glorify thee, I praise, and pray thee with
the whole intent of my mind, etc. This course is against the words and
commandment of God, Deuteronomy. 6.13 Isa. 42.8. Mat. 4.10.
who calls for worship, praise, divine service, and adoration to be given
unto himself, and not to an Image, or bread in this Sacrament: No man is so
foolish to worship the humane nature of Christ for his divine nature, nor to
worship the bread and wine in stead of Christ.

5 Christ says, Take ye, and drink ye all of this) Christ did not give to
one alone, that he should eat and drink for all the rest; but the Priest he
eats and drinks up all alone, and gives no man part with him; making the
simple people believe that his eating and drinking alone without any
participation to others, does no less profit them that are present, yea, them
that are absent (whether they be Kings, Popes, Bishops, Travelers, Mariners,
sick, dead, prisoners, etc.) then if they themselves did eat and drink the
Lords Supper. But if the righteous man shall live by his own faith, Hab. 2.4.
and not by the faith of another man: 2. Cor. 5.10
if every one shall receive according to that which he has wrought in his
body: if every man shall render an account to God for himself: Romans 14.12
if every man shall receive his reward according to his labor: Gal. 6.4.5.
and not according to another man's labor: if every man's own work shall
follow him, Reu. 14.12
and not another man's work, then every man's particular receiving of the
Sacrament shall profit him, and not the receiving of it by another. Surely, as
every one is bound to receive Baptism for himself, so he is bound to take the
Lords Supper for himself, that he may truly and profitably through his own
faith, apply unto himself the merits, and benefits of the passion, and death
of Christ. By this dealing of the Massepriests the poor, and simple people are
hunger-bitten, and deprived of the means of salvation, but themselves are
grown up exceeding great, proud, and rich. And although they have blinded the
eyes of the people, holding them in ignorance through this injustice, and
outrageous sea of Monkish superstition, yet they have run contrary to Christ's
institution; and therefore they may look for no other but eternal
destruction, and that the blood of all the say people shall be laid to their
charge. Thus by remoouall of these superstitious tricks of the Papists (which
secretly, and by wringing, and wresting they gather from these words of our
Savior) a plainer path, and entrance is made for us to speak of that which
follows.

Take ye.) First to speak of the persons, that were admitted to be partakers
of this Sacrament, they were Christ's faithful, and sanctified disciples; take
ye, says he, speaking to them alone. Hence note, That

A Minister is not to admit every one to this Sacrament: Doctr.
but there must be a special separation on of Atheists, profane, and open
offenders, from holy, godly, and religious professors: of open and manifest
Hypocrites, who profess in word, and deny God and his truth in their lives,
from sound, and sincere-hearted Christians. This commandment is directed to
the faithful servants of God only, not to the profane, and ungodly. And this
separation has been from the beginning: Adam in Paradise had the covenant of
God, and was admitted to the seals of the covenant, namely the two Sacraments,
Genesis 2.
the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of
good, and evil: but Adam after he had fallen, the Lord separated him from the
covenant, and the seals thereof. So Caine after he had slain his brother
Abell, was put from the Lords face, Genesis 4.12 16.
that is, he was severed from the place of Gods presence, where God especially
manifested himself unto his servants in his service, honor and worship; and
for this cause the Lord commanded that none should be admitted unto the
Passover (the same unto the Jews, Number. 9.13 Leu. 10.10.
which this Sacrament is unto us) being unclean.

The reason of this is plain; Reason.
we see a mortal Prince will not entertain, or admit of every one to his
Table, especially of his enemy; but his steward has charge, and authority (if
any dare be so impudent to bid themselves etc.) to give them the repulse; even
so we must not think, that the immortal Prince, the God of heaven and earth,
will admit of every ghost unto his Table, but has given commandment to his
stewards, even all his faithful Ministers to weed out the refuse, and
profane persons, and as the Prophet says, Ier. 15.19.
to separate the precious from the vile.

as are given to Drunkenness, Bibbing, Feasting, Gluttony, etc. And who^ not?
that this proverb may be found no less true, then old, Like will to like. Thus
the Popist Priests without all consideration, deliver the most holy mysteries
of the body and blood of Christ, (which the ancient Fathers gave to none, but
to those that were replenished with the knowledge of Gods will, in all wisdom, and
spiritual understanding) to them that are defiled with all kind of sin, and
abominations. 2. Every Minister must hence learn his duty: till such time as
they reform their lives, and become the Lords friends. In so doing, he shall
discharge the office of a faithful steward, and shall prevent Gods heavy
wrath, that otherwise would fall upon the head of the unworthy, and unbidden
guest. He that by admission of the Minister rusheth upon the Lords Supper
unworthily, in filthiness, and sins most odious, cannot avoid iugdment, nay
he is in danger of hearing the voice of the King; Friend how came thou in
hither, not having on thy wedding garment? Mat. 22.12.
and proving speechless, he is sure to be bound hand, and foot, and cast into
utter darkness, where is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Oh therefore;
thou that art the Lords Minister, suffer no man to enter unto this Supper with
filthy garments: If any man (though he be thine own brother) be a Fornicator,
an Idolater, on a Railer, or a Drunkard, 1. Cor. 5.11
or an Extortioner, or any one that brings not true Doctrine, bid him not God
speed, eat not with him, 2. epi. Ichn verse 10.
nay suffer him not to eat at this table. Hilar. in Mat. Can. 30.
Christ would not suffer Judas to eat of his last Supper (who according to an
other name Iscariot, Theophilact in Mat. Cap. 26.
is a man of power.) He went forth before Supper, and could not be suffered to
eat, because he was condemned of the holy Ghost to be a Traitor, an Hypocrite,
a covetous person, a devil, a son of perdition, a vessel of wrath, etc. And
we read that Ambrose stood in the Church door, and would not permit the
Emperor Theodosius, Theodoret Lib. 5. Cap. 18.
(after he had caused seven thousand men to be slain without judgment,) to
enter into the Church, but forbade him to go any further then the door,
saying. Quomodo manus extendes, de quibus adhuc sanguis stillat iniustus?
quomodo buiusmodi manibus suscipies sanctu^ Domini corpus? Qua temeritate, ore
tuo poculum sanguinis preciosi percipies, quando furore verborum tuorum tantus
unjust est sanguis effusus, etc. Tripar. hist Lib. 9. ca. 3.
With what eyes will thou behold the house of him, which is the Lord of us all?
or with what feet will thou tread upon his holy pauement? Will thou stretch
out these hands, which yet drop with the blood of them that were unjustly
slain, and with them take the most holy body of the Lord? or will thou put
that precious blood to thy mouth, who through the words that have proceeded
from thy furious mind, have shed so much innocent blood? I say unto thee,
depart, and to this thy former wickedness, add not another, that is more
wicked; fusus, etc. Tripar. hist Lib. 9. ca. 3.
neither disdain thou to take that yoke, and bond upon thee, which the Lord
of all does approve, and blow from above, etc. These were the words of that
good Bishop, uttered with an holy zeal against that great Emperor; and may
teach thee, that art Gods steward, much courage and boldness in this case: if
any ignorant man, or covetous miser, or a known sinner shall presume to come
unto this table, Chrysostom. in Mat. ca. 26. Hom. 83.
be not afraid to put him away, feate God more then man. If thou fear man,
thou shall be laughed to scorn of him, whom thou fear; but if thou stand
in awe of God, thou shall be reverenced of men also. As the porters of Iehoida
in the gates of Gods house, would not suffer any one that was unclean to enter
into it: So deal thou with all unclean persons, suffer not Vzza to touch the
Arc, nor the leprous person to come amongst those that are undefiled; give not
the childrens bread unto dogs, neither cast that which is holy before Swine.
Mat. 7.6.
Thus much of the persons that are to receive. Take) This is an actio^ of the
receiver, and from it we observe, That

If a man have true faith, as certainly as he receives bread and wine into
his hands, Doct.
and afterward into his stomach, so certainly does he receive Christ, and
all his benefits at the hands of God: for if we have a hand, and stomach to
take, receive, and feed upon Christ, when God says, Take, and eat; without
all question we receive Christ spiritually, and feed on him: Hence it was
said, that as many as received him, to them, he gave power to be the sons of
God, Job. 1.12.
even to them that believe in his name from whence we thus argue, That all who
receive Christ, must be the Sons of God; they that are the Sons of God,
must also believe in Christ, and therefore all that believe in Christ receive
Christ. Our Savior testifies of himself, I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall not hunger, Ioh. 6.35.
and he that believes on me, shall not thirst, meaning thereby that the
faithful who come unto him, receive him through their faith, after such a
manner, that he will be bread, to satisfy their hunger, and as drink to
stanch their thirst. Faith then is the hand to receive, and the Loadstarre to
draw him unto us.

Many things might be produced for proof, Reas. Romans 14.23 Heb. 11.6.
as that whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and that without faith it is
impossible to phase God: but the maine reason is this, that this Sacrament is
in it own nature the seal of righteousness, Romans 4.11.
and therefore it is absurd for a man to offer himself to receive confirmation
of that thing, which he has not; to have as it were a seal set to a blanke,
to come to have faith strengthened, when (perhaps) there is scarce a right
understanding of what is to to be received by belief.

Secondly, the rule of the Apostle always binds, that who so comes to this
Sacrament to receive Christ, must examine himself; 1. Cor. 11.28.
and wherein does this examination, and search consist, but in trying our
selves, whether we be in the faith or no? 2. Cor. 13.5.
How is it possible a man should receive Christ, and with him all things else,
when this grace is wanting?

true vine, we are interessed in him, and all his saving merits and graces.
And as the holy Ghost plainly teaches us, If we hold our confidence steadfast
unto the end, Heb. 3.14.
we are made partakers of Christ, Ephe. 3.17.
and so by our faith Christ will dwell in us.



decked up, against the coming of so noble a guest as Christ is: What
trimming and dressing all fine and brave, what putting on our best apparel is
there, when any strauger, or great guest comes to our houses? Well, behold, a
far more worthy guest is coming to our doors, even the doors of our
herds, Reu. 3.20.
he stands, knockes, and would gladly be in, promising to suppe with us, and
bring his cheer with him, (as the imputation of obedience, righteousness, as
our faith, Repenrance.) For shame then let us not keep our houses silthy,
defiled with sin, houses of Satan, and fornication, 1. Cor. 6.19.20.
unfit for such a guest; let us not still shut our doors against him, and
maintain idleness, Cant. 5.2.3
( I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? But when he puts in his
hand by the hole of the door, 4.5.
let our bowels be moved with compassion (in respect of our selves) to rise,
and open to him, yea let us give him the best room, and chamber, that he
calls for, Pro. 23.26.
even our whole heart.

2. Action of the Receiver, cate and drink) from which words of our Savior,
and action ob the Receiver we learn, That.

Every faithful receiver is made a partaker of a most happy union with Christ:
Doct.
So says the Euangelest, He that catech the flesh of Christ, Ioh. 6.56.
and drinks his blood, dwells in Christ, and Christ in him. As men take
bread and drink into their hands, carry them to their months, that so they
may be sent to the stomach, from whence they (being in part digested, and by
the vessels of Nature conveyed to the parts of the body for the nutriment of
flesh and blood) are carried into every part of the body, so as every part
takes his own, and so comes an uniting of the parts: before this there is no
union, no perfect nourishment, etc. Even so Christ the true meat, that came
down from heaven, by the hand of faith is taken, and carried to the stomach of
the soul, yea by faith, as by certain veins and pipes, he is conveyed to
every part of the spiritual man, and applied to them, so as every receiver
becomes bone of his bone, Ephesians. 5.30.
and flesh of his flesh. By this means there is a perfect union and without it
there is no sound nourishment in Christ.

Now this union between Christ and us is first expressed by plain testimonies
of Scripture: At that day (says Christ) shall you know that I am in my Father,
Ioh. 14.20.
and you in me, and I in you: that is, it may seem that I am far absent from
you, by reason of some troubles and distractions of mind; yet before I leave
you quite, I will give you my comforter, my Spirit, as a pledge of our
conjunction. And in another place: Our Savior prays unto his Father, that all
believers might be one with him: O Father that art in me, and I in thee, let
these be one in us, I in the^, Ioh. 17.21.23.
and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

These testimonies prove that Christ and we are joined together, though not in
a popish manner, (as if by eating the bread, we did eat the carnal and real
body of Christ, and so were joined to him:) yet we are so united to him, even
as though we were but one body with him.

Secondly, this our union with Christ, may be expressed by way of comparison.
First, Christ is called on Olive, or a Vine, Romans 11.17. Ioh. 15.5.
and we are said to be the branches; the branches ingrafted into the tree, are
of the tree, bear fruit and receive sap from the tree; and whatsoever is
ascribed to the branches is ascribed to the tree; so that if the branches bring
forth, the tree is said to bring forth: Even so it is with all Believers,
ingrafted into Christ.

Secondly, this our union with Christ, is set forth under the estate of
marriage: For we are mumbers of his body, of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
and of his bones. As there is an inseparable union in marriage between a man
and his wife, so is there bet ween Christ and his Spouse the Church.

Thirdly, this union is expressed in the Ephesians where God is said to have
given Christ to be the head to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22.23.
which is his body. In which place Christ is compared to a body, that as the
members are knit and united to the body, so are all we as members incorporate
into the body of Christ; and as the members this united are said to be part of
the body: so we being joined unto Christ, are said to be Christ's.

This union might here be expressed by other comparisons, as by the foundation,
1 Pet. 2.4.
and the building upon it, 1. Cor. 6.19. Romans 13.14.
by the garment upon a man's back. etc.

Prove your selves: 2. Cor. 13.5
know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? Till such time as we try and feel our selves to be united unto
Christ, we can ueuer receive nourishment by Christ, but that which we receive
will be as purgations given to unprepared bodies, very hurtful, and turn to
corrupt humors.



bodies of ours cannot be supported without the staves of bread and drink, the
one to kill hunger, the other to staunch the thirst: So we may persuade our
selves, that our souls for their cherishing and refreshing do require the
like necessity to be fed with the flesh and blood of Christ, that we may grow
up perfect men in him, and be freed from the scorching heat of desperation,
whereinto we may easily fall, through that stream and current of sin,
wherewith we are carried in the whole course of our lives; and from which we
cannot be saved, but through the sprinkling of that blood which was shed for
us upon the Cross. This is my body which is broken for you.) After that our
Savior had delivered this bread unto the Apostles, and they had taken it, and
did cate it, then he gave the^ the signification of it, and what it should
represent, here set down, This is my body, etc. Which words make this Supper
to be a Sacrament, and offer to our consideration two things: First Christ's
promise, This is my body. 2. The fruit and benefit of it, which is broken for
you. First, for Christ's promise, This is my body: We must understand the words
thus; not that the bread is the body, or is changed into the body of Christ
after the words of consecration: but that the bread is bread still, and
represents the body of Christ, and by Gods blessing on it, it has that virtue
infused into it, that it does not only signify his body, but convey his body
and himself unto us: as if Christ might say, This is my body, that is, this
bread which you receive, is a sign and token of my body. Hence learn, That

In receiving of bread, Doct.
we receive not the body of Christ, (though together with the bread, but not in
the bread, we by faith receive his body) but the sign of his body: for Christ
faith plainly of the bread, This is my body: yet his meaning is nothing less,
but rather that it is a resemblance of his body, speaking after the manner of
the holy Ghost in sundry places of the Scripture. We read, that God called
Circumcision the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 17.10.11.
and yet it was but a sign of the Covenant of Grace. Genesis 41.26.27.
The seven lean kine were called seven dear years, and yet they were but a
token of those years. Exc. 12.11.13.27.
The Lamb was called the Passover, and yet it was but a sign of the Passover.
Baptism is called Regeneration, Tit. 3.5.
though it be but the dipping of our bodies in water, and a sign of
Regeneration: and so here Christ calls bread his body, when indeed it is but
a sign of his body. These words of our Savior must not literally be
understood, but figuratively: Aug. ad euodium et in Leuit. c. 17.19.67.
we must above all things take heed, that no man believe, that the nature of
God, either of the Father, or of the Son, or of the holy Ghost, may be
changed. Neither let this move any man, that sometime the thing which
signifies, takes the name of that thing which it signifies.

Aug. in Psalm. 98.
The same Author in another place, says, Ye shall not eat this body that you
see, (Christ his speech to his disciples) nor drink this blood that they shall
shed who shall crucify me: But I have delivered you a sacrament, which being
spiritually understood, shall quickenyou. Idem in serum. ad infant. ista
fratres dicuntur sacramenta, quia in eis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur
And in another place he says, These things (meaning the bread and the cup)
are therefore called Sacraments, because one thing is seen in the^, and
another thing is understood. That which is seen has a bodily form, but that
which is understood, has a spiritual fruit. Idem co^tra Maximinum, lib. 3.
cap. 22. Insacrame^tis viden dum non quid, etc.
Again, In Sacraments we must not consider what they be, but what they
signify. Theodoret. Dialo. 1. seruator noster commutauit, etc.
He that called his natural body wheat and bread, and named himself a Vine,
even he in like manner has honored the signs which are seen, with the name
of his body and blood, not changing the nature, but adding grace unto nature.
Chrysostom. in Psalm. 22.
Christ prepared this Table, that he might daily show unto us in the Sacrament,
bread and wine, after the order of Melchizedecke, for a similitude or likeness
of the body and blood of Christ. Tertullian aduersus Marcion. lib. 4. Christus
acceptum pauem et Discipulis, etc.
Christ made the bread which he took, and distributed to his Disciples his
body, by saying, This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body: but it
had been no sigure except there had been a true body: For that which is no
substance, but a fantasy, can take no figure. Ambrose de sacra: lib. 4. cap.
5. Carnem et sangninem quae pro nobis oblata sunt, etc.
Make unto us this Oblation (meaning this Sacrament) both reasonable and
acceptable, which is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus. Beda
in Lucan cap. 22. panis corroborat carnem, et vinum opcratur, etc.
And Beda says, Because bread strengthens the flesh, and wine works blood
in it, the one is referred mystically to the body of Christ, and the other unto
his blood. I them in Octauis epiphaniae panis et vini eseaturae in Sacramentum,
etc.
The creatures bread and wine (says he in another place) by the unspeakable
sanctification of the holy Ghost, is changed (not into the very real body and
blood of Christ) but into the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.

By these sentences of divine Authors, it is plain and manifest, that the
words which Christ pronounced in the institution of this his mystical Supper,
are not to be understood simply, and as the letter sounds, but after a
figurative and spiritual manner: This bread is my body, that is, a resemblance
and figure of my body.

Secondly it being now granted, that these words of Christ have a mystical
sense, it may in the next place be demanded, Why Christ should speak in such
a mystical manner. Ob.


I answer, 1. The Apostles, Sol.
to whom he spoke, could well understand the sense, and meaning of our Savior
in this case; else they would have put out some question unto him, and have
said, Master what is thy meaning? This is an hard saying, Luke 8.9.
and we cannot understand thee: But being acquainted with such usual phrases,
they could better understand him.

2 It was Christ's manner, and usual custom, to speak by similitudes, showing
one thing by another, I will open my mouth in a parable (says Christ) which is
a plain and familiar kind of teaching, frequent in Scriptures, especially in
the types, and shadows of the Sacrament.

3 He spoke darkely, to the end, that they which be partakers of this holy
Supper, might not set their minds upon the nature of the things, which they
see, and so rest contented with the creatures (bread and wine,) but that by the
change of the names, they might believe the things, that be wrought in them by
Grace.

2 Quest. If the bread in this Sacrament be not the body of Christ, Quest.
but a representation of it, then how is Christ present in the Sacrament?

I answer, Sol.
that Christ is not really or corporally in the sacrament, but spiritually, and
by grace: And therefore as one well says, concerning the flesh which Christ
took in his Incarnation, which was borne of the Virgin, which was apprehended
of the Jews, which was crucified on the tree, taken down from the cross,
lapped in linen clothes, buried, rose again, and appeared after his
Resurrection, etc. You shall not have Christ present, Ier. 23.24. Vigilius
contra Eutychen. lib. 1 Dei silius s^^^du humanitatem ^^^essit a ro^^s; secum
d^mdiuinit^t^m ait, Ecce ^go vobiscum sum, etc.
but as concerning his Majesty, so Christ is never absent: He fills both
heaven and earth.

To this purpose well did Vigilius the Martyr speak: The Son of God, according
to his manhood, is gone from us, (He is ascended into heaven, and sits at
the right hand of God the father) but according to his Godhead he says,
Behold, I am with you unto the end of the world: So as then we may see plainly,
that Christ is not present as touching his body, but as he is God.



In this Sacrament, say they, after Consecration, the substance of bread and
wine is turned into the substance of the body and blood of Christ; the outward
forms, or rather the Accidents of bread and wine, remaining, which are the
Sacraments of holy things, the body and blood of Christ. Conceive their words
in a briefer manner: when the Priest has consecrated the bread and wine,
forthwith these Creatures are made the body and blood of Christ, the Accidents
of them (as roundnesse, thickness, hardness, coldness, whiteness, sweetness,
etc.) still remaining, which are the Sacraments.

What might be answered to the particulars of their words, B. Jewel. D.
Tindall. M. Bradford. M. Smith. M. Attersoll.
is elaboratly dispatched of others, and therefore we may be the more silent
in them; that which I will speak, shall be limited, and bounded in these two
things, a confutation of their Accidents, and their maine error of
Transubstantiation. 2. An answer to certain objections they make for it.

1. First, the Papists take away the substance of bread, and wine, and leave
nothing to be Sacraments but a few Accidents: this dealing is contrary to all
truth. If it were so that Accidents, as whitenes, roundnesse, etc. of the
bread, should represent Christ, then this absurdity would follow, that such
Accidents in any other substance, or subject, might represent Christ; yea, and
that substance should be Christ himself. Again, if Accidents should be
Sacraments, then Accidents should be mysteries of heavenly things, as
whiteness, roundnes, thicknes, etc. should signify heavenly things; then
Accidents should be instruments of Gods grace, causes of remission of sins;
then Accidents should be broken, eaten, and drunken, etc. How absurd this is,
let every one that can discern, and try doctrine,) judge. Our Savior says,
Mat. 26.29 Luke 22.18
I will not drink (not of these Accidents, but) of the fruit of the vine any
more: Paul says, the bread (not the forms or accidents, but) the bread which
we break, 1. Cor. 10.26.
is it not the communion of the body of Christ? And again, he says in the
next Chapter, As often as ye shall eat, (not these Accidents, 1. Cor. 10.26.
but) this bread. In a word, that which is made of many corns, (every one of
them being a substance in it self,) must needs be a substance, and no
Accident; but the bread in this Sacrament is composed, molded, and made of
corns, and therefore it is a substance, and no Accident. The Mayor is
undeniable, the Minor is the testimony of Cyprian, Panis ex multorum granorum
adunatione congestus est, Cyprian in Oration. Dominic.
that is, This bread is molded, and made of many corns.

Now touching their Transubstantiation, which is a maine pillar of their
Religion, and yet is in estimation but a fancy or a dream, it was first
hatched in the time of Pope Nicolas the second, in the year 1061: when it had
but small credit, till Pope Innocentius the third came, who gathering a swarm
of Papists together, about the number of 1300. in the year 1215. established
it. After him came Pope Urban the Monk, in the year 1264. and made up all the
market; for he ordained a feast called Corpus Christi, in honor of this
Sacrament, which day is still observed of the Papists: this device is but
lately found out, and deserves no credit; all that they can allege for it, is
no more but this, that Christ said, This is my body, by which they may as well
say Christ is a door, a way, a light, a vine, a shepherd; a lamb, etc.
Christ called his Father an Husbandman, Ioh. 15.1.
is his Father therefore an Husbandman? Christ called John Baptist Elias, is
therefore John made that Elias the Thisbite, who prophesied in the days of
wicked Ahab? Christ called John the Evangelist; Mary's son, and Mary his
mother; is therefore John made the natural son of Mary; or is Mary the
virgin made his natural mother? I am sure the Papists dare not avouch this: No
more is the Sacramental bread, Christ's natural body, although he calls it his
body; but his body in a mystery, and a figure, as has been showed before; and
my reasons against their Transsubstantiation are these.

ver. 26.27.
Bread: and what did his Disciples receive? bread: what did they eat? Bread:
and after the words of consecration what did he call his supper? eating of
Bread. Then it must of necessity be, that whatsoever Christ took, blessed,
brake, gave, consecrated, and his Disciples took and eat, was bread and not
his body.

2. It is against the nature of a Sacrament, that bread should be
transsubstantiated into the body of Christ; for then the thing signifying is
consumed, which makes the Sacrament: and nothing is left, but the thing
signified, which takes away the nature of it: a Sacrament is no longer a
Sacrament, then there is a sign to represent, as a Tavern, is said to be no
longer a Tavern, then the bush hangs before the door.

3. If Christ's body were really present in the Sacrament, then the Sacrament
should be turned into a sacrifice, which two differ, as much as giving, and
taking: It can be no sacrifice of Christ, for he offered himself but once,
and that was upon the cross, therefore it is called a Sacrament, because it is
but a sign of his sacrifice.

4. If Christ's body should be eaten in the Sacrament, then so often as we eat
it, Christ should be sacrificed, his body broken, and his blood shed; we
should then crucify him, as the Jews did; which is most horrible, and
fearful to consider.

5. If this their error; should be holden for a truth, then the damned crew of
profane and wretched sinners should eat Christ's flesh, and be saved; as our
Savior speaks, He that eats my flesh, Ioh. 6.54.
and drinks my blood, has life everlasting: Yea, the dumb and insensible
creatures should eat the flesh of Christ, as a mouse or a rat, etc. Which
thing the Council of Arelate fearing, decreed that the Priests should be
punished, and do penance, if a mouse, or any other beast did eat the body of
Christ through their negligence.

6. If Transsubstantiation were certain, then what became of all our
forefathers, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and other holy men of God, that were
before Christ's being in the flesh? what should become of many Infants, the
children of believing Parents? Al these never did eat the flesh of Christ, as
corporal meat; and yet they are saved: besides, they did all of them eat
Christ before his being in the flesh, as we do, (he being come in the flesh:)
So Paul plainly tells us, They did all eat the same spiritual meat, 1.
Cor. 10.3.4.
and drink the same spiritual drink, which meat and drink was Christ.
Mark the words; he says not only they did eat the same meat that we eat,
but he says that this meat was Christ; and not only so, but to show that
Christ is not a corporal meat, as the Papists say, he says, he is a
spiritual meat, as we say: and therefore you see we do not eat him
corporally, no more the^ our Fathers, but as they did eat him spiritually, so
do we.

7. If Christ's body were in the Sacrament, then it must be eaten with the
mouth, and pulled in pieces with the teeth; then the members of our body should
dismember, and disioynt his body, (which is absurd to speak, but damnable to
practice;) then it were enough to eat Christ corporally, being before our eyes
in the Sacrament: but in this corporal eating there can be neither Hope, nor
Faith: Romans 8.24 Heb. 11.1
Hope is of things not seen, and faith is an evidence of things not seen, and
the substance hoped for: but herein the Papists can go no further then the
things are before their face: when the obiecr is gone, (which is the body of
Christ really present,) then all their faith and hope decaieth.

8. If Christ's body be in the Sacrament, then, it must be either a mortal
body, or a glorified body, the one it must be. If it be a mortal body, then
either Christ is not dead as yet, (which is false,) or else Christ is again
subject to mortality, (which cannot be) but the truth is, Christ was dead, is
risen again, and has changed his mortal body into an immortal body; therefore
they cannot receive a mortal body, for Christ has it not to give the^. If it
be a glorified body, then he is not in heaven, he has left his seat at his
Fathers right hand, and is upon earth; which would cross the word of truth. As
touching his glorified body, the Scripture says, that Christ was received unto
heaven, Mar. 16.19 Col. 3.1.
and now sits at the right hand of God. In another place, Christ departed
from his Disciples, Luke 24.51
and was carried into heaven. Act. 1.9.11
Again, Christ was taken up into heaven. Therefore this body cannot be in the
Sacrament. The Papists may well stumble here, when they can receive neither
mortal, nor immortal body.

9. If the flesh of Christ should be in the Sacrament, then it would be
seen, felt, and received, as flesh, yea, it would taste, as flesh: but in this
matter every man's own mouth, and palate must be his Judge.

10. If bread be changed into Christ's body, then it is changed into such a
body, as has neither breath, nor being, and wan^eth a soul, which is but a
dead body. This will do them but little good, (if there were such a body,)
seeing it wants life.

11. If Christ's body be in the Sacrament, then as many Sacraments as there be,
so many bodies Christ should have, which were to make Christ a monster; nay,
Christ should have a thousand bodies at one, and the same time, because the
Sacrament may be received in a thousand places upon the same day; but this is
a monstrous conceit, and sauoreth of Antichrist, and we may conclude against
it that Christ's body is but in one place, and that place is heaven: Act. 3.21.
The heaven must contain him, till all things be restored.

12. If bread should be made flesh, then surely many Papists would sin
against themselves by eating flesh upon days prohibited, as Lent, Fridayes and
Saturdayes, euenings before festival days, etc. For doubtless upon some such
days, as these, they eat the Sacrament, and then, as they say, they eat the
flesh of Christ.

13. If bread be turned into Christ's body, then it should nourish nothing but
the body: a corporal substance is the nourishment only of that which is
corporeal: the soul finds small sweetness in drossie substances.

14. If bread (after words of consecration) should be made Christ's body, then
a Priest by speaking certain words, might make bread a living substance, at
least his God; and so do the people think: For so soon as the Priest has
consecrated the bread, the people take it to be their God, yea, they believe
it to be Christ Jesus, perfect God, and perfect man, as appears by their
kneeling unto it, knocking their breasts, lifting up of their hands, and
worshipping it.

15. If bread be changed into Christ's body, then to what substance do the
Accidents (as they say, remain) belong? if the accidents belong to bread, (as
they hold,) then must the substance of bread be in the Sacrament: for the
Accidents of one substance cannot be said to be the same Accidents of another
substance; as this whiteness in my hand, cannot be called the same whiteness
in a tree, or a stone.

Substantiae accidentia obueniunt. Accidentia semper insunt subiecto.
Again, either must bread be in the Sacrament, or else the Accidents may stand
without a subject; which can never be, for that is contrary to all rules of
Logicians.

16 To conclude, if bread be changed into Christ's body, why does the Massing
Priest say to the people, Lift up your hearts, when as they have al, God,
Christ, flesh and blood in their mouth at once? etc.

To these reasons making against transubstantiation, might be annexed the
sayings of diverse Authors, Fathers, neotericall Writers, and their own men; as
that of Peter Lombard in his fourth book, Magister. sententi. lib. 4. did. 1
In sentent. did. 11. lib. 4. quaest. 3.
and first distinction: That of Ioannes Scotus a subtle Doctor, who confessed,
that the article of transubstantiation, was neither expressed in the Apostles
Creed, nor in any other of the ancient Creedes, but only set out by the Church
(meaning surely the Church of Rome:) That of Cameracensis, In Decret. desum. et
fide Catho. c. firmiter.
plainly disputing, that it is more agreeable to the truth, if we affirm, that
in the Sacrament of thanksgiving there remain true bread, and true wine,
Eucharistia
and not the accidents only. And that saying of Biel may not be forgotten, In
canon. Missae Lect. 40.
It is to be noted (says he) that although it be plainly taught in
Scripture, that the body of Christ is truly contained under the kinds of bread
and wine, and received of the faithful people; yet how the body of Christ is
there, whether by conversion of any thing into it, or without conversion, it
begins to be the body of Christ with the bread, the substance, and
accidents of bread remaining still, it is not found expressed in the Canon of
the Bible. Other Authors I leave to them that deal more copiously in such a
large cause, these be sufficient to make against their error for my purpose.
But the Papists will object. Ob.


1 It is a miracle to turn the bread and wine into the body and blood of
Christ.

Sol. It is true indeed, Sol.
when the bread is once made the body of Christ, there is a miracle, but bread
is never made the body of Christ. 1. Besides, there is never a miracle, but it
has a sign with it, which shows it to be a miracle; and therefore if bread
should be made the body of Christ, they might see how it is miraculously
changed, and turned. But here is nothing seen.

2 Miracles in the time of the Gospel are extraordinary things, (for God
works not by miracles) but by the powerful. Word of Grace:) but they make
them ordinary things, for as often as they say Mass, which is every day, they
work miracles.

3 If it had been a miracle to turn bread into flesh, then the Evangelists,
and S. Paul would have counted it a miracle: but they speak not a word of any
such matter: Mat. 24.24 Luke 17.23 2. These. 2.9
they all speak of lying miracles, and without question this is one of them.

Ob. 2 If bread had not been made flesh, Ob. 2,
why did Christ say, This is my body?

Sol. I answer, Christ spoke figuratively, Sol.
as was answered before, and may be gathered by the words following, This is my
body which is broken for you; his body was not broken, neither had he suffered
as then, but his meaning was, this bread broken is a sign that my body shall
be broken: The bread could not be his body, for then his body should have
been broken, when the bread was broken.

Thou have an obligation in thy hand; Thou say, I have here twenty pounds: I
say again, there is nothing but paper, ink, and wax: Oh but thou tellest me,
here is that which will bring me in 20. p. and that is as good: so this is as
good, that under these signs you receive the virtue of Christ's body and blood
by faith, as if you did eat his body, and drink his blood indeed.

Ob. 3. But Christ's calling is making; Ob. 3.
he called bread his body, therefore it is his body.

Sol. God called the Lamb the Passover, Sol.
is it therefore made the Passover, or a sign of the passover? He called
Circumcision the covenant, was it therefore made the covenant, or but a sign of
the covenant? So Christ called himself a Vine, not that he made himself a
Vine, but to signify unto us, that as the branches are in the Vine, so the
faithful are in him: and here he calls bread his body, not that it was (upon
the word spoken) made his body, but because it is the Sacrament, sign, and
figure of his body.

Ob. 4. Then it seems that there is nothing in the Sacrament but bread and
wine? Ob. 4.


Sol. Not so: Sol.
In the Sacrament there is more the^ the bare Elements. Christ says, his body
is there: Paul says, that it is the communion of the body and blood of
Christ: therefore this bread goes beyond common bread, for it does not only
nourish the body as it did before, but also it brings a bread with it, which
nourishes the soul; not so as the nature of this bread is changed (that
remains,) but the use of this bread is changed.

Ob. 5. But Christ is omnipotent and Almighty, Ob. 5.
he can turn bread and wine into his body and blood, and therefore he does.

Sol. 1. It is an old rule, that from can to will there never follows any
good argument. Sol.
2. God is not called Almighty, A posse ad velle non sequitur argumentum.
because he can do all things, but because he is able to do whatsoever his
good pleasure is to do. There are certain things which God cannnot do, as for
example, God cannot deny himself, he cannot lie, he cannot save the
reprobate, and condemn the Elect: Whatsoever is contrary to his Word, that
cannot God do. But for Christ's body to be really in the Sacrament, is contrary
to Gods Word, therefore God cannot do that.

Ob. Ob. 6.
6. But Christ says, himself, Behold, Mat. 28.20
I am with you unto the end of the world.

Sol. Sol.
It is true, Christ is with all his Elect unto the end of the world
spiritually, but not corporally; he is present among his Elect; by his Spirit
and grace, but not with his natural body. Wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, (says Christ) there am I in the midst of them.
This promise of Christ and such like promises are to be understood not of the
corporal presence of Christ here in earth; but of his spiritual presence by
grace.

Let the Papists object for their transubstantiation what they will, yet the
truth is this, the substance of the bread still remains in the Sacrament, it
is not turned into the body of Christ. And therefore let us ground our selves
in this, That as Christ dwells in us, so he is present in the Sacrament, and
must be eaten of us: Christ dwells in us spiritually by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
therefore he is spiritually present in the Sacrament, and must be eaten by
faith. Thus much of Christ's promise in these words, This is my body.

Which is broken for you] Here is set down, and expressed the benefit and
fruit of Christ's promise: the faithful Disciples, and in them, all the Elect
are made partakers of the benefit of his death and passion; for he gave
himself for their redemption: he had nothing else to give, he might have said
with Peter, Gold and silver have I none; Act. 3.6.
neither by any other means could he save his people, and therefore He laid
down his life for his sheep; Ioh. 10.15.
he suffered, that they might be saved, he was accused as guilty, that they
might be innocent, and he dyed, that they might live. Learn, That

None but the Elect have benefit by Christ's death and passion: Doct.
he has put out the ha^dwriting of ordinances which was against them, he has
fastened it to the cross; he has closed up the streigth and narrow enclosure
of circumcision, and broken down the partition wall for their entrance into
his fathers house: the privileges and benefits of Christ's death, do only
belong to the faithful: Heb. 9.12.
By his blood he entered in once into the holy place, and obtained eternal
redemption for us: that is, for the faithful, and none other. As Zachary saw
in the heavenly vision two Olive trees dropping oil through the pipes into the
bolles of the golden Candlestick: Zach. 4.2.3.
So Christ this Olive tree does not convey his graces to any by the virtue of
his death, which is as the pipe, but to those that belong to the golden
candlestick of his Church; Christ is only the Savior of his body. Ephesians. 5.23.


is frustrate, or else God cannot do it, and so something should resist the
power of God, which is blasphemy to think. Secondly, if God, had such a
purpose to save all men, and then after seeing the incredulity of man should
change his mind, then the execution of Gods will should depend upon the
uncertainty and instability of the event; which does derogate much from the
al-sufficiency of God: and therefore we say, that Christ suffered for none, but
such as have their garments dipped in the blood of the Lamb.

Ioh. 17.9.
as for the world, he never prayed for it. Yea further, for whom Christ gives
himself, to those he gives his Spirit, to abide with them, and to seal up
their salvation to their own souls: for the Spirit lets them know the
things that are given them of God. But the world cannot receive him, for the
world sees him not, nor knows him: Ioh. 14.16.17.
and much less can it receive him.

He loved his Church (says the Apostle) and therefore he gave himself for it.
Ephesians. 5.25.
And again, He loved us, and gave himself for us. Reu. 1.5.
Now what is meant here by Us, all mankind, or any of the wicked? Nothing
less, but by it we understand Gods dear children and Saints, Such as are
washed from their sins, Ver. 6.
and are made Kings and Priests unto God.

4 If Christ's death had been effectual for all men, then it had been
impossible for any man, yea, the reprobates, Cain, Judas, and such others to
be damned: but this is a most infallible truth, that the Lord has chained
the^ up to everlasting death and destruction, and therefore Christ died not for
them.



1 The ends of his death are: 1. by his death to abolish him that had the power
of death, that is, the Devil; but he rules still in them: 2. Tim. 1.10
2. To conquer death it self; but they are still under the bondage and fear
of it: 3. To destroy sin, that it may dye in men; but it lives and rules in
them: 2. Cor. 5.15
4. That they which live, might live to him which is dead; but the wicked rise
against him, and attain not to the beginnings of life eternal here, nor the
perfection hereafter. And as for the fruits of Christ's death, which are
justification, remission of sin, imputation of righteousness, reconciliation
with God, regeneration, sanctification, salvation, and life eternal, none of
these belong to the wicked, but to the members of Christ: so as we may
conclude with the Apostle, He gave himself for his people, Tit, 2.14.
that are purged from iniquity, and are zealous of good works.

Ob. But I hope, Ob.
will some say, that there is no great danger in saying, Christ died for
reprobates. It is the speech of the Apostle Saint Peter, Some (says he) shall
bring in damnable heresies, 2. Pet. 2.1.
denying the Lord which has bought them.

Sol. Sol.
We understand these words bought them, as spoken not according to the
judgment of infallibility, but according to our own judgment, and the
judgment of others that are led by the rule of charity: for to expound the
words otherwise, and to say, they were indeed, and in truth redeemed, were to
make Christ a Redeemer of some, neither freed from the power of sin in this
life, nor from the power of hell in the life to come; which is contrary to many
places in Scripture.

Ob. Ob.
But we read in many places of Scripture, that Christ redeemed the world: God
was in Christ, 2. Cor. 5.19
and reconciled the world to himself, not imputing their sins unto them; he
is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for
the sins of the whole world, etc. 1. John 2.2.


Sol. Sol.
I answer, that our Savior says in another place, I pray for them, that is,
for my Disciples, I pray not for the world: here the world is excluded from the
benefit of Christ's prayer: So that we have a world opposed to a world: There is
a world of the faithful, and a world of reprobates. For the world of the
faithful, our Savior did give himself, but not for the world of wicked men:
Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc. And Christ
says I will give my flesh for the life of the world, etc. Meaning by the word,
world, all the elect, both of the Jews, and also of the Gentiles.

Ob. Ob.
But it will be further said, that Christ died for all: He gave himself a
ransom for all: 1. Tim. 2.6.
That he tasted death for all, Heb. 2.9.
etc.

Sol. Sol.
I answer, that this universal note, all, does not signified every particular
man, but all sorts of men, of all states, conditions, and callings, according
to that speech of Peter in his Sermon to Cornelius: In every nation he that
fears God, Act. 10.34.
and works righteousness, is accepted with him: So likewise it is said of
our Savior Christ, That he healed every sickness, Mat. 4.23.
and every disease: The meaning is not that he healed all diseases generally:
for questionless many died in his time, but he healed all sorts, and kinds of
diseases: Again the word all may be restrained to believers; as where it is
said, Christ tasted of death for all, the meaning is, Heb. 2.10.
he died for sons that must be led unto glory, for his brethren, and such
children as are given of God unto him.

Judas, as well as John, and Saul as well as Paul. The devil has deluded so
many men with this co^ceite of Christ his death for all men, that they commit
sin with gredinesse, and are grown careless of their own salvation. But
let all such know, that they shall find the contrary to their woe, unless
they prevent Gods wrath to come, with hearty Repentance. And certainly there
be many in the world, to whom it may be said as Simon Peter said to Simon
Magus: Act. 8.21.
They have neither part, nor fellowship in this business, being pre-ordained of
God unto condemnation. Jude 4.
Jude v. 4.

Ob. But I know Christ died for all men, and I am a Christian, as well as
another man, and therefore I am sure Christ died for me.

Sol. If a woman that had two children, should swear she were a maid, or he
that had the plague should say, and face me down he were sound; or one
reeling in the channel, that he were sober; would they not be spectacles of
shame to all that saw, and heard them? And for an unseemly and filthy liver to
challenge this honor, to be carried in Christ's bosom, to be remembered to his
Father in his prayers, and apportion part of Christ's death to himself, is as
absurd as the other; his fained hope in the last day will deceive him. Thou
sinful wretch, brag as much as thou will of thy portion in Christ his death, I
tell thee from the Lord, thou have no part in him, nor in his death, and
sufferings, but the marks of Gods vengeance are yet upon thee, and thou
venturest thy salvation peremptorily by deserring thy repentance. It is
therefore an intolerable absurdity for him el^^ bu^ (...) (...) ^^^^ed men
(...) (...) s^nne, etc. And Christ ^a^th I will give my flesh f^r the life of
the world, etc. Meaning by the word, world, all the ele^t, both of the Jews,
and also of the Gentiles.

Ob. Ob.
But it will be further said, that Christ died for all: He gave himself a
ransom for all: 1. Tim. 2.6.
That he tasted death for all, Heb. 2.9.
etc.

Sol. Sol.
I answer, that this universal note, all, does not signified every particular
man, but all sorts of men, of all states, conditions, and callings, according
to that speech of Peter in his Sermon to Cornelius: In every nation he that
fears God, Act. 10.34.
and works righteousness, is accepted with him: So likewise it is said of
(...) dis^^se. The (...) he he^^ed all dise^^^ (...) for questi^nlesse many
^^^^d in his time, but he he^led all sort^, and kinds of diseases. Again the
word all may be restrained to believers; as where it is said, Christ tasted of
death for all, the meaning is, Heb. 2.10.
he died for sons that must be led unto glory, for his brethren, and such
children as are given of God unto him.

Judas, as well as John, and Saul as well as Paul. The devil has deluded so
many men with this co^ceite of Christ his death for all men, that they commit
sin with gredinesse, and are grown careless of their own salvation. But
let all such know, that they shall find the contrary to their woe, unless
they prevent Gods wrath to come, with hearty Repentance. And certainly there
be many in the world, to whom it may be said as Simon Peter said to Simon
Magus: Act. 8.21.
They have neither part, nor fellowship in this business, being pre-ordained of
God unto condemnation. Jude 4.
Jude v. 4.

Ob. But I know Christ died for all men, and I am a Christian, as well as
another man, and therefore I am sure Christ died for me.

Sol. If a woman that had two children, should swear she were a maid, or he
that had the plague should say, and face me down he were sound; or one
reeling in the channel, that he were sober; would they not be spectacles of
shame to all that saw, and heard them? And for an unseemly and filthy liver to
challenge this honor, to be carried in Christ's bosom, to be remembered to his
Father in his prayers, and apportion part of Christ's death to himself, is as
absurd as the other; his fained hope in the last day will deceive him. Thou
sinful wretch, brag as much as thou will of thy portion in Christ his death, I
tell thee from the Lord, thou have no part in him, nor in his death, and
sufferings, but the marks of Gods vengeance are yet upon thee, and thou
venturest thy salvation peremptorily by deferring thy repentance. It is
therefore an intolerable absurdity for thee being a slave to sin, and as
profane as Esau, Heb. 12.16.
to vaunt of thyselfe, as the servant of God, and to claim a birthright there,
where thou have no more interest, then the dogs in the bread of Children. Mat.
15.26


Isay says: Isay 53.9.
He had done no wickedness, neither was deceit in his mouth; the just
suffered for the unjust; Heb. 9.14.
He offered himself without spot unto God; and as the Apostle says, 2. Cor.
5.21
He knew no sin. The devil set his wits on tenter hooks to prouoake Christ to
sin, yet never prevailed; as our Savior testifies of himself, The prince
of this world comes, Ioh. 14.30.
and has naught in me.

2. This may also inform us, and let us see the haynousnesse, and
grieuousnesse of our sins, that caused such an immaculate, and unspotted
Lamb to suffer a most shameful death for us: needs must those wounds be
deep, that could not be cured but by the wounds of the son of God. Behold,
holiness is scourged by ungodliness, wisdom is mocked at for foolishness,
righteousness condemned for wickedness, truth murdered for liars, and
harmelessenesse is slain for most mischievous, and heinous sinners: Our sins
were the cause of his death.

Oh therefore let us break off our sins by a righteous course, and never tread
under foot the precious blood of Christ, Heb. 10.29
nor count it an unholy thing: Acknowledge o man thy value, and thy debt; and
seeing so great a pride is paid for thy freedom and redemption, be ashamed of
sin, which is thy thraldom: and be carefully heedfull, that the devil wound
not that, which God has healed, lest by the content of thine heart, and
transgression of thy body, thou be bound to perform that service to thine
enemy, which thou owe to the Lord.

Tailor on Titus.
he gave his body, his soul his glory, and all for us; we must not then think
much to part with our body, goods, name, liberty, or life it self for his
sake, when he calls us unto it. The law of thankfulness requires that we
should part with such things, as in comparison are but trifles, for him who
thinks not his dearest things to good for us; and the rather because when we
have done all we can, we can never be sufficiently thankful for this greatest
gift, that ever was given to the sons of men; we can never speak
sufficiently of it, nor ever wade deep enough into the Ocean of that love,
that presents us with such a gift as this is. Howsoever therefore the sight
of the blood of Bulls, and Goats would more affect many, then this most
precious blood which they tread under their feet, yet let those that look for
part in it unto salvation, account this precious, yea and their glory; and
rejoice that the wisdom of God has left them means by the word, and
Sacraments, wherein Christ is daily crucified before their eyes, to reuoake it
into their memories: Let them conscionably use this means unto this end, that
this gift running ever in their minds, they may bethink them what they may
acceptably return for so great receipts; and when they hear their hearts called
for, they may give heart and hand, head and feet, will and affections, up to
the service of so good a benefactor.

conversation in this world. If thou followest excess of riot, and vain
conversation, thou have nothing in Christ: to whom soever Christ is a redeemer
by merit, procuring the pardon of sin, to him he is a Savior by efficacy
also, by turning his heart from sin to God: if then thou would know whether
Christ suffered for thee or no, and by his passion took away the guilt and
punishment of sin, then see whether thou art purged from the silthinesse of
sin. If thou art purged from sin, then thou art redeemed by Christ.

This do in remembrance of me. In these words are included a commandment of
our Savior Christ to his Disciples, commanding them to celebrate this
Sacrament after his manner, and the end of that commandment: In so doing they
remember him, and the wonderful works that he has done. The commandment is
in these words, this do; he bids his Disciples imitate him in administering this
Sacrament that he has instituted: Observe generally, those things that Christ
commanded, Doct.
are carefully to be performed: therefore his Disciples were careful in
administering this blessed supper every Sabbath day. Abraham so soon as he
received his charge to sacrifice his son, Genesis 22.3.
very early in the morning he arises, and fitteth himself to the work
enjoined. Christ will not have that Disciple, whom he calls, to go home, and
celebrate his Fathers funerals, Mat. 8.21.
but presently follow him: And when he sends out his Apostles to preach the
Gospel, they must make have, Luke 10.4.
and salute no man by the way (not forbidding thereby the common offices of
ciuility, but the hinderance of their calling:) we are therefore bound to
follow God commanding, and to obey his will, because we are his servants. Thus
David acknowledges, that he would do his good will, Psalm. 40.6.
for he had prepared, or pierced his ear; which form of speech is taken from
those solemn ceremonies, used among the Jews, when one sold, and gave
himselte into the service of another: As that servant who loved his Master,
and would not go out free, was brought to the Judges, set to the doote post,
Exo. 21.5.6
and had his care bored with an awle, that he might serve forever: So David
through the love that he bare to his Lord and Master, was as this servant,
prepared his ear for boring, stood at the door, and desired that he might
dwell in the court of the Lords house, to serve him forever.

Phil. 2.7.
and in his agony prayed with a submission, Father if it be possible let this
Cup pass from me; Mar. 26.39.42.
but if I must drink thereof, thy will be done.

2. Behold the Saints of God like Ioshuahes servants, saying, All that thou
command us, Josh. 1.16.
we will do. God says to David, Seek my face, David's soul presently
answers, Psalm. 27.8.
Thy face Lord will I seek. If Christ ask, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me, what meanest thou man? Paul makes but two needful demands for his
instruction, first of his person, Who art thou Lord? and perceiving it was
Jesus of Nazareth, whom he persecuted in his members, his next request is to
know his pleasure, what will thou Lord? And knowing now his Masters will, he
makes no further dialogues with him, but resolutely obeyed. Jacob whom God
commanded to return into the land of his fathers, and to his kindred,
protacted no time, but informing Rahel and Leah, Genesis 31.
of the necessity of his voyage, suddenly departed, and obeyed God. Zachary,
Luke 1.6.
and Elizabeth walked in all the ordinances of God without reproof, and the
Romans were commended, that they were full of goodness. Romans 15.4.


Isay 6.2.3.
resembling their cheerful obedience in executing the commandments of the
Almighty: The Angels do his will: Ps. 103.21. Job 38.11.
The Sea stays his waves, and pass not the appointed bounds: God speaks to
the Whale, Jonas 2.11
and he casts up Jonas upon the land: And in the plagues of Egypt, the Lord
spoke, Ps. 105.34.
and there came Locusts, darkness, tempest, etc. Yea, oftentimes they obey
contrary to their nature, The Moon stood still and waited, Josh. 10.13. 2.
Chron 32.31.
and the Sun went back.



to look to do one duty as well as another?

with them, if they obey some one or two: These are like those servants that
strive for mastership, they will serve but by halfes, they will do one part,
and their master must do another. Others will love God above all, and will do
any thing for him that he will bid them; but if he say, Love thy neighbor as
thy self, then their hears are dead, they are loath to deal justly,
discreetly, and conscionably. Others when God calls upon them to perform any
special duty, cry out, Master, this is an hand saying, and go away (like the
young man whom our Savior wished to sell his living) heavy at heart. Others will
be said to be Gods servants, yet they will be led by their own discretion; much
like retainers, that are willing to belong unto some Gentleman, but yet it is
for their private advantage.

All these that make custom, time, or law, or profit, or vain delight, or
idle and supposed estimation to be the rule of their course, are not obedient
to Gods Commandments, nor his true servants.

It is the will of God, Ephesians. 6.6.
Gods institution, and the ordinance of Christ: It is enough for a servant to
know, that such a thing is the will of his Master.

The second Argument is taken from the honor of their obedience, in serving
men they served the Lord Christ, Col. 3.24.
which is an honorable thing: besides, the benefit of our obedience redowndeth
unto our selves, God gains little by it; our goodness reaches not to him,
to add a grain to his perfection, but to our selves.

The third Argument is drawn from the expectation of reward, which, if their
masters should fail, God would not fail to repend unto them, Knowing, that
whatsoever good thing any man does, Ephesians. 6.8.
the same he shall receive of the Lord. Now if the Lord so liberally reward
faithful service done to mean men, how rich a reward gives he to the
faithful service of himself?

Helps and means of obedience
And that we may walk in the way of obedience, let us use these helps.

1 Make conscience of the least duty, as knowing, that omission of duties shall
receive sentence against them, Mat. 25.42
as well as commission of evil.

2 Look what thou art called unto, and in thy calling what is most needful,
and that do, wisely preferring the general calling before the special, and
heavenly things before earthly. Mat. 6.33.


3 Keep thy self in readiness to every good work, knowing that thou have
always one iron in the fire, a soul to save, an Election to make suit; 2.
Pet. 1.10
which requires all diligence.

4 Suffer thy self to be guided by the rule and square of Gods Word; it is a
Lantern and a light to guide thee, and the word of grace that will teach thee
to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts; Tit. 2.11.12.
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

5 He that would do all that God commands, must not only take occasions
offered, but even seek them, and watch the^, as being glad to obtain them.

6 Let not the Lord find a time wherein he may say to thee, as he did once
to some standing in the streets, Why stand you here gazing all day? but say to
thy soul as David did to his Son Solomon, Up and be doing: There is no time,
wherein God, and thy neighbor, and thy self, the Church, or Commonwealth, or
thy family, or the Saints abroad broad, call not for some duty from thee: Oh
lay up these rules, and they will be excellent helps to set thee forward in the
way of obedience.

Notes of obedience.
Quest. But how may I know that I am obedient unto Gods Commandments? Quest.


Sol. 1. Sol.
God loves truth in the inward parts, and refuses all that obedience, which
follows not sanctification of the spirit. Examine now thy inward parts, and
see whether there be such a change in thee, as thou can ioin the subjection
of thy soul with the obedience of thy body.

2 Examine thy self whether the love of God constraines thee, or the
prouocations of men compells thee to obedience: a free horse needs not the
wand, nor one willing to obey needs no coactions, nor fair encreatings.

3 Examine thy manner of obedience, whether it be a cheerful and a willing
obedience, that repineth not, as giving God too much; that deuiseth no excuses,
as Saul when he did but half the Commandment; 1. Sam. 15.
that seeks no delays: I made haste, Psalm. 119.
and delayed not to keep thy righteous judgments.

4 Do thou make conscience of the least Commandment, as well as the
greatest, and of all the Commandments, as well as one? obeying the
Commandment of faith in the Gospel, as well as the Commandment of the
actual, and moral law; obeying the Commandment as well of doing good, as of
abstaining from evil. And lastly, does thy obedience hold out, and never
shrink away; then surely thy obedience is sound, and thou art a true and
faithful Disciple, doing whatsoever thy Lord and master has commanded. Ioh. 15.
Thus much in general of this Commandment of Christ in these words, This do,
etc.

That which Christ in particular commanded, was the celebration of this Supper;
This do as you have seen me doing before you: Celebrate this my Supper
according to my institution: Observe, Doct.
the celebration of this Sacrament is imitatorie: the Minister and receiver
have nothing therein difficult or miraculous, for then Christ would not have
imposed it upon them for imitation: works of wonder are impossible to simple
men, they must be left unto divine powers. That which our Savior commanded
here, is such a thing as both may, and ought to be done: He did not bid his
Disciples turn the bread into his body, or the wine into his blood, that is a
matter that went beyond their skill, and had been a strange miracle indeed:
but as he took the bread and wine, gave thanks for them, brake the bread,
and powered the wine, distributed them amongst his Disciples, and commanded that
they should eat and drink of them, so would he have both Minister and people
to do in imitation of him.

This may serve to reprove the Papists, Use.
that add so many gawds to this Sacrament, which Christ never instituted, that
Lay people cannot see Christ through them. This institution left to our
imitation is made an oblation and a sacrifice by them. Christ said, Do this,
but not offer this, for he offered not his body nor his blood at this Supper,
yet they make this Sacrament an Offering, an Expiatory, Propitiatory, and a
satisfactory Sacrifice for the sins both of the quick and dead, which does
much weaken the virtue of Christ's death: and cross the word of Gods Spirit,
teaching us by his Apostle, that with one offering Christ has consecrated for
ever them that are sanctified: Heb. 10.14
so as this Sacrament cannot be a Sacrifice ( The offering of his body was but
once made to take away the sins of many: Ver. 10. Heb. 9.28.
) neither did Christ leave it to us, that we should understand it as a
Sacrifice, knowing, that then we could never imitate him. Besides, they make
the Sacrament a veil to hide Christ by their trashy additions: Christ said,
Do this, that is, eat, drink, etc. But they go further, they must put on
their masking apparel, Albes, girdles, copes, tunicles, deacon, subdeacon:
they must have their ceremonies, as censers, balls, candles, candlesticks,
paxes, pixes, corporasses, corporasse clothes, superaltaries, Altars, Altar
clothes, chalices, cruets, napkins; they must use strange gestures, turnings,
returnings, gaspings, gapings, kneelings, crowchings, crossings, knockings,
winckings, starings, kissings, lickings, noddings, nosings, washings, weepings,
with confessions, prostrations, commemorations, consecrations, coniurations,
pausations, and a thousand other abominations: All which are strange things,
and nothing concern us in the celebration of Christ's Supper.

2 Here also may be reproved all too curious Ministers, that run more upon
circumstance then substance, putting as much virtue in the outward robes and
vestiments, as in the matter of this Sacrament: But Christ bids us not put on
this apparel, or that piece of linen; all that he gave in charge was, they
should administer this Supper, as he did to his Disciples.

3 Here may be reproved many receivers, who make many a quaere at the
behavior of the Minister, not regarding the efficacy of this Supper to be of
God.

Ob. Some say, Ob.
how may I communicate with a wicked Minister, or with what comfort?

Sol. The wickedness of the Minister may somewhat lessen the comfort, Sol.
but neither diminish the perfection of the Sacrament it self, nor hinder the
efficacy thereof to us, seeing the efficacy depends only on the promise of
God, and the faith of the receiver.

Ob. But how can he be a means of conueying grace to me, Ob.
that is a graceless man?

Sol. Grace is compared to water; Sol.
now may not water that passes through a wooden or stony channel, which it
self is so undisposed, that it cannot receive or have any benefit of it, make
a whole garden fruitful? So it is in this Sacrament, though it come through a
wooden or a polluted vessel, a bad Minister.

Ob. But by communicating with him, Ob.
we communicate in his sin.

Sol. He that receives the Sacrament at the hands of an Adulterer, Sol.
is not made thereby an Adulterer nor partakes of his Adultery. If we either
made him Minister, or communicated with his insufficiency, which our souls
groan under, some part of the guilt would stick to our singers: But we
communicate only in the Lords ordinances, so far as he is able to
administer; and justify not the lawfulness of his calling, but that be only
is in the place of a Minister, whom we cannot avoid, unless we will put
away the Lord in refusing his Sacraments.

Ob. But what say you to a dumb Minister? Ob.
He is no Minister, and therefore he can perform no ministerial action: His
Sacraments also are no Sacraments.

Sol. For themselves, Sol.
I say their ministry it unlawful to themselves; and without repentance, a
certain matter of destruction. 2. I cannot blame those, who with their own,
and the Churches peace do avoid them. 3. We must distinguish between such a
man, and a mere private man; for although they be not good, and lawful
Ministers of God, yet because they come in the room of Ministers by the
election of the Church, to whom God gath given power to ordain them, they are
now public persons, and Ministers, though not good ones. 4. Being thus
enabled by the Church to give what they can, and bound by being in the place of
a Minister, though he come never so inordinately to administer Sacraments, we
may receive from him what he can give.

Ob. But how may I partake, Ob.
where open sinners are tolerated to receive the Sacrament? do not I partake
in their sins?

Sol. Christ was content to wash in a common water, Sol.
in the flood Jordan, he feared no infection from it: Though Naaman the Leper
were washed there, though the Pharisees, and Hypocrites washed there, yet he
takes no exception, contracts no uncleanness: So the wickedness of another
communicant does not prejudice him that is rightly prepared: though he
communicate with him in the Sacrament, yet not in his sin. No man's sin can
defile another, or make Gods promise in vain, nor the scale of it, to him that
is no way accessory to it, neither has it power to hinder him from the
Sacrament.

Do this in remembrance of me) Here is the end of Christ's commandment, he
bids us celebrare this Sacrament, that we may remember him, not that we
should think him present with his body, nor that the bread is turned or
transsubstantiated, (for remembrance belongs not to things present, and before
the face, but to things absent,) but that so often as we partake of this
Supper, we might call his love (in sacrificing himself for us) to our minds.

Our adversaries leave out this piece of Scripture, as a thing pertaining to no
purpose: yet they are so necessary, that without the knowledge of the^, the
Sacrament profits little: Or if they do not leave out these words, yet they
whisper them to themselves, that no man may be the better for their doings; and
that the people may be kept still in blindness: But the maine reason why they
make these words outcasts, and as without a father, is, because they make
against their transsubstantiation. If we do al in this Sacrament, in
remembrance of Christ's body, which was broken like the bread, it is an argument
that his body is not there. For remembrance is (as I said before) of things
absent: we cannot be said to remember, but rather to see that which is before
us. Let the Papists well remember themselves, that they are out of the right
way: Christ is not bodily present in the Sacrament, when he bids us do this in
remembrance of his body. But seeing Christ does in this his institution command
us to celebrate his Supper in remembrance of him, we may learn this lesson,
That

We are very inclinable to forgetfulness, Doct.
else Christ would not so much have pressed upon us this duty of remembrance:
He thought that we would not think of his love toward us, unless he had
given us a memento, whereby we might be put in mind of it; and indeed soon do
we forget Christ without a special token of remembrance. And that because,
Reas. 1.
1. Our natural corruption, and uncleanness of our hearts and minds, is such
a cursed fruit of original sin, as that it filles us full of wicked
thoughts, and carnal meditations, and makes us cast off all care of Christ, as
if we had nothing to do with him.



him. So complains the Prophet: According to then pasture so were they filled:
Hose 13.6.
they were filled, and their heart was exalted, therefore they have forgotten
the Lord their God.

Use. Seeing we are so forgetful of our Savior Christ, Use.
that has done so much good for us, as the world cannot comprehend: Let us
labor not only to see this, our sin of forgetfulness, but also to subdue
it; which that we may perform with care and conscience, let us consider the
grieuousnesse of it, and the greatness of the punishment threatened against it.

The grieuousnesse of it appears by the Lords often forbidding of it: Deu.
4.23. et 8.11.
Take heed to your selves lest you forget the covenant of the Lord: And
again, Beware thou Jorget not the Lord thy God.

2. Forget fullness is a kind of Atheisthe, Psalm. 10.4.11.
for they who are forgetful have no impression of God, not his Son Christ
engraven in their heart, mind, and soul.

3. It is the mother nurce of many sins, it goth not alone, but carries many
sins with it; whereof it comes to pass that forgetfulness, and
transgressions are joined together as the cause, and the effect.

It was the cause of the idolatry of Israel, of her sacrifice to devils, Deu.
32, 15 17, 18.
of her comtempt of Gods messengers, of her self conceit, of perverting her
way, Ier. 3.21. Judge. 3 7.
of doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, etc. And now speak by way of
reproof to any one that has done amiss: Why Sir, why did you swear,
profane the Lords Sabbath, deal injuriously, commit that act of uncleanness,
speak vainly and idly? etc. Did you not hear the Minister reprove these the
other day? His answer will be: Surely I had quite forgotten, and never
remembered. Thus you see forgetfulness is the cause of many great sins.

Secondly, as this sin is grievous, so the punishment of it is fearful. 1.
Isa. 49.14.
They that forget God, shall be forgotten of God: that is, Lam. 5.20.
he will withdraw his love from them. 2. They shall be vexed with barrenness,
Hos. 4.6.
and death: 3. With desolation, and destruction of their cities. Isa. 17.10.
4. With bondage, Hos. 8.14.
and subjection under Tyrants. 1. Sam. 12.9.
5. The Lord will scatter the^ as the stuble that passes by the wind of the
wilderness. 6. Ier. 13.24.25. Ier. 18.17.
They shall be ouerthrown in the day of battle. 7. They shall bear their
lewdnes, and their iniquity, Eze. 23.35.
which is a burden intolerable. 8. Lastly, they shall be punished with the
torments of hell, The wicked shall be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17.
and all the nations that forget God hell, death, and eternal destruction
shall be their portion.

Now therefore that we may avoid the grievous and fearful punishments
inflicted upon this sin, let us ever set our selves in Gods presence: As the
Lords eye is in every place to behold the evil and the good: Pro. 15.3.
so let the eye of our minds be steadfastly fixed on him: this is a matter of
especial behoof to be well thought upon.

Secondly, when we go about sin, let us remember Christ, how it was our sins
that caused him to shed his most precious blood, let us apply him to our hearts
by faith. For



Peter, when he once remembered Christ, Mat. 26.75
and his words, what did he then? surely the text says, He went out and wept
bitterly, and so became penitent: even so if we have sinned, and call to mind
the great love of Christ who came down from heaven to die for our sins, and
to rise for our righteousness, it will make us (if there be any spark of grace
in us) weep, and mourn for our sins, that we may become penitent, and
reformed. 3. It will help to stre^gthen our faith, and to increase our love
toward him: Ob. But my memory is short, will some man say, Ob.
and I cannot remember Christ as I ought. Sol. But tell me this one thing (I
pray you: Sell.
) as short as your memory is, did you ever forget where you laid your treasure?
No I warrant you, that will always be remembered, though you laid it up many
days ago. But shall I tell you how it comes to pass, that so seldom Christ is
remembered: The fault is not in thy memory, but in the will; thou want a good
will, and a love unto Christ: a man will never forget that thing he loves
best, he will hide it in his heart, as David did Gods word. Psa. 119.11
If therefore thou had a delight, and love unto Christ, thou would use all
means to rectify thy memory that he might not be forgotten.

Verse. 25. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when he had supped,
saying, This Cup is the new Testament in my blood, etc.) Hitherto we have
spoken of both services at this Table, viz. The bread and the Cup, and also of
all circumstances, and actions touching them both: yet somewhat remains
behind in this verse to be spoken of, that concerns the second part of this
Sacrament. After he had supped, he took the Cup: The Apostle seems to
express, and note some difference of time between the giving of the bread,
and the giving of the Cup, and the Evangelists agree with him therein;
fierienim potest, etc. (as Master Calvin says) It may be that in the Interim
between the delivery of the bread, In locum.
and the wine, Christ preached or prayed; he was not idle, nor ill occupied,
quia nihil agebat extraneum a mysterio: Because he neither did any thing, nor
spoke any word diverse from, or contrary to this holy mystery.

The Ministers calling is no idle calling, Doct. 1.
but a calling of labor, and great emploiments: when he has dispatched one
work, he must begin another, and when they are both ended, he must set
afresh on them again. When our Savior has administered the bread, he then
prays, or preaches, after that he delivers the wine, etc. He was always
employed: The ministers task is endless: 1. These. 5.12. (...) 1. Tim. 5.17.
They must labor among you, in word and doctrine. The word there used does
fignifie to labor unto wearines. And in another place Paul describing the
office of a faithful Minister, 1. Tim. 3.1.
says, If any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires a worthy work:
whereupon one said well, Episcopatus nomen est operis, nonhonoris August.
the office of a Bishop is a name of labor, not of honor.

The names that are given to them in Scripture; Eze. 3.17. Mat. 9.38.12.2. 1.
Cor. 3.9, 2.5.20. Ioh. 10.2. Luke 5.10.
betoken labor and diligence: they are called Watchmen, Laborers, Husbandmen,
Seedsmen, Ambassadors, Shepherds, Fishers, etc. Though their calling be an
high and an honorable calling, yet it is a calling of labor, not of case:
they go out of one Loome into another; sometimes they are employed in prinate
study: first, they learn by study what is fit to be taught: 1. Tim. 3.2.
sometimes they are employed in private prayer for their people, like Samuel;
God forbid (says he) that I should sin against Lord, 1. Sam. 12.23.
and cease praying for you: here he promised never to give over this duty for
his people. Sometimes they are employed in visiting the sick, in godly
conference, in Christian and heavenly admonitions and reproves: sometimes
again, they are employed in painful and diligent preaching of the Word, in
administering the Sacraments, and many other holy ordinances and exercises: so
as we see they cannot be idle, but instant in season, and out of season.

1 This Doctrine serves to reprove those people, 2. Tim. 4.2. Use.
who account the Ministers calling a lazy calling: we get our livings easily,
by pattering on a book a little, etc. some say, and it is no marvel that they
must labor for us. But we see by that which has been spoken, that they are
greatly deceived. Our Savior compares the work of a Minister to things of
great labor, as to plowing, fallowing, planting, watering, rearing an house,
seeding of Cattle, watching by night, etc. In all which great diligence is
required. The work of an husbandman is never at an end sometimes he fallowes,
sometimes he stirs, sometime he carries out his compass, sometimes he sowes,
sometimes he harrows sometimes he weeds; yea, every month brings with it new
work. So the Minister, that is Gods husbandman, if he have care to do his
duty, shall never find time to be idle, neither shall any man have any just
cause to say, that because he is a Minister, therefore he has an easy
occupation.

2 Here may be reproved idle Ministers, who are notwithstanding called to this
high calling; such are blind Watchmen that have no knowledge, and dumb Dogs
that cannot bark; Isa. 56.10.
they lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping. If they cate the fat, and clothe
themselves with the wool, Eze: 34.3
they care not greatly what becomes of the flock: such slow bellies are from
the Devil fishers of money, rather then from God fishers of men: they can hunt
well after many livings, yet bend themselves to do no good. It were to be
wished, that the governors of the Church would use their authority, to reform
this gross idleness of Ministers: Oh that these wells without water were
stopped up, 2. Pet. 2.17
and these clouds without rain were dispersed, Jude v. 12.
that Gods people might obtain the rivers of waters, and those streams that
shall never run dry.

serve to teach us with care and conscience to look to our callings; when one
thing is concluded, another most begin, still the end of one is the beginning
of another: we must ever be doing something, either preaching or praying, or
reading, or conferring, or visiting the sick, or studying, or admonishing,
etc. When we have planted knowledge, then practice must be urged; when
practice is approved, then perseverance must be pressed; when perseverance is
allowed, the^ progress must be urged; there is still (...) something left to
do. And to conclude, as it was with Peter touching his net: so it is with all
painful ministers touching their office: they busy, themselves sometime in
preparing, sometimes in mending, sometimes in casting, abroad, sometimes in
drawing in their nets, always in necessary employments.

This Cup is the New Testament in my blood.) That which has bin formerly
delivered touching the bread, that sacramentally it is the body of Christ, may
here be spoken touching the Cup, that sacramentally it is the blood of Christ:
And as there it was said, This is my body, that is, a Sacrament of my body: So
it is here said, and elsewhere in Matthew, and Mark, This is my blood, that is,
Mat. 26.28 Mar. 14.25
a Sacrament of the New Testament in my blood.

Now for the better understanding of these words, we are to mark, and consider
what a Testament is, and what things are therein contained: Secondly, what the
difference is of the Old and New Testament: Thirdly, the benefit that we from
thence may gather.

Testamento^ est externa morituri voluntas, qua bona sua dispensal, et quibus
vult, gratuito largitur. Musc. in Coen. Do.
1 Touching the nature of the word Testament: we must understand it to be a
promise, or a covenant made between one that is sick and ready to yield up
his Ghost, and his children or other his dear friends, to whom he bequeatheth
his goods and lands; and it is impressed in paper with pen and ink; yet so, as
that paper is a full testimony, witness, or sign of all the gifts and
Legacies, that the party sick and ready to depart, promised, gave and
bequeathed to his children or friends. In like manner Christ his Testament, was
his final promise, and covenant made to his Elect, touching his gift of Grace,
and free remission of sins confirmed unto them at his departure out of the
world, not in paper, but in the pouring and shedding forth his blood; for the
blood of Christ gives life to this Testament, as Moses plainly tells us, There
is life in the blood. This word Testament implies a promise; Leuit. 17.11.
and therefore teaches us that, This

Sacrament does confirm, strengthen, Doct.
and nourish our faith, because it seals the promise we should believe. As it
is with those to whom Legacies are bequeathed, they never are in doubt, or
fear of the payment, because, say they, it was his will, and Testament: but
the more they think of them, the more they are confirmed: So it is with all
the faithful; nay, they in better case, (for the executors of a mortal man
may fly, or die, or be bankrupt) they may fully assure themselves of the payment
of their Legacies bequeathed unto them by Christ, who who will never fail
them, for what he has promised in his last will, and Testament, shall be
established.

The things to be considered in, and about a testament, are such as these: 1.
The Testator, 1 The Testator
who makes his will and testament, and that is Jesus Christ, Mat. 16.16 Mar,
1.11.3.11 I am. 1.17. Isa. 9.6. Heb. 1.2.
the eternal Son of God, the Author of every good and perfect gift, the
everlasting Father, the heir of all things, etc. He had free liberty and
power to make his last will and testament.

Ob. But a servant in the house Ob.
of his master, and a son under the government of his father, can be no
Testators: Christ was both a servant, and a son, how could he then be a
Testator?

Sol. God gave all power and authority unto him, Sol.
as Christ himself testifies, Mat. 28.18
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: and God made him the heir
of all things, as he says in another place, All things are delivered unto me
of my Father: Luke 20.14 Mat. 11.27
therefore he had free power to be a Testator.

Secondly, God his Father sent him into the world for this end, that he should
confirm with his death this new Testament: Behold (says the Lord) the days
come that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, Ier. 31.31.32.
Heb. 8.7.8.9.10.
and with the house of Judah, etc.

The Legacies.
2 The Legacies that the Testator bequeathed, are many: but principally
Redemption, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14.
and liberty from the powers of hell, death, Satan, flesh, world, sin, etc.
(by his blood he has redeemed us) and free remission of sins: This is my
blood which is shed for many, Mat. 26.28
for the remission of sins. These Legacies were Christ's own proper goods,
they did not belong to any other, Christ might therefore more freely bequeath
them. No man can be a Testator of another man's goods and inheritance. 2. They
were not deserved, nor of merit: Non potest Test^menta liter Legari quod
debetur ex merito: Meritum enim transit in
that cannot be called a gift by will and testament, that was first earned; it
is rather a debt due, and excludes al favor and good will which is required in
a Testament.

debitum, Debitum autem excludit gratiam, quam libera requirit Testamenti
beneuolentia. Musc.
Much deceived then are the adversaries of Gods Church in respect of their
pardons, and of their merits: 1. By their pardons granted them by one or other
of their holy Fathers the Popes, they look for remission of sins; but they
may look long enough ere sins can be pardoned by a Pope; nothing can purge
us from them, but the blood of Christ Jesus.

2 By their merits they shall never procure those Legacies left by Christ to
his Church: he gave them freely, but they will have them deservedly, they
scorn his gift, they will either earne it, or not have it, and so they are
like for ever to go without it.

3 The heirs of the Testator: 3 The Heirs. Romans 8.17.
They are the Sons of God, and true believers: Christ in making this his last
will and testament was not partial, giving much to one, little to another, and
disinheriting a third; but he gave to all the faithful alike, even to all that
believed in him, remission of sins.

Ob. But it may be said, Ob.
that Christ herein did much wrong to his natural mother, brethren, sisters,
and other his kinsfolks: they aloue should have been his heirs.

Sol. I answer here, Sol.
Christ looks not at his kindred, his brethren and sisters by nature, flesh
and blood have small part in these Legacies; but he looks at his brethren and
sisters by Grace, to whom the Covenant was made. It is not the privilege of
nature, but of adoption, that can challenge inheritance given by his will.

4 The Executors.
4 The Executors: they were his Apostles, successively all diligent and
faithful Ministers, whom he entrusted with the careful performance of this
his will and testament: who, while they carefully and faithfully preach the
Word, administer the Sacraments, and perform other duties laid to their
charge, are said to be good and faithful Executors: and as Paul says, they
are right disposers of the mysteries of God. 1. Cor. 4.1.


5 The death of the Testator.
5 The death of the Testator: A will is as good as no will, so long as the
Testator lives, he may add to it, or take from it what he pleases: but when
he is dead, it is in force and strength, as the Spirit of God reaches us:
Where a Testament is, Heb. 9.16.17.
there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator, for a Testament is
of force after men are dead; otherwise it is of no strength, whilst the
Testator lives. This Testament of Christ was confirmed, and ratified by his
own death, and bloodshedding: as the Covenant God made with Israel, was with
the shedding of the blood of Bulls and Goats.

6 The Condition of the Heir.
6 Lastly, there are conditions required of the heir, which he must keep: So
also of the heirs of Christ, which they must observe: they must believe in
him, and make particular application of him and his merits unto themselves,
saying with the Apostle, He dyed for me, and gave himself for me. Gal 2.20.
They must walk worthy of those Legacies in his Testament bequeathed unto
them; being holy, merciful, and humble as he was, they must come as near to
his divine nature, as possibly they can, and resemble his Image. Yea, seeing
all of us are called to be heirs, let us not be proud of our inheritance
bequeathed, but rather let us be obedient to him that gave it: let us be
thankful for such a gift, let us give our selves again to him that has been
so liberal to us; let us no more mind earth and earthly things: and let us
give good possessions to our sons, and dowries to our daughters, that is, let
us labor for their plantation in the most holy faith, that they may be
co-heires with Christ, rooted and built up in him.

A new Testament.
Secondly, Christ does not only speak of a Testament, to show unto us that the
first covenant (wherein were the ordinances of divine service, Heb. 9. read
the whole Chapter.
and a worldly Sanctuary: For there was a Tabernacle made, the first was called
the Sanctuary wherein was the Candlestick, the Table, the Shewbread; The
second was called the holiest of all, wherein was the golded censer, the Arc
of the Covenant, the golden pot that had Manna, Aarons rod, and the Tables of
the Covenant, etc.) is renewed by Christ. All the ceremonies, carnal
ordinances, and sacrifices which did remain until the time of reformation
came, are abrogated and dissolved: For Christ being come an high Priest of good
things to come, by a greater, and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with
hands, did so wash the face of the old Testament with his blood (as I may so
speak,) that one would not think it the same, but rather a new Testament.
Even now it was shadowed with a thousand ceremonies, and now they are gone from
it, as the mist before the Sun.

2. It is called a new Testament, because of the often renewing of it, Genesis
9.26.27.12.1.2.3.
first to Sem, then to Abraham, after to David, and now both to Jew, and
Gentile, that it might be for ever a new Testament, 2. Sam. 7.14.
to distinguish it from the old, from which it differs not in substance, but in
circumstance, in regard of administration thereof: The Law was given by Moses,
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. John 1.17.
The Law is the ministration of condemnation: But the Gospel, or the new
Testament is the ministration of righteousness: 2. Cor. 3.9.
The Law, or the old Testament gendreth to bondage, but the Gospel is free,
Gal. 4.24.28.
and makes us children of promise: The old Testament was confirmed by the
blood of Goats, Bullockes, Exo. 24.8. Leu. 1.5.9.18.16.14.18.
and Rams; but the new Testament is confirmed by the blood of Christ. In the
old Testament Christ was promised, but not exhibited; in the new Testament the
promise is fulfilled, and he is exhibited. Mat. 3.17.
The old Testament was full of types, shadows, and figures: Moses put a veil
on his face, that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the end
of that which is abolished: 2. Cor. 3.13.
But the new Testament is the substance of those shadows: the sacrifices, and
ceremonies with the Priesthood are taken away, the veil is rent, and we may
behold as in a glass, with open face, the glory of the Lord: the new Testament
therefore does as far excel the old, as the substance does the shadow, or the
thing it self the figure of it. Hence therefore in the third place we may
observe for our benefit, and comfort, That

We under the new Testament have greater means of knowledge, Doct.
and obedience, then the faithful had in the time of the old Testament:
Salvation is nearer us then when it was first preached: the waters from under
the threshold of the Sanctuary reached but to their anckles, which now is
become a stream that cannot be passed: the Cloud at the first appearance to
them was no bigger then the palm of a man's hand, which now covers the whole
heaven: the Fathers of the old Testament, had but a candle to see by, but we
have the full glory, and beauty of the Sun: they had but the drop, and
sprinckling of water, we have the full fountain.

2. If we compare our Church with that of the Jews, we shall observe that the
Lord did but sprinckle his graces here and there upon a few persons, where he
pleased; but now he has powered out his Spirit, Joel 2 28.
and opened a fountain of grace for all believers: All nations, Gentiles,
Arabians, Barbarians, etc. Have equal part and promise in his graces. Isay
2.2.11.6.
The mountain of the Lord is lifted up upon the top of the mountains, that all the earth might be filled with the knowledge of God, as the waters cover the
Sea: So as now from the least to the greatest, all may know the Lord.







1 This may serve to teach us that as Gods grace has more abounded toward us
then to them of the old Testament, so the more should we endeavor to be
answerable unto them: This is a true rule, to who^ much is given, much is
required; Luke 12.48
and according to the increase of means the Lord looks for increase of
knowledge, faith, and obedience. When Joel first prophesied of the pouring out
of this Spirit, mark what wonderful effects followed; sons and daughters,
servants, and maids, old, and young, prophesied, saw visions, and dreamed
dreams. When this new Testament was first published, what fruits followed?
what illumination? what understanding? what tongues? what miracles? what
conversion to God? Sometime many hundreds, sometimes many thousands were won
at one Sermon; and how violently was the Kingdom taken? We have the same
Spirit powered forth in a more plentiful measure then they had; we have the
same Testament, but renewed unto us; we have the clear Sunshine of the
Gospel, and the fountain of living waters: But what condemnation is it, that
we should be like streit-necked vessels, that receive the Spirit but drop by
drop, though it be powered on us with full buckets? What a fearful judgment
hangs over our heads, that come behind the ordinary believers of the old
Testament in knowledge, faith, and fruition of Christ with his graces? Is
Christ come, crucified, raised up to glory; and are we but infants in these
elements? Oh what a disgrace is it that we should be inferior to those of the
old Testament, who had but the shadow, whereas we have the body and the
substance? What a great condemnation will it be, that we who are reserved to
such a bright shinning day, should stumble at noone? In a dark night to
stumble, and fall, were no such danger, but to say I am in the light, I see my
way well enough, and yet to come behind not only the Jews, who walked in a
dark light, but even the Gentles, who were darkness it self, in the
practice of justice, mercy, truth, sobriety, and such like, is an heavy
condition; and yet not the condition of a few professed Christians: and what a
shame is it that we should be never a whit washed, nor ever a whit the cleaner,
but like rubbish brickes, and Ethiopians, though rivers of waters be cast upon
us? Oh let us bewail our want of growth, and our backewardnesse in all holy
things, and labor to be filled with all saving knowledge whereof we have
such great means. Kings, and Princes desired to see the things that we see,
and could not.

Drink ye all of this.) As Christ commanded his Disciples to eat the bread,
so he commanded them to drink the wine; nay, he spoke more precisely of the
wine, then of the bread: For of the wine he said, Drink ye al of this, which
he said not of the body. Here the body and blood of Christ are joined together,
and commanded to be received together of every communicant.

Against this have the Papists much offended, Use.
dividing Christ's body, as the Soldiers did his coat; they will not stick to
do half of Christ's commandment, to give the bread: but for the wine, they are
ready to say with ancient Hereticques, Touch not, taste not, handle not: Col.
2.21.
It seems that Mass Priests are turned from servants, and stewards, to be
Lords and Masters; if they say, the Laity shall not drink at the communion,
it must be so, they will have authority equal with, or as great as Christ: if
he command to administer under both kinds, they will command their inferior
Shauelings to administer under one kind. Like Ananias, they keep back that
which they should distribute, they will give the bread, but not the wine, for
fear of spilling it on the peoples clothes. But herein these Pontificij
Popish Shauelings, 1. Sin against the institution of Christ, who gave to his
Disciples the mysteries not only of his body, but also of his blood, saying,
Drink ye al of this, and they all drank of it, says the Apostle. Mar. 14.13.


2 They sin against the integrity of the Sacrament; that must not be received
by piecemeale; but (accordingly as it was instituted) under both kinds.

3 They sin against the confirmation of the new Testament: For in taking away
the Cup, they take away the blood of Christ, wherewith the new Testament was
ratified.

4 They sin against the Apostolical Tradition, for the Apostles delivered
the Sacrament under both kinds, as they received it from Christ under both
kinds: That I received of the Lord (says Paul to the Corinthians) I have
delivered unto you. 1. Cor. 11.


5 They overthrow, and abuse the custom, and practice of the former, and purer
Churches, who acknowledged no other administration of this Sacrament then that
which was according to the direct institution of Christ.

6 They wrong their own men. De consecra. distin. 2. Can. comperimus autem
quod quidam sumpta etc Anno 494.
Pope Gelasius ordained that all Christians, spiritual and temporal, should
receive the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ in both kinds, and he
that would not should abstain from both. Pope Julius the first, Ibid. Cum omne
etc. Anno. 338.
commanded that the people should receive both the bread and the wine, one
several from another: Pope Eugenius the fourth, allowed of Christ's
institution, when the Council holden at Basile concluded that according to
Christ's institution the people should receive the Sacrament in both kinds. Anno
1430.


7 Lastly, they speak much for charity, but yet there is none to be found in
their Sacrament: For what charity is there, where one drinks up all alone? If
their Sacrament were a Sacrament of charity and love, then the members of
Christ might not only eat thereof, but also drink: The Cup of blessing which
we bless, 1. Cor. 10 16.
is it not a communion of the blood of Christ? and again, Do we not all
partake the same bread? But the Masse-monger he eats, and drinks up all by
himself, contrary to Christ's commandment, and the order of charity, so as he
makes the Lords Supper a Sacrament of hatred and dissension, rather then of
love and unity.

Verse 26. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lords death, till he come: The Apostle having set down the
institution of this Sacrament, now proceeds to the end and use of it, and
teaches us how we may remember the death of Christ, and how the virtue
thereof may be sealed, and stamped in our consciences: For as often, etc. That
is, whenever you are partakers of the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, (and necessary it is that we should often communicate,) You show forth
the Lords death, or, you shall show forth the Lords death. The word used, (...)
signifies to declare, or set forth: And according to the sense of the Ancient
Hebrews, (...) Deu. 20.3.
it signifies to praise, or give thanks, or to make profession. It is much at
one with that which was spoken before, Do this in remembrance of me, till he
come: till the day of Judgment, when Christ will perfonally appear, at that
time we shall need no shows nor simbolls of him; for then he will show
himself from heaven bodily, that all men may behold him visibly: but till that
time come, this Sacrament is a show of his death, and a remembrance of his
person.

So often as ye eat.] From this word Often, here used of the Apostle, we
learn this Doctrine, (...)
That

This holy Communion of the Lords Supper, Doct.
ought at sundry and diverse times to be celebrated and administered of the
Pastor, and received of the people. This the Apostle gives us to understand,
in that he says, So often as ye eat; taking it for granted, that it is not
sufficient for us to eat once or twice by the year at this blessed Table, and
of this holy Supper, but we must eat thereof often, as time and occasion may
conveniently serve. Hence we see in the Old Testament, though the people of
God were but once circumcised, yet often and sundry times they received the
Passover, and eat the Paschall Lamb: So though we be but once baptized, yet
we are to be made frequent partakers of the Lords table.

For a man is borne but once, Reason.
but he increases still, till he come to a perfect growth: even so a
Christian is but once borne of water and the Spirit, and so by baptism is
received into Gods Church; but being in the Church he daily increases, or
ought to increase, till he become a perfect man in Christ; and therefore
answerably, this Sacrament of the Lords Supper must often be received, being a
sign, a special means, and help of our growing forward in Christ: Omnibus
diebus dominicis comunicand^^ suadeo Aug.
My counsel is (says one) that every Lords day this blessed Sacrament be
received.

Use. Here two sorts of people may greatly be reproved: Use.
First, all such, whether they be teachers or people, that content themselves
with receiving this holy Sacrament but once a year, they think it sufficient,
and therefore they will trouble themselves no more with it: this plainly
shows their superstitious madness in their choice of one day in the year (
viz. Easter day) and no other for the receiving of this Sacrament: and it
bewrays their little care of the remembrance of Christ, of his death,
sufferings, and shedding of his blood for remission of sins.

2 All such may be reproved, that when occasion is offered, yet for negligence,
slothfulness, ignorance, malice, hatred, or for clearing themselves of
hypocricy (as some say) etc. will not receive: they will absent themselves on
purpose, never considering this duty of often receiving which was commanded by
Christ, and binds the conscience. It may be that thou art not prepared, that
thou lie in sin without repentance; that thou have hatred, envy, and
malice, boiling in thy heart against thy neighbor: In this taking thou art not
to lie still, but to use double diligence in preparing thy self, in repenting
of thy sins, in seeking reconciliation with thy brethren, otherwise thou
do deprive thy self of that singular fruit, and great good, which may be
reaped from the receiving of this Sacrament. This point has been handle
before and by Gods assistance shall be more largely spoken of in our treatise
touching the duties of Communicants.

Ye show the Lords death.) This is a special end of this Sacrament, and
teaches us that we ought often to remember Christ, Doct.
and to show forth his death: this is a special thing which God requires at
our hands, and for this end and purpose he has enjoined us this Sacrament. And
Christ also wills us, in the eating of this sacramental bread, and drinking
this sacramental cup, to remember him; for in so doing, we shall show forth
his death till he come.

Christ's death is showed forth either in word or in life.

1 In word, First, by praising and magnifying God for his mercies in Christ,
especially for our Redemption: we are made a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, 1. Pet. 2 9.
that we might set forth the virtues of him that has called us out of
darkness into his marvelous light: therefore Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, Luke 1.68.69.
because he has visited and redeemed us, and raised up the horn of Salvation
unto us in the house of his servant David: yea, blessed be the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.
who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things.

2 By making a confession, and profession of Christ his death before our
enemies. Be you ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a
reason of the hope that is in you. 1. Pet. 3.15. Phil. 2.11.
Thus Peter made a bold profession of the death of Christ, before the men of
Iudaea, Act. 2.14. and 3.10.18. and 4.8.9.10. etc. 5.29 30. and 10.34 35. etc.
all that dwelt at Ierusale, before Cornelius and his whole household: So did
Paul and all other the Apostles, being not ashamed of his death, whereby they
and all the faithful find life.

2 In life. 1. By suffering crosses and afflictions for Christ's sake, We must
look to Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2.
who for our sakes endured the Cross, and despised shame, etc. The servant
must not look to be above his Master: Christ has chalked the way, and we
must walk after him, through afflictions and troubles, through sorrows and
crosses. 2. Cor. 4.8.9.10.
Paul tells us that he did bear about in his body the dying of the Lord Jesus:
but how? In this, that he was troubled on every side, perplexed, distressed,
persecuted, cast down, etc. Unto us therefore it is given, not only to believe
in Christ, Phil. 1.30.
but to suffer for his sakes: Let us take up our Cross and follow him, knowing
that afflictions and sufferings are the marks of the Lord Jesus in our body,
and that he will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able.

2 By a daily sorrowing, and bleeding in our hearts: shall Christ suffer for
our sins, and shall not we whose sins they are, be moved, and affected?
The bleeding of our hearts with sorrow, and the dropping down of tears from
our eyes, may put us in mind of his precious blood that dropped, and distilled
down from his sides: The hardest Adamant that cannot be bruised with an
hammer, yet if it be steeped in the warm blood of a Goat, it may be broken:
And surely the blood of Christ will supple and soften our hearts, that we may
lament and be sorry for him, Zach. 12.10
as one that is sorry for his first borne. The more we mourn and weep for
our sins, the more we are put in mind of the sorrow and anguish Christ felt,
bleeding in his heart at his death, when he cried out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me?

3 By dying unto sin, Christ his death must be like unto the grave: The
grave consumes the body, so the death of Christ must consumethe body of sin.

This dying unto sin, is called a crucifying of the old Man, with all his
works, Romans 6.6.
an utter abandoning of sin, a selling of all that we possess, Mat. 13.14
a destroying of the body of sin, a mortifying of the deeds of the flesh,
Romans 8.13.
etc. They that are Christ's will show forth his death by crucifying the flesh
with the affections and lusts thereof: Gal. 5.24.
and in that Christ died unto sin once, it may teach us, Romans 6.10.11.
even us, that are redeemed by his blood, to make this account and reckoning
with our selves, to dye unto sin every day, and to deny al manner of world
lusts, never walking after the flesh, Tit. 2.11. (...) Romans 8.4.9
though we walk in the flesh.

The use of this point is, seeing God requires at our hands the remembrance of
Christ, Use.
and not only so, but that we should show forth his death: Let us then in the
fear of God be careful of this duty, and show forth his death till he come, by
magnifying his Name, by making profession of the faith before the world, by
enduring troubles and afflictions, by inward sorrowing and weeping for our
transgressions, which were the sharp nails that entered into his precious body,
and by a daily dying unto sin: But alas, for the most part we forget Christ,
we never think on him; we seldom or never glorify his holy Name, as
appears by our general carelessness in all holy duties, by our small account
of Christ's Passion, and by our ordinary cursing and swearing: we seldom or
never make profession of the saving faith, unless it be cursorily or
negligently, for fear we should be disgraced in the world with the
vpbraiding name of Puritans, and nice Protestants, or for fear of the loss of
great men's favor: we never suffer for Christ's sake, but rather like Demas fly
the troubles that are to come: or if we suffer, it is as a malefactor, 1. Pet.
4.15.
or as a thief, or an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters: Or
for tumults in the Church by schism and heresy: or because we shame to be
counted Apostates and reuolters, or because we desire to be honored as Martyrs.
We never mourn or take on for our sins, but we remain impenitent, and lie
in the hardness of our hearts, neither do we labor to kill sin, but it
reigns in our mortal bodies, which is the sword to kill Christ, and as the
poison of a dragon in the mouth of Christ. Thus we put far from us the death
of Christ: Oh therefore if we will look to have any part in Christ, let us
not thus remain in blindness and stubbornenesse, let us not thus blot Christ
out of the book of our memories; but let us so carry our selves, that in every
thing we take in hand, we may remember him, and show forth his death.

Till he come.) There is a twofold coming of Christ, one of bafenesse and
humility, which is his first coming, and past already: another of glory and
power, which is the second coming, that we daily expect: and of that does our
Apostle here speak, Till he come; that is, until Christ's second coming to
Judgment. From hence learn, That

At the last day Christ will come from heaven, Doct.
and visibly appear in his manhood: For the first, Christ will come from
heaven: this is plain in sundry places of Gods word, Phil. 3.20
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Savior: Mat. 24.30
The Son of man shall come in the clouds of heaven: Act. 1.11.
This Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as ye have
seen him go into heaven And again, 1. These. 4.16.
The Lord shall descend from heaven.

This needs no furt her proof, It is a thing that we all believe, and
confess, that Christ being ascended into heaven, and sitting at the right
hand of God, will come again from heaven in his appointed time.

This may reprove many sectaries, Use.
and Atheistical mockers of Christ's second coming. First, the Carpocratians,
the Caians, Porphyrie, and other Sadducean heretics, that deny the
Resurrection and the day of Judgment, when Christ should come: they take away
the cause, and the end of his coming, and so by consequence they deny his
second appearance.

Secondly, the Jews, who fasten both their eyes so steadfastly upon his first
coming, and the baseness and humility thereof, that they have no leisure to
think of his second glorious appearance; they turn not up their eyes to
behold him, whom they pierced, neither do they consider how he will come with
glory and great power; if they did, then they would acknowledge him the great
and powerful Messiah. But let not us (as they do) fix both our eyes upon
the baseness of his first coming, but let us with one eye behold the glory
of his second coming, which shall abundantly counteruaile the humility of the
first.

Thirdly, false teachers, that say, the body of Christ is not in heaven only,
but in earth also, in every kingdom, in every city, in every parish, in every
loaf, in every piece of bread, and cup of wine, where the Sacrament is
received: But this is to destroy the nature of a true body, which cannot be in
diverse places at once.

Let us therefore take heed of such deceivers, give no place to their error;
and trust perfectly that Christ sits at the right hand of the throne of
Majesty in heaven, having no corporal presence elsewhere: and that from thence
he shall come at the last day to render vongeance unto the wicked, and to be
glorified in his Saints.

Lastly, godless mockers of Christ's second coming, who^ Saint Peter speaks
of, 2. Pet. 3.3.4.5. to 10.
who in regard of so long delay of his coming, grow to deride and scoff at
the promise: But herein how much do they forget themselves, measuring the days
of Gods eternity by the scantling of our time? Secondly, how little do they
consider the ends, and reasons of the delay? which are not the Lords
forgetfulness, or change of his purpose, but his patience toward us in
walting for our repentance, and the accomplishment of that number that he has
chosen to life: of whom perhaps there are many as yet unborn.

put far from them the evil day, and despised the humility of Christ, and
his still voice in the Ministry of his Gospel: they will not tremble now at
his word to name their lives thereafter, therefore they shall tremble to dust
at the sight of his second appearance, and not be able to stand? Those that are
now ashamed of him, shall then be ashamed of themselves, Luke 9 26
when he shall be ashamed of them; and as for those that daily pierce him
with the spears and nails of their sins, they shall be sure to see him
whom they have pierced; when themselves shall be pierced with shame and
sorrow, to their endless confusion. Oh consider this, ye that forget Christ's
coming, and speak peace to your souls, why do you abuse his patience? Why
will you treasure up wrath for your selves, against the day of wrath? Why will
you fit your selves as fuel for the fire of that day, when the Lord Jesus
shall come from heaven, 2. Those. 1.8.
inflaming fire to render vengeance against all them which know not God, nor
obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus? Well, if you will not be warned, but you
will go on in sin, know it that the party wonged by your sin, is he, who must
come from heaven to be your Judge, and to pass sentence of condemnation upon
you.

we may learn a lesson of the children of this world: Where is the Usurers
mind, but where his silver and gold is? Where is the Husbandmans mind, but on
his tillage, pastures, barnes, and where he looks for the fruit of his
labors? Where are the affections of the voluptuous, and ambitious man, but
where the things are, which his soul desires? And where should our hearts and
souls conversation be, but in heaven from whence shall come our Savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ? Oh let us sail over Jordan into the land of promise,
let us go into heavenly Canaan, and be Citizens there. If we count that our
treasure is in heaven, let our hearts also be in heaven; there Christ is, and
thence we look for him.

2 Christ will not only come from heaven, but he will also come as man, he
will visibly show himself, in his manhood, that all eyes may behold him: This
is plain, God has appointed a day, Act. 17.31.
in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he
has ordained. Again in that Sermon of Peter before Cornelius, Act. 10.42.
the Apostle teaches us, how that the man Jesus was ordained of God to be
Judge of quick and dead: In another place, Mat. 16.27.25.31.26.64.
The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father. Paul enjoined Timothy to
fulfill his charge until the time of the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
1. Tim. 6.14.15.
which he shall show. Now the wisdom of God thought fit that Christ should
visibly appear, and come as man.



because neither Father, nor holy Ghost can assume visible forms, being
incorporeal, and spiritual substances: Neither could they make themselves of
small reputation as Christ God-man did: and their sides (having neither body,
nor forms of bodies,) could not be pierced; and therefore it is Christ alone
(whose body was broken, and sides wounded for our sins) that shall visibly in
the form of man appear, that mortal eyes may behold him.



4 Lastly, hereby he shall show his near affinity unto man, in that he shall in
his humanity be seen visibly descending in a Cloud, as he was seen visibly
ascending by a Cloud.

Use. Belike then Christ is resident in heaven, and so shall be in respect of
his humanity, till the time of consummation, when we may expect his second
bodily appearance. Is it not strange then, men should dream of his humane
presence perpetually upon earth? and that his humanity as well as his deity
fills both heaven and earth? What then is become of that which he spoke in the
days of his flesh? Mat. 26.11.
Me shall ye not always have; and, It is expedient for you, that I go away.
Ioh. 16.7.
How is it that the Scripture bids us feeke his body in heaven, and thence to
expect him? Let us content our selves with the simplicity of Scriptures, and
the truth thereof.

Use 2. This may serve to terrify the wicked; there is a generation of Anaks
house left still, who go about to lay Pelion upon Ossa; who think (because
Christ at the last day will come to judge the world in his manhood,) to be as
good as he, and to throw him out of the throne of Judgment: He is but the
Carpenters son, and shall he rule over us? But alas, when that day comes,
they shall tune another song, they shall quake and tremble, and not be able to
answer one word for a thousand. Now like Joseph's brethren they stalk, and
strout it out in their bravery, in their vain power, Shall he have dominion
over us? Come, Genesis 37.8.20.
let us kill him; but then they shall be troubled at his presence, Genesis
45.3.50.15.16.17.
and fear shall come upon them, they shall not be able to behold the glory of
his face, but shall fall down before him, and desire the hills to cover them.
His first coming was so base, and himself so despised, that every one did
ouertop him. He was then in the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7.8.
and cast off of every man; which our hellish Anakims, and profane Esaus take
hold of, and think him still the same: But to their sorrow and confusion, the
Lord has exalted him, appointed him their Judge; and he will (as sure as the
coat is upon their backs) come with thousands of his Saints to convince them
of all their ungodly Iud. 14.15.
deeds, and proud speeches, that they in an ungodly manner have spoken against
him; and (will they, nill they) they shall be slain before him. Luke 19.27.


Use. 3. Here is comfort for the godly, who have followed Christ in their
regeneration; and who have been his brethren, and sisters to do the will of his
Father: He will acquit them of all due and debt, set them free from sin;
and the rusty fetters of all their hard affliction. As he was their elder
brother in sanctification, so he will be for their salvation: Now he is for
them to his Father, an Intercessor, Mediator, Advocate; but then in his own
person, and manlike appearance, he will be a total Redeemer. Oh let us
comfort our selves, and wait for the day of our redemption, let us lift up our
heads for joy: The regions are white to the harvest, and the day comes on,
wherein our Head shall show forth both his own, and our glory who are his
members; and when it is come, then the least among us, shall be known to be
the Kings Son.

FINIS.

