A faithful and true pronosticatio^ upon the year. M. CCCCC. xlviii. and
parpetually after to the worlds end gathered out of the pro phecies and
scriptures of god, by the experience and practice of his works, very
comfortable for all Christen hertes divided into seven chapters. And in the
end ye shall find an almanac for ever, translated newly out of hye Almayne
into englysh by Miles Couerdale.

To the reader.
THe first chapter of genesis declares how that at the be gynnynge when the
water was now in his place, God said: Let the earth bring forth grene grass
and herb, that bears seed, and fruitful trees, that may bear fruit every
one after his kind etc. Genesi, i. And so it came to pass. Afterward upon
the fourth day made he lyghtes in the sirmamente of heaven: one greater light
for the day, and a less for the night, namely the Son and the Moon, and
made them to be tokens, and not to have influence upon these nethermost bodies,
as the Philosophers and our pronosticatours have written hither to, Contrary
unto it yt god says here, how that they should be unto tokens, and how that
the earth was fruteful or ever the stars and lyghtes were made.

Now where as they show any thing yt is his doing, and not theyrs: he only
does great wonders. Psalm. c. xxxv. he covers the sky with clouds, he
prepares rain for the earth, and makes the grass to grow upon the
mountains. Psalm. c. xlvi. therefore are not they the cause of tempests or
storms, nether of good wethers or frutefulnes in these nethermost creatures,
whether it be in man, be, or fruit: but are tokens only. For the which cause
God does often warn us in the law. Leuiti. xx. Deuteronomy. xviii. And in the
prophets Iere. xxvii. Esa. xlvii. yt we should regard no heaven gaser, no
beholder of stars, nor soythsayer because they have no power to change the
time nor ye course of heaven wherefore me think it a fooly she thing, yt we
are so afraid where no fear should be, and that we regard so many vain
pronosticacyons. why do not we rather rejoice, in so much as all things are
in Gods hand, and governed by Jesus Christ. Must not all things be subdued
unto him. i. Cor. xv. Heb. ii. Can any creature of his, work otherwise then he
will have it? Or how so ever they work, do not al things turn to our best?
No doubt. Put thou thy trust then in god. and be sure, that as long as he is
thy friend (which he has promised to be if thou love him and his word) there
ca^ nothing harm the: And as for the plages yt shall happen this year unto the
per secuters and enemies of Gods word, (if thou cleue unto it) thou nedest not
fear the^ nor be afraid of the^: but certaynlye may thou look to be
pertaker not only of his outward blessings this year, but of the toye for to
come, which is everlasting.

The first Chapter concerning the governors of this year. Christ. be
gospel he world.

VUhan I look well and consider the hy master of ye stars in his doctrine
and writing, I find yt this year and from hence forth unto ye end of the
world, the Sun, Mars and Mercurius shall reygne Now where as other me^ seek
their speculacio^ out of the stars, that do not I regard so much as
experience in the doctrine of Christian? And for the exhortacion and warning of
all estates, I will describe the nature and properties of these three
gouernoures.

The Son a mighty Lord over heaven and earth, is Jesus Christ our only
redemer and savior, in all things like unto his heavenly father. Psalm, ii. Io.
xiiii. the bryghtnes of his glory. Sap. vii. Heb. i. the image of the invisible
god: by whom al things that are in heaven and earth, were created: things
visible and things invisible, whether they be majesty's or lordeshyps, either
rules or powers, Col. i, This Jesus Christ the everlasting word of his
heavenly father, which took our nature upon him: Heb: ii. Phil. ii. and she
wed us his fathers will, coming into this world, brought with him Mars that
is the gospel, even out of the bosom of his father. But wonder not thou that
The god is called Mars.
I call the gospel Mars. Christ our savior says in Matthew. Think not y^ I
am come to send peace upon earth, I came not to send peace, but a sword,
for I am come to set a man at variau^ce against his father, and ye daughter
against her mother. etc. and a ma^s foes shall be they of his own household.
Mat. x. Luce. xii. Michee. vii. Is not this a battle? They shall put you to
trouble says he) and kill you, and of al people shall ye be hated for my names
sake. Mat. xxiiii. Therefore may the gospel well be called Mars. (...) the
^ospell.
for where it is preached there is ye sword, there is trouble and persecucyon,
there will the enemies sometime draw their daggers at the preachers thereof.

As for Mercurius, the Poets feign him to be the messaunger and oratoure of ye
Heithen gods, for the which cause he may well be likened unto the world,
which with eloquence, painted words and outward appearance perfourmeth ye
message of the deuel, and entiseth me so long, till it bring them into
destruction. But (as saint Ihonsayeth in his epistle) the world passes away
and the lust thereof 1, Io. ii And as S. Paul says. The fasshion of this
world passes away 1. Cor. vii. Therefore must we so hold us within the fear
of god, yt we suffer not our selves to be disceaued or seduced by Mercurius
from the son and Mars. Lest we be corrupt with this disceitful world and so
be defrauded of ye joy of ye ever lasting world to com: nether should yt painted
wisdom of this world move us in somuche as god makes it very foolyshnes. i.
Cor. i. and his word (which seems to be but folyshnes in the sight of the
world that shows he to be only wisdom and the very power of god, to the
salvation of as many as believe thereon: Roma. i.

Who so ever now has the grace to perceive and consider this, let him not go
after Mercurius, let him not follow the world and the beautiful lusters
thereof, let him not enter in at the wide gate and broad way that leads unto
destruction. Mathe. vii. but let him go in at the strait gate, and at the
narowe way, which is even Jesus Christ. Ioh. xiiii. the only mercy seat.
Romans iii. and mean to come by the favor of GOD. By him who soever entrethe,
he may be sure to be saved. Ioh. x. to receive mercy, to find grace, and to
be helped in the time of need. Hebre. v, which god the father grant us for
his sake.

Amen.
The second Chapter, concerning the increace or growing of fruits, and the
dearth of the same.
THe son shows plainly: that all soch as fear god, shall have a very
fruitful year. Psalm. c. xxvii. and ple^teousnes in the days of derth. Psalm.
xxxvi. In so much yt though Christ send them without wallet, without scrippe
and with out shues, yet will he so provide for them that they shall lack
nothing. Luce. xxii. For he sayethe him self: The labourer is worthy of his
meat. Math. x. Luc. x. who so now will labor, shall eat. But who so ever
will not work, ought not to eat, ii. Tessal, iii. Sturdy idle f^lows shall
not eat.
Now if we labor, I say, we shall eat also. Ye but where shall we get it?
Christ our sauyoure says: Be not ye careful for your life, what ye shall
eat or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body what ye shall put on. Is not
ye life more worth then meat, and the body more of value then raiment?
Behold ye fowls of the air: for they sow not, nether reap, nor yet carry
into the barnes, and yet your heavenly father fedeth them. math. vt. He gives
meat to the young raue^s. Psalm. c. xlvi. he opens his hand and fyllethe his
creatures with plenteousnes. Psalm. c. iii.

Therefore though our hands we ought to labor with our hands and to cast
our take upon the Lord.
should always be occupied in some good labor. Ephesians. iiii. yet ought not our
hertes to take thought what we shall eat or drink, but first to care how to
seek the kingdom of god. math. vi. and so should all things necessary be
ministered unto us. And why? Man, lives not, by bred only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of god. Deute. viii. math iiii. which thing
Christ our savior has manyfestly declared, in that he fed so many people
with so few loaves and fysshes, like as he had done before unto the children of
Israel by ye space of forty years in the wyldernes, where they wanted
nothing, for he him self fed them, and blessed them in all ye works of their
hand. wherefore in so much as god our merciful father takes soch care for us
(.i. Pe v.) we should by right cast all our care upon him, and faithfully to
cleue unto his word in our hertes, so ye we nether mystrust his godly
prouysion, nor lead an idle life. And if we mean well in our hertes, and
deal truly with our hands, doutlesse he shall send us necessary meat by
some body, as he did to Elias the prophet by the wedowe in Sarepta. iii. Re.
xvii. and like as he provided a break fast unto Daniel among the Lions by the
ministration of Abacuc. Dan. xiiii, Thus, I say, they that fear god, shall
have plentye and abundance of all things this year.

But so far as I can se or perceive by this theological Astronomye, Mars
threateneth a very evil and unfruitful year to diverse spiritual prelates,
as popish bishops, and popish preistes, and other mo, except ye son through
his gracious influence be good unto the^, although Mercurius reign in the^
with never so many horses, great pomp, authority, riches, oppression, with
exceeding many servants and dogs, which nevertheless if they will forsake
their abulions and dyete them selves after the qualities of the Son, they
shall be kept fro many diverse sur lettes, and have a very fruitful year in
all things. And so would I council them to do: for Mars goes about now this
year, to withdraw from the spiritualtye the gospel will resorm the
spiritualtye.
the excess of their fruits, riches, and worldly auctorite (like as he has
threatened them this great while) and intends planely to resourme them: And
where as their whordome and old custom withstand the furtherau^ce of ye
truth Mars purposes to take ye Son the gospel will suffer the spiritualtye
no more to use their whoredom.
to help, and with the plaster of marriage to heal the infirmity of their
uncleanness, ye and with his own sword of the spirit, to subdue their old
evil customs.

As for the multitude of the un godly in general, there shall come a great
derth upon the^, acording to ye words of a certain true astronomer: Behold,
the time comes (says the lord god) that I shall send an ho^ger into the
earth: not the honger of bred, nor the thyrst of water, but an honger to hear
ye word of the Lord: so ye they shall go from the one see to the other, ye
from the north unto ye east, re^nynge about to seek the word of ye lord, and
shall not find it. Amos. viii. but because they will not believe the truth and
have pleasure in unrighteous, therefore shall God send them strong
delusion, that they may believe lies. ii. Tess. ii so that the time shall come
wha^ they shall desire to se one day of the son of man, and shall not se it.
Luce. xvii. I pass over many other plages that Mars threateneth unto them,
because they will not know the time of their vtsitation. Luce. xix.

The third Chapter concerning the sycknesses and disceases of this year:
THe Egipcians haddea manner and use in their ba^ckettes, to carry about an image
of death, and to say unto every man that was at the bancket, Look upon
this, eat, drink and be merry, such one shall thou be when thou dyest.

And this they did (do doubt) to put men in remembrance of temperauncy and of
death, lest they indiscreetly through excess of eating and drinking, should
happen to dye before their age, for so does god use to punyshe soche syn:
wherefore if we dyete and temper our selves through the influence of the sone,
we shall have few diseases, except Mars bring some other thing to pass, that
we mysknowe not our selves.

As for such as follow Mercurius, living night and day in (...) shall (...)
th^s are.
ryote and uncleanness, these (I say) shall through ye Son have great diseases
in all the members of the body, in the lunges, lever, hands and fete, yea and
parel also of the soul, I pass over ye poverty that dronkardes and riotous
persons shall have? we shall be unto them? sorrow, strife, brawling, and
wounds shall be among them.

Pro. xxiii. yea and soch as will needs be ouerladen with excess of eating
and with dronkennes. etc. shall suddenly be prevented with the day of the
Lord. Luce. xxi There is douteles a marvelous sore punyshme^t to come upon the
hole world of the wicked, sword, wars, honger, not only spiritual (as I
said before) but temporal, which plages have been aiore our time, but are not
yet all pas^e. I need not reherce the pestilence and other great plages that
god will send to the reformacion of as many as will be warned. As for the
common sort of the ungodly, there shall such a fearfulnes of death come upon the^
yt they shall not tell where to turn the^ nor how to escape death. O how bitter
and grievous shall the remembrance of death be this year, to soch as seek
rest and consolacion in transitory substance of this world, to soche as
know of no adversity but have good days, and live in volupguousnes. Eccle.
xli. But O death how acceptable and welcome shalt thou be unto soch as are
in aduersite, i their last age, or in despair.

who so ever thou be therefore y^ woldesie escape the sickenesses of this year,
bewarre that thy body be not ouerladen with ouermoche man is hou^e ^^.
eating or with dronkennes. Luc xxi. For excess of meats brings sycknesse,
and glotonye comes at the last to an unmeasurable heat. Eccle. xxxvii.
Through glotonye shall many one perisshe this year, but he that dyeteth
himself temperarlye, shall prolonge his life. As for insatiable eaters, they
shall not only sleep unquietly this year, but shall have ache and pain of
the body. Eccle. xxxi.

Concerning the spiritual disease and sycknes that shall reign this year,
as it has done before time, Paul one of ye truest Astronomers says
plainly, that we be all sinners. To: iii. if we say that we have no sin, we
disceaue our selves, and the truth is not in us i. Io. i: This is now the
spiritual disease that shall commonly reign this year, but specially in them
syn is m^in them ^^ will not a know of it
that feale least of it, and will not knowledge it. Io. ix. For ye Son has
soch virtue, that who so ever can se this disease, and will complain of it. i.
Ioh. i, it shall cleanse them, and make them whole. Ye ye astronoemer says
plainly, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ^. Timo. i. And
an other that warns us in his pronosticacyo^ to bewarre of this sickness,
gives us yet good conforte and says: If any man sin, we have an advocate
with the father even Jesus Christ which is ryghteous: and he it is that
optayneth grace for our sins, not for our sins only, but also for ye
sins of the whole world. i. Ioh. ii.

who soever therefore has this disease (as there is no man without it) let him
do wisely, let him prove and examen him self by ^o man ^^ (...).
times. i. Cor. xi. ii. Cor. xiii. And go to physic before he be to sore
sick. Eccle. xviii. And above all things let him bewarre of soche false
surgeons and feigned phisicyans, as heal the hurt of the people with sweet
words. Iere. vi. and (as a true Astronomer reports) through sweet
preachinges and flattering words disceaue the hearts of innocents, and all
for their belyes sake. Romans xvi. Soch false phisicia^s lay wrong plasters to
men's sores, and speak the meaning of their own heart, but not out of the
mouth of the lord Iere. xxiii. yea they make soche as despise the word of god,
to continue still in their dregs. Soph. i, and to do as their fathers have
done before them to their utter destruction. Ierem. xliiii. For soche false
phisicians, as long as they have any thing to byte upon, preach unto men
that all shall be well, Micher. iii. and mayntaine the^ in their wyckednes,
making them believe to do as their elders have done before them, though it be
contrary to gods word, is the right way. Tusshe, say they, ye shall prosper
right well. Ier. xxiii. And unto all them that walk after the lust of their
own heart, they say? Tusshe, there shall no mysfortune happen unto you, ye
shall se no swerd, there shall no ho^ger come upon you. Iere. xiiii, But if a
man put not something in their mouths, they preach of war against him. mic,
iii, wherefore if thou will be hole of thy disease, beware of soch feigned
Phisicians: at who^ if thou seek health they shall make the pay dubble for it,
yt shall never ^e wary of (...).
do the good: but go thou boldly unto him, which only heals the contrith in
heart and byndeth up their wounds. Psalm. c. xlvi. He shall not cast ye away.
Ioh. vi. But if thou come unto him, he shall refreshe the, he shall ease the.
Math. xi. Ye thou be sick, go unto him. for he is the right Phisician for soch
as are diseased. Math. ix. If thou be thyrsty, and come unto him, he has
the water of life for the. Ioh. iiii. If thou be an ho^gred after
righteousness, thou shall be satisfied. mat. v. Summa h^ him self will feed
the, and bring the to rest. Eze. xxxiiii. Though thou be lost, he will seek ye:
though thou haste gone astraye, he will bring the again: though thou be
wounded, he will bind the vpthough thou be sick and weak, he will make the
hole and strong Seek him therefore this year and as long as thou lyuest, for
with him there is mercy, and ple^teous redempcyon. Psalm. c. xxix. He has
salvation enough for the: thou nedest not to seek help at any other, nether is
there salvation in any other. Act. iiii. Therefore byddeth he the ever come to
him self.

Math. xi. Ioh. vi. He never bad ye seek other phisicians to heal the of this
disease, for there is no help in the children of men. Psalm. c. xiv As for
corporal diseases, god has ordained outward medecynes for them in his
creatures by the ministracyon of true phesicia^s, which gift of god no wise
man will abhor. Eccle. xxxviii. But against the sycknesse of sin there is no
help nor succor but only in him self. And as there is no salvation
without him, so is there ever grace, mercy, pardon, and clean remission freely
in him, Esa. lv: for all soch as will receive it, and be thankful for the
same:

* The fourth Chapter concerning the strife and trouble of this year, and
the cause thereof.
THe sword that I spoke of partly in yt first Chapter, is like to be drawn
this year, for why, The Son, Mars, and Mercurius can not agree together. How
accords the world with Christ and the gospel? They shall never be at one
Sore eyes may not abide ye clare light of the son, the light will not
consent to the works of darkness, nether will ye beleuers have part with
infidels. ii. Cor. vi.

Thus can there be no agremente, for they be of contrary natures. Again, a
scornful body (as Solomon says) loves not one that rebukes him. Pro. xv.
The children of this world are scornful. and therefore are they not content
The gospel (...).
to be reformed by the gospel, which nevertheless though it have many enemies
(as it has ever had) yet because it is the truth, it shall bear away the
victory. iii. Eso. iii. And that shortly. For god has put into the hertes of
diverse princes to fulfill his will, and to hate ye whore of Babylon, to make
her desolate and naked, to put down her abusions. Apo. xvii. and utterly to
set her out of her stole. So yt it appears euydentlye, that satan shall no
more have so great dominion, as he has had in times paste. And now that he
seythe that his kingdom will have a fall, he works (and shall do) al yt he
can by the children of unbelief (specially by the shaue^ Madianites) to stir
up wars, sedicio^s, secret treason, and utter defiau^ce both among Princes
and cominalties. For soch adversaries of the truth had rather set all nacyons
by the ears, and wyckedly to relyste the ordinance of god in the auctorite of
their Prince, then to submyt them selves to the gospel.

And where as God has raised up good me^ to preach his word, the deuell is so
wood at it, that he has sent them a letter of defiau^ce by some of his
me^bres, even with soch an answer as was given to Jeremy the prophet. For they
say plainly. As for the gospel, we will not hear it, but what so ever goes out
of our own mouth, that will we do, we will set up candels and offer to stocks
and stones, we will do as our fathers have done before us. For when we so did,
then had we plenteousnes of vytayls, then were we in prosperity, and no
mysfortune came upon us. Iere. xliiii. But sense we left of soche Gods
service, we have had scarcenes of al things, and the world was never well
sens. etc.

Soch strife (I say) and debate shall happen this year because of the word
of god, for the enemies thereof had rather draw their daggers at it, then to be
reformed. But the lovers of it shall spare no labor to convert them, and to
maintain peace, and therefore I trust verily that through the gracyous
influence of the son this strife and deuysyon shall turn to no blood
sheddynge, for god shall send princes to defend his people from the malice of
the wicked yet shall the enemies of Gods word not cease from persecutyng but
do all the myscheife they can, that by one way or other the gospel of the
glory of God may be stopped. Therefore thou lover of God and his word, wha^
any soch heat of trouble happens unto ye (for by trouble must thou be tried
Marvel not at it, as though it were a strange thing but rejoice, in as much
as thou art partaker of Christ's affliccions: that when his glory apperethe,
thou may be merry and glad: And be even as content to be reuyled as he was.
i. Peter. ii. For there is no disciple above his master, nether servant
better then his lord. mat. x. if: they have called the good man of the house
Beelzebub, how much more shall they call the^ of his household so? These and
many other sweet words says he him self unto the, that in him thou may
have peace and a quiet conscience. In ye world thou shall have trouble: but be
of good conforte, he has overcome the world. Ioh. xvi.

The fyfth chapter concerning the estate of kings, and princes, and superioure
powers.
THe influence of the Son and Mars declares evidently by all conjectures
(ye certainly without any dout) that kings and princes shall have a
prosperous year: and me think I dare be bold to say the same, in as much as
I se that they begin now some of them to seek the true honor of God, and to
deliver their people from oppression. And to wake me doubt ye less herin.
Solomon (which was a king him self, and that of great experience) says
these words: Pro. xxv.

Take away ungodliness from the king, and his seat shall be stablished with
righteousness. Seeing now that god begins so graciouslye to work in
Princes, who has not occasion to hope for great increace of prosperity in
the^? For like as when a prince delyteth in lies (as says the wise man. pro.
xxix.) all his servants are ungodly, even so wha^ ye king or prince is a
favorer and mayntenet of the truth, his people shall ye more be given to the
fear of God. And I dout not, but god this same year (by the faithful
ministracion of his auctorite in kings and princes) shall bring noble acts
to pass, to the great deliuerau^ce of poor people, and reformacy on of ye
ignorant.

Thynkest thou not that God intends great good unto us, in that he so
gracyously endeweth ye hertes of diverse prices? dout not therein. Let them
remember therefore that the power which they have, is given them of the Lord,
and the strength from the highest: Sap. vi. lest they being officers of Gods
empire, be necligent in keeping the law of ryghteousnes But if they delight in
much people, let them love the light of wisdom which is gods word: for by it
they shall set the people in order, and the nacyo^s of their enemies shall be
subdued unto them: Sap. viii. who so ever he be then that loves not to resyst
the ordinance of god, let him submytte him self to the auctorite of his
prince, and let him not byte his lyppe at it, though good Ezechias break ye
brazen serpente, that the children of Israel have worshypped so long. iiii.
Re. xviii. let it not grieve him (I say) that the virtuous king Josias
expels soyth sayers, charmers, expounders of tokens, Idois, and other
abhomina cyons out of his land, to set up ye words of the law of God. iiii.
Reg. xxxiii. Let every man rather give thanks unto God, and be glad, that
Bell is delivered into Daniels power, that the falshede of Bells prestes is come
to light, and that the dragon is devoured, whom the people was wont to
worship. Dani. xiiii. Let no man therefore resyst this power of God that does
soch acts by ye ministracion of princes, but let every wise man be content to
be reformed of his error, to do well, and remember that the king bears not
that sword for naught. To. xiii. and the (as the wysema^ says:) The kings
displeasure is a messau^ger of death. Pro. xvi. Be thou therefore if thou b^
thankful unto god and obedient unto thy pri^^^ thou shall have a prosperous
year
thankful unto god and obedient unto thy prince, and doubt not but thou shalt
have a right prosperous year, and I can not se how it is possible to be
otherwise, for as long as the king makes so many Daniels of his council it
must needs be to the great wealth and prosperity of the people.

The syxte Chapter concerning the darkness of this year:
When I consydre the corrupt nature of Mercurius, and how he has been, is, and
ever shall be contrary unto Mars and the Son, I find by all experience, that
he shall cast a great myste between us and the Son, so that it shall be
dark: for though ye light shine in darkness, and become into the world
John. i. yet shall they (whose works are evil and after the conditions of
Mercurius) love ye darkness more then the light. And thus shall this darkness
be in the^ yt live naughtelye and follow their own abhominacions, for because
they do evil, therefore shall they hate the light, and not come to it, lest
their deeds be reproved. Ioh. iii. And (as Paul says) if the gospel shall be
yet hyd, it shall be hid in them that are lost, among who^ the God of this
world shall blind ^here shall be (...) not the gospel.
the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the gospel of the glory
of Christ (which is the image of god) should shine unto them. ii. Corint.
iii. But where the children of God are, there shall be light. Exodus x. and the
works of life. Seeing therefore that the light is yet a little while with the
walk while thou haste it, that the darkness fall not upon the. Ioh. xii. for
he that walks in darkness woteth not whether he goethe.

But believe thou stedfastlye on the light, while thou have it, that thou may
be the child of light, and escape the horrible darkness of the wicked. sapi.
xvii.

The seventh Chapter, concerning the estate of the spiritualte.
IF our spiritualtye sat not out of Moses seat, Mathewe, xxiii. and taught
not their own laws and constitutions: if they taught us the truethe
although they were but sayers and not doers them selves Mat, xxiii. if they
transgressed not the commandment of god because of their own tradicyons,
math xv. if they laid not to heavy burthe^s upon men's shulders, mat. xxiii. If
they loved not the highest seats, and shute not up the kingdom of heaven before
men, if they devoured not wedowes houses under the color of long prayers,
and were not full of robberye and uncleanness, ypocrisie and, wyckednes within,
if these corrupcyons (I say) were not in them. ye if all the abhominacyons of
the world beside were not in a manner as a shadow in conparyso^ to theirs, it
were not to be mistrusted, but that they should have a right prosperous year,
but seeing they speak evil of the way of truth, and through covetousness with
fained words make marchau^dyse of us ii. Pet. ii. Seeing they follow the way
of Balaam, and walk still in their erroures. Seeing they speak false through
ypocrisi, forbid dynge all prestes to marye, and comaundynge to abstain from
the meats which god created to be received with thanks geuynge i. Tim. iiii.
seeing they have not fed the flock of Christ, but the^ selves, and are churles
to the people. Ezech xxxiiii. seeing the most part of the^ enter not in at ye
door into ye shepefolde, but come in some other way to steal, to kill, and
destroy, Io. x. Seeing they tell but lies to man tayne their preachynges withal,
and blaspheme the name of God unto the people for an handful of barleye or a
piece of bread, Ezecht. xiii. Seeing (I say) that their wall is builded but with
untempered mortar, it must needs fall, for the Lord him self will upon them,
and require his sheep out of their hands. Eze. xxxiiii. ye the sheep them ^he
broken ^all will ^owne.
selves shall follow them no more, but fly from them, seeing they are but
strangers, and hired servants: for in so much as Christ goes now before
his sheep, they will follow him and harken no more to the voice of strangers.
John. x. This is now the year of aduersite that ye spirituality is like to
have for in so much as they have not Gods word on their side, they shall be
feign to stop their mouths. Mich. iii. And all plants yt the father in
heaven has not planted, shall be pluct up by the rotes. Math. xv.

For all this when I consydre ye gracyous influence of the son, I find by
the instruccyon of Mars, that though all the constel lacions be against the
spiritualtye if they will obey the ordinance of God, and submytte them selves
to his word, there shall none peryshe but the children of perdicion. Ioh.
xvii. As for all soche as strive against the f^r^ame, and will needs of malice
resist the power and persecute the people of God, let them bewarre that they
be not drowned with their Pharao: for God has herd the complaynte of his
poor oppressed, and lent them a Moses to be their gyde, to bring them out of
Egypt, and not only to defend them, but all other also as many as will
convert unto his word, and be reformed by his auctorite and power in his
anointed kings. Seeing then that god has called so many of the spirytualtye
all ready, and does daily call mo to ye knowledge of his word, I can not
despair but ye he will also be gracyous to many mo of them, for though the
rebellyons are like to have an evil year, I dout not but there be many among
them, which shortly wha^ the hyer powers shall require them, will be reformed,
to the great worshipe of the word of God. To whom for the conversion of some
all ready, be thanks, honor and glory now and ever more. AMEN. *

THere ends this true and faithful Pronosticaco^ upon the year. M, CCCCC.
xlviii. gathered out of the scriptures of God.
A spiritual Almanacke, wherein every Christian man and woman may se what they
ought daily to do, or leave undone. Not after the doctrine of the Papists,
not after the learning of Ptolomy, or other Heythen Astronomers, but out of the
very true and wholso me doctrine of God our almighty heavenly father, showed un
to us in his word, by his prophets and Apostles, but specially by his dear
son Jesus Christ. And is to be kept not only this new year, but
contynually unto the day of the LORDS coming again.

FOR so much as Almyghtye GOD has charged by Moses.

Dente. vi. and. xi. that we always should have his commandments in our
sight and mind, as a sign and token in our hands, and to teach our
children his godly will and commandment. Ephe. vi. to common and talk
thereof at night when we go to bed, and in the morninge when we rise, and to
write the same upon the walies and posts of our houses, to the intent that we
should not forget his word, his will and commandment, and lest we should
follow our own ymaginations: Therefore (good christen man and woman who so ever
thou be) I thought it fruitful to put the in remembrance of thy duty.

And this could I not do better, than by these godly textes of holy
scripture, which I have brought here together, specially to the honor,
laud and praise of god, exhorting the that art necligente and forgetful in
kepinge his laws, to take better hold, and go forward in his ways and turn
not aside, nether to the right hand nor to the left, but be ware of such as
teach the ought save the doctrine of god. And yt thou may be sure what thou
do. I pray Jesus Christ our only mediator obtain for the his holy
spirit, and give ye a good wholesome new year with the true knowledge of his
godly will, and increace of his faith. Amen.

To day if ye will hear the voice of God, harde^ not your hertes. Hebre. iii.

Every day it is good to believe, to learn, and to do what god has commanded:
And so likewise is it good to leave undone that god has forbidden.

This day is it good to learn gods word, for it is the incorruptible sede,
whereof we are borne anew in god. i. Pet. i. It is the fode of the soul, whereby
ma^lyueth. Deuteronomy. viii. math. iiii. and not only by bred. The word of god is
quycke and mighty in operacyon, and sharper then any two edged sword, and
enters through, even unto the deuydynge aso^der of ye soul and ye sprete, and
of the joints and the mary. Hebr. iiii. etc. It is good in deed to learn gods
word, for all good things al good things come in gods word.
come to us with it, and innumerable riches there through. Sap. vii. Therefore
are they blessed yt hear it, and to do thereafter. Luc. xi.

This day is it good to believe the word of god: for he yt believes and is
baptized, shall be saved. Mar. xvi. ye god gives them power to be his children,
yt believe in his name, Ioh. i. wherefore he that comes unto god, must believe,
for without faith it is not possible to please god. Hebr. xi.

This day is it good to keep the word and commandments of God, for he yt
loves me (says Christ) will keep my word, and my father will love him, and
we wylcome unto him, and will make our dwelling with him. Ioh. xiiii. He that
has my commandments (says he) and keeps them, ye same is he that loves
me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father. Therefore (I say) it is
good this day for every one of us to keep gods commandments, that is, to
have no Gods but one. Exodus xx. To sanctify and halowe the name of god: that
is, to call only upon it in all need and necessite etc. To halowe the Sabbath
the right sabbath.
day, namely to rest from our own works, as god did from his, Heb. iiii. to
the intent that he may work in us, and we to fulfill his will by hearing his
word, by steadfast faith and prayer. etc. To honor father and mother, Mar. xv.
that is, to be obedient unto the^ Ephe. vi. To help them in their need, to
cherysh them to comfort them in aduersite. etc. for that is acceptable and
well pleasynge unto the Lord. Collos. iii. To kill nobodye, that is to hate no
man. mat v. ^o bear no malice in our minds, to give no evil words, but
even to love our enemies. Mat, v. and to do good for evil* To break no
lawful wedlock, that is, to commytte no whoredom, aduowtrye, nor uncleanness,
but either to live chaiste or else to marye. i. Cor. vii. To steal nothing,
that is, to use no false marchaundyse, neither in barganing, weight nor
measure. i. Tess, iiii. Leu. xix. Deute: xxv. Ezech, xlv. but truly to labor
in some good occupacion, for the susteynyng of the poor: Ephesians: iiii. To bear
no false witness, that is, to hurt no mansname nor fame to lie of no man. Ephe.
iiii: but either to say yt truth, orels to keep silence. To covet no man's house
wife, servant, good, nor any thing that is his, that is, not once to lust
after our neghbours evil. Romans vii. and xiii. but hartelye to love him eue^ as
our selves. Leuit. xix. and to do unto him after the manner as we would he did
unto us. Mat. vii. Cob, iiii: These commandments (I say) is it good for us
to keep, not only this day, but as long as we live, to the honourynge of the
blessed name of god in us, to the increace of his kingdom, and to the
fulfyllyng of his godly will.

This day is it good in faith and steadfast believe to work partyte good works
and that by love, for love is the fulfyllyng of ye law Romans xiii. and hydeth
the multitude of sins. i. Pet. iiii. love has many noble condicyons, love is
pacient and courteous, love enuieth not i. Cor. xiii. love does not frowardely,
The condi^ous of (...).
love is not puffet up, love deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is
not provoked unto anger, thinks no evil, reioyseth not of iniquite, but
reioyseth in the truth, bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, suffers all things. who so ever now has the sprete of God, and
has truly received the light of his word, will use these works, these fruits
of the sprete, gal. v. and this armoure of light. True belenecs do good works.


This is the new commandment that our master has given us, for by this
shall every man know ye we are his disciples, if we love one another, Io.
xiii. not in word and tongue only, but in deed and verite. i. Ioha* iii. not
to suffer the^ to want, and we have, not to let them peryshe, and we may help
them, but louyngly and with a good heart, to distiribute unto ye necessites of
ye saites. To. xii, to feed ye ho^gry, to minister drink to ye thyrsty The
works of C^^^sten men.
Esa. lviii. Eze, xviii. To lodge the harbourlesse, to vyset the sick. ii:
Tim. i. to burye the deed. Tobi. i. and shortly, to do unto eueryman, even as
we would be entreated out selves.

This day is it good one of us to tell another his fault, and that louynglye
after a brotherlye correctyon without any desire of ven geaunce, for it is
written: Thou shall not aue^ge thy self, nor bear evil will against the
children of thy people. Leui. xix. Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thyn
heart, but shall tell thy neighbor his fault, that thou bear not sin for his
sake, And (as yt wise man says) Tell thy friend his fault, lest he be
ignorant, and say: I have not done it. Or if he have done it, that he do it
no more. Ecel. xix. Reprove thy neighbor, that he may kept his tongue, and if
he have spoken (any thing amysse) that he say it no more. For yt doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles is, that if any man be overtaken of a fault, they yt
are spiritual ought to enfourme him with a meke sprete, considering them
selves, that it is their they that have the sperite of gods knowledge, ought to
e^form their brethren.
own nature also to be tempted. Galla. vi. if thy brother trespace against the
(says our master Christ) go thy way and tell him his fault between the and
him alone. if he hear ye, thou have wo^ne thy brother. But if he hear ye not,
the^ take yet with the one or two, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses
every matter may be stablished. if he hear not them, then tell it unto the
congregacyon. if he hear not the congregation, then hold him as an heythen and
publycan. mat. xviii. Now if any that is in yt no^bre of the breathren in
Christ, and will be taken for a Christian man in deed be an whoremonger, or
covetous, or a worshipper of images, either a rayler, or a dronkarde, or an
extorcyoner, the doctrine of Paul is plain, that we should not eat, nor keep
company with soch.

This day is it good to beware of false prophets, of men's own Bewarre of
false dotrine.
ymaginacyons and dreams, lest we receive lies instead of ye truth lest we
receive the poison of Anti christ's laws, instead of ye blessed word of God,
lest we shote at a wrong mark, and be disceaued by soch as walk in humblenes
of their own choosing and in spiritualy of Angels. Coll. ii. But let us beware
of false prophets, which come unto us in shepes clothing, and are ranynge
wolves within. math. vii. who so ever there fore comes unto us, and brings
not yt doctrine of Christ, let us nether receive him into ye house, nor salute
him, lest we be partakers of his evil deeds. For by false prechers does ye
Lord our god prove us to were whether we love him with all our heart and with all our God proves us by false preachers.
soul. Deu. xiii. wherefore it shall be good for us, not only this day, but as
long as we live, to walk after the Lord our god, and to fear him and to keep
his commandments his statutes, his laws, and his co^stitucyo^s, to herke^
unto his voice, to serve him, and to cleue unto him. ye subject tes obey four
pry^ces.


This day is it good for every subject to be obedient, and to submit him
self to the auctorite of the hyer power, i. Pe. ii. Sa. vi. for there is no
power but of god. The powers yt be, are ordined of god: so yt who so ever
resysteth yt power, resists yt ordinance of god. And they yt resist, shall
receive to the^ selves dampnacyon. For rulers are not to be feared for good
works, but for evil. if thou wylt be with out fear of the power, do well then
and thou shall have praise of the same, for he is the mynister of god for thy
wealth. But if thou do evil, then fear: for he bears not the sword for
naught. For he is the offycer of god, a taker of vengeance, to punyshe him
that does evil. wherefore we must needs obey every one of us, not only for
punyshement, but also because of conscience. we are warned also by saint Paul
in an other place, to submytte our selves unto princes, and to the hyer
auctorite, and to obey the officers. Tit. iii. Submytte your selves, says
saint Peter, unto all manner ordinance of men for the Lords sake: whether it
be unto the king, as unto he king the chef: ^^ under ^d.
the chief head, or unto rulers, as unto them that are sent of him, for the
punysheme^t of euel doers, but for the praise of them that do well, i. Pet. ii.
As for such as will needs disobeye, let them remember that the king bears not
the sword for naught. To. xiii. and that (as Sa lomo^ says) The kings
displeasure is a messanger of death. Proverb. xvi.

This day is it good for kings, ye princes execute you^ office
princes and temporal judges, to execute their office as out of the power that
god ministers unto them. i. Pet. iiii. for in very deed the power is given
them of the Lord, and the strength from the highest. Sap. vi. Therefore seeing
they are the officers of his kingdom, as the wise man says, they ought not to
be neglygent, but to execute true judgment, to keep the law of ryghteousnes,
to walk after his will, to love the light of wisdom, to expel soythsayers,
charmers, expounders of tokens. Idols and all abhominacyo^s out of theyrlonde.
iiii. Reg. xxxii to set up the words of the law of god, to put down the
houses of Idols try, to se that the law and word of god be taught among ye
people The study to good rynet.
ii. Para. xvii to spare nether cost nor labor for the mayntenau^ce and
defense of ye same, to seek the peace, wealth, and prosperity of their commons,
to judge every man ryghteously without any wrestynge of the law. Deuteronomy. xvii.
to know no ma^s person in judgment, to take no gystes: Leui. xxiii. but ever
to have the law of God by them, and to read therein al ye days of their
lives, that they may learn to fear the Lord their god, to keep all the words
of his law, and to do there after, Deuteronomy. xvii. that they lift not up their
hertes above their brethren, and so turn aside from the commandment, either
to yt right hand or to the left, but that they may prolo^ge their days in
their office: Ye servants obey your Lords and Mastres.


This day is it good for servants to obey their bodily masters, with fear
and tremblyng, in syn glenes of their heart, even as unto Christ, not with
service only in the eye syghte, as me^ pleasers, but as servants of Christ,
doing ye will of god from yt heart with good will, thynkyng ye they serve even
the Lord and not men. Ephe. vi. Ye servants (says saint Paul in another
place) be obedient, unto, your bodily masters in all things, not with
service of the eye as pleasers of men, but in synglenes of the heart, fearyng
God. what so ever ye do, do it hertely even as unto the Lord and not unto men.
And be sure, that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance,
for ye serve the Lord Christ. Coll. iii. And unto Tit. ii. Exhort servants
to be obediente unto their masters, to please in all things, not answeryng no
bedient ^^uaunt ca^seth the ^or^e of (...) to have good re^^^^.
again, nether to be pykers, but to show al good faythfulnes that in all
things they may do worshipe unto ye doctrine of God our Savior. Tit. ii.
wherefore yeseruauntes, (says laynt Peter) o beye your masters with all fear,
not only if they be good and courteous, but also if they be forward i. Pet. ii.
And therefore was saint Paul so earnest to se this ordynan^ce of God kept:
namely that as many servants as are under the yocke. should count their
masters worthy of all honor, that the name of god and his doctrine be not
evil spoken of. And ye they which have beleuynge masters, should not dispyse
them because they are brethren, but rather do service, for so much as they are
bele uynge, and beloved, and partakers of the benefit. i: Timo. vi.

This day is it good for soche men as have servants, to put away ye lords
Masters d your servants ^^ eucl
all threatenynges and churlyshe words, Ephesians. vi. doing unto their servants
that which is just and equal, and know ye they them selves also have a master
in heaven, Col. iii. Therefore (according to the council of the wise man)
where as thy servant works truly, entreat him not euel, nether the
hyrelyng, that is faith full unto the. Eccle. vii. love a discrete servant as
thyn own soul. defraude him not of his lybertye. nether leave him a poor
man. How be it if he be not obedient, bind his fete. but do not to much unto
him in any wise, and without discrecyon do nothing, Ecclesi. xxxiii, Therefore
should evil servants be correct, seeing they will not be the better for
words, Pro. xxix. for though they understand them, yet will they not regard
the Do thou then the council of the wise man: tame thy evil servant with
bo^des and correccyon. Eccl, let not ^ou^e servants go^dle.
xxxiii. If thou set him to labor, thou shall find rest, but if thou let him
goydle, he shall seek liberty. For as (Solomon says) he ye delycatly
brings up his servant from a child. shall make him his master at length.
Proverb. xxix. Send him to labor therefore, yt he go not idle, for ydlenes
brings much evil. Set him to work, for yt belongs unto him and becomes
him well. Eccl. xxxiii.

This day is it good for weme^ to be obedient and to submytte themselves ye we
men obey your husbands.
unto their husbands as unto the Lord. For the husband is the wives head,
even as Christ also is the head of the congregagatyon, and he is the savior
of his body. Ephesians. v. Therefore as the congregacyon is in subieccyon to Christ,
so likewise let the wives be in subieccyo^ to their husbands in all things, as
it is comely in the Lord: Col. iii. yt even they which believe not the word,
may with out the word be wo^ne by yt co^uersacyon of the wives, when they se
their good living, i. Pe. iii. And let not their outward apparel be weme^
shall not be to gorgiously arrayed.
with broyded here, and having on of gold, or in putting on of gorgious array,
but let the in ward man of the heart be incorrupt with a meke and a quiet
sprete, which before god is much set by. For after this manner in the old time
did the holy women which trusted in god, tyer themselves, and were obedient
unto their husbands: Even as Sara obeyed Abraham and called him lord. Genesis
xviii.

This day it is good for men to love their wives, eue^ as Christ ye men love
your wives
loved the congregation, and gave him self for it, to sanctify it. and
cleansed it in the fountain of water by ye word, to make it to himself a
glorious congregation, having no spotte nor wrincle, nor any soche thing, but
that it should be holy and without blame. Ephesians. v. So ought me^ also to love
their wives, eue^ as their own bodies. He ye loves his wife, loves him
self. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but noryssheth and cherysheth
it, even as the Lord does also the congregacyon. Therefore ought every man to
do so, that he love his wife even as himself, and not to be bitter unto them,
Coll. iii. but to dwell with them according unto knowledge, geuyng honor unto
the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, and as unto them y^ are heirs with them
of ye grace of life, that their prayers be not let. i. Pe. iii. ye children
honor you^ fathers mother^.


This day is it good for children to honor their fathers and mothers, and to
obey them in all things, for that is well pleasyng unto the Lord. Ephe. vi.
Coll. iii. ye the Lord will have the father honored of the children: and look
what a mother commands her children to do, he will have it kept Eccl. iii.
who so honors his father, his sins shall be forgeuen him, and he that
honors his mother, is like one that gathers treasure together, who so
honors his father shall have joy of his own children, and when he makes
his prayer, he shall be herd. He that honors his father, shall have a long
life: and he that is obedient for ye Lords sake, his mother shall have joy of
him: He yt fears the Lord, honors his father and mother, and does them
service even as it were unto the Lord himself. Honor thy father therefore in
deed, in word, and in all pacyence, that thou may have his blessinge: for
the blessing of the father buyldeth up the houses of the children, but the
mothers curse roteth out the fou^dacyons. Rejoice not thou when thy father is
reproved, for it is no honor unto the, but a shame.

For the worshipe of a ma^s father is his own worship, and where the father
is without honor, it is ye dishonesty of ye sone. My son make much of thy
father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he lives. And if his
understanding fail, have pacyence with him, and despise him not in his
strength: For y^ good deed yt thou show unto thy father, shall not be
forgotten, and when thou thy self want, it shall be rewarded the. etc. He yt
forsakes his father, shall come to shame, and he that defyeth his mother, is
cursed of god wherefore my son, do thou thy deutye with loving meekness, and
so shall thou be loved above other men. ye fathers bring up your children in
the fear of god


This day is it good for fathers and soch men as have children to bring them
up in the norture and informacyon of the Lord. Ephe. vi. and not to be cruel
unto them, lest they be of a desperate mind: Collo. iii. But diligently to
teach them the commandments of God, for (as the wise man says) who loves
his child, holds him still in norture and under correcyon, Pro. xiii. that he
may have joy of him afterward. Eccl. xxx. and yt he grope not after his
neghbours doors. He that teaches his son, shall have joy in him, and need
not be a shamed of him among his acquayntaunce etc. An untamed horse will be
hard, and a wanton child will be wylfull. Therefore who so ever thou be that
have a child, give him not lybertye in his youth: Bow down his neck while
he is young, hit him upon his sides while he is a child, lest he be to
stubborn, and give no more force of the, (and so shalt thou have heaviness of
soul.)

Teach thy child and be diligent therein, lest it be to thy shame. with hold
not correccion from the child: for if thou beatest him with the rod, he shall
not dye thereof. Pro. xxiii. Thou smytest him with the rod, but thou delyuerest
his soul from hell.

This day is it good for every ye spiritu a shepherds feed your locks
one ye is a bishope or spiritual shepherde, to be blameles, the husband: of
one wife, sober, discrete. i. Tim iii. As the steward of God: Tit. i. not
wylfull, not angry, not given unto much wine, no fyghter, not gredy of fylthy
lucre, but manerly harberous, apt to teach, gentle, abhorryng strife,
abhorryng covetousness, such one as loves goodness, and is ryghteous, holy,
temperate, one that rules his own house honestly, having obedient children
with all honesty, such one as cleueth unto the true word of doctrine, that he
may be able to exhort with wholesome learning, and to improve them yt say
against it For above all things it is good byshopes euty^
for a byshope or spiritual shepeherde, to show himself an example of good
works, with vncorrupt doctrine, with honesty, with the wholesome word which
cannot be rebuked: that soch as with stand, may be ashamed, having nothing in
them to disprayse. Of soch things also as belong to ye doctrine of Christ,
would ye apostle have the^ to speak earnestly: that they which are beleuers
in God, might be dilligent to excel in good works: for these things at good
and profitable unto men.

For a conclucyon, who so ever thou art or of what estate so ever thou be, take heed yt there be not in the an evil heart of unbelieve, to depart from the
living god Hebr. iii. but exhort thy self daily with his word, while it is
called, To day, lest thou wax hard herted through the disceatfulnes of sin

Printed at London by Rychard Kele, dwelling at the long shop in the Poultry
under saint Myldreds church cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


