THE PERPETVITIE OF A REGENERATE MAN'S ESTATE.

Wherein it is manifestly proved by sundry arguments, reasons and authorities.
That such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a lively
faith, can neither finally nor totally fall from grace.

It is also proved, that this has been the received and resolved Doctrine, of
all the ancient Fathers, of all the Protestant Churches and writers beyond the
seas, and of the Church of England. All the principal arguments that are, or
may be objected against it, either from Scripture, or from reason, are here
likewise cleared and answered.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Gent: Lincolniensis.

PSALM. 125. Verse 1.

They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed
but stands fast for ever

Fulgentius de Praedestinatione ad Monimum.

Gratia praeuenis impium, vt fiat iustus: subsequitur iustum ne fiat impius:
Praueniselisum vt surgat: subsequitur eleuatum necadat.

LONDON,

Printed by WILLIAM JONES dwelling in Redcrossestreete. 1626.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD GEORGE BY THE Divine Providence Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate of England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council
MOST Reverend Father in God, it has pleased the dispenser and giver of all
honor and preferment, out of his especial providence, to advance your Grace
(next to our gracious and Dread Sovereign) to the highest place of rule and
dignity in this our Church, whereby you are far engaged to patronize the
truth of God, and the established and resolved Doctrines of our English Church.
Which when I had well considered, it moved me to consecrate these first fruits
of my studies to your Grace; which are nothing else, but a just, (though weak
and mean,) defense of a principell and ground of that religion, which has
been long established and settled in our Church, till some factious and
nouellizing spirits (if not worse) were so bold and impudent of late for to
disturb it. The men and means by which this truth has been disturbed and
drawn into question, are not unknown (I suppose) unto your Grace: and
therefore I need not to inform against them. All that I shall say of them is
only this; that they are now so potent and so politic, that if they are not
speedily and carefully prevented by your Grace, they are like to quell, at
least to cloud, that glorious truth and Gospel (which has shined so bright,
so plentifully and comfortablie among us for so long a season,) with the
dismal, the dangerous and pernicious mists of Popery and Arminianisme. Their
books, you know, which are fraught with dangerous and hurtful errors (and so
much the more dangerous, because they are sweetened, clothed and gilded over,
with the name and countenance of the Doctrine of the Church of England) are
printed and reprinted, sold openly and dispersed publicly without control:
and the pious, wholesome and Christian labors of all such as would confute them
(by reason of those means which they have made) can either find no license
for the press: or if they chance to come unto the press by stealth or
otherwise, they are either quelled and smothered in it before they come unto
their birth, or else they are called in and quelled, before they can be
published and dispersed, for to clear and vindicate the truth: so that by the
supportation and propagating of the one, and the discountenancing and
suppressing of the other, that truth of God which we have hitherto professed,
is like to be betrayed. Shall these factious, scismaticall and heretical
spirits, be so industrous to establish and to vent their Errors, and to quell
the truth: and shall not we be as diligent and courageous to defend it? shall
they with all their might and maine plant Popery and Arminianisme, nay
Pelagianisme and Atheismie in our Church, and shall we sit still with foulded
hands, with silent tongues, and stupefied hearts, and not labor to withstand
them. Alas where is our love, where is our zeal to God and to his cause? where
is our ancient courage for the truth, that we are now so cold and frozen, that
we are now so much ashamed of that glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ which has
flourished so long among us, and has made us a mirror and a spectacle of Gods
mercies unto all the world; that now we dare not, or at least we will not,
defend and take its part; that we dare not to ( Jude 3.
) contend and struggle for it? but that we suffer it so willingly to be
surprised and betrayed, as if we were more willing to be rid of it, then any
longer to enjoy it. Certainly this want of courage for, and love unto the
truth, as it is a sure syntome, ( Math. 24. 12.
) that iniquity does abound among us, so it may justly cause the Lord to bring
a famine and scarcity among us, ( Amos 8. 11.
) not of bread only (which now is very likely to befall us) but even of the
word of God, which is far worse: yea, it may provoke him, and that
deservedly, ( 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
) to give us up to strong delusions to believe lies, that we all may be damned,
because we would not receive the love of the truth, that so we might be
saved. O therefore let me now beseech your Grace, that as in former times you
have, so now, you would take heart and courage for the truth. You have many
encouragements, many inforcements and engagements for to do it. For your
encouragement, you have the Lord of hosts, and the almighty King of heaven for
to take your part; you have the votes and prayers of all true hearted
Christians, you have all the aid and assistance that heaven and earth can
yield unto you: O fear not then the ( Isay 2. 22.
) face or frown of man whose breath is in his nostrells; fear not the power
or the malice of any that oppose the truth, for wherein are they to be accounted
of? the ( Psalm. 46. 7. 11.
) Lord of hosts is with you, the God of Jacob is your refuge, man therefore
cannot stand before you. For inforcements and encouragements to be zealous and
courageous for the truth, you have very many. You are called to defend and to
support the truth: the very nature and quality of your function, and the very
dignity of that place and person which now you do sustain, do even engage
and bind your Grace to be courageous and zealous for it. God has committed
his truth and Gospel to your trust, and has given it you in charge to
propagate and defend it: God and our Gracious Sovereign, have committed the
care and custody of this our Church to your charge, and they have given you
more ability and power, (and so more cause) for to defend the truth and
doctrine that is established and settled in it, then to other men: and therefore
they will require and expect from your Grace, ( to whom so much is committed)
much more then they can, or will from any other. O therefore as you tender the
glory and honor of the God of heaven, the defense of Christ, and of his cause
and Gospel: the peace and safety of this our Church, which is committed to
your charge: as you tender your own honor and reputation with God and man, or
that great account which you must shortly make to God, of that great
stewardship of his which is committed to you: if you ^ender the good and
comfort of your own soul both here and hereafter: if you would have Jesus
Christ to own you, and not to ( Ma^ke 8. 38.
) be ashamed of you at the last, when he shall come in the glory of his
Father with all his holy Angels: if you would not be cast with those other (
Reu. 21. 8.
) fearful ones, into that lake which burns with fire and brimstone for
ever: take heart and courage for the Lord of hoasts, and for his truth and
cause, which now are likely to miscarie. Suffer not his word and truth to be
betrayed and suppressed, by scismaticall, factious, and Antechristian spirits,
for want of supportation and defense: but since the eyes of God and man are
cast upon you, execute, stir up and act that place and power, which God and
man have given to you, to the quelling of heresy and scisme, to the extirpation
of Popery and Arminianisme: (which are now flowing in so fast upon us, that
they do even threaten a sudden inundation and deluge to us) to the subversion
of the kingdom of Satan and Antechris^, to the maintaining and enlarging of
the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to the establishing of that glorious truth
and Gospel, which has flourished and shined so long among us, to the
admiration and mirror of our friends, and to the grief and envy of our
adversaries. Let not fear and cowardice, let not flesh and blood, or any other
impediment whatsoever, daunt your courage, or cool your love and zeal to
Christ, or to his cause; but be willing to deny your self, to part with all
for him, who has even denied himself, and parted with his life and all for
you. And here I would entreat your Grace to pardon this my boldness and my
rudeness with you; (which though modesty and manners might ca^e me to
forbear, yet piety and zeal to God and to his truth, and love to this my
Mother Church, together with the necessity and extremity of the times, has
made me guilty of it (I hope not faulty in it) and withal I humbly consecrate
these Firstlings of my studies (being nothing else but a just defense of a
comfortable and Orthodox point of faith, which has long been settled and
established in this our Church, and in all reformed Churches beyond the seas)
which if your Grace will but vouchsafe to Patronize and shelter, they shall not
feel, they will not fear, a total or a final (...),

Now the God of all Grace, so beautify and adorn your Grace with all the
graces of his Spirit, so fill and replenish you with zeal, with fortitude and
courage for the truth: and so firmly settle and establish you in the glorious
and happy estate of true and saving grace, that neither your Grace, (nor yet
that truth and Gospel which (...) now enjoy,) may ever feel a final, total,
or a partial fall.

Your Graces in all humble submission and respect WILLIAM PRYNNE.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, when as I had well considered with my self the great danger
and combustion that was likely to befall our Church and State, by reason of
some dangerous points of Pelagianisme, Popery, and Arminianisme, which some
factious and nouillizing spirits, have lately broched and set on foot among
us, as the received positive and resolved doctrines, not only of the
Scriptures, Fathers, and Protestant Churches in foreign parts, but likewise of
the Church of England; I supposed, that I could not perform a better piece of
service to God, or to our Church and State, then to cast in my Mite among the
rest, and to endeavor according to my poor ability, to stop the stream and
current of these late revived and new minted Errors; which by reason of the
learning, fame and greatness of their Patrons, and the deprauation of man's
nature (which is always more propense and prone to Error, then to truth and
holiness) are like to threaten a general and universal deluge to our Church
and State, if authority prevent them not in time, Upon this I resolved to put
my pen to Paper, and thereupon I selected and culled out from among the rest,
this heretical and pernicious Error, Of the total and final Apostacy of the
Saints from grace, to combat and to grapple with. The reasons which moved me
to single out this one above all, or any of the rest, were these. First,
because this Error is most of all insisted and stood upon, and is more
peremptorily maintained and d^fended then any of the rest; and therefore
requires the speediest and the strongest opposition. Secondly, because this
Error by reason of a misreported conference, has drawn more disciples and
parties after it, than any of the rest, it has found more Patrons of late
among us, than any other Error that I know; and therefore I thought that I
should do the greatest good, in opposing and suppressing the most infectious
and spreading Error. Thirdly, I made choice of this above the rest, because it
was a part of Pelagianisme heretofore, and it is but a point of pure Popery,
and Arminianisme now: and therefore I presumed that I might with greater
boldness and audacitie, and with less offense to any, adventure to refell it:
especially, since those who now defend it, produce no other reasons, arguments,
answers, or authorities, than those which the Pelagians, Papists, and
Arminians, have framed and collected to their hands before, without any new
addition of their own. Fourthly, I made choice of this, to vindicate the
Church of England, the Fathers, Scriptures, and Protestants in foreign parts,
from the false calumnies of those, who would make all these the Patrons of this
Error, when as they have all with one unanimous consent, condemned, censured
and refuted it, yea, and resolved against it, as against a dangerous and
heretical position. Fifely, I made choice of this, because the sound
confutation of it, will overthrow the whole frame and fabric of Arminianisme:
it will likewise out off a great part of Popery, and it will in effect
suppress and quite subvert, the most of all those Errors Which have been
lately broched among us. For if this total and final Apostacy of the Saints,
be once proved to be but an Error: then the doctrines of Universal Grace; of
Free Will; of Election from the foresight of says; that such men as were
never elected to salvation have true says: that the number of the elect is
uncertain: that the sins of the Saints do cut them off from Christ, that
all these who are baptized are regenerated: that the Sacraments convey grace
alike to all ex opere operato: that there are some sins which are not mortal
in their own nature: that men ought to doubt, and that they cannot be
certainly assured of their own salvation without some special revelation:
that Grace is but a moral persuasion, and that men may receive it or reject it
at their pleasure: that such as are not elected to salvation, are true members
of the holy Catholic Church: that such as are not predestined may be saved.
Yea, the Sacrifice of the Mass, Purgatory, Popish penance and Indulgencies,
will all to wrecke, and fall unto the ground: So many other Errors are there
which depend on this. Sixthly, I made choice of this above the rest, because it
is an Error of greatest consequence. For it derogates very much from all Gods
great and holy attributes; from his glory, mercy, honor, goodness, truth,
wisdom, justice, power, and the rest: it derogates from Christ's intercession,
and the merits of his death and passion: it detracts very much from the Deity,
might, power, essicacte, truth, and working of the holy Ghost: it quite
overthrows and disanulls the Scriptures, and the very kingdom, nature, (...)
and power of true and saving grace: it robs the Saints of God of all their
happiness, joy and comfort: it stripps and spoils them of all their
spiritual privileges, of all the treasures of their souls, and leaves them
(...), poor and miserable, where else they were the only, happy, and blessed
of the Lord: In a word, it strikes at the very root of all true religion; it
pulls God out of heaven: and it either makes men Atheists, to have no God at
all, or at least to have no God besides themselves. These and many other, are
the inevitable consequencies of this Error, which as they are many, so are they
very great and dangerous. Laftly, I made choice of this above the rest, because
it is not (as some surmize) a notionall and speculatiue Error, fit only for
Schools and Scholars to know, and to determine; but it is a practical Error,
and a point which trencheth far into the practice of Christianity: it is a
point and Error that concerns not only the learnedest, but the very lowest and
meanest Christians; it extends it self alike to all, and therefore the more
needful is it to refell it. Questions which concern the nature and the truth
of Grace, the Perpetuity and properties of Grace, extend indifferently to all
those to whom grace it self extends, to one as much as to another, because
they are alike useful and necessary unto all, be they learned or unlearned.
Now this being a question concerning the very nature essence, and property of
true and saving grace, extends alike to all men, and it is of great use and
moment, even in their very practice of (...). Yea, I will affirm it, that
there is no one thing (...) which will more (...) men in the practice of
religion, then this one pernicious Error, that they may fall totally and
finally from grace. For if Ministers should preach and publish this for
orthodox and current truth; that true grace is of a corruptible and fading
nature; that it is such a thing as may be lost, when once it is obtained; who
is there that would seek it or respect it; who is there that either would or
could prefer his profit and his pleasures, his riches and his honors far
before it? who is there that would part with these to purchase it, when as they
were not sure to enjoy it? when as they might be dispossessed of it at the
last? If grace might utterly be lost, if it were a transitory and fading good,
men would not, nay, men could not love it or affect it; they would not part
with any other thing to win and purchase it: every man would then love and
serve his own lusts and pleasures, you should have none at all to love or
serve the Lord. Besides if this were true, that men might fall from grace, what
comforts or encouragements could Christians give unto themselves or others? If
a man should come to any one that was perplexed in his conscience, or to a
dying Christian, if this were true, that true regenerate men might fall from
grace, what comfort could he give them? Should he magnify Gods grace and
mercy to them in Christ? Should he repeat those comfortable and precious
promises of grace and mercy which are every where recorded in the Scriptures?
should he tell them that they have lived a godly and religious life? That they
are in a happy condition and state of grace? that they are the beloved of the
Lord? that Christ has prepared an everlasting kingdom, and a crown of glory
for them in heaven, and therefore they need not for to doubt or despair of
Gods mercy? Alas, all these might be wiped off with this one answer; we are
fallen quite away from the state of grace by these and these our sins; if
not, we are sure to commit (...) sin or other ere we die, which will utterly
sever and cut us off from Christ for ever; and therefore all these promises and
comforts which you bring, they belong to others not to us, our souls can take
no comfort in them. Doubtless there is not a Christian in the world, which
could administer any ^oy or comfort at all, unto his own or other men's souls,
if true regenerate men might fall from grace at last, and lose the fruit and
benefit of all their works and graces. Again, what comfort or encouragement
could any Christian have, to do or suffer any thing for the Lord if this were
true? Who is there that would spend his life and days in doing of Gods
service? Who is there that would suffer persecution and afflictions, that would
undergo disgrace, contempt and scorn, or fire and faggot for the Lord, if he
might after all this fall from grace, and lose the things which he had
wrought? Christians could have no comfort or encouragement at all, to do or
suffer any thing for Christ, if this were true. Again, in what a miserable and
forlorn estate should poor Christians be in dubious, troublesome, and
dangerous times, if this position were grounded in their hearts, that they
might fall from grace? then they were not sure of heaven, they were not sure of
earth; they were uncertain of this present life, but more uncertain of the
life to come: they then should have no certainty at all of any thing; they
should have nothing left them on which to stay or rest their souls: they
should have horrors within, and fears without; troubles and doubts within, and
crosses and afflictions without: that curse of God which is denounced against
all disobedient and impenitent sinners should light upon them. Among the
nations they should find no Deu^. 28. 65, 66, 67.
ease, neither should the sole of their foot take any rest; but the Lord
should give them a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind:
and their lives should hang in doubt before them, and they should fear day and
night, and have none assurance of their lives; In the morning they should say,
would it were even, and at even they should say, would God it were mor^ing; for
the fear of their heart wherewith they should fear, and for the sight of
their eyes which they should see; they should then find no ease, no rest or
comfort to their souls at all, and so they must needs sink and perish in
despair: Where as if they had this pillar to rest and stay their souls upon,
that they can never fall from grace, nor be deprived of the love of God: that
let what will befall their bodies, their souls are sure to be safe: that
though their outward 2 Cor. 4. 16.
man perish, yet their inward man shall be renewed day by day: that though
their earthly house of this tabernacle 2 Cor. 5. 1.
were dissolved, yet they have a building of God, an house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens; this would comfort and rejoice their souls beyond
expression, this would bear them up in all extremities, and keep them from
sinkeing in despair. So that you see, that the whole comfort and treasure of a
Christian, that the whole service of God, and practice of religion are utterly
abolished and taken away by this pernicious Error; and therefore I made choice
of this above any of the rest, to combat and to grapple with, especially in
these dubious and ambiguous times of ours, wherein we need an anchor on which
to stay our souls. But now some men may think my labor vain and needless,
and perchance unseasonable to, because so many Worthies of our Church, have so
lately handled and discussed this our present Controversy. To which I answer
first, That the slacknesse of the Printer (in whose hands this work has been
pending ever since L^nt last) has turned these my First fruits into
Gleanings, against my expectation and intent: and therefore if you return a
Tarde to them, let the Printer bear the blame, not I. Secondly, I answer, that
though many have lately handled and discussed this very controversy in the by,
conioyning it with other points; yet none of them have handled it particularly,
and indiuidually by it selse, as I have done it. Yea, I may with modesty
affirm it, without any pride, arrogance, or selfe-conceite, that there was
never any hitherto who has written of this controu^rsie, that has handled and
discussed it so fully and perspicuously, as I have done it here. I have
produced many more arguments and reasons, and cited more quotations from
Scriptures, Fathers, Counsels, Synods, Confessions, and modern Divines to
confute this Error, and I have given more clear, full, and satisfactorie
answers to most of those arguments that are brought for to defend it, than any
yet have done, that I could read or hear of. And therefore notwithstanding,
that so many have lately written of this subject; I hope that these my labors
(which I have undertaken in the synceritie of my heart, for the glory of God,
for the peace and quiet of this our Church for the vindicating of the truth,
and for the comfort and consolation of all such faithful Christians as shall
be made partakers of them) shall find such approbation and acceptance in the
world, that they shall neither be condemned as untimely, nor loathed as
superfluous. And here (Courteous Reader) to free my self from causeless
censure, I must entreat these few courtesies at thine hands. First, that where
thou find any mistakes or slips in words or letters in reading of this
Treatise, that thou would take the pains for to amend them; imputing the
fault unto the Corrector and not unto my self. Secondly, that when thou
find the same reasons, Scriptures, Arguments, or answers reiterated and
repeated in several places of this discourse, that thou would^st not
forthwith condemn me of Battologie and Surplusage, because they are always
urged and recited in a different form and manner, and to other ends and
purposes then they were before: so that though they are almost the same in
words and matter, yet they always differ in circumstances, form, and end, and
in the manner of propounding them; so that in truth they are not the same,
though prima facie they may seem to be the same. Thirdly, I would request thee
so to censure and judge of these my labors, as thou would have me and
others to censure and to judge of thine, if thou thy self had written.
Lastly, since the general end and scope of these my labors, is nothing else
but to vindicate and clear, the honor and the truth of God: to establish
peace and unity in this our Church and State, that this our present
controversy, and those others which depend upon it, may no more molest and
trouble them: and to comfort and rejoice the hearts and souls of all the true
and faithful Saints of God, in these ambiguous, doubtful, and perplexed
times, (whose only joy and comfort, whose only stay and proppe, whose very
heaven upon earth and chiefest happiness, lie all at stake, and are suspended
on this present Controversy:). I would request thee so to read and meditate
on these my rude and indegested labors, as if thou did unfeignedly desire for
to learn and profit by them, and to diue into the truths contained in them.
Read them with a single and impartial eye, and with an upright and an honest
heart, void of all critical fore-stalled and preiudicated affections. Read
them with a meek and humble spirit, not to carpe or quarrel with them, but
willingly to yield and to submit unto them as far as truth and conscience will
permit: and if thou shall receive any benefit, comfort, or sa^isfaction from
them, give God the glory, p^ay for me.

The unfeigned well wisher of thine eternal good and comfort, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

TO ALL THOSE OF THE Church of England who falsely and maliciously traduce,
calumniate, and slander, the Patrons, of the total and final perseverance of
the Saints in grace, and thereupon labor to suppress their works, because
they know not how to answer, or resell them.
IT is recorded of ( Acts 6. 9. to 13.
) certain of the Synagogue of the Libertines and (...), who disputed with that
holy Martyr, Saint Steven, that when as they Were not able to resist the
wisdom, and Spirit by which he spoke: they suborned false witnesses against
him, which said; we have heard him speak blasphemous words against this holy
place, against Moses, and against God: and upon these false accusations, they
stirred up the people, the Elders and the Scribes against him, and caught him,
and brought him before the Council: thinking to carry away the cause, and to
confute that which they were not able to gainsay, by calumniating, traducing
and condemning the innocent person who defended it. Thus did the Jews confute
and answer, Saint Paul: when as they had nothing to reply unto his doctrine,
they presently fly upon his person: accusing him, ( Acts 17. 3. to 15 cap 21.
27. 28 and cap. 24. 5. 6.
) for a pestilent and seditious fellow: for a ringleader of sects: for a mouer
of sedition through out the World, and one that did contrary to (...) decrees
of Caesar. And thus did the Gentiles in former ages confute the Christians, if
( Apolog. 1. pro (...).
) Justin Martyr, ( Apolog aduersGentes.
) Tertullian, ( Aduers. (...) lib. 1. 3.
) Arnobius or ( De (...). lib. cap. 1. 9.
) Lactantius may be credited. You (my Breahtren) who oppose and bend your
selves against the Doctrine, of the total and (...) perseuerauce of the Saints
in grace, which has been so long settled and established in our Church;
reflect and cast your eyes on these examples, which are such lively Emblems,
and representations of your selves. These Libertines, Jews and Gentiles, when
as they could find nothing to reply against that truth, the which they did
oppose, they leave the matter, and the points in question, and fly upon the
persons of such as did defend them. So you since you have nothing to reply unto
the ar^ of those who do defend the total and final perseverance of the Saints
in grace, do waiue the Controversy, and fall foul upon their persons;
thinking to carry away the cause by calumnies, and scandalous accusations,
because you cannot do it by force and truth of argument. For first you accuse
and tax all such who patronize this orthodox and ancient truth, for Puritans.
Secondly, for pestilent, seditious and factious persons. And thirdly, for such
as do contrary to the decrees of Caesar: such as violate and transgress his
Majesty's most pious Proclamation: and upon these false and scandalous grounds
you labor to suppress the works, and prosecute the persons, of all such as
do defend this truth. A worthy and a learned confutation; which sauoreth of
nothing but of pure malice, and venomous rancor against all grace and
goodness, and such as do defend them. Now that all the world may know how
false your accusations are, and so, how ill your cause; I will a little (...)
them and discuss them.

Your first accusation and objection, against our present That there are none
but Puritants who (...) it. Surely, if you so confidently affirm, that there
are none but (...) that defend it. I may with greater confidence and truth
(...) it, that there are none but Pelagians, Papists, and Arminians, nay (...)
who oppose it: if any of you think I speak to harsh in this, I have the
warrant of our late and learned Sovereign King James, to justify me, who
has styled them ( Declaration against Vortius.
) Heretics, and Atheistical Sectaries upon record. But are there none but
Puritans who defend it? Sure I am (and I hope I have sufficiently proved it)
that Christ himself, his Prophets and Apostles: that all the ancient Fathers,
and some Counsels: that-all Protestant Churches, and sound orthodox writers in
foreign parts: that the Synod of (...): (at which there were the choice
Divines of most Protestant and reformed Churches:) that the Church of England,
and all her chiefest worthies: and that King lames of blessed memory, have
from time to time delivered, published, defended, propagated and resolved this
our present assertion as sound and orthodox: and yet are there none but
Puritans, or are they all Puritans who defend it? Was Christ, his Prophets and
Apostels Puritans? were all the Fathers and the Primitive Church, Puritans? are
all the Protestant and reformed Churches beyond the seas, and all their sound
and orthodox writers Puritans? was the famous Synod of Dort, but a mere pack
of Puritans? are the Church of England, and all her chiefest worthies,
Puritans? or was King lames a Puritan, that none but Puritans should maintain
this truth? If you will condemn all these for Puritans, (as you must do, if
your accusation go for current truth,) and so make Puritans to be nothing
else, (as they are in truth) but the true Church and Saints of God, who
profess, propagate and maintain the truth and purity of the Gospel, and
will not be withdrawn or seduced from it: then we willingly acknowledge the
accusation to be true, and account it, not a blemish, but a grace and honor to
our cause: but if you will have none of these to be the Puritans which you
accuse: your accusation then: That none but Puritans defend this assertion,
must needs be false: unless you know to make a difference between those who
(...) maintained it in former times, and such as do defend it now. Now that I
may give a further answer unto this false, scandalous, and malicious
accusation, I will a little inquire what kind of creature this Puritan should
be, which makes such a stir and business in the world, and is so much
accused, condemned, hated, persecuted, inueighed at and spoken against; that so
the odiousness and (...) of the very name, may not impeach the worth the
credit, the quality, or condition of the person on whom it is (...).
Certainly, the only Puritan that is now aimed at, and so commonly accused and
spoken against, is nothing else in verity and truth, (if you will but lay
aside the name that so you may behold him as he is). But a godly and sincere
Christian, who sticks close unto the word of God both in his judgment and his
practice, being more abstemious from all kind of sinue, more diligent and
frequent in all holy duties, and more industrious to serve and please the Lord
in all things, then those who do condemn, reproach and censure him. He that
now sticks fast and close unto the word of truth, and will not be withdrawn
from it: he that shows forth the power and efficacy of grace in the constant
holiness of his life: he that is diligent and frequent in Gods service, and
squares his life and actions according to his word: he that makes a conscience
of all his ways and works, and will not be so vicious and licentious, so
riotous and deboist: so profane dissolute and desperately wicked as other men:
he, and he only, is the Puritan which is now so much condemned: he only is
the Puritan who now is made the very But and object of all men's hatred, malice,
envy, scorn and disdain: he only is the Puritan whom you do here accuse.
Take but away the ugly, horrid and misshapen name and visard of a Puritan,
(which does now wholly ouercloud, the persons on whom it is imposed, and
present them in a strange and different form from what they are in truth) and
consider but the persons, the lives, the graces, and the inside of those men
who are reputed sor the greatest Puritans, disrobed and uncased of the name it
self; and then the greatest and fierceest Ante-puritan of you all, (if his
conscience be not strangly cauterized) must be forced to confess, that as it
was with the Christians among the Gentiles, so now it is with Puritans, among
such as seem to be Christians: ( Tertul. Apol. aduers. Gentes. cap. 4.
) Non scelus aliquod in causa est, sed nomen: et solius nominis crimen est:
that Puritans are hated, contemned, reproached, accused, and condemned, not for
any offense, for any evil or wickedness that is in them, but only for their
name; which is imposed on them only for this end, that men might the more
freely persecute, oppose, despise, condemn and hate them for their holy lives.
And if that this seem strange unto you, that men should be condemned, hated,
reproached, persecuted, and accused for their graces and their holy lives:
consider then, that even from the beginning, and from that time that God (
(...). 3. 15.
) put enmity between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, it
has been so. Take but the two first borne of the world Caine and Abell for an
example. Caine he does not only hate, but slay his brother Abell: and
wherefore slew he him? not for any injury that he did unto him: ( 1 John 3. 12.
) but because his own works were evil, and his brothers righteous. Does not
holy Job complain, that he was ( Job. 30. 9. 10.
) hated, and made the very song and byword of the people? Does not holy David
complain almost in every Psalm, that the ( Psalm. 22. 6.
) drunkards Ps. 35. 15 to 10.
made songs upon him: that he was derided, persecuted, hated, Ps. 69. 11.
Psalm. 71. 7. 10.
slaundered, reviled and laughed to scorn, and all because he followed the
things that were good and pleasing unto God? Do not all the Prophets
complain, that they themselves, ( Isay. 30. 10.
) were hated, persecuted, reviled, accused, slaundered and condemned, even cap.
50. 6. c. 54. 17. Ier. 6. 20. 28 c. 15. 10. c. 17. 15, 18. c 18. 18. to 23. c.
20. c. 26. c. 27. and 38.
for their grace and holiness of life, and for their prophesying of the truth?
Do not they all complain, that in their times, the righteous, and the upright
Saints of God, were pointed and hissed at, and made a ( Wisdo. 5. 3.
) very proverb of disdain and scorn? that they were ( Isay 8. 18.
) as signs and wonders in Israel? and that ( Isay 59. 15.
) such as did depart from evil did but make themselves a Amos 5. 10 c. 7. 10.
Zech 3. 8. Isay 54. 17.
prey? was not Jesus Christ himself the very spring and fountain of all grace
and holiness, though he were guilty of no crime at all, though he went about
doing good to all, and hurt to none, though he came to seek and save the lost
and perishing souls of men, hated, persecuted, slaundered and derided for his
grace, his goodness, and his holiness? was he not reported to be ( Luke 7. 34.
) a glutton and a wine bibber, a ( John 9. 16.
) deceiuer and impostor, a ( Math. 27. 63.
) sinner and not of God; a ( John 7. 20.
) man possessed with a devil, and one ( Math. 9. 34.
) casting out diuills through Beelzebub the Prince of the diuills? were not all
his glorious and holy Apostles, condemned, hated, persecuted, and ( Act. 28. 22.
) every where spoken against? were they not accused, for turbulent, ( Acts. 17.
3. to 15. c. 21. 27 28 c. 24. 5. 6.
) factious and seditious persons, for ringleaders of sects and heresies: for
incendiaries and disturbers of the whole world; for ( 2 Cor. 6. 8.
hypocrites and deceiues: for ( Acts 6 (...). 13.
) blasphemous persons and ( (...) (...). 7.
) (...) to Caesar? were they ( (...) (...) 4. 9. to 14. 2 Cor. 4. 8. to 12 c.
6. 3. to 11 c 11. 23. to 28.
) not made a spectacle unto the world, unto Angels and men? were they not
despised, buffeted, defamed and reviled? were they not made as the very filth
of the world, and as the dreggs and of scouring of all things? Was not this the
case of all the Christians in the primitine Church? were not they ( (...) Alex.
Or. (...) ad Genres. Tertul Apol. alu. Gentes. Arnob. lib. 1. (...). (...)
Lactant. de (...). (...) c. 1. 9. Justin Mart. Apol. 1. and 2 pro Christianis
Euse. (...). Histo lib. 4 c. 15. 16. lib. 5. c. 1. and Heb. 11. 33. to 40.
) all accused, hated, persecuted, slaundered and condemned, as factious and
seditious persons? as a false, idle, treacherous and hurtful kind of people?
as enemies to the Gods and to the States and Countries where they lived? as
unclean, unchaste and adulterous persons, as murderers of infants, and the
causes of all the mischiefs which did befall the world, and that for no other
cause at all but this, because that they were Christians? Was not that holy
Father ( (...). Sehol. Ec. Hist. lib. 6. cap 4. 5. 16.
) Saint Chrysostom, hated persecuted and reviled by the Clergy of
Constantinople, and were not his followers scoffed at by the name of
Iohannites, and all for their austerity and holiness of life? Does not Saint
Cyprian complain thus of his times? ( Epist. lib 2 Epist. 2. Donato.
) Esse iam inter nocentes innoxium crimen est: malos quisquis non imitatur
offendit: that it was accounted a grievous crime not to be vicious: and that
men grew angry with such as would not be as wicked as themselves? Does not
Saluian say of his times? Si honoratior quispiam religioni se applicuerit,
illico g De Gubernat. (...). lib. 4.
honoratus esse desistit: vbi enim quis mutauerit vestem, mutauit protinus
dignitatem. Si fuerit sublimis, sit despicabilis, Sifuerit splendidissimus, fit
(...). Si fuerit totus honoris, sit totus iniuriae. Peruersa enimsunt, et in
diuer sum cuncta mutata. Si be nus est qui quam, quasi malus (...). St malus
est, quasi bonus honoratur Statim vt quis melior esse tentauerit, deterioris
abiectione calcatur: ac per hoc omnes quodammodo mali esse coguntur, ne viles
habeantur? A true Emblem, and pattern of our times. Have not all the other
Fathers and Saints of God, complained of this very thing from time to time,
that they have been hated, slandered, reproached, accused, persecuted and
contemned (though under other pretenses) yet only for this very thing, that
they made a conscience of their ways, and would not rush so boldly into sin as
others did? and is it any wonder that it is so now? Does not St. Paul inform
us, that ( 2 Timothy 3. (...).
) all as will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution? and does not
Christ himself foretell all such as are his true and faithful members, ( Mat.
10. 16. to 36. c. 24. 9.
) that they shall be hated of all men and nations for his sake? that ( Math. 5.
11. 12
) men John 16. 2. 33
shall (...) and persecute them? that they shall separate them from their
company, cast out their name as (...), and say all manner of Luke 6. 22.
evil against them falsely? and what is the cause? what any sin, or wickedness
that is in them, or any injury or wrong, that they do to God or man? No such
matter: but because they honor ( Mat. 5. 11.
) and profess his name: because ( John 15. 19.
) they are chosen out of the world, and made men of another world: because (
Wisdom: 2. 15.
) their Luke 6. 22.
Math. 10. 22.
lives are not like other men's, and their ways are of another fashien: cap.
14. 9.
because ( Wisd: 2. 12. 14. 15.
) their holy and religious lives do reprove and secretly condemn, the finfull
and ungodly courses, of carnal, wicked, cap. 17. 14.
and ungodly men, and prove them to be evil: and ( 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
) because they will (...) run into the same excess of sin and riot that
others (...) and shall we think it strange that men are hated, persecuted,
John 3. 20.
slandered, and condemned for the selfsame causes Lactant. de Iustitia. lib
cap. 9.
now? Do not the Apostles prophecy, that in the latter times and ages of the
world, there shall be ( 2 Pet. 2. 3.
) scoffers, walking after their own lusts? That there shall ( 2 Timothy 3. 2. to
7. 2.
) be false accusers, fierce, despiser's of those that are good, speaking evil
of the things they know and understand not, and corrupting themselves in those
things Pet. 2. 12.
which naturally they know; having an outward form of godliness, Jude 10.
but (...) the power thereof? And may it not then sink into your thoughts,
that you are such as hate, (...), accuse, condemn and censure the Saints of
God, who do defend this truth (because they find the very sense and feeling
of it in their souls) under the name of Puritans, (which you are pleased to
impose upon them) because that you have nothing else which you can truly object
against them? Consider a little with your selves, that the devil is a cunning
and ambiguous sophister, that plays on both hands: that he clothes sin with
glorious, rich, and goodly robes to make it lovely, but grace with base and
ugly rags, with odious and loathsome names to make it odious and contemptible.
Consider likewise, that no man is or can be so impudently and desperately
wicked, as openly and directly to condemn, abhor, contemn, oppose, and
persecute grace in any of the Saints, and therefore to avoid the infamy and
shame of men, and to restrain and blind his own conscience, which else would
fly into his face, he uses some pretense or other, that so he may with less
suspicion, and with greater boldness disgorge his malice and his spite
against it. Again, consider that there is nothing so cross and contrary, so
odious and hateful to unregenerate and carnal men, as the very power and
truth of grace and holiness: nothing is there in the world that carnal men
abhor and loathe so much, nothing is there that they hate with such a bitter,
exorbitant, unlimited, and implacable detestation, as that power of grace, and
that image of holiness which shines so glorious and resplendent in the lives
and actions of the Saints: this makes them fret and fume, and mads them to the
heart. And lastly, consider seriously and in good earnest with your selves
(because it is a matter which concerns your souls) that there always have
been, are, all shall be, a genera^ion of men upon the earth, which shall be
hated, scorned, persecuted, reproched, reviled, accused, slandered, and
condemned even of all sorts of men for no crime, no cause, or sin at all, bur
only for their new, their gracious, godly, and their holy lives, and for their
hatred and detestation of all kind of sin. Now lay all these together, and
s^e what men there are in all the world, who are generally hated, reproched,
condemned, scorned, persecuted, disdained, ^euiled, falsely accused; see what
manner of men they are, whose names are cast out as evil, and who have all
manner of evil spoken against them falsely, by all sorts and kinds of men;
and tha^ only for the sincere profession of the name of Christ, for the
uprightness and synceritie of their hearts, for the purity and holiness of
their lives, and for the avoiding of all kind of sin; and then you shall
find that these, and these only, whom you accuse, censure, and condemn for
Puritans are the men: for they only are hated of all sorts, and kinds of men:
Papists, Protestants, Arminians, civil and morrall men, profane and loose
persons, young and old, rich and poor, Clergy and Laity, they all do band
and set against them, they all revile, reproach, accuse, condemn, deride,
persecute, slander, and abhor them: they all avoid and shun them more or
less, and separate them from their company: they all distaste them in their
hearts, they all cast out their names as evil, and prosecute them even with
virulent and bitter hatred, as far as opportunity, law, or power will give
them leave; yea, many men are so rauing mad against them, that they could wish
as ( Suetoni^. Calig: sect. 30.
) Caligula did of the Romans, that they had all but one neck, that so they
might cut them of at a blow: and all this is for no other cause at all, but
because they are too pure and precise, to holy and religious; because they are
too frequent in hearing and reading of Gods word; in prayer and such like holy
duties: because they will reprove men for their evil courses, and will not
bear them company in their sins: because they will not swear, whore,
drink, dice, game inordinately, mispend their time, haunt Plays and Tauernes,
and play the good fellows as others do; because they speak against
Pluralities, Nonresidents, and lazy, or good fellow Pastors, who either starve
and quite neglect, or else mislead their flocks. If all men would be profane
and wicked, and make no bones of sin, there would not be a ^uritan in the
world: If therefore Puritans are such men as these; if they are the best the
dearest and holiest Saints of God (as there is no doubt or question but they
are, if you will but give your own consciences liberty ^or to determine it)
your accusation then, that none but Puritans do defend ^his Doctrine, will be
so far from disparaging of it, that it does highly grace and honor it: and
prove you who do oppose and contradict it, to be but prophaue, licentious,
carnal and graceless persons, and utter enemies to all grace and goodness.
And now since I have made it manifest unto your understandings (at least unto
your consciences) that Puritans are not the men you take them, (or rather such
men as you would have them) for to be: forbear from henceforth to hate, to
scorn, to disdain, reproach, accuse, deride, condemn, oppose and slander
them without a cause, as formerly you have done; for fear lest whiles you bend
your tongues, your hearts, your malice and your force against them, for
standing close unto the truth, and for manifesting the very power and truth of
grace and holiness in their lives: you take up arms against the Lord of
Hoasts, and King of heaven, and wrecke your souls upon that rock, and sin
against the holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven. But admit now that none
but Puritans maintain our present assertion, that is, (as you in part intend
it) that none but Caluinists, o^ men infected with Geneuanisme do defend it:
must it therefore be a Puritan doctrine, must it therefore be a false position?
does the quality or condition of the Patrons, make truth to be no truth?
consider I pray a little of it, and then reflect upon your selves, perchance it
may be some disparagement to your cause. But say that the quality of the
Patrons does change and alter the very nature of the truth, are Calvin and his
followers, so undeserving of the Church of God; or is the Church of Geneua, or
the Belgicke Churches so subject unto Errors in their doctrine, that this
should not be truth, because that these defend it? Surely, though I will ^ot
wholly pin my faith on Caluins sleeue, nor canonize him for a Saint, stiling
him St. Calvin, (as some of you have done it in disdain and scorn) though I
make no doubt, but he is now a Saint with God in heaven; yet this I will say
unto the best, the proudest, and the learnedest of you; that the name of Calvin
shall be remembered and renowned in the Church of God, when as your names shall
rotte and be forgotten. And as for the Church of Geneua, and the Belgic
Churches, though they differ from us in their discipline, yet none but Papists
or Arminians can cauell at their Doctrine: if you are such (as you must be
such, if you continue to oppose our present assertion) go on and cauell at
them whiles you will: your cauells will but honor them, not disgrace them: and
this our cause shall never fare the worse, because it has these Patrons to
defend it. Since therefore the quality of the Patrons of this truth, can never
change the nature of it, and make it not to be a truth: since Puritans
appearing in their proper colors, are men of greater grace and holiness than
the best of those who slander them and style them so; and are not such in
truth, as they are commonly taken and reported for to be: since Christ, his
Prophets and Apostles, and the whole Church of God from time to time have
propagated, embraced, resolved, and defended this our present assertion as
sound, and there were never none as yet, but Pelagians, Papists, and Arminians,
nay, Atheists that opposed it: then this your accusation, that none but
Puritans do defend it, must needs be false and forged: at least it must be
idle and impertinent; because it is but a mere evasion and waiuing of the
Controversy, a mere Calumny and reproach, and a falling foul upon the
persons of sincere and upright Christians who defend it, for want of truth or
learning to answer to their works.

I come now unto the second accusation, that the Patrons of this assertion are
nothing else, but a pack and company of pestilent, t Acts 17. 3. to 15. cap
24. 5. 6.
factious, and seditious persons. Indeed St. Paul had this very accusation laid
against him by the Jews, because he was so zealous to maintain, propagate,
and defend the Gospel and the word of God: and I am verily persuaded, if St.
Paul were now upon the earth, as one unknown to you, that you would presently
fly upon him, accusing and condemning him for an Arch-Puritan, for a
Pestilent, factious, and seditious fellow; since you accuse his followers of
the selfsame crime, for defending this our Doctrine and assertion, which he
himself has commended and recorded to them, when as they are nothing like so
hot and zealous for this truth as he. But are there none but pestilent,
factious, and seditious persons, who maintain our present assertion: then
Christ himself, his Prophets and Apostles, then all the Fathers, and all the
Churches of God from age to age were but a faction: and a pack of pestilent
and seditious persons: then the Church of England, and the Reformed Churches in
foreign parts, are but a faction: then the Synod of Dort, and our late
Sovereign King JAMES, who was the cause of assembling and calling of it,
together with all the other German States and Princes who were parties to it,
were but a faction: for all these have maintained, defended, and resolved this
very assertion of ours as sound and orthodox. If these were not a faction, (as
none but Heathens, Atheists, or Devils dare to style them) then surely those
are not a faction who defend it now: and so this false and scandalous
accusation, which you labor to fasten upon others that are guiltless, must
truly light and rest upon your selves, who strive with all your might and
maine, and lay your heads and force together, to question, unsettle, and
suppress, this ancient and approved truth, which has been so long
established, settled, and resolved in the Church of God, and in this our Mother
Church. If one man should set an house on fire, and another shauld endeavor
for to quench it: If one man should raise and stir up strif^, and another
should take pains for to appease it: If one man should break another head,
and a third man should apply a salve to heal it. If one man should oppose, and
labor to suppress the truth, and another should set himself against him to
defend it. I pray which of the two should be the pestilent, turbulent,
factious, and seditious person? which of them is it who deserves the blame? he
that puts out the fire, or he that kindles it? he that seeks for to appease
the strife, or he that stirs it up? he that heales the wound, or he that
gives it? he that defends the truth, or he that does oppose it? Now those whom
you accuse for pestilent, factious, and seditious persons, they do but labor
to extinguish and put out the flame: it is you that kindle, nourish, and
increase it: they do but appease the strife: it is you only that stir it up:
they do but seek to heal and to repair, the wounds and breaches of our
Church, it is you that give and make them: they do but shelter and defend the
truth, it is you only that oppose it, and seek to quell and root it out:
therefore you only are the Incendiaries and firebrarnds, you only are the
turbulent, factious, and seditious spirits, you only (and not these good
Eliahs) are the ( 1 King. 18, 17, 18.
) Ahabs who trouble this our Israel, you only are the dangerous and preuayling
Faction (who like so many unnatural vipers will eat out the very bowels of
this your Mother Church, and of all true and saving grace, if you are not
prevented and withstood in time) and not the men whom you accuse, of purpose
for to free and clear your selves: wherefore you must needs take this second
accusation and slander to your selves alone, to whom it does truly and of
right belong, till you can find some better cause to place it upon those whom
you do here acuse.

To your third forgerie and last accusation, That the Patrons of the total and
final perseverance of the Saints, are such as do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, and such as violate his Majesty's late and pious Proclamation. I
answer, that you are much mistaken. For as most of their works were published
and printed, before the Proclamation was published or thought on (and so are
not within the danger and compass of it) so the only end of this his Majesty's
pious Proclamation was to establish and settle the ancient, settled, received
and approved Doctrine of the Church of England in peace and quiet, and to keep
back you, and all other factions, scismaticall, nouellizing, Arminianizing,
and Romanizing spirits from opposing or distrubing of it: it was only to
defend, propagate and establish the truth of God and the doctrine of our
Church, and not to qu^ll them and suppress them. Who then are those who
violate and transgress this godly Proclamation? those who under pretense and
coulor of it, do labor to suppress and quell the truth, and Doctrine o^ our
Church, contrary to his Majesty's good intent? or those who out of good and
honest hearts endeavor to defend them, and to put them out of further doubt
and question? Doubtless (if I, and many others are not much mistaken) not the
defenders and establishers, but the treacherous and pernicious quellers of the
truth, and of the Doctrine of our Church, are those who must incur the blame
and censure: and then this crime and accusation must fall off from others, and
light heauiest on your selves, to whom it does in truth belong. If any of you
object, that the total and final Apostacy of the Saints, is the undoubted
truth, and the established and resolved Doctrine of the Church of England. I
answer, that this is but an impudent and audatious forgerie; and I dare to
justify it against the greatest Gamaliells of you all, who dare to contradict
me in it. Yea, more then this; if any of you will bona fide affirm, the total
and final Apostacy of the Saints, to be the positive and absolute truh, and
the received doctrine of our Church; I dare adventure for to challenge him, not
only for a graceless and atheistical person, and as one who never had as yet
any truth of saving grace within him; but likewise as a friend unto Arminians
and the Church of Rome, and as an open and professed enemy to the grace of
God, and to the Doctrine of our Church: if any of you will be so bold, as to
take up this challenge, this present Treatise (or if not this, another) shall
make it good against him; so as the peace of this our Church be not disturbed
by it. But if that your assertion, be the positive Doctrine of our Church, as
perchance you do pretend it for to be, how then does it appear to be so? Sure
I am, our Articles; our reverend and learned writers; our Religious professors;
and our Divinity Schools: our reverend Ministers throughout the Kingdom, have
always cried it down till now, as blasphemous, Papisticall and heriticall;
and there is not one approved writer of our English Church, that did ever dare
as yet to publish it unto the world, as sound and orthodox, or as the Doctrine
of our Church. And if it be the Doctrine of our Church, why do you not join
issue on it, and put it to the trial? why do you not answer and refute, but
only labor to suppress, the works of those who do oppose it, and challenge
it as unsound? Indeed the truth is this: you know your cause is bad: you know
that this your Doctrine is but false and counterfeite, and quite repugnant to
the Doctrine of our Church: and therefore you dare not put it to the trial,
for fear it should be proved to be false: you dare not go about to prove our
position to be unsound, or to give an answer unto such as have defended it: all
your labor is to quell it, and to suppress, not to answer, the works of such
as have defended it. And why is this? let ( D^ Justice (...) cap. 1
) Lactantius relate the cause. Timeut ne a nobis reiucti manus dare aliquando,
clamante ipsa veritate cogantur. Obstrepunt igitur, et intercedunt ne audiane,
et oculos suos opprimunt, ne lumen videant quod offerimus, quum neque
cognoscere, neque congredi audent, quia sciunt se facile superari. Et idcirco
disceptatione sublata: pellitur e medio sapientia, vi geritur res. You know you
are not able for to answer, and therefore you labor to suppress our works:
thinking to carry away the cause by force and policy, and to suppress the
truth, before it shall be able to come unto a just and legal trial. But
remember, that ( Arnob. contr. Gentes. lib. 3 ^4. 104.
) Intercipere scripta, et publicatam velle submergere lectionem, non est Deos
defendere, sed veritatis testificationem timere: this is not to confute, but to
suppress the truth: this it not to confirm and prove, but to condemn and
mar your cause. That gold which dreads the touchstone is but counterfeite:
that felon who refuses his trial, does but confess himself guilty: and that
doctrine which ( John 3 20. 21.
) hates the light, and will not come unto it: which would establish it self by
force and policy, and not by truth and honest dealing; it does but discover it
self to be evil, false and counterseite. Whiles therefore you labor to
suport your haerisie, by force and policy, and by suppressing of the truth,
you do but ( Ezech. 13. 10. to. 16.
) daube with untempered mortar, and mar it, whiles you make it. Wherefore,
give over now for very shame, your sinester and disloyal practices (of which
the world takes notice, though you think not of it:) pervert not any longer,
the godly and religious intent of our gracious Sovereign, to a wicked and
irreligious end: and make not that an instrument, to suffocate and curb the
truth of God, and Doctrine of our Church: which he intended should support,
enlarge and ^uccor them. How ever, take this instruction from an ancient
Father: ( Tatul. Apolog. aduers G^ntes. cap 4.
) Nulla lex vetat discuti, quod prohibet admitti. Or if the saying of a Pope
will please you better, let Leo, tell you thus much for your learning ( Epist
decrit. Epist 78. cap (...)
) Quae patefacta sunt quaerere; quae perfecta sunt retractare: et quae sunt
definita co^ellore: quid aliud est, quam (...) adeptis gratiam non refer, et
ad interdictae arboris cibum, (...) probos appetitus mortiferae cupiditatis
extendere? I know not whether you will, I am sure you may apply it.

You see now, how scandalous, how slight, how false and forged all these your
accusations are: you see they are but shifts for to euade, and colors to
oppose the truth and such as do profess it and defend it: they are but mere
impostures and pretenses, whereby the diuill and your own deceitful hearts.
do labor for to blind your eyes, and to keep you still in darkness, to
stupifie your h^arts and consciences, and so to set you in opposition against
all grace and goodness, that so they may deprive you of your souls at last.
Consider therefore, these wiles and policies of Satan, and look unto the end
of all your actions. Consider who and what it is that sets you now on work, to
slander and traduce the Saints of God, and to oppose his truth: and know that
it is not the God of peace and union, the God of grace, and truth: but the very
Diuill himself the very spirit of Antechrist, and the enemy of all grace and
goodness, who out of some carnal, wicked, sinister and by respects, has put
you on this service: ask but your own breasts, and the secret whisperings of
your own consciences, and they will tell you so. And therefore, though I have
spoken somewhat sharply to you before, to make you know your selves, (the want
of which knowledge, if ( De Falsa Relig lib. cap. 1.
) Lactantius may be credited, is the cause of all your Errors,) so now I do
even beseech you by the mercies of God, and by the death of Jesus Christ your
Savior, ( 2 Cor. 5. 15.
) who died for you, that you should no longer live unto your selves but unto
him, that now you would lay down your arms of rebellion, and vomit up your
bitter hatred, malice, and dispite against all grace and goodness, and such as
do excel in piety and holiness: that so you may with all meekness of
spirit, and humility of heart and mind, submit, unto this comfortable and holy
truth, which here I offer and expose unto you; which will be the only joy, the
only comfort, and safety of your souls. If you will but seririously consider
it, and ponder it in your hearts, and desire God to sanctify and bless it to
you: if you will but read it with meek and quiet spirits, with indifferent
and impartial minds, and with an earnest desire to find out the truth: it
may be it may rectify your judgments and reform your lives, it may be it
may do you good, and save your souls. But if you will shut your eyes and will
not see; if you will stop your ears, and will not hear, or if you will
harden your hearts and not consider. If you will proceed for to oppose and
persecute the Doctrine and the power of grace, in such as do defend them. (
Arnob. aduer Gentes. lib. 6. (...). 193.
) Si quod semel sine ratione fecistis, ne videamini aliquando nescisse,
defenditis: meliusque putatis non vinci, quam confessae cedere atque anuuere
veritati: if you think it a disparagement unto you to recant your Errors, and
would rather obstinately continue in them, then disclaim them, Go on and
perish: your blood shall light upon your own heads, not on mine. All I have to
say unto you then is this; that there is a day of account, a day of death, and
judgment coming (which now cannot be far) ( 2 These. 1. 6. to 11. Jude. 14.
15. Wisd. 5. 1. to 12.
) wherein the Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven with his Angels,
in flaming fire taking vengeance of you, and punnishing you with everlasting
destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power;
for hating, slaundering, reuiling, persecuting, deriding, and traducing of his
Saints, and not submitting to his word and truth. Consider therefore, and
again I say, consider, and think well of this, and of that great account
which you must render unto God ere long, even for your carriage and your
actions in this particular Controversy; ( 2 Timothy (...). 7.
and the Lord give you understanding in all things; that so you may repent you
of all the evil of your doings, and of all your damnable and pernicious Errors
both in life and Doctrine; that so you may be saved, and not condemned in the
day of Christ, which now draws near.

The earnest and hearty desirer of your true conversion, both to the Doctrine
and the life of Grace. WILLIAM PRYNNE.

A brief Epitome and Compendium, Of the whole work, which may serve for a
Table to it.
THis Whole Work may be divided into four general parts: unto the state of
the question controuerted: Into the proofs of the conclusion which is
maintained: Into the answer and defeat of the Arguments objected: and into the
uses which arise from the conclusion and assertion here defended.

1. The state of the question you shall find recorded, page 2. to page 5. 2.
The proofs and Arguments in defense of the conclusion here maintained, are
reduced unto 8. general heads:
First, into Arguments drawn from God himself: Which are page 5. The second
from his almighty power and strength, page 8. The third, from his perpetual
presence With, and his continual vigilancie over his Saints, page 10. The
fourth, from his perpetual and constant love unto them, p. 13. The fifth from
his gracious mercy and goodness to them, p 22. The sixth, from his infinite
Justice, p. 24. The seventh from his honor, p. 26. The eight from his infinite
wisdom, p. 29. The ninth, from his readiness to hear the prayers of his
Saints, p. 31. And the tenth, from his gracious Covenants and promises, to
support and keep his Saints from falling, p. 33. Now in these Promises of God
there are four things considered: First, the great multitude and number of
them which are reduced unto 10. heads: from page 33. to 47. Secondly, the
absoluteness and freeness of them, they being all absolute and positive,
without any condition at all annexed to them: in which all the cauells to the
contrary, are answered and cleared, from page 48. to 72. Thirdly, (...)
ability and power of God for to perform them, page 72 Fourthly, the truth of
all these promises, and Gods truth and faithfulness in performing them. p. 72.

Secondly, into Arguments, drawn from Jesus C^ist: which page 74. The second,
from his perpetual intercession for his Saints, page 76. The third, from his
might and power, page 78. The fourth, from (...) compassionate and tender
nature, p. 79. The fifth, from his (...) vigilancie, and care over his Saints
and sheep, p. 79. The sixth from his perpetual residencie and dwelling in
their hearts, p. 81. And the seventh, from his Sacraments, p. 81.

Thirdly, into Arguments drawn from the holy Ghost; being p. 82. The second
from that seal and stamp which he sets upon them. p. 85. The third, from that
seed and anointing which he puts into them, p. 86. The fourth, from that
earnest which he gives them, p. 90. The fifth, from the witness of the Spirit
to them, and from the ordinary and constant working of the Spirit in their
hearts, p. 92. The sixth, from his continual guidance and direction of them, p.
94. The seventh, from his intercession for them, and his assistance of them,
page 95.

Fourthly, into an Argument drawn from the perpetual presence page 96.

Fifthly, into arguments drawn from the present estate and condition page 96.
which are 15. in number. First, they are partakers of the divine nature and of
the immortal seed, p. 96 97. Secondly, they are borne of God, and they are the
sons of God, p. 97. Thirdly, they are built upon a rock, and upon Christ the
sure corner stone, p. 98. Fourthly, they have a new heart, and a new spirit,
and the law of God engraven in them, p. 98. Fifthly, they have over come the
world: they are men of another world: they are translated from death to life,
and shall not come into condemnation, pa 99. Sixthly, they are partakers of the
first resurrection, and the second death shall have no power over them, pa. 99.
Seventhly, they are always green and flourishing like trees planted by the
rivers side. pa. 100. Eigthly, they are truly happy: they are truly and fully
saved, and they have eternal life begun within them. p. 101. Ninthly, they are
called, justified, and sanctified: and they are made Kings and Priests for over
unto God the Father, page 102. Tenthly, their names are written in heaven, and
in the Book of Life, page 103. Eleuenthly, they cannot depart from God, and it
is impossible for any to seduce them. page, 107. Twelfthly, they cannot choose
but serve and please the Lord: and they can never sin unto death, page 109.
Thirteenthly, they are married unto God for ever, and they cannot be separated
from his love, page 111. Foureteenthly, they are the inheritance of the Lord:
they are as pillars in the house of God, and they are so established, settled,
and grounded in grace, that they cannot be cast down, page 111. Lastly, they
have all the inward and outward helps and means that may be to preserve them
in grace, page 112.

Sixthly, into an Argument drawn from Grace it self, which page 113. to 122.
where all the objections against the perpetuity, and immortality of grace are
answered.

Seventhly, i^o Arguments drawn from the dangerous consequencies

First, into the d^ngerous consequencies in respect of the whole page 122.
Secondly, it would derogate much from the truth, the promises and word of God,
page 123. Thirdly, it would derogate much from the infinite goodness, mercy,
and love of God, page 124. Fourthly, it would derogate much from the
omnipotency and power of the Trinity, and from the efficacy of the means of
grace, page 125. Fifthly, it would derogate much from the infinite justice and
wisdom of God, page 126. Sixthly, it would much eclipse the efficacy and
virtue of Christ's passion and intercession, page 127. Seventhly, it would make
the sweet and comfortable working of Gods Spirit in the hearts of the Saints to
be but a mere imposture, page 127. Eigthly, it would rob the Lord of the
heart, the affection and the love of all his Saints, page 128. Ninthly, it
would rob the Lord of all his praise and glory, page 129. Tenthly, it would
make men negligent in Gods service, page 130. Eleuenthly, it would rob God of
the prayers of his Saints, and make the Lords prayer to be but vain and idle,
page 131. Twelfthly, it would take away all absolute and irrespectiue
predestination, page 132. Lastly, it would make men and not God, the authors of
their own salvation, page 133.

Secondly, into the dangerous consequencies, in regard of the page 134.
Secondly, it would deprive them of all true happiness in this life, and make
them miserable men, page 134. Thirdly, it would deprive them of all (...) joy
and comfort, page, 135. Fourthly, It would drive them to despair, page 136.
Fifthly, it would make no difference at all between the godly and the wicked
in this present life, p. 141. Lastly, it would breed a doubt, whether God had
always a true Church on earth, or whether there are any saved, page 142.

Thirdly, into dangerous consequencies in respect of grace it self: p. 142.
Secondly, it would destroy the very nature and essence of true grace, page 143.
Thiraly, it would utterly abolish and take away all true and saving faith, pa.
144. Fourthly, it would take away all certainty and assurance of salvation, pa.
145. Fifthly, it would take away and abolish the graces of love to God, and of
joy in the holy Ghost, p. 146. Lastly, it would make grace to be no work and
fruit of the holy Ghost, but a mere mor all persuasion; and it would quite
destroy the ^ery kingdom of Grace which is in men, page 147.

Fourthly, into the dangerous consequents in respect of the whole page 147.
Secondly, it would revive those herefies which they had formerly condemned,
page 147. And into the dangerous consequences in respect of the Church of
England: Which are 4. First, it will pull up one maiue point and principle of
that doctrine and religion which has been planted and established in our
Church, p. 148. Secondly, it will give our adversaries occasion for to triumph
over us, Ib. Thirdly, it will be a means to bring in Popery and Arminian^sme
into our Church, ibid. Fourthly, it will breed divisions and Combustions in our
Church, page 249.

Eighthly, into humane authorities: which are of three sorts: England, p. 151.

First, for Fathers and Counsels, we have for us: Dionysius the Great, p. 165.
Ambrose, p. 167. Epiphanius, page 169. C^rysostome, p. 169. Augustine, p. 171.
Cyril, pa. 173. Prosper, p. 174. Chrysologus, p. 175. Fulgentius, p. 176.
Gregory the Great, p. 178. Venerable Bede, p. 179. Anselme, page 181. Bernard,
p. 185. Bradwardyn, p. 188. The Council of Miliuitan, p. 189. The General
Council of Afric, and the Council of Arausica or Orange, p. 189. An answer
to the Fathers that are objected, p. 193. 194.

For Protestant Churches beyond the Seas: we have first their page 196. to 202.
Secondly, their several Confessions, Articles, Resolutions, and Synods which
are cited, p. 202. to 215.

Thirdly, for the Church of England, page 215. we have first pa. 216. to 226.
Secondly, her Articles, p. 226 to 235. where the objection from the 16. Article
is answered, and the Article it self is expounded. Thirdly, her Homilies and
Common prayer B^ke, which make rather for us than against us, p. 235. to 245.
where the objections from the Homilies are answered. Fourthly, an Argument to
prove this present position here defended, to be the received and resolved
Doctrine of the Church of England, p. 245. In this eighth part all the cauells
of those who would have the Error of the total and final Apostacy of the
Saints to be the Tenet of all Antiquity, of all the German Protestants, and of
the Church of England, are answered in their places. And this is the whole
sum and substance of the second general part of this work.

The third general part of this work which begins at page 253. contains the
arguments which are made against this assertion here defended, with the
several answers that are given to them; where first you have two observations,
commended to your consideration, which serve to answer, or at least to weaken,
all future arguments that are objected: which you shall find. page 253. 255.
Secondly, you have the several arguments which are objected, and the answers
to them in their order. The first argument is taken from Ezech. 18. 24. and 33.
12. 13. 18. it begins page 257. The second is from 1 Cor. 9. 27. page 264. The
third from Heb. 6, 4, 5, 6. cap. 10. 26. to 30. and the 2 Pet. 2. 21. page 287.
The fourth from Math. 12. 43, 44, 45. Luke 11. 24, 25. page 273. The fifth from
John 152. to 11. page 276. The sixth Phil. 2 12. page 211. The seventh from 2
Pet. 3. 17. page 283. 284. The eighth from 1 Cor. 10. 12. Heb. 3. 12. cap. 4.
1, 11. and Romans 11. 8. page 285. The ninth from 1 Cor. 16. 13. Phil. 41. Reu.
2. 25, 26. page 288. The tenth from John 8. 31. 1 Cor. 15. 2. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
Gal. 69. Col. 1. 21. 22, 23. 1 These. 3. 8. 1 Timothy 2. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 21. Heb. 3.
6. and 2 Pet. 1. 10. p. 290. The eleventh from Heb. 10. 35. 38. page 296. The
twelfth from Dan. 11. 35. page 296. The thirteenth from Prou. 24. 16. page 297.
The fourteenth from 1 Cor. 8. 11. page 298. The fifteenth from 1 Timothy 5. 11.
12. page 300. The sixteenth from 2 Cor. 6. 1. and 1 Cor. 15. 2. page 301. The
seventeenth from Psalm 27. 9, 11. Psalm. 51. 11. Psalm. 71. 9. page 302. The
eighteenth from Gal 5. 4. page 304. The ninteenth from Prou: 30. 8. 9. page
305. The twentieth from 1 These. 5. 19. page 306. The twenty one from 2 John 8.
page 307. The twenty two from Psalm. 119. 176. page 309. The twenty three from 1
Cor. 6. 15, 16. page 310. The twenty four, That a regenerate man may fall into
a gross known and scandalous sin, and lie in it for a time, or dye in it
without repentance; therefore he may fall from grace. page 312. The twenty
five: That a regenerate man may be excommunicated, and therefore he may fall
from grace. page 342. The twenty six: That infants which are regenerated in
their baptism may fall from grace; and therefore true regenerate men. page
343. where that place of Gal. 3. 27, and the words objected out of the Common
prayer book are answered, and the use, the efficacy and the end of baptism,
are declared. The twenty seventh argument is from examples. page 364. which are
of three sorts. The first, of Adam and the Angels. page 365. The second, from
whole Churches. page 368. as the Church of the Jews. page 369. The Church of
the Galathians. page 370. The Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira and
Pergamus. page 372. The third, from particular Saints, as the second and third
ground. page 383: those in John 2. 23, 24. page 375. The Disciples who went
back from Christ: John 6. 66. page 377. David: page 378. Peter: page 385.
Judas. page 391. Solomon. page 393. Saul. A^a. Ioash. Simon Magus. the Elders
of the Church of Ephesus. Demas. Hymenens. Alexander. those of Math: 24. 24.
and the rest of whom Paul, Peter, and Jude have prophesied, that they should
depart from the faith. page 393. 394. The twenty eighth and last argument, is
from the inc^cies of this our assertion. page 394. which are three. First, it
would make men presumptions, and bold to sin. pa. 395. Secondly, it would make
men negligent and sloathfull in Gods service. page 399. Thirdly, it would make
men proud and arrogant. page 403. And this is the substance of this third
general part.

The fourth and last part of this work consists of two profitable uses, page
406. The first is a use of exhortation, to incite and stir up all men to
seek and prise the state of grace, which is so permanent. page 406. The
second, a use of exhortation to the true Saints of God, to comfort and rejoice
their souls in the consideration of the perpetuity of their state of grace.
page 408. And thus you have the compendium, sum and substance of this
Treatise.

THE PERPETVITIE OF A REGENERATE MAN'S ESTATE: WHEREIN IT is proved by sundry
arguments, reasons, and authorities, That such as are once truly regenerated
and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, can neither Finally, nor
Totally fall from grace, etc.
IT is the express voice and testimony 2. Pet. 2. 1.
both of the Spirit and the word 1. Tim. 4. 3. 4.
of God, that in the latter times and ages 2. Tim. 3. 5.
of the world, there shall be some false teachers in the Church, which privily
shall bring in damnable haeresies, and pernicious doctrines, even denying the
Lord that bought them, and bring upon them selves swift damnation. Yea the same
Spirit and word of God do testify, that as there shall be such false
teachers in the world, so likewise, that there shall be many who departing from
the faith, and turning their ears from the truth, shall give heed to their
seducing and erroneous spirits, and follow their pernicious ways and
doctrines, insomuch that wholesome doctrine, and the very way of truth itself
shall be evil spoken of. I would to God these prophecies and praedictions were
not so truly and experimentally fulfilled in these last and evil days of
ours; wherein we may truly say, that there are some false teachers crept in
among us, who privily have brought in damnable doctrines (under the spetious
pretense and color of the doctrine of our Church) almost to the denial of
that Lord which bought them, to the seducing of many ignorant and unstable
souls, and to the scandal and reproach both of the word and way of truth. Who
and what those persons and these doctrines (...) I need not for to mention: the
public fame has made them so notorious, that it would be altogether idle and
superfluous for me to point and chalk them out. Wherefore passing by the
persons, I shall only single out one pestilent and pernicious doctrine which
they do maintain (to wit, the Total and final Apostasy of the Saints) the
which I here intend for to encounter, not with the weak and feeble arms of
fleshly wisdom, but with the all conquering, and all-subduing sword of the
Spirit, the word of God.

Now that I may not fight as one that beats the air, nor trouble you with a
long discourse to little purpose; before I come to grapple with the
adversaries, I will briefly and perspicuously relate the state and substance of
that controversy which is between us. The question and controversy (...)
self is only this, Whether those that are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and li^ely faith, may either finally or totally
fall from grace? For the full and clear understanding of which, you must take
notice of two distinctions: the first concerning regenerate men and such as are
in the state of Grace: the second concerning Grace it self. Of regen^rate men,
and such as are in the state of Grace there are two sorts. The first are such
as are regenerated, and invested into the state of Grace only in outward show,
and in the bare opinion of men, but not in sincerity and truth: these, they are
not within the question: for though they make an outward show and flourish of
Grace unto the world, yet they had never any truth of saving Grace within them,
and therefore we grant, that such as these may both finally and totally fall
away from that hypocritical and superficial show of Grace the which they
made. The second sort of regenerate men are such as are regenerated in
sincerity and truth, and not in outward show only, such as have really the
seeeds and habits of true and saving Grace within them: of these only is the
present question: and of these we do affirm that they can neither finally
nor totally fall from Grace. For Grace it self which is the second thing; you
must observe that it has a double acception in the Scriptures. First it is
taken for the free love and mercy of God in Christ Jesus: secondly, it is taken
for the graces which are wrought in men by the holy Ghost: in this latter sense
only, and not in the former, is Grace taken in our present question. Now these
Graces of Gods Spirit they are of two sorts. First there are ordinary and
common Graces, which are common to wicked men as well as to the Saints of God:
as prophecy, learning, the knowledge and interpretation of Scripture and
tongues, the working of miracles, the discerning of spirits, extraordinary
skill in any art, mystery, or science: an heroical valient and Kingly mind,
and spirit, of which we may read in the 1. Cor: 12. 1: to the 12. Exodus: 35:
30. to the end of the chapter. Iudgees 14: 19: cap: 15: 14: 15. 1: Sam. 11: 6:
and cap. 16: 13: 14. Of such ordinary Graces as these this question is not
intended, for these may be both finally and totally lost. Secondly, there are
sanctifying, saving and peculiar graces of Gods holy Spirit, which are proper
only to the elect children and saints of God: such as are faith, love, hope,
saving and experimental knowledge, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost,
and the like, of which we may read Gal 5. 22: 23. of these only is our
present question. Now in these sanctifying, saving, and peculiar graces, there
are two things to be considered: first, there are the seeds, and habits of
these graces, of which this question is only intended: secondly, there are the
degrees, the sense and feeling, the acts and effects of these graces, which are
not within the verge and limits of our question. As for the seeds and habits
of the graces, we hold, that a tru^ regenerate man, can neither finally nor
totally fall from them: but as for degrees, the sense and feeling, the acts and
effects of these saving graces, we hold, that a regenerate man may fall from
them, and loose them for a time. So that the question that is now to be
disputed of, is no more but this. Whether those that are true believers, those
that are once truly regenerate and grafted into Christ by a true and lively
faith (and not only in outward show) may fall finally and totally from the very
seeds and habits (not from the degrees, the sense, the acts and effects) of
the saving, sanctifying and peculiar graces, (and not of the ordinary and
common) graces of Gods holy Spirit, wrought in their hearts and souls? In this
question, there are three different opinions. Some there are, that hold, that
those that are once truly regenerated, and put into the state of saving grace,
may fall totally from the very seeds, and habits of their graces, but yet not
finally; that is, they may so far loose the very seeds and habits of these
saving graces for a time, that there shall not be so much as any remainders of
them left behind, insomuch that they need a new insition and ingrafting into
Christ again: but yet they hold, that they can never fall finally from grace,
because that God having praed^stinated them unto life eternal, and foreseeing
this their fall, does always out of his mercy raise them up again, that so
they may not perish finally, but have everlasting life. Others there are, that
hold, that the true regenerate Saints of God, and members of Jesus Christ, may
fall from the very seeds and habits of saving grace, not only totally, so as
utterly to loose these seeds and habits of saving grace for a time, but
finally to, so as to loose them for ever, and to perish everlastingly in their
sins. Others, they hold, that the state of grace is such a permanent, settled
and well grounded estate, that the seeds and habits of true and saving grace
are so rooted and fixed in the hearts and souls of all those in whom once they
are begun in truth, that they can neither totally for a time, nor finally for
ever fall from the state of grace, or utterly loose the seeds and habits of
these saving and peculiar graces that are within them. The two first of these
opinions I am now to refute, as false, wicked, damnable and erroneous, and the
last opinion only will I maintain, as sound and orthodox. Now because these
two first opinions of a total and a final fall from grace are so wraped and
included one within the other, and have so near affinity one with the other,
that the same arguments and answers serve to defend them both, and most of the
arguments that serve to overthrow the one of them, do serve likewise for to
subvert the other; to avoid prolixity and tedious repetitions, I will join
them both together, and oppugn them both, by maintaining this sound Orthodox
and comfortable assertion, which defeates them both.

That those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true
and lively says, can neither finally nor totally fall from grace. Infinite and
many are the arguments which I might produce to prove this Orthodox and sound
position: which for order, method, and perspicuity sake, I shall now reduce to
seven general heads. The first sort of arguments shall be taken from God
himself: the second, from Christ: the third, from the holy Ghost: the fourth,
from regenerate men themselves, and from those privileges which they do
enjoy: the fifth, from the Angels: the sixth, from the very nature of true and
saving grace: and the seventh, from those many dangerous absurdities and
consequences which else will necessarily follow upon the contrary assertion.

First, from God himself there are ten arguments which 1. From God himself.
may be deduced to prove the total and final perseverance of the Saints. The
first thing in God is that which makes for the final perseverance of all such
as are once truly regenerated: to wit, Gods eternal purpose and immutable
decree, whereby he has elected and praedestinated all such as are truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Jesus Christ by a true and lively faith unto
eternal life. From which eternal purpose and decree of God I have this
argument: which neither has already been, neither shall hereafter be once
fully answered. Those who by Gods eternal purpose and immutable decree are
praedestinated and ordained to eternal life, can never finally fall from
grace. But all those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ
by a true and lively faith, are by Gods eternal purpose and immutable decree
praedestinated and ordained to eternal life: therefore they can never finally
fall from grace. The mayor proposition that can not be denied: for Gods
eternal purpose and immutable decree cannot be altered or changed: this
purpose of God according to election, it shall stand firm for ever. Psalm: 33:
11. Rom: 9: 11. As he has purposed so shall it stand, and none shall disanull
it. Isay 14: 24: 27. this foundation of the Lord it abides sure, having the
seal of God annexed to it. 2: Tim: 2: 19: therefore it can not be changed. If
you object that of the 2: Pet: 1: 10. where the Saints are exhorted to make
their calling and election sure: therefore, their election is not so sure but
it may be altered. I answer, that this Scripture has not reference or
relation to the calling and election themselves, as they have relation unto
God; for election and vocation in themselves and as they have reference unto
God, they are immutable, and if they were not so, it were not in the power of
regenerate men to make them so, but it has only reference to regenerate men
themselves, or to election and vocation, as they have reference to regenerate
men and not to God: so that the Apostles meaning is no more but this; that the
Saints of God, ought by their holy lives and godly conversation, and by the
inward graces of his holy Spirit, (which are the undoubted fruits and marks of
their true election and vocation,) to assure their hearts and consciences, that
they were truly called and elected to salvation: so that the Mayor proposition
remains as true. The Minor only rests for to be proved: That all those who
are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively
faith, are praedestinated and ordained unto eternal life. And this appears by
these ensuing reasons. First, because that none are called and truly
regenerated: but those that are praedestinated and elected unto eternal life,
which appears by diverse evident texts of Scripture: as Rom: 8: 30. Whom he did
praedestinate them also he called, (a) and no oothers, Aug de (...) (...): cap.
17.
and whom he calls them he also justified, and no others, and ^nselme in Romans
(...). 30.
whom he justified, them he also glorified and no others: God does regenerate,
call, and sanctify none but such as are elected to eternal life, and the rest
are hardened. Rom: 11: 7. God does save or call none with an holy calling, but
according to his purpose of grace in Jesus Christ, before the world began: 2:
Tim: 1. 9. None but such as are Christ's sheep believe and hear his voice,
John 10: 26. as many as are ordained to eternal life believe, and none but
they: Acts 13: 48. None be rich in faith but such as God has chosen to
eternal life. James 2: 5: and therefore Titus 1: 1: faith is styled the faith
of Gods elect, to signify thus much unto us, that none have true and saving
faith, but such as are elected to salvation: therefore it is evident, that all
those who are once truly regenerated and ingra^ted into Christ by a true and
lively faith are praedestinated and ordinated to eternal life: Secondly, it
must needs be so, because all those that are once truly regenerated and
sanctified, are regenerated and sanctified by virtue of their praedestination:
this is evident by Ephesians: 1: 4: 5. Blessed be God who has chosen us in
Christ, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love, having praedestinated us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself. Those that are sanctified called and
adopted, they are all praedestinated to this their adoption sanctification and
calling, and withal they are praedestinated to eternal life, as you may read
at large. Rom: 8: 29: 30. Ephesians: 2: 10. 1: These: 5: 9. 2: These: 2: 13: 14. 1:
Tim: 6: 12. 2: Tim: 1: 9: cap: 2: 19: 21: and 1: Pet: 1: 2. therefore it is
altogether impossible that they should ever finally fall from grace. All that
can be answered to this objection and argument is only this, that there is no
such absolute and irreuocable decree and praedestination to eternal life,
which how false it is, let these Scriptures testify. Psalm: 139: 16. Isay 49:
1: 5. Ier: 1: 5: cap: 31: 3. Mal: 1: 2: 3. Math: 24: 22: 24. cap: 25: 34: 41.
John. 12: 40. Acts 13: 48. Rom: 8: 29: 30: 33. cap: 9: 11: 23. cap: 11: 5: 7:
28. Gal: 1: 15. Ephesians: 1: 3: 4: 5. cap: 2: 10. 1: These: 5: 9 2: These: 2: 13:
14. 1: Tim: 6: 12. 2: Tim: 1: 9. cap: 2: 19. 21. T^t: 1: 1. 1: Pet: 1: 2. cap:
2: 9. and 2: Pet: 1: 10. which are all express to the contrary: or else, that
all those that are once truly regenerated; sanctified, and ingrafted into
Christ by a lively faith, are not praedestinated to eternal life, which I have
proved to be false. Wherefore this argument proves this to be an undeniable
truth, that those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Jesus
Christ by a true and lively faith, can never finally fall from grace, for then
Gods election should be frustrated, which cannot be.

The second thing in God is his almighty power and strength, which gives us
full assurance, that those who are once truly regenerated, can neither finally,
nor totally fall from grace: from which I frame this second argument. Those who
are kept by the very might and power of God unto salvation, it is altogether
impossible for them either finally, or totally to fall from grace. But all such
as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively
faith, they are kept by the very might and power of God unto salvation: so is
the express text in the 1: Pet: 1: 5. Who are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation: so is Esaias: 26: 3: c: 27: 3. I the Lord do keep my
vynyard, I will water it every moment, least any hurt it, I will keep it night
and day, thou will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee: so
is John 10: 27: 28: 29. My sheep hear my voice, and I give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hands; my Father that gave them me is greater then all, and no man is able to
pluck them out of my Fathers hand. God does keep all those that are once truly
regenerated through his own name unto everlasting life, he preserues and
keeps them by his power. John 17: 11. 2: Cor: 12: 9. cap: 13: 4. Ephesians: 1. 18.
and 2: Tim: 1: 12: wherefore they can neither finally nor totally fall from
grace. All that is replied to this argument, is only this. That it is true
that God does keep all such as are regenerated by his power to salvation, he
preserues them, so that nothing can pluck them out of his hands, unless they
will themselves: God does preserve and keep them so, that no outward thing
sh^l pluck them from him, but yet he does not preserve them from themselves;
though nothing can pluck them out of his hands, yet they by the liberty of
their own wills may pluck themselves out of his hands, and so fall totally or
finally from grace. To which I answer, that it is as impossible for the Saints
themselves by virtue of their own free will to pull themselves out of the
hands of God, as it is for any outward thing to do it. First, because Christ
himself tells us, that no man can pluck them out of his Father hands: if no
man can do it, then they themselves can never do it, for they are but men and
so are included in this word no man, as well as others: no man, nor any man can
do it, therefore they themselves can never do it. Secondly, they themselves
can never do it, because the Scripture says expressly, that they are kept by
the power of God through faith unto salvation; that they are kept night and day
in perfect peace, so that none can hurt them: Ergo, they cannot pluck
themselves out of Gods hands, for then they might perish, and so this that they
are kept by the power of God unto salvation, that they are kept in perfect
peace must needs be false. Thirdly, they themselves cannot possibly do it,
because then Christ's reason would be vain: for he tells us, Ioh: 10: 28, 29:
That his sheep shall have eternal life, and that they shall never perish,
because no man can pluck them out of his Fathers hand: if then they themselves
out of the liberty of their own wills might pluck themselves out of Gods hand
and custody, and so fall and perish, Christ's reason would be false, who yields
his reason why none of his shall ever perish, because that none can pluck them
out of his or his Fathers hand. Fourthly, if they themselves might pluck
themselves out of Gods hand, this would be, to make themselves stronger then
God who has undertaken to preserve them by his power to salvation: and to make
a poor silly mortal man more strong and potent then God himself, whose very
weakness is stronger then men, 1: Cor: 1: 25. How great a blasphemy will it
be? Fifthly, if man himself might by the liberty of his own will pull
himself out of the hands of God, to what end then is it for God to preserve
him against all things else? if God does not preserve his Saints against
themselves, its to little purpose for him to preserve them against their
outward enemies: outward enemies could do no harm at all, if they had no
enemy within: temptations without inward corruptions to work upon are vain
and bootelesse: wherefore either this you must grant, that God does defend and
keep his Saints by his might and power against themselves as well as against
all outward things whatsoever, and then it follows, that they themselves can
never pluck themselves out of Gods hands, and so can neither finally, nor
totally fall from grace: or else it will necessarily follow, that Gods keeping
of his Saints from outward temptations and enemies is to little purpose,
(because he kepes them not from themselves, without which, these outward
enemies and temptations could never hurt them) which would be little better
then gross blasphemy. Lastly, if men out of the freedom and liberty of their
own wills, might wrest themselves out of the strong and powerful hands of
God, this would be nothing else but to make man an absolute creature of
himself, not any way subject to the scepter, guidance, disposing and
government of God himself, this would be wholly to exempt man from Gods
jurisdiction, when as the Scriptures testify, that his heart, his will, and
all his ways are in the hands of God to dispose of them as he thinks fit:
Prou: 21: 1: and Dan: 5: 23: wherefore, neither the Saints themselves, nor any
outward thing whatsoever can be able to pluck them out of the hands of God,
who keeps them by his power to salvation, that they shall never perish: and
therefore its impossible for them, either finally, or totally to fall from
grace. If any man deny, that all those who are once truly regenerated are thus
preserved, the Scriptures here alleged, where Christ does speak both of his
vineyard and his sheep, (in which number, all such as are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith are included,)
and the places and reasons alleged in my former argument, will give him full
satisfaction to the contrary, so that the argument stands still in force.

Thirdly, as the might and power of God, so likewise his perpetual presence
with, and his continual vigilance and watchfulness over all such as are once
truly regenerated and ingrasted into Christ do give us strong assurance, that
they can neither finally, nor totally fall from grace, from which I raise this
third argument. Those who are perpetually fenced and guarded by the perpetual
vigilance and care of God himself, and by the special presenee and protection
of God, to the end, that nothing should be ever able to hurt them or withdraw
them from him, its altogether impossible that they should either finally, or
totally sall from grace. But all those who are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, are perpetually fenced and
guarded by the perpetual vigilance and care, and by the special presence and
protection of God himself, to the only end, that nothing should be ever able
to hurt them, or withdraw them from him: Therefore its altogether impossible
for them, either finally, or totally to fall from grace. The Mayor proposition
cannot be denied, for then it must needs follow, that God does loose his end,
and that his care and custody over his Saints is but in vain, which would be
a great dishonor unto God, and a great dishartning to his Saints: so that the
Mayor must needs be granted to be true. As for the Minor proposition, that
must needs be true, if God himself or his word be true. For the Lord does
cover the righteous, and with his favor does compass them as with a shield.
Psa: 5: 11: 12. God is their habitation for ever, even from generation to
generation: Psa: 90: 1: 2. He will cover them under his wings: and they shall
be sure under his feathers, his faithfulness and truth shall he their shield
and buckler: Psa: 91: 1: 4: as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the
Lord about his people from henceforth and for ever, so that they shall not be
moved but stand fast for ever. Psa: 125: 1: 2. All the Saints of God they have
a strong City, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks, God will
preserve them in perfect peace, by an assured purpose, because they have
trusted in him, Esaias 26: 1: 3: God is their strength in all extreamities and
troubles whatsoever, he is a refuge to them against the tempest, a shadow
against the heat when the blasts of the mighty are like a storm against the
wall. Esaias 25: 4: When they pass through the waters and the floods he will be
with them that they shall not ouerflow them, when they walk through the very
fire they shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon them, for God
is the Lord their God, and the holy one of Israel is their Savior. Esaias 43:
2: how then is it possible that those should ever perish, or fall finally or
totally, who are thus protected and defended by the Lord himself? And least
that you should think that the Lord does only at sometimes, and not always
thus protect and guard his Saints, so that they may chance to fall when he is
absent from them: this you must know withal, that the Lord does keep his
vineyard night and day least any should assail it, yea he waters it every
moment. Isai. 27: 3. God will not suffer the feet of any of his to be moved at
any time, for he that keeps them will not slumber: behold, he that keeps
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep: the Lord himself he is the keeper,
the Lord is his shade upon the right hand, so that the sun shall not smite
him by day nor the moon by night: the Lord shall preserve him from all evil,
he shall preserve his soul: the Lord shall preserve his going out and his
coming in from this time forth and for evermore. Psa: 121: 2: to the end. The
Lord will create upon every place of mount Sion, and upon the assemblies
thereof a cloud and a smoke by ^day, and the shining of a flame of fire by
night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense; and there shall be Tabernacle
for a shadow in the day time from the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for
a covert from storm and from rain. Is: 4: 5: 6. Mark here and see how
vigilant and careful the Lord is to defend and keep his Saints from evil:
not upon one place only, but upon every place of mount Sion, and upon all the
assemblies thereof, and upon all the glory shall be a defense, not only by
day, but by day and night to, not only against some sorts of temptations but
against all, God will be a covering and a refuge against the heat, against the
storm, and against the rain, against all temptations and afflictions
whatsoever: God will keep every regenerate man as the apple of his own eye,
and cover him under his wings: Deuteronomy: 32: 10: 11: he will be with him to the end
of the world. Math: 28: 20: he will not fail him nor forsake him: Heb: 13: 6:
the Lord is his shepherd, the Lord preserves his soul and leads him on in
the paths of Righteousness, the Lord is on his right hand to preserve and
keep him that he should not fall, that he should not wholly wander and stray
from him. Psa: 23: 1. to: 5. Psalm: 16: 8. Psa: 37: 28: 23: 24. Psa: 125: 1: 2.
John 10: 28: 29. Jude 24. Hebr: 13: 6: 7: Esaias 25: 4. cap: 26: 3. cap: 27: 3.
cap: 43: 2: therefore its impossible for him either finally or totally to fall
from grace. All that here can be replied is only this; that as long as men
are regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, that God does thus defend and keep
them, but when they fall away from God then he does not preserve them. To which
I answer, that I press this argument only to this purpose, to prove that the
Saints of God when they are once regenerated can never fall away from grace,
because God does presence, and guard them thus with his continual care and
presence, and not to prove that God does sense and guard his Saints: the
vigilent care and custody of God is that which makes the Saints of God to
continue Saints, so that they can never cease to be Saints any more, and
therefore, the answer is but a mere begging of the question, and noe answer
at all to the force and drift of this my argument: it is only a deny all of my
conclusion, not of my premises, and so it is no answer but a shift and cauell.
If you object, that all these places are meant of a temporal protection from
worldly dangers. I answer, that the most of them if not all of them are
principally if not soly intended and meant of a spiritual protection and not
of a temporary, of a perpetual protection from spiritual, not from temporal
dangers as the places themselves do fully prove: how ever let them be intended
of a protection from temporal dangers only which cannot be, yet this does
necessarily follow: that if God has so great a care to free his Saints from
temporary dangers, he will certainly have as great, if not a greater care to
protect them from spiritual dangers: and so the argument stands still in
force.

The fourth thing in God which may give us full assuranc^ of the truth of this
assertion is his immutable and perpetual love to all such as are once truly
regenerated, and made the true members of Jesus Christ, from which this fourth
argument does arise. Those whom God himself does love with an immutable,
constant and perpetual love, and those who can by no means possible be ever
severed from this love of God, its altogether impossible for them either
finally, or totally to fall from grace. But all those who are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith are such as
God himself does love with an immutable, constant and perpetual love: For
whom God does once love he loves unto the end: Ioh: 13: 1: he loves all the
true members of Jesus Christ in the same manner as he loves Christ himself,
and with the same love that he loves him. John 17: 23: 24: 26: now Gods love
to Jesus Christ is immutable, constant and perpetual, therefore must his love
to all his members be so to. God he loves them with an everlasting love. Ier:
31: 3: he is their loving God and Father from everlasting to everlasting: Psa:
90: 1: 2: his loving kindness indureth for ever and ever upon them Psa: 103:
17: his righteousness shall be forever and ever, and his salvation from
ge^eration to generation: the mountains may remove and the hills may fall
down, but his mercy shall not depart from them, neither shall the covenant of
his peace be removed: Esaias 51: 8: and cap: 54: 13: Gods love to them is
immutable, constant, and perpetual. Neither can they by any means whatsoever
be ever utterly severed from this love of God to them in Christ. It is Paul's
express challeng, Rom: 8: 35: who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness or
sword? nay (says he verse 37: 31: 39:) i^ all these things we are more then
conquerers through him that loved us: for I am persuaded, that neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor hight, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate (not me, but us who are once in Christ, and made the Sons of God by
adoption and grace: verse 1: 9: 14: 15: 17: 29: 30:) from the love of God which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord: so that they may boldly say with David, Ps: 26: 1:
the Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then shall I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? God he loves all such
who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively
faith with an immutable, constant and perpetual love, and they themselves can
never be utterly severed from this love of God: wherefore it is impossible for
them, either totally, or finally to fall from grace. Our subtle Sophisters have
nothing here to answer, but their crambemillies coctum, that God does love all
such as Answer.
are truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ with an immutable, constant
and perpetual love, as long as their love to him is constant and immutable:
but when as they do cease to love God (as many times they do when they sin
against him,) then God does cease to love them: so that the defect is not in
Gods love to (...), but in our love to him. To which false and slender (...) I
will make this replication. Reply.
First I say: that Gods love unto the Saints does not depend upon the love of
the Saints to him: first, because the Scriptures certify us expressly, that God
does love his Saints freely, that he shows mercy to them for no other cause
but because he will have mercy: Exodus: 33: 19. Ios^a 3: 8. Rom: 4: 15, 19. and
Ephesians: 1: 5, 6. therefore his love to the Saints does not depend upon the love
of the Saints to him: for then his love were not free, depending merely on the
riches of his mercy and the freedom of his will. Secondly, Gods love unto his
Saints cannot depend upon their love to him, because then the Saints should
love him first; and so God should love them, because they loved him first, and
chose him to betheir God: but Saint John tells us in express words, 1: Ioh: 4:
10: 19: that we love God, because he loved us first, and Christ himself
assures us, John 15: 16: that we have not chosen him but that he has cho^en
us: God does love his Saints before ever they did love him, and therefore his
love does not depend on theirs, but their love on his: they bear not the
root, but the root them: Rom: 11: 18. Thirdly, Gods love is a permanent,
constant, and perpetual love, as I have proved by the Scriptures formerly
cited, therefore it cannot depend upon the love of man to him which is various
and mutable: that which is immutable permanent and constant in its own nature
can never depend upon that which is fickle and unconstant: therefore, you must
either grant the love of the Saints to God to be constant and immutable, which
makes altogether against you, or else you must hold the love of God to his
Saints and children to be mutable and unstable which is expressly against the
Scriptures, and unbeseeming that great and glorious God in whom there is no
variableness nor shadow of turning: James 1: 17: wherefore this surmise of
theirs, that the love of God unto his Saints and Children depends wholly upon
their love to him, is merely false, and contradictory to the Scriptures: and
so the answer to this objection is no answer at all. Secondly, I say that
this surmise, that God should love all such as are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, with a permanent, constant,
and immutable love, and yet that they should either finally or totally fall
from grace implies a mere contradiction: for if this love of God to them be
immutable constant and perpetual, God can not but preserve and keep them both
from a total and a final fall from grace. Morrall men who have but a spark
of love within them, will never suffer any either totally or finally to fall or
perish whom they love with a constant settled and perpetual love, if it lie in
their powers to relieve them: and can you think that God who is infinite,
constant, and perpetual in love unto his Saints, and always able to relieve
them will suffer them either totally or finally to fall from grace? doubtless
he will not, nay he cannot do it: this love of his is constant and permanent,
therefore he cannot suffer them to fall totally, it is perpetual and
everlasting, therefore he will not permit them to fall finally from him: the
perpetual and everlasting objects of Gods love, can never be the perpetual
and everlasting objects of his wrath and justice: God will still preserve and
keep them from a total and a final fall, he will sustain them and keep
them by his hand and power, that they shall never fall utterly from him and
perish, Psa: 37, 24. Psa: 16: 8. Ps: 145: 14: 20. Cant: 8: 3. John 10 28, 29.
God never casts of those, he never throws those into hell (...) (...), wgi^
he loves with a constant, permanent, and everlasting love, and therefore they
can neither totally, nor finally fall from grace. And here you must observe
this difference, that it is one thing for God to have love for ever if men will
entertain it, and another thing for to love men for ever, because it is his
will and pleasure so to do: in the first case its true that men must first
embrace Gods love before that they can have it, and if they chance for to cast
off this love of God they might chance to loose it, which is not our case: but
in the other (which is our case) where God does love men actually, with a
constant, permanent and perpetual love, only because it is his will and
pleasure so to do, there men can never utterly deprive themselves of this love
of God: this love is grounded not upon their merits, but upon his own free
love and goodness, and therefore, God will not utterly withdraw it from them
though they sin against him, so that they can never totally, nor finally fall
from grace. Thirdly, I reply, that the Saints themselves, who are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, can never separate themselves from the
love of God, and so fall from grace. First, because the Lord has married
himself to them, and them (...) himself, not for a time only, but for ever;
they are his spouse, he is their husband; Christ and they are become one flesh,
and one spirit for ever. Hosea: 2: 19: 20. Psa: 4: 3. Cant: 7: 10 Isaiah 43: 1.
cap: 54: 5. 1: Cor: 6. 17. Ephesians: 5: 25. to 33: therefore they cannot sever or
divorce themselves from God: those things which God himself has thus joined
together, no man can separate. Secondly, all those that are once truly
regenerated and made the sons of God,) they have a son-like nature, and
disposition put into them; the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts by
the holy Ghost, which is given to them; which love of God does with a natural
kind of instinct and holy violence, constrain them for to love and please
him, to stick fast and close to him continually, with full purpose of (...)
(...); yea this love of God does so knit and tie their hearts and souls to God
and Christ, it does so over rule and master them, that they cannot do the
things they would; they cannot totally no^ ^nally depart from him; nay they
cannot so much as will a departure from him: for proof of this read but,
Ezech: 36: 27. Cant: 5: 5. Math: 718. Acts 4: 20. John 6: 67, 68. Gal: 5: 16:
17. Rom: 5: 5. Ier: 33: 40. and 2: Cor: 5: 14, 15. which are all express in
this point; and therefore it cannot be, that God should ever totally or finally
withdraw his love from them, or they their love from him. Thirdly, Paul assures
us, Rom: 8: 25. to the end, that tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, can never seperta^ the Saints from
the love of God: nay he assures both himself and us, that neither death, nor
life (of which the fear of the one, and the love of the other, would separate
the Saints from the love of God, if any thing would do it, seeing that the one
is most terrible, the other most sweet and lovely) nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers (which would surely separate the Saints from the
love of God, if might, force, and policy could do it) nor things present, nor
things to come, nor highth, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to
separate the Saints of God, from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus their
Lord: if things present, if things to come, if Devils, or men, if no creature
whatsoever can separate them from the love of God, then its certain, that they
themselves can never do it: for they themselves are creatures, and therefore
if no creat^r whatsoever can separate them from Christ, neither can they
themselves, nor ye^ their flesh (which is a distinct creature from their inward
man which is themselves) be ever able for to do it. Lastly, if the Saints
themselves could fever themselves from God, then it must be merely out of the
freedom and liberty of their own wi^, (for Paul has certified us in the
forenamed place, that nothing else can do it.) But this can never be: first,
because if it be in the mere power of their wills to fall or stand, they
cannot will a fall from grace, because its dangerous and hurtful to them; it
will pull eternal misery upon them: therefore they can not will it if they
would.: the will can not desire any thing but that which is good in truth, or
at least in show, it can not desire any thing that is ill, as ill: now a
total, or a final fall from grace, can not be good, either in truth or in
show; it can not be considered but as ill and hurtful: therefore, regenerate
men out of the freedom of their own wills can not desire it or seek it; they
can not but desire to stand and persevere in grace, which is every way best for
them. Secondly, they cannot fall from grace out of the freedom and liberty of
their own wills, because their wills are subordinate (especially in this of
perseverance, which is principally for their own eternal good) unto the will
of God: the same spirit and mind is in them that is in God and Christ. 1: Cor:
6: 17. and Phil. 2: 5. Now it is the will of God and Christ, that the Saints
should always persevere and never fall from grace; and therefore it must
needs be their will too, because their wills are subordinate, and conformable
to the will of God. Thirdly, the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts,
which does so unite and knit their souls to God and Christ, that they can not
will a fall, or a departure from them; they cannot will any thing with a full
and perfect will, that is displeasing to them, and which might sever and divide
them from them: the very evil that they do, is the evil that they would not
do. Romans 7. 15. to the end, and Gal. 5. 16, 17. therefore out of the mere
liberty of their own wills, they cannot fall from God. Fourthly, they can not
will a total or a final departure from God, because they know him to be the
only true God, and they know not any else to whom they may resort for succor
and relief: this is evident by Peter's answer unto Christ, John 6. 67, 68.
When Christ demands of the twelve, will ye also go away? Lord (says Peter,)
to whom shall w^ go? thou have the words of eternal life: and we believe, and
are sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living God: the Saints of
God, know God to be the only true God, and they know not whether to go if
they should depart from him; and therefore they can never will a departure from
him. Lastly, God has put his fear into the hearts of all his Saints, he has
put his spirit into them to the end that they should ^ot depart from him. Ier.
32. 40. Ezech. 36. 27. and therefore out of the liberty of their own wills
they can not fall from grace, nor yet deprive themselves wholly o^ the
immutable constant and perpetual love of God. Lastly, out of the liberty of
their own wills they cannot depar^ away from God, because it is the absolnte
and positive will of God that they should not depart from him. Ier. 32. 40 Psa.
85. 8. John 6. 39. Romans 3 11. put this then to be the case; God does absolutely
will, that a regenerate man shall not fall from grace, and he has determined
it, that he shall not fall; well this regenerate man (which I only admit by
way of supposition) resolves that he will fall away from grace, notwithstanding
that God has absolutely willed and refolued the contrary; I pray which of
these shall have their wills, either God, or he? if man, then where is the
power, where is the omnipotency, nay where is the sovereignty and deity of
God? if man can cross and thwar^ the absolute and positive will of God, then
either God is not God, or else man can overrule him: either ofwhich is
atheistical and blasphemous to affirm or think. But if God in this case has
his will, and notman (which none but an atheist can gainsay) then it follows
that a regenerate man can not fall quit^ from grace out of the freedom and
power of his own will. Lastly, for to end this cauell; I answer that a
regenerate man, and a true member of Jesus Christ, can never finally nor
totally cease to love the Lord, and therefore by your own reason the Lord can
never finally, nor totally cease to love him. That a regenerate man can never
utterly cease to love the Lord, I prove it by these reasons. First, because a
regenerate man's love to God, is grounded upon Gods immutable and perpetual
love to him: he lo^es God, because that God did love him first. 1 John 4. 10.
19. and Psa. 116. 1. Gods love is the cause of his: now this love of God tohim
is immutable, constant and perpetual: therefore his love to God must be so to:
as you may see expre^y: Psa: 116. 2, 2. Math. 5. 46. Ioh. 15. 9. Ephesians. 3. 18,
19. 1. John 4. 10, 11, 16, 19. 20. as long a^ God is kind and loving to his
Saints, they can not but be loving and obedient unto him; else they should be
worse then publicans and sinners, yea then the beasts that perish. Secondly,
regenerate men, and the true members of Jesus Christ, can never cease to love
the Lord, because the holy Gh^st does dwell in their hearts and souls for
ever. John 14. 16, 17. now where the holy Ghost does always dwell, there the
lou^ of God must needs dwell too, because it is a fruit of the spirit, and it
can not be severed from the spirit. Romans 5. 5. Gal. 5. 22. Ephs. 3. 16, 17. 1
John 3. 16. therefore the true Saints of God can never cease to love the Lord
habitually, because the holy Ghost the spring and fountain of this love does
always dwell within them. Thirdly, this love of the Saints to God is a grace
which God bestows upon them out of his love, and which is preserved in him by
his love, and therefore if they should cease to love the Lord, the breach would
be on his side, not on theirs; for they can never cease to love him, but where
God does first give over to support their love to him: God must first withdraw
this grace from them, or else they could not give over for to love him: so that
if there could be any total or final breach between God and his Saints, the
defect should be in God, who has undertaken to preserve them in his love, and
not in the Saints; which defect on Gods part can never be admitted. If you
object, that they give God the cause of breach, and so the defect is not in God
but in themselves. I answer, that God has undertaken to preserve them
blameless and without offense, he has undertaken to preserve them from
sin. 1 These. 5. 23, 24. Ezech. 36. 27. ler. 32. 40. 2 Timothy 4. 18. Isay 46. 3,
4. c^p. 27. 3. therefore, though the sin be theirs when as they do commit
it, yet if it make a total breach betwixt God and them, the breach will be
first in God, in not preserving of them from this sin according to his
promise, and not in them in committing of it. Lastly, true love is of a
permanent and constant nature, if it be set upon a constant, permanent and
immutable object. Let a man love any thing truly for it self, as long as the
thing continues, and the cause for which he loves it, his love can never
cease. Let a man love any man truly for his virtues or his graces, as long as
he continues virtuous and gracious, he can not cease to louehim: now God as he
is all and only amiable, so he is always amiable: there is never any change
at all in him; wherefore those that do once truly love him for himself,
cannot but love him still; and so the answer to this my argument, is but false
and idle. I have been the larger in refuting of this answer, because I shall
have occasion often times for to refer you to it hereafter. I now proceed to
other arguments.

The fifth thing in God which does yield us an argument for to prove our
conclusion, is the gracious mercy and goodness of God: in which there are
four things to be considered. First, the freeness of it: it is voluntary and
of free grace, it is not wrested or merited by us from God: Exodus 33. 19.
Hosea. 14. 5. John 3. 8. Romans 9. 15. 19. and Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Secondly, it is
permanent and constant, it indures for ever, and admits not of any total
change or interruption. Psa. 103. 17. Psa. 100. 5. Psa. 118. 4. Psa. 136. Psa.
138. 8. Isay 51. 8. and cap. 54. 8. 10. Thirdly, it is infinite, there is an
infinite store of it, which is never drawn dry. Exodus 34. 6, 7. Psa. 103. 8.
Psalm. 130. 7. Micah. 7. 18. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Ephesians. 2. 4. cap. 3. 16. and 1 Timothy 1.
14. Fourthly, God is ready and willing to impart it to his children upon all
occasions, it is his chiefest delight and joy for to dispense the riches and
treasures of his mercy to his Saints. Ezech. 18. 23. cap. 33. 11. Micah. 7. 18.
Math. 11. 28. cap. 23. 37. 2 Cor. 5. 20. 1 Timothy 2. 4. and 2 Pet. 3. 9. from
this mercy of God thus considered, I frame this fifth argument. Those who are
partakers of the free, permanent, constant, sure, everlasting, in finite and
abundant metcies of God, and have these mercies of God readily, freely, and
bountifully imparted unto them upon all occasions, its impossible for them,
either finally or totally to fall from grace: but all those who are once truly
regenerated and in grafted into Christ, are partakers ofthese mercies of God,
and they have these mercies of God, readily, freely, and bountifully imparted
to them, upon all occasions and times of need: therefore, its impossible for
them, either finally, or totally to ^all from grace. The Mayor proposition
cannot be denied: the Minor only rests to be proved: in these particulars:
first that the mercyes (I mean the saving and spiritual mercyes of God) are
permanent, constant and perpetual. Secondly, that all those who are truly
regenerated, and are the true members of Jesus Christ are partakers of these
mercies: For the first of these, it is evident by Isay 55. 3. where Gods
spiritual mercies to his children are styled, the sure mercies of David: the
seed of grace which is sown in the hearts of all regenerate men, is an
immortal seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. a seed that remains, and an unction that
abides in them, 1 John 2. 20. 27. and cap. 3. 9. the Saints of God they have
Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost, who shall abide and dwell in their hearts and
souls for ever. John 14. 16, 17. Ephesians. 3. 17. 1 John 3. 24. cap. 4. 4. and Gal.
2. 20. they have a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. a faith which
cannot fail. Luke 22. 32. a joy which no man can spoil them of. Ioh. 16. 22.
and charity which shall never cease. 1 Cor. 13. 8. they have mercies which
endure for ever, Psalm. 103. 17. Gods mercies to them are permanent, constant,
and perpetual, it cannot be denied. Secondly, that all those that are once
truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, are
partakers of these mercies, it is most evident: For all those that are borne of
God, all those that are within the c^uenant of grace, all those that are the
true sheep and members of Jesus Christ, they are partakers of these mercies;
which appears expressly by Isai. 55 1. 3. cap. 4. 5 6. cap. 27. 3. Romans 4. 16.
Mark 16. 16. and Act. 2. 38, 39. almost every page in Scripture has some
thing in it that will prove it; now all those who are truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, they are borne of God, they are the members and sheep
of Christ, and within the covenant of grace; and therefore it is certain that
they have such permanent, constant, and everlasting mercies as those, and so
can never finally, nor totally fall from grace. Can any one so much as think
that God who has Exodus 34. 6, 7.
Mich. 7 18.
proclaimed himself to be a God of grace and mercy, a God delighting Pal. 103.
8.
in mercy, (...) to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, (...) mercy for
thousands, f^rgiuing iniquity, transgressions and sins; that God who does
not desire the death of any sinner, but rather that he should repent and be
saved; that he can suffer any of his dear, adopted, and best beloved sons in
Christ, to fall and perish, for want of supportation and defense? that he who
has redeemed them by the rich and precious Romans 5. 10.
blood of Jesus Christ his only Senne, when as they were his mortal and his
utter enemies, will not preseru^ and keep them from falling from him now they
are his dearest dear, as dear unto them as the very apple of his eye. Deuteronomy.
32. 10. and Zech. 2. 8? certainly that gracious God of infinite and boundless
mercy, who will not suffer so much as one ^aire of the heads of any of his
Saints to perish. Luke 21. 16. will not, nor cannot, out of the riches of his
great and glorious mercy, suffer the least Mal. 3. 17.
and meanest of his true and faithful Saints (who are his only and his
chiefest jewels) for to perish, nor yet finally, nor totally to fall from him,
let all the rabble of Papists, Arminians, and the rest of our Antagonists say
what they can, or will, to the contrary.

The sixth thing in God, which may assure us of the final and total
perseverance of the Saints, is the infinite justice of God, from whence I frame
this sixth argument. Those who are in that happy estate of grace, which God in
his justice will not, nor can not, suffer them utterly to loose or fall from,
its altogether impossible for them, either finally, or totally to fall from
grace. But all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by
a true and lively faith, are in such an happy estate of grace, as God in his
justice will not, nor cannot suffer them utterly to loose and fall from:
therefore they can neither finally, nor totally fall from grace. The Mayor can
not be denied, beeause then God should be un just; the Minor only needs a
proof. Now that all those who are truly regenerated, and which are once the
true members of Jesus Christ, are in that happy estate of grace, which God in
his justice will not, nor can not suffer them to fall from, it is most evident
for Jesus Christ has purc^sed eternal redemption and salvation for the (...)
with his precious blood he has satisfied his Fathers wrath for them unto the
fill, being made a curse for them, that they might be made sons of God, the
heirs of heaven, and the righteousness of God through him. 2: Cor: 5: 19. 21.
Rom: 7: 6. cap: 8: 2: Col: 2: 14. Gal: 4: 5. cap: 2: 20. Heb: 9: 12. cap: 10:
12: 14. 1: Pet: 1: 18: 19. Christ has paid a full satisfactory price unto hi^
Father, for all such as are his members, he has purchased them of his Father,
he has purchased grace, heaven, happiness, salvation, everlasting life, and
all things that may further and preserve them in their state of grace, and
glory; and God his Father has accepted his price at his hands, as a
sufficient, full, and perfect satisfaction; yea, he has promised to preserve
them in the ^tate of grace, to keep them from falling and perishing, to give
them that inheritance which Christ has purchased for them, and to make good
unto the utmost, every thing that Christ has merited, and procured of him for
their eternal good: so that God is now in his justice bound for to preserve
them in the state of grace continually, and to make good unto them, what ever
his Son Christ Jesus has purchased of him for them: wherefore this is
certain, and it cannot be denied, that all those who are once truly
regenerated and made the members of Jesus Christ through faith, can neither
finally, nor totally fall from grace, because God in his justice will not, nor
can not suffer them to fall from their estate of grace. What can be well
replied to this argument, I cannot as yet s^rmise: If you say that though
Christ has purchased grace, heaven, and eternal life for all his Objection.
true and faithful members, yet he has not purchased perseverance and the
means for to obtain them. I answer; Answer.
first, that this is false, and quite repugnant to the Scriptures: which assure
us, that God in Christ has given them, not only life and godliness, but all
things that appertain unto them too. 2: Pet: 1: 3. that as he has (...) them
Jesus Christ, so (...) has together with him freely given them all things
else. Rom: 8: 32. God has given them his word to instruct them, his Sacraments
to feed and (...) (...), (...) (...) Spirit to (...), comfort, and direct
them, to preserve them from falling: he himself is always present with them,
holding them up with his hand, carrying them in his arm^s, and helping them on
in the way to heaven; he that gives them grace, heaven and eter nall life does
give them perseverance too, he puts his fear into their bearts that they shall
not depart from him. Ier: 32: 40. wherefore this is but a false surmise.
Secondly, if Christ should have only purchased grace, heaven, and ^ternall
life for them, and not given them perseverance with all, and the means for to
obtain the things so purchased, his death and purchase had bin in vain: for
alas, they of themselves are able to do nothing without his aid and
assistance, it is he that must work all in them, and for them. Isai: 26: 12.
Ieh. 3: 27. cap: 6: 44: 65. Rom: 2: 29. Gal: 2: 20. Phil: 2: 13. 1: Cor: 3: 7.
cap. 4. 7. cap: 15: 10. and 2: Cor: 3: 5. if Christ had not purchased the
means for to obtain salvation and eternal life, as well as the things
themselves, if he had not purchased the perpetuity and perseverance of his
Saints in grace, as well as grace it self, his death had bin in vain, and to
no purpose. Whe^efore this sur^ise is idle, and so the argument remains
unanswerable.

The seventh argument, to prove my present assertion, is taken from the honor
of God. Those who are in such an them, as we may see by those express (...)
and examples of holy Scripture. Exodus 22. 12. 14. Numb. 14. 13. ver. 18. Ezech:
20: 8, 9, 14, 22. 44. Leuit. 10. 3. Psa: 29. 1, 2. 1: Tim. 1. 17. Jude 25. Reu:
4. 11. and Reu. 5. 13. if therefore it stands upon Gods honor and glory to
preserve his Saints in that estate of grace which he has given them, it cannot
be that ever they should loose it, or fall from it, because God should then
loose his honor and his glory, which he will not do. Men will not loose
their honor and their glory, if they can preserve it, much less will God:
therefore the Mayor must be granted. Now for the Minor, that all such as are
once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, are in such an estate of
grace, as God in his honor can not but preserve them in it, and that it will
not stand together with his honor, that ever he should suffer them for to fall
quite from it, it is most evident and plain. For how can it ever stand with
the honor and glory of Gods infinite and boundless mercy, with the glory and
honor of his almighty power, with the praise and honor of his
incomprehensible wisdom, with the glory and honor of his eternal purpose
and decree, and of his infinite and never failing truth? how, can it stand with
the glory of his deity, and the honor of his eternal immutabilitie? how can
it stand with the honor of his great and glorious attributes, that any of
those who are once truly regenerated, and made the true members of Jesus Christ
should either finally, or totally fall from grace? Is it for the honor and
glory of his infinite and boundless love and mercy, that any of his Saints
wherein his soul delights, that any of those whom he has bought and purchased
with the precious blood of his only Son, should ever fall from grace and
perish? Is it for the glory and honor of his almighty power that any of those
whom he has undertaken for to preserve and keep unto salvation by his mighty
strength and power, that ever they should, either finally, or totally fall from
grace? Is it for the glory of his incomprehensible wisdom and almighty power,
that he should leave any work of his unfinished? that he should with that
foolish builder, Luke 14: 29, 30. begin to build, ^d to ^rect the frame of
grace in the hearts of any of his children, and yet be unable or unwilling for
to finish it? How would men (especially such as are professed atheists)
blaspheame the name of God, how would ^hey deride his wifdome and his power, if
this were so? Is it for the honor and glory of his word and truth, that those
whom he has bound himself by promise, oath, and covenant to preserve and
keep from falling from him, that they should ever fall from grace? Is it for
the glory and honor of his eternal immutabilitie and bounty, that he should
ever repent him of (...) gifts and graces? that he should take away those
graces from his Saints, which he had fully and freely imparted to them out of
the largess of his love and bounty? Is it for the honor and glory of his
wisdom, that he should ever suffer any of his Saints, either finally, or
totally, to fall from grace, when as it would bring a scandal on himself, and
upon the profession and professors of his name? Or is it for the glory of his
deity, that he should not protect those from a total or a final fall, who
are his friends, his children, and his meniall servants? Can it not stand
together with the honor and glory of an earthly potentate not to shelter and
protect his subjects, his friends, his children, and his meniall servants from
fall and ruin; and shall it yet stand with the honor and the glory of the God
of heaven not to do it? If God be not able for to do it, that were a
dishonor to his power: if he be able and yet not willing for to do it, that
is a great blemish and disparagment unto his love and mercy. If God should ever
suffer his faithful children after they are once regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, either finally, or totally to fall from grace, he must needs
loose the very glory and honor of his diety, and of all his great and glorious
attributes, which he will never do. Gods greatest glory, and his chiefest
honor is, in the perseverance of his Saints, it is his chiefes^g lory, and his
souls delight, to see his children continue and stand fast in grace, and to
hold out unto the end: wherefore, seeing that it is Gods chiefest honor, (...)
(...) (...) (...) that his (...) should persevere and grow continually (...);
seeing that it cannot stand together with his honor and his glory, to suffer
them to fall away from that estate of grace which he has given them, and
^eeing that God for his own glory and honor (...) (...) (...) still (...)
(...) in their state of grace: let others babble whiles they will, yet this I
can assure you, that they can neither finally, nor totally, fall from grace.
What can be now replied to (...) this argument, it transcends my understanding
(...) surmise. Let others then answer and reply unto it as they can, I for my
own part know not how to do it.

The eighth argument which makes mainely for the that his Saints should fall
from grace. Secondly, it would give Infidels, Atheists, and Heathen men
occasion to blaspheme his name, and to deride both himself, and all that
should profess his name: God for being, Christians for choosing such a God, as
either could not, or at least would not preserve them, from a total and a
final fall: wherefore God in his infinite wisdom can never suffer his
children thus to fall. Thirdly, this would make religion odious and distasteful
even unto Christians themselves: the fall of hypocrites which never had true
grace, makes those who are the true professors of the Gospel odious, it brings
a scandal and imputation on religion; what then would it do if the true
regenerate Saints of God themselves should fall away? If the very slips and
errors of the Saints make many men distaste religion, and speak evil of the
ways of God, what would their final, or their total falls from grace
produce? God therefore in his wisdom cannot suffer his Saints thus to fall,
because it would make religion odious and distasteful even to Christians
themselves. Fourthly, it would quite discourage the hearts of all Gods
children, it would quite deprive them of all true joy and comfort, it would
make them dull, dead, heavy, and exceeding negligent in Gods service: it would
make them not to value grace; it would cause them to call Gods word and truth
in question: it would make men mere Atheists; it would drive men to despair;
many such consequents would follow, which could not stand together with the
infinite wisdom of God (of which I shall write more fully hereafter) wherefore
seeing that it can never stand with the infinite wisdom of God, that any who
are truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, should either finally, or
totally fall from grace, it can not be that ever Objection.
they should thus fall. If you object, that these falls of the Saints from
grace, would make those that fall, and others that see their falls more
circumspect and watchful afterward, and therefore it standsvery well with Gods
wisdom that they should thus fall. I answer, first, that God has many Answer.
better means to make his children circumspect and watchful against sin,
then this of a final or atotall fall from grace: those temporal punishments,
those threatenings in the word of God, those inward conflicts of conscience and
griefs of heart, that loss of the comfortsand fence of grace, which the
Saints do feel after their sins committed, are sufficient moriues for to
make them circumspect: this motive of a final and a total fall would be but
superfluous, or to little purpose: and therefore, it stands not so well and
fully with the wisdom of God. Secondly, which is the maine answer; I say that
God in his infinite wisdom, will never use that for onesmall and less
necessary end, which will cross his wisdom in many great and weighty ends:
now if God should suffer his Saints either finally or totally to fall from
grace, to make them more vigilant and circumspect for the time to come (which
may be done more fitly and effectually by many other means) when as this would
cross his wisdom in many weighty things and ends, (as I have proved that it
does) it cannot stand with Gods wisdom, that he should use it for this only
and less necessary end. It is the part of fools and not of wisemen to
redress one small and little inconvenience with many great and dangerous
mischieses: wherefore, seeing that God at the most should remedy but one small
inconvenience, but bring in many mischiefs, by sufferring of his Saints to
fall quite away from him, it cannot stand with his infinite wisdom to suffer
them to fall away, and so this argument stands firm, and in my judgment cannot
be answered.

The ninth thing in God, which yields us an argument for the proof of this
assertion, is his readiness to hear the prayers of all such, as are o^ce truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ: from which this ninth argument may be
framed. Those who do always pray to God to give them perseverance, and to
keep them from a final and a total fall from grace, if God does always
hear their prayers, and grant them their requests in this behalf, it is
altogether impossible for the either (...), or (...) (...) all from grace. But
all those who are once truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ by a true
and lively faith, do always pray to God to give them perseverance, and to
keep them from a final and a total fall from grace: and God does always
hear their prayers and grant them their requests in this behalf: therefore it
is altogether impossible for them either finally, or totally to fall from
grace. The Mayor cannot be denied, for then this contradiction must necessarily
follow, that God should always give regenerate men perseverance, and yet they
should not persevere in grace: The Mayor then is only to be proved, which
consists of two particulars. First, that all such as are once truly regenerated
and ingrafted into Christ by faith, do always pray to God, to give them
perseverance, and to keep them from a final, and a total fall from grace.
Secondly, that God does always hear their prayers, and grant their requests
in this behalf. For the first of these, I appeal but to the consciences of
those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ. I doubt not but
they all with one consent can testify from their own experience, that it is
the chiefest desire, and the constant, daily, and perpetual prayer of their
hearts and souls to God, to give them perseverance, to keep them in the state
of grace, and to preserve them from apostacy; and therefore you need not for
to doubt of this. If you will have Scripture for to prove it, the third
petition in the Lords prayer, which you shall find. Math. 6. 10. does fully
prove it: where we pray thus: thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven:
that is, that God would enable us to do his will on earth, in the same manner
as the Saints and Angels do it in heaven. Now the Saints and Angels in
heaven, they do the will of God constantly without any interruption,
continually without end: wherefore seeing the Saints of God do always pray to
God, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, they do in it, both pray to
God to give them perseverance, and to keep them: to, that they may never
finally, nor totally fall from grace: so the (...) part of the Mayor pr^n (...)
(...) (...) and (...). All the doubt then rests in the second thing, whether
God does always hear and grant these prayers of theirs? If any deny it (which
is all that can be answered to this argument) I prove it, that God does hear,
and grant those prayers of theirs, in this behalf, by these reasons. First,
because it is the same prayer, which Christ himself does always make unto his
Father for them: as appears by John 14. 16. cap. 17. 11. 15. Luke 2^. 31. 32.
Romans 8. 34. and Hebr. 7 25. now if it be the same prayer that Christ himself
does always make unto his Father for them. God cannot choose but hear and
grant it to. Secondly, they always pray for this their perseverance in the
name of Christ, and therefore God cannot but hear and grant it. John 14: 13,
14. cap: 15. 16. 22. 1: John: 3: 22. and cap. 5 14: 15. Thirdly, It is a prayer
according to the will of God, therefore God cannot but hear and grant it: 1:
John 5. 23, 14. Fourthly, it is a prayer proceeding always from faith, and
from a sincere and upright heart; it is a prayer, that is for the most part
accompained, with feruency, and zeal of heart and spirit, and therefore God
cannot choose but grant it always. Wherefore, seeing that all such as are once
truly regenerated, and ingrafted truly into Christ, do always pray to God for
final and constant perseverance, in grace and holiness; and seeing that God
does always hear and grant those prayers of theirs; it follows of necessity
even in this respect) that those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, can never finally, nor totally fall from grace. How unanswerable
this argument is, let those that read it judge.

The tenth and last thing in God, which seals the truth Fourth^y, that all
those promises are exceeding true, and that God is faithful in performing
them. From these covenants and promises of God thus considered, I frame this
argument. Those who have a great multitude, of absolute, true, and faithful
covenants and promises, which shall be performed to the utmost, which do
either in express ^earmes, or at least by way of necessary consequence,
assure them, that they can never fall quite away from God, and grace: can never
totally, nor finally fall from grace. But all such as are truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, have a great multitude of
absolute, true, and faithful covenants and promises which shall be performed
to the utmost; which do either in express terms, or by way of necessary
consequence assure them, that they can never fall quite away from God, or
grace: therefore they can never finally, nor totally fall from grace. The Mayor
proposition cannot be denied: the Minor only is for to be proved. In the Minor
proposition I shall prove these four things. First, that all the true
regenerate Saints, and members of Jesus Christ, have a great multitude of
covenants, and promises made unto them by God himself, which do either in
express terms, or by way of necessary consequence, assure them, that they
shall never fall quite away from God, and grace. Secondly, that all those
promises are absolute, without any condition at all on our parts. Thirdly, that
God is able to perform them. Fourthly, that he out of his truth and
faithfulness, will perform them to the utmost. For the first of these, which
is the multitude of these promises; it appears most evidently by these many
sweet, comfor^able, and heavenly promises and covenants, which are every where
scattered throughout the Scriptures: which because they are many in number, and
different in words, (though one in substance,) I will for perspecuity and
methods sake, reduce them unto general heads, and recite them in their order.

The first promise which I meet with in the Scriptures, is that which is
express and full in point; that God will praeserue all his Saints and
children; that he will put his hand under them, and support them, so that they
shall never fall utterly from him: nor yet be moved, or utterly cast down:
from whence I frame this argument. Those whom God himself has promised to
preserve and keep from falling from him: those whom God has promised to
support, and hold up with his hand continually; and those whom he will never
suffer to be moved; it is impossible, that they should ever finally, or
totally fall from grace: But God himself has promised, to all such as are
once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, that he will preserve and
keep them from falling quite away from him, Psalm 37 23, 24. The steps of a
good man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way; though he fall,
he shall not be utterly cast down: for the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand,
and verse. 28. 31. The Lord for saketh not his Sain^s, they are preserved for
(...): the law of their God is in their hearts; none of their st^ps shall
slide, Psalm. 94. 18. when I said my foot slippeth, thy mercy, O Lord, held me
up, Psalm. 145. 14. 26. The Lord preserves all them that love him: be
vpholdeth all them that fall; and raises up all those that be bowed down:
Prou. 3. 26. the Lord will be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from
being taken, Esai. 26 3. thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee, Isai. 40. 11. and cap. 46. 3. 10. Hearken unto me, O house of
Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are borne by me from
the belly, which are carried from the womb: and to that old age I am he, and
even to hoar^: hairs will I ^rry you: I have ma^e, and I will bear, even I
will carry, and will deliver you: I will carry you in my bosom: How then is it
possible that ever they should fall away from God? So Phil. 4. 7. the peace of
God which passes all understanding, shall keep our hearts and (...) (...)
Jesus Christ, and 2. These. 3. 3. the Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you,
and keep you from evil. God is able to keep his Saints from falling, Ind.
24. and he has promised for to do it: Y^a, he has promised to carry them in
his arms, to bear them up, and support them with his hands that so they might
not fall, Psalm. 37. 24. Psa. 16 8. Isai. 46 3, 4. Psa. 145. 14. Ca^t. 8. 3.
Ioh. 10, 28, 29. and 1 Pet. 1. 5. He has promised that they shall not be
moved from their state of grace, ( Ps. 15. 5. Psa. 16. 8. Ps. 37. 27. Ps. 55.
22. Ps. 89. 37. Psa. 102. 28. Isai. 33. 20. and Prou. 10. 30.) they that trust
in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast
for eu^r. Psalm. 125. 1. God has promised to plant all his Saints upon their
land, and that they shall no more be pulled up from off their land which he
has given them; that he will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of
their own, and move no more. 2 Samuel 7. 10. Amos 9. 15. he has promised to
keep his Saints from falling: to carry them in his arms; to support them with
his hands, to plant and settle them in the state of grace so firmly, that they
shall never be removed, or cast down again. Therefore it is altogether
impossible, that ever they should finally or totally fall from grace. If you
object that these promises Object.
of God are meant only of the outward and temporary, and not of the inward and
spiritual estate of the Saints. I answer, Answ.
that it cannot be: first, because the scope and sense of the Scripture in the
fore^cited places, prove the contrary. Secondly, because God does not always
preserve his Saints from outward losses, crosses, and a^ictions. None more
subject to the loss of temporary and outward estates, than the saints of God:
God oft-times does suffer his Saints to be stripped of them: Wherefore these
promises must only be referred to their inward estate of grace, of which they
are never quite deprived, and in which the Lord does still preserve them.
Secondly, admit that these promises, or at least some of them, do extend to
the temporary and outward estate of the S^ints, yet most of them extend ouly,
and all of them refer principally, to their inward and spiritual estate of
grace. Lastly, admit that those promises had relation and referrence, only to
the outward estate of the Saints, and not to their inward estate of grace,
(which cannot be granted) yet this would necessarily follow; that if God has
so great a care to preserve their temporary estates, and earthly treasures, and
possessions, that he will have much more care, for to preserve their
spiritual, inward, and eternal state: if God will be so good and gracious to
their bodies, he will doubtless be (...), bountiful, kind, and grati^us to
their souls: Wherefore these promises, and the argument deduced from them are
unanswerable.

The second promise which I meet with in the Scripture, 2 Promise.
is that of I^r. 32. 38, 39, 40. where God makes this covenant with all the
Israel of God. They shall be my people, and I will be their God: and I will
give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the
wealth of them, and of their Children after them: and I will make an
everlasting covenant with them, that I will never turn away my face from them,
from doing them good: but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. Mark now in this covenant of God, these two things, which
may fully assure us, that the true regenerate Saints of God, shall never fall
quite away from grace: the first is the nature and quality; the second the
matter and substance of this covenant. In the nature and quality of this
covenant, observe these two things worth the observation. First, that it is no
temporary and mutable, but a perpetual and everlasting covenant, which admits
of no change, no end or interruption: secondly, that it is not (as some would
gloss it) a mutual and reciprocal covenant, where in God covenants for
himself to us, and we covenant again for our selves to him (for then we
might chance to break with God, and so God might by this means break with
us.) But it is an entire covenant, made by God himself, both for himself and
us, wherein he covenants for us, as well as for himself, to us, and to
himself: this covenant therefore being only the covenant of God, for us, and
for himself: and being likewise an everlasting covenant, cannot be broken.
Secondly, in the matter and substance of this covenant, or in the covenant it
self, there are two parts to be considered: First, the covenant that God makes
for himself to us: which consists of these four branches: first, that he will
be our God: secondly, that he will give us one heart and one way: thirdly,
that he will not turn away his face from us from doing of us good: fourthly,
that he will put his fe^re into our h^rts. Secondly, here is the covenant which
God does make for us unto himself, which does branch it self into three
parts: first, that we shall be his people: secondly, that we shall fear him
for ever: thirdly, that we shall not depart from him. All which being put
together, do yield us this unanswerable argument. All those with whom God has
made an everlasting co^enant for himself, that he will be their God: that he
will give them one heart and one way: that he will not turn away his face from
them from doing them good: that he will put his fear into their heart: to the
end that they may fear him for ever, and not depart from him: and for whom he
has also couenanted to himself, that they shall be his people; that they
shall fear him for ever, and not depart from him; it cannot be, that they
should ever finally or totally fall from grace. But withal, those who are once
truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ; God has made such a covenant as
this; both for himself to them, and to them for himself, (as appears by the
premises.) Therefore it cannot be that they should ever finally or totally fall
from grace. Nothing is there that can be replied to the argument, as it is thus
propounded. All the answer that is given, is to Answ.
the text it self: which in substance is but this. That it is true, that God
does choose men for to be his people, that he does give them one ^eart, and one
way to fear him (by means of it) for ever; that he does put his fear into
their hearts, to the end that they shall not depart from him: but yet God does
not give them the grace to fear him always, and not to depart from him; that
is left wholly to themselves: God gives them the means to fear him always,
he gives them ability not to depart from him; but yet he gives them not the
event that is wholly left to them: so that though God does never fail them in
the means, yet they Reply.
themselves do oft-times fail in the issue and event. To which I shall reply:
First, that this answer is salse, and quite repugnant to the text: for in this
covenant, God does first avow and promise to them, that they shall be his
people: secondly, that he will give them one heart, and one way: thirdly, that
he will never turn away his face from them, from doing of the good. Fourthly,
that he will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
him; and that they may fear him for ever: so that the issue and event proceeds
merely from God, and not from man: man himself is not the cause wherefore he
does not depart from God, but God himself: it is the fear of God and the new
heart which God does put into him, that keeps man from apostasy; and not man
himself: the Prophet makes the fear of God, not man himsefe, the cause of
perseverance. Now that God himself, and the fear of God, are the causes of
man's perseverance: it is evident by Ezech. 36. 27. where God makes the same
covenant, in effect, with his children, as he does here. I (says God) will
give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them: It is
God himself, and not man, that does cause the issue and event: so in the 1
John 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him: neither can he ^inne, because he is borne of God: it is the
new birth and the seed of grace, not men's freewill, that does keep them from
committing sin, and cause them for to persevere in grace: they do not bear
the root, but the root them. Romans 11. 18. they do not perserue their graces,
but their graces do preserve them from falling from the Lord, It is the fear
of the Lord that keeps men close to God; that causes them to avoid sin and to
depart from evil. Psalm. 4. 4 Prou 3 7. cap. 8 13. cap. 14. 2, 16, 26, 27. cap.
15. 33. cap. 16. 6. cap 19 23. cap. 28 14. Eccle. 8. 12 13. cap. 12. 13. Psa.
19. 9. and diverse other places are express in it, that it is thefeare of God
which does preserve us from sin, and keep us from departing from the Lord, and
not we our selves: therefore, this their gloss, that the event and issue of
our perseverance, depends on the ^eedeme of our own wills, and not upon the
Lord, and those graces which he gives unto us; is but false, and quite
repugnant to the Scriptures: it is God only that does work all our works for
us; it is he, and not our selves, that does preserve us from falling, and work
this grace of perseverance in us. I^ay 26. 12. and Phil: 4. 13. Secondly, I
reply: that God does give us one heart and one spirit, that he does put this
fear into our hearts to that only end and purpose that we should not depart
from him, but that we should fear him for ever; if therefore we should cease
tofeare the Lord, and depart away from him, then he should loose his end: which
cannot be admitted. A wise man will not loose his end, when as he is able to
effect it: much less will God: so then this place and covenant is yet
unanswered: nay I may be bold to say, that it cannot be answered.

The third sort of promises which I meet with the Scriptures, (...) Pr^mise.
that make for my conclusion, they are these: that the righteous shall hold on
their way, and proceed from grace to grace, and from strength to strength
without fainting: that their graces shall never fail, nor yet decay, but
always gr^w and increase. From which I frame this third argument. Those that
shall hold on their way, and proceed from grace to grace, and from stength to
strength, without fainting: those whose graces shall never fail, but still
grow greater and stronger; it is impossible for them, either finally, or
totally to fall from grace. But God has promised, that all such who are once
truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, shall
hold on their way and proceed from grace to grace, and from strength to
strength, without fainting: so is the express text. Job. 17. 9. the righteous
shall hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger: Isay 40. 29, 30, 31. he gives power to the faint, and to them that
have no might he increases strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary,
and the young men shall utterly fall: but they that wait on the Lord shall
renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as Eagles: they shall
run, and not be weary: they shall walk, and not faint: the Lord will
strengthen and support them: he will help them and uphold them with the right
hand of his righteousness, and cause them to proceed from strength to
strength, till they all appear before him in Zion. Psalm. 29. 11. Psalm. 31. 24.
Psalm. 84. 7. Psalm. 119. 33. Isay 41. 10. cap. 46. Ezech. 34. 16. Hosea 14. 9.
and 2 Cor. 4. 16. Yea God has promised that their graces shall not fail. Luke
22. 31. 32. that they shall not wax old, nor be corrupted. Math. 6. 20. Luke
12. 33. God has promised, that their sun shall no more (...) downe^ neither
shall their moon withdraw it self. Isai 60. 20. those that do but once drink
of the waters of life and grace, shall never thirst: but those waters shall be
in them a well of water, springing up into everlasting life. John 4. 14. their
graces shall be still on the growing hand: they shall wax stronger and
greater then they were. Job. 17. 9. Prou. 4. 14. Isai. 40. 29, 31. cap. 44. 4.
Psa. 92. 13 14, 15. Col. 1. 10, 11. 2 These. 1. 3. 2 John 2. 2 Pet. 3. 18. and
Reu. 2. 19. Therefore it is impossible for them, either finally or totally to
fall from grace. What can be here replied, I cannot yet conjecture.

The fourth sort of promises that make for my present 4 Promise.
purpose; are these. That God will stablish and confirm his Saints unto the
end: that he will keep them from evil, and preserve them blameless even unto
the coming of Christ: from which this fourth argument will arise. Those whom
God himself has promised for to establish and confirm unto the end: those
whom he has promised to keep from evil, and to preserve blameless even to
the coming of Jesus Christ: it can not be that they should ever fall finally
or totally from grace. But God has promised to all such as are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, that he will establish and confirm
them unto the end: ( Psa: 89: 35: 37. 1: Cor: 1: 8. Rom: 16. 25. Ephesians: 3: 18:
Col: 1: 11. cap: 2: 5: 6: 7. 1: These: 3: 13. 2: These: 2: 17. cap: 3: 3. Ier:
32: 41. and Amos 9: 15. which are express in point:) that he will keep them
from evil, and preserve their souls and bodies holy and blameless even to
the coming of Jesus Christ. 2: These: 3: 3: the Lord is faithful, who shall
stablish you, and keep you from evil: 2: Tim: 4: 18: the Lord shall deliver
me from every evil work, and preserne me to his heavenly kingdom. 1: Cor: 1:
8. who shall confirm you to the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and (...): These: 5: 23: 24. the very God of peace
sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole spirit, and soul, and body,
may be kept blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: faithful is
he that calls you, who also will do it: God will establish and confirm
unto the end, all such as are once truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Jesus
Christ, (...) will (...) them from (...), and keep them blameless and h^ly
unto the (...) of our Lord Jesus Christ: (as these forecited Scriptures fully
prove) therefore it cannot be that they should ever fall finally or totally from
grace.

The fifth sort of promises making for me, are: that the Lord will guide and
keep the feet^ of his Saints, that they shall 5 Promise.
not utterly stray and wander from him: that he will never leave them nor
forsake them: that he will be their rock and strength, their fortress and
their buckler: that he will be always present with them, to guard and protect
them from all evil, and to preserve them from falling: from which holy
promises, this fifth argument does arise. They whose feet the Lord will guide
and keep continually, that they shall not utterly ^ray and wander from him:
those whom he has promised never to forsake and leave: those to whom he will
be a rock, a strength, afortresse, and a buckler: and those with whom he will
be alway^s present, to protect and guard them from all evil, and to preserve
them from falling: can never finally, nor totally, fall from grace. But God
has promised, that he will guide and keep, the feet of all his Saints, that
they shall not (...) stray and wander fro him: 1: Sam: 2: 9 Psa. 17: 5. Psa:
23: 3, 4, 7. Psa: 25: 9, 12. Psa: 37: 23: 31. Psa: 48: 14. Psa: 73: 24. Psa:
121: 3. Prou. 2: 11: cap. 16. 9. cap. 20: 24. and Isay 26. 7. he has promised
never to: leave them nor forsake them. Leuit: 26: 43. Deuteronomy: 31: 6. Ioshu: 1: 5.
1: Sam: 12: 22. Psa: 37: 28. Psalm: 138: 8. Isay 41: 10. cap: 42: 16. and Heb:
13: 6: 17: he will be a rock, a strength, a fortress, and a bulwark to them,
to keep from all evil. Gen: 15: 1. Psa: 29: 11. Psa: 37: 39, 40. Isay 8: 14.
cap: 26: 1. cap: 41: 10. Prou: 18: 20. Z^c: 10: 12. and Joel 3: 16: 20. he will
be always present with them to protect and guard them from all evil, and to
preserve them from falling: Psalm: 16: 8. Psa: 5: 12. Psa: 90. 1. 2. Psa. 91. 4.
Psa 121. 3. to the end. Psa. 125. 1, 2. Exodus 15, (...). cap. 33. 14. Deuteronomy. 32.
10. 11. Esaias 4. 5. cap. 25. 4. cap. 26 1. (...). ca. 27. 3: Math. 28. 20. Ioli^
10. 12. 28. 29. (all which places formerly cited, are express in point, and to
many to recite at large:) therefore, they can never finally, nor totally fall
from grace. If now you except, and say, that though God does not forsake them,
yet they may forsake God, and so Object.
come to rui^. I answer, that God has promised for to guide and keep their
feet, that though they slip out of Answ.
the way some time, yet they shall never stray quite away from him: and
therefore, this ca^ell is but idle.

The sixth fort of promises which make for my present purpose are these: that
Christ Jesus himself, and the holy 6 Promise.
Ghost shall dwell and abide for ever in the hearts of all those that are once
truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, and that they also shall continue
and abide in Christ: from which this sixth argument may be framed. Those in
whose hearts and s^ules the holy Ghost, and Jesus Christ will abide for ever,
and those who shall continue and abide in Christ, it is impossible for them to
fall finally, or totally from grace; but God has promised that Jesus Christ
and the holy Ghost shall dwell and abide for (...) in the hearts and souls of
all such as are once truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ: and that
they also shall continn^ and abide in Christ, as appears by these express
testimonies of Scripture, too tedious to recite at large: John 14. 16. 17. 23:
27. Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians: 3. 17. 2 Cor: 12. 9. cap: 13. 5. 1 Cor. 6: 19. 2 Timothy: 1.
14. 1 John: 2: 27. cap. 3. 24. and cap: 4: 4. therefore it is impossible for
them to fall finally or totally from grace. I will speak more largely of this
hereafter, and therefore I will pass it over now.

The seventh sort of promises which make for me, are these: 7 Promise.
that God will love his Saints unto the end, that his love and m^rcy shall rest
upon them for ever: that he will finish the work of grace which he has begun
within them: and that no temptation what soever shall be ablevtterly to
vanquish or to overcome them: from which promises I shall collect this seventh
argument. Those whom God himself has promised for to love unto the end, those
upon whom his love and mercy shall abide and rest for ever: those in whom God
will finish that work of grace which he has begun within them: and those
whom no temptation whatsoever shall ever utterly vanquish and overcome: it
cannot (...), that they should ever finally or totally fall from grace. But God
has promised all such as are once truly reg^nerated and ingrafted into Christ,
that he will love them to the end. John 13. 1. that with everlasting kindness
he will have mercy upon them. Isai. 54. 8. that he will keep his mercy and
covenant with them for evermore. Psa. 89. 28. that his mercy shall rest and be
upon them from everlasting to everlasting. Psa. 103. 17. that he will love
them with an everlasting love. Isai: 54: 8. and John 17. 23. 26. he has
promised that he will perfect that work of grace which he has begun within
them. Psalm. 138: 8. the Lord will perfect that which concerns me: Phil. 1. 6.
he that has begun a good work in you will perfect it until the day of Jesus
Christ. he that has bin the beginner, will likewise be the finisher of our
faith, he will not leave his work imperfect. Hebr. 12: 2. Reu: 1: 8. and
Deuteronomy: 32. 4. he has promised that no temptation whatsouer shall be able
utterly to vanquish and subdue them, though it may foil them now and then. 1
Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted, above that
you are able: but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye
may be able to bear it. Satan has desired to sift the Saints as wheat, but
all in vain: for their faith shall never fail: Luke 22. 31, 32. the gates of
hell may fight against the Saints, but yet they shall not prevail against
them: Math. 16. 18. the winds, the storms, and the floods may beat violently
against them, but yet they shall not cause them for to fall, because they are
founded on a rock Math. 7. 24, 25. Satan may assault them, and sometimes may
chance to foil them, but yet he shall not vanquish and conquer them, for God
has promised that he will bruise Satan under his feet. Romans 16. 20. though
the Saints arr tempted and tried, yet they shall be able to endure their
temptations and be made the purer, and the brighter by them. Iam. 1. 12. 1 Pet:
2. 7. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. 2 Pet. 2. 9.
he will arm them with the armor of Christ, and therefore they shall be able to
stand in the evil day, and to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: Ephesians:
6: 11: to 19. God will love them even unto the end; he will love them even with
an everlasting love; his love and mercy shall rest upon them for ever: he will
perfect that work of grace which he has begun within them; and he will suffer
no temptation whatsoever utterly to vanquish and subdue them. Therefore it
cannot be that they should ever finally or totally fall from grace.

The eight sort and kind of promises making for me, are: 8 Promise.
that the Lord will never forget his Saints; that he will never cast them off:
that he will quite subdue their iniquities and rebellions; that he will heal
their backslidings, and that he will remember their iniquities and sins no
more. From which this eighth argument does arise. Those whom God has promised,
never to forget, never to cast out, or off: those whose iniquities, and
rebellions he will quite subdue: those whose backslidings he will heal: and
those whose sins and iniquities he will no more remember: it is impossible
that they should either finally or totally fall from grace. But God has
promised all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, that
he will never forget, nor yet forsake them. Isai. 49: 15, 16. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of
her womb? yea, they may forget: yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have
graven thee upon the palms of my hands: thy ways are continually before me:
and as God will not forget so neither will he forsake his people: 1 Samuel 12:
22. the Lord will not forsake his people, for his great names sake, because it
has pleased the Lord to make them his people: his gifts and graces they are
without repentance: Romans 11. 29. whom he has once chosen he will not forsake:
Hebr. 13. 6. Yea, God will quite subdue all their iniquities and rebellions,
and heal all their backslidings, Ier. 3. 22. Hosea 14. 5. Mich. 7. 19. he will
remember their sins and their iniquities no more: Ier. 31. 34. Heb. 8. 12.
and 10. 17. he will turn again, he will have compassion on them: he will
subdue their iniquities, and cast all their sins into the depths of the sea:
Mich: 7. 19. He has chosen them, and will not cast them away. the Father has
given them to Christ, who when they come unto him, will in no wise cast them
out: John 6: 37: therefore, it is impossible for them, either finally, or
totally to fall from grace. If you object, that though God will never forget,
Object.
never forsake them, or cast them out, yet they forget, forsake and cast off
God, and so fall from God. I answer; Answ.
First, that God will subdue their rebellions, and heal their backslidings:
therefore they can never utterly and totally revolt from him. Secondly, I
answer, that if God will never forsake them, never forget them, never cast
them out, as he has promised not to do it: then they can never forsake,
forget, or cast off God: for whiles he is with them and in them, he will not
suffer them to forsake, or cast him off: Christ is that good shepherd of our
souls, those that are his sheep, he will not only not cast them out of his
fold, but he will also keep them so, that none of them shall be lost. John 10.
28. and 17. 12. Wherefore this cavil and objection is but vain and idle.

The ninth kind of promises making for me are these: he 9 Promise.
that believes, he that repents shall be saved; he shall never perish, never
come into condemnation: he shall have ever lasting life, and shall receive a
sure reward. From which I raise this argument. They that shall assuredly be
saved, they that shall never perish, nor come into condemnation: they that
shall have everlasting life, and shall receive a sure reward, it cannot be that
they should ever fall quite away from grace. But God has promised that all
such as do repent and believe shall assuredly be saved: that they shall never
perish, nor come into condemnation: that they shall have everlasting life, and
receive a sure reward. Psa: 34. 22. Psalm. 37: 40. Isai. 45. 17 cap. 55. 3.
Mark 16. 16. Luke 12: 32. John. 3. 17, 18. cap 5: 24. cap. 10: 28. Rom: (...):
9, 10, 17, 21. cap 8: 1. cap. 10: 13. 1 Timothy: 4: 8. Heb. 11: 16. 1 John 3: 14.
and Prou: 11. 18: all express in point. Therefore, it cannot be, that they
should ever fall quite away from grace.

To omit all others: The tenth and last promise which 10 Promise.
makes for me, is that covenant which God has made with all his children:
Ezech: 36: 25, 26, 27, 28. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall
be clean: from all your filt^enesse, and from all your idols will I cleanse
you. A n^w heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you,
and I will take ^ay the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
he^rt of flesh: and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in
my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them: an^ ye shall be my
people, an^ I will be your God. From this gracious (...) this (...) ^rgument
may be framed. Those whom God will (...) (...) all their sin and filthin^sse:
those to whom ^e will give a new ^eart and (...) ne^ spirit: those whom he
will make to be his people and cause to walk in his (...), and to keep his
judgments and do^ them, it is impossible for them either finally or totally to
fall from grace. But God has couenanted with all such as are once truly
regenerated, with all such as are his children, that he will cleanse them from
all their sin and filthiness; that he will gi^e them a n^w heart, and a new
spirit: that he will make them his people, and (...) them to walk in his
statutes, and to keep his judgments and do them, (as appeartes by the
praemises:) therefore it is impossible for them, either finally or totally to
fall from grace.

Lo here what a multitude of sweet and heavenly promises there are throughout
the Scriptures, which may fully assure and resolve every true regenerate man,
and every one that is a true member of Jesus Christ, that he can, never finally
nor totally fall from grace. Not one of all these promises but may assure a
doubtful, scrupulous, and perplexed conscience, that he need not fear a
total, or a final fall from grace, if he be but once truly regenerated, and
ingrafted into Christ.

Et (...) non prosint si^guila, cuncta inuant. And if that any one of them by
it self, may thus resolve him, what will they do when as they ^re all
conjoined and put together?

But yet our stout Antagonists, that they may leave no stay or comfort to a
Christian ^oule, will frustrate all these gracious promises, and blow them
quite away at one breath: one idle and false evasion, forged out of the
superfluity of their idle and frothy brains, (without any ground in Scripture
for to warrant it) shall be sufficient to delude and frustrate all these
plain, comfortable, sweet, and heavenly promises of God, and to falsify them
as untruths. For say they, Object.
all these promises which you have mentioned, though they are absolute,
positive, and perpetual in respect of God, yet they are but contingent;
accidental, and altogether un certain in respect of us: they are all
conditional, and suspended upon our wills and upon our perseverance. Now there
is no absolute certainty in our perseverance, we are fickle and vnconstaut,
and may fall away from grace: and therefore these promises, they give us no
absolute assurance of our final Answer.
and total perseverance. This is in truth the only answer that our
adversaries give to all those Scriptures and reasons, that we produce against
them: this is the very sum and suhstance of all that they reply unto us. If
this answer then of theirs be but fully confuted, and manifested to be but
friuilous, false and idle; our adversaries must then sit mute and silent, and
yield the cause to us, or else be condemned for their silence. Wherefore that I
may give a full and satisfactory defeat to this sophistical, false, and
fained evasion, that it never lie as a rub in our way again, I shall now in
counter it with the second thing which I have observed in these promises: to
wit, that they are absolute and positive without any condition at all, either
on Gods part or our own.

I say that all these promises which I have mentioned are add unto it, for
which God will add to him that does it, the Object.
plagues that he has written in his book: Reu: 22. 18. If you object, that
there are many places of Scripture pronounced absolutely, which yet
notwithstanding are conditional: as that of Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty days and
Nineue shall be destroyed: and that o^ Is^ 38 1. Gods m^ssage to Hezechiah. Set
thine house in order for thou shall (...) and no^ live. and Prou. 22. 4. By
humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honor, and life.
therefore these promises forecited, though they are absolntely pronounced
without any annexed condition, yet there may be an implied condition in them.
To this I answer, First, that there is a great difference betwixt temporal
judgments and mercies, and spiritual covenants and promises For though God
does threaten a temporal judgment against any people, or person, or promise
any temporal blessing to them, though the words of the judgment denounced, or
the mercy promised, are absolute and positive without any express condition
annexed to them, yet commonly there is an implied condition included in them,
for diverse reasons, which cannot be applied to spiritual covenants and
promises. If temporal judgments be denounced in positive and absolute words,
yet there is an employed condition included in them (to wit, if they repent not)
for these reasons. First, because that God throughout the Scriptures has
promised mercy, and freedom from temporal judgments, to all such as shall
meet him by repentance; and therefore those particular denuntiations of
temporal judgments, though they are pronounced in absolute and positive words,
have commonly this implied condition annexed to them, unless they do repent,
because they shall not cross and contradict his general promises of mercy, if
they do repent. Secondly, most particular temporal judgments, that are
denounced against men in the Scriptures, have this condition expressly annexed
to them, unless they repent, as we may read at large: Deuteronomy. 5, 30, 31. 2 Chronicles. 7. 13. 14 Ier. 18. 7, 8. and Luke 13. 3, 5: and therefore, the other
absolute places must be expounded by these, and have this implied condition
annexed to them: unless they do repent. Thirdly, the only cause for which God
does threaten and inflict this temporal judgments upon men, is to bring them
to repentance; to save them, not for to destroy them; and therefore if they do
repent before the judgment is inflicted, the judgment though absolutely
denounced shall not be executed, because God has his end for which he did
intend for to inflict it. Lastly, all Gods judgments they are only inflicted
because of sin: if there were no sin in men, there should be then no
judgment^ of God inflicted on them: now repentance before Gods judgments are
executed, does utterly take away the guilt of sin, and so by consequent the
judgment which should follow sin, though it were absolutely denounced:
therefore all those judgments that are absolutely denounced against men without
any annexed condition, have commonly an employed condition included in them,
because they have relation and reference to our repentance. So again for
temporal blessings: though God does sometimes promise them absolutely unto his
children, yet there is always an implied condition in them, and that for many
reasons. First, because that these temporal blessings are not always best for
them. Secondly, because they are ought times greater crosses and curses then
blessings to them. Thirdly, because they are things of a fading, fickle, and
unconstant nature. Fourthly, because they are no special tokens of Gods love:
they are common to wicked men, as well as to the Saints. Fithly, because they
are not the proper portion and inheritance of the Saints: God has provided
far better and greater things for them. Lastly, because God in most places of
the Scripture does suspend these temporal blessings upon these two conditions.
First, if his children do obey him. Secondly, if these outward blessings are
best for them: to which conditional Scriptures, all other positive places must
be referred. But now it is far otherwise, with those spiritual covenants and
promises which God does make unto his children in positive and absolute words:
because all these promises they have reference unto Gods gracious goodness,
mercy and bounty, and not to man's desert or merit: and also, because it is
always best for the Saints that these covenants and promises should be
fulfilled. Now for these spiritual promises of grace which we find recorded
in the Scriptures, you must understand that there are two sorts of them. The
first general and common unto all men. The second proper and peculiar only to
the Saints, and such as are in the state of grace. For the first sort of
promises they are conditional, and have reference to something which is first
to be wrought in us by God, before that we can have any benefit or advantage
by them: but when once the condition on our parts is in truth performed by God,
who works it for us, then the promises and the things promised are our own
for ever, without any further condition. This we may see in these three
several promises of God. He that repents, he that believes, he that
receives Jesus Christ shall be saved, and shall not come into condemnation.
Mark 16: 16. John 1: 12. cap. 3: 17, 18. cap. 5: 24. Acts 2: 37, 38, 39. cap.
3: 19. and cap. 16. 30, 31. Here it is true, that these promises being
conditional, and requiring something on our parts before we shall enjoy them,
we by the assistance and help of God must first truly repent, believe, and
receive Jesus Christ before we shall be saved, and freed from condemnation: but
when we have once truly repented, believed, and received Jesus Christ, then we
are saved, and freed from condemnation for ever. Now in these three general
promises, I would have you to observe these two things which make much for my
present purpose. First, that these three promises are the original charters
and assurances, that give us interest, right, and title unto heaven and
eternal life: and that all these other promises which belong unto us after we
have truly believed, repented, and received Jesus Christ, give us no new
interest, right, and title to heaven and eternal life, but only serve for to
confirm and strengthen that interest, right, and title to which we had in
them before, by these three general promises, that so we may enjoy them with
greater comfort and assurance. I cannot better express it then by this
similitude. A man has lands demised to him, by a fine, or by a deed indented
and enrolled, or some such original conuaiance: these very original deeds,
without any other assurance, do give him, a full, perfect, and absolute right
and interest in those lands. Suppose now, that after this devise, the party
that sold those lands should make a general release or confirmation of those
lands, unto the party to whom they were devised: this release or confirmation,
gives him no new right or interest in these lands, but only serves to
strengthen and confirm the old, which was sure and safe enough before. So it
is hear: these three original promises when once we do truly believe,
repent and receive Christ Jesus, they are the original charters that give us a
full, sure, and perfect interest, right, and title to heaven and eternal life:
and all these other promises which God makes unto us, either for himself or
us, when once we are within the covenant and state of grace, serve only to
strengthen and confirm our ancient interest, right, and title unto heaven,
which was sure and safe before, they give us no new interest, right, and title
to it. So that if a man do but once truly believe, repent, and receive Christ
Jesus, this makes him sure of heaven and eternal life, though he had no other
promises to assure him but these. Secondly, observe, that salvation, heaven,
and eternal life in these three radical and original promises are suspended
only, and depend merely upon the performance of the conditions themselves,
and not upon the perpetual and continual performance of them. God does not
say, if ye believe and believe for ever, if ye repent and repent for ever, if
ye receive Jesus Christ and receive him for ever, ye shall be saved and have
everlasting life: no, there is no such matter in the promises: but if we truly
believe, if we do truly repent, and receive Christ Jesus in the sincerity of
our hearts, though it be but once, we shall be saved and have everlasting
life: because that he that does truly believe, truly repent, and receive
Christ Jesus but once, does believe, repent, and receive Christ Jesus for ever,
he is passed from death to life for ever, and shall not come into condemnation:
John 5: 24. Rom: 8: 1, 2. and Mark 16. 16. Suppose a man should promise
another an hundred pounds, upon condition that he should marry his daughter,
or publicly recant those injuries which he had done unto him: if there he does
marry his daughter but once, or recant those injuries in public but once,
though he do not reitterate them, he shail have the hundred pound, because
he has performed the condition. So when as God does promise us salvation,
heaven, and eternal life if we believe, r^pent, and receive Christ Jesus in
sincerity and in truth: if once we do but truly believe, repent, and receive
Christ Jesus, we shall certainly be saved, and have heaven, and everlasting
life, because the condition on which these are suspended is performed. I would
ask but this question, of any of our Antagonists, whether any man may not
safely make this argument with himself? Every one that does truly believe,
repent, and receive Christ Jesus shall be saved, and have everlasting life. But
I my self do truly believe, repent, and receive Christ Jesus: therefore I
shall be saved, and have everlasting life. If this be not a good argument,
then what benefit, comfort, or assurance can any Christian take from these, or
any other promises of the Gospel? what claim, interest, or title can he lay
to salvation, heaven, or eternal life? or to what end do these promises
serve? If it be a good argument (as I think none can deny it) then certainly
heaven, salvation, and eternal life, depend only upon the faith and
repentance of men, and their receiving of Jesus Christ, without any necessary
relation to any inclusiue condition, if they persevere withal: for he that
does but once truly believe, repent, and receive Christ Jesus, does believe,
repent, and receive Christ for ever. Certainly as Christ himself by dying unto
sin but once is become the author of eternal salvation to all truly
penitent and beleiuing sinners, and being raised from the dead dies no more,
death has no more dominion over him. Rom: 6: 9, 10. Hebr: 5: 9. cap. 7: 27.
and cap: 9: 25: 28. So he that is but once truly regenerated, and alive to God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord dies no more, death has no more dominion over
him, but he shall live for ever unto God, and shall not come into condemnation.
Rom: 6: 7: to 12: John 5: 24. Rom: 8: 2. 1 John 3: 9, 14. and Hebr: 10: 2. how
then can he ever finally or ^otally fall from grace? Let all the devils in
hell, or men in earth lay their heads together, they shall never with all
their wit and sophistry delude or overthrow this plain and pregnant truth.

Again, there are a second sort of promises which are proper and peculiar only
to those which are in truth regenerated, and within the covenant and state of
grace, of which sort the greater part of all the promises which I have formerly
cited are: which promises I have proved, give them no new interest, right, or
title unto heaven and eternal life, but only serve to ratify and confirm
that interest, right, and title, which they had to them before, upon their
first repentance and true conversion unto God: the first three promises are our
assurance for the end: these latter assure us of the way and means for to
attain the end: Now all these promises they are pronounced absolutely without
any condition at all annexed to them: they are positive and absolute, they are
all pronounced categorically and plainly, as you may perceive if you will but
cast back your eyes upon them: and therefore, you cannot annex any condition
of your own unto them, when as God himself has annexed none. Secondly, all
those promises which I have formerly cited, must needs be absolute and
positive, and shall be performed to the utmost, because they are made by God
himself, without any reference and relation unto any thing that is to be done
by us: God does only promise what he will do for us, he himself does
undertake all for us, he will act his own and our parts too, without exacting
any condition at all from us. When we are but once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, then he does covenant and promise: that he will
preser^e us blameless till his coming; that he will finish that work of
grace which he has begun within us: that he will carry us in his arms and
bosom and keep us from falling: that he will subdue our sins and corruptions
for us; that he will heal our backslidings and rebellions: that he will work^
all our works in us and for us: Isay 26: 12. God himself has absolutely
undertaken to do all that for us, which he requires and expects from us:
there is not any thing at all that God requires of us, but he has absolutely
promised to do it for us: true it is, that he will use us as instruments in
the work, but he himself will do the work. All the promises which I have
cited contain nothing else but what God himself will do for us out of his
favor, love, and bounty: he tieth us to no conditions in any of these
promises: he only declares what he will freely do for us, when once we are
his children, without exacting any thing from us at all. If he does require
any thing at our hands, it is only that which he himself has couenanted and
promised to do for us. Wherefore all those former promises and covenants,
seeing they are positive and absolute, containing nothing in them but what God
himself does absolutely promise to us and for us, without requiring any thing
at all from us, but what he himself does absolutely covenant to do for us:
these promises must needs be absolute in themselves without any inclusiue
condition at all. Thirdly, these promises which I have mentioned must needs be
absolute and positive without any inclusiue or implied condition at all,
because that most of them are incapable of any condition: and you cannot annex
any condition at all unto them, without a manifest contradiction, and
ouerturning of the promises. For example, to instance in some of them. The
righteous shall never be removed, and they that trust in the Lrod shall be as
mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever: which is the
first of these promises which I have cited. Here is an absolute promise which
is incapable of any inclusiue condition. Our Antagonists they indeed will
annex a condition to it. For say they it is true that the righteous and such as
Object.
trust in the Lord shall not be removed, but shall stand for ever, if they
continue righteous and trust still in God, but not else. For answer to which
cauell. I would first demand of them Answ.
whence they learned this evasion, and from whence they had it? if it be Gods,
then show me where, and in what Scripture I shall find it. If their own and
not Gods, why then should I my self ot any else believe it. Secondly, I would
but ask them, whether this promise of God? has reference only to the present
state of grace wherein the Saints of God do stand, or to their future
continuance only, or to both of them? If to that present estate of grace only
wherein they stand without any reference to their future stabilitie, then the
sense of the place is this. Every righteous man, and every one that trusts in
the Lord, is for the present so settled and established in the state of grace,
that he shall not, nor cannot be removed but shall stand fast for ever; and
then their supposition if he continue righteous and trust in God, is but a
mere Battalogie, or a mere contradiction: he shall not be removed but shall
stand fast for ever, if he be not removed, and if he stand ^ast for ever: or as
long as he is not removed, so long he stands fast. Or else he shall not, nor
cannot be removed, but shall stand fast for ever, and yet he may be removed
and stand fast for ever: a learned and scholasticall interpretation. If it has
reference to their future continuance only, or to their present estate and
their future continuance both: then the genuine and proper sense and meaning of
this promise is this. That all righteous men and such as trust in God, are for
the present in a sure state of grace, and shall stand so fast for ever in it,
that they shall not, nor cannot be removed from it: and this indeed is the
proper sense and meaning of this promise, which has reference both to the
present and future estate of the Saints. Well then, let this be the scope and
meaning of this promise, as it is: let us apply their gloss and exposition to
it, (if they continue righteous and trust still in God: or as long as they
continue righteous, and trust in God:) then the sense and meaning of the
promise is this. That all righteous men and such as trust in God, are for the
present in a sure state of grace, and shall stand so fast for ever in it, that
they shall not, nor cannot be ever removed from it, as long (say they) as they
continue, or if they continue righteous and trust still in God. Which clause
and addition of theirs, is first, contradictory and repugnant to the praemises:
for the praemises say, that their estate is sure, that they shall not, nor
cannot be removed from it, and that they shall stand fast for ever: this
addition and gloss, if they continue, or as long as they continue righteous,
supposes that they may be removed, that they may not stand fast for ever, and
that their estate is not sure: which is quite cross and contradictory to the
praemises, and therefore it cannot be admitted. Secondly, it is but a mere
(...) and nugation: the promise certifieth us, that the righteous shall never
be removed, that (...) cannot be re^, that he shall stand fast for ever; yea,
say they, if he continue righteous, or as long as he continues righteous, which
in effect and substance is no more but this: the righteous shall never be
removed, if he be not removed: and he shall stand fast for ever, if he stand
fast for ever. For the promise does preserve him in his righteousness, and in
his estate of grace: the promise does support him, and not he the promise: he
continues righteous, and trusts still in God, because that God has promised
that he shall do so: he shall stand fast for ever, and never be removed, not
because he does do so, but because God has promised that he shall do so: so
that their clause and supposition, if he continue, or as long as he continues
righteous trusting in God, is but a mere tautologie: for if a man continue
righteous, it is certain that he shall never be removed, or fall from grace,
though this promise of God had never been. Thirdly, I would demand this
question of them, what profit, fruit, or benefit any Christian could reap
from this promise of God, if this their exposition and gloss upon it were
true? For if this promise (as they pretend) does not establish and settle
Christians in the state of grace, and give them full and comfortable assurance,
that when they are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by faith,
that they shall continue and persevere for ever, and never fall from grace;
what benefit or comfort have they from it? If you say, that it assures them,
that if they continue righteous and trust still in God, that then they shall
never be removed, but shall stand fast in grace for ever: then it leaves them
but where they were before: for if they should continue and persevere in grace
unto the end, its certain that they should never be removed, though God had
made no such promise at all unto them: and so this answer of theirs, does
quite frustrate and make void the promises of God. If they say, that this
promise declares Gods constancy to the righteous, if they are constant unto
him: I answer, that there is no such thing as this in it: for God does not
promise here what he will be unto his Saints, but he only promises what they
shall be: he does not promise, that he will not remove from them; but that they
shall never be removed, and stand fast for ever: this promise has only
reference to the stability of the Saints; it only declares what their estate
shall be, (...) not what God will be to them: and therefore this their
answer and exposition, does but delude and frustrate these promises of God.
Fourthly, I answer, that this clause and gloss of theirs does quite pervert
this promise of God: and all the other promises. For it takes away all from
God, and puts all on man: whereas this and all the other promises, take all
from man, and puts all on God, that so he may have the praise and glory of all:
The Scriptures they inform us, that a regenerate man's estate, is permanent,
sure, and perpetual, because that God has promised that it shall be so:
because that God has promised, that the righteous man shall never be removed,
but shall stand fast for ever: they by this evasion, if he continue righteous,
take all from God, and lay all on man; that so man may glory in himself, and
not in God. So that this evasion and shift of theirs, it peruerts the promises
of God: it robs God of the glory, and man of the fruit and comfort of them,
and so cannot be admitted. Fifthly, I answer. That this promise which I have
mentioned, is partly a promise, to assure the Saints of God of the perpetuity
of their estate, because that God will establish them for ever, and never
suffer them to be removed: and partly a declaration or description, of the
firmness, stability, and perpetuity of a regenerate man's estate: and if it
be a declaration, and a description of the stability and firmness of a
regenerate man's estate, then it cannot admit of any inclusiue and implied
condition. For a declaration, manifestation, or description, admits of no
suppositions or inclusiue conditions; but is a thing that is plain, absolute,
and positive in it self, declaring things as they are in themselves, without
any ambiguities at all: so that it admits of no suppositions or conditions at
all. Now that this place of Psalm: 125: 1: should be a declaration and a
description of the firmness and stability of a Christian man's estate; it
appears most evidently by the words themselves, and by that illustration or
similitude that is included in the^. The words are these. They that trust in
the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast
for euer^ Here the state of a regenerate man is illustrated and set forth by a
comparison, it is as stable and firm as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
but stands fast for ever. Which proves, that this is not only a promise of
God, but likewise a description and declaration of the sure and steadfast estare
of faithful Christians: and being so, their imaginary and inclusiue condition,
(if he continue to trust in God) it can never stand together with it. Sixthly,
I answer, that this their gloss, ( if they continue righteous and trust still
in God) can never be admitted: for the words are not: these that trust in the
Lord are not for the present only like to mount Zion, which cannot be removed:
but they shall be so: they are so for the present, and they shall be so for
ever, which has reference to all future times: they do not one only stand
fast for the present, but they shall stand fast for ever: if therefore they do
not only stand fast for the present, but shall do so for ever to: where then
is their supposition, ( if they do continue,) when as the Scripture says
expressly, that they shall continue and stand fast for ever? it is but merely
friuilous and repugnant. Seventhly, I answer, that the only scope and drist of
the holy Ghost in this promise and place, is to prove, that a truly faithful
and regenerate man, can never fall away from his estate of grace, and therefore
their supposition, (if he continue faithful) is but friuilous and repugnant to
the place. Now that this is the scope and meaning of the place, I prove it by
these reasons. First, because the words themselves do best of all bear this
sense and meanings and cannot well admit of any other: the words are plain and
categoricall, without any ambiguities or suppositions at all: they that trust
in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands
fast for ever: therefore this exposition and application of these words to this
end, to prove the stability of a Christian and regenerate man's estate, being
most consonant and agreeable to the sense and meaning of the words, must ne^ds
be the scope and end of them. Secondly, the very emphases, the very force and
vigor of these words do prove it. For the text does not say: that they that
trust in the Lord shall be as a tent that may be removed, as an house (...)
(...). 7.
upon the sand that may be ouerturned and cast down, or as a tree without a
root, that may be blown down with every wind. No nor yet as a man hanging
by a bough that may fall if he will himself: but like to mount Zion which
cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever Mark the comparison, and observe
it well. A man that trusts in the Lord is like to moun^ Zion. but in what is
he like to mount Zion? why in this: mount Zion it cannot be removed: it cannot
remove it self, though it would: it cannot be removed by others: it is so
fixed and established, that it shall stand fast for ever, mauger it self and
others: So he that trusts in God, is so settled and established in grace,
that he cannot be removed, neither by the liberty and freedom of his own
will, nor yet by the policy and force of all outward enemies and temptations
whatsoever. So that this their gloss and exposition, that they cannot be
remo^ed, unless they will themselves, does quite thwart the comparison: for
they are compared to mount Zion, which cannot remove it self, nor yet be
removed by others: and therefore, neither can they themselves remove
themselves: neither can others do it: this word cannot is so emphaticall, that
it takes away all possibility both in themselves and others for to do it.
Wherefore the very emphases and vigor of the words do prove this to be the
scope and meaning of the place. Thirdly, the ensuing verses prove this to be
the scope and meaning of the place: or when the Psalmist in the first verse,
had laid down this as a firm and positive ground. They that trust in the
Lord, shall be (...) (...) Zion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast
for ever: he shows the reasons of it in the: 2: and 3: verses: which are
twoFirst, because God is always present with them, and does compass them
about on every side. As the mountains are (...) about Terusalem, so the Lord
is round about his people (...) from hence forth and for ever. Secondly,
Because God does speedily deliver them from those outward afflictions which
might shake and cast them down: For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon
the lot of the righteous, least the righteous (...) forth their hands unto
iniquity. Then in the fifth verse, he confirms it by an anithesis between the
righteous and the wicked. True it is, (says he) there are many that made an
outward show of trusting in God, but yet their hearts were not upright, such as
these, they turn aside unto their crooked ways, and the Lord shall lead them
forth with the workers of iniquity; (that is,) he will severe them from his
own flock, and discover them to be goats and hypocrites: But peace shall be
upon Israel: the true Israel of God, they shall have always peace with God,
and they shall not be moved, but like mount Zion shall stand fast for ever. So
that the whole scope and drift of this Psalm is but to prove the perpetuity
and stability of a regenerate and faithful man's estate: and therefore cursed
is this gloss of theirs, which would thus corrupt this text, and all those
other promises of God which I have cited: whose only scope and end is nothing
else, but to assure the Saints of God, that they shall always persevere, and
never fall from grace. Eighthly, I answer, that this their shift and starting
hole: ( If they contin^e righteous, or as long as they continue righteous and
trust in God) it it be well examined, is nothing else but a mere petitio
princip^, a begging of the question controuerted, and a denying of the
conclusion proved. For the question being no more but this: Whether those who
are once truly regenerated and ingrafied into Christ may f^ll from grace? I
produce this argument to prove that they cannot fall from grace: God has
promised that their graces shall never fail; that the holy Ghost shall be with
them and dwell in them for (...): he has promised them for to support and keep
them from falling, and that they shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be
removed, but stands fast for ever: and therefore they cannot fall away from
grace. Well, what now is the answer^ that they give? Their graces shall not
fail, the holy Ghost shall dwell in them for ever: God will keep them from
falling, and they shall not be removed; if they continue faithful; or as long
as they continue faithful, or unless they will themselves. What now I pray
are these answers of theirs, but a mere begging of the question which is
dispuputed, and a plain and manifest denying of the conclusion proved? what
else in substance is it, but only this? that those who are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, may fall away from grace: and so a
begging of the question, and a denial of the conclusion. Which how absurd and
ridiculous a thing it is, and how un befeeming those that make a show of wit
and learning, every freshman, and puny Sophister in our Universities can
inform you. Ninthly, This answer of theirs, if they continue righteous, and
unless they will themselves: can never be admitted as sons and consonant to
the Scriptures, because it gives man a free will either to take and receive
grace, or to refuse and cast it off at his will and pleasure: it sets the clay
and the weak and impotent creature (who has no might, no strength, no will,
and power of his own but what he has from God) above the Potter, and almighty
Creator. For if regenerate men may fall from grace, out of the liberty of their
own wills, when as God himself has undertaken and promised to preserve and
keep them from falling: to confirm them to the end; and to perserue them
blameless unto the day of Jesus Christ: (as that answer does suppose they
may:) what were this but to exempt man from Gods jurisdiction and alleagance,
and to make him an absolute creature in himself, without any dependancy at all
on God? Yea this were nothing else, but to take the hearts and wills of all men
out of the hands of God, and to give him no soueragntie and power over them;
which is expressy contrary to the Scriptures: which certify us, that the
hearts of Kings, (and therefore of all men else) are in the Prou. 21. 1.
hand. of the Lord, and that as the rivers of water he turns them whether
soever he will: that the lives and ways of all men are in his hands, and that
it is not in men's own wills or power for to direct their step^ Dan: 5: 23.
Jer: 10: 23. (...): 16: 13: With God only is wisdom and strength; he has
council and understanding. Behold, (...) breaks down and it cannot be built
again: he shuts up a man, and there can be no opening. With him is
strength and wisdom, the deceiuer, and the deceived are his. He leads
councellers away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. He loses the bond of
Kings, and girdeth their loins with a girdle. He leads Princes away spoiled,
and overthrows the mighty. He remoueth away the speech of the trusty, and
takes away the understanding of the aged. He powers contempt upon Princes,
and weakneth the strength of the mighty. He increases the nations and
destroys them: he inlargeth the nations and straitneth them again. He
takes away the heart of the chief of the people of the earth, and causes
them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way. Job: 12: 13: to 25. If
our wills were in our own powers and not in Gods alone, why then do we daily
pray to God: thy kingdom come; thy Mat: 6. 10. 13.
will be done on earth as it is in heaven; and lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil? this prayer were but vain and idle if our wills
were our own, if God had no kingdom and power over us to sway and rule us as
he pleases. If our wills are free; if we may cast away that grace which God
has given us, and has likewise couenanted to preserve it in us: why then do
we call the Lord our God, our King, our Master and our Governor: and why does
the Scripture certify us, that our souls, our spirits, and our selves, are
not our own but Gods, and that it is God only that works in us both the
will and the deed, of his good pleasure: 1 Cor: 6: 29. and Phil: 2: 13?
Certainly, if God, be God, Lord, and King over us, as he is: if our hearts,
our wills, and all our ways are in his hands to dispose of them at his
pleasure: (as we must needs confess they are unless we will turn Atheists
and deny his Diety) then when as God himself does absolutely promise and
undertake to preserve and keep (...) Saints from falling; and to establish
them so, that they shall not, nor cannot for ever be removed: this their slight
and supposition: if they continue faithful, or unless they will themselves,
must needs be false and idle: or else you must of necessity grant that those
whom God himself has promised to keep from falling, and to establish so that
they can never possible be removed: may fall away from grace; which does not
only falsify the Scriptures and the promises of God; but likewise pull God
out of heaven: and either make him to be no God at all, or else sets man above
him; which is blasphemous and atheistical. Lastly, If this their answer to
the absolute promises and texts of Scriptute, which we allege against them,
were once admitted to be true, then mark what dangerous consequents would
follow upon it. First, it would be a means to shake the very foundations,
principals, and pillars of religion. For if a thing which is absolutey true, be
not absolutely true, (which is the very sum and substance of all their
answers,) if that which God has promised to establish for ever, to keep from
falling and departing from him, may notwithstanding fall and come to ruin, if
it will it self, and that it is safe only if it continue, or as long as it
continues; then mark what a ready way they make for Atheists and Infidels to
delude all those fundamental truths which are delivered and set down in
Scripture. For if I were an Atheist and an Infidel, and they should come to
convert, or confute me by the Scriptures or by reason. If they should now
produce any argument, or text of Scripture, to prove that there were a God, to
prove that there were a Christ, or an holy Ghost: or to prove that there were a
Church: or to prove any such fundamental truths; I would shift them of with
this sleeuelesse answer of their own: true it is that there is an eternal
God: there is a Christ, and an holy Ghost: there is a Church of God, if they
continue, or as long as they continue: and then I would infer as they do upon
this answer, but they do not continue, and therefore they are not. What
answer could they giu^ me, if this their own cuasion would hold water, and go
for c^rrant? certainly none at all. Yea, but Object.
they will object, that the Scripture says, that the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost are eternal, and that the Church of God continues and abides
for ever: and therefore this answer, if they continue: or as long as they
continue, (...).
is very repugnant. And does not the Scripture say as positiuely: that the
righteous shall never be removed? that they shall stand fast for ever? that
their faith and graces shall never fail: that the holy Ghost shall abide with
them for ever: that they shall never fail or perish? Where then I pray you
stands the difference? If this answer of theirs be repugnant and
contradictorie in the one, why should it not be so in the other to? Yea, but
God is eternal in his own Nature, and so in this Object.
there is a difference? And is not grace an immortal and incorruptible Answer.
seed? a treasure which neither rust nor moth can corrupt, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
nor thieves break through and steal? the Scripture I am sure Math. 6. 20.
styles it so: Yea, Christians themselves that are once illuminated Luke 12. 33.
with the spirit of Grace, they are immortal through grace: the second death
shall have no power over them, and they shall die no more, Reu. 20 6. and Romans
6. 10, 11. Therefore if Christians are immortal and everlasting by Grace: and
if that Grace which we have now by Christ, be of an incorruptible nature, as
well as God is eternal: if it be absurd to suppose that God may not continue
and abide for ever: or to say that he is eternal unless he will himself: it
must likewise be absurd to suppose, that Grace which is immortal, and
incorruptible: that the Saints of God who shall stand fast for ever, and cannot
be removed, may notwithstanding cease to be, and fall from grace and perish. So
that you see plainly, that this evasion of theirs if it were admitted, would
utterly subvert and ouerturne, the very grounds, principles and foundation of
Religion. Secondly, if this their shifting answer should be admitted, it would
make the word of God but a mere nugation; a mere tantologie; a vain, absurd,
and idle thing: a thing merely repugnant and cross unto it self. Absolute
things must then be conditional: plain things will become obscure, express
and absolute promises, must be suspended upon vain and idle suppositions:
men's graces then should always increase and never fail, and yet they should
be lost and fail: the Saints then should never fall, perish, or be removed,
and yet they should fall quite away from grace: they should perish and be
removed: they should not be able to depar^ from God, and yet they should
depart: the Scriptures in which there is no jar at all, should then be full
of contradictions, or nugations: Yea, Scripture would become no Scripture,
truth no truth, God no God, if this their shift, anfwer and evasion should be
admitted to be true. And therefore we reject this answer of theirs, as an
absurd, frivolous, nugatory, false, and contradictory thing: as an answer un
beseeming any, much more such men as do profess themselves to be not only
Christians, but Scholars to.

All that now may colourably be objected by them to defend Object.
this answer and evasion, is but this. That though those promises and
Scriptures which I have cited, are positive and absolute in themselves, without
any annexed condition, either on Gods part or on ours: Yet there are some other
promises and tex^ of Scripture, which have an express condition on our parts
annexed to them. As that of Math. 24. 13. and Mark 13. 13. He that continues
to the end, he shall be saved: and that of Gal. 6. 9 In due time (...) shall
reap if we faint not: and Reu. 2, 10. and cap. 3. 21. Be thou faithful to the
death, and I will give thee the crown of life. Therefore to reconcile these
and such like absolute and conditional promises and Scriptures one unto the
other, that there be no jar or contradiction at all between them, we frame
this former answer, and make all these absolute promises and tex^s of Scripture
to depend upon these conditionals, which have a secret influence into them all.
This is all that is, or may be colourably objected to justify the former
answer: and alas, this all, is nothing, if it be well examined. For first, if
you will interpret these promises Answ.
and Scriptures one by another; you must then interpret them according to the
due rules of interpretation which are two: First, you must interpert and
expound, the fewest and the More obscure, by the greater number, and the more
perspicuous, plain, and easy. Now those positive and absolute promises of
God, which I have cited, are more in number then these conditional promises
objected by you; and they are far more perspicuous, plain, and manifest then
they: therefore you must rather interpret your conditional promises by them,
then them by your conditional; else you do but proceed ab ignotioribus ad
notiora, Which is a preposterous course. Secondly, if you will expound these
Scriptures one by another, you must then make such an exposition of them, as
may fully reconcile them, that so they may all stand together without crossing
or contradicting one another, or perverting and corrupting the true sense,
scope, and meaning one of the other. Now if you will expound those absolute
promises and Scriptures which I have formerly alleged, by these conditional
ones, annexing an implied and inclusiue condition to them, in steed of
reconciling these Scriptures one un to the other, you set them quite at
variance, and cause them for to cross, oppugn, and contradict one onother,
and to pervert the true sense, scope, and meaning of one another, (as I have
proved at large before) and therefore this your exposition must needs be false
and vicious. If then you would fully reconcile these Scriptures with prima
facie may seem to be repugnant, you must then expound these conditional
places which you object, by these absolute texts which I have cited: you must
put these conditional places in the forefront, and let the absolute follow
after, and then these places will not only be reconciled one unto another, but
they will also ratify and confirm one another, and make for my conclusion.
This will appear most evidently if we reduce, these absolute and conditional
places into this Syllogism. He that continues to the end, he that faints
not, and he that continues faithful to the death, shall be saved, and shall
receive the crown of life. But all those who are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by faith, they shall endure to the end, they shall not
faint, and they shall continue faithful to the death. Therefore they shall be
saved, and they shall receive the crown of life. I pray now where is there any
contradiction or opposition between these places being thus ordered and
expounded? if you will but place these conditional propositions and places
first, and then rank the absolute promises and places after them, then they
will both agree together, and the one will ratify and confirm the proper
sense and meaning of the other without any contradiction. But as you expound
and order these Scriptures, placing the absolute in the first place, and the
conditional in the second, you make the one to cross and contradict the
other, and in steed of making peace and reconciliation between them, you set
them both at variance, and corrupt them both. This will most evidently appear,
by inuerting of the former Syllogism, and by putting the minor into the majors
place: for then the Syllogism will be this. All those who shall continue
constant to the end, and never faint, nor fall from grace, nor yet depart from
God, may notwithstanding fall from grace, if they do not continue and
persevere in Grace. But all these who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, may not continue and persevere in grace: Therefore they may fall
away from grace. Mark now how this exposition and reconciliation of yours,
does falsify and corrupt even both the texts: First, it falsifieth and
corrupts the positive and absolute texts; it makes them conditional,
ambiguous, and doubtful, yea, and contradictorie to themselves: Secondly, it
makes those conditional placcs which are cited to be absolute and positive: as
he that overcomes and continues faithful to the death, he that indureth
to the end and faints not shall be saved: it makes those to be absolute, and
in effect but this: all those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into
Christ, may faint and fail, and not hold out or continue to the end: When as
the places themselves do not so much as mention any such thing, no nor yet so
much as necessarily implie it. Be ashamed then of this your false
interpretation, and contradictory reconciliation, which sets those Scriptures
at enmity and variance which were at peace before. And if you know not how to
reconcile those places, then put but the conditional places (if they are
conditional) first, and let the absolute come but after them, and then there
is no jar at all between them: they then will ratify and strengthen one the
other, and make both for my conclusion. When you meet with that of Gal. 6. 9.
In due time ye shall reap if ye faint not: and with that of Math. 24. 13. He
that indureth to the end, he shall be saved: then parallel them with that of
Isai. 40, 29, 30: 31. and Job ^7. 9. The righteous shall hold on his way, and
he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger: Even the youths shall
faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: but they that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint.
If you meet with that of Exodus 19. 5. If ye will obey my voice indeed, and
keep my covenant, then you shall be a peculiar treasure unto me, above all
people: then encounter it with that of Ezech. 36. 27. I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them. Go through all the Scriptures, and you shall not
meet with any condition which God requires of us, but you shall likewise
find, that he has promised to perform the same condition for us, and in us.
Wherefore set down the conditional places first (which are first in order and
in nature) and then the absolute promises of God to perform the same
conditions for us, and so all the Scriptures will be fully recon^led.
Secondly, to this objection of yours. I answer, that the only end and scope of
all those places which you object for to defend your answer, is only to incite
and stir men up to perseverance, and to an holy boldness, and cheerfulness
in the ways of God, and in the constant profession of Religion: they were
never spoken to that end to which you wrest them, to fear and to discourage
men, or to prove that they might fall quite away from grace, when once they
were in truth regenerated. For that of Math. 24. 13. and Mark 13. 13. He that
endures to the end he shall be saved: and that of Gal. 6. 9. Let us not be
weary of well-doing, for in due time we shall reap if we faint not. and that
of Reu: 2. 10. Be faithful to the death, and thou shall receive the crown of
life: and those other places of this nature: they are but so many exhortations
and encouragements to go on and persevere in a Christian resolution; and in a
constant practice and profession of religion maugre all afflictions, crosses,
persecutions, and scandalls whatsoever, as the contex^s do most plainly
manifest. They were spoken only to this purpose, and they are no more in
substance but this. There are many afflictions, many troubles and crosses, many
persecutions, losses, scandalls and diffamations that will befall you, even for
the very profession and practice of religion: Yet let not all these discourage
you from going on in a constant and settled course of holiness: for though
these losses, crosses, afflictions, persecutions, and scandalls do befall you,
yet they shall not hurt or disadvantage you, you shall be no loosers by them:
for you shall be saved: you shall reap the fruits of all those sufferings at
last: what ever you loose on earth, it shall be recompensed to you in heaven:
these light and momentary afflictions which here you suffer shall purchase for
you a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Go on therefore as
you have begun, hold on your way, and persevere in grace unto the end, for then
you shall receive a full reward for all that you have done or suffered. This is
the only end and scope of the Holy Ghost in all those texts of Scripture: this
was the only end for which they were spoken and recorded, to encourage and
provoke the Saints of God to a constant and final perseverance in grace and
holiness. How grossly then do you abuse and wrest these Scriptutes, when as
you make no other use of them, but to quench the smoking flax, and break the
bruised reed? to discomfort and deiect the hearts and souls of weak and
tender Christians, and to discourage them in the ways of holiness, when as
you prove unto them from those places, that they may finally and totally fall
from grace? Certainly if the chief and only meaning of the Holy Ghost in all
these places, is but to encourage and stir men up to perseverance (as it is
most plain and evident that it is) you do but cross the very scope, the very
sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, when as you rack and wrest those places
to this your present purpose, which the holy Ghost did never thinks of or
intend: unless that you will make the holy Ghost an ambiguous equivocator,
like unto your selves. If therefore you will take those places in their genuine
and proper sense, and as they are intended, as being so many encouragements and
helps to constant and final perseverance; they are so far from making for
you, that they make much against you. If now you do object, that you are
forced to maintain this doctrine of the Apostacy of Object.
the Saints, and so by consequence this evasion, to free God from injustice,
and from being author of, or party to men's sins. For, if God should
absolutely without any condition on our parts, promise for to keep us from
falling from him, and yet should suffer us for to fall from grace, as we seee
he does often times; then we should make God himself unjust in not fulfilling
of his promise. Wherefore that we may free God from injustice even in this
behalf, we say, that notwithstanding all those promises of God are absolutely
and positively pronounced, yet they are all suspended upon the freedom and
liberty of our own wills, having this inclusiue condition annexed to them (
If we our selves will continue righteous) And so when as we fall away from
grace out of the liberty and freedom of our own wills, the sin and blame
lights only upon our own heads, which else would rest on Gods. I shall answer
you in the words of holy Answ.
Job, Will you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for Job 13. 7, 8.
him? will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God? as if God did need
your help and counsel for to free him from injustice, and were not able for
to clear himself without this help and shift of yours. Well, admit that you
do God some service in it, in clearing of his justice, yet how much is God
beholding to you for your pains, who in freeing of him from injustice, do rob
him of his mercy, goodness, honor, power, wisdom, truth and justice to? For
if God should suffer his chosen and his best beloved Saints to fall away from
him, and so to perish, where then were his mercy, and his gracious goodness?
If he should suffer those to fall, whom he has undertaken to preserve and
keep from falling, where then were his honor, his truth, his wisdom, his
justice or his power? If he should suffer those to fall and perish for whom
Jesus Christ has shed his precious blood, that so they might not perish but
have everlasting life, if God should suffer them to loose that grace, and that
heau^ly inheritance which Christ has purchased for them, where then were this
his justice which you labor to maintain? Doubtless this paradox and shift of
yours, it robs the Lord, and strips him naked of all his glorious and most
sacred attributes, yea, it depriues him of his very Diety: so that whiles you
seek to do the Lord a favor in vindicating of his justice by this your
cauell and evasion, you do him all the wrong that may be. If then you would
free God from injustice, and reserve his very Diety, and all his other sacred
attributes unto him without any deminution, or eclipse at all, the only way to
do it, is for to maintain, the final and total perseverance of the Saints.
For if it be impossible for those who are once truly regenerated and
sanctified, to fall from grace (as we affirm it for to be) then your surmise
of clearing Gods justice when they fall away, is out of doors, and comes not
into question: and so Gods justice, mercy, goodness, honor, wisdom, truth
and power, are not only not so much as once tainted and ecclipsed, but likewise
highly magnified, in the continual perseverance and preservation of the
Saints, And thus I hope I have so fully cleared the absoluteness of all Gods
promises, and so fully vindicates them from those false glosses and sophismes
of the opposites which did obscure and delude them: that now they may give full
and perfect assurance to every Christian soul that is become a true member of
Jesus Christ, that he shall never finally nor totally fall from Grace.

The third thing in these promises of God which may assure

Lastly, all these promises of God they are exceeding faithful promi ses, if
they were not true, but false and counterfeite, there were then great cause and
color for to doubt of them, and men's hearts and souls could take no true joy
and solid comfort in them, because they could not rest and trust upon them. But
now all these promises of God which I have formerly mentioned, to prouethe
final and total perseverance of the Saints, they are exceeding faithful and
true, proceeding from that God and spirit of truth, which will not, nor cannot
lie unto us. All the promises of God they are yea, and amen in Christ: 2 Cor:
1: 20. his covenant will he not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
his mouth: He has (...) in his holiness that he will not lie unto us: Psalm:
89: 34, 35. As God has thought, so shall it come to pass, as he has
promised, so shall it surely stand, no man shall disa^ll or turn that back
which he has promised and decreed. Isay 14: 24: 27. God has ratified all his
promises with an oath, and sealed them unto us, even in the blood of Jesus
Christ, to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his Council,
and the truth of all his promises, to the end that they might have strong
consolation and comfort in the^. Heb: 6: 17, 18. And as all these promises of
God are true and faithful in themselves, so God will be exceeding just and
faithful in performing them to the very least title and circumstance of them.
God will his truth to Jacob, and his mercy to Israel, which he has sworn to
our fathers in the days of old. Mic^: 7: 20. The strength of Israel will not
lie, neither will he repent him of his word: 1 Samuel: 15: 29. Whatsoever he has
promised the will perform to the very uttermost title. Heaven and earth may
pass away, but yet not so much as the least title of any of these promises
which he has made unto his Saints shall fail, until it be fulfilled to the
full: Math: 5: 18 When God had promised to bring the children of Israel out of
Egypt after four hundred and thirty years: it came to pass at the end of the
four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day that God had promised,
that all the host of Israel went out of Egypt: Exodus: 12: 41: 51: God did not
fail them in this promise so much as in one day. God has always bin so
faithful in the performance of his promises unto his people, that he did never
so much as fail them in any circumstance: wherefore Solomon in the period and
perclose of that excellent and famous prayer of his, at the consecration of the
Temple, does use this gratulatory speech to God. Blessed be the Lord which has
given rest unto his people Israel according to all that he has 1 Kings. 8. 58.
promised: their has not failed one word of all his good promise which he
promised by the hand of Moses, his servant. Every word and syllable that God
has spoken for the weal and welfare of his children, he will as certainly and
faithfully perform, as if he had actually performed it to them already. Seeing
then that we have so many absolute and sure, so many true and faithful
promises which shall be performed to the utmost syllable, which may assure us,
that such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and
lively faith, can neither finally nor totally fall from grace: let us wholly
rely and depend upon them, let us cast our selves and our souls upon them.
And seeing there are so many things in God himself, which may fully resolve
and settle us in this truth: let us have strong consolation: and let us run
that race of holiness which is set before us, with joy, with comfort, and
assurance. And though we may and ought to fear, the falling into any sin
whereby we may offend the Lord, and cause him for to scourge us with the rods
of men, and with the stripes of the children 2 Samuel 7. 14.
of men: yet let us never fear or dream of any final or total fall from
grace, when once we are but truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by
faith: because we have God himself for our assurance, that we shall never fall
from him.

Secondly, as it is altogether impossible in respect of God From Chrst.
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, should either totally or
finally fall from grace: so is likewise altogether impossible in respect of
Jesus Christ. Now in Jesus Christ himself, there are these several things
which may assure us of this potision.

First, there is the efficacy, metits, and power of his death and passion,
whereby the power and strength of sin, the forts and holds of Satan, are
weakened and subdued in them, whereby their souls are thoroughly purified and
washed from all pollution of flesh and spirit, and their sins and wickedness
for ever so utterly abolished, that they shall never appear any more; from
which I frame this first argument. Those out of whom the works of Satan are
utterly destroyed by the death of Christ, those whose souls are purified and
washed from all sin by the blood of Christ. Those in whom the power of Satan
and the whole body of sin are wholly destroyed by the passion of Christ, to
no other: end and purpose, but that their consciences might beo purged from
dead works to serve the living God, that they being dead unto sin might live
unto righteousness, and bring fotth fruits unto God, that they might live
together with Christ, and unto Christ alone, and not unto themselves, that they
might be a peculiar people unto God, zealous of good works, that they might
serve him in holiness and true righteousness all the days of their lives,
and that Christ might present them unto himself, a glorious and holy Church,
without spot, blemish, or wrinckle, it is altogether impossible, that they
should ever finally or totally fall from grace: because, else Christ should dye
in vain, and not obtain the end, the fruit and substance of his death and
passion: But out of all those that are once truly regenerated, the works of
Satan are utterly destroyed: 1 John 3: 8: the power of (...) and the body of
sin are quite destroyed by the death and passion of Christ. Hebr: 2: 14: 15.
Rom: 6: 6: and their souls are purified and washed from their sins, by the
blood of Christ. Revel. 1: 5. Tit: 3: 5. to the only end and purpose, that
their consciences might be purged from dead works, to serve the living God:
Hebr: 9: 14: that they being dead unto sin might live unto righteousness,
and bring forth fruit unto God: Rom: 7: 4. 1 (...): 2: 24: that they might
live together with Christ, and unto Christ alone, and not unto themselves or
sin: Rom: 6: 6. 2 Cor: 5: 15. 1 Ephesians: 5: 10: that they might be a peculiar
people unto God, zealous of good works: Tit: 2: 14. That they might serve him
in holiness and righteousness without fear all the days of their lives:
Luke 1: 74, 75: that they might live and dye unto the Lord, and that both
living and dying they might be his: Rom: 148: that Christ might present them
unto himself an holy Church without spot or blemish or wrinckle. Ephesians. 5. 26,
27. and so it is altogether impossible, that they should ever totally or
finally fall from grace.

Secondly, as the death and passion of Christ, so likewise his Rhemists did in
their conference at Hahge) that God does not always hear the intercession of
Christ, and grant him his requests: which is blasphemous in it self, and
contrary to the Scripture. For John 11. 41, 42. Christ does give thanks unto
his Father for that he has heard him, and I know, says he, Father that thou
hear me always. ^oubtlesse if God will grant us whatsoever we our selves
shall desire and pray for in the name of Christ, as he has promised to do.
John 14. 13, 14. Cap. 16. 23. 24. much more then will he grant that thing which
Christ himself shall petition to him for. And if God should not always grant
whatsoever Christ should now desire and request of him, Christ's intercession
would be fruitless and to little purpose, and we our selves should have but
little benefit or comfort from it. Now for the Minor proposition, that Christ
does always make intercession to his Father for all those who are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into him; it is plain and evident by John 16. 26.
Romans 8. 24. Hebr. 2. 17. cap. 4. 14. 15, 16. cap. 7. 25. and cap. 9. 24. And
that this his intercession is for their constant and continual perseverance it
is evident: Luke 22. 32, 33. where Christ tells Peter that he had prayed for him
that his faith might not fail, which prayer of Christ extends to all his
faithful member, as well as unto Peter: by that of John 14. 15. 16. where
Christ himself does certify us that he will pray unto his Father for all his
Saints, and that he shall give them another comforter which shall abide and
dwell and be in them and with them for ever, and also by that prayer of his
John 17. 11, 15, 21, 23, 24. where he prays thus for his Apostle, and
afterward for all true beleiuers. Holy Father keep them thorough thy own
name, those whom thou have given unto me, that they may be one as we are one,
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from evil, and that they may all be one as thou Father
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. I in them, and thou
in me, that they may be made perfect in us, and that the world may know that
thou (...) sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me, Father, I will
that those also whom thou have given me be with me where I am; that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me. This is also intimated by the
Apostle: Hebr. 7 25. where speaking of Christ he says thus of himself,
wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Those for whom
Christ himself does pray and interceede they shall be saved to the uttermost,
no man shall condemn them or separate them from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus their Lord, because that Christ himself is even at the right hand
of God, always making intercession for them. Romans 8. 33. to the end of the
chapter. Christ has prayed heretofore, and does now continually make
intercession to his Father, for all such as are once his true and faithful
members, that they may always persevere and continue constant in the state of
grace: and therefore it is altogether impossible for them, either finally or
totally to fall from grace. If it be objected, that this prayer of Christ does
only tend Object.
to keep them from a final, but yet not from a total fall from grace. I
answer, that it is not so: but that this prayer Answer.
of Christ extends to preserve them from a total, as well as from a final
fall. First, because Christ does pray that their faith might not fail; now if
they might fall totally from grace, then their faith should fail, yea, that
numericall faith which once they had should utterly be lost, for that faith
which they have by their new inscision into Christ is not the same numericall
faith which they had before, for that was totally lost and utterly abolished:
so that by this exposition their says should not only fail, which is the
less, but likewise utterly to be lost, which is far greater, and so Christ's
prayer should not be granted: for that which may be lost and is lost, does
without all question fail. Secondly, I answer, that Christ prays that the
holy Ghost may abide with them for ever, and dwell in them, and be in them: if
therefore the holy Ghost do abide and dwell in them, and with them for ever,
they cannot fall totally from grace: for where the holy Ghost is always
dwelling and residing, there grace must of necessity always be. Thirdly,
Christ does pray unto his Father: that he would keep all those that are his
true and faithful members from evil, that they might be in him and he in
them continually: and that they might be made perfect in him: if therefore
this prayer of Christ be granted, it cannot be that they should ever totally
fall from grace. Fourthly, this prayer and intercession of Christ does s^ue men
to the uttermost, it keeps them so, that nothing shall be able so much as
once to separate them from the love of God which is in Christ: and therefore it
must needs be, that this prayer and intercession of Christ does not only
keep his true and faithful members from a final, but likewise, from a total
fall from grace, so that this argument remains still unanswered: neither is it
possible for any man to give a full and satisfactory answer to it.

The third thing in Christ which may assure us of, and settle us in this
present truth: is the power and might of Christ; from which I frame this third
argument. Those who are kept by the power and might of Christ: so that nothing
can pluck them out of his hands, to that end and purpose that they might never
perish, but have everlasting life; it cannot be, that they should ever finally
or totally fall from grace. But all those who are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, are kept by the power and might of Christ to that end,
and purpose that they may never perish but have everlasting life, Iud. 1. 1.
John 10. 28. 2 Cor. 12. 9. 10. and 1 Pet. 1. 5. Therefore it cannot be, that
they should ever finally or totally fall from grace. Of which argument you may
see more in the second argument drawn from God himself.

The fourth thing in Christ that proves this position to He will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax, Isai. 42. 13. Mat. 12. 20. He will
seek that which is lost, and bring again that which was driven away, he will
bind up that which is broken, and strengthen that which is sick, he will
seed his flock like a shepherd, and he will gather the Lambs with his arm,
and carry them in his bosom, and will gently lead those that are with young,
Exech. 34. 16. 10. and Isai. 40. 11. He gives power to the faint and to those
that have no might; he increases strength. Isai. 40. 29. And therefore seeing
that Jesus Christ is so compassionate to all those that are his members, and
once ingrafted into him; seeing that he is always touched with the sense and
feeling of their infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. It cannot be that ever they should
either finally or totally fall from grace. When a man is once but truly
regenerate and ingrafted into Christ, if he be weak and faint, he will
strengthen and refresh him: if he be sick and dead, he will quicken and
revive him: if he be sick and wounded he will heal and cure him: if he be
in any distress or temptation, he will help him and assist him; if he be
dejected in mind and conscience, he will comfort and rejoice him; such is the
merciful, gracious, and compassionate nature of Jesus Christ, that he will
supply all the wants and necessities of all his Saints in all kinds
whatsoever; they shall never want any thing that may help to keep them in the
state of grace, or bring them home to heaven, Psalm. 23. 1. Phil. 4. 19. and
Psalm. 34. 10. therefore they need not fear a total or final fall from grace,
it cannot happen to them,

The fifth thing that may stablish our hearts in the present truth is, the
vigilance and care of Christ over us, and his perpetual presence with us:
Christ is that great, that good, and that careful shepherd of his sheep, Who
is always watching over his fl^cke lest any of them should miscarry; He does
always night and day keep and guard his sheep, and never flees from them
when the thief does come to steal them: but he carries them in his own
bosom, and keeps them in his arms; be gives life in great abundance unto
all his sheep, yea, he lays down his own life for his sheep, he gives
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of his hands, as we may read John 10. 10, 11, 12, 28. Psalm.
23. 1, 2. Ezech. 34. 16. Isai. 40. 11. Psalm. 121. 3, 8. Christ is always
present with his faithful sheep, his presence does go with them always for
to give them rest, Exodus 33. 14. and as it was with the Children of Israel, when
they marched toward the temporal Canaan, so is it with all those that are once
truly regenerated in their marching toward the heavenly: Jesus Christ, will go
before them in a pillar of a cloud to lead them in their way, and in a pillar
of fire by night to defend them from their enemies, and to give them light to
go by day and night, he will not take away the pillar of the Cloud by day,
nor the pillar of fire by night from before his people, Exodus 13. 21, 22. Cap.
14. 19: Therefore they shall be safe, and never fall either totally or finally
from grace: From all which I collect this fifth argument. Those who have Jesus
Christ for their Pastor and shepherd, those whom he does always guard and
keep with special care and vigilance, and protect and shelter with his
presence, its altogether impossible for them to fall from grace. But all those
that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, have Jesus Christ
for their Pastor and shepherd ( who will lose none that are committed to his
charge, John 17. 14.) He does always guard and keep them with special care
and vigilancie, and protect and shelter them with his continual presence, and
therefore it is altogether impossible for them to fall from grace. The minor
proposition cannot be denied; the mayor like wise must be true, else you must
make Christ Jesus that great, good, and careful shepherd of the sheep, to be
exceeding negligent and careless in his office. A good shepherd will never so
much as lose a sheep, or let it go astray, much less then will Jesus Christ
loose any of those sheep that are once committed to his charge, Ioh. 17. 14.
Ezech. 34. 16. Isai. 40. 11. Luke 15. 45. 2 Pet. 3. 9. and Luke 21. 18.
Therefore the conclusion follows of necessity and cannot be denied.

The sixth thing in Jesus Christ that may establish us in this present truth: is
Christ's continually residence and dwelling in our hearts: from whence I frame
this argument: Those in whose hearts and souls Christ Jesus does for ever
remain and dwell, it is altogether impossible that they should fall from
grace, but Jesus Christ does for ever remain and dwell in the hearts and
souls of all them that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into him, Io.
14 20, 23. Cap. 17. 2^, 23, 26. 2 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians. 3. 17. 1
John 3. 24. cap. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 22. 1 Io. 4 12, 13. 15, 16. cap. 5. 10. 20.
Col. 1. 27. Psalm. 68. 16. 18. Re^. 2. 20. Therefore it is altogether impossible
that they should ever totally or finally fall from grace. What can be truly
answered or replied to this argument I cannot learn or know.

The last thing in Jesus Christ that may assure us of this present truth, is
his Sacraments: for to what other end do the Sacraments serve, specially that
of the Lords Supper, but to assure our souls of Gods unchangeable love unto us
in Jesus Christ, and of our everlasting obedience unto him: The Sacraments they
are the very seals of Gods covenant, wherein God and Christ do seal unto us
even in the blood of Jesus Christ, the one that he will become a gracious and
loving Father, the other that he will become a gracious and loving Savior to
us for ever, and we seal again to God and Christ that we will become
dutiful, faithful, and obedient Children and servants unto them for ever. The
holy Sacraments therefore wherein God does choose us for his children, and we
do choose him for our God and Father, must needs assure our souls that we
shall never finally and totally fall from grace, or be deprived of Gods love
and favor. If we could either totally or finally fall from grace, what
comfort and benefit, what profit and assurance could we have from those most
comfortable and blessed Sacraments? if that covenant which is sealed, ratified,
and confirmed in the blood of Jesus Christ should ever once be broken, what
good or profit could it bring unto our souls? Wherefore the very Sacraments
which seal Gods love unto our souls, and all those other things which are in
Christ, which have been formerly mentioned, may give our souls this
comfortable and sweet assurance, that we shall never totally or finally fall
from grace, even in respect of Jesus Christ, when once we are but truly
regenerated and ingrafted into him.

Thirdly, it is altogether impossible in respect of the holy ^om the holy Ghost.
either totally or finally fall from grace. Now in the holy Ghost there are
these things which may serve for to assure us of this truth.

First, there is his personal residencie and habitation in Io. 14 16, 17. I
says Christ will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter
that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth whom the world
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye know
him, for he dwells in you and shall be in you: by Romans 8. 9, 11. But ye are
not in the flesh but in the spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in
you, Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of is, but if the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by ^is spirit
that dwells in you: by 1 Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not that your body is tho
Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are
not your own? by 2 Timothy 1. 14. That good thing which was committed unto thee,
keep by the holy Ghost which dwells in us, and by Ezech. 36. 26, 27. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will
put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall
keep my i^dgements and do them. Therefore it is altogether impossible that
they should ever fall, either finally or totally from grace.

If it be objected that the holy Ghost may be taken away Object.
from v^; that it may be grieved, quenched, and resisted, as it is evident by
Psalm. 51. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. Ephesians. 4 30. and Act. 7. 51. I answer that it is
true, that the sense and feeling of the Answ.
sweet and comfortable motions of Gods holy Spirit may oft-time be taken from
us and suspended for a time: but yet the habitual graces and fruits of Gods
holy Spirit, the Seal and inward annoynting of Gods Spirit, and that fruit
and seed of grace which Gods holy Spirit has planted in our hearts, shall
never be taken away or lost, they shall abide and remain in the hearts of
those that are regenerated for ever, they cannot be rooted or weeded out of
them, Io. 14. 16, 17. 1 Io. 2, 20. 27. and cap. 3. 9. And though David prays
to God, not to take away his holy Spirit from him, Psalm. 51. yet that is only
meant of the joy and comforts of the spirit, and not of the spirit it self or
the graces of the spirit, as appears by the 8. and 12. verses of the same
Psalm wherein he prays to God not to restore to him the holy Ghost, or the
graces of the spirit, but to restore unto him the joy of the spirit. As for
that exhortation of Paul. 1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the spirit: some interpret
it to be no more but this, that men should not hinder any one whose heart and
soul was filled with the graces and gifts of Gods spirit from preaching of the
word of God, and interpreting of it upon all occasions, coupling it with the
next verse, where the Apostle says thus, Despise not prophecyings, but the
genuine and proper meaning of the place is this: that men should not quench and
smother those good motions and holy affections which the spirit of God does
kindle in their hearts, but stir and blow them up upon all occasions. The
spirit of God ofttimes does trouble the hearts of his Saints with good and holy
motions and affections, as the Angel sometimes troubled the poole of Bethesda,
inflaming, rauishing, and warming of their hearts and souls, and stirring of
them up to frequent prayer, godly meditations and discourses, and such like
holy duties: which motions and influences of Gods spirit, if the Saints of God
do well observe and take advantage of them, to kindle and to stir them up,
they may gain abundance of grace, of heavenly joy and comfort to their souls,
which for want of joining with them, and stirring of them up, may quite be
lost. Now the Apostles meaning here is only this, that we should not quench
these motions and influences of Gods spirit, when as we feel them arising and
growing up in our hearts and souls, but that we should blow and stir them
up, by yielding and assenting to them, that so they might fully warm our
hearts and souls, and bring much joy and comfort, and much increase of grace
unto them, and not that the spirit of God it self, or the habitual and
inherent graces of Gods spirit might be quenched and quite put out within us.
And though that good men may sometimes resist the spirit in not hearkening and
yeclding to those motions of it, and may oft-times grieve it by their sins,
yet they do never so quench it or resist it, as utterly for to loose it and
the habitual graces of it. Yea, but you will object that the spirit Object.
of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled
him, and therefore the spirit it self, and the habitual graces of it may be
lost. I answer, that in this place the Answ.
spirit of the Lord is not taken for the sanctifying gifts and graces of Gods
holy Spirit, which are proper only to the Elect and Saints of God, but only
for the common and ordinary gifts of Gods Spirit, as Fortitude, Valor,
Wisdom, strength, and an Heroical, Valiant, and Kingly spirit, as appears by
comparing these several places one with another, Judges 9. 19. cap. 15. 14.
cap. 16. 19. 20. cap. 6. 14. 1 Samuel 10. 10. cap. 6. 7. cap. 16. 13. 14. So that
the spirit of the Lord departed from him, signifies only this that his
heroical, valiant, and Kingly spirit, and those other common gifts of the
spirit departed from him which are not here in question, and not the holy and
sanctifying Spirit of God, and the saving graces of the Spirit: for this
abides as a firm and stable truth, that where once the sanctifying spirit of
God does come, there it dedicates and sanctifies the heart and soul unto it
self, there it takes up its rest, its habitation, and abode for ever, as those
places of Scripture formerly cited do expressly testify: And therefore it is
altogether impossible that those that are once regenerated, and truly
sanctified, should ever totally or finally fall from grace.

The second thing in respect of the spirit of God which does assure us of the
truth of this position, is the seal of Gods Spirit, which is stamped on the
hearts of all those which are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ;
Those that are sealed and marked to be Gods, by the inward and powerful
operation of Gods Spirit working upon their hearts and souls, and that not for
a time only, but to the day of Redemption, and the day of Jesus Christ, it is
altogether impossible that they should ever finally or totally fall from grace;
because the seal and stamp of Gods spirit does always abide and rest upon
their souls, and can never be razed and blotted out again. But all those that
are once truly regenerated, are sealed and marked by the Spirit of God to be
Gods own peculiar people, and that not for a time, but to the day of
Redemption, and the day of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. Now he which
establ^sheth us with you in Christ, and has anointed us is God; who has also
sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, Ephesians 1. 13, 14. In
whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of
promise; Which is the earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of the
purchased possession unto the praise of his glory, cap. 4. 30. And grieve not
the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption.
Therefore it is impossible, that they should ever finally or totally fall from
grace. This argument though it may seem a mystery and a riddle to carnal men
who were never acquainted John. 14. 17.
with the workeing of Gods Spirit, yet it does so fully convince 1 Cor. 2. 13.
14.
the hearts and consciences of all the true saints of God, and so settle this
conclusion in them, that nothing can be able to persuade them to the contrary.

The third thing in the Spirit of God which man may assure our souls of the
truth of this position: is the seed and annoynting of Gods Spirit, from which
I frame this third argument. Those that have the seed and the annoynting of
Gods Spirit in their hearts, it is altogether impossible for them, either
finally or totally to fall from grace. But all those who are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, they have the seed and annoynting of
Gods Spirits in their hearts; therefore it is impossible for them, either
finally or totally to fall from grace. The Mayor proposition is warrented by
these two reasons. First, because the seed and annoynting of Gods Spirit they
are of a divine, incorruptable, perpetual and immortal nature, whence they
are styled an incorruptible seed, and a divine nature. 1 Pet. 1. 23. and 2
Pet. 1. 4. Secondly, because where ever the seed and anointing of the Spirit
are, there they always continue and remain for ever, as appears by the: 1
John 2. 20. 27. But ye have an, unction from the holy one, and the annoynting
which ye have received of him abides in you, and by 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is
borne of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is borne of God. And that all those who are once truly
regenerated and borne of God, have this seed and annoynting of the Spirit, it
appears by Romans 8. 9. 14. where it is said, that if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ he is none of his, and that as many as are led by the Spirit
of God they are the sons of God, and no others, and by 1 John 3. 9. where the
express words are: whosoever is borne of God does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him. The premises then being Object.
true: the conclusion does ineuitably follow, that they can neither finally nor
totally fall from grace. Yea, but say our acute, Antagonists (if not absurd in
this) it is true, that as long as the seed and annoynting abides in those
that are regenerated, they cannot sin or fall away, but when the seed and
onnoynting is gone, then they may. I have given Answ.
a full defeat in general to this evasion and shift before, and therefore I
will answer it but breefly now, as it is applied to these particular places of
Scripture. I say therefore, that this answer is but false and idle, and
contrary and repugnant to these places of Scripture, to which it is applied.
For first, it is only a denying of the conclusion, for which this Scripture is
alleged, and a mere begging of the question now disputed. Secondly, it is but
a mere nugation and tautologie, and in effect no more then this: that those
that are borne of God cannot sin or fall from grace, as long as they do not
sin or fall from grace. Thirdly, it is a supposition that is quite repugnant
to the sense and meaning of the place. For first, the text says, that the
seed and annoynting of the Spirit abides in them, and if it does abide within
them, then your supposition and andition (as long as it abides in them) is but
idle and contrary to the text, because it supposes, that the seed does not
abide. Secondly, this is an immortal, incorruptible, and eternal seed, 1
Pet. 1 23. Hebr. 9. 14: therefore this supposition, that the seed should fail
and not abide, must needs be false, because it is contrary and repugnant to
the nature of the thing supposed. Thirdly, the scope of the Apostle in this
place, is only to prove, that those that are once truly regenerated and borne
of God, can never fall from grace, because they cannot sin unto death. Now
his reasons why they cannot sin unto death are two. First, because they are
borne of God, and secondly, because the seed remains in them. This therefore
being one of the Apostles reasons, why those that are once truly regenerated
can never fall away from grace, because their seed remains in them, this
your answer and supposition does but falsify and make void the Apostles
reason: and therefore it must needs be false. Fifthly, if your exposition were
the Apostles meaning in this place, no doubt but the Apostle himself who
desires plainness and perspicuity, would have expressed himself in other
terms then now he does: to wit, that those who are borne of God cannot sin
as long as the seed remains in them, and not in these words which now he
uses, because the seed remains in them. Sixthly, those who are regenerated
and borne of God, the text faith, they cannot sin, because they are borne of
God, God having once chosen them for his children, and begotten them again in
Jesus Christ, they must needs continue still to be his children, because, now
they are partokers of the Divine nature, and they cannot sin, so as to
separate themselves from God, and to cease to be his children, because they are
borne of God: God chooses none to be his children and adopted sons in Christ,
whom he does intend to disinherit afterward. Men will not adopt those to be
their heirs whom they will disinherit afterward, much less then will God do
it, whose gifts and calling are without repeutance. Romans 11. 29. Therefore the
Apostle says, that they cannot sin, and fall from grace, because they are
borne of God, and so your supposition (as long as they are borne of God) is
friuilous and repugnant to the Apostles meaning. Seventhly, this your answer
and evasion does quite inuert and change the words and meaning of the text, for
the text makes the seed of grace and the new birth the cause of the
perseverance of the saints; they cannot sin, because the seed remains in
them, and because they are borne of God. Now you make the saints themselves the
cause of the perseverance and continuance of their graces; you make the Saints
to preserve grace, and to bear the root; when as grace and the root does
preserve and bear them, and so you inuert the Apostles order and meaning.
Lastly, your answer supposes, that this seed and annoynting of the Spirit
may be lost; if it be lost, then there must be some thing that is the cause of
it, there is something or other that must root it out of their hearts. Now I
would demand of you what that cause should be, if there be any cause, then
either it must be some gross sin which they do commit: or the mere
freedom of their own wills, for God himself cannot be the cause, whose gifts
and calling are without (...): nor yet any outward thing whatsoever which can
befall or assault them, for Paul assures us, that they can never separate them
from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 35. to the end. Now no
gross sin that they do commit can do it, for the Apostle tells us, that those
that are borne of God do not (...) sin, for the seed remains in them,
neither can they sin, because they are borne of God. 1 Io. 3. 6. 9. and cap.
5. 16. 18. Secondly, the liberty and freedom of their own wills can never do
it. First, because their wills are in the hands of God, they are subordinate and
conformable to his will, now it is Gods will, that the seed of grace should
abide within them, and therefore it cannot but be their will; so that they
themselves out of the freedom of their own wills cannot root out the seed
of grace that is planted in their hearts, because they cannot will to do it,
their wills being subordinate and conformable to this will of God. Secondly,
out of the liberty of their own wills they cannot cast out the seed of grace
which they have once rece^ued, because it is every way hurtful for them, and
there is no color of any good to do it, now they cannot will that which is
every way hurtful for them; because the will cannot will that which is
hurtful to it self; and therefore they cannot will the casting away of this
seed of gracc. Thirdly, out of the freedom of their own wills they cannot
cast away this seed of grace which they have once in truth received, because
then they should repent them of those graces which they have. Now the saints of
God can never repent them of those graces that they have received, whence Paul
styles repentance to salvation, repentance not to be repented of. 2 Cor. 7.
10. and therefore they can never out of the freedom of their own wills reject
and cast them out again. Fourthly, out of the liberty and freedom of their
own wills, they cannot extirpate and root out those graces which are once
planted in them, because, though they had the will, yet they never have the
power for to do it. For as men cannot alter and change the order and course of
nature though they would, they cannot change that nature which God has given
them, though they should set themselves about it, no more can they change and
alter that seed and habit of grace which God has put into them, because it
is an other nature, yea a thing more permanent and unchangeable then nature is.
It is such a thing as does make them new men and new creatures, it puts a new
nature and disposition into them, so that they cannot alter or destroy it if
they would. But of this see more in the reply to the answer which is given to
the fourth argument drawn from God. If therefore no sin which the saints of
God can commit, if the freedom and liberty of their own will cannot destroy
that seed of grace which is within them, and there be no other cause or thing
to do it, it is certain that this seed and annoynting of the Spirit must
still remain within them: and so your answer (as long as the seed and
annoynting remains) which supposes that they do not always remain and
abide within them, must needs be false, friuilous, and repugnant. And so this
argument and text of Scripture remains unanswerable. Other answers there are
upon the diverse readings and expositions of these places, which because they
are but vain and idle, and not worth the answering, I will pass them over,
and so proceed.

The fourth thing in the spirit of God or in the holy Ghost, that may stablish
and settle us in this present truth, is the earnest of the Spirit that is given
to all those that are once truly regenerated: from whence this fourth argument
does arise. Those that have the earnest of Gods spirit in their hearts, it is
altogether impossible, that they should ever finally or totally fall from
Grace. But all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ,
have the earnest of Gods spirit in their hearts, 2 Cor. 1. 22. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.
2 Cor. 5. (...). Therefore it is altogether impossible, that they should either
finally or totally fall from grace. The minor being the express text of God.
The mayor only is for to be proved: Now that those that have the earnest of
Gods spirit in their hearts, can never fall either finally or totally from
grace, it appears by these reasons. First, because the earnest of the Spirit
of God is nothing but an assurance given unto us by God of that share and
portion which he has prepared for us in heaven: whence it is styled the
earnest of our inheritance until the purchased possession be really bestowed
upon us, Ephesians. 1. 14. 15. Secondly, because it makes the Saints of God confident
and sure of heaven and of eternal life, as appears by the 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8.
Where Paul says thus; Now he that has wrought us for the selfsame thing,
is God, who also has given unto us the earnest of the Spirit: therefore (...)
are always confident, knowing that whiles we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord, we are confident I say and willing, rather to be absent
from the body, and to be present with the Lord. This (...) of the Spirit makes
the Saints of God confident and sure of their salvation upon good and solid
grounds, and not upon bare conjectures, and therefore it cannot choose but
keep them from falling away from grace. Thirdly, it must needs be so, that
those who have the earnest of the Spirit can never fall from grace, in respect
of the properties of an earnest. For first, an earnest it ties and binds the
party that does give it to make good his bargain and his promise. Secondly, it
is a badge and sign of true and upright dealing, and it gives an assurance,
that the bargain shall be punctually performed to the utmost by him that
gives the earnest. Thirdly, an earnest is part of payment, it is part of the
whole which we shall receive. Fourthly, it is such a thing as can never be
taken from us. Let the Bargain or the Contract hold or break, the earnest
still remains with him that does receive it: he that gives it, is not to
require it, he that receives it, is not to restore it. Fifthly, an earnest
draws the whole to it, it makes the whole of which it is an earnest to be our
own. Now the Spirit of God and the graces of Gods Spirit which are once put
into our hearts, are styled an earnest in all these respects, because they
bind the Lord for to perform his Covenant, and to give us that inheritance
which he has promised to us (...) because they give us full assurance that God
deals truly, honestly, and in good earnest with us, and that he will perform
whatsoever he has promised unto us to the very utmost: because that portion of
Grace and of Gods Spirit which we have in possession, here is a part and
inchoation of that happiness and glory which we shall have hereafter: because
they are such things as shall never be taken from us again. Luke 10. 42. Mary
has chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her. God will
not require this earnest at our hands again, but we shall still enjoy it as
our own: and because they draw the whole unto them, they make the whole and
all of that which God has promised to us to be our own. Wherefore this must
needs be an undoubted truth, that those who have but once this earnest of
Gods spirit in their hearts (as all those that are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ have it, Rom 8. 9, 14.) can never possibly fall, either
finally or totally from grace: for then this earnest of Gods spirit should be
lost, and serve to none or little purpose. Of all arguments that can be
produced, this is one of the strongest and least capable of any sound and solid
answer.

The fifth thing in respect of the holy Ghost, which may passes understanding,
and testifies to their own spirits and consciences, that they are the adopted
children and sons of God, which causes them to cry, Abba Father Rom, 5. 1.
and cap. 8. 15, 16. Then it stampes and settles this assurance of Gods love;
this undoubted certainty of their own salvation, and of their continual
perseverance in grace unto the end upon their hearts and souls in such deep
and indelable Characters, that no temptation, no sin or affliction whatsoever
can utterly raze and blot it out again, though it may so blot and blurre it
for a time, that they themselves may not so evidently and clearly see it as
they should. And when all this is done, then the holy Ghost descends as a sweet
and heavenly dew upon them, and does fill and even gl^tte and ravish their very
hearts and souls with that joy which is most unspeakable, comfortable,
delectable and glorious. This is the ordinary and constant method and manner
of the working of Gods spirit in the hearts and souls of all such, as are once
truly regenerated: the very Spirit of God assures their souls and consciences,
that God will always love them, and preserve them unto the end, that he will
never suffer them wholly to depart or stray from him, that he will give them
perseverance, and cause them to hold out constantly unto the end: The spirit of
God himself does secretly, powerfully, and fully resolve and satisfy their
souls and consciences, that they shall never return unto their sin^ again,
or fall finally or totally from him. Therefore those who are sound grown and
experienced Christians, can never be persuaded to believe that they shall ever
appostatize and fall quite away from God or grace, because the spirit of God
does so powerfully persuade them and resolve them to the contrary. Wherefore I
dare be bold for to avouch this for truth, that those who hold thee fiuall and
total Apostacy of the Saints did never so much as feel the powerful,
sweet, and comfortable working of Gods spirit in their hearts, which would
have fully resolved them to the contrary. Carnal men who have never felt the
sweet and comfortable working of Gods spirit in their hearts and souls, may
chance to call this holy truth into question, because the spirit of God did
never seal it to their souls, or fix and stamp it on their hearts. But
regenerate and ^oly men can never do that, because the Spirit of God does
witness to their spirits, that they are the sons of God, and that they shall
continue such unto the end, so that all the devils in hell cannot persuade
them to the contrary. From hence therefore I do collect this experimental,
sensible, and unanswerable argument (which though it be a mere Mystery and
Riddle unto natural and carnal men, who cannot perceive these holy operations
of Gods spirit, John 14. 17.
because they are spiritually disc^rned, and are known and 1 Cor. 2. 13. 14.
discovered to be true only by an inward experience, sens^ and feeling, and
not by any outward knowledge, learning, Science, or Discourse whatsoever. Yet
the hearts and consciences of all experienced and grounded Christians must
willingly subscribe and yield unto it.) That which the inward working and
secret operation of Gods holy Spirit, does powerfully, evidently, and
vndeniablie seal and ratify unto the hearts, souls, and consciences, of all
experienced, grown, and sincere Christians, that must needs be a sure, firm,
and infallible truth. But the spirit of God by the inward and secret operation
of it, does powerfully, evidently, and undeniably seal and ratify unto the
hearts, souls, and consciences of all experienced, grown, and sincere
Christians, that they shall neither finally nor totally fall from grace. And
therefore it must needs be true: For proof of the minor proposition, I only
appeal unto the souls and consciences of grown, strong, and aged Christians,
who have had long and sweet experience of the sweet working of Gods spirit in
their hearts. And for the Mayor, no man can deny it, unless he will make the
working of Gods spirit in the hearts of his Saints to be but a mere imposture
and delusion, which is blasphemous for to think. Wherefore I doubt not but
that these fo^r last arguments here produced, will be so prevalent and
irresistible in the hearts of all experienced and grown Christians (who are
only able to discern and judge of them) that they cannot but subscribe to
this assertion, and embrace it as the truth.

The sixth thing in the spirit of God which may establish us would: it is
impossible for them either ^inally or totally to fall from grace. But all those
who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, are always led,
guided, and directed by the Spirit of God, Exek. 36. 27. I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them, Romans 8. 14. As many as are led by the spirit of God,
they are the sons of God, Psalm. 48. 14. For this is our God for ever and
ever, he will be our guide even unto death, Io. 16. 13. When the Spirit of
truth is come, it guides you into a^ truth; They walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. Romans 8. 1. And they are so ouer-ruled and mastered by the
Spirit, that they cannot do the evil that they would, Gal. 5. 16. 17. This I
say then, walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, for the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the
things ye would: the Spirit of God does cause them to walk in his (...), and
to keep his judgments and do them, they cannot choose but do them, Ezekiel. 36.
27. and Act. 4. 20. Therefore it is impossible for them, either finally or
totally to fall from grace.

Lastly, the intercession and assistance of Gods spirit, may help our
informities, and makes intercession unto God for us with gronings which cannot
be uttered, and he who searches the hearts, knows what is the mind^ of the
spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God, Romans 8. 26, 27. When we are weak, dull, and dead, and quite indisposed
unto holy duties, then does the holy Ghost help and quicken us, and enable us
to perform them, in a gracious, comfortable, and holy manner, whence I
conclude with this argument. Those whom the spirit of God does always make
intercession for, and those whom the holy Ghost does always assist in the
performance of every holy duty, it is impossible for them to fall from grace.
But the spirit of God does always make intercession to God for those that are
truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, and does always assist them in
the p^rformance of every holy duty. Therefore it is altogether impossible for
them to fall from grace: And thus you see how true this Doctrine and position
must needs be true in respect of the holy Ghost himself.

Fourthly, it is altogether impossible for the Saints of God Fourthly, in
respect of the Angels.
totally or finally to fall from grace in respect of the Angels, who do
always guard them and attend them, from which I form this argument. Those
about whose persons the holy Angels of God do always pitch their te^ts, and
incampe themselves that they may deliver them. Those ^uer whom the Lord does
give his Angels charge to keep them in all their ways, and to bear them v^
in their hands, left they dash their fe^te against a stone, it is utterly
impossible, that they should ever finally or totally fall from grace: for how
can they be hurt whom a guard of Angels does inviron? how can they ever fall,
whom the holy Angels do support and keep from falling? But about all those
who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, the holy Angels do
always pitch their tents, and incampe themselves that they may deliver them:
and over them the Lord has given his Angels charge to keep them in all their
ways, and to bear them up in their hands left they should da^ their feet
against a stone, Psalm. 34. 7. Psalm. 91. 11, 12. Genesis 32. 12 2 King. 6. 16, 17.
Math. 4. 11. Therefore it is altogether impossible for them, either finally or
totally to fall from grace. This argument I do not so much rely upon, because
this protection of the Angels is principally of the bodies of the Saints, but
whether they have any influence into the souls of the Saints to preserve them
from sin, that I will leave unto the judgment of the reader to determine.

Fifthly, it is altogether impossible for those that are once Fifthly, in respect
of the Saints themselves, and of their privileges.
totally to fall from grace in respect of themselves, and the many privileges
they do enjoy, and of that present e^tate and condition wherein they stand.

For first of all; all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into
Christ, they are partakers of the divine Nature, and they are borne of an
immortal seed which still remains in them, and cannot be rooted out: From
which I frame this argument. Those which are partakers of a diuin^ nature, and
borne of an immortal seed which still remains in them, and cannot be rooted
out: it is altogether impossible for them, either finally or totally to fall
from grace; but all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into
Christ, they are partakers of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. and they are
borne of an immortal seed which still remains within them and cannot be
rooted out, 1 Pet. 1. 23. and 1. Io. 3. 9. Therefore it is altogether
impossible for them, either finally or totally to fall from grace.

Secondly, they are borne of God, and are sons of God, the sons of God,
then are they also heirs, and co-^eires together with Christ, and shall be for
ever glorified with him, Rom 8. 17. Gal. 4. 6, 7. Tit. 3. 7. Heb. 1. 14. cap.
2. 11, 12. 1 Io. 1. 2. Secondly, if they are sons, then they shall abide in the
house for ever, and never be put ^nt, (...). 8. 36. Gal. 4. 30. Thirdly, if
once sons and borne of God, then they cannot sin, and the seed of grace
abides within them, 1 Io. 3. 6. 9. Fourthly, if once sons and borne of God;
then they shall stand fast for ever: Psalm. 125. 1. Eccles. 3. 14. Fifthly, if
once sons, Jesus Christ he lives in them, and the life which they then
live, they live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal 2. 20. Sixthly, if sons,
God then will never condemn them for their sins, but he will spare them,
even a^ a father spares his own son that serves him: Mal. 3. 17. and Psalm.
103. 8. to 15. But all those that are once truly regenerated, and ingrafted
into Christ, they are the sons of God, John 1. 12, 13. Romans 8. 14. to the 18.
Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 6. 18. Titus 3. 17. Heb. 2, 16. 11, 12. Iam. 1 18. 1
Io. 3. 2. 9. and therefore it is altogether impossible for them, either finally
or totally to fall from grace.

Thirdly, those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted they are built
upon a rocks: they are founded upon Jesus Christ a sure corner stone, which
cannot be moved: From whence I collect this third argument. Those that are
founded and built upon a rock, and are founded upon Christ himself, that sure
foundation, and precious corner stone, it is impossible for them, either
finally or totally to fall from grace. For the Scriptures are express in it,
that all such as are built and founded upon Christ, shall never be asham^d or
confounded, that though the rain descend, and the floods com^, and the winds
blow and beat upon them, yet they shall not fall, because they are founded
upon a Rock. Mat. 7 24, 25. Luke 6 48. 1 Cor. 3. 12. to the 15. 1 Pet. 2. 6.
and Ephesians. 2. 2^. But all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, are founded and built upon a rock, and upon Christ himself that
sure foundation and precious corner stone, Math. 7. 24. 5. Luke 6. 40. Ephesians. 2.
20, 21. and 1 Pet. 2. 5, 6. Therefore it is altogether impossible for them,
either finally or totally to fall from grace.

Fourthly, the Saints of God they have a new heart, a new spirit, and a new
nature put into them, the law of God is written and engraven in their hearts
with indelible Characters by the finger of Gods spirit, from whence this fourth
Argument may be framed. Those that have a new heart, a new nature, and a new
spirit put into them, which will cause them to walk in Gods statutes, and to
keep his judgments and do them: Those who are new men, and new creatures,
and have the law of God written and engraven in their hearts by the finger of
Gods Spirit, can neither finally nor totally fall from grace. But all those who
are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, they have a new heart, a
new nature, and a new spirit put into them, which will cause them to walk in
Gods statutes, and to keep his judgments and do them, Psalm. 51. 10. Exek.
18. 31. cap. 36. 26, 27. Io. 1. 13. They are new men, and new creatures, 1 Cor,
5. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 3. 16. cap. 4. 21, 22, 23. Col. 3. 8, 9, 10. 1 Pet.
3. 4. And the law of God is written and engraven in their hearts by the finger
of Gods Spirit, Ier. 31. 33, 34. Hebr. 8. 10. cap. 10. 16. 17. Therefore it is
altogether impossible for them, either finally or totally to fall from grace.

Fifthly, the Saints of God have overcome the world, they are taken out of the
world, and made men of another world, they are translated from death to life,
and shall not come into condemnation: From whence this fifth Argument may be
framed. Those who have overcome the world; those who are quite translated and
taken out of the world, being made men of another world, those who are
translated from death to life, and shall not come into condemnation, it is
impossible for them either totally or finally to fall from grace. But all those
who are once t^uly r^generated and ingrafted into Christ, they have overcome
the world, 1 Ioh. 4. 4. Ye are of God little children, and have overcome them:
because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world, cap. 5.
4, 5. Whosoever is borne of God overcomes the world, and this is the victory
that overcomes the world, even our faith, Christ has overcome the world for
them, Io. 16. 33. And God he gives them victory through the Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57. They are quite translated and taken out of the World.
They are redeemed from the earth, and from this present evil world, and made
men of another world, their hearts and souls, their thoughts, their
affections, desires, and conuersation^ are in heaven, Io. 15 19. cap. 17. 11.
16. Reu 14. 3. 4. Phil. 3. 20. They are translated from death to life, and
shall not come into condemnation, Io. 5. 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
he that hears my word and bel^eueth on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is past from death unto life,
Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Col. 1. 13. who has delivered
us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the Kingdom of his
dear Son, and 1 Io. 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death unto
life, because we love the brethren. Therefore it is impossible for them either
finally or totally to fall from grace.

Sixthly, those who are partakers of the first resurrection, those who are dead
to sin, those who have put off the old man, called us with an holy calling,
Tit. 3. 5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the holy Ghost. Yea, they are saved to the uttermost, Heb. 7.
25. they are saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation: they shall not
be ashamed nor confounded world without end, Isai. 45. 17. they are passed
from death to life, and shall not come into condemnation, John 5. 24 And they
have everlasting life in present possession: he that believes on me, he that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood h^h everlasting life: Christ does not say
he shall have it, but he has everlasting life, John 3. 16. 18. 36. ca. 5. 24.
c. 6. 27. 39: 49: 47: 50, 51: 54: 57: 58. Christ has given everlasting life to
all those that are his sheep, John 10. 28. Every true believer he has the
Son of God dwelling in him, and therefore he cannot choose but have
everlasting life: He that has the Son has everlasting life within him: 1
John 5. 11, 12: 13. Yea, this is life eternal, to know God to be the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17. 3. and 1 John 5. 13. 20.
Therefore it is impossible for them to fall finally or totally from grace. This
is an argument which in my judgment cannot be answered or euaded.

Ninthly, all those who are once truly regenerated and they are called to
salvation, and to the obtaining of the glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These.
2. 13, 14. They are called unto Gods kingdom and glory, 1 These. 2. 12. They
are called to lay hold of eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 12. therefore they cannot
fall from grace, for then they should loose the end of their calling: Secondly,
all those that are justified, they are freed from condemnation: and they are
justified only to this end and purpose, that they might not be condemned, Romans
8. 1. 33. 34. and John 5. 24. Therefore they cannot fall from grace, for then
they should loose the benefit and fruit of their justification. Thirdly, all
those who are sanctified, they are therefore sanctified, that they might be
glorified, and saved, Romans 8. 30. 2 These. 2. 13. Tit. 3. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4, 5.
Fourthly, all such as are the true and living members of Jesus Christ: Christ
gi^es unto them eternal life, John 10. 28. and 1 Ioh. 5. 11, 12, 13. Though
they were dead before yet they shall live in him: and when they do live once
in him, they shall so live, that they shall never die: death shall have no more
dominion and power over them, John 11. 25, 26. and Romans 6. 9, 10, 11. Christ
Jesus who is the head will never suffer any of his living, true and faithful
members for to perish, he will keep them and preserve them so, that none of
them shall be ever lost or broken; or cut off from him: Psalm. 34. 20. and John
17. 12. Where Christ himself is, there they shall always be, they in him, and
he in them, John 17. 23, 24. Fifthly, all such as are Kings and Priests unto
God for ever, they cannot fall finally nor totally from grace, for then they
should cease to be Kings and Priests, and could not be such for ever. But all
those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, they are truly
called, justified, and sanctified, Romans 8. 29 30 1 Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 1. 18.
cap. 5. 26. 27 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Christ Jesus is made unto them of God,
righteousness, justification, sanctification, and redemption; 1 Cor 1. 30.
They are the true and living members of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30. We are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bone, Christ is the Vine, they
are the branches, John 15. 5. He is the head and body, they are the members, 1
Cor. 6. 15. Ephesians. 4 16. and Col. 2. 19. And they are made Kings and Priests
for ever unto God the Father, to offer up spiritual sacrifices unto ^im: 1
Pet. 2. 5. Reu. 15. 6. and cap. 5. 10. Therefore it is impossible for them to
fall finally or totally from grace.

Tenthly, the true regenerate Saints of God, they have Book of life, it is
impossible for them to fall quite away from grace: (First because that God
himself has promised, that he will never blot out the names of those who are
once truly registered in the book of life, Reu, 3. 5. Secondly, because God
has promised such, that they shall be had in everlasting remembrance, and that
he will give them an everlasting name which shall not be cut off, Psalm. 112. 6.
Isai. 56. 5. Thirdly, because God has promised all such as are registered in
the book of his remembrance, that they shall be his in the day when he makes
up his Jewels, and that he will spare them, even as a Father spares his own
son that serves him, Mal. 3. 16, 17. Fourthly, because Christ bids his
Disciples to rejoice, because their names were written in heaven, Luke 10: 20.
if then their names might have been blotted out again, they had had no just
cause of true and solid joy, and so Christ's exhortation had been in vain.
Fifthly, because they whose names are written in the book of Life cannot be
seduced by the beast: they cannot be withdrawn from God, Reu. 13. 8. Sixthly,
because those that are received in the book of Life, they were written in that
book from the foundation of the world, Reu. 17. 8. they were predestined to
Eternal life from all eternity, by the determinate counsel and Decree of God,
which shall stand fast for ever, and shall not be repealed, Psalm. 89. 28. 33.
34. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Isai. 54. 10. Seventhly, because all such as are written in
the Lamhes book of life, shall enter into the new Jerusalem, Reu. 21. 27. they
shall surely be saved. Lastly, because there is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning with God. Iam. 1. 17. he never repent him of his gifts and calling,
Romans 11. 29. therefore he will never suffer any of those to fall, to die, or
perish, whom he has registered in his Book of life.) Now all those who are
once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, they have their names written
in heaven, and engraven in the book of Life, Mal. 3. 16. 17. Luke 10. 20.
Phil. 4 3. Hebr. 12. 23. Reu. 3. 5. cap. 13. 8. cap. 17. 8. c. 20. 12. and c.
21. 27. Therefore they can never fall quite away from grace.

But it may be objected, that men's names may be blotted Object.
out of the Book of life: For Moses prays to God, to bl^ him (...) of the
Book of life, rather then the Israelites should b^ destroyed, Exodus 32. 32.
and Paul, he could wish himself accursed from Christ for his brethren the
Jews, that so they might be saved, Romans 9. 3. Yea, God himself says
expressly. Exodus 32. 33. Whosoeu^r has sinned against me, him will I blo^ out
of the book of Life, and Reu. 22. 19. If any man shall take away from the
words of this Prophecy; God shall take away his part out of the Book of life.
All those places prove, that men's names may be razed and blotted out of heaven,
and the Book of Life. I answer first. That these wishes and prayers Answ.
of Moses and David, they do only serve to testify their exceeding love, and
their ardent affection to the Israelites; but they do not prove that such as
have their names written in heaven, and engraven in the book of Life, may have
them blotted out again: First because they are but mere wishes and desires,
proceeding only from a passionate love and zeal: they are patheticall and
hyperbolicall speeches, and do not necessarily imply, either a reality or a
possibility in (...) thing desired, and wished for. It is common for men to
wish and desire things that are impossible out of passion and affection: these
therefore being but wishes and desires, prove nothing at all against me.
Secondly, these wishes and desires they are not absolute, but conditional,
they are subordinate to Gods will, and therefore they prove nothing absolutely.
Thirdly, they are such wishes and prayers, which were altogether impossible to
be performed, because they were contrary and repugnant to Gods infinite
justice. For it could not stand with Gods justice to condemn a righteous man,
that so many wicked ones might be saved. Fourthly, these wishes of theirs if
they were absolute, were impossible to be performed in respect of Gods eternal
and immutable Decree: God had predestined Paul and Moses to eternal life,
and he had reprobated and cast off these Israelites, for whom these wishes of
theirs are made: these wishes therefore of theirs could not alter and change
Gods purpose and decree, which is immutable, irreuocable and impossible to be
repealed. Fistly, their damnation could not be satisfactory unto God for the
sins of their brethren: therefore these zealous desires of their^ were
impossible to be performed, and so they prove not any thing at all against me.
Secondly, to that of Exodus 32. 33. Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I
blot out of my book. I answer. First, that this book here spoken of, is only
the book of this temporal, but not of eternal life, as will easily and
plainly appear by comparing this ver^e: with the 27, 28, 29, and 35. verses of
the same chapter and with Psalm. 119. 13. 15. For the Israelites had there made
a Calfe, and committed idolatry against God in worshipping of it. For which
sin of theirs the sons of Leuy by Moses command slew 3000. of their
brethren: Yet Moses fearing that the justice and wrath of God were not fully
satisfied with the death of these 3000. men, but that he had some greater
temporal judgment in store for them; makes recourse unto God for them by
prayer, confesses their sin and the greatness of it, and desires God to
pardon it; if not then, he desires God rather to take away his life, and to
blot him out of his book then to suffer so many of his people for to perish.
To which prayer of his, God returns this answer: Whosoever has sinned against
me, him will I blot out of my book: that is, he shall be slain, and my
judgment of the Plague and Pestilence which I have provided for the punishment
of this his sin shall seize upon him for to cut him off. So that Moses his
prayer being but to remove the temporal judgment of the Plague which God did
afterward inflict upon them for this their sin, this book of God may here
be well taken and accepted for the book of this temporal life: Hierome,
Gregory, Parerius, and others make this to be the exposition of the place: and
so it makes not against me. Secondly, I answer, that there is a difference
between the book of Life, living, and between that book of life wherein the
righteous are written and recorded. David he makes the difference, Psalm. 69.
28, Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written
with the righteous. A man may be blotted out of the Book of the living, that
was (...) written with the righteous. H^ that is written in that book of li^e,
wherein the righteous are recorded, can (...) be blo^e out (as I have proved
before,) he that is written in (...) book of the living may: therefore this
book of God mentioned in this place of (...), seeing it is not styled the
book of Life, but only Gods book, must be intended to be the book of the
li^ing, and not the book of life. Thirdly, if you will take this book of God
in this place for the book of life, and compare it with that of Revel. 22. 19.
If any (...) shall take away from the words of this Proph^cie, God shall take
away his part out of the Book of Life. I answer then, that the meaning of the
Scriptures is no more but this; Whosoever shall sin against me, and take from
the words of this Prophecy, I Reu. 3. 1.
will blot him out of my Book, and take his part out of the Book of life.
That is, I will make it manifest to himself and all the world, that albeit
such a man had a name he lived, and that he had his name registered and
recorded in the Book of life, that yet he was never but a dead man, and that
his name was never truly written and recorded in the Book of life. The sense
and meaning of these two places is but this. He that sins against me shall
die the death, and shall never inherit everlasting life. So then you see that
those places make nothing at all against me: that those whose names are
registered and written in heaven, and the Book of life can never be blotted
out again, and so they cannot fall quite away from grace.

Eleuently, those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted God will put ^is
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from him, Ier. 32. 40. And
they cannot possibly be seduced by any means, miracles or policies
whatsoever. Math. 24. 24. Mark 13. 22. There shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders: insomuch, that (if it
were possible) they shall deceive the very elect. Yea, the Beast which did
deceive all the other Inhabitants of the earth could not deceive them with all
his subtilty, Reu. 13. 8. and cap. 17. 8. Therefore they can never finally nor
totally fall from grace. The euasions to that place of Jeremy, I have fully
answered and defeated heretofore; the euasions to the other places remain now
to be answered, which are two in number. First, that these words, if it were
possible, imply only Object. 1.
a great difficulty, but not, an absolute impossibility. Secondly, that it
proves only, that they cannot be seduced Object. 2.
finally, but it proves not that they cannot be seduced totally. To the first
of these. I answer; that these words imply an Answ. 1.
absolute impossibility of seducing any such as are the elect of God. First,
because the very emphasis of the words imply as much; for these words, if it
were possible, imply a more impos^ible impossibility then the word impossible
does. Secondly, because the end and scope of the text is to prove as much. For
if any thing could seduce the Saints of God, then certainly false Christ's, and
false Prophets coming under the color and habit of Religion, and working
great signs, miracles, and wonders, to the very admiration of the beholders,
would seduce them: but yet all those great subtle and lying signs and wonders
cannot deceive them, it is impossible 2 These. 2. 9. 10.
even for those to do it; and therefore is it absolutely impossible for any
thing to seduce them. Thirdly, because the Scriptures certify us, that the
Beast, and Antichrist (whose coming is after the coming of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiuablenesse of
unrighteousness) could never seduce any of the elect Saints of God, whose
names were written in the book of life: but only such as never had any share
or portion in the Book of life, 2 These. 2. 10, 13, 14. Reu. 13. 8. and cap.
17. 8. If he could never seduce any of Gods elect, it is then impossible for
any to seduce them; and so their first evasion is but false, for the second
evasion, that the elect Saints of God cannot be finally Answ. 2.
seduced, I willingly admit: but that they may be totally seduced
notwithstanding, that I shall deny. For first, if they may be seduced totally
for a time, then the words and sense of the place, are not so fully satisfied:
For he that is totally deceived, is deceived, and so not impossible to be
deceived, as the words and sense import him for to be. Secondly, he that may
be deceived totally, may be deceived finally to, and so both finally and
totally: which will quite falsify and delude this Scripture: and therefore if
it be impossible for the elect Saints of God to be finally seduced, it must be
likewise impossible for them to be totally seduced to. Lastly, the sense and
scope of this Scripture, and the very litterall words do fully implie and
affirm, that they can neither finally nor totally be seduced; and therefore
we must give these Scriptures their full and perfect sense and meaning, and
imply them to an impossibility of a total, as well as of a final seducement.
If you object that the Object.
Saints of God are oft-times deceived and seduced. I answer, Answ.
that they are oft-times deceived, but yet not seduced: they may fall into
diverse petty errors in religion, but yet they always hold the maine and
fundamental truths, 1 Cor. 3. 11. verse. 16. and so this Argument stands good
and firm.

Twelfthly, the true regenerate Saints of God, they cannot given them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear him for ever, Ier. 32. 39. God does put
his Spirit into them, and cause them to walk^ in his statutes, and they shall
keep^ his indgements and do them, Ezech. 36. 27. If they should at any time
resolve with Ier^miah, that they will not make mention of the Lord, nor speak
any more in his (...), his ^d which is written (...) ingran^n in their hearts,
will b^ (...) a burning fire shut up in these bones, it will make the^ we^rie
of for bearing, and they cannot stay, but they must presently both speak it
and do it, to, Ier. 20. 9. Christ does lead them in the way of
righteousness, and in the midst of the paths of judgment, Prou. 8. 20. The
love of Christ does even constrain them, for to please him, so that they
cannot but speak and do the things which they have seen and heard, 2 Cor. 5.
14. Acts 4. 20. They are vessels unto honor, sanctified, and meet^ for their
masters use, and prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2. 21. the whole frame
and disposition of their souls is bent, and set only upon that which is good,
so that they cannot choose but serve, obey, and please the Lord continually in
all things. They cannot do the evil, and commit the sin they would. They
are good trees of the Lords own planting, therefore they cannot bring forth
evil fruit, Math. 7. 18. they are borne of God, therefore they cannot sin,
1 Ioh. 3. 9. They have put off their coat of sin, how then shall they put it
on? they have washed their feet, how shall they then defile them? Cant. 5. 3.
They are dead to sin, and how can such as are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? Romans 6. 2. The sheep of Christ they will not follow a stranger, but
they flee from him, for they do not know his voice, John 10. 5. They walk in
the spirit, so that they cannot do the things they would, nor yet fulfill the
lust of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. 17. The word of God does cast down their
sinful imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against God,
and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor.
10. 5. So that they cannot do the evil that they would. And again, they
cannot sin unto death, because their seed remains always in them, and
because they are borne of God, 1 Ioh. 3. 6. 9. and c. 5. 16, 17, 18. Therefore
they cannot possibly fall finally or totally from grace. How this argument can
be answered, or ^uaded, I cannot yet conjecture.

Thirteenthly, the Saints of God: they cannot be separated Hosea s. 19. 20. I
will betroth the^ unto me for ever: yea, I will betroth thee unto me in
righteousness, and i^ judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies: I
will even betroth thee unto me^ in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord:
God will marry himself to them, and them unto himself, ^e will be their
husband, and they shall be his Spouse, Psalm. 45. 10. 11. Isai. 54. 5. Ier. 3.
14. cap. 31. 32. Math. 19 5. 6. Christ and they are become one flesh and one
spirit, Ephesians. 5. 28. ver. 33. 1 Cor. 6. 17. They cannot possibly be separated
from the love of God which is in Christ ^sus their Lord, by any thing or
creature whatsoever. Romans 8. 34. to the end. God has chosen them to be his
people, and has also c^sed them to choose him for their God: Psalm. 4 3. Ier.
31. 33. verse. 38. Isai. 43. 1. Ezech. 11. 20. Tit. 2. 14. Hebr. 8. 10. and 1
Pet. 2. 6. And has also caused them to join themselves unto him in such an
everlasting league and cou^nant as shall (...) be forgotten, Ier. 50, 5.
Therefore it is impossible that they should ever finally or totally fall from
grace.

Fourteenthly, those who are established, settled, and grounded the Lord
himself, it is impossible for them, either finally or totally to fall from
grace. But all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ,
they are established, settled and grounded in grace, Job 36. 7. He withdraws
not his eyes from the righteous, but he does establish them for ever, 2 Cor. 1.
21. He which establishes us with you in Christ, is God, See Psa. 89. 36, 37.
Romans 16. 25. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Ephesians. 3. 18. cap 6. 10, 11. 1 These. 3. 13. 2 These.
2. 15. 17. Col. 1. 11. cap. 2. 57 and 1 Pet. 5. 10. They are so rooted and
grounded in grace, that they can never be removed or cast down. Psalm. 37. 27.
Psalm. 112. 6. Ps. 125. 1. Prou. 10. 30. Math. 7. 24. 25. Ephesians. 2 21. He^. 12.
28. and 1 Pet. 2. 6, They are as pillars in the house of God, and shall go out
thence no more, Reu. 3. 12. Yea, they are the Lords own inheritance. Deuteronomy. 4.
20. Psalm. 78. 71. Psalm. 2. 8. Psa. 79. 1. Therefore they must endure for ever:
(For an inheritance is not of any transitory and fading thing, but of such
things only as are perpetual, and endure for ever) Therefore it is impossible
for them, either finally or totally to fall from grace.

Lastly, the true regenerate Saints of God, they have all once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, they have all the inward and outward
means that may be, to preserve and keep them in the state of grace: they have
the Word and Sacraments: the Communion, company and prayers of the Saints; the
continual presence and protection of God himself: they have Jesus Christ and
the holy Ghost dwelling and residing in their hearts and souls: they have the
perpetual intercession and mediation of Jesus Christ, together with the
protection of all the blessed Angels, and many such like great and glorious
privileges which I have mentioned and proved at large before. Therefore it is
impossible for them either finally or totally to fall from grace. Thus you see,
how in regard of the very present estate and condition of the Saints of God,
who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, and in respect of
these many excellent, great, and glorious privileges which they do enjoy upon
their regeneration and inscision into Christ, that it is altogether impossible
for them either finally or totally to fall from grace.

Sixthly, it is altogether impossible for such as are once In respect of Grace
it self.
totally from grace, in respect of the very nature of Grace it self. For first
of all, true and saving grace, as it is the immediate the Divine nature, 2 Pet.
1. 3. an incorruptible seed which abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 23. a seed
remaining within the Saints, 1 John 3. 9. an unction abiding in Gods children,
1 John 2. 27. a living well of water springing up into everlasting life, Ioh. 4
14. cap. 7. 38. a spring of water, whose waters fa^le not, Isai. 58. 11. an
heavenly treasure which never wears out, nor waxes old: a treasure which
neither Moth nor Canker can corrupt, nor yet thieves purloyne and steal, Luke
12. 33. Math. 6. 20. and food that perishes not, but indureth unto everlasting
life, John 5. 24. cap. 6. 27. 47. 50. 54. Hence it is that faith is said to be
everlasting life, John 17. 3. and to be such a grace as shall not fail, Luke
22. 32. for it is kept by the very power of God, 1 Pet. 1. 5. Hence is it said
of love, that it is as strong as death: that many waters cannot quench it,
neither can the floods drown it, Cant. 8. 6, 7. Hence is it said of the fear
of the Lord, that it is clean, enduring for ever, Ps. 19. 9. of Charity that
it never fails; that is, which never fails in this life, nor in the life to
come, 1 Cor. 13. 8. of joy in the holy Ghost, that it is everlasting joy which
cannot be taken from us, Isai. 35. 10. cap. 51. 11. 12. John 16. 22. and of
the righteousness of righteous men that it indureth for ever, Psalm. 112. 3. 9.
Perpetuity, immortality, and eniternity, they are of the essence of true and
saving Grace. That grace which is not perpetual, and holds not out unto the
end, it was but false and counterfeit and never true, because it wanted this
perpetuity, this eniternity, immortality and perseverance, which is the very
life and essence of all true grace. That which does distinguish hypocrites from
true believers, and the show and shadow of grace from the truth of grace: that
which makes a specificall and essential difference, between a living faith
and a dead faith, between a true believer, and a temporary, is only this: True
believers, true grace, and true living faith, they always persevere and hold
out to the end, they never die, they never fade or end. Hypocrites and such as
have but only a show of true and saving grace, they never persevere, they last
not, they hold not out unto the end. Perseverance only is that essential
character, badge, and property, whereby God himself does distinguish true and
saving Grace, from false and counterfeite; true Saints from Hypocrites, and
other men: as we may see expressly by these texts of Scripture, Math. 13. 3.
to the 24. Luke 8. 11. to 16. 1 John 2. 19. John 5. 25. cap. 6. 66. to 70 cap.
8. 31. 2 Job. 9. Luke 8. 18. Isai. 40 29. 30. 31. Job 17. 9. Psalm. 92. 12. 13.
14. Therefore it is certain, that true and saving grace, is of a perpetual,
incorruptible, divine, and perseuering Nature, admitting of no final end, nor
total interruption, as long as any of those that do enjoy it, have any life
and being. Grace is a part of God, of Christ, and of the holy Ghost; it is a
part of their Image, and it participates of their nature and immortality: it
is the work of God, and therefore it shall be for ever, Eccles. 3. 12.
Therefore it shall always as persevere, it cannot die nor have an end. Secondly,
as true and saving grace is of an immortal, perpetual, divine, incorrup^ible,
and perseuering, so likewise is it of a growing and still-increasing nature; it
is always growing greater and greater, stronger and stronger, as we may see by
these ensuing Scriptures, Job 17 9. Psalm. 84. 7. Prou. 4. 18. John 14. 14. cap.
6. 27. Isai. 40. 29. 31. cap. 44. 4. Ezech. 47. 3. to 7. 2 These. 1. 3. 1 Pet.
2. 2. 2 Pet. 3. 18. Luke 2. 52. and 2 John 2. Hence it is, that grace is
compared to a grain of Mustard Seed, which though it be but little at the
first, yea, the least of all seeds, yet at last it grows to be the greatest of
all herbs, Math. 13. 31, 32, and Mark 4. 31. 32. to a spring of water,
springing up unto everlasting life, and rising higher and higher, John 4 14
Ezech. 47. 3. to 7. Hence it is, that true regenerate Christians, are compared
unto trees planted by the waters side, and to the Cedars of Lebanon, that are
always flourishing, growing and increasing, Psalm. 1: 3: Psalm. 52: 8: Psalm. 92:
12, 13 14. Psalm. 104. 18. ler. 17. 8. Hosea 14. 5, 6, 7. To Calves of the
stall, which are always groing and increasing, Mal. 4. 2. and to living stones
and members growing up into an holy temple and body in the Lord, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Col. 2. 19. and Ephesians. 4. 13. 16. From the nature of grace thus proved and
considered, I frame this Argument, which does most evidently and fully confirm
and prove my present assertion. If all such as are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, have such graces in them, as are of a perpetual,
immortal, incorruptible, perseuering, growing and increasing nature, it must
then be altogether impossible for them, either finally or totally to fall from
grace. But all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ,
have such graces in them, as are of a perpetual, immortal, incorruptible,
perseuering, growing and increasing nature. Therefore it must be altogether
impossible for them, either finally or totally to fall from grace. The sequel
of the mayor proposition cannot be denied: unless you will say, that though
grace be permanent, immortal, perseuering, and Object.
increasing in its own nature, but yet it is not so in respect of us: that it
is perpetual always in it self, but not in us. I answer, that if grace in
its proper nature be perpetual, Answ.
immortal, and always perseuering, then it must of necessity be so in
respect of us. First, because that which is perpetual, permanent, immortal,
and always perseuering in its own nature, must need^ be so in all respects;
for nothing can be truly considered, as abstracted from its own essence and
nature, for then it cease for to be the thing it is, especially is it be
considered in a Notion which is quite contrary to its nature: A thing that is
immortal and perpetual in its own nature and essence, cannot be considered
as a thing that is mortal and momentarie, because this consideration destroys
the essence and nature of the thing considered. If therefore grace be
immortal, incorruptible, and perpetual in its own nature, it cannot be
mortal, corruptible, and transitory in respect of those that do enjoy it?
Secondly, Grace has never any essence, being, or subsistence but in man: it is
no substance, but an habit and quality, and therefore it has no being,
essence, or existence in it self, but as it is conjoined with its subject man:
Let grace be severed from man, or man from grace, then grace must needs perish
and cease to be: it cannot subsist of it self, it cannot be transferred to
another subject, and therefore it must needs vanish and come to naught. If
grace therefore has no being, essence, subsistence, or existence of its own,
but only as it is inherent in its proper subject man, if it be immortal,
perpetual, and always perseuering in its own nature, it must needs be so
likewise as it is in man, because it has no being, no essence, no nature or
existence, but as it is in man. Wherefore this your answer which would give
grace a being, and subsistence of its own abstracted from its subject man,
must needs be false and idle: and so the ^quell of the Major proposition can
never be denied. If you deny the Minor proposition, that true and sanctifying
grace is not of a Divine, permanent, perpetual, immortal, growing and
increasing nature. I answer, that the premises do sufficiently and undeniable
prove it. But you will object. Obie^. 1.
First, that Grace may decay in part, it may decay in the fruits, and in the
degrees of it, therefore it may decay in the whole: and so it is not of a
Divine, perpetual, and immortal nature. To which I answer first. That in
grace Answ.
there are these two parts: First, there are the seeds and habits of grace,
which are here in question: secondly, there are the degrees, and the fruits of
grace which are not controuerted here. True it is that the fruits, the
effects, and the degrees, the strength and vigor of grace may decay in part,
and be suspended for a time, but the habit and the seed of grace they never
perish, they never do decay, they never suffer any diminution or abatement:
the decay, the fading and suspention of the fruits and effects of true and
saving grace, does not argue or imply a decay or diminution in the seed and
habit of grace. No man is so simple as to argue thus, the Sun is oft-times
hindered from shining on us, by reason of the interposition of the Earth,
therefore the Sun is not always of a shining nature: Or the Sun does not
always shine so bright at one time as it does at others: therefore there is
some defect, decay, and imperfection in the Sun it self. No man will argue
thus the effects, the fruits and faculties of the soul do oft-times decay,
by reason of sickness, old age, or distemperatures of the mind, therefore the
soul it self does decay, and so is not eternal: so neither is this a good
argument, the fruits, the effects, and the operation of true and saving grace
do sometimes decay in men, and are oft-times suspended; therefore the very
seeds and habits of grace do decay, and so they are not of a perpetual and
immortal nature. We all see by common experience, that the leaves and fruits
of trees, of grass and herbs, do annually decay, and yet the trees
themselves, and the roots of grass and herbs are always living, and do
not decay with them. So it is with Grace, the sense and feeling of it, the
strength and vigor of it, the fruits and effects of it may be weakened,
lessened, and suspended for a time, but yet the seed and habit of grace remain
without any diminution or decay at all. Secondly, I answer, that the remission,
diminution, and suspention of the degrees, the operations and the fruits of
grace, proceed not from any defect or decay in the seed, the habit or root of
grace, but from some external cause and impediment, which does hinder and
suppress the operations and the fruits of grace. For either it proceeds from
God himself, who does sometimes withdraw and suspend the influence of his holy
Spirit into our hearts for a season (which should quicken and inliuen these
fruits and operations of grace) to humble us, and to make us see our weakness
without his afsistance: or to cause us for to prise the influence and
assistance of his Spirit more then we did before: or to stir us up to seek
him with greater diligence and importunity, or to punish us for some neglect or
sin. Or else it proceeds from some defect or impediment in our selves. For
either we neglect the means of grace in part or in the whole: we do not use
them all, or else we use them but negligently, carelessely, and superficially:
or else we do not cherish and stir up these sweet and comfortable motions,
which Gods Spirit does infuse into our souls: or else we grieve the good
Spirit of God, and hinder his sweet influence into our hearts, by some sin
or other which we do commit: or else there is some indisposition, either of
body or mind, which does suppress and hinder the operations, fruits, and
effects of grace for a season. So that these defects, ecclipses, and
suspentions in the operations, fruits, and effects of grace, proceed not from
any defect or decay in the habit and seed of Grace it self, but from some
extrinsecall causes and impediments, which though they do suspend, and cloud
the operations and fruits of Grace for a season, yet they never extinguish,
nor yet annihilate and extirpate the seed and habit of Grace which is in men.
And no sooner are these outward impediments removed, but the habit and seed of
Grace, become more operative, more strong and vigorous, then ever they were
before. Wherefore this first objection makes nothing at ^ll against this
perpetual, immortal, and perseuering nature of true and ^auing Grace. But now
you Object. 2.
will object in the second place. That true and saving Grace, perpetually
requires some spiritual nourishment and sood to feed it and preserve it, or
else it would decay and perish: therefore it is not of a perpetual, permanent,
and immortal nature. To this I answer: First, that the antecedent is false,
Answ.
For t^ese things that are of a ^ding, and corruptible nature, though they had
always food to nourish and to feed them, yet they would come to ruin and have
an end: as we may see in men, beasts, and plants: let them have all things
necessary to p^eserue and keep them in life and being, yet they die and
perish, because they are of a corruptible and mortal nature. But those things
that are of an immortal nature, though they require food to nourish and
preserve them; they cannot die, nor yet decay and peresh, if they have food and
means to nourish and preserve them, not because the food preserues them, but
because they are of an incorruptible and immortal nature: it is not the food
and nourishment, but the very nature and essence of the things themselves, that
makes them immortal and incorruptible. Secondly, I answer. That grace and the
food which should preserve and keep it are inseparable, and they can never be
disioyned one from the other. Where ever God gives true and saving grace, there
he gives all other things that are requisite and necessary to preserve it. God
never gives men Christ, but he does together with him freely give them all
things, Rom 8. 32. He never gives grace and spiritual life to any, but he
does likewise give them all things ^ppertaining unto life and godliness, 2
Pet. 1. 3. Therefore if the seed and habit of true and saving grace, being
inseparable from the means of Grace which should preserve them, though they
require means for to preserve and nourish them, may be of a perpetual,
incorruptible, and immortal nature. Thirdly, I answer, that all the holy
duties which we do, and all the means of grace the which we do enjoy, do
not give an efficacy and strength to grace of themselves, but it is grace that
gives the efficacy and virtue unto them. For where there is no grace at all,
there can be no good use of the means of grace, nor no good and profitable
performance of holy duties, Grace gives an efficacy to the means of grace,
through the blessing and assistance of the God of grace: and holy duties give
not a being or an essence to the habit and seed of Grace, but grace gives an
essence and a being unto them; so that they do not preserve grace, but grace
them. True it is, that grace without the works of grace is dead, even as a
tree that bears no leaves nor fruit is dead: but yet those works and fruits
of grace, and this using of the means of grace, do not so much preserve and
nourish grace, as grace does preserve and nourish them; even as the fruits and
leaves give not a being, and preservation to the tree, but the tree gives a
being and a preservation unto them. And therefore seeing the efficacy and use
of the means of grace, do depend more upon grace, then grace it self does
upon them: therefore though these means of grace are requisite and necessary to
preserve grace, yet it follows not thereupon, that grace is not of a
perpetual and immortal nature. Fourthly, I answer, that grace is an infused
habit, created and produced in our hearts and souls by the holy Ghost
himself, so that though it be enlarged and increased by using of the means
of grace; yet it depends not wholly upon these means, neither can it be
utterly extinguished, and lost for want of using them. Habits that are merely
acquisite, and have their being and their rise from actions, may utterly be
lost and discontinued for want of actions to preserve them, because they may
be dissolved in the same manner as they were first acquired: they were gotten
by actions, and therefore they may be lost for want of actions. But habits
which are not got by action, but are infused into men (as grace is) cannot be
lost for want of actions, and therefore they are not preserved by actions only,
and the outward means of grace, but by union and conjunction with him that did
infuse them. Now all the true and saving graces which we have, they come from
our union and conjunction with Jesus Christ our head, and from his fullness,
we do^ recei^ grace for grace, John 1. 16. Ephesians. 1. 22. 23. cap. 2. 21, 22 cap.
4 13. 15. 16. and Col. 2. 7. 19. Suppose then that a man were v^terly deprived
of all the outward means of Grace, and of all those helps which should
increase, nourish, and preserve his graces, yet his graces should never fail
nor yet decay, because that he is still united and ^onjoyned unto Christ, who
like a living, bountiful, and gracious head, does always convey abundance of
spiritual life and grace to all his true and living members, even when all
outward helps and means of Grace do fail them. So that these outward means
of Grace they are not necessarily and simply required, to the being and
existence of grace, but only to the better being and existence of it: and
therefore grace though it require outward means and helps for to nourish and
preserve it; for its better being and existence, yet it proves not, that it is
not of an incorruptible and perpetual nature, because it requires them not
always as simply necessary for its being and existence. Lastly, I answer,
that the outward means of Grace, and the practice of holy duties, do not
nourish and preserve our graces in v^ immediately, but mediately and secundarily
by preserving our union and conjunction with Christ and with the holy Ghost,
and by drawing of us nearer unto them. The outward means of Grace may be said
to preserve and nourish Grace, in the same manner as the meat we eat, may
be said to preserve and nourish our souls: not immediately, but mediatly: and
therefore this objection makes nothing at all against the perpetuity, and
immortality of true and saving Grace. If now you object in the third place:
that Grace Object. 3.
does not always grow and increase, and therefore it is not of a growing: and
increasing nature. I answer, that the Argument Answ.
follows not. If a man should argue thus: Trees do not always grow,
especially in Winter: therefore they are not of a growing nature. Or men do
not always vs^ reason: therefore they are no reasonable creatures: this were
an absurd and idle argument: your argument is the same in substance. Grace does
not always grow and increase: therefore it is not of a growing and increasing
nature: and therefore it follows not. But to answer punctually to this your
Argument; Grace in it self is always of a growing and increasing nature;
though by reason of some outward lets and impediments, it does not always grow
and increase. The reason why good Christians do not always grow and increase
in grace, but oft-times stand at a stay, and perhaps go backwards to: is not
from any defect in Grace which would always spring and grow: but in Christians
themselves, who hinder and suppress this growth. Grace does always grow and
increase, if there be no strong lets and impediments for to hinder it.
Wherefore since true and saving Grace is of a permanent, perpetual, immortal,
incorruptible, perseuering, growing, and increasing nature: it is impossible
for those that have this Grace (as all those who are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ must needs have it, or else they were never truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ) either finally or totally to fall from
it again, even in respect of the very nature of Grace it self.

Lastly, it is altogether impossible for such as are once truly Seventhly in
respect of the dangerous consequences which else would follow.
to fall from grace, in respect of the many dangerous consequents which else
would ineuitablie follow upon the contrary; and that both in respect of the
Trinity; in respect of the true Saints of God; in respect of grace; and in
respect of the Church of God in general, but specially of our Church of
England.

First, these dangerous consequents would follow even in

For first, it would de^ogate from the honor of the Trinity. they should
begin to build the fabric of grace in men, and yet be unwilling or unable for
to make an end? that they should make so many absolute covenants and promises
to preserve and keep the Saints from falling and not perform their words?
that they should give true grace to men, and yet repent them of these gifts and
take them quite away? that they should own such for their followers, their
servants and attendants, their children and their friends, as should disgrace
them by their falls, and bring a scandal upon the profession of their names?
What would Atheists, what would Heathens say, if they should hear of this
position, that the true Saints of God may apostacy and fall away from grace?
would they not say, that it were far better to have no God at all; that it
were far better to have an Idol God, then such a God as this, as either will
not, or cannot keep his Saints from falling from him? Certainly, this very
Doctrine of the Apostasy of the Saints dishonours all the Trinity in all their
sacred and most glorious attributes: yea, it depriues God of his Dietie, it
pulls him from his throane, and sets up man above him: it makes God to be no God
at all; or at least, to be no better then an Idol, or an idle God. Wherefore
in respect of this dishonor, which el^e would light upon the whole Trinity,
this Doctrine of the perseverance of the Saints must needs be true.

Secondly, if the true regenerate Saints of God might Apostatize and fall away
from grace, it would derogate much and Christ no better then the Devil
himself, who is a liar and the father of lies. John. 8. 44. Yea, I may boldly
say, that this assertion, of the Apostacy of the Saints, would quite overthrow
the whole frame and fabric of the word of God. For take the whole Scripture
from the beginning to the very end of it, the whole frame and fabric of it,
serves to no other end and purpose, but to take away all from man in matters of
grace, and to attribute all to God, that so he only, and not man, might have
the praise and glory of all. Now this assertion of the Apostacy of the Saints,
it takes all away from God, and attributes all to man, that so man might glory
in himself only and not in the Lord. It gives a man free will to reject or
receive grace at the first: and it gives him full power and ability to reject
or to retain grace after he has received it: it takes away Gods providence,
kingdom, sovereignty and power over man, it exempts man wholly from his
jurisdiction: it makes man an absolute creature; it makes him a God and Lord
over himself: whereas the Scripture dorh take man of from his own legs, and
subjects him wholly unto God, in whose hands, his life, his thoughts, his will,
his ways, and all his actions are: and so it dissolues and ouerturnes the
whole frame and fabric of the Scriptures; and strikes at the very foundation
and root of all religion. Wherefore this Doctrine, of the Apostasy of the
Saints, can never be admitted to be true, even in this respect; and so my
present assertion must be sound and orthodox.

Thirdly, if the true regenerate Saints of God might fall Object. 2.
that the fault is not in the love of God to them; but in their want of love to
him. I answer first, that Gods love to them is free and voluntary: Hosea 14.
5. I will love them freely: Answ.
therefore if God should quite withdraw his love from them for their
disobedience unto him, this freeness of Gods love would be much tainted and
blemished, and the breach would light on God. Secondly, Gods love to them, is
the cause of their love to him. (...) John 4. 10. 19. and it is the love and
mercy of God which should preserve and keep the saints in obedience, loyalty,
and subjection unto him: yea, God himself has promised, to preserve their
whole spirit, soul and body blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 1 Th^s. 5. 23, 24. If therefore God should suffer them to sin against
him, and so to incur his displeasure, whereas he has undertaken to preserve
them blameless unto the coming of Jesus Christ, the breach must be first on
Gods part in suffering them to sin, and not on theirs, who has no power of
their own without the power and aid of God to keep themselves from sin. If
a man had a dear entire friend who was like to perish unless he did relieve
and help him: if now he should absolutely promise him to sucour and releive
him, and then fail him at the last: if now this man should perish, the blame
would now light upon him that should have helped him, and not upon him that
perishes. God is able to keep his Saints from falling from him. Jude 24. and
he has promised for to do it. Psalm. 37. 24. Psalm. 155. 1. Psalm. 121. 3, 7, 8.
Psa. 145. 13, 20. He that has given us grace, has promised to preserve and
keep it for us, because we cannot do it of our selves. If then we might loose
this grace and fall quite from it, the blame would light on God, and on the
whole Trinity, who are both able and only able to preserve and keep the
saints from falling, and have likewise promised for to do it: and not on the
saints themselves who are not able of themselves, to keep themselves in the
love of God, and to preserve themselves from falling from him: and therefore
this your Doctrine can never be admitted to be true.

Fourthly, if the true regenerate saints of God might fall from the
omnipotency and mighty power of the Trinity: and from the virtue and
efficacy of the means of grace. For if these might fall from grace, where
then were the omnipotency and mighty power of God and Christ, which should 1.
Pet. 1. 5.
preserve and keep them through faith unto salvation? where Ioh. 10. 28, 29.
were the efficacy and power of the holy Ghost? where were the strength, the
life and mighty operation of the word of God and of the means of grace, which
should conquer Rom 16. 20.
and subdve the very Prince of darkness and trample him under 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5.
feet? which should cast down imaginations, the strong holds and forts of
sin and Just, and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, and bring into captivity 1 John. 3. 8.
every thought to the obedience of Christ? where were the efficacy Heb. 2. 14.
15.
and power of the death and passion of Jesus Christ, which should destroy out
of the Saints the works of the Diuill, the Romans 6. 6.
power of Satan, and the whole body of sin? where were the efficacy and
power of that fear which God will put into their hearts ^er. 32. 40.
that they may not depart from him? Certainly this assertion, would derogate
very much from the omnipotency and mighty power of the whole Trininie, and
from the efficacy and power of grace and of the means of grace: and therefore
it cannot be admitted to be true and orthodox.

Fifthly, if the saints of God might Apostatize and fall from the state of
grace, it would derogate much from the infinite justice and wisdom of
almighty God. For when as God shall have once accepted of the death and
passion of his only Son in full satisfaction for the sins of all his true and
faithful members: when God shall promise for the merits of this his Son to
pardon all their sins, and to remember their iniquities no more: when Christ
shall purchase grace, and all things ^er. 31. 34.
appertaining to life and godliness; when he shall purchase perseverance,
heaven, and eternal happiness for them, and God shall in his justice promise,
to make all these things good unto them: if after all this, they should fall
from grace, and be deprived of all these things which Christ has purchased
for them, where then will this infinite justice of God appear? Yea, where will
his infinite wisdom be? Can it stand together with Gods infinite wisdom, to
discourage and deiect the hearts and souls of any of his saints, to weaken and
abate their love to him, and to make them cold and negligent in his service: to
bring a scandal upon himself, and upon the profession and professors of his
name, which are the inevitable consequencies of this your doctrine? what
justice or what wisdom would there be in God if this were true? Doubtless
very little or none at all: and therefore this doctrine of perseverance must be
true.

Sixthly, if the saints of God might fall from the state of save men to the
utmost, and preserve them from falling from the state of grace? to what end and
purpose would his death and passion serve? If this were true, then Christ's
should be but an imperfect Savior: a Savior, and yet no Savior: a Jesus at
one time for to save us, and yet afterward a Judge for to condemn us. Then a
man might be often times saved, and often times damned: one hour in the state of
grace, another in the state of damnation: a man might be ost times saved in one
month, in one week, and in one day. And if so, where were the efficacy of the
death, where were the virtue of the intercession of Christ? Christ by his death
and passion has purchased eternal redemption for Heb. 9. 10.
his true and faithful members; and has perfected those that Heb. 10. 14.
are sanctified for ^uer: and now he is in heaven he makes perpetual
intercession to his Father for them, to keep them in his John. 17. 11. 15. 23.
own name, to preserve them from evil, and from falling from him. If then
those members of Jesus Christ might notwithstanding fall from the state of
grace which once they have, the very death and intercession of Jesus Christ
would be of very little, or of no effect, and the very dearest of Gods saints
and children could reap no benefit or comfort from them.

Seventhly, if this were true, that the Saints of God might fall away from the
state of grace, it would make the sweet and comfortable working of Gods Spirit
in the hearts of all Gods children, to be but a mere delusion and imposture,
or at least, but a mere lying fancy and a vain conceit. For this I am well
assured of, that every sanctfied grown and experienced christian, which has
felt the working of Gods Spirit in his heart, can testify, that the Spirit of
God has so sealed this truth unto his soul, and so firmly settled and
engraven it in his heart, that he can never depart away from God, or fall
finally or totally from grace. Wherefore this position which would falsify
this working of Gods Spirit in the hearts and souls of all his faithful
children must needs be false and odious, and cannot be admitted.

Eighthly, if this should be admitted, that the true regenerate hearts and
souls from other things to set and fix them wholly upon him, as upon their
chiefest joy and only treasure. And therefore this Doctrine which would rob
the Lord of the hearts and souls of all his children, and lessen, abate,
extenuate, if not wholly extinguish the heat and vigor of men's love to him,
must needs be odious and abominable to such as love and fear the Lord, and
cannot be admitted to be true.

Ninthly, If this should be admitted, that the true regenerate Psalm is wholly
spent in praising God, and that only upon this ground, because his mercy
indures for ever. Now this position, that the true regenerate saints of God may
fall away from grace, it takes away both these causes and grounds of praising
God: it attributes both the beginning, and the end, the continuance and the
perseverance of grace to man's freewill and power, and not to God: it makes man,
both the beginer, and the preserver of his own grace: and it makes the grace
and mercy of God, together with those spiritual and heavenly graces which he
bestows on men, to be but momentary and fading, and not ^o endure for ever:
and so it robbes the Lord of all the praise and glory which is due unto his
name. Therefore it must needs be a damnable and pernicious Doctrine, and
cannot be admitted.

Tenthly, if this were once admitted, that the true regenerate saints he might
loose the things which he has wrought, and not receive a full reward? would
any wise or well advised man, consume and spend his time and days, in
purchasing of such a treasure or possession which he were not sure always to
enjoy? would any man take pains to sow the seed of grace, where he were not
sure for to reap the fruits? It is Christ's own counsel and advise to all his
saints. Labor not for the food that perishes, but for that which indureth
unto eternal life. John 6. 27. and lay not up for your selves treasures on
earth, where moth and rust do corrupt, and where thieves break thorough and
steal. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor
rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break thorough nor steal. Math.
6. 19. 20. If therefore grace were such a treasure that might be lost and
perish, the Saints of God even by Christ's own rule were not to seek it: nay,
they would not, neither could they seek it, they could not serve the Lord with
that diligent auxious and industrous care as now they do; they would grow very
slack, negligent and careless in his service. For though it be always true,
that the true Saints and children of God, ought not, nor do not serve the Lord
only or principally for the wages of heaven and eternal life, or out of
selfeloue or self respects, but for himself: yet that which does most
encourage them and make them more forwards, active, zealous and lively in Gods
service, is the consideration of that large and great reward, which God out of
his mercy and goodness has promised them for their service, of purpose to
encourage them, and to make them active in it. This is evident by the example
of Moses: Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. who refused to be called the soune of Pharohs
daughter, ch^sing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season: and why did he do all this? for he
had respect unto the recompense of reward. So the Hebrews themselves, they
took io^fully the spoiling of their goods, only for this reason, because they
knew that they had in heaven a better and more enduring substance. Heb. 10. 34.
Yea, who ever he be that comes to God, he must not only believe that God is:
Heb. 11. 6.
but also that he is a rewarder of all such as do diligently se^ke him: for if
he should consider the service of God abstracted from the reward, it would make
him negligent and weary of Gods service. Wherefore if this assertion were once
true, that the true regenerate saints of God, who have spent their whole life
and strength in doing of Gods service, might after all their care and pains,
fall quite away from grace, and so loose the reward of all the works which
they had done, you should have few or none that should deny themselves, or yet
forsake their carnal friends and pleasures, or their present worldly honors,
riches, and preserments, (which after your computation, are like to be more
permanent then their graces,) that so they might seek unto the Lord alone, and
serve him diligently with all their hearts and souls: you should have few or
none at all that would be forwards, diligent and fervent in the work and
service of the Lord. Wherefore this assertion must needs be false and dangerous
even in this respect, and so cannot be admitted for a truth.

Eleuenthly, if the true regenerate saints of God might fall on God, but on our
selves, (as our Antagonists do and must affirm, or else they would to wrecke)
how few men would there be, that would power out their hearts and souls
before the Lord, in fervent and faithful prayers? If it were in men's own
power to take up, to preserve, and to reject their graces at their pleasures,
what need men to pray to God at all? if God does nothing in this business,
our prayers unto him were vain and idle, God should have no prayers at all for
any spiritual things, if this were true, and it would be to no purpose for to
pray unto him for grace and perfeuerance, Peter then should be very much
mistaken in praying thus to God for those Saints to whom he writes. The God of
1 Pet. 5. 10.
all grace who has called you unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, make
you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you: Paul should the^ be mistaken in
praying thus for the Thesolonians. The Lord make 1 These. 3. 12, 13.
you to abound and increase in lone one toward annother and toward all men,
to the end that he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before God
even our Father, and stablish you in every good 2, These. 2. 2. 17.
word and work. For he which establishes us with you in Christ 2 Cor. 1. 21.
is God. David should be then mistaken in praying unto God Psalm. 51, 14.
to uphold and stablish him with his free Spirit: and that prayer which Christ
himself has framed and commanded us to use, should be but superflous and to
little purpose. For who would or could pray thus to God: thy kingdom come; thy
will be done en earth as it is in heaven: leadivs not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil; if God had no rule and sway over him, if God did not
give him perseverance, and preserve his gra^es in him; if man himself had
free will and power to take and to resist grace, to preserve and keep it, or
for to reject it? Wherefore seeing that this assertion, it it were admitted,
would rob the Lord of many faithful prayers which now his Saints do make
unto him for their perseverance; and seeing it would make that very prayer
which Christ himself has recorded and composed for us, to be superflous,
vain and idle, it cannot be admitted to be true.

Twelfthly, if this should be admitted for a truth, that the Saints of God
might fall quite away from the state of Grace, it would take away all absolute
and irrespectiue predestination and election to eternal life: one of these
three must then necessarily follow; that either the Saints of God who are
predestined to eternal life, may fall from grace and perish: or that there
are some men who are truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, who were
never predestined and elected to salvation: or that God did only predestinate
men unto salvation out of the foresight of their faith, their works and
perseverance: which are all ex diametro opposite and contrary to the
Scriptures, to the Fathers, to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and to
all orthodox and Protestant Divines of modern times: and therefore cannot be
admitted.

Lastly, if the true regenerate Saints of God, might fall God that shows
mercy, and disposes all things according to the purpose of his own free will
and pleasure, but of man that wills and perseuereth out of the strength and
power of his own free will. Man should then be his own God, his own
governor and director, his own judge and savior, if this were once admitted
to be true; which would be a great disparagement to Gods supremacy, and to
the death and passion of Jesus Christ. And therefore in regard of these
dangerous consequences, in respect of the whole Trititie, this doctrine cannot
be allowed to be true, that the Saints of God may finally or totally fall away
from the habit, and state of true and saving grace.

Secondly, as this Doctrine of the final or total Apostacy

For, first it would cause men for to call Gods truth, Gods

Secondly, it would deprive true Christians of all true they shall be such for
ever, Genesis 27. 33. and Number. 23. 8. 20. God himself has pronounced all such as
are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ to be blessed and happy
men (as I have proved it at large before) therefore they are and shall be such
for ever. Now this position, if it were granted, would quite deprive the Saints
of God of all their happiness, it would strip and rob them of their graces,
which are the only treasure of their souls, and make them of all men most
miserable, where 1 Cor. 15. 19.
as they are the only blessed of the Lord: wherefore this posi^ion cannot be
granted to be true, even in this respect.

Thirdly, it depriues the Saints of God of all true joy and their names are
written in heaven, that their peace is made Luke 10. 20.
for ever with God; that they are justified and sanctified by Jesus Christ:
that they are passed from death to life, and shall never John 5. 24.
come into condemnation: that they are so established and settled in the state
of grace, that they shall never fall, nor be removed from it: and that they are
so thoroughly ingrafted into Christ, that they shall never be broken off from
him again. But if this once were true, that these Christians might either
finally or totally fall from grace: that they might utterly loose all the good
things which they had done in all their lives, so that they should not be any
more remembered: Ezech. 18. 2^
that they might loose Gods love and favor: loose Christ Jesus, and all the
rich benefits and merits of his death and passion, loose the holy Ghost and all
the comforts and graces which they have by him; How doleful, how miserable
then should the state of Christians be? how would their souls droope and
languish with grief and heaviness, which now do even dance and leap for
joy? how would their zeal, their love, and courage be abated? how would their
minds and consciences be perplexed? how would the devil vex and torture them
after every small and little sin which they should commit with this Quare:
do^ I yet persevere? am I yet in the state of grace? or am I not already fallen
from it by my sins? Certainly if this exposition were once embraced as a
truth, the devil would so tyrannize over weak, scrupulous, and tenderhearted
Christians by this means, that he would even drive the^ almost unto despair,
and send them down with grief and sorrow to their graves, where as else they
should have always cause to laugh and sing. The state of Christians is a state
of joy: God himself commands them, to rejoice evermore. To rejoice in the Lord
always, and again for to rejoice. 1 These. 5. 16.
To be joyful in glory, and to sing aloud in their beds for joy of Phil. 4. 4.
heart. Therefore this position which would deprive the Psalm. 149. 5.
Saints of God of their very heaven upon earth, of all their sweet and heavenly
joys and consolations, and of all the grounds and causes of their joy, and
fill their souls with doubts, fears, griefs, discouragements, t^ares, and
amazements, must needs be odious, false, and dangerous, and cannot be admitted.

Fourthly, it breeds despair in the hearts and souls of all devil tyrannize
and triumph over them? He would then be always suggesting this unto them,
and pressing it upon their consciences: You are now fallen quite away from
grace, you are now cut off from God and Christ by these, and these your sins:
you were once the children of God, but now you are now the sons of Satan, and
vessels of Romans 9. 22.
wrath fitted only for destruction. You are now fallen quite away from that
state of grace wherein you stood before, and so it is impossible for you to be
renewed by repentance any more: Heb. 6. 6.
Your last end now shall be far worse then ever your bigin^ing 2 Pet. 2. 20.
was: and because that you have cast off God, he has now for ever cast off
you: you have committed a wilful sin, in departing and falling from his
grace, and therefore there is no Heb. 10. 26. 27.
more sacrifice and oblation for sin remaining, but a certain fearful
expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour you. What
can poor perplexed and distressed souls answer unto these objections or the
like, when Satan shall assault them with them, and press them on their
consciences? They cannot say, we were in the state of grace before, and
therefore we are sure that we continue in it now, because it is impossible
for us to fall from it: for this were quite contrary to this assertion: They
dare not say, that they have committed no such sin as might disturb them
from the state of grace, and cut them off from Christ, because the devil, and
their own scrupulous and tender consciences do testify the contrary: they
date not for to say that they are still in Christ: and if they are di^cted and
cut off from him, they cannot hope to be ingrafted into him again, because
they have so wilfully fallen from him: and so they cannot but despair: whereas
if they had this pillar, this help and stay to rest their souls upon. We
know that we were once ingrafted truly into Christ, and therefore it is
impossible for us to be broken off from him: we were once invested into the
state of Grace from which we cannot fall, and therefore we are now in Christ,
we are in the sure state of grace, and shall continue in it all our days:
This would be able to ward off all these fierce assaults of Satan, that they
should never hurt them, this would comfort and bear up their souls, and keep
them from sinking in despair: this would make men for to die with joy and
comfort, and to lie down and rest in peace: For then they might say with Paul:
We have finished our course, we have fought a good fight, and we have kept
the faith, henceforth there 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
is laid up for us a crown of glory: Whereas now they cannot die with joy,
with comfort, and assurance, and lie down in peace, because they are not sure
of their perseverance, they are not sure of their state of grace: it may be
that they are already fallen from their state of Grace for ought they know: if
not, they may fall from it ere they die; yea, in the very last gappe and minute
of their lives, they may commit such sins as may cut them off from Christ for
ever, because they cannot live for to repent of them before their death; and so
desp^iring, or at least doubting of their own salvation (the devil being
aptest then for to assault them with desperate and auxious thoughts and fears,
when as they are nearest to their ends, and least able to resist his fierce
assaults) they lie down in terror, and rest in woe and grief. Alas, what
comfort could a godly and a Christian life (which otherwise would comfort and
rejoice the soul beyond expression) bring any man at his death, if this were
true, that he might after all fall finally or totally from grace? if all the
works and holy duties which he had done, or wrought in all his life might
utterly be lost, and be remembered of the Lord no more? If he might loose the
wages and reward of all his pains at last? Certainly, if faithful Christians
and holy men, who are the only happy men on earth, and have the only cause for
to rejoice and joy continually, might either finally or totally fall from
grace, they should of all men be most wretched and miserable, they should be
stripped of all true comforts here, and be driven to despair at the last day.
Away then with this Doctrine of a final or total fall from grace, which
sauoureth of nothing but of mere despair. God grant that those who do
maintain it in their health, may never feel the smart and terror of it in
their temptations, sicknesses, or deaths. But you may perchance object, that
though regenerate Object.
men may fall totally from grace, and so may be discouraged and perplexed for
the present, yet they may comfort and sustain their hearts and souls with
this, that God in his mercy may raise them up again: and may in some good
measure assure their souls, that because God has bestowed grace upon them
heretofore, therefore he will be the more ready, and willing to restore it to
them again, and to impart it to them the second time. To this I answer, Answ.
that you are much mistaken in this point, and it is nothing so. For their
having of Grace bestowed on them heretofore, does rather argue that God will
therefore bestow grace on them no more, because they did not keep it at the
first. God seldom or never gives those grace the second time, who have not
kept it at the first. Gods graces they are always precious, he will never
cast them before such dogs and swine as have lost and trampled them under
foot before. This is evident by all those places of Scripture which our
Antagonists do principally object against us. For Ezech. 18. 24. When a
righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity,
and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does,, shall be
live? (Mark the comfort which you talk of) no: all the righteousness which
he has done, shall be no more remembered, God will not so much as once
respect it, in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that
he has sinned, in them shall he die. So Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. It is impossible
for them who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God,
and of the powers of the world to come, if they fall once away, to renew
themselves again unto repentance, seeing that they crucify again^ unto
themselves the Son of God, and put him to open shame. Mark the words, it is
impossible for such as fall totally from grace, to be renewed again unto
repentance, they cannot be ingrafted into Christ the second time. Where then
is the truth or comfort of your answer? So Heb. 10. 26. 27. If w^ sin
wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation to devour those that do Apostatize from
Grace: These and such like Scriptures which are objected against us, for to
prove a total, or a final fall from true and saving grace, serve only to
satisfy this objection, to terrify the hearts, and daunt the souls of all
such men as shall once fall from grace, and to exclude them for ever from Gods
mercy, and from rising up again. So that the possession and inioyment of grace
before, if it be once lost, serves only for to prove, that those which had it
shall never have it, nor enjoy it any more; and not that God will therefore be
more ready and willing to bestow it on them again. And so the due
consideration of all these Scriptures, and this position of a total or a
final fall from grace, would drive men unto final desperation. You therefore
that maintain this desperate and terrible doctrine of the final or total
Apostasy of the Saints, beware, lest that you quench the smoking flax, and
break the bruised reed, which Christ himself would never do: Isay 42. 3.
Beware lest you afflict, and wound to desperation, the tender and the broken
heart, the troubled conscience, and the soft and tender soul, which God
himself commands you Isay 61. 1, 2, 3.
for to heal, to comfort, cherish and bind up with the comfortable Ezech. 13.
22.
assurance of his immutable, constant, and perpetual love cap. 34. 4. 16.
to them in Christ, and with the impossibility of a final or total fall from
grace. If the pressing of this doctrine, drive any to despair, (as it cannot
choose but do, unless they are persuaded by Gods Spirit to the contrary)
their blood and souls shall be required at your hands that press it, and
Christ himself who is that good and great Shepherd of his sheep, which will
not suffer any of his sheep to perish, will John. 10. 28.
frame this accusation and in ditement against you at the day of Judgment, as
he did against the shepherds of Israel, Ezech. 34. 4. The diseased have ye
not strengthened, neither have you healed that which was sick, neither have
you bound up that which was broken, neither have you brought again that which
was driven away, but with force and cruelty have you ruled them: and then your
doom and judgment will be terrible and dismal as this your Doctrine is.

Fifthly. This doctrine of a final or total fall from grace, sons of
Be^ial, and vessels fitted for destruction. Wherefore seeing that this doctrine
of falling from grace, puts no sound and sure difference between the wicked
and the godly in this present life, and gives the one no greater and no surer
privileges then the other has, when as the Scripture makes as great a
difference between them, as is between sheep and goats, wheat and tares,
gold and dross, happiness and misery; it must needs be false and opposite to
the truth, and cannot be admitted.

Lastly, if the true regenerate Saints of God might fall finally from grace, it
would breed a doubt and scruple in men's minds, whether there are any that are
saved, or at least whether God has always had a true Church on earth. For if
one regenerate man may fall from grace, then a second and a third may to, and
so every regenerate man in particular, and so all regenetate men; and then
there should be none that should be saved, then there might be a time when
all men might be fallen from grace, and so a time when as there was no Church
of God on earth. We all know, that the very best of all Gods Saints and
children are apt and ready to fall into sin, and that in many things they
offend all, which things by your assertion may cut them of from Christ, and
cast them headlong from the state of grace: wherefore, for ought that any man
knows, there is not any one of Gods Saints and children, but may be fallen
quite away from the state of grace before his death, and so may dye and perish
in his sins; and therefote if this position were once admitted, it would
breed a doubt in men where ever there were any saved: or whether God has
always had a Chruch on earth, which would be a dangerous consequent, and would
much eclipse the riches of Gods mercy, the merits of Christ's death and passion,
the glory and perpetuity of his kingdom, and make men careless of religion.

Thirdly this Doctrine, of a final or total Apostacy from

First, it would cause men to vilify and undervalue grace, it would cause them
for to slight and disrespect it, and not to possession, which will never decay;
that is is not subject unto time and chance, as all sublunary and worldly
things are: that it is such an heavenly treasure as cannot be lost, nor taken
from us. Therefore Christ, when as he would incite and stir us up to seek
after grace, does commend grace unto us as a permanent, and everlasting good
which never fades, nor yet decaies, putting it by way of antithesis and
opposition to all worldly things, which are but momentary and fading: hence are
these his exhortations: John 6. 27. Labor not for the ^eate that perishes,
but for that which ind^reth unto eu^rlasting life. Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon earth where (...) and rust does corrupt, and where thee^es
breaks through and ^teale, but lay up for your selves treasures in heaven,
where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where the^es do not break
through nor ^eale. Math 6 19. 20. Whosoever shall drink of this water shall
thirst again: but whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall
never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life. Ioh. 4. 13, 14. That which does most
of all commend and set forth grace, that which makes it amiable and lovely, and
gives it an exc^llencie above all earthly things is this, that it is a
permanent possession, and an everlasting treasure which cannot be lo^t. If it
were notso, men could not prise it above earthly thing. This Doctrine therefore
of falling from the state of grace, it takes away the very excellency of grace,
and so it would cause men for to vilify and undervalue it, and to prefer the
base and transitory things of the world before it; which would be a dangerous
consequence.

Secondly, this assertion, it would overthrow and utterly therefore cannot be
admitted, even in this respect.

Thirdly, this assertion, if it were admitted would utterly disanull, abolish
and take away the very root and chief of Heb. 11. 1. Is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen: it is a sure evidence
of heaven and eternal life. Wherefore those that have this faith, must not
only believe, that God is, but also that he is a rewarder of all such as do
diligently seek him: they must be persuaded of all Gods promises, and embrace
them as their own. Hebr. 11. 6. 13. and with faithful Abraham. Romans 4. 19.
20, 21. they must not stagger at the promises of God through vnble^fe, but they
must be strong in faith, they must be fully persuaded, that as God is able, so
likewise he will be faithful to perform what ever he has promised. He
that has a true justifying and saving faith, he must be able to apply Christ
Jesus and all the promises of the Gospel to himself, he must appropriate and
ascertaine them unto himself, so as to make them his own for eu^r: he must
be able thus to argue. He that hears the word of Christ, and believes on him
that sent him, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
is passed from death to life: John. 5. 24. he that trusts and waits on God
shall never be removed, but shall stand fast for ever, he shall mount up with
eagles wings, he shall run and not be weary, he shall walk and not be faint.
Psalm. 125. 1. Isai. 40. 31. God will put his fear into his heart, and they
shall not depart from him: Ier. 32. 40. But I do hear the word of Christ, I
believe on him that sent him, I do wait and trust on him: therefore I have
everlasting life, I am passed from death to life and shall not come into
condemnation, I shall never be removed from the state of grace, but shall stand
fast for ever, I shall run and not be weary, I shall walk and not faint, I
shall not depatt from him. He that cannot argue thus, he that cannot thus
apply and assume these promises of God unto himself, has no faith at all: he
that has faith and is able thus for to apply them, can assure himself that
he shall persevere unto the end, and that he shall neither finally nor totally
fall from grace: yea, and must assure him self so from these and such like
promises, or else he has no faith in them. So that if this assertion of the
Apostacy of the Saints were once admitted, it would quite abolish and utterly
take away all true and saving faith, whose property it is, not only not to
fail: Luke 22. 32. but likewise to assume these promises of final and total
perseverance to it self.

Fourthly, if this assertion were once admitted, it would Job. 19. 25, 26. cap.
11. 15 18. cap. 13. 16. cap. 16. 19. Psalm. 27. 1. Psalm. 46. 1. to 8. Isai. 25.
8, 9. cap. 50. 7, 8, 9. John. 5. 24. cap. 14. 27. Romans 8. 35. to the end. cap.
14. 8. 2 Cor. 5. 1. to 10. Ephesians. 3. 12. Phil. 1. 21. 23. Cor. 3. 4. 1 These. 1,
4, 5. 1 Timothy 1. 7. 12. 2 Timothy 2. 19. cap. 4. 7, 8, 18. Heb. 2. 15. cap. 10. 34,
35. 1 Pet. 4. 19. 1 John 3. 2. cap. 4. 17, 18. cap. 5, 18, 19. 20. Wherefore
since this doctrine of the Apostacy of the Saints would utterly abrogate,
falsify and overthrow the grace and doctrine of assurance and certainty of
salvation, it must needs be a false dangerous and pernicious doctrine which
cannot be admitted.

Fifthly, if this were once admitted for a truth, it would take away and
utterly abolish in the Saints the grace of love, John 15. 11. Romans 14. 17. and
cap. 15. 13: wherefore it cannot be admitted even in this respect.

Lastly, if this assertion were once admitted, it would make brings every
thought into subjection unto Jesus Christ. 2. Cor. 10. 5: it works so
powerfully and maiestically in men's souls, that none can let it or resist it:
Isai, 43. 13. and Acts 6. 10. it makes every knee to bow and stoop to Jesus
Christ, and to keep his judgments and do them. Phil. 2. 10. and Ezech. 36.
27. wherefore this doctrine which does thus ouerturne and pull down the
kingdom of grace, which makes it subject unto man, whereas man is subject unto
it, must needs be a damnable and pernicious doctrine, and so cannot be
admitted for a truth even in this respect.

Fourthly, if this doctrine of the final or total Apostacy England.

For first, it would wrong the whole Church of God in traducing,

Secondly, it would wrong the whole Church of God in Pelagian Heresy, which
has not only been condemned and opposed by Saint Augustine, Hierome,
Prosper, Bradwarden, and others, but likewise by three several Counsels; to
wit, the Council of Mile^etan: the Council of Afric, and the Council of
Orange. For as all the points of Arminianesme are nothing else but mere
Pelagianisme clad in other terms, so this was one part and member of the
Pelagian or Deem pelagian Heresy, that the true regenerate Saints of God might
fall away from the state of grace: and therefore the Demepelagians did ca^ell
and carpe at Saint Augustines doctrine, for teaching that the Saints of God
after they were once regenerated had such a disposition put into them, that
they could not but perseverance in grace, as appears by the Epistles of
Hilarie and Prosper to Saint Augustine concerning the remainders of the
Pelagian Heresi^s: wherefore this doctrine of the Apostacy of the Saints being
nothing else but a part of the Pelagian Heresy, cannot be now admitted and
embraced without great wrong and prejudice to the whole Church of God.

Thirdly, it would produce many dangerous consequencies England. For first, it
will pull up a maine foundation, and a maine principle and ground of truth,
which has bin planted and settled in our Church; it will raise a strong
bulwark and fort of true religion, which the best and chiefest worthies of our
Church have hitherto full well and manfully defended, against all foreign
hostility whatsoever: which will be a great disparagement and blemish to our
Church. Secondly, it will give our enemies just cause to vaunt and triumph over
us, and to erect a Trophie where as they never got the field. This has been
the glory and honor of the Church of England, that the (...) Church and all
her accomplices, since her reformation and revolt from them, could never yet with
all their learning, wi^, or policy, convince her of any maine or fundamental
error in her doctrine. If then we should now admit and approve of this
doctrine of a final or a total fall from grace, and embrace it as a truth,
we should then convince our selves of a maine and fundamental error in our
doctrine, we should then subscribe and yield the wasters up to them, without
any combat or opposition at all, when as they were not able for to wrest them
from us by truth and strength of argument: and so we should give them just and
lawful cause to triumph over us, to the great dishonor of God, to the very
betraying of the truth, and to our own perpetual infamy and disgrace.
Thirdly, it would break down the very walls and bulwarks of our Church, that
so Armi^nisme and (...) might come rushing in with a full carere and quite beat
down the truth. For if this be once admitted and received for a truth, that
the true regenerate Saints of God, may fall either finally or totally from the
state of grace: this very point it self is gross and palpable Arminianisme
and Popery; it is a point which all Rhemists and Arminians, and which
Bellarmine, Becaonus and other Papists do defend against the Pro^estants, and
it draws along with it many other gross and palpable points of Armianisme and
Popery, as predestination from the foresight of faith and works: freewill both
to receive and reject grace at our pleasures: venial, sin: no certainty of
salvation in this life without some special revelation: universal grace: that
those who are not elected to salvation are members of the holy Catholic
Church, that the number of the el^t is not certain unto God himself, and the
like. If this one point then should be admitted and embraced by us as a truth,
it would scrue in the whole body of Arminianisme and Pelagianisme, and a great
part of Popery into our Church, and so would quickly crush and quell that
glorious and holy truth which now we do profess. Fourthly, it would breed
such a combustion and division in our Church, as would hardly be appeased
without great hurt and danger to the state: we see by present experience that
a little conniuancie and wincking at this doctrine, has bred a kind of
faction and division in our Church, and drawn many great disciples after it,
who if they were not awed by superior powers, and with the expectation of the
doom and censure of the General and Grandee of their faction, would make such
astrange and sudden rent and combustion in our Church and state, as would
endanger both; and give occasion to our enemies to fish in troubled streams,
where they could hardly miss their prey. You therefore, (my brethren) who are
so hot and forwards, to usher and bring in this damnable and pernicious
doctrine, into our glorious and much renowned Church, consider what you are
about to do; consider what dangerous and dismal consequencies are like to
follow and ensue upon it: consider how ill and viper like you shall reward that
mother of yours, which has nourished and brought you up, to the end, that you
should defend her upon all occasions, and not bear arms against her. Consider
that it is no other but the Diuill himself, woo either by his own private
suggestions to your hearts, or else by his dangerous agents and seditious
factors, does labor to withdraw you from the faith, and to rent you from your
mother Church; not for any desire or love to God or to the truth, but for
private ends, and by respects, that so he may make both you and others a prey
and booty to himself. Consider what the inducements are that lead you to
embrace this error. If you will but examine your own hearts well you shall
find, that the thing which leads you to embrace this error; is either the
learning or the fame of some particular men that do defend it: or else some
secret hatred and malice, either to all, or to some particular men that do
oppose it: or else some felfe conceit, and some high opinion which you do
attribute to your own conceits without any due examination of them by the
word of God: or else it is some desire of singularity or fame, or the hope of
gain, honor, and preferment: one of these I may be bold to say is the cause
that moves you to patronize this error, and not the love of God or of his
truth. Remember therefore, that you are bought with a price, that you should
not be the servants of men: 1 Cor. 7. 23.
that the word of God is the rule of life and doctrine, and not the word of
men: remember that, if you are the sheep of Christ, John 10. 44.
you must hear his voice and his only, you must not hearken to the voice of
strangers, let their learning or their parts be what they will. No men more
apt to err then those of greatest parts and learning, especially when as their
parts and persons are not sanctified. The greatest scholars have always
broached and propagated the greatest, and the most dangerous errors. Wherefore
never pin your faith to the fickle opinions of frail and mortal men,
(especiallly of such men in whose lives the practice and power of religion
shines not forth) but examine all things by the word of God: and (...). 1. 8, 9.
though an Angel from heaven, (much less a Devil from hell, or a carnal man
from earth) should bring any other doctrine to you then what you find to be
warranted and recorded there, receive him not but let him be accursed. Sure I
am, that this doctrine of the final or total Apostacy of the Saints, has no
ground or footing for it in the word of God; if you will but take the pains to
search the Scriptures, you shall find it to be so: and therefore let not the
opinion or fame of any particular man that does patronize this error, ouersway
your judgments against the Scriptures and the word of God. And as for all other
private and by respects which may engage you to adore this error; remember that
Gods glory and the love of truth (if not the good and welfare of the Church)
should over balance and surpass them all. Better is it for to loose the world
with all the fame, the riches, honors, and preferments in it, then to loose
the Lord of truth, and his everlasting favor; to loose both soul and body at
the last, in hope of gaining honouror prefern^ent now. Wherefore lay aside all
sinister and by respects, and consider how many great, dangerous, and
pernicious consequencies will inevitable follow upon this doctrine, of the
final and total Apostasy of the Saints, and then you cannot but disclaim it
and detest it from your souls, and even fromyour hearts embrace this orthodox
and sound position which here I do defend. That such as are once truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, can neither
finally nor totally fall from grace.

Having thus (as I suppose) so fully proved the truth of this position, by
arguments and reasons drawn from the Scriptures, that no man can be able to
gainsay it. For further satisfaction in the point, I will now produce some
humane authorities for to prove it: which authorities I shall reduce to these
three general heads. First, I will prove that this was the doctrine of the
ancient Fathers of the Church: (...) that this was, and is the doctrine of all
Protestant Chur^ beyond the Seas: Thirdly, that this was and is the doctrine of
the Church of England.

For the first of these: that this was the doctrine of the ancient Fathers of
the Church: I shall manyf^ it by their own authorities, which I will vouch in
^atine, as I find them printed, lest I should give the opposites any occasion
for to carpe at me: or wrong the authors, or the reader in the translation:
especially since I cite these Fathers to satisfy the learned, not the ignorant.

I will first begin with the ancient of the Fathers, and so descend to these
of latter times.

Dionysius Areopagita.
Dionysius Areopagita who lived in the Apoftles times, and (as himself records
it in his 11. Epistle to Apollophanus the Parifi^ 1555.
Philosopher) was 25. years of age at the death of Christ, though others doubt
of it, has delivered and recorded this very doctrine, in his book de diuinis
nominibus, cap. 7. His words are these, Diuina fides, est stabilis credentium
seeds, qua hos in veritate locat, in ipsisque veritatem impersuasibili
identitate certam and simplicem veritatis notionem habentibus ijs qui
crediderunt. Nam profecto si scientia cognoscentium, and cognitorum coniunctrix
est, ignorantia vero mutationis semper, and ex se ignoranti suae diuisionis est
author: eum qui in veritate credit iuxta Scripturae fidem, nihil remouebit a
verae fidei autore, in quo constantiam immobilis atque immutabilis identitatis
habebit. In the 8. chapter of the same book, about the end of the chapter he
has these words; Verum enim profecto and hanc salutem non praeter intentionem
Scripturae sanctae, vt bonitate cuncta saluantem qua sunt omnia, ab suorum
prolapsione bonorum redimentem, praedicare merito possumus, quantum cuiusque
salu^ndorum admittet naturae. Idci^co etiam redemptionem iam theologi nominant,
ex quo sinit quae vere sunt ad id caedere, vt non sint. Ex eo item quod et fi
quid deliquerint, and ab ordine suo aberrauerint, and imminutionem aliquam
perfectionis bonorum suorum passa fuerint: Hac etiam part a passione and
imbecillitate, ac priuatione reddimit, impleus quod deest, and paterno affectu
infirmitatem supplens, at que a (...) ^rigons, imo in pulchro fistens and quod
effluxerat bonu^ reparans ae disponens, ordinis quod deest in illo atque
positionis exornans, integrumque perficiens, and ab omnibus absoluens (...)
atibus. And a little before he has these words. Itaque (vt verum dixerim) hoc
magis est diuinae iustitiae proprium nequaquam emollire atque enermare
optimorum quorumcun que masculum sensum. largitione carnalium: neque si quis id
conetur agere, eas sine adiutorio linquere, sed eos in praecl^o, inflexibilique
statu solidare, eisque cum sint huiusmodi secundum merita reddere. So that by
this most ancient Divines opinion, these that are truly faithful, can never
fall quite away from grace.

Justin: Martyr.
Justin Martyr who flourished in the year of Lord 163. and somewhat after
concurreth in opinion with us, in his Explic. quaest. a Gent. Christ.
positarum: quaest. 23. For there Pari^is, 1554.
the Gentiles demand this question: Si Dominus antequam mortem perferret,
rogauit vt Discipuli a patre sancti efficerentur, and tamen postea ^udas
perijt, qui fit vt causa eorum praeces oblatae, acceptae, grataeque fuerint?
quomodo etiam verum est illud, Scio me a ^e semper audiri? To which he
replies. Judas quidem ex eo tempore perijt, cum Christus buccellam panis
intin^tam ei dedit, acceptaque buccella, a Judah Satanas in eum intrauit,
egressusque se a caeteris discipulis diremit. Preces autem pro discipulis fusae
sunt post Iudae disiunctionem. Idque ex ipfis praecibus intelligitur cum
Dominus praecatus ^st his verbis. Quod mihi dedisti and tradidisti seruaui, nec
quisquam eorum perijt nisi filius perditus vt Scriptura impleatur. Primum
igiter Judas p^rijt: deinde fusae sunt praeces discipulorum causa: From whence
I collect, that in the opinion of Justin Martyr, those for whom Christ does
pray and intercede, can never perish or fall from grace: But Christ does pray
and intercede for all such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into him
by faith. Therefore in Justin Martyrs opinion they can never perish nor fall
from grace. So Quest: 98. The Gentiles demand. Si Deus timorem non necessarium
verbis suis confirmat, cum ait, qui timet non est perfecta charitate praeditus
cur idem discipulos suos doc^t his verbis: Timete eum qui and animum and corpus
in Gehennam potest perdere? He explicates this question thus. Non hoc a Domino
dictum est, Qui metuit non est in eo perfecta charitas, et si is qui illud
dixit, ex Domini dixerit sententia. Illud autem, Metuite potius eum qui and
animum and corpus perdere in Gehennam potest, dictum ab eo non est perfectae
charitatis tollendae gratia. Qui enim maiore dei metu minorem hominum metum
tollit sua in deum charitate ductus hoc faeit. It aque mayor dei metus causa
est cur ea quae chara habentur minime amittantur. Quo enim praestantius est id
quod creditur, and traditur, eo vehementius amatur: and quo charius habetur, eo
vehementius is qui illum charum habet, eius amissionem timet, dum in certa^n de
re quam char^m habet discenderit. Derempto autem certamine v^a cum illo, etiam
met us amissionis eorum quae amata sunt, depo^itur. Itaque ad illud tempus
necessarius est dei metus. Neque enim vt odium vim habet tollende charitatis,
sic metus. Idem enim and amare potest and timere. Bertius, as from the former
place, so from this latter would collect and prove that the saints might fall
from grace: and his reason from this latter place is, because they ought to
fear. I collect the contrary, and so does Justin Martyr affirm, that because
they ought to fear, therefore they cannot fall away: because the fear of God
is the cause that their graces are never lost: and so Justin Martyr is clear
for me, not for Bertius.

Irenaeus.
Irenaeus who flourished in the reign of Commodus the Emperor about 182.
years after Christ's nativity: has in effect delivered the selfsame
doctrine, lib. 5. aduersus haereses, page 550. to 558. and p. 564. according to
the edition at Basil: 1571. his words are these. Perfecti igitur, qui and
spiritum in se perseuerantem habent dei, and animas and corpora sieve querela
seruau^rint: id est, illam quae ad Deum ^st fidem servants, and eam quae ad
proximum est custodientes. Vnde and templum dei plasma esse ait. Nescitis,
dicens, quoniam templum Dei estis, and spiritus 1 Co^. 5.
Dei habitat in vobis? Templum igitur dei in quo Spiritus inhabitat, and membra
Christinon participare salutem, sed in perditionem redigi dicere, quomodo non
est maximae blasphemae? and a little after: Mori neque animae euenit, ^latus
est enim vita: neque spiritui, incompositus est enim, and simplex spiritus, qui
resolui non potest, and ipse vita est eorum: qui percipiunt eum, page 553.
Facies nostra videbit faciem Dei viui, and gaudebit gaudio inenarrabili:
Videlicet, eum suum videat gaudium. Nunc autem partem spiritus eius sumimus ad
perfectionem and praeparationem incorruptelae, Paulatim assuescentes capere and
portare Deum: quod and Pignus dixit Apostolus, hoc est, partem eius honoris,
qui a Deo Ephs. 1.
nobis promissus est. Si ergo hoc pignus habitans in nobis iam spirituales
efficit, and absorbetur mortale ab immortalitate. Vos enim, Romans 8.
ait, non estis in carne, sed in spiritu, siquidem spiritus Dei habitat in
vobis. Hoc autem, non secundu^ incturam carnis, sed secundum communionem
spiritus fit. Non, enim era^t ^ne car^e, quibus seribebat, sed qui assumpserant
Spiritu^ Dei, in quo clamamus Abba Pater, Si igitur nunc pignus habentes
clamamus Abba Pater, quid fiet, quando surgentes facie ad faciem videbimus eum?
and page 564. Aliud est afflatus vitae, qui and animalem efficit hominem: and
aliud spiritus vinificans, qui and spiritalem efficit eum. Afflatus enim
temporalis: spiritus autem sempiternus. Et afflatus quidem auctus ad modicum,
and tempore aliquo manens, deinde obij^ sine spiramento relinquens illud in quo
fuit ante. Spiritus autem circundans intus and foris hominem, quippe semper
perseuerans, nunquam relinquens eum. By Iren^us his verdict then, he that has
the sanctifying spirit of God within him once, can never fall from grace, and
die again: he can never loose this Spirit of God, or suffer it to be quite
extinguished. So again, lib. 2. adu. Haereses, cap. 47. Fides quae est ad
magistrum nostrum semper permanet firma, lib. 4. cap. 34. Quomodo rursus dicunt
carnem in corruptionem deuenire and non percipere vitam, quae a corpore Domini
and sanguine alitur? lib. 4. cap. 37. Gloria Dei viuens hom^. Vita autem
hominis visio Dei. Si enim quae est per conditionem offensio Dei vitam praestat
hominibus in terra vnientibus, multo magis ea quae est per verbum manifestatio
Patris, vitam praestat his, qui vident Deum, lib 5. page 611. Qui credit in me
non iudicatur, id est non separatur a Deo, adiunctus est enim per fidem Deo:
vide, page 440. 515. 522. 610. 611. where he makes for our present purpose.
Thus is this holy and ancient Father very full and copious in our behalf.

Clemens Alexandrius.
Clemens Alexandrinus a man of admirable learning and parts who flourished in
the reigns of Seuerus and Antonius: between the year of our Lord, 200. and
220: is so full and copious in our behalf throughout his works, as if we
will but refer our selves to him, this controversy will be soon determined.
Now that you may the easier find these places which I shall cite out of him, I
shall refer you to the page wherein the authorities are: the edition which I
shall cite, is that which was printed at Basil, 1556: translated by Gentianus
Heruetus. The first authority that I shall cite out of him you may find it:
Paedagogi. lib. 1. cap. 5. fol. 19. b. where speaking why the Saints of God are
called children in the Scriptures, his words are these. Iunenes ergo populus
nouns, vt distinguetur a veteri populo, ij sunt qui noua bona didicorunt: et
est nobis vber aetatis ipsa inuentus expers senij, in qua semper vigemus ad
intelligentiam, et mentis agitationem, semper inuenes, et semper mansueti, et
recentes ac noui. Quod autem fuit aeternitatis particeps; eo quod est ab
interitu alienum solet assimilari, vt puerilis aetatis appellatio, sit nobis
ver totius vitae, propterea quod sit senij expers, quae est in nobis veritas,
et mores nostri qui sunt veritate perfusi. Sapientia autem semper germinans,
quae semper similiter et eodem modo se habet, et nunquam mutatur. Ib. cap. 6.
fol. 20. a. b. Tincti, illuminamur: illuminati, in filios adoptamur: adoptati,
perficimur: perfecti, immortales reddimur. Ergo, inquit, dixi, dij estis, et
filij excelsi omnes. Ib. Perfectum dicimus cui nihil deest. Q^id autem ei desit
qui deum nouit? Est enim reuera absurdum dei vocari gratiam, quae non sit
perfecta et vndiqua que plena. Qui est autem perfectus, perfecta vtique
largietur. Soli ergo qui primum vitae fines attigimus, iam perfecti sumus. Iam
autem viuimus qui sumus a morte seperati: Christum ergo sequi salus est. Quod
enim factum est, in ipso vita est. Amen, amen dico vobis, inquit, John. 5.
qui sermones meos audit, et credit ei qui me misit, habet vitam aeternam, et
in iudicium non venit, sed habet vitam aeternam. Ita solum eredisse, et
regeneratum esse, est in vita perfectio. Nunquam est enim Deus imbecillus:
nouit quos vocauit, quos seruauit: simul autem vocauit et seruauit. Ipsi enim
vos, ( inquit Apostolus) a deo docti estis. Nefas est ergo imperfectum sentire,
quod ab ipso docetur. Quod autem ab eo discitur, est aterni seruatoris, aeterna
salus: Ib: Fides est doctrinae perfectio: et ideo dicit: qui credit in filium
habet vitam aeternam. Si ergo qui credimus habemus vitam aeternam quid reliqui
est vltra vitae aeternae possessionem? Ib. fol. 23. a. Omni ergo ratione nos in
omnibus Christo coniungimur et familiares reddimur, et in cognatione, per
sanguinem eius quo reddimimur: et in consensione, nutritionem quae ex verbo
efficitur: et in incorruptione per eins ipsius institutionem, (...) vitoe
agexdae rationem. Ib. cap, 7. fol. 23. b. Diuina vitae iustitutio, est in
aeternum permanens possessio. Paedagogi. lib. 3. cap. 6. fol. 48. b. Quomodo
non is multa, imo omnia possidet, qui the saurum aeternum nempe deum habeat?
Petenti in quit, dabitur, et pulsanaperietur: Si deus nihil negat, pietate ac
religione praediti viri sunt omnia. Ib. cap. 1^. fol. 54. a. b. Sapientiae the
sauri non possunt deficere. Tales (...), verbi legis, verba consolatoria, non
in tabulis lapideis, digitis domini scriptis, sed scriptae in cordibus hominum,
in quas solum non cadit interitus. Strom. lib. 2. fol. 80. a. Est reuera
immutabiliter, ad id quod est immutabile deductio. Fides ergo, et cognitio
veritatis efficient, vt quae ^as acceperit anima, eodem modo et semper, et
similiter se habeat. Cum falso autem cognatione coniuncta sunt transitio,
declinatio, et desectio. Strom. lib. 7. fol. 149. b. Ei qui exercitatione ex
cognitione parauerit virtutem quaenon potest amitti, efficitur naturalis
habitus. Et quomodo lapidi grauitas, ita huius scientia euadit buiusmodi, vt
amitti non possit, non inuolentarie, sed voluntary, vi rationis ac cognitionis
ac prouidentiae. Quoniam autem amissum non esse, per cautionem fit eiusmodi vt
non possit amitti: cautionem quidem ad hoc vt non peccet, bonam autem
considerationem, ad hoc vt virtus non amittatur retinebit: cognitio autem
videtur honam praebere consideratione^, docens perspicere ea quae possunt
adiuuare, ad hoc vt virtus permaneat. Res est ergo maxima Dei cognitio: quo
circa ea quoque ita conseruatur virtus vt amitti nequeat. Ib. 152. b. Scientia
facit vt si quis casus euenerit, a proprio habitu nunquam excedat is qui est
praeditus cognitione, est enim, solida et immutabilis boni quae scientiam
constituit possessio, vt quae sit scientia diuinarum rerum et humanarum.
Cognitio ergo nunquam fit ignorantia, nec bonum mutatur in malum. fol. 153. a.
b. Qui mundanas quidem vicit cupiditates, de ijs quae cognouit futuris, et quae
adhuc sub visum non cadunt, tam certam habet persuasionem, vt ea magis adesse
putat, qua^ quae sunt praesentia. Is vero etiam praecatur cum angelis, vt qui
iam sit etiam aequalis angelis: neque est vnquam extra sanctam custodiam, et
licet oret solus, habet chorum Angelorum vna assistentem. Psalm. 19.
Dictum quidem est, timor Domini castus, permanens in seculum seculi: qui enim
conuertuntur a timore ad fidem et iustitiam, permanent in seculum. Iam vero
abstinentiam a malis operatur is qui timet: etiam cum fiducia accedit ad
praeces. Genus autem ipsum orationis est gratiaram actio propter praeterita,
praesentia et futura, vt quae (...) per fidem iam praesentia. Strom. lib. 6.
fol. 132. b. Sapientia^ autem solidam et humanarum cognitionem, firmam quandam
et stabilem, et quae non potest excidere, compraehensionem, et quae
compraehendit ea quae sunt, et praeterita, et futura: quam nos docuit per suam
praesentiam, et per prophetas Dominus, estque huiusmodi vt non possit excidere:
vt qua a verbo sit tradita. Ib. fol. 134. b. 135. a. Non est enim vtique
decorum vt Dei amicus, quem Deus praedistinauit ante mundi constitutionem, vt
referatur in summam filiorum adoptionem, voluptatibus subijciatur vel
timoribus, et occupetur in comprimendis animi perturbationibus. Audacter, enim
dixerim, quemadmodum est praedestinatus per ea quae agit, et id quod
consequetur: ita ipse quoque cum praedestinauerit, propter eum quem cognouit,
habet quem dilexit: nec habet futurum coiectu difficile, sicut multi viuunt
coniectantes, sed per fidem cognitione praeditam, accepit id quod est incertum
et obscurum alijs: et propter charitatem iam est ei praesens, id quod est
futurum. Credidit enim et propter propheciam et propter praesentiam, deo qui
non mentitur, et habet id quod credidit, et obtinet promissionem: veritas autem
est qui promisit, et finem promissionis, propterea quod fide dignus sit is qni
promisit, firmiter ac stabiliter accepit per scientiam. Is autem qui per eum in
quibus est statum, nouit firmam ac stabilem futurorum comprehensionem, futuro
occurrit per charitatem: Ib. Scientia assidua meditatione peruenit ad habitum:
et ita perfecta et consu^mata in habitu mystico, propter charitatem manet talis
us non possit excidere. Nam primam causam, et eam quae ab his est genita
compraehendit, et in his est firmus ac stabilis, stabiliter stabiles, et quae
excidere et dimoueri nequeunt Ps. 114.
rations possia^ens. Clamauit enim David, in aeternum non co^mouebitur justus.
Neque ergo falli ab oratione, neque a falsa voluptate: vnde neque mouebitur a
sua haeriditate. Many such like places tending to this purpose are there to be
found in this ancient and learned Father, to tedious to recite at lage: as in
his Oration exhortatoria ad Gentes. fol. 21. b. 12. b. 15. a. b. 16. a.
Paedagagi. lib. 1. cap. 6. fol. 22. 23. strom. lib. fol. 79, 80, 81. strom.
lib. 4. 101. a. 106. 2. 109. b. strom. lib. 5. 122. b. strom. lib. 6. 132. b.
134. 138. a. strom. lib. 7. 145. a. 149. a. b. 154. a. and 157. b. Thus is our
conclusion proved by the doctrine and judgment of this ancient and most
learned Father throughout his own works.

Tertullian.
Tertullian a man of admirable Eloquence and learning, who flourished in the
same time that Clemens Alexandrinus did, concurres in opinion with us in his
book de Praescript: aduersus Haereticos, c. 2. Editio: Beati Rhenani Parisijs,
1566. tom. 1, pa. 161. 162. Quis hoc dicens non ipse sibi respondet, neque
prudentes, neque sideles, neque vsitatos estimandos, quos haereses potuerint
demutare? Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? Nemo sapiens est,
nisi fidelis, nemo mayor, nisi Christianus: nemo autem Christianus nisi qui ad
finem vsque perseuerauerit. Tu vt homo extrinsecus vnumquemque nosti: putas
quod vides: Vides autem quosque oculos habes. Sed oculi, inquit. Domini alti,
homo in faciem, Deus in praecordia contemplatur. Et idio cognoscit Dominus qui
sunt eius: and plantam, quam non plantauit Pater, eradicat: and de primis
nouissimos ostendit, and palam in manu portat ad purgandum aream suam. Auolent
quantum valent paleae leuis fidei quaecunque afflatu tentationum, eo purior
massa frumenti in horrea Domini reponetur. Nonne ab ipso Domino quidam
discentium scandalizati deuerterunt? Nee tamen propterea caeteri quoque
discedendum a vestigiis eius putauerunt: sed qui scierunt illum vitae esse
verbum, and a Deo venisse, per seuerauerunt in comitatu eius vsque ad finem:
cum illis si vellent, and ipsis discedere placide obtulisset. Minus est si and
Apostolum eius aliqui Phygelus, and Hermogenes, and Philotus, and Hymenaeus
reliquerunt: ipse traditor Christi de Apostolis fuit. Miramur de ecclesiis eius
si a quibusdam deseruntur, quum ca nos ostendunt Ghristianos, quae patimur ad
exemplum ipsius Christi. Ex nobis, inquit, prodierunt, sed non fuerunt ex
nobis: si fuissent ex nobis, permansissent vtique nobiscum. And in his book de
Corona militis, cap. 9. page 156. Nusquam Christianus aliud est. Therefore in
Tertullians judgment a true and faithful Christian, can neither finally nor
totally fall from grace.

Origin.
Origin the Scholar of Clemens Alexandrinus, who flourished in the reign of
Antonius Caracalla, Ma^rinus and others, from the year of our Lord 213. to
240. in his first Homily upon Jeremy toward the end of the Homily concurreth
with us: Where speaking of Gods dealing with his Saints, that he does first
kill them and then make them alive, and not make them alive, and then kill
them; his words were these. Impossible est quod semel viuificauit Deus, ab
eodem ipso, val ab ali^ occidi; It is impossible that he whom God shall once
inliuen with the life of grace, should afterward be slain again, either by
himself or others. What more plainer testimony can be alleged for us then
this? So again Hom. 1. in Math. Petra est omnis qui immitator est Tom. 3. fol.
1.
Christi: and super omni huiusmodi Petra, aedificatur Ecclesia Dei. In singulis
enim quibuscunque perfectis qui habent in se cognitionem verborum and operum,
and sensuum omnium qui huiusmodi beatitudinem operantur, consistit ecclesia
Dei, cui portae inferorum non preualent? Si autem super ipsum Petrum arbitraris
^iuersam ecclesiam aedificari a Deo, quid dicis de loanne and lacobo filijs
tonitrui, vel de singulis Apostolis? vere ergo ad Petrum dictum quidem est: tu
es Petrus, and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae
inferorum non praeualebunt ei. Tamenomnibus Apostolis and omnibus quibuscunque
perfect fidelibus, dictu^ videtur: quoniam omnes sunt Petrus, and Petrae, and
in omnibus aedificata est Ecclesia Christi, and adversus nullu^ eoru^ quitales
sunt, portae praeualent inferorum. Omnes enim qui imitatores sunt Christi,
similiter Petrae cogn^minantur, quemadmodu^ Christus, etc. Vt recte dicatur ad
emnes, Tu es Petrus and super (...) Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and
portae infer^ru^ non praexalebunt ei? Cui ei? vtru^ Petrae non praexalabunt in
qua aedificat Christus Ecclesiam; aut ei (...) siae non praexalebunt, quam
aedificat super Petram? non exprimit manifest^. Tamen manifestum est quia nec
aduersus Petram illam super quam aedificatur ecclesia: nec aduersus Ecclesiam,
quae aedificatur super ^iusmodi Petram, portae praexalebunt inferorum:
quem^odnm nec viaserpentis super Petram, secundum quod in Prouerbijs positum
est poterit inueniri. Aduersus quem autem portae praeual^nt inferoru^, ille
neque Petra dicendus est super quam Christus aedificat Ecclesiam: (...)
Ecclesia quae super Petram ^tur a Christo: quoniam (...) qui Petra
inambulabilis est serpenti: sieve qui vera Ecclesia est fortior est portis sibi
aduersantibus inferorum propter Christum virum sapientem, qui aedificavit super
Petram Ecclesiam suam. Nam cum sciamus quod (...); peccatum, per quod
discenditur ad inferos, porta sit inserorum, intelligimus quoniam omnis anima
quae recipit super se peccatum, and propterea non est sancta, neque Petra est
super quam Christus aedificat Ecclesiam: neque Ecclesia est, neque pars
Ecclesiae quam Christus aedificat super Petram, etc. Cum sint ergo mill, and
innumerabiles inferorum portae, nulla (...) praeualet contra eum, qui aut Petra
est aut aedificata Ecclesia super Petram. So Hom. 4. in Psalm. 36. Nos vero
neque ad Tom. 2. sol. 49.
dextram neque ad sinistram declinates (speaking of regenerate Christians)
ingredimur mediam viam quae est Christus Dominus, qu^ in ipso ambulantium
gressus Dominus dirigit. A Domino ergo hominis gressus dirigentur, and viam
ejus cupiet: illam scilicet viam de qua supra diximus. Cupiet enim qui a Deo
dirigitur Christum, and desiderabit permanere semper in Christo. Cum ceciderit,
inquit, non perturbabitur. Superius dicens quia a Domino diriguntur gressus
ejus, hic de casu eius loquisur. Vide ergo quia etiam his qui iter hoc
incedunt, aliquando accidat cadere, etiam his qui a Domino diriguntur. Sed est
multum differentiae inter casum iusti, and casum iniusti. Iustus enim cum
ceciderit non prosternitur: iniustus and qui spem non habet in Domino positam,
si ceciderit, presternitur, and non surgit, id est, si peccauerit, non
paenitet, and peccatum suum emendare nescit. Iustus autem si in aliquo offender
it in verbo, vel in facto, scit emendare, scit corrigere: scit ille qui
dixerat, nescio hominem, paulo post cum respectus fuisset a Domino, flere
amarissime: scit and ille qui de lecto mulierem viderat, and concupieret eam,
dicero, peccaui, and malum coram te feci: Si ergo cum ceciderit, iustus non
prosternitur, non permanebit in peccato sed exiliet cito, tanquam damula ex
retibus, and tanquam auis de laqueo. Iniustus autem non solum permanet, sed and
prosternitur in peccatis. Iustus autem quid facit? Lex Dei eius in cord
ipsius, and non supplantabuntur gressus ejus, quia Dominus confirmat manus
ejus: In quo ostenditur esse aliquos casus qui tamen non continuo indicent esse
victu^ and prostratum eum qui ceciderit: and so he proceeds to this purpose
to the end of the Homily. I could produce more testimonies from this ancient,
holy, and learned Father, which for breuity sake I will omit, but these are
sufficient to manifest his assent to our present assertion.

Cyprian.
Cyprian who flourished in the days of Decius, Gallus, Valerianus, and
Galienus Emperors, between the years of our Lord 250. and 270. is likewise
our suffragan in this behalf: whose nerds in the first book of his Epistles:
Epist. 3. Cornelio Fratri ( according to the edition of Erasmus, printed at
Antwerpe, 1541. Tom. 1. page 15. are these. Ecclesia quae in Christum credit,
and quae semel id quod cognoverit tenet, nunquam a Christo discedit, and isti
sunt Ecclesia qui in domo Dei permanent. Plantationem vero plantatam a Deo
Patre non esse videmus, non frumenti stabilitate solidari, sed tanquam paleas,
discipantis inimici spiritu ventilari: de quibus and Ioannes in epistola sua
dicit: Ex nobis exierunt, sed non fuerunt ex nobis: si enim fuissent ex nobis,
mansissent vtique nobiscum. Item Paulus monet nos, cum mali de Ecclesia pereunt
nec recedentibus perfidis fidem minui, etc. Item, Tract: contra Demetrianum.
Tom, 1. p. 226. Viget apud nos spei robur, and firmitas fidei, and inter ipsas
seculi labentis ruinas erecta men's and immobilis virtus, and nunquam nisi laeta
patientia, and de Deo suo semper anima secura: and page 230. Speaking of such a
one as is once truly regenerated, he has these words. Neque enim poterit nisi
laetus esse, and gratus, qui cum morti esset obnoxious, factus est immortalitate
securus. Item, Tract: de Simplec: Prael: Tom. 1. page 249. Adulterari non
potest sponsa Christi incorrupta est, and pudica. Vnam domum novit: vnius
cubiculi sanctitatem casto pudore custodit. Haec nos Deo servat: haec Filios
reg no, quos generavit assignat, and Ib. p. 252. Nemo aestimet bonos de
Ecclesia posse discedere. Triticum non rapit ventus, nec arborem solida radice
fundatam procella subvertit. Inanes paleae tempestate jactantur, inualidae
arbores turbinis incursione evertuntur. Hos execratur and percutit Ioannes
Apostolus, dicens, Ex nobis exierunt, sed non fuerunt ex nobis: si enim
fuissent ex nobis, mansissent nobiscum. Hinc haereses and factae sunt
frequenter and fiunt, dum perversa men's non habet pacem: dum perfidia
discordans non tenet vnitatem. Fieri vero haec Dominus permittit and patitur,
vt dum corda ac mentes nostras veritatis discrimen examinet, probatorum fides
integra, manifesta luce clarescat: Per Apostolum praemonet Spiritus sanctus,
and dicit: Oportet and hareses esse, vt probati manifesti sint in vobis. Sic
probantur fideles, sic perfidi deteguntur: sic and ante judicij diem hic quoque
jam justorum, atque iniustorum animae dividuntur, and a frumento paleae
seperantur. So that by this holy Fathers sentence and opinion, the true
regenerate Saints of God can neither finally nor totally fall from grace: bnt
only hypocrites who never had any grace at all in truth, but merely in outward
show. The same Father has one pregnant place more to this very purpose with
which I will conlude: and that is in Lib. 4. Epist. 2. Antoniano Fratri: his
words are these. Graves viros, and semel supra Petram robustam solida
stabilitate fundatos, non dico aura leui, sed nec vento aut turbine amoveri.
Manet enim fidentium robur immobile, and apud timentes ac diligentes toto cord
Deum stabilis and fortis perseverat integritas.

Arnobius.
Arnobius who fluorished in the time of Dioclesian from the year of our Lord
290. to 300. in his Commentary upon Psalm. 124. alias 125. ver. 1. 2.
concurreth with us: His words are these. Qui confidit in imperatorem militet in
circuitu eius: qui confidit in potestatibus mundi, apparitores in tuitione
eius: qui confidit in facultatibus suis, nummi in manu eius. Qui confidit autem
in Domino, montes sunt in circuitu ejus. Qui sic confidit (ille est) sicut mons
Sion, non commouebitur in aeternum: nulla secta, nulla Haeresis, nullus
disputator, eum a recti tenero detorquebit.

Hilarie.
Hilarie Bishop of Poytiers who flourished from about the year of our Lord
350. to 370: does consent with us in this particular point. De Trinitate lib.
1. page 3. according to the edition at Colen. 1617. his words are these.
Regeneratio advitam mors est ex vita: and morientes vitijs immortalitati
renascimur, Christo pro nobis ex immortalitate moriente, vt ad immortalitatem
vna cum eo excitaremur ex motte. Math. Can. 4. page 150. h: Apostoli autem sunt
rerum coelestium praedicatores, and aeternitatis velut satores, immortalitatem
omnibus corporibus quibus eorum sermo aspersus fuerit conferentes. Merito
igitur Sal terrae nuncupati sunt, per doctrinae virtutem saliendi modo
aeternitate corpora reservantes, Can. 6. in Math. page 155. a. b. Qui verba
Christi audit and facit, super Petram est adificatus and fundamento stabili
firmoque consistit, eumque incidentium tempestatum impetus non potest
dissoluere, nec loco suo mouere. Ib. Can. 10 p. 169. a. upon these words, Non
duas tunicas: Sufficit enim nobis Christus semel indutus. In Psalm. 1. Enarrat.
p. 193. b. Iam non sicut in Adamo donu^ ejus and statuta perturbabu^tur, quia
ille constitutae immortalitatis beatitudinem peccato transgressae legis amisit:
sed per redemptionem ligni vitae, id est, Dominica passione cum ipsi ligno
vitae similes crimus, jam quicquid in nobis fiet aeternum est: aeternum autem
cum beatitudinis sensu. Prospore dirigentur autem omnia illa quae fient, non
demutatione incerta, non natura infirma cum incorruptio corruptionem, and
aeternitas infirmitatem, and forma Dei formam terrenae carnis absorpserit. Huic
igitur plantato ligno, in tempore suo hos fructus suos danti beatus ille erit
similis, ipse quoque in paradiso plantatus, vt plantatio Dei, non eradicanda
permaneat, in quo omnia a Deo facta prospere dirigentur, nulla deinceps
demutatione, vel infirmitatis nostrae, eradican da vel temporis. In Psa. 118.
alias 119. p. 259. e. Sperans in judicijs Dei verbu^ veritatis de cord sibi
non metuit auferri. Vid. In Ps. 262. e. f. page 280. c. Finis nullus est spei
nostrae, sed in coelestes res semper extenditur, and in aeterna Dei promissa
procedit. Nullum tempus vacuum habet, nullum otiosum page 282. a. b. Haec
itaque indemutandae veritatis est constitutio: sic principio verborum Dei
veritas est, (...) novus homo regeneratus in Christo, viuat deinceps secundum
aeterni Dei, id est, coelestis Adae imaginem, jam aeternus. In Psa. 120. alias,
121. page 287. f. h. Ergo quia adversantes nobis daemonum virtutes, optima and
validissima fidei nostrae opera debilitare and convulnerare contendunt, idcirco
super manum dexterae cust^dia Dei vigilatura promittitur: vt illibata in nobis
bonae voluntatis opera perseuerent, quibus manentibus aeterni illius and beati
temporis regno, abstersa enim infirmitate corporeae labis mancipemur. Ergo
fidelem animam, ab omni malo Dominus custodit: id est, ne eam diaboli tinea
corrumpat, ne fur obrepat, ne canis oblatret, ne Lupus laceret, ne vrsus
desaeuiat, ne pardus insileat, ne Tigris aduolet, ne Leo vastet. In Ps. 128.
page 301. D. Saepe impugnauerunt me a inuentute mea: Etenim non posterant
(...). Talis religiosorum debet esse confessio. Et hae^ vera fid^i probatio
est, vt qui saepe eos a iuuentute impugnant, nunquam tamen eorum quos and
saepe, and pridem a inuentute impugnauerint, praepotentes sint. Adversus
validiores and longum and frequens est praelium. Et idcirco inimicae
spiritalesque virtutes firmos fide, and timore Dei viros, and diu and saepe
pertentant: quia iterari necesse est, quod diu geritur, nunquam obtinetur. In
Psalm. 134. page 311. h. Serui Domini. jam non vagi, non er^atici, sed stant^s
in domo eius sunt, and stantium firmitate stabiliti. Et in Ps. 244. page 340.
d. upon these words: Suffulcit Dominus omnes quiruunt, and erigit omnes elisos.
Adest omnibus Dei Sanctitas, and se humanis auxilijs non subtrahit: Suffulcit
enim Dominus non collapsos, sedcadentes. Quod etsi trahat pronus naturae lapsus
in casum: poenitentia tamen, quae author est desinendi, ne penitus j^m
ceciderit, sistet in lapsu, suffulcit. Ruere enim, non ru^le, potest in id
confirmat^m esse ne ruerit. All which sayings prove the assent of this ancient
Father to this our assertion.

Basil.
Basil the great, a learned and holy Father, Bishop of Caesaria and Cappad^cia,
who flourished in the reign of Valens the Emperor about the year of our
Lord, 370, and so to 380: concurreth with us. For in his book de Uera
Virginita^. Tom. 2. 2. Editio. Basil. 1565. page 160. his words are these.
Neque enim ideo descendit Christus, vt inhaerend^ sponsae remaneret in terris,
sed vt assumens eam atque in meliora co^mutans, e terris ad caelos, et ad regna
aeterna reueheret. Nempe quae Christo desponsa est, non modo ad sponsalia
lauacro Ioanne vtitur ministro, sed angelos etiam habet, qui ascendenti ad
patris solium epithalamiu^ canant: non modo igitur virgo union qua
incorruptibili verbo conjungitur incorrupta perdurat, verum ipsa quoque
integritas postquam fuerit vnita, perficitur. Non enim in morem carnalis sponsi
qui integram virginem carnali coniugio violat et mulierem facit, animarum
quoque nostrarum sponsus incorruptam animam sua communione commaculat, sed
inquinata^ potius a diabolo per voluptates corporis nactus, eam, ex muliere
polluta immaculatam virginem efficit. Sicut enim author ac princeps vxoris
corrumpendae est vir, ita incorruptionis cuique nostrum author est Dominus: qui
cum nostrae inuiolata puritatis ratione sit Dominus, ipsam a principio nobis
iudulsit: quem etiam incorruptionis nostrae Dominum oportet cognoscere, in co
scilicet man endo et inhabitando. In ipso quippe viuimus, mouemur et sumus, vt
eam quasi totius virtutis et integritatis domum semper incolentes, non
excidamus eo quod in ipso est illibatae sanctitatis domicilio. Sicut enim in
his qui digni sunt inhabitat et inambulat: ita rursus qui digni sunt, in ipso
habitant. So in his Scolia: upon Psalm. 144. verse. 19. 25. Hicrursus de
benignitate Dei disserit, quae est maxima regni eius gloria: quod non solum
stantes, sed et cafuros conseruat ne prolabantur, et iacentes erigit: et quod
mirabile est, non vnum aut alterum, sed vniuers^s, et haec est haud modica
diuinae prouidentiae portio, quod eos quibus prouidet, munitos reddit. Si vero
quosdam diligentium se puniri sinit, est hoc animas eorum custodientis,
illustrioresque reddentis, etiamsi corpus intereat. So in his Sermon De Spirito
Sancto: Tom. 1. page 416. Quemadmodum solis radij nubes illuminant, et asspectu
fulgido splendescere faciant; ita et Spiritus sanctus corpus hominis ingressus
vitam dedit, immortalitatem dedit, sanctimoniam dedit, et quod iacebat erexit.
Habet enim homo per inhabitationem spiritus dignitatem Propheticam, Apostolicam
et angelicam, cum antea fuerit terra ac cinis: et qui participes spiritus sunt
diuino quodam modo viuunt, vitam adepti diuinam ac caelestem. So in his Sermon,
De Legend. libris. Gentilium. Tom. 1. page 409. Virtus autem sola possessio
immortalis, atque immobilis, et viuenti et morienti permanens.

Ambrose.
Saint Ambrose Bishop of Millaine who flourished from the Coloniae. 1616.
year of our Lord, 370. till about the year 400. concurreth Tom. 2.
with us: for in his Enarration upon Psa. 36. alias. 37. verse. 24. Though the
righteous fall, yet he shall not be vtrerly cast down, his words are these.
Iustus cadit interdum, sed si justus est, cum ceciderit non conturbabitur. Quod
conditionis est, cadit: quod justiciae resurgit: quoniam justum Deus non
derelinquet, sed confirma^ manum eius: and in Psalm. 40: his words are these.
Qui fidelis est in terram non cadit. So in his Enaration upon the 50. Psalm.
verse 12. Confirm me with thy principal or chief spirit, his words are
those. Firmamentum nostrum spiritus principalis est. Denique is qui principali
confirmatur spiritu, non est obnoxious seruituti: nescit seruire peccato, nescit
fluitare, nec studio nutat incertus, sed firmatus in Petra, solido stabilitur
vestigio. So Tom. 3.
in his Commentary upon Romans 8. ver. 29, 30. he has these words. Deus istos
quos persciuit futuros sibi deuotos elegit ad promissa praemia capescenda, vt
hi qui credere videntur, et non permanent in fide caepta, a Deo electi
negentur: quia quos Deus elegit apud se permanent. Et quos vocauit, ipsos et
iustificauit: quos autem iustificauit, ipsos et magnificauit: quia quos
praesciuit Deus aptos sibi, hi credentes permanent; quia aliter fieri non
potest, nisi quos praesciuit Deus, et ipsos et justificauit: ac per hec
magnificauit illos, vt similes fiant filio Dei. De caeteris quos non praesciuit
Dev^ non est illi cura, in hac gratia, quia non praescijt. At si credant aut
eligantur ad tempus, quia videntur boni ne justitia contempta videatur, non
permanent tamen vt magnificentur, sicut Saul et Judas: And again in his
Commentary upon Ephesians. 1. 4. he has these words. Quos Deus vocare dicitur
perseuerant in fide. So in his first book De Vocatione Gentium: cap. 4. and 9.
his words are these. Charitas (...). 4.
Christi eos quos diligit, inseperabiles facit, idest, vsque in finem
perseuerantes: nam quid est aliud perseuerare, quam tentatione non vinci. And
there he produces many pertinent and pregnant texts of Scripture: as Phil. 1.
6. cap. 3. 13. Romans 8. 35. 1 These. 2. 13. cap. 5. 23, 24. 2 These. 2. 17. 1 Pet.
5. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 57. Luke 22. 32. John 10. 28, 29. 1 John 5. 4, 5. to prove
that the Saints of God do persevere in grace, and that God himself is the
author and giver of this their perseverance. And in his secoud book De
vocatione Gentium: cap. 9. these are his words. Innumeris sanctis suis, donat
vitutem perseuerandi vsque ad finem diuina protectio: a nullis tamen aufert,
quod ipsis repugnat ex ipsis, vt in omnibus studijs eorum, atque conatibus,
semper inter se velle et nolle decertet. Merito igitur non solum incipientibus,
verum etiam prouectissimis sanctis vniformiter Domino supplicatur et dicitur.
Ne nos inducas in tentationem, sed libera nos a malo: vniversis enim Man. 6.
qui in fide ac dilectione permanent ab ipso donatur, ne in tentatione
superentur, vt qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur, ipsamque gloriam ijsdem
quibus eam impertit, adscribit: vt quamvis in auxilio Deisteterunt, quia in se
habebant vnde caderent, ipsoru^ sit meritu^ quod steterunt, Igitur sicut qui
crediderunt iuvantur vt fide maneant, sic qui nondu^ crediderunt iuvantur vt
credant. And a little John 17.
after. Quod pater filio dedit, filius non amittit: neque quisquam John 10.
potest de manu eius eripere, quod accepit. Firmum fundamentum 2 Timothy 2.
Dei stat, et mansuri in aeternum templi eaificatio non vacillat: praetenta
supra omnes veritate et misericordia Dei, a quo quod et nemini negatur, et
nulli debetur, in ijs quoque promisit, efficitur. Ipse enim operatur omnia in
omnibus. Q^i sicut praesciuit ante secula quanta totius mundi hominu^
multitudo, vel communibus via donis, vel specialibus adiuta presidijs, declinas
tamen ab itinere veritatis ac vitae ingressura esset latitudinem erroris ac
mortis. Ita semper praecognitum habuit, quantus pioru^ numerus per opem
gratiae, et per seruitutem obedientiae ad eternam beatitudinem pertineret, vt
nullo excidente de plenitudine promissoru^, qui nec prouectu erat fallendus,
nec auxilio defuturus, eos glorificaret prae omnibus, quos elegit ex omnibus.
uniuersitati quippe hominum, ita multiplex atque ineffabibilis Dei bonitas
consuluit semper, et consulit, vt neque vlli pereuntiu^ excusatio suppetat, de
abnegati lumine veritatis, neque cuiquam sit liberum de sua justitia gloriari:
cu^ et illos propria nequitia demergat ad paenam: et istos Dei gratia perducat
ad gloriam. See Prosper Aquitanicus de vocat: Gent. lib. 2. cap. 28. to the
same purpose.

Epiphanius.
Epiphanius, Bishop of Cyprus who ^ourished about the year of the Lord, 300.
and after coucurreth with the rest, and conse^teth to them and us in this
particular. For lib. 2. Tom. 2. Contra haereses. haeres: 69. page 627. edit.
Lutesiana. 1612. his words are these Sic et Dominus docuit Discipulos suos
dicens. Si quod ab initio a^diuistis manserit in vobis, vos in me manebitis et
ego in patre et vos in me. Quare veritas fidei ab initio a Domino audita manet
in sancta Dei Ecclesia, et propter a man et sancta D^i Ecclesia et orthodoxa
fides in Domino, et Dominus vnigenitus in patre, et pater in filio, et nos in
ipso per sanctum spiritu^, si facti fuerimus templa sancta ipsius spiritus
capacia; quemadmodum dixit sanctus Dei Apostolus. Vos templum Dei estis, et
Spiritus Dei habitat in vobis.

Chrysostom.
Chrysostom whofl^urished from the the year. 230. to. 212. has (...) us his
testimony and approb^tion upon record in this particular point. For about the
end of his first Homily upon Genesis, his words are these. Paris^s. 1581.
Spiritualia ^unt firma immobilia, vicissitudinem Tom. 1.
non accipientia, ad omne seculu^ se extendentia: applying these words to
graces which are proper to the Saints: Hom.in Psalm 120. his words are p^oper.
Custodiet introitum tuum, et exitum tuum ex hoc nunc et vsque in seculum. Hic
quidem certe omnem vitam significat. In his enim vita vniuersa confistit, nempe
in ingressa et exitu; et id volens apertivs significare, subiungit. Ab hoc nunc
et vsque in seculum. Non vno inquit, aut duobus aut tribus, aut december, aut
viginti, aut centum diebus, sed perpetuo. Quod quidem non in est hominibus, sed
sunt mnltae mutationes rerum, frequentes traductiones, et continuae
vicissitudines. Hodie amicus; hodie fert opem cras vero te deserit, sed etiam
oppugnat, et insidiatur quouis host grauius, sed quae Dei sunt, manent
immobilia, perpetua, immortalia, stabilia, fine carentia. And hom. in Psalm.
124. 1. Montem enim dixit spem in Deu immutabilem, firmam et constantem,
invincibilem, et inexpugnabilem. Q^e enim, etiamsi quis innumerabiles adhibeat
machinas, montem convellere nec labefactare poterit: ita etiam qui eum
aggreditur qui spem in Deo collocavit, reuertitur domu^ manibus vacuis.
Commotionem ne voces reru^ casus: non est enim Tom. 3.
hoc commotio sed animae intertis, et virtutem amisisse, quod quidem non euenit
in periculis, ijs qui sunt sobrij ac Tom. 4.
sapientes. Hom. 5. in John: upon these words of Christ to the woman of
Samaria, Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst, etc. He has these words. Spiritus gratia cu^ menti illapsa est eamque
irrigarit omni font vberius scaturit, nunquam deficit, nunquam vacuatur
nu^quam stat. Hom. 9. in Romans Talis est ipsa Dei gratia, finem nullu^ habet,
terminu^ non nouit, sed et ad maiora semper propagatur, atque progreditur. Id
quod non ita in hominibus vsu venit. Verbi gratia, assecutus est quis
magistratu^, gloriam, principatu^, tamen in eo perpetuus non manet, sed
confestim ab eo excutitur. Nam vt honorem cum humana manus non eripiat, certo
superueniens mors omnio ereptura est. At quae Deus bona largitur, haudquaqua^
talia sunt, a quibus non homo, non tempus, non reru^ adversarium vis, non ipse
diabolus, non mors ingruens deturbare nos poterit: quin vel mortui cum sumus,
tum demu^ firmius ea possidemus, atque adeo quo progredimur magis eo pluribus
semper, maioribusque illis effectis fruimur. Onapropter si futuris fidem non
habes, saltem praesentia, et quae iam es assecutus de illis tibi fidem faciant.
Idcirco, enim, ait, gloriamur sub spe gloriae: quia futuraru^ reru^ spes sic
firma est atque euidens, vt et iam dataru^, aeque et super illis gloriamur.
Hom. 3. in 2 Cor. upon these words, he that has established us with yon in
Christ, and has anointed us is God: who has also sealed us, and given us the
earnest of the spirit in our hearts. He discourses thus. Rursu^ per preterita
fidem futuris conciliat. Nam si ipse est qui nos in Christo confirmat, hoc est,
qui nos a fide quae est in Christo dimoveri non sinit: atque ipse etiam est qui
nos vnxit, spiritumque in cordibus nostris dedit, qui tandem, non futura quoque
daturus est? Nam cum principu^, et materiam, et radicem ac fontem, hoc est,
veram ipsius cognitionem, ac spiritus participationem largitus sit, qui fieri
potest, vt non ea etiam largiatur quae ex his oriuntur? Nam cu^ illa horu^
causa donentur, multo magis is qui haec dedit, illa quoque praebebit. Et cu^
haec ad huc hostibus dederit, multo magis illa in gratiam receptis donabit. Ac
proinde ne spiritu^ quidem simplicem dixit, sed pignus nominauit, vt per hoc de
toto fiduciam accipias. N^que enim si totu^ daturus non esset pignus praebere,
ac frustra ac temere perdere in animum in duxisset. Tom. 3.
And iu his Homil. 1. De spiritu sancto in Pentecost: Haec nobis spiritus
sanctus regnum coelorum est, de quo dicit Christus, regnum coelorum intra vos
est: Christus intus, spiritus sanctus intus, Pater intus; quae ocutus non
vidit, et quae aures non audierunt etiam ipsa intus. Et quomodo consequenter
omnis Christianoru^ munda men's non comprobatur puru^ coelu^, imo etiam coelo
praetiosior? Coeli enim peribunt, fideles autem permanent in seculu^ quotquot
D^u intrinsecus in seipsis ferunt ac vident. Thus is Saint Chrysostom very
large and copious for us.

Augustine.
Augustine Bishop of Hippo, the most iuditious Divine of all the Fathers, who
flourished in the same time that Saint Chry^ostome and Epiphanius, did and
somewhat after them, is so full and ous in this point, that I wonder how any can
be so impudent, shameless and audacious as to cite him to the contrary. His
authorities which are punctual to this our present purpose are so many, and so
commonly cited by all those who have written of this subject, that it would be
superfluous for me to mention them: yet because I have undertaken for to prove
this doctrine by the Fathers, I will only quote one place of his, which is
cited on all hands, and two other places which are not yet cited by any (if my
memory fail me not) and so refer you to the rest. The first authority which
is cited on all hands is in his book De Corrept: et Gratia. cap. 12. Sanctis
(...), 7.
in regnu^ Dei per gratiam praedestinatis, non tantum tale adiutoriu^ gratiae
datur vt possint perseuerare si velint, sed tale vt eis perseuerantia ipsa
donetur, non solu^ vt sine isto dono perseuerantes esse non possunt, verum
etiam vt per hoc donu^ non nisi perseuerantes sint. Non solu^ enim dixit, sine
me nihil potestis facere: veru^ etiam dixit, Non vos me elegistis, sed ego
elegi vos, et posui vos vt eatis et fructum afferatis, et fructus vester
maneat. Quibus verbis eis non solu^ iustitiam, veru^ etiam perseuerantiam se
dedisse monstrauit. Christo enim, sic eos ponente, vt eant et ^erant fructu^,
et fructus eoru^ maneat, quis audeat dicere, forsitan non manebit? sine
poenitentia enim, sunt dona et vocatio Dei: sed vocatio eorum qui secundu^
propositu^ vocati sunt. Pro his ergointerpellante Christo, ne deficiat fides
eorum, sine dubio non deficiet vsque in finem, ac per hoc perseuerabit vsque in
finem, nec eam nisi manentem vitae huius inuer^t finis. And a little after.
Subuentu^ est ergo infirmitati voluntatis humanae vt diuina gratia
indeclinabili^er, et inseperabiliter ageretur, e^ideo quamuis infirma, non
tamen deficeret, neque aduersitate vlla vincere^r. Adamo for^ssimo dimisit,
atque permisit facere quod vellet: infirmis seruauit in ipso donante
invictissime quod bo^um est vellent, nec hoc deserere invictissime noll^nt.
What is there that can be more full and punctual to our purpose then this?
The second authority is that which you shall (...) in his Enarration upon
Psalm. 36. a^as 37. ver. 31. The law of God is in his heart, none of his steps
shall slide. Vp^ (...). 8.
on which words he comments thus. Liberat a laqueo verbum Dei in cord, liberat
a via prava verbum Dei in cord, liberat a lapsu verbum Dei in cord. Tecum
est, cujus verbum a te non recedit. Cord autem quid mali patitur quem custodit
Deus? Viuat ergo securus, and inter malos viuat securus, and inter impios viuat
securus. And in his Enarration upon the 65. alias 66. Psa. verse 9, which
holds our soul in life, and suffers not our feet to be moved: he comments
thus: Ecce posuit animam nostram in vitam, quia credimus in eum qui in vitam
posuit animam nostram: Sed quid deinde opus est nisi vt perseueraremus vsque in
finem. Et hoc quis dabit, nisi de quo consequenter dictum est: Et non dedit in
motum pedes meos. Ipse posuit animam meam in vitam, ipse regit and pedes ne
nutent, ne moveantur, and dentur in motum, and ipse nos faciet and viuere, ipse
perseuerare vsque in finem, vt in aeternum viuamus. These three places do
sufficiently declare St. Augustines opinion in this point. If any man desire
further satisfaction from him, let him read his whole book de Bono
perseuerantiae, and de Corrept: and Gratia: his books de Praedestinatione
sanctorum: and to be brief, let him read but Abbot Bishop of Salisburie in
his Animaduersion upon Thomsons Diatriba, cap. 8. where he shall see St.
Augustines opinion thorowout his several works, in this particular point,
collected and epitomized to his hand.

Cyrill.
Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, who flourished about the year of our Lord 420.
in his 7. Book upon John, cap. 10. does suffragate to our conclusion in these
words: Suis omnibus Dominus vitam aeternam se dare affirmat, paseua scilicet
vberrima bonorum omnium copia affluentia: vbi lux clarissima, pax secura, qu^es
dul^issima, gloria perpetua. Et non peribunt in aeternum, q^ia pastor eorum, ac
saluator talis est, apud qu^m nihil omuino perire possit. Eos enim quos semel
praedestinaendo Christus assumpserit, nulla vis diabolicae tentationis, non
immanit as humanae persecutionis de sort and latere eius potest auferre. Sed
nonne Judas (dicit quispiam) in aeternum perijt, and surreptus est a Satana de
manu Dei; and nonne mulii viam Domini ambul^nt a qua tand^m d^cidunt? Verum ad
finem vsq, in bo^o perseverantes duntaxat Domini oues sunt and dicuntur. Qui
igitur post perceptam gratiam de numero Christi ouium perdunt; Hi certe in dei
oculis o^es non sunt: quare nec Iud^, nec alij retro abeuntes ad ouile Christi
pertinere dicendi sunt. What more plainer evidence can be produced for us then
this? I could add more out of this Father, but this is sufficient.

Prosper.
Prosper Aquitanus who flourished about the year of our Duari. `1577' fol. 26^.
Lord 430. to 440. in his Commentary on Psa. 114. alias 116. verse 8.
concurreth with us: for these are his words. Exempta est a morte anima, etiam
mortali adhuc carne circundata, quae ex infideli fidelis effecta est, and
preter illam perfectam, aeternam a cunctis laboribus requiem quam adipiscitur
pretiosa in conspectu Domini mors sanctorum, habet etiam in hac vita requiem
suam anima quae de morte infidelitatis exempta est, and quae non ab operibus
iustitiae, sed ab iniquitatis abstinet action. Talis anima quae iam vi^it
Domino and mortua est mundo, quae spirituali industriae vigilanter intenta, in
humilitatis and mansuetudinis non pigra sed quieta tranquillitate requiescit,
pro adeptis iam habet, quicquid non dubia spe patienter expectat. So in his
Exposi^ion upon psa. 138. alias 139. verse. 15. fol. 297. Est quaedam in sanctis
hominibus dei insup^rabilis fortitudo, and inuicta patientia quam in ijs
occulte affinxit Deus, and absconditum fecit, habentem osseam firmitatem quae
nec corrumpatur secundis, nec frangatur aduersis. So Respons. ad Object. 12.
Vincentiani: Praedestinatio de^, e^si apud nos, (...). 139.
dum in praesentis vitae periculis versamur, incerta est, apud illum tamen qui
fecit quae futura sunt, incommutabilis permanet, nec quae illuminauit obcaecat;
nec quae aedificauit, destrun, nec quae plantauit euellit. Sine poenitentia
enim sunt dona and vocatio Dei: Romans 11.
and firmum fumdamentum dei stat, habens signaculum hoc. (...) Tim. (...).
Cognouit Dominus qui sunt ejus. Nullo igitur modo praedestinatio dei facit, vt
aliqui ex filijs. Dei, filij sint aiaboli, aut ex templo Sancti spiritus templa
sint daemonum: aut ex membris Christi, fiant membra meritricis: sed potius
praed^stinatio facit, vt ex filijs diaboli fiant fillij Dei, and ex templo
daem^um, templum sit Spiritus sancti, and ex membris meritricis membra sint
Christi. Quia ipse alligat fortem, and vasa ejus rapit, eruens ea de potestate
t^nebrarum, and transferens de contumelia in gloriam. Hi autem de quibus
dicitur. Ex nobis exierunt, sed non fuerunt ex 1 John 12.
nobis: si enim fuissent ex nobis, mansissent vtique nobiscum: voluntate
exierunt, voluntate ceciderunt. Et quia praesenti sunt casuri, non sunt
praedestinati. Essent autem praedestinati, si ^ssent reuersuri, and in
sanctitate ac vnitate mansuri. A^ per hoc, praedestinatio Dei multis est causa
standi, nemini est causa labendi. See Respons. ad cap. 2. 3. to 8. Gallorum:
Respons. ad Excepta Genuen sium: Dubium 8. 9. Where Prosper affirms, that none
of the Elect can fall from grace, but that God does always give them
perseverance to the end, and never suffer them to fall or perish. See lib. 1.
de vocatione Gent: cap. 24. which is very full to our present purpose. And
though his Respons. ad cap. 7. Gallorum, and ad Object. 7. Vincent. and lib. 2.
de vocat. Gent: cap. 28. may serve to prove, that the true regenerate Saints of
God may fall both totally and finally from grace; Yet all these places, are not
to be vndestood of such men as were regenerated in truth, but only of such as
were regenerated in outward show, and in the eyes of men: For the Author
informs us in these places, that such as do thus fall away, are such, as were
never praedestinated, such as God did never sever from the sons of perdition,
because ^ee did foresee that they would not continue to the end, as all the
Elect of God do: because that perseverance is an inseperable concomitant of
their election. So that those which fall being not in the number of the Elect,
could never be truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ. And so Prosper, as
well as his Master St. Augustine, is wholly for us.

Chrysologus.
Chrysologus Archbishop of Rauenna, a man of admirable eloquence, who
flourished from the year of our Lord, 440. to 490. concurreth in opinion with
us. For in his 25. Sermon de terrenorum cura discipienda: Mentioning these
words of Christ, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it is your Lugduin.
1623.
Fathers will to give you a kingdom, he applies them thus unto the Saints of
God. Quis de victu, quis de vestitu, quis de pleb^io censu, and vernalis cespi
it is (...) suspirat, de regno certus, de dominatione securus? Quid te mereri
dubit as habere te, and possidere iam cogeris confiteri. Quid ergo cum terra
illi qui possidet coelum? Quid illi cum humanis, qui adeptus est iam diuina?
nisi forte placent gemitus, eliguntur labores, amantur pericula, pessima mors
delectat, and illata mala bonis sunt gratiora collatis. So Sermon. 40. de Bono
pastore: Homo non te turbet fides, spes te longior non fatiget, quia certa tibi
res est, quae in ipso tibi rerum servatur auctori. Mortui, in quit, estis, and
vita vestra absconsa est cum Christo in Deo: cum autem apparuerit Christus vita
vestra, tunc and vos apparebitis cum illo in gloria. Laborans messor quod in
semine non videt, videbit in mess, and quod in sulco deflet, gaudebit in
fructu. Sermo. 57. and 58. De symbolo Apostolorum. Sanctam Catholicam
Ecclesiam. Neque a capite membra, nequo sponsa seperatur a sponso: sed tum tali
coniunctione spiritus fit vnus, fit omnia, and in omnibus Deus. Accepturi ergo
Symbolum, hoc est, pactum vitae, salutis placitum, and inter vos and Deum fidei
insolubile vinculum pectora parate, non chartam: sensum acuite non calamum, and
audita non atramento, quia non potest committicaducis and corruptibilibus
instrumentis aeternum, and coeleste secretum; sed in ipsa arca animae, sed in
ipsa bibliotheca interni spiritus est locandum. Sermo. 131. Omnis qui
crediderit John 5. 24.
non morietur in aeternum, sed transibit de morte ad vitam. Quomodo non
moritur? Q^ia de morte transit ad vitam. Moritur ergo, moritur omnis qui
nascitur de condition mortali, sed viuit, and in aeternum viuit omnis qui
renascitur de generatione vitali. Sermo. 162. Charitas nu^quam excidit: quia
charitas si est, permanet, si non permanet, non est. And Sermo. 166. Reuera,
fratres, nescit lassari, mori non potest, cui panis, cui vita De^s est.

Fulgentius.
Fulgentius, an acute and learned Father, who flourished from (...) 1587.
the year of our Lord 490. to 510. has fully declared himself on our
behalf. For in his Book de Praedestinatione ad Monimum, page 20. 21. his
words are these; Gratia ^st illa iusta retributio, qua bonis suis meliora
retribuens Deus, glorificaturus est justos: and hoc etiam gratiae opus erit.
Quia vt hoc mereatur, ipsa praeueniendo misericorditer in cipit; ipsa
subsequendo custodit. Praeuenit igitur impium, vt fiat justus: subsequitur
justu^, ne fiat impius. Praevenit caecum, vt lumen quod non invenit, donet:
subsequitur videntem, vt lumen, quod contulit, seruet. Praevenit elisum vt
surgat: subsequitur elevatu^, ne cadat. Praevenit donans homini bonam
voluntate^: subsequitur beneuole^tem, operando in illo boni operis facultatem.
Hoc igitur ista misericordia dei in homine subsequitur, quod praeveniens ipsa
largitur. Et ideo non solu errantem iustificando ad viam revocat: sed etiam
been ambulando custodit and adjuvat, vt ad donum glorificationis aeternae
perducat. Haec autem omnia, id est, and vocationis nostrae initia, and
justificationis augmenta, and glorificationis praemia, in praedestinatione sua
Deus semper habuit, quia and in vocatione, and in justificatione, and in
glorificatione sanctorum, gratiae suae futurae opera praescivit. Ob hoc totu^
Deo assignat Apostolus dicens: Nam quos praesciuit, and praedestinauit
conformes fieri imagini filij eius, vt sit ipse primogenitus Romans 8. 29, 2^
in multis fratribus. Quos autem praedestinauit hos and vocauit and quos
vocauit, hos and iustificauit: quos autem iustificauit, illos and glorificauit.
Ista sempiterna voluntas ejus nunquam mutabilita^i subjacet, quia initium
existendi non habet. Quod autem semper sic est vt esse non caeperit proculdubio
sic est, vt id quod est, non esse, non possit. And in his book De Incarnatione
and Gratia Domini Jesus Christi, cap. 31. p. 797. 798. and 815. 806. his words
are these. Quocirca omnes illos quos Deus vult salvos facere, sic intelligere
debemus, vt nec aliquem putemus salvari posse nisi volente Deo: nec existimemus
voluntatem omnipotentis Dei aut in aliquo non impleri, aut alequatenus
impediri. Omnes enim quos Deus vult salvos fieri, sine dubitatione salva^tur,
nec possunt salvari, nisi quos Deus vult salvos fieri, nec est quisquam quem
Deus saluari velit and non salvetur, quia Deus noster omnia quaecunque voluit
fecit. Ipsi omnesvtique salvi fiunt: quos omnes vult salvos fieri: quia haec
salus non illis ex humana voluntate nascitur, sed ex Dei bona voluntate
praestatur. Nefas est autem, si quis omnipotentem dicat aliquid facere non
posse, quod ipse velit. voluntati enim eius quis resistet? Nemo vtique quia non
est aliqua Romans 9.
natura quae ab eius creatione sit aliena. Et sicut nihil naturaliter
subsistit, quod ille non fecerit: ita nihil prouenit in salutem hominum, quod
ille non in aeterna bonae voluntatis suae dispositione faciendum
praedestinauerit, a quo et fides gratis infunditur per quam been ambulemus et
perseuerantia donatur, per quam ad spem peruenire possimus, haec autem dona sua
semper Deus in aeterna atque incommutabili habet voluntate disposita, in qua
praeordinauit atque praeparauit, et quae daret et quibus daret. Ipse enim
praedestinando praeparauit gratiae donum qui gratiam donando implet
praedestinationis effectum. Cuius gratia nobis et initium bonae voluntatis
donatur ad fidem, et ipsi voluntati adiutorium tribuitur, vt quod been vult,
been operetur. Deus enim qui hominem condidit, ipse praedestinatione sua et
donum illuminationis ad credendum, et donum perseuerantiae ad proficiendum
atque permanendum, et donum glorificationis ad regnandum, quibus dare voluit
praeparauit, quique non aliter perficit in opere, quam in sua sempiterna atque
incommutabili habet voluntate dispositum. What can there be said more fully to
our purpose, then this, which the elegant, acute, and learned Father had
recorded to posterity?

Gregory the great.
Gregory the great, who flourished from the year 590. to 644. Paris^s. 1619
has declared himself in our behalf. For in the 8. book of his Morralls
upon Job. cap. 6 his words are these. Quia electoru^ lux tentatione no^
extinguitur, nequaqua^ nox, sed vespera facta perhibetur: quia nimiru^ saepe
tentatio in cord electoru^ Tom. 2.
lume^ justitiae abscondit, sed non interimit, et quasi ad pallorem
trepidationis pertrahit, sed funditus non extinguit. And cap 24. Iustoru^ bona
quia ex cord incipiunr, vsque ad praesentis vitae terminu^ crescunt: So Moral.
lib. 25. cap. 8. Charitas in cordibus electorum in extinguibilis manet: inde
dicitur. Ignis est iste (...) qui nnnquam deficiet de altari. And lib. 34. cap.
13. Aurum quod prauis diaboli persuasionibus steini ficut lutum potuerit, aurum
ante oculos Dei nunquam fuit: qui enim seduci quandoque non reversuri possunt,
quasi habitam sanctitatem ante oculos honimum videntur amittere, sed eam ante
oculos Dei nunquam habuerant. That whole chapter is spent to this purpose,
which makes wholly for us. See more to this purpose in Hom. 3. et. 5. in
lezechielem. it Moral. lib. 2. cap. 28, 29.

Venerable Bede.
Bid who flourished in the time of Gregory, and long after, to the year of
our Lord, 750. being the ancient glory of our English nation, and a man of
greatest worth and learning, of any in his age; concurreth with us in opinion,
as is evident by diverse of his works. For in his exposition upon the 1 Pet. 1.
23. his words are these. Colonia. 1512.
Sicut ex semine incorruptibili caro quae corrumpitur nascitur, Tom. 5.
sic per aquam verbo Dei consecratam, vita nobis quae finem nesciat tribuitur.
And it^ his exposition upon the, 1 Ioh. 5. 18. We know that he which is borne
of God does not commit sin: he comments thus. Peccatum scilicet ad mortem. Quod
et de omni crimine capitali, et de illo spetialiter potest intelligi, quo omnis
qui natus est ex Deo non peccat: Denique David rex crimen mortale admisit. Quis
enim nesciat adulterium et homicidium mortem mereri perpetuam? sed tamen David
quia ex Deo natus est, quia ad filiorum Dei pertinebat societatem non peccavit
vsque ad mortem qui sui reatus veniam mox paenitendo promeruit. Sed genoratio
cael^stis conseruat eum et malignus non ta^git eum. Gratia Christi qua renati
sunt fideles conseruat eos qui secundu^ propositum vocati sunt sancti, ne
peccatum in mortem committant: et si quibuslibet pro humanae conditionis frag
ilitate deliquerit, ne ab hosti maligno possint tangi, defendit. Item dicendum,
tamdiu nos in generatione Dei permanere quandiu non peccauerimus: imo qui in
generatione Dei perseuerant, peccare non possunt, neque a maligno contingi. So
in his Exposition upon Romans 8. 15. but ye Tom. 6.
have received the spirit of adoption wh^rby we cry Ab^a Father: he descants
thus. Q^alis res est, si pignus tale est? Nec pignus, sed Arrcha ^icenda est:
pignus enim quando ponitur, cu^ fuerit res ipsa reddita aufertur. Arrha autem
de ipsa reddatur, quae da^da promittitur: vt res quando redditur, impleatur,
quod datum est, non mutetur. And upon the 29. verse of the same chapter, he
comments thus. Qui secundu^ propositum vocati sunt, in eo quod diligunt Deum
permanent vsque in finem. Quicunque in Dei prouidentissima dispositione
praesciti, praedestinati, vocati, justificati, glorifica^i sunt, non dico etiam
nondum renati, sed etiam nondum nati, iam filij Dei sunt, et omnino perire non
possunt. Talibus Deus diligentibus cum omnia cooperantur in bonum, vsque adeo
prorsus omnia, vt etiam si qui eorum deuiant et exorbitant etiam, hoc ipsum ijs
faciat proficere in bonu^, quia humiliores redeunt, atque doctiores. Horum
praedestinatorum nemo cum diabolo perit, nemo vsque ad mortem sub diaboli
potestate remanebit. Quos enim et proedestinauit eos et vocauit, vocatione illa
de qua dictum est. Sine paenitentia sunt dona et vocatio Dei. And upon the last
verse of this chapter, his words are these. Si ergo nulla res ab eius charitate
nos separat, quid esse non solum melius, sed etiam certius hoc bono potest? So
upon the 1. Cor. 13. 8. Charity never fails: he amplifieth himself thus.
Deus dilectio est, et qui manet in dilectione, in Deo manet, ^t Deus manet in
illo. Sit tibi domus Deus, esto domus Dei: mane in Deo, vt man eat in te Deus.
Manet in te Deus vt te contineat: manes in Deo, ne cadas: quia sic de charitate
Apostolus, dixit, Charitas nunqua^ excidit. Quomodo cadet quem continet Deus;
And in his exposition upon the 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of the Lord abides
sure, having this seal; the Lord knows who are his. His words are these.
Satis fixum atque immobile debet cord retineri Jerusalem captiuam ab huius
seculi Babilonia decursis temporibus liberari: nullumque ex illa esse
periturum, quia qui perierit, non ex ipsa erit. Firmum enim fundamentum Dei
stat, habens signaculum hoc, nouit Dominus qui sunt eius. Nec moueat quod saepe
diabolus seducit etiam illos, qui regenerati iam in Christo, vias ingrediuntur
Dei. Nouit enim Dominus qui sunt eius. Ex his in aeternam damnationem neminem
ipse seducit. Sic enim nouit eos Dominus vt Deus, quem nihil lateat etiam
futurorum: non vt homo, qui homine^ ad praesens videt, si tame^ videt cuius cor
non videt. Novit Deus qui permaneant ad coronam, qui permaneat ad flammam:
novit in arca sua triticum, novit paleam; novit segetem, novit zizannia. Modo
enim corpus Christi mixtum est tanquam area, sed nouit Deus qui sunt eius,
sicut tu nosti quod trituras, quia ibi est latens massa. Nec consumit
trituratio quod purgatura est ventilatio: certi sumus fratres, quia omnes qui
sumus in corpore Domini, and manemus in illo, vt and ipse maneat in nobis. Sed
quid est quod ait; qui manet in me, and ego in illo? Quid nisi quod martyrs
audiebant: Q^ perseuerauerit vsque ad finem hic salvus erit. De illis ovibus de
quibus dicit Apostolus, Nouit Dominus qui sunt eius, and quos praesciuit ipsos
and praedestinauit: quos autem praedestinanit, hos and vocauit, quos autem
vocauit ipsos and iustificauit, quos autem iustificauit, ipsos and
glorificauit. De ouibus istis nec lupus rapit, nec fur tollit, nec latro
interficit. Securus est de numero eorum, qui pro ijs novit quod dedit: and hoc
est quod ait, non rapiet quispiam eos de manu mea. Numerus, ergo iustorum, qui
secundum propofitum sunt, de quibus dictum est, Nouit Dominus qui sunt eius,
ipse est hortus conclusus, fons signatus, puteus aquae viuae, paradisus cum
fructu pomorum. Ex hoc numero quidam spiritaliter vivunt, and supereminentem
charitatis viam ingrediuntur, and cum praeocupatum hominem in aliquo delicto
instruunt, and cum spiritu lenitatis intendunt, ne and ipsi tententur. Et cum
forte ipsi praeoccupantur, reprimitur in ijs aliquantulum, non autem
extinguitur charitatis affectus; rursusque insurgens, and inardescens, pristino
cursu restituitur. Thus you see how this venerable and learned Father, and
Countrie-man of ours is wholly for us.

Anselme.
Anselme sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, in the reigns of William Rufus,
and Henry the first, about the year of our Lord 10^3. to 1106. has recorded
and published to posterity the Coloniae 1612.
same position that I here maintain. For in his Commentary upon Math 17.
verse. 20. his words are these. Perfecta fides tentationis To^. 1.
pistillo probata, and ab omni superficie levium cogitationum cribro
discretionis castigata, and perfectae dilectionis melle dulcorata, omnes de
cord, quod est interioris hominis caput, vitiorum sentinas exhaurit; non solum
ad praesens, sed etiam in futurum ne colligantur munit. So in his exposition
upon Romans 8. verse. 17. Si filij sumus, erimus and haeredes: id est ejusdem
gloriae participes. Non enim inaniter filij sumus, sed magnum inde commodum
habebimus, quia haeredes patris noftri erimus, imo ipse erit haereditas nostra.
Sed si hoc parum erit, audiamus adhuc vnde amplius gaudeamus, quia erimus
cohaeredes Christi, id est, simul cum Christo^ aeredes, eandem scilicet quam
ipse possidet beatitudinis haereditatem cum eo possidentes, And upon verse. 28.
29. 30. he comments thus. Hi qui secundum propositum Dei vocati sunt sancti,
in eo quod diligunt Deum permanent vsque in finem, and qui ad tempus inde
deuiant revertantur, vt vsque in finem perducant, quod in bono esse caeperunt.
Nam secundum propositum occultissimae iustitiae bonitatisque suae Deus quos
praedestinauit, ipsos vocat, and iustificat, and glorificat, Gratia est
praedestinationis ipsius effectus. Et haec est predestinatio sanctorum,
praescientia scilicet and praeparatio benificiorum Dei, de quibus certissime
liberantur, quicunque liberantur. Ex his enim qui piaedestinati sunt nullus cum
diabolo perit, nullus vsque ad mortem sub diaboli potestate r^manebit. Horum
enim si quisque perit, fallitur Deus. Sed nemo eorum perit quia falli non
potest qui praedestinavit eos. Deus illis quos praedestinavit ad vitam dat
virtutem and bonorum operum gradus per quos ad tantam sublimitatem possint
erigi. Vocat enim illos and justificat, and magnificat. Et haec sua dona
quibuscunque ipse donavit proculdubio se daturum esse praescivit, and in sua
prescientia praeparavit. Quos ergo praedestinauit, ipsos and vocauit, vocatione
illa de qua dictum est, Sine poenitentia sunt dona and vocatio Dei. Nam in sua
quae falli mutarique non potest praescientia opera sua disponere, id omnino,
nec aliud quicquam est praedestinare. Non ergo alios, sed quod peaedestinauit
ipsos and vocauit: nec alios, sed quos ita vocauit, ipsos and instificauit,
nealios sed quos praedestinauit, vocauit and instificauit, illos and
magnificauit, sieve glorificavit. Praedestinatio nostra non in nobis facta est,
sed in occulto, apud ipsum in ejus praescientia. Tria vero reliqua in nobis
fiunt, vocatio, and justificatio, and magnificatio. Vocamur praedictione
poenitentiae, justificamur innovatione misericordiae, and timore judicij,
magnificamur profectu virtutu^, sieve glorificamur aeterna beatitudine. Ita
omnia jam facta sunt: praedestinavit, praescivit, vocavit, justificavit,
magnificavit; quoniam omnes jam praesciti ac praedestinati sunt, and multi jam
praedestinati ac justificati, and magnificati sunt; quamvis adhuc vsque in
finem seculi multi vocandi, and justificandi, and magnificandi sunt. Verba
tamen praeteriti temporis posita sunt de rebus etiam futuris tanquam jam vt
fierent, quia ex aeternitate disposuit qui fecit quae futura sunt. Quicunque
ergo providentissima Dei dispositione, praesciti, praedestinati, vocati,
magnificati, iustificati, gloricati sunt, non dico etiam nondum renati, sed
etiam non nati, jam filij Dei sunt, and omnino perire non possunt. And a little
after upon verse 31. he comments thus; Si Deus gratuito suo munere tanta nobis
confert, quis poterit nobis quicquam harum auferre? vel quis poterit eius
volu^tati resistere, qui nos ad gloriam praeordinavit perducere? Si Deus pro
nobis, quis contra nos erit? Deus pro nobis vt praedestinaret nos, Deus pro
nobis vt glorificaret nos, Si Deus pro nobis, quis contra nos? Si Deus in
omnibus pro nobis est, qui nobis vult adversari, paret se, si potest, bellare
adversus Deum. Non enim ledit nos, nisi qui Deum vincit. Et quis est qui vincit
omnipotentem? Quicunque reluctari voluerit, sibi nocet. Si Deus pro nobis, quis
contra nos? Etiamsi totus mundus contra nos insurgat, and omni genere
tormento^m in nos saeviat, quid totus mundus, quando pro nobis est per quam
factus est mundus? Quid est omnis qui Deo nitit^r resistere, paranti nos ad
regnum perducere? So in his exposion upon the 2 Cor. 18 Confirmabit vos vsque
in finem. Et vere confirmabit quia fidelis, id est, verax est in promissis suis
Deus, quia fideliter reddet quicquid promisit. Promisit salutem aeterna^ and
beatam vitam cum Angelis sine fine, vbi nullus deinceps moriendi metus erit.
Talia promisit, and in horum promissione fidelis erit, quia sine mendatio
reddet ea illis quibus promisit. Fidelis Deus per quem vocati estis: quia qui
aversos vocavit, jam facilius confirmabit. Vocati estis in societatem non modo
Apostolorum vel Angeloru^ sed ^tiam filij eius Jesus Christi Domini nostri, vt
sitis participes haereditatis ac gloriae quam possidet filius ejus. Hoc enim
dedit vobis esse quod credidistis, vt quia credidistis Christum esse Dei
filium, vos quoque efficeremini filij Dei mansuri in eadem dignitate in qua
manet Christus. So in his exposition on Phil. 1. 6. ipse qui per prevenientem
gratiam, coepit in vobis opus bonum, per subsequentem and cooperantem perficiet
illud vsque in diem Jesus Christi, id est, vsque ad extremum diem vitae
vniuscujusque quando anima de corpore egrediens praesentatur ante tribunal
Christi judicanda. Cooperando enim in nobis Deus perficit, quod operando
incipit: quoniam ipse vt velimus operatur incipeins, qui volentibus cooperatur
perficiens: And in his exposition on Col. 3. 3. Mortui, inquit, estis, sed
mortui specie, viui radice, sicut arbores in hieme. Sed ne arescatis intus est
radix, intus est vita, intus est charitas, qua vita abscondita est cum Christo
in Deo. Erit autem postea tempus vestrum, erit aestas vestra quando
circumvestiemini dignitate filiorum, and replebimini vbertate fructuum. And in
his exposition on the 2 Timothy 2.19 with which I will conclude, his words are
these. Fides quorundam infirmantium, and ad electorum sortem non pertinentium
subvertitur ab haereticis, sed firmum fundamentum Dei, id est, firma fides quam
Deus per Spiritum sanctum in cordibus suorum electoru^ fundavit stat, id est
nullatenus subverti vel inclinari potest: habens hoc sigillum, id est, hanc
velut sigilli impresiionem, quia scilicet, cognouit Deus qui sunt eius, and
discedat ab iniquitate quicunque nomen Domini nominat. Hoc sigillum cordi suo
impressum bonus habet, id est, hanc cognitionem menti suae firmiter infixam, vt
apud se dicat. Quid mihi prodesset, si exterius simularem esse justum, vel
fidelem, and interius nequam essem? Nihil: quia qui corda omnium inspicit, ipse
nouit qui sunt eius. Ideoque veraciter in oculis eius studio fidelis vel justus
apparere, vt possim ad eoru^ sortem qui sunt eius pertinere. Talis cogitatio
est diuini sigilli impressio. Per hoc enim haereses, et omnia saluti contraria
deuitat, quia scit debere discedere ab iniquitate omnes qui Dominu^ inuocant.
Haec itaque sigilli impressio qua distinguuntur a caeteris qui subuertuntur,
est in fundamento Dei firmo, id est, in robusta fide electorum Dei, quia nouit
Dominus qui ad eius haereditatem pertineant: et alijs recedentibus a fide, illi
qui praedestinati sunt non possunt recedere, vel si recesserint eos necesse est
redire. Nec moueat quod saepe etiam diabolus seducat etiam illos quiregenerati
in Christo, vias ingrediuntur Dei; quia nouit Dominus qui sunt eius. Ex his in
aeternam damnationem neminem ipse seducit. Thus you see this godly Father and
Countryman of ours is very full and large in our behalf.

Bernard.
Bernard, who flourished from the year of our Lord, 1140. to Antwerpiae. 1616.
1170. is very copious and large in our behalf. For in his 79. sermon upon the
Canticles: upon the words of the spouse. Cant. 3. 4. I held him and would not
let him go, until I had brought him into my mothers house. He descants thus.
Ita est ex tunc, et deinceps, non deficir genus Christianu^, nec fides de
terra, nec charitas de Ecclesia: venerunt flumina, flauerunt venti, et
impigerunt Math. 7.
in eam et non c^ciait, eo quod fundata esset supra Petram: Petra aute^ est
Christus. Itaque, non verbositate Philosophoru^, nec cauillationibus
Haereticorum, nec gladijs persecutoru^ Rom 8.
potuit ista a^t poterit aliquando separari a charitate Psalm. 72.
Dei quae est in Jesus Christo: ad^o fortiter tenet quem diligit anima sua, adeo
ille adhaerere bonum est. Glutino bonu^ est, ait (...). Quid hoc tenacius
glutino, quod nec aquis eluitur, nec ventis dissoluitur, nec gladijs scinditur?
Denique aquae multae non poterunt extinguere charitatem: Tenui Genesis 32.
eum, ne^ dimittam. Et sanctus Patriarcha, non te, inquit, dimittam, nisi
benedixeris mihi. Ista non vult eum dimittere, et forte magis qua^ Patriarcha
id not vult, quia nec pro benedictione quide^. Siquidem ille benedictione
accepta demisit eu^, haec autem non sic. Nolo, inquit, benedictinem Psalm. 72.
tuam, sed te. Quid enim mihi est in coelo, et a te quid volui super terram?
Non dimittam te, nec si benedixeris mihi. Tenui, nec dimittam. Nec minus
forsitan ille teneri vult, cum perhibeat dicens, deliciae meae esse cum filijs
hominum. Prou. 8.
Quoque pollicens, ait, Ego vobiscum sum vsque ad consummationem Math. 28. 20.
seculi. Q^id hac copula fortius quae vna duorum tam vehementi voluntate
firmata est? Tenui eum, inquit. Sed nihilominus ipsa vicissim tenetur ab eo
quem tenet, cum alibi dicit, Tenuisti manum dexteram meam. Quae tenetur et
Psalm. 27.
tenet quomodo iam cadere potest? Tenet fidei firmitate, tenet deuotionis
affectu. At nequaquam diu teneret, si non teneretur? Tenetur autem potentia, et
misericordia Domini. So in his first sermon on septuag^ssima: Inuenies ab eodem
Ioanne scriptum, Omnis qui natus est ex Deo non peccat, sed generatio coelestis
conseruat illum. Non peccat, inquit, idest non permanet in peccato; quia
conseruat illum vtique vt perire no^ possit, ea quae falli non potest generatio
coelestis. Sieve non peccat, id est, tantunde^ est vt si non peccat, pro eo
scilicet quod non imputatur ei peccatum, generatio coelestis etiam in hac part
conseruat illum. Data sunt signa quaeda^ et indicia manifesta salutis, vt
indubitabile sit eum esse de numero electoru^ in quo ea signa permanserint.
Propter hoc (inquam) quos praesciuit Deus, ^t praedestinauit conformes fieri
imagini filij sui, vt quibus certitudinem negat causa sollicidinis, vel
fiduciam praestat causa consolationis. So in his tracte de gratia et liberio
arbitrio. Neque enim hic possumus pen^tus esse sine peccato et miseria,
possumus tamen gratia iuuante nec peccato superari nec miseria. Qaunqua^ tamen
scriptura loquatur. Omne quod natu^est ex Deo non peccat. Sed hoc dictu^ est de
praedestinatis ad vita^ no^ quod omnino no^ peccant, sed quod peccatu^ ipsis
no^ imputetur, quod vel punitur condigna paenitentia, vel incharitate
absconditur. So in his book de Natura et dignitate amoris diuini. c. 6. Itaque
quisquis ille est, sicut dicit beatus Johannes, secundu^ hoc quod natus est ex
Deo, id est, secundu^ interitoris hominis rationem in tantum non peccat, in
quantu^ peccatu^ quod corpus mortis foris operatur, odit potius quam approbat,
semine spiritualis natiuit at is quod ex Deo natus est, eum interius
conseruante. Quod etsi interim aliquando incursu peccati laeditur, et
attenditur, radice tamen charitatis in altum defixa non perit. Imo statim
saecundius et viuacius conualescit 1 John 3.
in spem boni fructus et surgit. Sic enim dicit beatus Ioannes, Omnis qui natus
est ex Deo peccatum non facit, quoniam semen ipsius in eo manet: et non potest
peccare, quia ex Deo natus est. Notanda vis verborum. Non (inquit) peccatum
Romans 7.
facit, quod patitur potius qua^ facit qui natus est ex Deo et non potest
peccare perseuerando scilicet in peccato, du^ legi Dei cu^ mente seruit: etiam
carne^ festinat subigere, quae tentatione et peccato incurrente legi peccati
videbatur seruire. Petrus cum peccauit, charitatem non amisit, quia peccauit
potius in veritatem quam in charitatem, cum se no^ esse mentitus esset in re
cuius totus erat in cord. Ideoque negationem falsitatis continuo lachrymis
lauit veritas charitatis. Sic et David cum peccauit, charitatem non perdidit,
sed obstupuit quodammodo in eo charitas ad vehementem tentationis ictu^, et
charitatis in eo nequaquam facta est abolitio, sed quasi quaedam soporatio,
quae mox ad vocem arguentis prophetae euigilauit, continuo in illam
ardentissimae charitatis confessionem erupit, peccaui Domino, et continuo
audire meruit, Dominus transtulit a te peccatum tuum, non morieris. And to
conclude, in his book de Tripl, coherent: vinculo: etc. his words are these.
Nouit Dominus qui sunt eius, et propositum Dei manet immobile: etsi horrendorum
criminu^ nota David inuritur, etsi Maria Magdalene septem daemonjjs cumulatur,
etsi princeps Apostorum in profundum negationis barathrum submergitur; non est
tamen, qui de manu Dei possit eruere. Thus is this Father fully for us, though
some would wrest and scrue him to the contrary. See more of this. Sermo: 61: in
Cantica. Sermo: de duplici baptsmate: etc. and Sermo: de fragmentis septem:
Misericordiarum.

Bradwardyn.
Bradwardyn our own Countriman, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury in the
reign of King Edward the third, who was styled the profound Doctor of his
time, and as Thomas of Walsingbam relates it, departed this life in the year
of our Lord, 1350: concurreth in opinion and judgment with us. For in his first
book de Causa Dei: cap: 23. he proves. Quod tam sci^ntia Dei quam voluntas
eius est omnino immutabilis; and from thence he infers this fifth Corolarie.
Quod omne saluandum aut damnandum, praemiandum vel puniendum sub quocunque
gradu voluit ab aeterno saluari vel damnari praemiari similiter vel puniri sub
eodem gradu praecise: et hoc nedum voluntate conditional aut indeterminata,
sed it a absoluta et determinata sicut vult in praesenti vel finali iudicio,
aut post valet: which is the very ground and basis of the constant and final
perseverance of the Saints. So in his 2. book de Causa Dei. cap. 5. 6. he
proves that no man can overcome the least temptation, without the special aid
and assistance of God, and with all he certifieth us. Quod auxilium Dei
speciale posse tentationem aliquam superare, est voluntas eius inuicta. So cap.
8. he declares what perseverance is, and proves it to be the gift of God: et
quod nullus viator quantacu^que gratia creata subnixus solius liberi arbitrij
viribus, vel etiam cum adiutorio gratiae possit perseuerare finaliter, vel per
aliquod tempus omnino sine aliquo Dei auxilio speciali: cap: 11: he proves.
Quod perseuerantia non est aliquod donu^m Dei creatum a charitate et gratia
realiter differens et distinctum, but that it is always an adjunct and
concomitant of true grace: cap. 13. he proves. Quod illud auxilium sine quo
nullus perseuerat, et per quod quilibet perseuerat, est spiritus sancti diuina
bonitas et voluntas, et quod Deus dat voluntatem et po^estatem perseuerandi
sanctis suis: and cap. 14. he proves. Quod perseuerantia gratis detur a Deo, et
non meritis comparetur. In all which chapters, if you will take the pains to
read them, you shall find him fully for to act our parts, and to produce such
Scriptures, and sentences from the Fathers (in which he was very well read) as
make undeniable for this our present assertion.

Counsels.
To these authorities and sayings of the Fathers I may add that of the
Council of Miliuitan: can: 3: 4. Where in these 2. Cannons with diverse others
were concluded upon against Pelagius and his followers. Item placuit vt
quicunque dixerit, gratiam D^ in qua iustificamur per Iesum Christum Dominum
nostrum, ad solum remissione^ peccatorum valere quae iam commissa sunt, non
etiam ad adiutorium vt non committantur, anathema sit. Item quisque dixerit
eandem gratiam Dei per Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum, propter, hoc tantum nos
adiuuare ad non peccandum quia per ipsam nobis reuelatur et aperitur
intelligentia mandatorum, vt sciamus quid appetere, quid vitare debeamus, non
autem per illam nobis praestari, vt quod faciendum cognouerimus etia^ facere
diligamus atque valeamus, anathema sit. Cum enim dicat Apostolus scientia
inflat, charitas vero aedificat: valde impium est vt credamus adeam quae inflat
nos habere gratia^ Christi, adeam quae aedificat non habere, cum sit vtrumque
donum Dei, et scire quid facere debeamus, et diligere vt faciamus, vt
aedificante charitate scientia non posset inflare. Sicut autem de Deo scriptum
est: qui docet hominem scientiam: ita etiam scriptum est. Charitas ex Deo est.
Which two Canons affirming that true grace is a great help and preservative
against sin, inabling those that have it, not only to know, but likewise for
to do and love the things which God commands them, make much for my
conclusion: for he that is able through the special assistance of God and
grace to resist sin, and to do and love the things which God commandes him,
how can he choose but persevere in grace? Grace gives him power, love gives him
will to persevere, what is here then that can hinder him from perseuering? To
conclude, let but any indifferent and judicious reader peruse that general and
famous Council of Afric, held in the year of our Lord: 418: against
Pelugius the Heretic, and the second Council of Aransica, or Oreng^, held in
the year of our Lord: 529: and if his eyes and judgment are not praeiudicated
and infected with Arminianisme, or phrase-transformed Pelagianisme, he must
needs acknowledge, that these two Counsels do corroberate and confirm our
present assertion. For in both these Councels it is positiuely resolved. That
grace is the only work of Gods Spirit, and the gift of God, and not a morrall
persuasion, nor the strength of nature. That regeneration and the state of
grace, is wrought only by the Spirit of God, and not by any freewill, strength
or power of our own. That the beginning, the continuance, and the end of the
work of grace in us, is from God alone, and not from our selves, and that by
the grace of God only we are what we are. That when we do enjoy any good at
all, it is not from our own power and strength, but from the assistance of God
himself, who works in us and with us. That God loves us not because we do
deserve his love, but because that he intends to make us lovely. That the
perseverance of the Saints is from God alone, and not from themselves, that so
they might ascribe the glory of their graces and their perseverance not unto
themselves but unto God alone. If then grace and regeneration be the only
work of the Spirit of God, if the continuance, the beginning and the end of
Grace, and perseverance in the state of grace, be from God alone and not from
man, as these two Councels have determined it, then by the determination of
these two Councels, the true regenerate Saints of God can never fall finally
nor totally from grace. For if perseverance be the only Ezech. 36. 27.
work and gift of God alone: the Saints of God can never choose but persevere,
because that God has promised and Ier. 32. 40.
couenanted, to give them perseverance; to cause them to walk i^ his statutes,
and to keep his judgments and to do them, and to put his fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from him: if God will cause them for to
persevere, there is nothing then that is able for to hinder them: for no man
can resist his work and will: Rom: 9: 19. and Isai: 43: 13. If you will but
compare the Canons and Decrees of the general Council of Afric with Saint
Augustines books de Bono Perseuerantiae, and de Corrept: et Gratia: who was
then present at this famous Council, then you may ascertaine your selves, that
this famous, Council and likewise the Council of Orange, who took their
pattern and grounds from it, did suffragate to this our assertion, That those
who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a justifying and
lively faith, can neither finally nor totally fall from grace.

You see now how we have an whole Grand-Iury, of ancient and learned Fathers
and Counsels, who have given up their verdict for us, so that you need not for
to doubt of the truth and goodness of our cause. And here (good Reader) I
would entreat thee to take notice of the truth, the honesty, and modesty of
one Mr. Mountague, who in his Gagge and his Appello Cesarem does confidently
affirm, Gagge, p. 158.
That it has been the common Tenet of all Antiquity, That Appeal 27.
the true regenerate Saints of God may fall finally and totally from the state
of grace. O the matchless impudency, malice, and falsitie of the man, who
against his own knowledge and conscience durst to affirm so gross and
palpable an untruth, and that to such a wicked and pernicious end, as to
deceive his readers, and to thrust a dangerous and condemned error on them, for
an ancient and approved truth. What Mr. Mountague, did you think that none had
read the Fathers but your self? or that your fame and credit was so great
among us, as that we would believe your false quotations, before the
authentical Records themselves? Or did you think (as you have attempted for
to do) to stop the labors of all such, and to crush them in the shell, as
should disclose your partial and disloyal dealing to the world, that so yout
virulent Appeal, and your forged and new coined doctrines therein recorded,
might pass without control? It is well you thought so, but (thanks be to
God) you are deceived in your expectation; and truth though it has found some
difficulty and opposition at the press by your means, yet it has come forth
at last to display your baseness, your impudency, your malice, and your
disloyalty unto the world. But say you had had your will Mr. Mountague and all
things had succeeded according to your hopes: yet me thinks Mr Mountague, if
you had had any conscience or fear of God within you, if you had had any love
and respect unto antiquity and truth (as you pretend you have, how truly let
others judge) you might have been ashamed and afraid to have traduced,
slandered, and sophisticated; to have outfaced, and belyed all Antiquity as
now you have, for fear lest the worthy works of so many Fathers should have
cried out against you here, and these very Fathers themselves should have risen
up against you to condemn you in the day of judgment, for wronging, and
traducing of them to that end as you have done. Nay, if you had had any love
unto your Mother Church, or to the souls of so many thousands of your
Countrymen which you should have wronged and seduced by these false quotations
and confident assertions of your own, you could not have been so graceless,
so false, so treacherous, and so shameless, as to have fathered this your
damnable and pernicious error on the ancient Fathers, who have so much opposed
it. But it may be the good learned man did all this out of ignorance and
simplicity. For being destitute of the Fathers works, or wanting time for to
survey them, or having an higher conceit of other men's learning then his own,
he trusted unto their quotations, and thence he was deceived. And this is not
unlikely. For I find all M. Mountagues quotations, one only excepted, (to wit
that of Clement in his constitutions) recorded verbatim by that famous Arminian
Bertius, in his book de Apostatia sanctorum, neither are they to be found in
any man's works but his. Indeed Mr. Mountague in his Gagge, cap. 20 would make
the world believe, that he did quote his Fathers not out of their own works,
but out of Bucer and other Protestant Divines; but to tell you the (...). 159.
165.
truth, these quotations are not to be found in Bucer or in any other
Protestant Divine, but only in that infamous and arch Arminian Peter Bertius
out of whom Mr. Mountague, has transcribed them verbatim. Only herein is the
difference: Bertius has recorded these quotations in Latin, Mr. Mountague
has translated some of them verbatim into English: Bertius he cites many
sentences, and more Fathers then Mr. Mountague does, who has culled out the
eminentest and choycest of them. And because all the world shall know that I
wrong not Mr. Mountague I will compare his quotations and Bertius his
quotations together. Mr. Mountague in his Gagge page 165. 166. quotes Ignatius
the ancientest Father this day extant: the selfsame quotation you shall find
in Bertius, in his Apostatia Sanctorum, page 90. Mr. Mountague quotes
Tertullian de Prescript: cap. 3. Gagge page 166. 167. So does Bertius in the
selfsame words, pa 96. So he quotes Cyprian, Epist. 7. Gagge, 167. So does
Bertius page 98. So he quotes Nazianzen, Gagge 168. So does Bertius in the
same words, page 99. 100. So he quotes Hierome lib. 2. advers. Pelagianos,
Gagge 168, the selfsame quotation you shall find in Bertius, page 100. So he
quotes St. Gregory, lib. 6. in 1 Regum: you shall find the same in Bertius
page 103. So he quotes St. Augustine de corrept: and Gratia cap. 13. Gagge
168. Apeale 27. for the book de bono Pursue. and lib. 11. de Ciu. Dei, cap.
12. Appeal 27. the selfsame quotations are in Bertius, page 102. and in
Bellarmine, lib. 3. de Iustif. cap, 14. So he quotes Prosper, resp: 7. ad cap.
Gallorum Appeal 2^. you shall find the selfsame words and quotation in
Bertius, page 102. so he quotes Cyprian de vnitate Ecclesiae: Athanasius, lib.
4. cont: Arrian. Basil epist ad Chilonem in the margent. Appeal 36. The
selfsame quotations are in Bertius, page 97. 98. 99. Thus has our learned
Mr. Mountague who vaunts so much of his skill and knowledge in the Fathers,
transcribed them verbatim out of Bertius. Nay, I will say more, he has
transcribed all he has touching this point of falling from grace, either in
his Gagge or in his Appeal, yea, his very argument from our 16. Article out of
Bertius: let him disprove it if he can; and therefore it is no marvel that
Mr. Mountague avoucheth the total and final Apostasy of the Saints, to be
the Tenet of Antiquity, of the Protestants in Germany, and of the Church of
England, because that Bertius says so to; out of whom he did transcribe it.
But whether Mr. Mountague be an honest innocent and harmless man, and one
that seeks only the peace of the Church in dealing thus, I leave it unto
others for to judge. I come now to give a short answer to these Fathers which
Mr. Mountague has cited out of Bertius: As for Clement and Ignatius, there is
a great question whether they are spurious and abortiue yea or no, and most
Protestant Divines not without good cause, think them to be mere forgeries;
and so their authorities are but little worth. But admit them to be true, yet
they prove nothing against us. For that of Ignatius, that one and the same man
is sometimes the child of God, and again the child of the devil: is no more
but this in substanee, that the child of God does sometimes fall into sin,
and so in the judgment and repute of men is sometimes the child of God, and
at other times the child of the devil, but not in Gods esteem; if you read
the place, you shall find this to be the meaning: as for the other places,
they are impertinent and need no answer: As for that of Clement, it is nothing
to the purpose: for he says not that the holy Spirit is wholly divided from
any man that ever had it: but if he be divided he leaves them destitute,
etc. That of Tertullian if you read all the chapter is express for us, for it
is no more in brief then this: that hypocrites fall away from God, but such as
are truly regenerated do still continue with him. That of Cyprian is no more
then this, that men must use the means to preserve their graces. That of
Nazianzen is no more then this: the ordinary and common gifts of Gods Spirit as
prophecy, and a royal mind may be lost. That of Hierome and Gregory, is
only this in substance; that we cannot know whether other men shall persevere,
because we know not their estates, and therefore we cannot call them happy
before their death. The Epistle of Basil, ad Chilonem, is but a mere
exhortation to perseverance, there is not one word in it that a regenerate man
may fall from grace. That of Prosper is spoken only of such as were regenerated
in show and not in truth: and so is that of Augustine de bono Perseu: cap. 13.
That of Augustine de Ciui: dei. Is nothing to purpose, for he says not, that
all the Saints of God do not persevere, but, that all of them know not
certainly whether they shall persevere; that is, they are not certain of their
perseverance with the certainty of knowledge, but yet they are sure of it with
the certainty of faith, as the Protestants in the Disputation of Ratishon, page
511. have expounded it; So that all which these Fathers say, proves nothing at
all against me, if it be well examined: and if Bertius or Mr. Mountague had
dealt ingeniously and not cited the Fathers by peece-meale, the very places
which they allege, would either not make for them, or else make against them.
Well then to end this controversy, I dare defend it against any man, that
either all, or at least most of the Fathers are express and strongly for us;
let these their testimonies which I have cited out of their own records, and
not at the second hand, determine it: and this I will say withal, that there
is never a Father, which being rightly understood, does make any jot against
us. Wherefore seeing that this total and final Apostacy of the Saints, is
but an vpstart doctrine among us, quite contrary to the whole stream and
current of the Fathers, I will conclude with that golden rule and saying of an
ancient Father, Vincentius Lerinensis by name, who flourished about the year
of our Lord, 430. (which saying I would to God Mr. Mountague had well
considered before he had put his Pen to paper) Cum primum mali cuiuscunque
erroris is putredo Cont. Hera^ cap. 39. Edit. Cost^ri.
erumpere caeperit, and ad defensionem sui quaedam sacrae legis verba furari
atque fallaciter and fraudulenter exponere: statim interpraetando Canoni
maiorum sententiae congregandae sunt: quibus illud quoque exurget nouitium,
ideoque prophanum, and absque vlla ambage prodatur, and ^ine vlla retractatione
damnetur. Sedeorum duntaxat patrum sententiae congregandae sunt quae in fide
and Communione Catholica sancte, sapienter constanter viuentes, docentes and
permanentes, vel mori in Christ^ fideliter, vel occidi pro Christi feliciter
meruerunt. Quibus tamen hac lege credendum est: vt quicquid vel omnes, plures
vno eodemque sensu, manifest, frequenter, perseueranter, velut quoda^ sibi
consentiente magistroru^ concilio, accipiendo, tenendo tradendo firmauerint, id
pro indubitato, certo, ratoque habeatur. Quicquid vero quamvis ille sanctus and
doctus, quamvis Episcopus, quamvis Confessor and Martyr, praeter omnes, aut
etiam contra omnes senserit: id inter proprias, and occultas and priuatas
opiniunculas, a communis publicae and generalis sententiae autoritate secretum
sit, ne cum summo aeternae salutis periculo iux^ sacrilegam haereticornm and
scismaticorum consuetudinem vniversalis dogmatis veritate dimissa vnius hominis
nouitium sectemur errorem. Follow now this safe and golden rule in our
particular case; we have the unanimous consent of most if not of all the
ancient Fathers for us, which they have manifestly, frequently, and constantly
recorded and commended to us: and therefore let not Bertius or Mr. Mountague
his ape, nor any other vpstarts whatsoever, who defend their errors, seduce and
lead you from this ancient, resolved, and approved truth, to the wrecke, the
peril, at least the great d^comfort of your souls.

The Protestant Churches and writers beyond the seas.
Secondly, as this has been the unanimous and constant doctrine of all the
ancient Fathers and of the Church of God in former ages. That the true
regenerate Saints of God can neither finally nor totally fall from grace: so
likewise has it always been, the received, positive, consiant and resolved
doctrine of all Protestant and reformed Churches beyond the seas: which is
evident. First, by the writings and records of their greatest, learned and
chiefest Scholars and Divines, which are very full and copious, in the defense
and maintinance of this our present assertion. Secondly, by the several
Articles and Confessions of these Churches, and by the express resolutions of
those Synods, which have bin held and kept among them, which have resolved and
established this our position as the orthodox truth and Tenet.

First, their greatest, learned and chiefest Scholars and Divines, have in
their several works and writings recorded, propagated, published and defended
this our present Theses and assertion, as the orthodox and undoubted truth;
which I will prove by a particular Induction and Index of their names and
works, without transcribing of their words, for fear least I should be to
voluminous and ouer-tedious in this point: John Husse, that learned and
faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ, and one of the first reformers of the
Bohemian and German Churches, has not only published and recorded this our
present assertion, of the total and final perseverance of the Saints in
grace, to all posterity as you may read at large in his Tractate de Ecclesia:
cap: 1, 3, 4. but he has likewise sealed and ratified the truth of this with
his very blood: as is evident by the 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, and 21, Articles of his
which were condemned in the 15. Session of the Popish Council of Constans.
After him laborious and zealous Luther in his Postills, Homil: in lohn 14: in
die Penteeostes. Hom: in fecto sanctae Catbarinae and in his Commentary in 1
Pet: 1: 23. Learned Bucer in his Comment: on Math: 7: 13. cap: 16: 18. cap: 24:
24. on lohn 4: 14 cap: 10: 28, 29 cap: 14: 16, 17. and on Rom: cap: 7: and 8.
and in diverse other of his works, epithomized by Zanchius in the first part of
his 7: Tom: in his treatise de Perseuerantia sanctorum: learned Zwinglius in
his Opus Articulorum: Artic. 8. Elegant and learned Melanchthon in his
Comentary on the 1 Cor: 10. 13. in his Loci Comm: Loc^s de Iustificatione ac
fide: and in Tom. 3. de sacris Concionibus page 264: 267. Profound Brentius in
John 10. hom. 81. in lohn 16. hom. 56. in John. 17. hom. ^4. and in his
Exegesis in John 17. Learned, painful, and judicious Calvin (a far better
Divine, and a far honester man then any of all those who calumniate slight
and vilify him) in his lnstitutions lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 11. and cap. 5.
sect. 3. lib. 3. cap. 24. sect. 6, 7. Expositio. in Psalm. 51. verse 12. 13.
Commen. in Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. In. 2 Pet. 3. 17. and in diverse other places of
his works. Learned Bullinger in his Comentarie on 2 Timothy 2. 19. and is his
Exposition on Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. Gualtherus in Euangelium Lucae homil. 197. et
201. and homil. 26. in Epist. 1 John. Grynaeus in his Disputationum Theolog.
pars 2: de fide electorum. Theses 18. page 471. and Praelectiones in Hebr. 6.
verse 4, 5, 6. Profound and learned Peter Martyr. Locorum. Com. Classis 3. cap.
3. sect. 46, 47. and in his Commet. on Romans 8. Judicious Marlorat in his
Exposition on Psalm. 51. 12, 13. and on Psalm. 125. 1, 2. In his Exposition on
Math. 7. 25. cap. 16. 18. cap. 24. 24. on John 4. 14. cap. 5. 24. cap. 6. 37.
cap. 8. 31. cap. 10 28, 29. cap. 15. 6. cap. 17. 9. on Romans 5. 2. cap. 9. 3. on
1 Cor. 1. 8. 9. on 2 Timothy 2. 19. on Hebr. 6. 3, 4, 5. on 1 Pet 1 5. 23. on 1
John 2. 19 cap. 3. 9. and cap. 5. 16. Musculus in his Comentary on Ma^h 16. 18.
cap. 24. 24. and on John 10. 28. 29. and in his Loci Comm. de Peccato cap. 5.
Aretius in Phil. 1. 6. in 2. Tim. 2. 19. in 1 Pet. 1. 5. and in his Theolog
Problemata Locus 6. de Praedestinatione. page 81. Oecolampadius in 1 John 2.
19. Mollerus in Psalm. 121. 3. to the end, and in Psa. 125. 1. 2. Alardus
Mehinus in Anchora salutis. page 173. Hyperius in his Comentary on the 2 Timothy
2. 19. and on Titus 1. 1. Rennicherus in his Aurea Catena salutis. cap. 27.
page 210, 211. Hess^usius in his Exposition in 1 Cor. 1. 8. and in his Examen
Theolog. Locus 16. de Predestinatione. Gasper Oleuianus in his Expositio
Symboli Apostolici. page 38, 63, 64, 75, 133, 134, 137, 138, 139, 150, 154,
155, 156, 162, 163, 164, 191. in his Commentary on Romans 8. ver. 28, 29, 30. and
so to the end of the chapter. and de Testimonio faederis gratniti pars 2. sect.
15. 18. to 24. Gorrutius de Prouidentia. lib. 14 cap. 5, 6, 7. Heerbrandus in
his Compendium Theolog. Locus de Electione. page 438, 439. Hutterus in his Loci
Com. Locus 13. de Praedestinatione. quest. 5, 9, 12, 13. Tossanus in his book
de Prouidentia Dei. cap. 4 page 175. to 179 Chassanus. Locorum Comm. lib. 2.
cap. 8. Tilenus in his Syntagma Theolog. de Praedestinatione Dei Theses 24. to
33. Hemingius in his Comm. in 2 Timothy 2. 10, 19. Gesnerus in his Compendium
doctrinae caelestis. Loc. 30. de Praedestinatione. page 235, 246, 247, 248.
Marcus Cyriacus in his Conciones. 7. de Perseuerantia sanctorum. Vrsinus in his
book de Prouidentia. page 16. Chemnitius in his Encheridion de
Praedestinatione. page 224. and his Loci Communes Locus de Iustificatione, and
de fide, and in his Harmonia Euangel. cap. 2 on Math. 7. 24. to 28. and Luke 6.
47. 48. Learned Iunius in his Notae on Psalm. 1. verse 3. and in Philip. 1. 6.
in his Meditation on Psalm. 122. verse. 2. in his Comment. on Ezech. 33. 12. and
in his Theses, 33. Thesis, 11. and Thesis, 37. Corol. 2. Gomarus in
declaratione sententiae suae. page: 32. Learned and profound Danaeus in his
Isag^ges pars 2. de Ecclesia: cap: 5. Isag: pars 4. lib: 4: de fide. cap: 18.
19. and in his Tom: 2. Controuers: aduers: Bellarm: de Baptismo Respons: 15.
page: 385, 386. Trelcatius: in his Institutio: Loc: Com: lib: 3. de fide pars
(...), and Festus Hommius, in his Specimen Controuersiarum Belgicarum, seu
confessio Ecclesiarum Reformatarum in Belgio: Articulus 29, 33, 35: all these I
say, have in these their several works and writings, recorded, propagated and
delivered, this our persent assertion, of the total and final perseverance of
the Saints in grace, as an orthodox sound and undoubted truth. To these let me
add some other of great learning worth and credit, in the Churches wherein
they lived, (the most of them being public professors of Divinity) who have
particularly handled and discussed this our present assertion, That the true
regenerate Saints of God can neither finally nor totally fall from grace, and
defended it as sound and orthodox against such Pseudo-Lutherans, Papists and
Arminians, who have opposed it. Learned Zanchius in his book de Perseuerantia
sanctornm: which you shall find in his 7: Tom: pars: 1. page: 91. to 174. and
in his Confession to the Argentine Senate touching this very point: recorded in
the same Tom. page: 347: to 388. Sturmius in his book de Praedestiantione:
Theses 11. Kimedoncius in his book de Praedestinatione: page: 328: to 333:
English. Reverend and judicious Beza in his Theses Geneuenses: Theses 27: de
fide: Theses 6: in his Breuis explicatio totius Christianismi: cap: 4:
Aphorismus 12: cap: 8. Aphor: 2. and Colloquium Mompelgartense: page: 463. to
469. Amandus Polanus in his Syntagma Theolog: lib: 6: cap: 43. Pareus in his
Comment: on Rom: 8: Dub: 7. and in Appendice ad cap: 15: lib: 3: de
Iustificatione. Robertus Somus in his Tractatus de tribus quaestionibus:
quaest: 3: Georgius Sohinus Operum: Tom: 2: in Exegcsi Artic: Augustanae
Confessionis: page: 764: to 785, 990, 991, 1016, 1017. Piscator in Vorstij amica
Collat: cum Piscatore sect: 108: and in his own These: Theolog: vol: 1: Locus
20: de Certitudine electionis These: 25: and vol: 2: Loc: 5: de effectis Fidei:
These: 102. Ludouicus Crocius in his 7 books de Perseuerantia sanctorum against
Bertius. Ruardus Acronius in Enarrati: Chatech: quaest: 53. sect: 11. Petrus
Molineus in his Anatome Arminianismi: cap: 46, 47. Ioannes Scharpius a Scot
professer of Divinity in Dion, in his Tractatus de Iustificatione Controuers:
5. Bucanus in his Loci Comm: Loc: 20: de fide sect: 24, 27. Rollocke in Psalm:
51: and Rom: 8. And Doctor Ames a learned English man, a professor of Divinity
in the Netherlands, in his Corouis ad Collationem Hagiensem: Artic: 5. as also
some of those whom I have formerly mentioned, and therefore will not here
recite them, have learnedly maintained and defended this our present position
as a sound and orthodox assertion, and as the received and resolved doctrine of
all Protestant and reformed Churches. It is evident then by this cloud of
reueren, famousd, and renowned witnesses, that the most, the learnedest, and
the soundest writers in all Protestant and reformed Churches in foreign parts,
have always defended and maintained our present assertion, of the total and
final perseverance of the Saints, as sound and orthodox, and embraced it as an
undoubted, established, and resolved truth. How honest then is Master
Monntague, who has auerred it upon record, that the Protestants in Germany
have Gagg^. 158. 159.
assemted unto the Church of Rome, in this, that faith once had may be both
totally and finally lost; and that this is the resolution of many, Gagge. page
170, 171.
if not most Protestant Divines, as private men of Protestant Churches, in
their Descisions and Resolutions; and that this assertion, That faith once had
cannot be lost, is as much or more opposed, propugned and refelled, by
Protestants, as by Papists. Indeed Master Mountague being so great a booke-man
might have done well to have given us a Catalogue of the names and works of
those Protestant Divines in other Churches, who have consented to the Church of
Rome in this particular; but, Dolosus versatur in vniuersalibus, Master
Mountague is a wily Fox, and one who is loath to have his subtilety (I will
not say, his knavery and treachery) discovered, and therefore he lurkes in the
general and universal terms, of most Protestant Divines. Indeed he
particularizeth in one, Bucer by name, and in none but him; by which he has
discovered either much ignorance in vouching such a man whose works he never
read; or much treachery and falsnesse, in vouching him, for a total and
final loss of faith once had, who is so full and frequent to the contrary
throughout his works, that he could not have lighed on such another. Indeed I
must confess, that some spurious, abortiue and PseudoLutherans, have held,
that faith once had might be totally lost, and and some of them have likewise
held, that it might be finally lost. As Aegidus Hunnius tractat: de Praedest:
page: 500: to the end. Eckhardus in Fasciculo Controu: cap: 7: quaest: 4:
Winckelmannus Disput: Theol: Tom: 1: Disp: 14: Hinckelmannus Disputatione: 7:
Anticaluinistica: cap: 1. Policarpus Lyserus: Disput: 7: de Praedest, Matthias
Hafanrefferus Locor: Theolog: lib: 3; loc: 3. Wolffgangus Franzius Syntag:
Controuersiarum: Disput: 4. Ioannes Hesselbineus: discursi: Theol: cont.
Materium Heyderum disp: 4: These: 10. and some few others of that stamp. I
confess likewise, that Bellarmine lib: 3: de Iustific: cap: 14: Becanus de
Iustificat: Caluinist: cap: 10. Franciseus Feu-ardentius, Zacharias Bauerius
and other Romanists have held so. I confess likewise, that the Rhemists who
are little better then mere Romanists in their several Conferences at Hage,
recorded by Brandius and Bertius have concurred in the contrary assertion. I
confess, that Iacobus Arminius in Apolog: aduers: Artic: quosdam Theologicos.
Respons: ad Artic: secundum, and in Examinatione Praedestinationis Perkinsis:
that Conradus Vorstius in amica collatione cum Piscatore: sect: 108: that
Nicholaus Greuinchouius, and Bertius in his Hyminaeo desertore, sine de
Sanctorum Apostasia, and others of the Arminian crew (to whom Master Mountague
is much beholding,) have been of this opinion, That faith once had may be lost
again. But that any sound and orthodox Protestant Divines were of this opinion
in any of their decisions, writings, or resolutions, that I never heard or read
of as yet. But will you know now who are Master Mountagues Protestant Divines,
who have so much opposed our present assertion, and consented to the Church of
Rome, in the total and final loss of faith once had? Surely they must and
can be no other, but those whose reasons, arguments, and quotations both out of
Scriptures and Fathers Master Mountague has ttanscribed in his Gagge, for he
intimates as much himself. Now what Divines are these Surely I must needs
inform you who they are, because they are worth the knowledge: his two chief
Divines, they are Bellarmine and Bertius, the one a Cardinal and cheise pillar
of the Church of Rome; the other the strongest pillar and stoutest Champion of
the Arminian faction. It may be he has praid in some aid from the Rhemists:
but I can assure you, that all his quotations that are there cited, are
transcribed either out of Bellarmine in his 3. book de Iustif: cap. 14. or out
of Bertius in his Hymeneo disertore, sieve de Apostasia sanctoru^: and most of
them (especially the quotations out of the Fathers) are not to be found in any
other Writer but in Bertius only. Are these your Protestant Divines Mr.
Mountague? were there no other Protestant Divines from whence to fetch
resolutions and decisious but from these? or can you be so strangely impudent,
as to grace these two notorious, and famous men; the one known for the
greatest Papist, the other for the chiefest Arminian that ever was, with the
style of most Protestaut Diviues? no marvel then is these men be your
Protestants, that you style all others that dissent from them, not Protestants,
but Caluinists Puritans, and Nouellers, and that you style this doctrine, of
the total and final Appeal. page 18.
perseverance of the Saints, a Puritan Doctrine: Wherefore (good Reader) take
this short Nota with thee in the by, that all M. Mountagues Protestants, are
none but Papists and Arminians, and all his Puritans, Nouellers, and
Caluinists, whom he so much lasheth, none but sound and Orthodox Protestants,
who assent not to Arminius and the Church of Rome; and what must Mr. Mountague
be then in the mean time? Surely a Papist or Arminian, if not both, or worse
then both.

But I pass this over, and come to the second thing, which is to prove, the
total and final perseverance of the Saints in the state of Grace, to be the
received and approved doctrine of all Protestant and reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, by their several Articles and Confessions, and by their Synods which
have so resolved it. That this is the received and approved doctrine of their
Articles and Confessions, it is evident and plain. First by the latter
Confession of Helvetia Artic. 9. Because that the strength of the flesh and
relics of the old man, are not of such great force in the regenerate, that
they can wholly quench the work of the Spirit, therefore the faithful are
called free; yet so, that they do acknowledge their infirmity, and glory no
whit at all of their Free Will. So that by the express words of this
Confession, the regenerate Saints of God can never fall totally from grace;
because the strength of the flesh, and relics of the old man, are not of such
great force in the regenerate, that they can wholly quench the work of the
spirit. So Artic. 10. of the same confession: The Saints are chosen in Christ
by God, unto a sure end: and Artic. 15. We who are once justified, are not
only cleansed from sin, and purged, and holy, but also endued with the
righteousness of Christ, yea, and acquitted from sin, death and
condemnation: finally we are righteous and heirs of eternal life. And Article
16. True faith is the mere gift of God, because God of his power does give it
to his elect, according to measure, and therefore it is called the faith of
Tit. 1. 1.
Gods elect. This faith does pacify the conscience, and does open unto us a
free access to God: it does keep us in our duty which we owe to God and to
our neighbor; and does fortify our patience in adversity, and it does bring
forth good fruits of all sorts, etc. By this it is evident that our assertion
is the positive doctrine of the Helu^^^^tian Church. So is it also of the
Bohemian, as it is manifest by the 6. Article of their Confession, which says,
That true faith does always lift up him that has it, and assures him, that
in, and for Christ, he assuredly has, and shall have for ever, eternal life,
according to his true promise which he confirmed with an oath, saying; Verily
I say unto you, he that believes on me has eternal life. For whomsoever God
does justify, to them he does give the holy Ghost, and by him he does
regenerate them as he promised by the Prophet, saying. I will give them a new
heart, and I will put my Spirit in the Ezech 12. and 3^ Romans 5.
midst of them, that as before sin had reigned in them to death, so also
grace might reign by righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ.
Now they that attain to this justification by Christ our Lord, are taught to
take unto themselves true and assured comfort, out of this grace and bounty of
God, to enjoy a good and quiet conscience before God to be certain of their
own salvation, and to have it confirmed to them by this means, that seeing
they are the sons of God, they shall also after death in the resurrection be
made heirs. The French Church does likewise concur with us in our assertion:
in the 21. and 22. Articles of their confession, which say; That true faith is
given only to the Elect, not that they might once only be brought into the
right way, but rather that they might be forward therein unto the end: because
that as the beginning is of God, so is also the accomplishment. Therefore it is
so far that faith should extinguish the desire to live well and holily, that
it does rather increase and kindle it in us; whereupon good works do
necessarily follow: with which the confession of Belgia, artic. 23. 24. does
fully agree. The Confession of Saxony, Artic. 3. 7. 9. concurreth with us; For
it testifies unto us. That the Error of doubting is altogether heathenish,
that it does abolish the Gospel, and take away all true comfort from them that
feel the wrath of God, and that this Error is evidently confuted by these
words. Being justified by faith we have peace with God. Also, therefore is
righteousness of faith that it might be sure. Therefore it advises us to lay
hold on this sweet comfort, that the Son of God is the keeper of his Church,
as he says, John 10. No man shall take my sheep out of my hands. He does
protect us, and also by his holy Spirit does confirm our minds to true
opinions; as he does begin eternal life, so does he kindle in our hearts
good motions, faith, the love of God, true invocation, hope, chastity, and
other virtues. Through the Son of God we are delivered from eternal death,
and translated into eternal life; as he says. I give unto them eternal
life: and, he that has the Son has life. And let hope be firm and sure,
as Peter says, hope perfectly; that is, look for eternal life, not with
doubtful opinion. The famous Augustane confession, confirmed and ratified by
all the Protestant Princes, States, and Churches of Germany, Anno Dom. 1530. in
the 3. Article concurreth with us: for says the Article. ( Concord Lutherans
page 12.
) Christ does sanctify all those that believe on him, by sending the holy
Ghost into their hearts, who does govern, comfort, and quicken them, and
defend them against the devil, and the force of sin. If against the Devil
and the force of sin, then nothing can cast them down from the state of
grace. If you object, that the 12. Article of this famous Object.
Confession does condemn the Anabaptists, who deny that such who are once
justified can loose the holy Ghost, and therefore by the voice of this
confession, those who are once justified may fall from grace. I answer, that
the Protestant Answ.
Divines in Germany, who were at the making of this Article, and those who have
lived since, did never expound or intend it in this sense, that a man once
justified might fall away from grace either totally or finally; but they
condemned this Tenet of the Anabaptists in that sense as they defended it. For
this was the opinion of the Anabaptists. ( Concord. Luthera: page 310. 574.
) That when once a man was regenerated, and had obtained the holy Ghost, and
was made a true believer, that sin could not hurt him; and therefore they would
tell men, that if they did believe, let them do what they would, or commit
what sin they would, it could not hurt them: for faith would blot out all
those sins: which was the Error of the Valentinians as ( Advers. Haer. lib.
1. cap. 1. page 22. 23.
) Irenaeus has recorded it. Now in this sense only does this confession
condemn the Anabaptists and in no other; and so did the Lutherans before them,
as you may read in Articulis Smalcandicis: Article 3. composed by Luther
himself, which you shall find in Lutherana Concordia, page 310. Now the
reason yielded by the Lutherans, why they condemn this Error of the
Anabaptists in their third Article will fully prove, that the true regenerate
Saints of God can never fall from grace: Forsay they, the Saints of God do
always grieve and repent for their sins groaning under the burden of them,
and they always strive against them. Theresore those that voluntary rush into
sin, whether it be adultery, murder, or blasphemy, must needs shake off
faith and the holy Ghost, and faith and the holy Ghost must needs depart from
them. For the holy Ghost does nener suffer sin to reign, to get strength, or
to obtain the victory, and to be perfected: but he does repress and curb
it, that so it might not do the thing it would. But if it does what it would,
certainly the holy Ghost and faith are lost: neither are they present, For so
says John, he that is borne of God does not sin, neither can he sin. So
that both the Augustane Confession, and the Article of Smalcard, are both for
me, and not against me being rightly understood. The Augustane Confession
composed by the Argentine Church, and confirmed by their Senate, Anno dom.
1539. concurreth with us: For these are the words of their 7. Article. ( Zanch.
Tom. 7. part. 1. page 387.
) This sole and only mediator, has taken away our sins, and reconciled us to
his Father: he has impetrated the holy Ghost for all those whom his Father
has given him, and which hear his voice. This regeneration together with all
Christ's merits, the holy Ghost does inspire into the hearts of all the
faithful, and preserve them in them to the end. All these Confessions of the
Protestants in Germany and elsewhere, are express for me: let Mr. Mountague,
now show me any to the contrary.

But you will tell me now that Mr. Mountague records it, Object.
That all the Protestants of Germany have concluded against Gagge. page 158.
159.
me, and consented to the Church of Rome, in the Diot of Ratisbon. Upon those
grounds and reasons which he there mentions. Answ.
True it is, that Mr. Mountague has so recorded it: but his records are so
false in every thing, that he must have a strong faith that will believe them,
without examination of the truth of them. For my own part, I have read the
disputation of Ralisbon set out by Bucer himself Anno dom: 1548. and I can
find no such thing as Mr. Mountague relates in it. For first this question of
a total and final fall from grace, was not so much as controuerted there,
neither are there any of those Scriptures, grounds, and Fathers which Mr.
Mountague has recorded in his Gagge, or in his Appeal, (only that place of
Phil. 2. 12. and of St. Augustine de Ciuit: Dei, lib. 11. cap. 12. excepted) so
much as mentioned in all that disputation; and these two quotations are cited,
by Steven Bishop of Winchester, who did oppose the Protestants in that
Disputation, and not by Bucer and the other Protestants there present. How then
could the Protestants of Germany yield to that position in this Diot which was
not drawn into question there? Indeed the question of the certainty of
salvation was there controuerted and discussed, and by the unanimous consent of
all the Protestants, resolved and determined against Maluenda, Billickius, and
the Bishop of Winchester who did oppose it; and in the resolution and
determination of this Controversy, if you will believe learned Zanchius in his
Confession to the Senate of Argentine Tom. 7. operum. part. 1. page 372.
in this our point De perseuerantia sanctorum, or the Disputation of Ratisbone
it self, our very assertion though it were not there particularly
controuerted, was yet de claro resolved for us, in this famous Diot in the name
of all the Protestants in Germany. For in the Disputation of Ratisbon, or
Ralisbon, page 41. Respons ad Replic. 14. This is the express Resolution of
all the Protestants in that Diot. That true faith and a sin that wastes the
conscience are incompatible; and that he which lives by a true and justifying
faith, can never stick in such a sin: So page 243. to 251. they proceed to
prove this assertion and conclusion: For say they, those who have this
justifying and lively faith, they are the sons of God, and the Spirit of God
does move them to those things which are holy and right, that so they may not
wittingly commit any things to the contrary, much less persevere in them;
notwithstanding oft-times out of the weakness of the flesh they sin, and do
not according to faith: but yet they never commit those sins which waste the
conscience, nor those which do forthwith exclude them from the kingdom of
God: which reason they do back likewise with this Syllogism, drawn from the
Scriptures. He that believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God, 1
Ioh. 5. but he that is borne of God, the same Apostle in the same Epistle
testifies, cap. 3. that he does not sin, neither can he sin, therefore ^ee
who does truly and liuingly believe the Gospel of Christ, can abide in no
sin which does waste the conscience: For every one who commits such a sin as
this, has neither seen nor known God. Wherefore seeing that this Diot has
resolved, that such a one as has true faith, cannot commit such a sin as
does waste his conscience, but only sins of infirmity, which do not cast
men wholly from the state of grace: it has likewise by this resolved against
Mr. Mountagues assertion, that faith once had may be both finally and totally
lost again: and so they have not consented to the Church of Rome in this, as
he most falsely does affirm. Again, this whole Diot have with one unanimous
consent resolved it; that all such as have true faith, both may and must be
assured of their salvation: because that God has undoubtedly promised eternal
life, to all such as are justified, and do (...) believe in him, which promise
he will punctually and undoubtedly perform in the time which he has
promised: because that Christ does call and elect all his, not to a temporary
kingdom grace or life, but to an eternal: because that God himself will
enable them, and cause them for to persevere: because this living and
justifying faith is in it self eternal life; and those that have it, even
from the first time of their having of it, have everlasting life: because this
faith is preserved in those that have it, not by their own power or might, but
by the very power of God and of the holy Ghost: and because this faith is of an
incorruptible, of a growing and increasing, and never failing nature: as you
may read from page 461. to 538. Therefore by this express resolution, upon
these pregnant and sure grounds, which do all prove our assertion to the full,
it is most evident and apparent to all the world, that this famous Diot, (and
so all the Protestants in Germany who assented to it, and were present at it)
have resolved and determined, That the state of true and saving graece, that
true and lively faith once had, can neither finally nor totally be lost again:
How base, how treacherous, and perfidious then is Mr. Mountague who would thus
traduce this noble Diot and all the German Protestants in recording it unto the
world, that they assented to the church of Rome in this, that faith once Gagge
p. 158. 159.
had might be lost again, when as they did expressly resolve it to the
Contrary, Well Mr. Mountague, I must needs speak plainly to you (and let all
the world judge whether I do amiss in it or no) as in many other things
touching this particular controversy, so especially in traducing and abusing
of this famous Diot, you have showed your self a base, an impudent, a lying,
and seditious Varlet, and a man unworthy to live in any Protestant Church or
Christian Commonwealth, and I will evidence and prove it by these 4.
particulars. First, in that you traduce, corrupt, and falsify the judgment of
a whole Protestant Synod. Secondly, in that you traduce and falsify it in such
a manner: saying, that all the Protestants in Germany assented to the Church of
Rome in this Diot at Ratisbon; in this point of falling finally and totally
from grace, as if all the Protestants in Germany were turned Papists. Thirdly,
in that you do it to this end to bring in Popery (...).
and Arminianisme into our Church: to make the world believe that Popery and
Protestanisme are all one, and that Protestants have heretofore always yielded
and submitted to the Church of Rome in matters of Doctrine, and therefore they
should do so now: and so the end of this your falsification of this Synod, is
but to persuade all Protestants to turn Papists, at least in this particular
point. Fourthly, in that you would father the base bratts of that Arminian
Bertius, upon this Protestant and famous Diot, that so his dangerous works
might be countenanced, approved, and received, as sound, and orthodox, under
the name and color of this Diot. For if it please Mr. Mountague to remember
himself, those Scriptures, reasons, and authorities of Fathers which he cites
in his Gagge, cap. 20. as the reasons, arguments, and grounds which moved
Bucer, and the Diot of Ralisbon, to assent to the Church of Rome in this point
of falling from grace, as they are not to be found in the disputation of
Ralisbon wherein the contrary was resolved: so all and every one of these
Scriptures, reasons and Fathers. ( Clemens Romanus a mere suppositions and
forged Writer only excepted) were transcribed out of this Bertius his Apostatia
Sanctorum, where they are all, and only to be found. Now he who professing
himself to be a Protestant, and receiving so many favors from our Church,
shall putposely traduce and falsify such a general and famous Synod or Diot
as this, in such a base and infamous manner, and that to such dangerous,
sinister, and wicked ends as these, how ill he does deserve of God and man
(especially of this our Mother Church whom he does labor to corrupt and
seduce by this his juggling) let all men judge. But to pass this over (which
the love I owe unto the truth and to my Mother Church could not suffer me to
smother or conceal) I will now proceed, to give you some farther and clear
evidence, to prove the total and final Perseverance of the Saints to be the
doctrine of the Protestant Churches beyond the Seas. Concordia Lutherana which
was agreed upon, and resolved, and set out by the consent of all the
Protestants in Germany, against those who did oppose the Augustine Confession,
informs us, that this was one Article of the Protestants belief touching
justification, which they did both teach and confess. That albeit true
believers and regenerate men, were liable Page 569.
to many infirmities and spotts even to their death, yet that they ought not
for to doubt, either of the righteousness imputed unto them by faith, or of
eternal salvation: but that they ought firmly to resolve, that God is
reconciled to them in Christ, according Page 573.
to his sure word and promise. And though there be much infirmity in the
Saints, which makes them to complain with Paul: yet God does never impute this
infirmity to his Saints, and that for Christ their Mediators sake. For so it
is written, That there is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus.
Besides, we believe, teach, and confess, that faith and salvation are
preserved in us, and retained, not by our own works, but only by the Spirit
of God. Again, they believe and confess, that Page 600.
Predestination, or the eternal election of God, belongs only to the good, and
the beloved sons of God: and this is the cause of their salvation. For it
procures their salvation, and orders those things which belong unto it, upon
this predestination of God, our salvation is so founded, that the gates of Hell
cannot subvert it. And again, by this doctrine of predestination we are
assured, that we Page 602. 771.
are elected to eternal life out of mere grace in Jesus Christ, without any
merit of our own, and that no man shall take us out of the hands of Christ:
and that we shall constantly persevere unto the end. And a little after, God in
his eternal purpose has decreed, Page 774.
that he will defend all those whom he has elected, called, and justified,
even amids their many and sundry infirmities, against the devil, the world
and the flesh, and lead them on and guide them in his ways: and if they chance
to slide at any time, that he will put under his hand, that so they may receive
solid consolations in all their crosses and temptations, and be preserved unto
eternal life: he has decreed that he will finish that good work which he
has begun within them, and that he will confirm and finish it unto the end.
Which doctrine of Predestination does afford us excellent consolation. For how
great a benefit of God is this, that he has been so careful of Page 780.
the conversion, righteousness, and safety of every Christian, and so
faithful to procure it, that he has deliberated and ordained before the
foundations of the world were laid, how he would call and bring us to
salvation, and preserve us in it? that he should fence our salvation with such
strong garrisons? that he should place our salvation in his eternal purpose
(which can never be deceived nor altered) as in a most defensed Castle, and
place it to be kept in the Almighty hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, out of
which no man can pull us. If the custody and safeguard of our own salvation
were committed to our selves, good God, how easily should we loose it for the
infirmity, wickedness, and corruption of our flesh? how easily would it be
wrested and taken from us by the treachery and power of Satan, and by the
policy of the world? Therefore Paul builds the certainty of our happiness
upon the foundation of Gods purpose, when he collects from this, that we are
called according to Gods purpose, that no man can separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And a little after. Seeing our election
to eternal life does not depend upon our Page 787.
virtues or righteousness, but upon the only merits of Christ, and the good
pleasure of our heavenly Father: who cannot deny himself (since that in his
will and essence he is immutable) for this cause when his children do disobey
him, and fall into sin, he calls them to repentance by his word: and makes
the holy Ghost eflectuall in them by his word, that they may return into the
way and amend their lives. These and many such like sayings are to be found in
this Lutheran Concordancie, which give sufficient testimony, that all the
(...) and Protestants in Germany concur in judgment with us, that the true
regenerate Saints of God, can neither finally nor totally fall from Grace: See
more of this, p. 488. 568. 569. 600 650. 661. 671. 781. Since Luthers and
Bucers time, and since this Concordancy was composed, and the Diot of Ral^sbon
concluded. This has been the constant doctrine of the Lutheran and Protestant
Churches, that the regenerate Saints of God can neither finally nor totally
fall from grace, as appears by those several Catechismes which are publicly
taught and received in these Churches, and by those many learned Writers of
those Churches, whose names and works I have cited before. Zanchius in Tom. 7.
page 373. 374.
his Confession in this particular point to the Senate of Argentine records it,
that many Churches, many Universities, and great men throughout Germany have
defended and confirmed this assertion: and that this our Theses was publicly
defended and approved in the University of Maspurge, and afterward published
in print by the said University as sound and orthodox. The Divines of the
University of Leydon, and the Professors of it: on the 9. of December 1595, in
the business of Cornelius Wiggerus, declared their resolution to the States,
that the opinion of Wiggerus, that the elect Saints of God might out of the
liberty of their own wills fall quite away from the covenant and grace of God,
was so contrary to the Scriptures and to the Confessions, and received
Catechismes of the Belgicke Church, that they could not be reconciled, neither
could this his assertion be taught in the Church of God without great hurt,
and scandal; which resolution was subscribed by Iunius, Trelcatius, Gomarus,
Bastingius, Vtengobardus and others: as you may read in the Conference at the
Hage, recorded by Bertius and Brandius: and by Amesius in his Coronis to this
conference, page 361. 362. The Belgicke confession analized by Festus Hommius
Artic. 29. 34. 35. and the Belgicke Catechism, Respons. 1. 28. 32. 51, 52, 53,
54. 58. 64. 76. and 126. and Bastingius in his Catechism Exegisis ad Quaest.
45. 53. 54. concur in this our present assertion. The German Protestants and
Orthodoxe Divines have from time to time defended it against the Rhemists as
appeared by their several (...) at the Hage. King lames in his Declaration
against Vorstius informs us, That all the Protestant Churches in Germany had
with open mouth complained against Arminius, for maintaining of this heresy of
the Apostacy of the Saints, and those other assertions concurring with it. The
Church of Geneua has always maintained this assertion, as I have proved by
her Confession, and as it is evident by those Theses maintained and defended in
her University, Recorded in Theses Geneuenses, Theses 27. de Fide. These. 6.
where our present assertion is publicly maintained and defended. Indeed Mr.
Mountague whom I may well style the Father of lies, (so many forgeries and
untruths has he broached in this our present point) has recorded it, that
John Deodate Minister of Geneua, should tell him when Apeaie. page 71.
Gagge 171.
he was with him at Eaton, that the Church of Geneua did dissent from this and
other private opinions of Calvin and Beza. But his own Dioceson, Bishop
Carlton in the examination of his Appeal, has taken him tardie in this,
informing us, that Deodate himself has informed a Bishop of this kingdom (in
a Letter purposely written to him, to clear himself of this imputation,) that
he never spoke these words to Mr. Mountague, neither was he ever with him at
Eaton, nor is he of this opinion as he has recorded it. And therefore it is
likely that the Church of Geneua is still of this opinion as she was before,
and so Deodate has declared in that Letter of his: so that there is no doubt,
but that all the Protestant Churches in Germany and other parts, concur in
judgment and resolution with us, and have not subscribed and assented to the
Church of Rome against our present assertion, as M. Mountague has recorded.

But admit now, that the Diot of Ratisbon has assented to the Church of Rome
in this our Thesis, and that the Protestants in the German Churches had been
of opinion against us heretofore (which I have proved to be false:) yet what
reason has Master Mountague to affirm, that this is their received doctrine
and opposition now? Master Mountague and all the world knew very well, that in
the fifth Article of the Synod of Dort which was held in the years of our
Lord: 1618: and 1619. this very controversy of ours, That those who are once
truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, can neither totally nor finally
fall from grace. was resolved by the unanimous consent of the Deuines of Great
Britain, of the County Palatine of Rhene, of Hassia, of Heluetia, of the
correspondence of Weteran, of Geneua, of Breme, of Emden, and of all the
Belgicke professors of Divinity assembled by lawful authority, who have all
subscribed their names unto this Synod in testimony of their unanimous
approbation of it, and of this Thesis and position which we do here maintine
and defend. He knew that Vorstius, Greuinchouius, Bertius and others that
opposed it, were banished the Netherlands for it. He knew that this doctrine
and assertion was now fully settled and established by virtue of this Synod,
and the Estates approbation of it, in all the Belgike Churches: and yet Master
Mountague, that he might do the Arminians and the Church of Rome a favor, and
wrong the Church of England, to make her swallow a Popish and Arminian
doctrine, under the coulor of Protestanisme, must (...) pass by this Synod,
and the resolution of it in this point, and not so much as mention it in his
Gagge; making the world believe, that the German Protestants had assented to
the Church of Rome in this point of falling away from grace, and that it is
their positive resolution, doctrine and assertion now, notwithstanding the
Synod of Dort had resolved it to the contrary. This is square and honest
dealing Master Mountagne, is it not? If you had any grace or honesty in you,
you would have publicly recanted it long ago, and have made fuel of your
books ere this, which are so full of manifest and palpable lies, forgeries,
Impostures and untruths, least they should record your impudency, your
treachery, and your base and lying forgerie to posterity. Great reason had
you to check and blame your Informers in your Appeal, for dishonesty,
slander, iuggling, legerdemaine, forgery, and the like, when as you your self
have so superabounded in them all in this our particular point. Well to spend
no more time in this particular, I will close and shut it up with this
sillogisme. That which all the Protestant Churches and writers, have with one
unanimous consent in their several Confessions, Synodes, Decrees, Resolutions,
Catechismes, Schools, and writings, published, established, ratified,
defended, and resolved, must needs be the established, received and resolved
Doctrines of those Churches. But all the Protestant Churches and writers beyond
the seas, have with one unanimous consent in their several Confessions,
Synodes, Decrees, Resolutions, Catechismes, Schools, and writings, defended,
published, established, ratified, and resolved this our present assertion, That
those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, can neither
finally nor totally fall from grace: (yea, they have banished and punnished
such from time to time as have opposed it,) as appears by the premises.
Therefore this our present assertion here maintained, must needs be the
established, received and resolved doctrine, of all the Protestant Churches and
writers beyond the seas.

The Church of England.
Thirdly, as this has been the Doctrine of the ancient The Church of England.
it is the received, positive and resolved Doctrine of the Church of England,
and of the learned and most judicious Divines which the Church of England
ever bred. Indeed Mr. Mountague, who contradicts himself in most things,
contradicts both himself and me in this particular. For first, he affirms,
Gagge. page 158. Appea^e, 28.
That the learned in the Church of England do affirm, that faith once had
may totally and finally be lost, or that men once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, may both totally and Appeal. page 26, 28, 29, 30, 31,
36, 37, 73.
finally fall from grace. Secondly, he affirms, that this is the public
doctrine which is publickely professed and established in the Church of
England: not delivered according to ordinary tracts and lectures: but delivered
publickely, positiuely, and declatorilie in authentical records, insomuch that
none can be ignorant of it. And for proof of this he cites the 16 Article:
the Conference at Appeal. page 28. 29.
Hampton Court, the book of Homilies: and the book of Common prayers; in
which this doctrine is publickely, positiuely and declaratorily Appeal p^g.
32, 33, 34, 35.
delivered. Now that I may answer Mr. Mountague, and clear all that which he
objects, I will first of all prove, that this assertion which I here maintain,
is the received, positive, and resolved doctrine and position, of all the
learned and most judicious Divines of England. Secondly, I will prove that it
is the Doctrine of the Articles of the Church of England, and that the 16.
Article makes nothing at all against it, but rather for it. Thirdly, that the
books of Homilies, and of Common prayers, make nothing at all against it. And
lastly, I will prove, that it is the public received, establish and resolved
doctrine of the Church of England.

For the first of these, that this my present assertion, (to wit) That such as
are one truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by a lively faith, can
never finally nor totally fall from grace,) has been the received, positive,
and resolved doctrine of all the learned, and most judicious Divines in
England, I shall make it good by this argument. If most of the learned and
judicious Divines of the Church of England, have from time to time, not only
in the Schools and Pulpet, but likewise in their learned labors set forth by
public allowance and authority, maintained, propagated, and defended this my
present assertion, and there be no Orthodox English Divine that did ever
publicly in the Schools, or in any writings of his set forth by public
approbation, maintain the contrary, then it is certain that this my assertion
is the received, positive and resolved doctrine of all the learnedest and most
judicious Divines in the Church of England. But most of the learnedest and
judicious. Divines of the Church of England, have from time to time, not only
in the Schools and Pulpit, but likewise in their learned labors set forth by
public authority, maintained, propagated, and defended this my present
assertion, and there is not one Orthodox English Divine, that did either
publicly in the Schools or in any writings set forth by public approbation,
maintain the contrary. Therefore this my present assertion, is the received,
positive, and the resolved Doctrine of all the learnedest and most judicious
Divines of the Church of England. For the Major it cannot be denied; the Minor
I shall prove by many particular authors. I will not stand to mention those
many learned Divines throughout the Kingdom, who in their several Sermons and
Lectures have maintained and defended this my present assertion; every man
knows that this assertion is publicly preached throughout the Kingdom for
orthodox and ^urrent truth, neither was there any one that ever did positiuely
deliver the contrary in any Sermon that ever I heard of with public
approbation, till Master Mountagues Appeal was published. Some three or four
did preach it (as I have heard) before, but they were presently conuented for
it, and enjoined to recant. How this my assertion has from time to time been
maintained and defended in the public Schools, I need not for to mention it.
Sure I am that the Schools of the University of Oxford have always defended
it, and so have the Schools of Cambridge to: and I never heard that the
contrary was publicly defended and maintained in them. That which I intend
mainely to insist upon, is the learned labors and writings of the chiefest
worthies, and learn dest of our Church in which my present assettion is
recorded and defended. Not to make mention of venerable Bede, or of Anselme and
Bradwardyu, both Archbishops of Canterbury, who have declared their opinions
upon record, in defense and maintenance of this my assertion, I will only
mention such writers of our English Church, as have been famous and eminent
since the reformation. I will begin with that godly and learned Martyr William
Tindall, who lived in the beginning of the reformation. Who in his Treatises,
what the Church is, and whether it may err: how a member of Christ's true
Church sins and erreth, and yet sins and erreth not, and how he is yet a
sinner and may err: and of the manner and order of our election: which you
shall find in his works: page: 257: to 261. has recorded it, That the true
regenerate Saints of God can never sin so far as quite to loose that habit
and seed of grace which is within them, nor yet to fall quite from God. These
Treatises of his are only to this effect, that the true regenerate Saints of
God can never finally nor totally fall from grace. Master Latimer, Tyndalls
contemporanie, a man of worth and note in the times where in he lived, in his
Sermon on the Gospel the third Sunday in Aduent: which is in his Sermons: page:
258. has likewise registered it. That there was never none that believed in
Christ which was lost, but all beleiuers were saved: therefore (says he) it
is not to be doubted but that if we will believe, we shall be saved too.
Master Greenham, that worthy and experimental Saint of of God in the 2 part of
his works: cap: 32: sect: 5, 6. in his readings on Psalm: 119. ver: 116. and in
other places of his works has delivered this our present assertion as a sound
orthodox and experimental truth. So has Master Deering in his 27. Lecture on
the Hebrews. But if these men seem vile and little in your eyes, behold some
greater men then these are here, to give testimony to us and our assertion,
and that upon record. Matthew late Arch-B. of York in his Commentary of
Election Praedestination and reprobation. Edwin Arch-B. of York in his Sermon
upon Luke 1: v: 74, 75. sect: 14. Dr. Babington Bb. of Worcester on the 12:
Artic: of the Creed: life everlasting. In his exposition on the Lords prayer,
the sourth use from the word Father, and on the sixth petition. Lead us not
into temptatien, but deliver us from evil. Learned Doctor Robert Abbot Bishop
of Salisbury, and regious professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford,
in his Lecture De perseuerantia sanctorum, read publicly in the Divinity
schools at Oxford in the Act time, Iulie: 10. 1613. In his Animaduersions upon
Thompsons Diatriba: and in his answer to Bishop: part: 1. cap: 12. and part 2.
cap: 3. Ready and learned Doctor Fulke in his answer to the Rhemist Testament
on Rom: 8. 16. 39. Incomparable Hooker in his discourse of Justification, and
in his Sermon of the certainty and perpetuity of faith in the elect. Profound
Doctor Field in his first book de Ecclesia: cap: 3: 17: and in his pathway to
the Church Digress: 42. Profound, judicious and famous Doctor Reinolds, once
regious Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford, a man of
incomparable learning, and of as godly, humble, and religious a conversation
(whom yet Master Mountague, (how justly let all men judge) styles; a Puritan:
Appeal page 28, 30, 123.
one of the Tribe: a petitioner against the doctrine and discipline of the
Church of England: and a man only excellent for his reading) in his 6: Theses.
These: 4. sect: 23, 24. in his Apollog: Thesium. sect: 17, 20. and Conference at
Hampton Court: page: 24. Learned Doctor Whitakers regious Professor of Divinity
in the Appeal page 71, 27.
University of Cambridge (whom Master Mountague sticks not for to style, an
earnest promoter of novel opinions) in his Respons: ad 8: Rations Campiani.
De paradoxis: lib: 8. and in other of his works. Learned Doctor Over all Deane
of Paul's, and afterward Bishop of Norwich, ( whose memory by Mr. Mountagues
Appeal page 31
own confession shall ever be precious with all good and learned men.)
Conference at Hampton Court: page: 41, 42, 43. Profound, orthodox, and solid Mr.
Perkins, in his book of Praedestination and Grace; in his Commentary on Jude
1: 24. and other of his works. Learned Mr. Nowell Deane of Paul's in his
Catechism. Reverend Mr. Phillipps in his Sermons on Rom: 8. ver: 15, 16. Godly
Mr. Hireon in his Sermons. page: 102: 119, 205, 365. Mr. Rogers Chaplain to
Archbishop Bancroft in his Analysis upon the 17: Article, Proposition third.
Laborious and learned Doctor Willet in his Synopsis: page: 63, 64. 548, 546.
923, 924, 925. in his Commentary on Rom: 5: Contr: 3: on cap: 6. Contr: 7: on
cap: 8. Contr: 19, 21. on cap: 9. Contr: 16: and on cap: 11: Contr: 19, 21. Mr.
Wilcocks on Psalm: 125: 1, 2, and on Rom: 8. Godly painful and learned Mr.
Byfield in his discourse of the promises: cap: 13. Mr. Elton in sundry places
of his Sermons on Rom: 8. Learned and laborious Mr. Fox in his Martyriolege,
Printed at London, 1610: page: 1506. and in diverse other places. Mr. John
Downham in his Snmme of Divinity: lib: 2. cap: 7. Mr. Culuerwell in his
Treatise of faith: the 6: general head: page: 489: to 506: to whom I may add,
Learned King JAMES of blessed memory, in his Declaration against Vorstius: all
these I say, who were undoubtedly the learnedest in the Church of England in
their times, and have hitherto bin reputed so without control: have with one
unanimous and joint consent in these their several writings and records (in
which they do and shall for ever live) defended and maintained the Total and
final perseverance of the Saints, as the Orthodox, positive and undoubted
truth and as the received and resolved doctrine of the Church of England,
opposing, confuting, rejecting and condemning the contrary assertion as
haereticall, wicked, blasphemous, and athiesticall, and as quite repugnant and
cross to the received Object.
and established doctrine of our Church. But now it may be objected, that it is
true, that the learnedest in the Church of England have heretosore maintained
and desended this our present assertion as sound and orthodox, and as the
received doctrine of our Church: but do the learned^st in the Church of
England, maintain and defend it now in any Answ.
of their works and writings? I answer, yes Doctor Benefelde Lady Margarets
Lecturer in the University of Oxford, as learned and profound a Scholar as
any in the Church of England, in his two books de Perseuerantia sanctorum,
being nothing else but two public Lectures which he read in the Divinity
Schools at Oxford. Doctor Prideaux now regious Professor of Divinity in the
University of Oxford, a man as famous for his learning as any in our Church,
in his Lecture. de Perseuerantia sanctorum, and in his Sermon entitled Ephesus
backsliding. Doctor Ames a famous and renowned Scholar, now a Professor of
Divinity in the Netherlands, in his Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem: Article
5. Doctor Francis White (whom some report to be dyed black of late) one of the
greatest Gamaliels in our Church, in his reply to Fisher: page: 52, 53, 54, 81,
84, 87, 102, 167, 168, 200. Doctor Carlton the reverend Bishop of Chichester.
Doctor Dauenat, Bishop of Salisbury. Doctor Samuel Ward. Doctor Thomas Goade,
and Doctor Balcanquall, in the fifth Article of the Synod of Dort, at which
they were present, and to which they have subscribed their names; and in the
Examination of Mr. Mountagues Appeal composed by Bishop Carlton, to which they
have also annexed a Protestation touching the Synod of Dort, and so touching
our particular point, which is resolved in the one, and defended in the other.
Mr. Wotton in his defense of Mr. Perkins, in the point of the certainty of
salvation. Mr. Bolton in his Discourse of true happiness, to pass by Mr.
Ronse, Mr. Burton, Mr. Yates, and others who have answered Mr. Mountague, and
have written particularly of this our present controversy; all these I say,
who are the learnedest, at least as learned, as any in our Church, have
defended and maintained this our present assertion as sound and orthodox, and
as the doctrine of the Church of England, in these their several records:
neither is there any English Divine but Mr. Mountague, that did ever publish
and record the contrary. This cloud of witnesses which I have here recorded,
together with many others which I might have mentioned, is sufficient for to
prove, that the learnedest in the Church of England, not only heretofore, but
likewise at this present time, concur and iumpe with us in this our
assertion, that true grace once had can never be totally nor finally lost
again. Mr. Mountague himself though he records the contrary, is so ingenious
as to con^esse, that many in the Church of England, reputed learned, have
concurred in opinion with us, but yet withal Appeal. 28.
he auerreth, that those who hold the contrary, are their superiors both in
learning and authority: so that in his opinion no learned men indeed, no man
of place or note in this our Church, but only some mean obscure men, who are
reputed learned, but are in truth illitterate, were ever of his opinion, that
true faith once had could not be totally nor finally lost again. But whether
those men whom I have formerly mentioned were obscure men or no, or whether
they were illitterate dunces, and men only reputed learned, or whether they are
not more eminent in place, learning, dignity, and piety, then Mr. Mountague or
any of his Abettors let all men judge. Having now sufficiently proved by many
testimo^ies, that the learnedest in the Church of England have assented to us,
and that they have maintained this our assertion as the resolved doctrine of
the Church of England. I will now in the second place examine, whether there
are any learned in the Church of England who either did or do oppose it, as Mr.
Mountague has auerred it. For my own part I must confess ingenuously, that I
never heard or read of any English orthodox and Protestant Divine that did ever
oppose or contradict our present assertion, in any work or writing of his set
forth by public authority. Indeed Mr. Bradwell in his detection. page 89. and
Mr. Rogers iu his third proposition on the 17. Article records the doctrine of
a total and final fall from grace, to be one of Glouers errors: but whether
Glouer were one of the learnedest in the Church of England of which Mr.
Mountague speaks, or whether he has left this error of his upon any
authentical and approved records, that I know not; sure I am that this
doctrine of his which Mr. Mountagne would father upon the learnedest of our
Church, is but a branded error, and that upon record. I must confess that John
Breyerly a Priest, in his reformed Protestant, Printed at (...) in La^cashire,
1621: page: 79. has recorded this, to be the Tenet of Mr. Harsnet, now Bishop
of Norwich, and he quotes his sermon at Paul's Cross in the margent, for to
prove it, where in this error of the total and final Apostacy of the Saints,
together with some other Arminian points were delivered by him. If the Bishop
of Norwich then be one of Mr. Mountagues learnedest number who oppose this our
present assertion. I answer, first, that Mr. Harsnet was long since conuented
for his Sermon, and forced to recant it as haeriticall and erroneous; and
therefore since he has recanted it as an error heretofore, I doubt not but he
does disclaim it as an error now. Secondly, I answer, that upon this Sermon,
and the controversies that arose upon it, the Articles of Lambeth which do
resolve this for us, that the true regenerate Saints of God can neither finally
nor totally fall from grace were composed, and by the appointment of the whole
University of Cambridge Mr. Wotton was appointed to confute Mr. Harsnets
Sermon as haereticall, the next Sunday following; and therefore, by the voice
of the whole University of Cambridge, and by the resolution of the reverend
Bishops and learned Divines assembled at Lambeth (who were far more learned
then Mr. Harsnet,) this total and final Apostasy of the Saints was branded
for an error, and so not the received Tenet of the learnedest in the Church of
England. Thirdly, I answer, that this Sermon of Mr. Harsnets was never
published and Printed by authority, it was so far from this, that it was
inioyn^d to be recanted by authority, and therefore howsoever, it can be no
record against me. Never was there any among us before Mr. Mountague that
published this error of the Apostacy of the Saints in print, but only
Thompson a Dutchman, fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, a man of an excellent
memory, and of great learning, but of little grace, and of a deboist, loose,
licentious and voluptious life: he being the first who infected Cambridge with
Arminianisme, has published this error of the Apostacy of the Saints in that
posthumous Diatraba of his. But was this book of his printed in England, and
allowed and received of our Church as sound and orthodox? no such matter. For
when as Thompson himself made means to publish it, it was stopped at the
press, and it sound no license or approbation, because it was contrary to the
doctrine of the Church of England. After his death (because it could find no
license here,) it was transported unto Lions by some friends of his, and there
was it printed. But no sooner was it come from the press, and scattred abroad
in England, but as it found resistance at the press at first, so it found a
Reverend and learned Antagonist (even Abbot Bishop of Salisbury) to encounter
it, least our Church should be disquieted and infected by it. Since therefore
this Thompson was no English, but a Dutchman and a drunken one to: since this
his book was utterly disalowed of, as contrary to the doctrine of our Church,
and was printed but by stealth beyond the seas, and not by any public license
and allowance here: and seeing it was no sooner printed, but it was presently
refelled by a learned Bishop of our Church as haereticall and quite opposite to
the established and received doctrine of our Church, it makes much for me, not
against me: fo that as yet there are no records against me, but all of them are
wholly for me. Let Mr. Mountague now with all his reading (if he can stoop
so low, as to cast his eyes upon the modern writers of our Church, whose very
names he cannot mention without disdain and scorn) show me but one learned
Divine, nay any mean and unlearned Divine in the Church of England since the
reformation, that did ever openly, and in express terms oppose, the total
and final perseverance of the Saints in grace, in any work of his set forth
by public allowance and authority, and then perchance I shall in part believe
him, that some of the learned of the Church of England have opposed it, till
then I shall account him, but a meerelyer and impostor, as he is. For how is it
possible, that all the learnedest in the Church of England should affirm, that
faith once had might be both totally and finally lost, and that they should
oppose and refell the contrary, when as there is not one member of the Church
of England to be found, from the first reformation of it hitherto, that does
in any public or approved work of his record the same. If there be any
records of any learned in our Church to be found which may make good Mr.
Mountagues words, let him do us that favor as to give us a Catalogue of their
works and names; but if his learnedest in the Church of England be but a mere
notion, abstracted from no Indiuidualls, if they are namelesse and workelesse,
then surely Mr. Mountague is much mistaken, and he must for shame recant this
forgery and untruth of his. Indeed Mr. Mountague has vouched one by name, and
but one, to patronize and make good his words, to wit, Doctor Ouerall Deane of
Paul's. But was Doctor Ouerall the learnedest in the Church of England? if he
were so, yet he is but one, and what is one to all those worthies and learned
Divines which I have cited to the contrary? If Doctor Ouerall were of this
opinion, where then is this opinion of his recorded? Surely in no printed
works of his set forth by public authority, but only in the Conference at
Hampton Court: page: 41, 42, 43. And what are his words? they are only these.
Those who are called and justified according to the purpose of Gods election,
how ever they might and did fall sometimes into greiuous sins, and thereby
into the present state of wrath and damnation: yet did they never fall totally,
from all the graces of God, to be utterly destitute of all the parts and seeds
thereof, nor finally from justification: but were in time renewed by Gods
Spirit unto a lively faith and repentance, and so justified from these sins,
and from the wrath, curse, and guilt annexed thereunto. Is this the learned man
the which you vouch as making for you, who in express terms concludes againg
you? Indeed if this be your meaning, that those are the learnedest in our
Church, who have maintained this our assertion pointblanke against you, I
willingly acknowledge it; but yet that Doctor Ouerall or any others who are ex
diametro against a total and final fall from grace should be so punctually
for you, I confess this is a mystery and ridd^e unto me: I cannot understand
it, unless your ipse dixi (...) Gospel, and their opinions must be so, not
because they are so, but because you say it. But it may be now of late some of
the learned in the Church of England have made a defection from their Mother
Church, and have shaken hands and sided with Papists and Arminians, and this
makes Master Mountague to auerre that the learned in the Church of England
do assent unto Antiquity, and to Arminius and the Church of Rome in this; That
faith once had may be both finally and totally lost. If this be so (as I do
not believe it) I would to God Mr. Mountague would disclose their names unto
us, that so we might endeavor to convert them, or else learn for to avoid
them: or at least that we might judge of them whether they are the learned
in the Church of England, yea or not. Sure I am, whoeuer or whateuer they are,
they are neither the greatest, nor yet the learnedest, nor yet the best and
honestest in the Church of England: if there be any such, make the best and
utmost of them that you can, they are but a company of carnal, graceless,
profane, and dissolute persons, there is no truth nor power of grace in any of
them. For our two Archbishops, and the learned Archbishop of Meth (to whom
Mr. Mountague and all his Abettors are much inferior) they are all for us. For
other of our Bishops, and diverse others of our learned Clargie throughout the
Kingdom, I know that they have declared themselves wholly for us, and for my
own part I know not any man of any learning, worth, or note, (at least of any
grace and goodness) in our Church, who has fully declared himself against us
in any written or printed records; if there are any against us (as I profess I
know not any particular man) sure I am that they are neither the best, nor
greatest, nor yet the learnedest in our Church: and therefore unless that Mr.
Mountague will arrogate and monopolize this title, of the learnedest in the
Church of England unto himself alone (which he is very like to do, because
he does debase the chiefest worthies of our Church, with such vile, scandalous,
reproachful and vnderualuing terms, and check, correct, reject, and use them
at his pleasure) though alas good man he is not worthy for to be their
scholar) he must pardon us though we believe him not in this, That the
learnedest in the Church of England have always held, that faith once had may
be both totally and finally lost: for you see that I have proved it to be a
mere forgery and untruth, that was never published and recorded by any member
of the Church of England but himself.

But now Mr. Mountagne tells us, that they were the learnedest in the Church of
England that drew, composed, and agreed Appeal, page 28.
the Articles in 52. and 62. that ratified them in 71. that confirmed them
again in 640. Well, what if this be granted, though perchance there might be
some question of it? All these (says he) have, and do assent unto Antiquity
in this Tenent, and subscribe it truly, or in hypocrisy. Well, I grant it: for
all Antiquity, as I have formerly proved, has concurred with me in this
assertion: Yea, but Mr. Mountague says otherwise, and therefore I must take
his meaning, not his words: to wit that the learnedest in the Church of
England, have agreed, ratified, and confirmed it, that Faith once had may be
both totally and finally lost. But how does this appear? O says he,
obsegnatis tabulis, by the express words of the 16. Article; so that now the
second and the maine thing which I have to prove is only this; That the
Articles of the Church of England, (but specially the 16. Article,) do not
prove Mr. Mountagues assertion of a total and final fall from grace.

This will evidently appear; first, by the very title of the 16. Article,
which is only this: of sin after Baptism. The Title doubtless of every
Article compriseth the very pith, scope, and substance of the Article, as well
as the title of our Homilies does of the Homilies, (else they were very
injudicious, and not the learnedest in the Church of England, who imposed it,
and you an injudicious and shallow-pated scholar to draw arguments from
titles, as you have done from the Title of an Homily) if therefore this title,
and the 16. Appeal 32.
Article suite together, the 16. Article must needs be only intended of sin
after Baptism, and not of a total or final fall from grace. Secondy, as the
title of the Article, so the very words, the very scope and end of the Article
prove as much. For the very scope and end of the 16. Article, (as any man that
has his eyes in his head may discern at first) was but to condemn two sorts
of Heretics. First, such as hold, that after men are once regenerated, they
cannot sin, as the Nouatians, Iouinians, and Catharists did, and as some
Brownists do: having reference to the 15. Article going immediately before:
which concludes, that all men besides Christ, though regenerate were sinners:
Now this appears by the conclusion of the 16. Article: therefore they are to
be condemned, which say they can no more sin as long as they live here.
Secondly, to condemn such as deny place of forgiveness and reconciliation to
such, as commit any gross and scandalous sin after Baptism, though they are
truly penitent for the same, as the Montanists and Nouatians did in the
primative Church, and as some Anabaptists and Brownists do now: which appears
by the conclusion of the Article from the former praemises: Therefore they are
to be condemned which say, they can no more sin as long as they live here, or
deny place of forgiveness to such as truly repent. This then being the only
substance, end and scope of our 16. Article, to condemn these two sorts of
heretics, there is nothing as yet to be found in it, which makes either for
a total or a final fall from grace. If then there be any thing in this
Article making for it, then it must needs be, these bare words of the Article
abstracted, and wrested from their genuine and proper scope and sense, After we
have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into
sin, and by the grace of God we may rise again, and amend our lives. But
these words torment and rack them to the utmost, they warrant not this
Doctrine of a total or final fall from grace, at least they warrant it not in
that declaratory and positive manner, and in App. page 36. 37.
plain and express words, as Mr. Mountague affirms they do. For first, here
is not so much as one word of falling either totally or finally from the state
of grace, and justification, into the state of death and damnation; not so much
as one word, that faith once had, may either totally or finally be lost
again. Appeal 259.
Now they are your ow^ words Mr. Mountague, the words are not direct which are
not express: so say I, that is not the plain, positive, declaratorie and
express Doctrine of the Articles, which is not delivered in positive, plain,
absolute, and express terms; this Doctrine of a total and final fall from
grace is not so delivered in these words in this 16. Article, therefore it is
but your bare and wrested collection, and not the express doctrine of the
Article. Secondly, the very words themselves will not bear that doctrine which
you would thrust upon them in any good grammatical construction. For what good
Grammarian is there that would give this construction to these words. After we
have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, and fall into
sin, that is, we may fall quite away from the state of grace, into the state
of damnation; as if that every departure from grace and every fall into sin,
were a falling totally from the state of grace. Every man I hope will grant,
that the committing of any sin, is a departure from grace, in respect of that
particular sin, be it but a sin of infirmity: he that commits the least
sin, departs from grace and falls into sin, and yet he does not presently
fall from the state of grace into the state of damnation. A man may depart from
the act of grace, and yet retain the habit still: a man may fall into finne,
and yet not fall from the state of grace into the state of damnation: he may
recedere depart, as our Article affirms, and yet not excedere fall quite away,
from grace given: so that the very words will not necessarily, no nor impliedly
bear that sense the which you give them; because a man may depart from grace
given, and fall into sin, and yet not fall either totally or finally from the
state of grace. Secondly, the words are, that he may fall into sin, not that
he does cast himself into sin in a voluntary, presumptuous, and wilful
manner, so that this word fall into sin, implies, that these sins here
mentioned, are sins of infirmity and incogitancie, not of malice and
presumption: now I hope you will grant, that sins of infirmity, and
incogitancie without any precogitated and resolved malice, do not cast a man
totally from the state of ^ce, (for then every Saint of God should fall from
the state of grace continually) but only sins of malice and presumption,
committed with an high hand, and with an absolute, full, and deliberate
consent: Wherefore the sin mentioned in the Article, being but a sin of
infirmity only and not of praecogitated, and resolved malice, it cannot be
imagined that this falling into sin in the Article should be a total or a
final fall from grace. Thirdly, observe the order of the words, they do first
depart from grace given, and then, fall into sin: they do not fall into
sin first, and then depart from grace given; if then they depart from grace
before they fall into sin, then this departure from grace cannot be intended
of a falling from the state of grace; because our Antagonists will confess,
that the sin committed, is that which casts men down from the state of
grace, and that men fall not from grace before, but after sin committed: this
departure therefore from grace given, being before the sin committed, cannot
be a total departure from the habit and state, but from the act of grace.
Fourthly, the very coherence and connection of the words will clear the sense
and meaning of them: For and being a conjunction copulati^e ^itting both
sentences together, it makes the sense of the Article, After we have received
the holy Ghost, (...) may depart from grace given, and full into sin, to be
no more but this, after we have received the holy Ghost, we may ^all into
sin: so that (...) departure from grace given, is nothing else but to fall
into sin, which a man may do and yet not fall from grace; so that torture
and rack^ these words which way you will, they will not warrant this doctrine
of a total or a final fall from grace. Y^a, but you will object that these
subsequent words, By Object.
the grace of God we (...) rise again, and amend our lives, do necessarily
imply thus much, that the Saints of God may fall totally and finally from
grace. True Mr. Mountague, if Answ.
you, if Bortius, or the Rhemists be the interpreters, else there might be
some doubt of it. For you must know, that the only reason wherefore these words
were added to the former, was but to meet with the Montanists, N^uations,
Anabaptists and Brownists, who denied forgiveness and reconciliation to such,
as sinned after Baptism; and if you had not been purblinde when as you read
the Article, you could not but have seen it: But God in his justice has given
you eyes according to your mind, which always look besides and overthwart
the truth, but not upon it. But if you will have the sense of these words, it
is only this; that the Saints of God may rise again from that sin into which
they were fallen and amend their lives, and not that they rise again from the
state of condemnation. That from which the Saints of God must rise, is only
from that into which they were fallen; for falling and rising they are
Relatiues; but the thing into which the Saints were fallen, was but into some
act of sin, as appears by the words of the Article, we may depart from
grace, and fall into sin, it was not a fall from the state of grace, into the
state of damnation, and therefore this is but a rising from some actual sin,
to amendment of life. Secondly, I say that these words make much against you.
For if those that fall do rise again; this does necessarily imply that they
were not fallen quite away from the state of grace, into the death of sin,
that all their spiritual life was not extinguished and abolished by their
fall; for if they were dead in trespasses and sins, they could not rise
again: He that is quite dead in sin, and without the life of grace, is not
said to rise again and amend his life, (for that implies a continuance of the
former life) but he is said to revive again, and to have a new life put into
him: and therefore if the Article had intended, this departure from grace given
and falling into sin, of a total or final fall from grace, into the state
of death and damnation, the words should have been these; He may revive
again, or God may raise him up to a new estate of grace again, and he may
have a new life of grace infused into him, (which would cross this rule in
Logic, a priuatione ad habitum non datur regressus) and not that he may rise
again, and amend his life. Take then either the title, or the scope and
substance, or the very letter and words of the 16. Article, yet neither of them
will warrant this doctrine of a total or a final fall from grace. All the
argument which any man can raise from this Article, in proof of this
conclusion, is but from the bare words and letter ab^racted from the sense; to
wit, Those who have received the holy Ghost, may depart from grace given and
fall into sin, and by the grace of God may rise againt and amend their lives.
Therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may both finally and totally fall
from grace; therefore faith once ^ad may be both totally and finally lost;
which how w^ll it follows, let all men judge. But to give M. Mountague and
others full satisfaction in the sense and meaning of this Article, I will
compare it with some other Articles, which are express in point, that the true
regenerate Sai^ts of God ^an neither finally nor totally fall from grace. The
5. Article of Lambeth concluded and agreed upon Nouemb. 20. 1595. by diverse
reverend and learned Bishops and Divines of this our Church, for the
determining of some controversies in the University of Cambridge, is
expressly contrary to Mr. Mountagues collection from our 16 Article for the
words of that Article are these: True, living, justifying faith, and the
sanctifying Spirit of God, is not extinguished, it fayles not, it vanishes not
away in the Elect either finally or totally. If the 16. Article had been
express to the contrary, I suppose, the reverend and learned Composers of this
Article would not have varied from it. But Mr. Mountague pleads to this, that
the Articles of Lambeth are forbidden by Authority, Appeal, page (...) 56. 71.
72.
but when and where, and by what authority, that he sets not down. Surely for
my own part I never yet could learn that these Articles were disallowed by
any public authority, but only by Mr. Mountagues, who like a Magisteriall
Dictator, and Cathedral moderator over all divinity and Divines, approues and
disalowes of whom and what he will without control. Sure I am these Articles,
and the doctrine in them were approved and agreed upon on all hands at the
conference at Hampton Court, though Mr. Mountague records the contrary. The
book is yet extant, which will auerre all that I say for truth, and prove Mr.
Mountagu^ a liar and Impostor, if not worse: so that if Mr. Mountague had not
had his face even crusted and steeled over with more the^ audatious impudency,
he would not have thus encouraged his readers. See the book. Again, the
Articles of Ireland, Appeal. 32.
Number 33. 38. confirmed by King Ia^es under his broad Seal, they are the
very same with the Articles of Lambeth, and contradictory to Mr. Mountagues
collection from the 16. Article, which proves that the Articles of Lambeth were
never repealed by public authority, and that the 16. Article was never
expound^ in Mr. Mountagues sense, by any public authority, for then King
James would never have confirmed these Articles under his broad Seal, he
being such a King as did desire unity and peace, as much or more in Church, as
in the Commonwealth. The words of the Article of Ireland are these. A true,
lively, justifying faith, and the sanctifying Spirit of God, is not
extinguished, nor vanished away in the regenerate, either finally or totally:
And again, All Gods Elect are in their time inseparably united unto Christ,
by the effectual and vital influence of the holy Ghost, derived from him, as
from the head into every true member of his mystical body. So that if you will
interpret our 16. Article, either by the Articles of Lambeth or Ireland, Mr.
Mountagues exposition must be false and strained. But the best expo^ition of
the 16. Article will be taken from the 17. Article which was composed by the
same men, at the same time: and if you will expound it by this Article then
farewell Mr. Mountagues false gloss upon it, For our 17. Article certifieth
us; That they which be endued wi^h so excellent a benefit as Predestination is,
are called according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit working in due season, and
that they through grace obey the calling, that they are justified freely, that
they are made the sons of God by adoption, that they are made like the Image
of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, that they walk religiously in good
works, and at length by Gods mercy obtain everlasting felicity. From which
article Mr. Rogers, Chaplain to Archbishop Bancroft in his Analys^ on the 39.
Articles, allowed to be public, by the lawful authority of the Church of
England, and not hitherto disallowed or called in, has raised this third
proposition. They which are predestined unto salvation cannot perish; and
from thence he inferres this Consectarie: Wander then do they from the truth,
which think that the very Elect, totally and finally may fall from grace and
be damned: that the regenerate may fall from the grace of God: may destroy the
Temple of God, and be broken off from the vine Christ Jesus: which was one of
Glouers errors (of which exposition allowed by public and lawful authority
Mr. Mountague cannot be ignorant, because (the more is the pity) he has
subscribed and read them often, as himself informs us.) And therefore if you
will believe the 17. Article, or Mr. Rogers his Collection from it ( allowed by
the lawful authority of the Church of The title of Analysis.
England, as the doctrine maintained, professed, and protected in the Church of
England) Mr. Mountagues collection from the 16. Article must be false, and
contrary to the Articles and Doctrine of the Church of England, and he
himself must in the mean time be a scismaticall factious and seditious
person, and one that does oppose the Articles and Doctrine of our Church in an
audatious, peremptory, impudent, and dangerous manner. All now that Mr.
Mountague can say for himself is this: That this exposition and Collection of
his Appeal 30. 31.
from the 16. Article, and this doctrine of a total and final fall from
grace, was resolved of and auowed for true, Catholic, ancient, and orthodoxe
by that royal, reverend, honorable, and learned Synod at Hampton Court, and
for proof of it, he sends us to the Conference at Hampton Court published by
warrant, and republished by command. But sure Mr. Mountague did never read the
book, or else he was purblinde when he read it, for there is no such thing
within the book. All that is mentioned and recorded there touching the 16.
Article is this; Dr. Reynolds moved his Majesty, that the 16. Article, Page 24.
the meaning of which was sound, might be enlarged and explained with this or
the like addition; yet neither totally nor finally: and Page 41. 42, 43, 44.
that the 9. assertions Orthodoxall might be inserted into the book of
Articles: to which his Majesty replied, that it was best not to stuff the
book with all conclusions theological, Upon this Dr. Ouerall Deane of Paul's
informed the King of what had passed between him and some other in Cambridge
t^ching our present question: and concludes that notwithstanding those who were
instified and called according to the purpose of Gods election might and did
sometimes fall into grienous sins, and thereby into the present state of
wrath and damnation, yet did they never fall, either totally from all the
graces of God, to be utterly destitute of all the parts and seeds thereof, nor
finally from instification: to which King James replied, that repentance in the
elect of God after known sins committed is so necessary, as without it there
could not be remission of these sins, nor reconciliation unto God. This was
all that was spoken either of this point, or of the 16, Article: and whether
Mr. Mountagues gloss and exposition were not here condemned in express
terms, let all men judge. But will you now know what was the true cause why
Mr. Mountague did so grossly mistake. I will inform you in a word, and it
worth your knowledge. Mr. Mountague as he has been deceived by that varlet
Bertius in other things, even so he has been in this: For he transcribed
this argument from our 16. Article out of Bertius in his Apostatia Sauctorum,
page 107. and for his Exposition of it, and that it was so resolved on at the
conference at Hampton Court, he had it Verbatim from the Rhemists in their
second Conference at Hage, recorded by Brandius, page 364. Alas good Mr.
Mountague, that you should be overtaken thus, that you should be driven to such
narrow shifts as to fly to Bertius and the Rhemists, (the very dregs and
seumme of all Arminians) for corrupt glosses, expositions, and collections upon
our Articles, as if the Church of England did not understand but quite mistake
the genuine, true, and proper sense of her own Articles: or as if that Bertius
and the Rhemists who are strangers to them, understood them better then the
Church, yea, then the learnedest of the Church of England, who Appeal. page 28.
composed them. What does this betoken, but that Master Mountague, like Crows
and Ravens, loves (...) better then any other sweet and wholesome flesh, that
he preferres the Rhemists and Arminians, before all his brethren or his Mother
Church: that he is quite apostatized and fallen from the doctrine of the
Church of England (I say not from the state of true and saving grace, for that
I dare presume he never had as yet) into the very mi^e of Popery and
Arminianisme, thinking to verefie this his doctrine of a (...) and final fall
from grace, by his own example for want of better proofs. I hope therefore,
that seeing Mr. Mountague had this his exposition and collection from Bertius
and the Rhemists, that you will rather hearken and yield to the sound and
orthodox exposition which the Church of England has heretofore made of it, and
which Doctor Benefield, Bishop Carlton, Mr. Rouse, Mr. Yates, and Mr. Rogers
have made of it, then unto Mr. Mountague, who labors only to corrupt, but not
to expound the 16. Article.

Having thus proved that the Articles of the Church of England are utterly
against a total and final fall from grace, and that the 16. Article makes
rather for me then against me. I come now to the third thing, to prove, that
the Homilies of the Church of England, and the Common prayer book make not
against me. As for the homilies, they make not against me. For first, Mr.
Mountague himself who obiecteth them confesses that the Homilies are not the
dogmaticall and confirmed resolutions Appe page 260.
of the Church of England: that they have no dogmaticall positions or doctrine
in them to be propugned or subscribed in all and every point, as the books of
Articles and Common prayer have: therefore by Mr. Mountagues own confession,
admitting that the Homilies were clear againg me, yet they prove not, that the
dogmaticall resolution and the received, settled and established position of the
Church of England is against me to: because the dogmaticall and public
resolutions of the Church of England are not (...) in the Homilies, neither are
they such positive and current divinity, as to be subscribed in all and entry
point, if Mr. Monntague may be credited. But now you may wonder well what
should be the cause that Mr. Mountague App pa. 36, 37.
should so magnify our Homilies in one place: as to style them, authentis alt
and orthodox records, containing the established positive and publicly
professed doctrine of the Church of England, and in an other place to slight
and vilify them so much, and to contradict that which he had written of them
before (...) Surely there is a mystery in it, and some pretty trick of more
then Presbyterian-Legerdemaine. For you may know, that App. page 29.
where Mr. Mountague does press and magnify our Homilies, they give some
seeming color, to the Popish and Arminian doctrine, of a total and final
fall from grace: but where he vilifies and vnderualues them, there they cross
and oppose him in his Popery, in speaking against Images; and therefore here
they must not be the positive doctrine, and the dogmaticall resolution of the
Church: or if they be so, yet Mr. Mountague did not subscribe to them in this
particular, and so they contain not the dogmaticall resolutions of the Church
of England in this particular case, for want of his subscription. So that in
Mr. Mountagues judgment, the Homilies established and confirmed by the Church
of England, so far as they make for Popery and Arminianisme, are the
dogmaticall resolutions, and the authentical and orthodox records of the
Church of England, and thus far are they to be subscribed to: but as far as
they make against Popery and Arminianisme they are not authentical, they are
not the dogmaticall and positive resolutions of the Church of England, and thus
far they are not to be subscribed. Very good, Mr. Mountague, if an honest man
should have said as much as this, I doubt me he should have lost his livings,
his ears, yea, and his life ere this, and that deservedly too: you can say
thus much (which is no more in substance but this, that the Church of England
is a mere Popish and Arminian Church) and yet escape scot free: take heed you
smart not for it ere be long. And do you not deserve to undergo the sharpest
censure that your Mother (if your Mother) can inflict upon you^ I dare avouch
it that you do, and I will prove it to, or else I will suffer in your steed.
For you confess in your Appeal page: 260. that the Homilies contain in them
godly and wholesome exhortations to honor and worship almighty God: and you
grant that they contain in them godly and wholesome doctrine necessary for
these times, (and you cite the 33. Article for the 35. Article for to prove it,
which shows that Mr. Mountague is but an Ignoramus in our Articles to which
he has so often subscribed.) and yet you say in the same place, that they
contain not in them, the public dogmaticall and confirmed resolution,
positions, and doctrine of the Church of England, neither are they to be
subscribed in all and every point. I pray observe this passage well, and then
judge what Mr. Mountague is, and what he does deserve. For first, in these
words he affirms, that the doctrines established and confirmed by the Church
of England, and commanded to be diligently and distinctly read in our Churches
by the Ministers, by our 35. Article, are not the public and received doctrine
of our Church, which as it is a contradiction in it self, and a vilification
both of our Articles and Homilies, so it is a great disparagement to our
Church, accusing her either of ignorance and dotage, in not knowing what her
doctrine is; or of inconstancy, in having no settled and positive doctrine; or
at least of grand hypocrisy, in commanding such doctrines to be diligently
and distinctly read as godly and wholesome, and as her public and received
doctrine, when as it is nothing so. Secondly, in these words Mr. Mountague
affirms, that the Homilies of the Church of England established by authority,
are not sound and orthodox, which is contrary to the 35 Article to which he
has so often subscribed: for which very thing many honester men then himself
have not only bin silenced from preaching (which penalty Mr. Mountague needs
not undergo, for he is to dumme already in that kind) but have likewise been
deprived, and quite stripped of all their spiritual livings and promotions.
Thirdly, in these words Mr. Montague judges the Church of England, as it is
the Church of England, to be but a wicked, haereticall, and atheistical
Church, in as much as there are many godly wholesome and necessary doctrines,
which though they are in the Church of England, yet they are not the received
established and confirmed doctrines and resolutions of our Church. Fourthly, by
these words, Mr. Mountague makes the Church of England but an incompleate and
imperfect Church, a Church in which there is no life and power of religion, a
Church which is all for faith and speculation, but not for life and works: in
as much as there are many godly, practical, wholesome and necessary doctrines,
helping men to honor and worship almighty God, which are not the received,
established, and confirmed doctrines of our Church. Fifthly, in these words,
Mr. Mountague, (if you mark the end wherefore he speaks them, to wit, because
they are to sharp, and to precise against Images) affirms that the Church of
England, does gratify the Church of Rome in points of Popery, indeauouring to
reconcile herself and to submit to her, in things in which she has formerly
oppugned her. These five things are necessarily implied (and I fear me
principally intended) in these words and passage of Mr. Mountague touching our
Homilies, and their authority amongst us: what censure he is worthy of for
such words and passages as these, I leave to others, I judge him not.

From the authority of our Homilies, and Mr. Mountagues abusing of them, I
come to examine the words which he objected out of them against my present
assertion. His first objection is from the title of the Homily. There is an
Homily, says he, allowed and established in our Church, entitled. Of falling
(he adds away) from God. Therefore it is the received and established doctrine
of the Church of England, that true regenerate men, may both totally and
finally fall from grace.

Was there ever such a ridiculous and simple argument propounded by any learned
man that had his wits and senses about him? as if the doctrine of the Church of
England were merely titular depending on the very titles of books, (which as
they are not always suitable to the doctrine contained in them, so are they
never doctrinall, and positive resolutions in themselves:) and therefore Mr.
Mountague if you had not a brazen forhead, or a crazie brain, you could not
choose but blush at this your agument. From the title of the homilies I descend
unto the words the which you cite. The words out of the first Homily are
these. For where as God has s^ewed to all them that truly believe his Gospel
his face of mercy in Christ Jesus, which does so inlighten their hearts, that
they (if they behold it as they ought to do (which parenthesis you have
omitted) be transformed to his image, be partakers of the heavenly light, and
of his holy Spirit, and be fashioned to him in all goodness requisite to the
children of God, so if they after do neglect the same, if they be unthankful
unto him, if they order not their lives according to his example and Doctrine,
and to the setting forth of his glory, he will take away from them his
kingdom, his holy word, whereby he should reign in them; because they bring
not forth the fruit thereof that he to^kes for. The words you cite out of the
second Homily are these. The place of Esaias (...) before, shows, that God at
length will so forsake his unfruitful (...), that he will not only suffer it
to bring forth wild briars and th^rnes, but also further to punish the
vnfruitefullnesse of it. He says, he will not cut it, he will not delue it,
and he will command the clouds that they shall not rain upon it; meaning that
he will take away the teaching of his holy word from them; (which words Master
Mountague has passed over) so that they shall be no longer of his kingdom,
they shall be no longer governed by his holy Spirit, they shall be put from
the grace and benefits which they had, and over might have ini^yed through
Christ, they shall be deprived of the heavenly life and light which they had in
Christ, whiles they abode in him. And to be shart, they shall be given into
the power of the (...), which (...) rule in all them that he cast away from
God, as he did in Saul and Iud^s, and generally in all such as work after
their own wills, the children of mistrust and unbelief. You say Master
Mountagne, that these two Homilies, but principally the words here cited, do
thoroughly and wholly insist upon the affirmation, App pi 32, 33.
that faith once had may again be lost, and that no other construction of
these words may be made, then that a man my fall and hap^e from grace both
totally and finally. But I pray what faith and what grace do you intend Mr.
Mountague? a true living and justifying faith, and sanctifying saving and
habitual grace? or only an historical and common faith, or ordinary, common
and hypocritical grace? If you intend these latter, (for you leave them
indefinite and ambigious, that so you may euade the better, when you are
questioned for abusing our Church and Homilies) then I say, that your inference
and collection is nothing to the purpose, and reaches not unto that faith and
grace which is now in question. If you intend and mean the former, I answer
then, that these words of the Homily do not warrant yours. For first, they
are your own words. That words are not direct which are Appeal, p. 257.
not express. Now here there is not so much as one word, that faith once had
may be lost, that a true regenerate man may fall finally and totally from the
state of grace, your eyes Mr. Mountagne are better then all other men's, if you
can find these words, or any like unto them in these Homilies, they are but
your private fancy and conceit, and therefore this is not the direct,
positive, and declatorie doctrine of these Homilies, but your false and forged
collection from them. Secondly, that I may instruct you a little in the
Homilies, in which I fear me you are truly or wilfully ignorant: you may
please to observe Mr. Mountague, that in the second and third part of the
Homily of faith. It is said expressly. That he that believes in Christ has
everlasting life: and therefore it must needs consequently follow, that he that
has this faith must also have good works, and be studious to observe Gods
Commandments obediently: so that neither the world, the diuill, (...) all the
power of them shall prevail against him. That they that have a lively faith
do make their calling and election certain, sure and stable by good works.
Therefore it is the express doctrine of the Homilies that true faith once had
cannot be utterly lost again; these words then which you allege cannot imply
the contrary, unless you will have them to repeal and contradict the former.
Thirdly Mr. Mountague these two Homilies and the words you cite out of them,
do not thoroughly and wholly insist upon this, that faith once had may be lost
again, but if it Appeal 27, 28.
please you to read them over once again, you shall see that their principal
and only end, is to exhort men to obey the Gospel and the word of God, and to
bring forth fruits worthy of them, for fear least God deprive them of them.
What then will you infer from hence. All men are exhorted to obey Gods word,
for fear of being deprived of it. Therefore the true beleiuers and Saints of
God may fall totally and finally from grace: a worthy argument I promise you.
Fourthly, these words are spoken indefinitely to all, but principally to such
as were not yet converted and ingrafted into Christ, as appears by the
conclusion of the second Homily, and they are but an exhortation to move men
to come in and obey God: therefore, they prove nothing against us. Fifthly, I
say that these words which are cited by you, are intended only of hypocrites
and barren Christians, and such as have but a dead faith, ( which as the first
Homily of faith says, is no faith, neither is it properly called faith.) For
they are spoken of the unfruitful vyneard, and of such as are barren in good
works, of such as wholly neglect Gods service, and order not their lives
according to his example and doctrine, in the number of which such as have a
true justifying and living faith do never come: as we may see by the three
Homilies of faith. So that your argument from hence can be but this:
hypocrites and barren Christians may fall finally and totally from grace,
therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may do so too: which is a gross
Nonsequitur. Yea, but Mr. Mountague Answ.
objects, that those in the first Homily are such as truly believe: and such
as beholding the face of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ, are transformed into the
same image, etc. I answer, that it is true, that they are called true
believers, not because they have Object.
any true, justifying, and saving faith within them, but because they are
visible members of a true visible Church, and have a true historical faith
believing the Scriptures to be true: they are such as believe the Gospel to
be true, which ( if they behold it as they ought to do) I pray mark this
parenthesis which you have purposely and cunningly omitted; will transform
them into his image, and make them partakers of his heavenly light and of his
holy Spirit etc: which parenthesis implies that those true beleiuers so styled
here, did not behold the Gospel and the face of Gods mercy in Jesus Christ,
and so they were not true believers, nor yet partakers of the Image of Christ
and of the holy Ghost, as they might have been, had they beheld them as they
ought. So that the genuine sense of the words is only this. All those that are
planted in the visible Church of God, and have the powerful offer of Christ
unto them in the Gospel, which is able to regenerate them, and to make them
partakers of the holy Ghost, if they make a good use of it; if they neglect
this Gospel and walk unworthy of it, God will surely deprive them of it. What
is this to true believers, to true regenerate men, which have bin transformed
into the image of Christ by the Gospel? what is this to a total and final
fall from the true and saving state of grace? Secondly, it is evident that
these words are not spoken of such as are truly regenerated and made the sons
of God: for it is said of them, that if they behold the face of God in Jesus
Christ in the Gospel as they ought to do, it will fashion them in all
goodness requisite to the children of God: which words prove, that these here
meant are such as had not that goodness which is requisite to the children of
God, and therefore they are not the children of God. Lastly, the conclusion of
this Homily which follows upon these words, proves that those here spoken of
are only such as liueing in the Church become notoriously vicious, selling
themselves over unto sin, and that they were such as never were truly
regenerated. Lastly, admit that those here meant were true believers and such
as had the grace of true and saving faith within them, yet the Homily says
not, that these do finally or totally fall from grace: all it says of them is
this. That God will begin to forsake them, and that ^ee will take his word
from them if they do neglect it: this God may do, he may begin to forsake
them, and yet not utterly forsake them; he may take away his word, and yet not
take away their faith and other saving and habitual graces from them: and
therefore rack these words to the utmost, they will not prove that the true
regenerate Saints of God do either finally or totally fall from grace. As for
the words of the second Homily they are only spoken of hypocrites and wicked
men and not of the true regenerate Saints of God: which appears. First,
because they are spoken of the barren and fruitless vyneard, of such,
Christians only as bear noe fruits, now the true regenerate Saints and such
as have a true and living faith are always fruitful in good works Ps: 1: 3.
Ps: 92: 12, 13, 14. Ier: 17: 8. Math: 3: 8:. cap: 7: 17, 18, 2 Cor: 8: 7.
Ephesians: 3: 18: 19. John 15: 3, 5. Phil: (...): 17. and James 2: 14, 18, 22, 26.
this the three Homilies of faith do likewise teach: and those that are barren
and unfruitful under the means of grace they are such as have no true and
saving grace, no living faith at all, as the Scriptures and the Homilies
forecited do declare: therefore those in the second Homily are no true
regenerate Saints of God. Secondly, they are compared unto Saul and Judas, and
to all the children of mistrust and unbelief, now Saul and Judas (as I shall
prove hereafter) and the children of mistrust and unbelief were never truly
sanctified and regenerated: therefore neither were these in the Homily.
Lastly, the whole Homily proves it, which is purposely intended to wicked men
planted in the visible Church, and to such as were not yet come into ^st, nor
regenerated by the Gospel; and to no others: ^re is no mention of true
regenerate men in the Homily; the substance of the Homily and the whole sum
of it is but this. Brethren if you will not now obey the Gospel which is
preached unto you, and come into Christ, and bring forth fruits worthy of it,
you shall be deprived of it, and be cast out of the Church. Christ and his
spirit shall never rule and reign within you: what makes all this to our
present purpose? sur^ly nothing at all. Yea, but says Mr. Mountague, these
were truly justified, Object.
for they were in Christ and continued in him for a time. I answer, that they
were so in outward show to the eyes of Answ:
men, they were visible members of the visible Church, and men could not
discover so far as to see their hearts; therefore in the judgment of men
they were in Christ for a time, but yet they were never truly ingrafted into
Christ, they had never any true life in him, they were but like the Church of
Sardis Reu: 3: 1. they had a name they lived and yet were dead: they were
always dead and barren trees, that never brought forth living and wholesome
fruits: they were but as Saul and Judas who were never truly sanctified and
regenerated, as I shall prove hereafter. Sixthty, I answer in your own Appa.
260, 261.
words, that admit that these places are meant of true regenerate men, yet
these Homilies being no dogmaticall decisions, but popular sermons and Godly
exhortations, may sometimes hyperbolize out of a rhetorical strain, and
stretch some sayings beyond the use and practice of the Church, and so every
word in these homilies is not strictly and literally to be insisted on, but we
must give the^ a fair and gentle construction. Seventhly, these words here
mentioned are but exhortations and preservatives to keep men from falling from
God, therefore they do not necessarily imply that men may fall from God: all
they imply ineuitablie is but this, that men cannot stand fast in grace and
cleave close to God but by using of the means, they do not imply that
regenerate men will not use the means, or that they may fall from grace: and
the use of the means, does not imply an incertaintie in obtaining of the end.
Lastly, which answers all that can be objected; All the comminations and
threats in these Homilies are conditional, so that take them as they are most
aduantagious to you, and as spoken to the true regenerate Saints of God, yet
all the argument that you can extract and juggle from them is but this. If the
true regenerate Saints of God neglect Gods word and become unfruitful, they
shall be cast of, and be given up to the power of the devil. Therefore the
true regenerate Saints of God may finally and totally fall from the state of
grace: a learned Nonsequitur, following the Antecedent, as much as darkness
does the Sun, and all one. And therefore Mr. Mountague and all others if they
were not obstinate, (admitting these Homilies to be dogmaticall decisions,
containing in them the doctrines and resolutions of our Church, which Mr.
Mountague himself denies) must needs acknowledge that these Homilies, and so
by consequence the Church of England, makes not against my present assertion,
but rather for it then against it.

As for the argument drawn from the Common prayer book, that infants after
baptism fall from that state of grace which they have received in their
baptism, therefore true regenerate men which are ingrafted into Christ by
faith, may fall from grace. I shall answer it fully in another place. All that
I shall say of it here is this; that though you would ground your argument on
the words of the common Prayer Book, to make a flourish of it to the world, as
if it were your own: yet the truth is this, you had it from the Rhemists, from
Mr. Thompson, Eckardus, Bertius, Aegidius Hunnius, Zacharias Mathesius and
other Arminians or else from Bellarmine, who do press this argument, and
rely upon it as much as Mr. Mountague does. Which Argument Mr. Mountague
knows to have been oft-times answered both by Bishop Abbot in his Animad. in
Thomps. Diatr. cap. 7. by Dr. Benefield in his book de Persen, Sanctorum, lib.
1. cap. 14. by Dr. Prideaux in his sixth Lecture; by the Whole Synod of Dort
in the 5. Article; and by diverse others; and he knows it to be but a mere
nonsequitur admitting the Antecedent to be true: and yet that he might deceive
the ignorant and the ouer-credulous, he makes no bones to publish it as an
Orthodox and invincible Argument. Alas Mr. Mountague, what is become of your
honesty in the mean time, who would thus deceive both God and Man, yea, and
your own Mother Church, by charging her with such a damnable and pernicious
Tenent, doctrine, and assertion, and that upon such weak and ridiculous
grounds as these.

I have now sufficiently proved, The total and final Apostasy of the Saints
from grace, not to be the received and resolved doctrine of the learnedest in
the Church of England, nor yet of the Articles, Homilies, or Common prayer
book of our English Church, and so by consequence I have acquitted the Church
o^ England of this pernicious doctrine which Mr. Mountague would scandalously
lay upon it. I will now in the fourth and last place prove the total and
final perseverance of the Saints, to be the established, resolved, and
received Doctrine of the Church of England, and that by this unanswerable
Argument. That assertion doctrine and position which is ratified and confirmed
by the 17. Article, by the Articles of Lambe^h and Ireland, and agreed upon by
the royal Synod of Hampton Court: That assertion Doctrine and position which
the learnedest in the Church of England have with one unanimous consent, not
only published and taught in their several parishes and Cures, but likewise
publicly maintained and defended in the Schools in both our Universities from
time to time, and in their learned writings set forth by public authority and
approbation, as the established and received Doctrine of the Church of England,
must needs be the received, established, and resolved Doctrine of the Church of
England. But this assertion, Doctrine, and position, That such as are once
truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, can
neither finally nor totally fall from grace; is ratified and confirmed by the
17. Article, by the Articles of Lambeth and Ireland, and agreed upon by the
royal Synod of Hampton Court: and the learnedest in the Church of England have
with one unanimous consent, not only published it in their several Parishes
and Cures, but likewise publicly maintained and defend^ it in the Schools, in
both our Universities, from time to time, and in their learned writings set
forth by public authority and approbation, as the established and received
Doctrine of the Church of England, (all which I have already proved in the
premises.) Therefore it must needs be the received, established, and resolved
Doctrine of the Church of England. Yea, but Mr. Mountague Ob^ct.
in his Appello Caesarem affirms the contrary. True, he does Page (...). 28.
to 37. and 73.
so, but is Mr. Mountague a Pope that he cannot err or lie? or that our Church
of England should be included in his Answ.
breast alone? or are Mr. Mountagues words such Gospel, that men must of
necessity believe them, because he speaks them? Perhaps they may be so with
some: with me they are not, nay, they shall not be. But if there are any who
are so much devoted to Mr. Mountague, that they will pin their faith upon Mr.
Mountagues sleeue, and believe none else but he: Let them consider but these
three things, which I will not only propound, but prove unto them. The first
^his, That as Mr. Mountague has all he has (excepting that of our Homilies)
touching our present controversy: out of that arch Arminian Bertius, and that
Arch Papist Bellarmme, so he has this among other things, that this doctrine
of a total and final fall from grace, is the received doctrine of the Church
of England. They are Bertius his words in his book de Apostata sanctorum, page
107. In his Preface to the same book, and in his Letter to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, as you may see in King JAMES his Declaration against Vorstius. Mr.
Mountague cannot show me in any of our own Writers, or in any other
Protestant and Orthodoxe Writer, that this was ever the received Doctrine of
the Church of England: only Bertius, and the Rhemists in their Conference at
the Hage, Recorded by Brandius, page 364. are the men that auerred this to be
the Doctrine of our English Church; and from them Mr. Mountague among other
things transcribed it: so that if you believe this to be the doctrine of the
Church of England, you believe not Mr. Mountague himself, but only the
Rhemists and Bertius, from whom he does transcribe it. The second thing which I
will propound unto you is this: that Mr. Mountague does thrice record it in his
Gagge, cap. 20. that this our present Controversy is undecided and
undetermined in our Church, and that the Church of England, leaves it at
liberty unto us: though in his Appeal, he avouches the Total and final
Apostasy of the Saints to be the public, received and established doctrine of
our Church, delivered in authentical, plain, and Orthodoxe records, in such a
manner, that no man can be ignorant of it. Behold, here you have Mr. Mountague
against himself, you have one of his books against another: which of them is
it that you will believe? If you believe him in his Appeal, then you must make
him, (as he has made himself) a notable dissembler and Impostor: in
recording that to be undecided and undetermined by our Church, which he
himself con^th to be resolved, established, and determined by the common,
(...), and orthodoxe records of our Church, and that in such a palpable manner,
that no man can be ignorant of it. Or else you must make the Church of England
to have resolved this our Controversy since the Gagge was written, which
cannot be: For our Articles, our Homilies, and our Common prayer Book, were
composed long before the Gagge or Mr. Mountague himself were hatched, and I am
sure they are the same, as they were before the Gagge was penned. The Church of
England (though Mr. Mountague like a Lordly Pope has done it) has neither
altered the words or sense of any of them: wherefore if this our Controversy
were not recorded in them, or decided by them before, it is not determined or
resolved by them now, as Mr. Mountague records it. But how comes it to pass,
that so great a Scholar as Master Mountague should so much contradict
himself? It is a saying of E^ripedes in his Hyppolitus Coronatus, that all men
have two tongues, the one true, the other what you will. Mr. Mountague has the
latter of these two tongues; but the first he wants, or at least he wants the
use of it; and this makes him for contradict himself. It is storied by
Diodorus Biblioth: Histor: lib. 2. sect. 56.
Siculus, of certain Ilanders, who had such a double cloven and divided
tongue; partly from nature, partly from subtilitie and craft, that they could
counterfeite and resemble any voice: and that which was most admirable, they
could speak to two men of different things at once, the one part of their
tongue speaking distinctly of one thing, the other part of their tongue
speaking distinctly of another. I know not whether Mr. Mountague be of these
men's race or no, I am sure he has their qualities and conditions, if not from
nature, yet at least from subtilty and craft: for you see he can speak two
contrary things, to two several men at once. And indeed if you will know the
mystery of it, the difference of the men against whom he writes, does cause
this difference in his words. His Gagge you know was written against a Papist,
and therefore to gratify him in deeds, (though he curries him with inuectiue
and uncivil words) this Controversy must be vndeeided by the Church of
England; only the learnedest in the Church of England consent with Rome in
this: which is as much to say, that the Church of England is so far from
varying from the Church of Rome in this particular point, which she has
defended against her heretofore, that now she has almost yielded, if not
consented to her: if there be any difference between them, it is only a few
Dunces among us, (who are not to be reckoned of) that make the difference; but
all the learnedest, (which are in substance the whole Church of England,)
consent to Rome in this, and so we both agree. Now his Appeal is purposely
written against Protestants, whom he bedawbes with the reproachful names of
Puritans and Novellers, the better to conceal his dangerous projects, and to
countenance his Arminian and Popish doctrines, as if no Protestants but only
Nouellers and Puritans did ever contradict them: and therefore here that he
might secretly gratify both Papists and Arminians, he will make the Church of
England the Patro^esse of their doctrines, and to give her content withal (and
so to please both sides at once) he bears her in hand, that all he does is
but to vindicate her positive and received doctrines, from the deprauation and
corruption of Puritans and Nouellers, who are always thrusting out their own
private fancies and conceits, as the public and resolved doctrine of the
Church of England, and not to countenance either Popery or Arminianisme, which
he abhorres in words as much as any man, though he does reverence and adore
them in his heart. This is the whole scope and Mystery of Mr. Mountagues
juggling; he labors to please the Church of England in words, that so he may
covertly bring in Arminianisme and Popery into her in deeds, and this is the
cause why he does so contradict and vary from himself in this and other
particulars, that so this false and treacherous practice of his, might be the
better concealed. This therefore being Mr. Mountagues aim, his words being so
contradictory and repugnant to themselves, either believe him not at all, or
believe him in both, and so in neither: else if you believe him in the one, and
not in the other; whiles you take him for a true man in the one, you condemn
him for a liar in the other. Thirdly consider, that for any thing that yet
appears, Mr. Mountague is not thoroughly resolved in this point himself. For as
far as I can yet collect from any of his writings he is a Neuter, at least a
man unsettled in it, ready to change his tune, and to recant his words upon all
occasions. For he certifieth us in his Appeal, page 37. In my answer to the
Gagger, I suspended mine own judgment, and lay off aloof in a kind of
neutrality. Neither do I now say more then I am urged to do, by the express
words of our Articles, etc. So that as yet Mr. Mountague has not declared
himself so fully in this point, as to give you his own resolution in it. But
admit he has declared himself: yet he informs us in the same Appeal. page
107. That if any Puritan or Papist make it plain, that any thing by me
disclaimed for being the public established doctrine of our Church, is yet the
doctrine of the Church, and I am ready to recant. In which words, as Mr.
Mountague has used a pretty slight, to keep off men from writing or speaking
against him, lest they should come within the compass of these two hateful
names, Puritan and Papist: so he has discovered himself egregiously unto the
world, and that in these particulars. First, he has discovered himself to be
a mere Roman Catholic in heart, what ever he profess in words, in having
his belief and faith not grounded on the word of God but on the Church: He
believes only as the Church believes, and not otherwise; let come what will,
the Churches faith shall still be his: If our Church will own this doctrine
of his, then he will defend it, then he will teach it: if our Church will not
own it, then he will disclaim it and recant it; not because that this his
doctrine is in it self true or false; but merely because it is the doctrine
of the Church. Now for any man thus to tie and pin his faith upon the Church,
and upon that only, what is it but to be a professed Roman Catholic?
Secondly, by these his words he has discovered himself, to be but a mere
temporizer, a mere Proteus and Chamelion, a mere Neuter, and a man of all
religions as time and place shall serve, and so a man of no religion or grace
at all. Let the Church of England not own this doctrine of a total and final
fall from grace. Mr. Mountague will forthwith disclaim it, though he himself
has affirmed it to be the doctrine of the Scriptures, Fathers, and of the
learnedest in the Church of England. So Appeal, page 2^ 28. 36.
that his Tenets and religion shall be always altered and changed with the
times and seasons. And will you (my Brethren) receive this for a sound and
orthodox truth, and as the received doctrine of the Church of England, when as
Mr. Mountague himself, is as ready to disclaim it, as to own it? will you
suspend and pin your faith, your judgment and religion, upon Mr. Mountagues
sleeue, whose religion is but a mere Weather-cocke, that is altered and turned
about with every blast and change in Church or State? and who has yet no other
positive or resolved religion in him, but only this: to be of no religion, or
of any religion, as the times shall serve? O hazard, hazard not your souls
upon such uncertainties; but rather stick and cleave to such who will sooner
loose their lives and all they have, then be removed from this present truth,
which none of our Antagonists will dare to do in defense of these their
Errors. And now seeing I have made it manifest unto your souls and consciences
by undeniable proofs and testimonies against the forgeries of Mr. Mountague
and his Abbettors, that this assertion of the total and final perseverance of
the Saints, is not only the positive, established, and resolved doctrine of the
Scriptures, but likewise of the ancient Fathers, of all the Protestant Churches
beyond the Seas, and of this our Mother Church of England; o then if you tender
the glory, honor, and authority, both of the God and word of truth, which
shall judge you at the la^t; if you reverence and respect the authority of the
ancient Fathers, and of all the Churches of God; or if you tender the peace,
the good, and welsare of this your Mother Church, be willing to submit and
yield unto the truth. What if Mr. Monntague, what if men of greater worth and
place then he, oppugn and contradict this truth? what if carnal men of great
abilities and parts, (who are no more able to judge of this our present
assertion, then blind men are of colors, because it is a sensible and
experimental, a spiritual and heavenly truth, which is principally testified
and revealed to the souls of men, by the inward operation of Gods Spirit, and
is not subject unto carnal reason) do publish this as a sound and orthodox
truth. That the true regenerate Saints of God may Apostatize, and fall both
totally and finally from grace? are not the Scriptures and the word of God: are
not the Fath^rs, and the Churches of God; and those many godly, learned, and
famous writers which I have cited (who have far transcended them even in
parts and learning) of better credit and repute with you then they? If not;
then farewell all religion, let Popery and Arminianisme, let herisie and
Atheism rule and sway the world. But if the Scriptures, if the Fathers, if all
the Churches of God, and all those worthies which they have produced, have any
estimate or credit with you, then strive, contend, and stir no more in this
our present controversy, nor yet in any other that depends upon it, but
willingly subscribe to this most orthodox, sound, and comfortable assertion of
ours (which is the only proppe and pillar of a Christian soul, and the only
thing which makes men live and die with joy and comfort) which they have all
ratified and resolved with one unanimous and joint consent. That those who are
once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, by a true and lively faith,
can neither finally nor totally fall from grace.

AN ANSWER TO THE Arguments which may be objected.
Having thus (as I suppose) sufficiently and fully proved, the truth of this
position; ( That those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into
Christ, by a true and lively faith, can neither finally nor totally fall from
grace,) By unanswerable proofs and Arguments: there is nothing now remaining,
but that I should give a satisfactory answer, to all such Arguments and texts
of Scripture, as either are, or may be objected to the contrary: and then I
doubt not but that this truth will be so clear and evident in the hearts and
consciences of men, that they shall never dare for to resist it, or oppose it
more. Now that I may the better answer and clear those Arguments which shall be
objected, I would first of all entreat you to take special notice of two
things, which I shall propound unto you; which will take off all future
objections that are made against me, and give a final determination to the
point in question.

The first thing I would wish you to observe, is this: That totidem verbis say,
or else by way of necessary and undeniable consequence prove, That a true
regenerate man, and one that is truly ingrafted into Christ, can either finally
or totally fall from the state of grace, but that all the Arguments which are
objected from the Scriptures, are nothing else but bare inferences, and wrested
Collections, contrary to the true scope and meaning of the places. There is not
any of our Antagonists, that can show me any express, absolute, and positive
text of Scripture, which does either in express words, or by way of necessary,
sound, and inevitable consequence, confute this Doctrine of the total or
final perseverance of the Saints, and prove the contrary to be true: All that
they produce against us from the Scripture, is nothing else but their own
collections and conceits; which how far they vary from the true scope and
meaning of the places from which they are collected, you shall see hereafter by
particulars. Now on the contrary side, there are diverse and sundry texts of
Scripture, almost in every page throughout the Bible, which do in so many
words, either abso lute ly, fully, positiuely, and plainly set it down; or by
way of sound, necessary, and inevitable consequence infer, that those who are
once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, can never fall, never be
moved, never be cast down from the state of grace: never depart quite away
from God, nor yet be separated from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus:
the most and chiefest of which places I have quoted in my former Arguments, and
therefore will not stand to repeat them now. The case then standing thus, I
take this for a true, sure, and never failing rule, which admits of no
exception. That when there is any point of doctrine se t down in Scripture, in
plain, positive, and express terms, (especially if it be thus set down in
diverse several places, which is our case) that there no inference, or bare
collection from any other text of Scripture, contrary to that doctrine, and
those express places of Scripture which doc warrant it, ought not to be
admitted or received: for else we should prefer the inferences and vain
conceits of men (which are full of error and uncertainty,) before the
positive and sure word of God. Wherefore seeing that all which is objected
against us from the Scriptures, is not the Scripture it self, but bare
conceits, inferences, and collections from the Scriptures, far dissonant
from the true sense and meaning of those Scriptures from which they are
collected: it is not to be valued or accounted of, but to be slighted and
rejected as humane fancies and conceits, and as opposite and contrary to the
express, plain, positive, and absolute word of God, which does in so many
words, and in express terms lay down this doctrine which I here maintain,
I shall reduce this first observation to this Argument. That doctrine and
Argument, which is but a bare inference and collection from the Scriptures, and
is quite opposite and contrary to that doctrine which is plainly, positiuely
fully, and in express terms delivered and recorded in the Scriptures, is not
to be regarded or embraced, but to be rejected, and contemned as false and
counterfeit: But the doctrine of the final or total Apostacy of the Saints,
and the Arguments which are produced for to prove it, are but bare inferences
and collections from the Scriptures, and they are quite opposite and contrary
to the doctrine, of the final and total Perseverance of the Saints, which is
plainly, positiuely, fully, and in express terms delivered and recorded in
the Scriptures. Therefore they are not to be regarded or embraced, but to be
rejected and contemned as falfe and counterfeit. This is the first thing which
you must observe.

The second thing which I would have you to observe, is this. That the
Scripture says expressly, that all those that do Apostatize and fall from
grace, were never truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, but only in
outward show and appearance. This is positiuely and literally set down by the
Apostle, in the 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but
they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
Here the Apostle expressly affirms: That such as are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, can never Apostatize nor fall from grace: And that all
such as do fall away from that outward show of grace the which they made, do
therefore fall away, because they had never any truth and soundness of grace,
or any true regeneration in them. This is seconded by the same Apostle in the 2
John 9. Whosoever transgresses and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, has
not God. (He was never truly regenerated in the sight of God, though he were in
the eyes of men:) but he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has the
Eather and the Son: he only has them in truth and in deed. This is also
ratified by Christ himself, John 8. 31. If you continue in my word, then are
you my Disciples indeed: intimating, that such as did not continue in his Word,
were never his disciples indeed, but only in outward show. So Luke 8. 18.
Whosoever has, to him shall be given; but whosoever has not, from him shall
be taken, (not that which he had in truth) but that which he seemed to have.
None are there that do ever loose the state of grace, but such only as seem
to have it, but have it not in truth. All the plants which are rooted out of
the Church of God, are such as God the Father never planted, Math. 15. 13.
Those that seem to fall out of the hands of Christ and perish, are only such
as were not in the number of his sheep, John 10. 28. and those of Israel that
fall from grace and perish, they are only such as were not Israel: they had
only that circumcision which is outward, consisting merely in the flesh and in
the letter: they had never the inward circumcision of the heart and of the
spirit, whose praise is not of man, but of God, Romans 2. 28, 29. and cap. 9. 6,
7. From which I shall frame these two Arguments: the one to prove my present
assertion, the other to defeat all those subsequent arguments which shall or
can be urged against it. The first Argument is only this. If all those that
fall away from grace, were only such as were never truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, then such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, doc never fall from grace. But all those that fall away from
grace, are only such as were never truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ:
(yea, and the reason why they fall from grace, is only because they were never
truly ingrafted into Christ, as appears by the premises) Therefore those that
are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, do never fall from
grace, what can be replied to this Argument, transcends the sphere and
compass of my thoughts. The second Argument, which will utterly defeat and
falsify, all the Arguments, and the very ground of all those objections which
are, or can be made against me, is this. If all such as fall away from grace,
are only such as never had any true and saving grace, and such as were never
truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ: then all the Scriptures and
examples which onr Antagonists produce against us, make nothing to the purpose.
(For then they must either be intended only of such men which are regenerated,
and ingrafted into Christ in outward show, but not in truth, (which are not
within the verge and compass of our question,) and not of such as were in
truth regenerated and inserted into Christ. Or else if they are intended of
true regenerate men they will not reach so far as to prove, that ever these
did either finally or totally fall from grace, notwithstanding all their
wrestings and collections, because the express words of the Scripture say the
contrary: and so they come not home unto the point in question.) But all such
as fall away from grace, are only such as never had any true and saving grace,
and such as were never truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ. Therefore
all those Scriptures and examples which our Antagonists produce against us,
make nothing to the purpose.

These, two general assertions which are able for to satisfy and clear all
future objections, being thus praemised: I come now to give a particular
answer, to all those particular arguments which may be objected against me,
either from Scripture, or from reason.

The first argument which may be objected against this Object.
conclusion, is drawn from Ezech: 18: 24: 26. and Ezech: 33: 12, 13, 18. where
the words are these. If the righteous turns away from this righteousness,
and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned: in his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin
that he has sinned in them shall he dye. When I say to the righteous, that he
shall surely live: if he trust to his own righteousness and commit iniquity,
all his righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his iniquity that he
has committed, he shall dye for it. From which texts of Scripture, this
argument is framed. Righteous men, may turn away from their righteousness and
commit iniquity, and do ac^cording to all the abominations that the wicked
do, and they may dye in their sins, as appears by this text. Therefore they
may fall finally or totally from grace. I answer, that the Antecedent is
false, and is not warranted by Answ.
the place that is alleged. For first of all, the righteous man which the
Prophet speaks of in these places, is not such a one as is justified by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, being ingrasted into him by faith, but such a
one which is justified, merely by his own righteousness, as your Popish
merit mongers seek to be: which is evident by the express words of the text.
For these words: If he trust to his own righteousness: if he turn away from
his righteousness, all his righteousness, that he has done shall not be
remembered: the righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day
of his transgression, neither shall he be able to live for his righteousness
in the day that he sins: prove that the Prophet speaks only of Legal and
not of Evangelical righteousness, and his words are in effect no more but
this. He that seeks to be justified by his own righteousness, or by the
works of the law, if he commit but one sin in all his life, this does
disanull his legal justification, and makes him liable to eternal death. For
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. Iam. 2. 10. and cursed is he that continues not in all the words of
this Law to do them. Deuteronomy. 27, 26. So that all the argument which this text
affords you is but this. He that seeks to be justified by the Law and by his
own righteousness, if he commits but one sin does loose his justification,
and make himself liable to damnation. Therefore regenerate men, who are
justified only by faith in Christ, may fall from the state of grace: how well
this argument follows, and how well it makes for your purpose, let all men
judge. Now for farther proof that this righteous man, and this righteousness
here mentioned is only meant of such a man that is legally righteous, and of
legal righteousness, I shall manifest it to be so by these three reasons.
The first is taken from Ezech: 18: 4: 20. where the words are, the soul that
sins it shall dye: this is true only in respect of the strictness of the
Law, but not in respect of the clemency of the Gospel: for then none should
be saved: therefore the righteousness here intended must only be a legal
and not an evangelical righteousness: for in the Gospel, and in respect of
evangelical righteousness, the soul that sins may not dye. The second
reason is taken from: Ezech: 18. ver: 5. to 9. ver. 14: to 18. wherethe words
are these. If a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right: and has
not eaten upon the mountains etc. has walked in my statutes and kept my
judgments, to deal truly: he is just, he shall surely live says the Lord
God: which words cannot be intended of the righteousness of faith which is
wrought by Christ alone, but only of the righteousness of works, which is
wrought by men themselves: wherefore this righteousness here mentioned is
only a legal, and not an evangelical righteousness. Thirdly, the Scriptures
say expressly, that a true regenerate man, who is justified by faith in Christ;
can never sin unto death, because he is borne of God, and his seed remains
in him: 1 John 3: 9. that he keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him
not: 1 John 5: 18. that he shall be had in everlasting remembrance: Psa:
112^6. and that he shall never perish nor yet dye the death: John 10: 28. and
cap: 11: 25, 26. And therefore this righteous man here mentioned which may
sin unto death, which may be quite forgotten and not remembered, and which
may dye and perish in his sins, must needs be one that is legally
righteous, or righteous only in the eyes of men, and not such a one as is
regenerated, and justified by Jesus Christ: and so this place of Scripture
makes nothing for your purpose. Secondly, admit that this place were meant of a
true regenerate man and such a one as is justified by faith, yet it proves not
any thing at all against me, for two reasons. First, because the whole scope
and meaning of the place is not to prove the Apostacy of the Saints, but only
for to clear Gods justice, and that in these two particulars. First, that he
will never punish any man for the sinens of other men, of which they are not
guilty; that he will never punish a righteous son, for the sins of a wicked
father: the soul that sins it shall dye, and no other: the son shall not
bear the iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity
of the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him: Ezech: 18: 4: 20. This is the
maine scope of the whole chapter, to clear Gods justice in this particular,
and to answer that scandalous proverb of the Jews, The fathers have eaten
sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set an edge: this was the only cause
of penning this chapter: as you may read, ver: 2, 3, 19. The second scope and
end of this whole chapter, is to free God from ^niustice and partiality in his
dealing: which has reference to two sorts of men. First, to the wicked.
Secondly, to the righteous. His justice, and partiality toward the wicked is
manifested in this chapter, in these two particulars. First, that he does
punish them but when there is a cause for it: that he does never punish them
but when they sin. Secondly, that he will spare them when they do repent:
and therefore he does deal impartially and justly with them, he wrongs them
not at all. His justice and impartial dealing with the righteous, consists in
these two things. First, that he does not respect them and prefer them
before wicked men without a cause: and that the only reason why he does is
is, because they do obey his will. Secondly, that if they fall away from him,
and give themselves over unto sin, that then he will punish them as well as
wicked men. This is the only scope and meaning of the words, and they are in
substance no more but this: he that repents and forsakes his sins shall be
saved, but he that forsakes me, and will live and dye in his sins shall be
damned. If therefore the only aim and end, the only scope and drift of these
words which you object, are only to clear Gods justice in these two
particulars, without any intent or purpose at all, to declare unto us, that a
true regenerate member of Jesus Christ, might fall away from the state of
grace: the place makes nothing at all against me; unless you will pervert the
true scope, sense and meaning of it, and wrest and rack it to your purpose,
against the true intent and meaning; which will be a great disparagement, not
only to your selves, but to your doctrine to, which needs such foreign and
strained constructions and collections to support it. The Scripture, as you
know has but one genuine, true and proper sense and in this only it must be
taken, when there is any special doctrine to be grounded on it, or proved by
it. If it be not taken in this sense, it is but wrested: and the argument and
sense so wrested from it, is not to be regarded; because it is not the
Scripture, but the racked construction and wresting of the Scripture that is
objected. Your argument therefore from this Scripture, being not within the
proper scope, sense, and meaning of the Scripture, cannot be warranted by the
Scripture: it is but your own collection, and so it is not to be regarded,
though the place were meant of the righteousness of faith, and of true
regenerate men. Secondly, if I admit that this place is meant of the
righteousness of faith, and of true regenerate men, yet it makes not against
me; because the words of it are conditional, and not absolute and positive.
The Prophet says not, that righteous men do commit iniquity, and turn from
their righteousness, and do according to all the abominations that the wicked
man does, and dye in their sins. But, if they commit iniquity, if they turn
from their righteousness, and do according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, that then they shall dye in their sins. So that your
argument from this place can be no more then this. If a righteous man fall
from grace, then he shall perish: therefore a righteous man may fall from
grace; which is a ridiculous consequent. If you object, that a conditional
speech though Object.
it gives no being, yet it gives a possibility to the thing to which it is
applied, and therefore this place, though it proves not, that righteous men do
fall, yet it necessarily proves, that they may fall from grace. I answer, that
there are two Answ.
sorts of conditional speeches or suppositions. The first, of things
imposible, which neither give an essence nor a possibility to the thing
supposed. For example, If God should cease to be, then there should be no
eternal life. If all the stones in England were gold, then we should be rich.
Neither of these two speeches or suppositions give an essence or a possibility
to the thing supposed, because the thing supposed is impossible. Secondly,
there are conditional speeches and suppositions which are possible: if such a
man study hard, he may be Archbishop of Canterbury. If such a man be
Archbishop of Canterbury, he shall take place of all other Bishops of
England. If such a man get to be Lord Keeper, he shall be a man of great
employment. These suppositions and conditional speeches: they give not a
reality, nor yet a necessary possibility to the thing supposed. Now this place
of Ezechiel, it is an impossible condition, and so gives not a being, nor a
possibility to the thing supposed. For first: those that are regenerated, they
are borne of God, and 1 John 3. 9.
their seed remains in them: therefore they cannot sin. Secondly, they are
good trees: therefore they cannot bring forth bad Math. 7. 18.
fruit. Thirdly, they are the elect of God: and therefore they Math. 24. 24.
cannot possible be seduced. Fourthly, the spirit of God is put into Mark. 13.
22.
them which does cause them to walk in his statutes, and to keep Gal. 5. 17.
his judgments and do them: so that they cannot do the things they Psa. 125.
1.
would. Fifthly, they do trust in God: therefore they cannot be removed, but
shall stand fast for ever. Wherefore this of Ezechiel must needs be an
impossible condition: and therefore cannot imply an actual or a potentiall
fall from the state of grace. If you object: that if this be an impossible
condition, Object.
then this commination of God in this place should be to no purpose. I answer.
First, that the end of this and such like comminations, is only to preserve
and keep the Saints of Answ.
God from security and presumption, and to stir them up to watchfulness, and
perseverance: the end of these threats, is to help the Saints of God in their
perseverance, and not to prove that they may not persevere. Now God obtaines
this end of his by these his comminations, and therefore they are not vain and
idle, though those to whom they are spoken cannot but persevere; of this I
shall say more hereafter. Secondly, I answer: that God does use those words and
suppositions which you allege, not as bare comminations, but as declarations
of his law and justice. So that the effect and substance of these words is
only this. Suppose a righteous man should cast of my yoke, and wholly
inthrall himself to the bondage of sin and Satan, I will be so just and
impartial in my dealing toward him, that he shall surely dye for it. Now
this being principally a declaration of Gods law, and justice, and not a
commination only, though the righteous never fall from grace, yet God has his
end, because his law and justice is declared by this place. Lastly, this
commination is made generally to all, as well to the elect of God as to any
others: now you your selves do grant, that those whom God himself has
elected to salvation ex praeuisa fide can never fall from grace: and therefore
this commination being made to them as well as to any others, can never imply a
fall from grace, for then it should imply, that the elect of God should fall
from grace as well as others, which is impossible by your own confessions. And
thus much in answer to this first objection. Other answers there are which are
given to this place. As first, that this righteous man, and righteousness here
mentioned, is only meant of hypocrites, who have only an outward show of
righteousness, and seem to be righteous in the sight of men: and not of men
that are truly righteous, nor of true righteousness: nor of such ai were
habitually righteous, but only such as were actually righteous, having only
the acts of righteousness but not the habit. Others: answer, that those which
are here meant, are such as are truly righteous: but yet the departing from
righteousness here mentioned, is only intended of the acts, but not of the
habits of righteousness and grace: and that by death in this place, is only
meant a temporal death, but not an eternal: which temporal death being the
punishment of sin, may be common to the righteous and the wicked, and is
inflicted upon righteous men often times, as a punishment for some sin of
theirs, as we may see in the examples of Josiah and Hezechiah: 2 Chronicles: 35: 22.
and Isay 38: 1. but never the eternal death. But these answers are less
probable, and come not so home as the others do. Wherefore I will pass them
over, and proceed to the second argument.

The second argument that may be made against me, is taken Paul: 1 Cor: 9: 27.
I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: least that by any means
when I have preached unto others, I my self should be a cast away. From whence
this argument is framed. Paul who was a true regenerate man might become a
reprobate or cast away. Therefore, such as are truly regenerated may fall from
grace. For answer to Answ.
this argument, I shall first of all deny the Anticedent. For if you take a
reprobate, or castaway in this place, as opposite to one that is elected, (as
you do) then the proposition is false, and is not warranted by the text. For
he that is elected to salvation can never become a reprobate in this sense:
because the foundation of the Lord abides sure, and his purpose according to
election shall stand, fast for ever. 2 Timothy: 2: 19. and Romans 9. 11. Now that
Paul did not fear to become a reprobate in this sense, it is evident by these
ensuing reasons. First, because that Paul was always sure and certain of his
salvation. ( Romans 8. 35. to the end.
) He was always fully persuaded, that neither tribulation, distress,
persecution, famine, nakedness, peril nor sword: that neither death nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, should be able to separate
him from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus his Lord. He was always
sure, ( Romans 14. 8.
) that whether he should live or dye, he should live and dye unto the Lord:
and ( 2 Cor. 5. 1, 8.
) that when ever his earthly house of this tabernakle were dissolved, he
should have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
highest heavens: he was confident of his salvation; and this his confidence,
made him ( Phil. 1. 21, 23
) willing to be dissolved, that so he might be present with the Lord. He (
2 Timothy 1. 12.
) knew whom he had believed, and that he would surely keep that which he
had committed to him against that day. Whence he does boldly avouch this of
himself: ( 2 Timothy 4. 18.
) The Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me to
his beauenly kingdom. And therefore a little before his death, he triumphs
over hell and death, in this comfortable, confident and triumphant speech: ( 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
) I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which God the righous
judge shall give me at that day. Paul therefore could never fear, that ever
he should become, such a reprobate and castaway as you intend, because he
was so sure, and so absolutely confidenr of his salvation. Secondly, Paul was
sure that he could never fall away from the state of grace, and become a
reprobate in your sense, because he knew that he was praedestinated and
elected to eternal life; and therefore could not but be justified, sanctified
and glorified for ever with God in heaven. Paul knew very well that none of the
elect of God could perish; and he also knew that himself was elected to
salvation: as we may see by Acts 9: 15. Rom: 1: 1. cap. 8, 30, 33, 35. cap. 9.
11. cap. 11. 7. 2 Cor. 1 21. cap. 5. 1. to 10. Gal. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14, 16. 2 Timothy 1. 2 12. and Tit. 1. 1. Therefore he could never
fear to become such a reprobate, as should be damned and cast for ever into
hell; or such a reprobate as you inted: and so the Antecedent is untrue in the
sense that you propound it. If then you will take a reprobate and a castaway,
for such a one as is blame worthy, such a one as deserves reproose, (which is
the genuine and proper sense of the word in this place,) then it makes nothing
for your purpose. For I grant that a regenerate man may deserve reproof and
blame, for some miscariages, or sins which he does commit, but yet if follows
not thereupon, that therefore he may fall from grace. Paul he did endeavor to
live according to his doctrine, least his auditors should have just cause for
to reprove him: if he had done any thing in his practice which might cross
this doctrine, for which he should deserve reproof; yet it follows not that
therefore he might fall away from the state of grace. Wherefore, if you take a
reprobate or castaway in the strictersense, for one that is bound over to
eternal condemnation: then your Anticedent is false: if in a more mild and
larger sense, for one that deserves reproof, then the Anticedent is true, but
the argument is false and follows not. Secondly, admit that Paul in this
place, does use this word reprobate or castaway, in the stricter sense, for
one that is utterly forsaken of God, and bound over to eternal condemnation:
then the argument follows not. For Paul's meaning then is no more but this. As
God has ordained that his Saints should persevere, so he has ordained the
means by which they should persevere; as fasting, prayer, mortification and
the like. Now I use these means of perseverance, I beat down my body, and
bring it into subjection, as God has appointed me to do, that so I may
persevere. I cannot persevere in grace but by these means, and these means I
use, that so I may persevere. So that, take the words and sense of Paul in this
place as favorable as you can for your selves, yet they make not any thing for
your purpose: the most that you can truly collect from them, is but this gaping
and disioynted argument. The Saints of God cannot persevere in grace but by
using the means. Or, The Saints of God do use the means to persevere in
grace. Therefore they may fall from grace. Paul could not be saved, Paul could
not persevere, but by using the means to do it. Therefore Paul might become a
reprobate, and fall quite away from grace. How absurd, ridiculous and false
this argument is, there is no man of understanding but may judge. For it makes
the use of the means to deprive men of the end, and to make the end
uncertain: where as the end is never certain neither can it be obtained but
by using the means. Answ.
But you will say, that the Saints of God do not always use the means to
persevere in grace: and therefore they may fall from grace. I answer, that the
Antecedent is false, and Object.
quite repugnant to this text which you allege: for Paul tells us in this
place, that he did beat down his body, and bring it into subjection; that so
he might not fall from grace: and you argue and reason thus from this example.
Paul being a regenerate man did use the means to persevere in grace: therefore
regenerate men do not always use the means to persevere in grace: as sound
an argument as the former was. Paul did use the means to persevere in grace:
therefore Paul might fall from grace. Well then, I will deal with you, but as
you deal with us. You from this particular example of Paul, would
praeposterously collect a general untruth: that Paul might fall away from
grace, and therefore other regenerate men might do so to: give me leave
therefore from this particular example of Paul, to collect this general truth.
Paul did always use the means to persevere in grace: therefore all other
regenerate men do use them to, as well as he; and so your last objection is
but false. Thus you see that this place of Paul makes nothing at all against
me. Give me leave now but to retort it against you who do object it, and
then you shall see how much it makes for me. Those who always use the means
to persevere in grace, lest by any means they should prove reprobates, at the
last, can never fall from grace. But all such as are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ, they always use the means to persevere in grace, lest
by any means they should prove reprobates at the last (as it is evident by
this example of Paul) Therefore they can never fall from grace. Here you are
put to this Dilemma: either you must yield my Argument to be sound and good,
which ouer-turnes your false assertion: or else you must give such an answer to
it, as will utterly defeat all the Arguments which you your selves can object
against me from this place. So that now I hope you will grant me one of these
two things: that either this place makes not against me at all: or else that it
makes more (or at least as much) for me, as it does for your selves: and so it
is impertinent to your purpose.

The third Argument that may be objected, is collected Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. c. 10.
26. to 30. and 2. Pet. 2: 21. and it is no more but this in substance. Those
that have been once enlightened: those that have received the knowledge of the
truth: those that have escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ: those that have tasted of the heavenly
gift, of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come: and
those that have been made partakers of the holy Ghost, may fall away from
grace, and never be removed again: (as appears by the fore-quoted places.)
Therefore such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, may
finally and totally fall from grace. To this I shall give a double Answ.
answer. First, I shall deny the Argument, which follows not. For those which
you mention in the Antecedent, are only Hypocrites, and such as never had any
truth of grace: and so your argument is no more in substance but this.
Hypocrites and such as have no truth of Grace, may fall from the outward shows
of grace: therefore true regenerate men, and true believers may fall from the
truth of grace. Now that these places of Scripture here alleged, and so
consequently your Antecedent which is grounded on them, are meant only of
hypocrites, and such as never had any truth of grace within them; I prove it by
these ensuing reasons. First, because there is nothing mentioned or recorded in
any of these three places which are objected, but that which is common to
hypocrites and carnal men, as well as to the regenerate Saints of God. For
first hypocrites and carnal men, which never had any truth of grace, may be
so far enlightened as to know the truth of God, and the mysteries of
salvation: Yea, they may yield an assent unto them and believe them to be true:
yea, they may do many things, and go very far in the outward practice of
Gods word, and yet be hypocrites and carnal men still: as we may see by these
several Scriptures and examples. Numb. 23. 10. Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29. 2 Chronicles. 25.
2. Psalm. 50. 16, 17. Math. 7. 21. 22. cap. 13. 5, 6, 7. 20, 21, 22. Luke 11.
44. 47. Mark 6. 20. Acts 19. 15. cap. 24. 25, 26. Prou. 12. 13. Secondly,
Hypocrites and carnal men, may escape the pollutions of the world; that is,
they may avoid all gross, notorious, and open sins, of which the world
takes notice; as drunkenness whordome, covetousness, pride, oppression,
deceit, theft, murder, and the like: they may have a very fair outside, and
yet their hearts and souls may be polluted, and not cleansed from their
filthiness, Luke 11. 44. Math. 23. 25. 27. and 2 Pet. 2. 22. Thirdly,
Hypocrites and carnal men, they may be made partakers of the holy Ghost: that
is, of the ordinary and 1 Cor. 12. 1. to 11. (...)
common gifts and graces of the holy Ghost: as knowledge, illumination, the
gift of tongues, preaching, and prophecy: the Math. 7. 22. 23.
gift of healing, and of working miracles: the gifts of temperance, sobriety,
justice, meekness, affability, fortitude, and such like moral and common
virtues: and yet they may not be regenerated by the peculiar, by the saving and
sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit: as appears by Math. 7. 21, 22. 1 Cor. 12.
4. to 12. and cap. 13. 1, 2, 3. Fourthly, hypocrites, and carnal men, they may
taste of the good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come: that is,
they may hear the word of God, and receive it with great joy, as the second
and third ground did, Math. 13. 20. Mark 6. 20. and as John Baptists auditors
did, John 5. 35. Yea, they may relish the word of God, and taste a sweetness
and pleasantness in it; they may be much affected with it for a time, but yet
in a carnal manner, out of self-love, and by-respects, or out of fear, in
times of sickness, or outward judgments: they may be much affected with the
promises of grace and mercy: though the Doctrine of mortification and
self-denial may seem harsh and bitter to them. They may taste of the powers
of the world to come: that is, they may understand the Doctrine of the
Resurrection, and of eternal life: they may be much affected with the joys
of heaven, and with the happiness of the Saints, when they shall hear them
amplified and expressed to the full. We know by common experience, that many
Hypocrites and wicked men, when they do but hear the joys and excellencies
of heaven discoursed of, have oft-times by sudden fits and flashes, a kind of
inward taste, sense and feeling of them, and their very hearts and souls are
even ravished and delighted with them; not from any inward principle of grace,
or any sure evidence of heaven which they have within them; but out of a secret
admiration of the things themselves; or out of a false and groundless opinion
and conceit that these joys and excellencies belong to them, when as it is
nothing so, Wherefore, there being nothing in these places, but that which is
common to hypocrites and carnal men, we ought with the most and best
expositors upon these places, to appropriate these texts and places only to
hypocrites and carnal men, which may fall away from their outward shows of
grace, and not unto the true regenaerate Saints of God, who cannot fall from
grace, nor yet depart from God, or sin unto death, Ier. 32. 40. and 1 John 3.
9. cap. 5. 16, 17, 18. But you will object, that those of whom Saint Peter
writes, were Object.
bought with the blood of Christ: for they denied the Lord that bought them, 2
Pet. 2. 1. and those of whom the Apostle writes, Hebr. 10. 29. were such as
were sanctified with the blood of the Covenant: therefore they were men truly
regenerated, and not only in outward show: I answer, that they were Answ.
such as were purchased with Christ's blood sufficiently, or in common
reputation, but not effectually, and truly: they were never washed and cleansed
with his blood: for Peter applies this to Heretics, and false teachers which
privily should bring in damnable beresies, even to the denying of the Lord that
bought them. Now such Heretics and false teachers, they were never truly
purchased, or sanctified with the blood of Christ: for if ever they had been
of the true sold and sheep of Christ, if ever they had been truly ingrafted
into him, they would no doubt have continued with them: but therefore they went
out from him, that it might appear, that they were never truly regenerated and
ingrafted into him, 1 John 2. 19. And whereas it is said that they were
sanctified with the blood of the Covenant. The meaning is no more but this,
that they were Sacramentally sanctified; they were outwardly washed in their
Baptism from the filth of their sins, but yet their hearts and natures were
not inwardly purified, washed, and regenerated, by the blood of Jesus Christ,
and the inward operation of Gods Spirit. This is evident by the 2 Pet. 2. 22.
where they are styled, washen swine, who had their outside only washed, but
their swinish and filthy nature still remained in them, and therefore they
return again to their wallowing in the mire, and puddle of their sins.
Wherefore all these places must be understood only of Hypocrites and carnal
moral men, whose hearts and natures were never changed and renewed, and not of
the true regenerate Saints of God who are new men, and new creatures. Secondly,
all these places must needs be understood of Hypocrites, and such as never had
any truth of grace, because the most and best expositers, do appropriate and
apply them only to such, as commit the sin against the holy Ghost, which
shall never be forgiven. Now this is certain, that all such as are truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, can never commit the sin against the
holy Ghost. For St. John tells us: 1 John 3. 9. and cap. 5. 16, 17, 18. That
he that is borne of God sins not unto death, because his seed remains in
him: neither can he sin thus, because he is borne of God: he cannot commit
the sin unto death: which most interpret to be the sin against the holy
Ghost: wherefore these places cannot be meant of such as are truly regenerated
and borne of God, who cannot commit the sin against the holy Ghost: Again,
Christ himself assures us, that none of his sheep shall ever perish: John 10.
28. and David certifieth us, that though the righteous man fall, yet he shall
never be utterly cast down: for the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand: Psalm.
37. 24. therefore these places cannot be understood of any of the Sheep of
Christ, or of any that are truly righteous, but only of Hypocrites, and such as
had no truth of Grace. Thirdly, it is evident that these places must needs be
intended only of hypocrites and carnal men, and not of true regenerate men, by
reason of the antithesis, opposition and difference, that the Apostle makes
between those regenerate Saints of God to whom he writes, and those which were
^lightned and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and had tasted of the good
word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. For when the Apostle had
spoken of those Heb. 6. 4. to the 9. verse: in the 9. and with verses: he
subjoynes these words; But we are persuaded better things of you, and things
that accompany salvation, though we thus speak: For God is not unrighteous,
to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward his
name, and Heb. 10. he does the like (...) So that this difference which the
Apostle himself makes, between the Saints to whom he writes, and those of
whom these places which you object make mention, proves that those places which
you allege, are only meant of hypocrites, and such as were never truly
regenerated, and so they come not to the purpose. Lastly, the very words of
these places and Scriptures prove as much. For first, those who are here
mentioned, are only such as did but taste of the good word of God, and of the
heavenly gift, and of the powers of the world to come. Which phrase of tasting,
implying but a mere fit, flash, and transitory act and passion, which is
proper only to hypocrites and carnal men, and cannot be fitly and properly
applied to the Saints of God, and such as are truly regenerated: who do not
only taste of the good word of God, and of the heavenly gift, but do likewise
really and fully enjoy them and possess them, not only in their tongues and
pallates, but in their inward parts and bowels, in their hearts and souls,
and in their whole man. Christ Jesus, the holy Ghost, with all the sanctifying
and saving graces of the Spirit, together with the word of God, do dwell
richly and plentifully in them, their souls are even filled, and glutted with
them: Psalm. 63. 5. Acts 6. 8. cap. 7. 55. John 14. 16, 17, 20. cap. 15. 11.
Romans 15. 13. Ephesians. 3. 17. 19. and Col. 3. 16. and therefore these places
cannot be meant of them. Secondly, that Proverb which Peter does use of these:
2 Pet. 2. 22. It is happened to them according to the true proverb: The dog
is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire: proves, that those of whom these Scriptures speak, what
ever outward show they made for a time, were never truly regenerated: their
natures were never changed by grace: they were dogs, and swine still: their
natures and their hearts were filthy and corrupt, though their outsides were
washed for a time. So that all these places here objected against me, must
needs be intended of carnal and wicked men, and not of the true regenerate
Saints of God; and so your Argument from these places follows not: Secondly,
admit that all these places were meant of true regenerate men: yet I answer,
that your Antecedent is false. For all these places are conditional. They say
not, that the Saints of God do fall away, or that they may fall away: but
only, if they fall away: it is impossible for them to be renewed by repentance,
or to be reconciled unto him again. So that all the Argument which you can
collect from them is this. If the true regenerate Saints of God fall from
grace, then they shall for ever perish, and not be able to repent: therefore
they may fall finally from grace; which is a false, absurd, and incongruous
consequent. Lastly, if this place makes for a final fall from grace, yet it
makes altogether against a total, without a final fall from grace: so that it
makes one way for me, though not another, it makes for one of my conclusions,
if not for both of them. And thus much in answer to this third Argument.

The fourth Argument that may be objected against me, Math. 12. 43, 44, 45.
and Luke 11. 24, 25. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through ^rie places seeking rest, and finds none. Then he says, I will
return into my house from whence I came out. And when he is come he finds
it empty, swept and garnished: then goes he and takes with himself seven
other spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and
the last estate of that man is worse then the first. From whence this argument
may be framed. The devil may return again with seven other spirits more
wicked then himself, and dwell in the hearts of those out of whom he was
formerly expelled, and so make their latter end to be worse then their
beginning was. Therefore such as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into
Christ, may afterward fall from grace. I answer, that the argument follows
not, because Answ.
this parable of Christ (and so by consequence your Antecedent) is meant only
of hypocrites, and not of true regenerated and sanctified men. So that your
Argument in substance is but this. Hypocrites may fall from grace, and therefore
true regenerate men may do so to: which argument is not only false, but
likewise very ridiculous and absurd. Now that this parable of Christ, is meant
only of hypocrites, it is evident by these reasons. First, because that this
parable has reference, to that miracle which Christ did, in casting out of the
devil out of the blind and dumme man, which was possessed with him; which
gave the occasion of this parable. Now Christ no doubt did cast out devils out
of many, that were possessed with them, whom he did never sanctify withal,
as he cured many men's bodies, whose souls he did not heal: and it is likely
that Christ did not heal the soul of him out of whom he did cast this
devil: for all that the text relates of him is this, that Christ healed him,
insomuch that he both spoke and saw: there is no mention of any cure wrought
upon his soul: and therefore you cannot apply this parable, to those whose
souls are cured, to such out of whose hearts the works of the devil are
destroyed: but only to such whose bodies are dispossessed, of the actual
residencie and habitation of the devil: So that all which you can properly
collect from hence is this: that the devil may return again and actually
possess such men, out of whom he had been actually, not spiritually cast out
before. Secondly, the very end of this Parable proves as much: For Christ
applies this parable merely to the Jews, Math. 12. 45. Even so shall it be
to this wicked generation: Christ therefore applying this to a wicked
generation only, you cannot apply it to the faithful and holy generation of
the Saints of God. Thirdly, it cannot be intended of any other but hypocrites
and wicked men, because the very words themselves imply as much. For first, the
words are not, when the devil is cast out, but when the unclean spirit is
gone out of a man: which word gone out: implies a voluntary action in the
devil. Now the devil never goes out of any, but out of such as are wicked
men, and taken captive by him at his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. He is always cast
out by force out of the Saints; because when once he is excluded by them, he
can hardly get any passage into their hearts again. Hence it is said of
Christ, that he was manifested to destroy out of his Saints, the works of the
devil, 1 John 3. 8. to destroy out of us the body of sin, Romans 6. 6. The
devil is always cast out by force out of the Saints; Romans 12. 7. 8. 9. 2 Cor.
10. 4, 5. and that with much ado, with much struggling and contention: Ephesians.
6. 11, 12. after long prayer and fasting, Math. 17. 20. 22. therefore these out
of whom the devil goes out, and is not cast out, must needs be such as are
wicked men, and taken captive of him at his will. Secondly, the devil when he
returns again, finds these men empty, swept, and garnished, fit to
entertain so unclean a guest: Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost, were not
dwelling and residing there, for then the house had not been empty, and there
had been no room so much as for one unclean spirit to inhabit, much less
for seven more. Now Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost, they always dwell in the
hearts and souls of all regenerate men: Ephesians. 3. 17. John 14. 16, 17. Math.
28. 20. they leave no room for inmates, especially for Satan and unclean
spirits: therefore these men here were not regenerated and truly sanctified.
Thirdly, the unclean spirit and his companions, they enter in and dwell in
these men here: but this they never do in the regenerate Saints of God: For
God has hedged them about, so that the devil cannot come near to touch them,
much less to dwell within them, without Gods special permission: Job 1. 10.
Math. 8. 31, 32. They are armed with the whole armor of God, so that the
devil cannot (...) though he assalt them; Ephesians. 6. 10 they keep themselves,
and that wicked one touches them not, 1 John 5. 18. Therefore this place
cannot be understood of true regenerate men. Lastly, the end of all regenerate
men, is far better then their beginning: their latter fruits are more and
better then their first, Psalm. 92. 13, 14 Numbers 23. 10. Romans 6. 22. 1 Pet. 1.
9. Reu. 2. 19. and Psalm. 37. 37. But the end of those whom Christ speaks of
here, is like to theirs in the 2 Pet. 2. 21^ it is (...) their beginning:
therefore this Scripture cannot be intended of godly and regenerate
Christians, but of hypocrites and wicked men, and so it makes not any thing for
your purpose. If you object, that they were swept and garnished: therefore Answ.
they were sanctified. I answer, that the text says that they Object.
were empris, swept, and garnished: Wherefore this place cannot be intended,
that they were garnished, adorned, and purified with the graces of Gods Spirit;
for then they had not been empty: then they had not been fit to entertain
such unclean and filthy spirits, which cannot dwell, but in polluted hearts
and souls. So that the meaning of these words is this: that they were empty
and void of Christ, and of the gifts and graces of his spirit: that they were
swept and garnished, not with graces, but with sins and vices, the best
ornaments of the Diuils tabernacle, and those in which he most of all
delights. Thus you see that this place, on which our opposites do much rely,
makes nothing at all against me, and comes not home unto the point in question.

The fifth argument which may be produced against me, John 5. 2. to the 11.
and it is this. If the regenerate Saints of God who are once ingrafted into
Christ may not abide in Christ, if they may bear no fruit, and so be cast out
into the fire to be burned, then they may finally and totally fall from grace.
But the true regenerate Saints of God may not abide in Christ, they may bear
no fruit, and so they may be cast out into the fire to be burned: for the
words of Saint John are. Every branch in me that bears not fruit he takes
away, Abide in me and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self,
(...) ^ide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. If a man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men
gather them and cast them into the fire and they are burned. If you abide in
me, and my words abide in you, you shall ask what you will, and it shall be
done unto you. Which words do prove the Minor proopsition. Therefore the true
regenerate Saints of God, may fall finally and totally from grace. To this I
answer, that the Minor proposition Answ.
is false, and is not warranted by this place of John. For first, you may
perceive two sorts of branches of which this Scrip-ture makes mention. First,
there are dead and withered branches, branches which bear no fruit at all:
brances which have a name they live and yet are dead; as the Church of Sardis
was: Reu. 3. 1. These branches, though they made a show of life unto the world,
yet they had never any true and spiritual life and sap within them, they never
brought forth fruit: and therefore they were never truly ingrafted into
Christ. If a grift be put into a stock, if it draw no sap, no life and
nourishment from the stock, if it grow not, or if it bear no fruit, but
withers away, no man will ever say, that this grift was well and truly
ingrafted into the stock; so it is with those that are ingrafted into Christ:
if they grow and spring not, or if they bear no fruit, they were always but
dead branches, they had no spiritual life within them, they were never truly
ingrafted into him. Now of these branches Saint John affirms, that they shall
be cast out, and withered, that they shall be taken away, and cast into the
fire to be burned. Secondly, there are fruitful and lively branches, which the
Apostle opposes to these other branches: verse 2. and of these he there
affirms, that his Father purges them, that they may bring forth more fruit:
these branches, they flourish like the palm tree, and grow like a cedar in
lebanon: they flourish in the Courts of God, they still bring forth fruit in
old age, they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92, 12, 13, 14. They never
wither like these other branches, neither do they cease from yielding fruit:
but they bring forth their fruit in their season, and their leaf does not
wither nor fall away. Psalm. 1. 3. and Ier. 17. 8. So that this place of the
Apostle is no more in substance but this: hypocrites which were never the true
living and fruitful branches of Jesus Christ, they shall wither, and be cut
down and cast into the fire, for their unfruitfulness, like those trees that
John Baptist speaks of: Math. 3. 10. and like the fruitless fig tree. Math
21. 19. Luke. 13. 6. to 10. But those that are the true and living branches of
Jesus Christ, they shall always grow and flourish, and bring forth more fruit
continually: their last works shall be more then their first. Psalm 92. 12, 13.
Reu. 2. 19. Therefore this place makes wholly against you and not for you, it
warrants not your Minor proposition to be true, but proves it to be false.
Secondly, I answer, that this Scripture here is not meant only of the
regenerate Saints of God, but of the whole militant Church of God comprehending
both the good and bad, as appears by the first verse of the chapter, I am the
true vine (says Christ) and my Eather is the husbandman, etc. Now you know
that the Church of God which is militant on the earth, is compared to a
vineyard and to a vine, in diverse places of Scripture, as Psalm. 80. (...). to
16. Isai. 5. 1. to 8. cap. 27. 2. 3. Math. 21. 33. to 42. and other places: as
it is in other places compared to a net, which has Math. 13.
good and bad fish in it: to a field, which had tares as well as corn: Math.
3. 12.
to a floor, which has chafe as well as wheat and pure corn: and Luke 3.
17.
to an house which has vessels of honor and dishonor in it. So that 2 Timothy 2.
20. 21.
the proper meaning of this place is only this. that in the militant Church of
God, there are two sorts of Christians; some there are that are members, and
branches of Christ, in outward show and profession only, but not in truth:
these God the Father, will cut off as dead, rotten, and fruitless members, and
he will cast them into hell fire to be burned, because they do not abide in him
and bring forth fruit. Others there are that are the true members and the
living branches of Christ, bringing forth much fruit: those God the Father
will be always purging, that they may bring forth more fruit: but yet not by
their own strength and virtue, but by that sap and nourishment which they
receive from Christ, all therefore that you can collect from hence is only
this. That hypocrites and the dead branches of Jesus Christ may fall from grace
and perish, which no man will deny. Yea, but you will object: that here are two
words in Object.
the text, which do strongly imply, that the true branches of Jesus Christ may
be broken off from him, may become unfruitful, and so be cast into the fire:
to wit, this word, ^xcept: and this word, if: which are both conditional
words. I answer, Answ.
that neither of these words imply the thing which you intend. For first, this
word except, in this place of John, is a word of causality and not of
condition: As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the
vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me: our abiding in Christ, is not a
condition, but a cause of bearing fruit: that which makes us fruitful in good
works, is our abiding in Christ, is the only substance and sum of these
words; and so you can collect no necessary consequence which makes against me
from them. All the argument which this sentence yields you is but this. No
regenerate man can bear any fruit except he^ abide in Christ: therefore such
as are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ may fall from grace:
which is a mere (...). Secondly, for this word, if: I answer, that it does
necessarily imply, that the true branches of Jesus Christ may be broken off,
withered, and cast into the fire. Consider but the words themselves, and you
shall find it so. If any man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch and
withered: If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, you shall ask what
you will and it shall be done unto you. What now will your arguments from these
words be? surely no more but this. If anyman abide not in Christ, he is cast
forth as a branch and withered: therefore regenerate men may fall from grace.
If any man abide in Christ, all his prayers shall be granted: therefore
regenerate men may fall from grace. Who but frantic, and distracted men would
produce such arguments as these. Yea, Object.
but there is a great deal of profound matter in the white of an egg: there
is much included in these conditional words which every man's understanding is
not able to fathom: these conditional speeches must needs imply possibility
of falling from grace, else to what purpose are they used? I Answ.
answer. Not to prove that regenerate men might fall from grace, this was never
Christ's meaning in this place, it is but your wrested, strained and forced
collection. For the only end wherefore Christ did speak those words, was only
to encourage and stir up his Disciples and his Saints, to fruitfulness in
good works, which he does by these two several means. First, by declaring
unto them the way and means by which they might be fruitful, and that is by
continuing and abiding in him. Secondly, by propounding some certain motives
to them to stir them up to fruitfulness, which are of two sorts. The first
taken from the danger of unfruitfulness: every branch in me that bears not
fruit my Father takes away, and he is cast forth and withered. Secondly, From
the advantage, and the great commodity of fruitfulness in good works: both
in respect of themselves, and in respect of God. In respect of themselves: it
would cause God to give them a gracious answer to all their prayers and
requests to him: it would preserve and continue the love of Christ to them: and
it would fill them full of joy. In respect of God: God should be glorified by
their fruitfulness in good works. This then being the only end and scope of
Christ's words in this place, to stir up his Disciples, and to provoke them to
fruitfulness in good works: if you take the words as they are spoken and as
Christ intended them, then they make not for you at all: then your conclusion
and argument from them must be this. Christ does provoke and stir up
regenerate men, and such as are his members to fruitfulness in good works,
therefore they may fall from grace: a ridiculous and absurd inconsequence. To
conclude all, I say that the true branches of Jesus Christ can never fall from
grace, nor yet depart from Christ. First, because Christ himself has chosen
them, and ordained them, that they should go and bring forth fruit, and that
their fruit should remain, John 15. 16. Secondly, because Christ and the holy
Ghost will always live, dwell, and abide within them: John 15. 3. cap. 14. 16,
17. Ephesians. 3. 17. Gal. 2: 20. Math. 28. 20. 1 John 4. 15. and cap. 5. 10. 20.
Thirdly, because that Christ does love them in the same manner as his Father
loves him, John 15. 9. Now Gods love to Christ is perpetual and never ends:
therefore Christ's love to them must be perpetual to: and so Christ cannot but
abide in them, and they in him. Fourthly, because the true branches of Jesus
Christ, cannot bring forth ill fruit, Math. 7. 18. they cannot fade nor
wither, they cannot cease from yielding fruit, Psalm. 1. 3. Ier. 17 8. Fifthly,
because the fear of God is in their hearts, that they shall not depart from
Christ, Ier. 32. 40. Sixthly, because Christ has prayed to his Father for them,
to keep them through his own name, that so they might be in him, and he in
them: John 17. 11. 23. That is, (as ( Contr. Arian. (...). 4.
) Athana^us expounds it) that the grace of his Spirit might remain irreuocable
and immouable in his Disciples: that that which was granted to the Son by
nature, to be in the Father, might be granted (...) unto us by the Spirit:
which when Paul knew, who (says he) shall separate us from the love of Christ?
for the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Lastly, because Christ
spoke these very words which you object to this only end, that his joy might
remain in his Disciples, and that their joy might be full, John 15. 11.
neither of which could be, if that the true members of Jesus Christ might fall
quite away from grace; For then Christ could have no joy in them, nor they no
joy and comfort in him. Therefore your collection from this place, being quite
repugnant to the very words and scope of the place; and all the arguments which
you can truly collect from hence, being mere Nonsequiturs and inconsequencies,
and nothing to the purpose, I will here shake hands with this text and
Argument, and proceed to some others.

The sixth Argument that may be made against me, is Phil. 2. 12. Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling. The regenerate Saints of God must
work out their own s^luation with fear and trembling: therefore they may
fall from grace. For if they might not fall from grace, they had no cause to
fear and tremble thus. For answer, Answ.
here unto, I shall deny the argument, for the inconsequencie of it. True it
is, that a true Saint of God may fear and tremble, yea, and he ought to do it,
yet it follows not, that therefore he may fall from grace. You must know
therefore, that there is a double fear of God: the one a servile fear, or a
fear of hell, and of Gods judgments, a fear of God as he is a just and
upright judge: which fear can never stand with the truth of grace and love,
but is always swallowed up and cast out of men by the synceritie and truth of
grace and love, as it appears by Romans 8. 15. 1 John. 4. 17. 18. Luke 1. 74.
75. Psa. 27. 1. Psa. 46. 1. to 8. Heb. 13. 6. and 2 Timothy 1. 7. This fear
therefore being incompatible with the truth of grace and love, and being cast
out of the hearts of of all the Saints of God, who have received the spirit of
grace and adoption, is not the fear which Paul intends in this place.
Besides this, there is another kind of fear, of which all the true Saints of
God are made partakers; to wit, a religious, godly, devout and filial fear,
proceeding from the due consideration of the holiness, the glory, the
majesty, omnipotency omnipresence, and gracious goodness of God, and from
the consciousnesse of our own baseness, emptiness, vileness, and ^nabilitie
to do his will, where by we stand in awe of God, and are afraid to commit any
sin which may offend and greiue him, out of that love and holy reverence
which we owe unto him, because he is our gracious God and loving Father, and
not because we fear that he will utterly disinherit and cast us off for
these our sins. This is the fear which is here enjoined; and this fear is
always accompanied with faith, with love, with joy and (...) (...) Ma^tyr:
(...): quaest: Qu^st: 98.
perseverance, and it is the chiefest means ( a) to keep men from falling
from the state of grace. For first, this filial, reverent and godly fear, it
keeps men from committing sin, it makes men for to stand in awe of God, and
not to sin against Mayor Dei me^ (...) est cur (...) quae (...) (...) mini^
(...).
him. Psalm. 4 4. Prou. 3. 7. cap. 8. 13. cap. 14. 2, 16, 26, 27. cap. 16. 6.
and cap. 19. 23. Secondly, it keeps men from d^parting from the Lord. Ier. 32.
40. I will put my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me.
Thirdly, it makes men for to cast themselves wholly into the arms of God and
Jesus Christ, it makes men for to trust perfectly in God, and to choose him for
their only portion, their only refuge, stay, and prop. So that this fear of
God, is the only preservative and antidote against Apostacy and falling away
from grace. Now that this is the fear which is here intended it is plain and
evident. First, by the words themselves. Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling: what for fear of falling away from grace? no such matter: for
it is God that works in you both the will and the deed of his good pleasure.
They must fear and tremble not because they may fall from grace, but because
they have to do with God; whose presence, whose love and goodness, whose
majesty and greatness, whose purity and holiness are all exceeding dreadful
and terrible, and require much reverence, much awe and godly fear, from such
as are to deal with him, especially in such weighty matters as concern their
souls. Secondly, it is evident by paralelling this place, with some other
Scriptures that expound it. as Psalm. 2. 10. Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Joy and trembling can never stand together, if you take
trembling for a ^lauish fear, or a fear of falling away from grace. So Psalm.
4. 4. stand in awe and sin not. Psalm. 33. 8. Let all the earth fear the
Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him. Psalm. 34. 7. O
fear the Lord ye his Saints: for there is no want to them that fear him.
Psalm. 5. 7. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies: and in
thy fear will I worship toward thine holy Temple. Psalm. 89. 7. God is greatly
to be feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence, of
all them that are about him. Ier. 5. 22. Fear ye not me says the Lord? Will
ye not tremble at my presence, etc? and Hosea. 3. 3. They shall fear the
Lord, and his goodness in the latter days: which places being compared with
this of the Apostle, prove that this fear which he intends, is only a
filial and loving fear, of not offending God, and not a fear of falling away
from grace: that of Heb. 12. 28. will iully clear it. Wherefore we receiving a
kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may serve God
acceptablie, with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire.
The place is worth the observing. The Saints o^ God have received such a
kingdom which cannot be moved; and yet they must serve God with reverence and
godly fear. But is this fear, a fear of loosing their kingdom and graces?
no: they are so firm and sure that they need not fear the loss of them,
they are a kingdom which cannot be moved. What is it then, that they must
thus reverence and fear? it is only the glory, the majesty, and almighty
power of God: they must serve God acceptablie, with reverence and godly fear,
because that he is a consuming fire. So that this place being only meant of a
religious, godly devout and filial fear, which is the chiefest preservative
against Apostacy, it makes not for you but against you.

The seventh objection that may be made against me is may be led away with
the error of the wicked, and fall from their own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3. 17.
Therefore they may fall from the state of grace. I answer, that the Antecedent
is false and not warranted Answ.
by this place of Peter, which I shall manifest and prove by these subsequent
and ensuing reasons. First, because this place of Peter, is nothing else but a
mere exhortation to vigilancie and circumspection, for fear of being seduced
by Heretics and false teachers. You therefore my brethren (says the Apostle)
seeing that you know these things, beware least you being led away with the
error of the wicked, fall from your own steadfastness. Which words, being
nothing else but a bare admonition and exhortation, to beware of seducing
Heretics, do not necessarily implie a fall from grace. First, because
admonitions, caueates, and exhortations to beware of being seduced, are maine
preservatives and helps against Apostacy: they are the means which God
himself has provided to keep us from Apostacy. Secondly, because these
admonitions and exhortations they only stir us up to use the means to
persevere: Circumspection and vigilancie are these chiefest means to preserve
and keep us from falling; and this place of the Apostle does but quicken and
encourage us for to use these means, and therefore it does not necessarily
implie that a man may fall from grace. Thirdly, because God does oft-times
admonish his Saints to beware of being seduced, when as it is impossible for
them to be seduced. Christ tells us expressly, that it is impossible for the
elect to be seduced, Math. 24. 24. Mark 13. 22. and yet in these very places
he admonishes them to beware of false Christ's and false Prophets, lest they
should be seduced and deceived by them: which is the same case with this of
Peter: For Peter he writes this Epistle to the elect Saints of God, and then
admonishes them to beware of being seduced, when as Christ himself assured
us, that it is not possible for them to be seduced; therefore this place being
but a bare exhortation, yields you but this absurd and disioynted Argument. The
Saints of God are exhorted to use the means to persevere, they are admonished
to beware of seducers, when as it is impossible for them to be seduced;
therefore they may fall from grace. Or, Admonitions and cautions are the means
to preserve the Saints from falling from grace. Therefore the Saints to whom
these admonitions and cautions are given, may fall from grace: which how well
it follows, I refer it to the reader for to judge. Secondly, the Antecedent
is not warranted by this place, admitting that this exhortation did necessarily
implie, that the true regenerate Saints of God might be seduced with the Error
of the wicked: For the Apostle bids them not to beware of falling from the
seeds and habits, but from the steadfastness of Grace. Beware lest you fall
from your own steadfastness. Now grace, or the habit and seed of grace, is
one thing, steadfastness of grace another: the one is the tree, the other but
the fruit: the one is the essence, the other but the degree of grace. We
grant that a man may fall from the steadfastness and the degree of grace, but
yet it follows not, that therefore he may fall totally or finally from the
habit and seed of grace, because they are distinct and different things, of a
distinct and different nature. Therefore though I grant you all that this place
can yield you, yet it makes not for your purpose; it proves no more but this,
that a man may fall from the degrees of grace, which I do not deny, but it
comes not to the habit and seed of grace, which are the things in question: and
so it is impertinent.

The eigth objection which may be made against me is Cor. 10. 12. Let him
that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall: that of Heb. 3. 12. Take
heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God, and that of Heb. 4. 1. 11. Let us therefore
fear, lest a promise being left us, of entering into his rest, any of you
should seem to come short of it: Let us labor therefore to enter into that
rest, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief. From which places
this Argument may be framed. The Saints of God are admonished to take heed
lest they fall and depart from God through unbelief, and so come short of
heaven; therefore they may fall from grace. I answer, that the argument
follows not, because these admonitions Answ.
and cautions serve only to further the Saints of God in this their
perseverance, they are helps and means to preserve and keep them from
falling; and therefore do not necessarily imply, that they may sall from
grace, of which see more in the answer to the precedent argument. Now for the
places themselves- I shall answer them particularly. For that of 1 Cor. 10. 12.
I answer, that it makes not against me. First, because it is spoken only to
hypocrites and presumptuous men; and not to the Saints of God: to such as
think they stand, and not to such as do truly stand by faith. Secondly,
because it is spoken only to awaken men out of their carnal security; and to
make them wary of committing sin for fear of Gods temporal judgments.
Thirdly, because it is spoken only to preserve and keep men from falling, and
not to prove that they may fall from grace. So that your Argument from this
place will be no more but this: Hypocrites, presumptuous, and secure men, must
beware lest they fall: therefore the Saints of God may fall from grace: which
follows not at all. For that of Hebr. 3. 12. I answer: that it was spoken to
all the Hebrews, and not only to such of them as were the true regenerate
Saints of God; and it is no more in effect but this: Brethren, let every one of
you search and try his own heart, for fear lest he should have an
unbelieving heart, and so should depart from God at last: which the true
regenerate Saints of God, and such as are true belee^ers can never do, Ier.
32. 40. John 6. 68. and 1 Job. 2. 19. And as for that of Hebr. 4. 1. 11. it is
no more in substance but this: Brethren, you have a gracious and precious
promise made unto you, of entering into the heavenly Canaan, see therefore that
you labor, and strive to enter into it, lest you come short of it, and so lose
the benefit and comfort of this promise. What are these two places to this
falling away from grace? surely, nothing at all. All men must examine their
hearts to see whether they are sincere and upright: all must strive to enter
into Gods rest, else they shall never do it. Therefore a regenerate Saint os
God may fall from grace, is but a ridiculous and strange Nonsequitur. To these
admonitions I will add that of Romans 11. 8. place much infisted upon. Be not
high minded but fear. To which I answer first, That this is spoken to all
believing Gentiles, who had taken upon them the outward profession of (...),
and not to the particular Saints of God, and those (...) regenerate men that
were among them: for they need not fear a breaking off: for Christ himself
commands them no^ to fear, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little flock, for it is
your Fathers will to give you a kingdom. Christ has assured them, that they
(...) never perish, and that none shall eu^r pluck them out of ^is, or bis
Fathers hands, John 10. 28. that Nothing shall ever separate them from that
love of God which is in Christ Jesus the^ Lord. Romans 8. 39. and therefore they
need not fear this breaking off from Christ: so that this place must be
applied to the whole visible Church of the Gentiles and not to the Elect,
faithful, and particular Saints of God within the Church. Secondly, I answer.
That this is spoken only by way of counsel and advice, to admonish the
Gentiles how they should carry themselves toward the Jews: that they, should
not therefore contemn the Jews and (...) over them, because that God had cast
off the Jews, and had chosen them to be his people in their room: but that
they should carry themselves lovingly and humbly toward them, because they
were once the people of God, and might be so again for ought they knew: and
God might as well cast off them, if they grow insolent and sin against them,
and (...) (...) the Jews again in^o his favor, as he did cast off the Jews
to receive them. What then makes this to your purpose? God may reject the
Gentiles and receive the Jews, therefore the true regenerate Saints and
members of Jesus Christ may fall from grace, is no good consequent. (...) I
answer with Anselme in his Exposition upon this chapter, that this (...) (...)
in Romans 11.
place here is but a friendly admonition, and a godly exhortation, not to a
servile, but to a (...) fear which is the chiefest means to keep us close to
God, and to restrain and awe us, so that we shall not d^part from ^im Ier.
32. 40. therefore this being but an exhortation unto such a grace as is one of
the chiefest means to keep us from falling from the state of Grace, cannot
implie a fall from grace as you pretend it does. Lastly, I answer, that the
Saints of God, they are humble, meek, and lowly men, they are not high-minded,
nor haughti^ hearted, and they always stand in awe of God, Psalm. 131. 1. 2.
Psalm. 39. 2. Isai. 61. 1. Math. 5. 3. 5. cap. 11. 29. Gal. 5. 22, 23. and Col.
3. 12. therefore they need not fear to be dissected or broken off from Christ
for pride and arrogance: and so they are not within the compass of this
admonition and advice of Paul: at least not within the compass of the
punishment of that sin, which Paul does here dehort the Gentiles from. All
these admonitions and cautions therefore which you here object, make nothing at
all against me: they serve only in maiorem cautelam, to make the Saints more
wary, not less firm and stable in the state of grace.

The ninth objection which may be framed against me, Cor. 16. 13. Watch you
and stand fast in the faith, quitte you like men, be strong. That of Phil. 4.
1. stand fast in the Lord. That of Heb. 4. 14. Hold fast your profession; That
of Re^. 2. 25, 46. Hold fast till I come, and the like. These exhortations
intimate, that the Saints may fall from grace, else they were but idle. I
answer, that you are Answ.
much deceived. For the end of these and such like exhortations, is but,
currenti calcar: to put spurs to a running horse: to incite, encourage, and
stir up the Saints of God to greater steadfastness, and immobilitie in faith:
to root, settle, and ground them more firmly in the state of grace: and to
help them on in their constant and final perseverance; this is their maine
and only end; that men may be more resolute, firm, and stable, then they were
before: and therefore they do not necessarily intimate or implie, that the
true regenerate Saints of God may fall from the state of grace. This I shall
evidence and make plain by some few familiar examples. A Captain who has a
regiment of resolute and valiant Soldiers, who will rather die, then turn^
their backs and fly, being to encounter with an enemy, speaks thus unto
them. Sirs, now you must stand close unto it, or else you are undone: wherefore
pluck up your spirits, and your courage, show your valor, maintain your
credit and your honor, and rather sacrifice your lives unto the enemies sword,
then stain your honor by a dangerous flight: Do these words of exhortation
and encouragement, necessarily imply, that the Soldiers would trust their
heels before their hands, and turn their backs unto their enemies, because
they are thus encouraged and exhorted for to fight? should these Soulders take
these words as a disparagement and blemish to their valor? nothing less: for
they are words of encouragement only, not of diffidence and distrust. A man
that cannot swim is fallen into a deep, swift, and broad river, so that he
is in danger to be drowned: one that is standing by perceiving this his danger,
casts a rope unto him for to pull him ou^; of which when he has taken hold,
he then does use these words unto him: hold fast the rope, and be sure not to
let it go, or else you will be drowned: do these words of his implie, that
the other will let go the rope and not hold it fast? no, he is in danger of
his life, and therefore he will be sure for to keep his hold, though the
other had never used these words unto him. So it is here: the eternal life and
welfare of the Saints of God, depends upon their spiritual prowess, upon
their holding fast of Christ; if they should turn their backs to Satan and
fly before him, if they should let go their hold of Christ, they were utterly
undone for ever, and their souls should perish. Wherefore these and such like
exhortations, do not necessarily implie that the Saints of God may fall away
from the state of Grace, and therefore they come not to the present purpose.
Secondly, I answer, that these exhortations make wholly for me, for they do
all implie, that the Saints of God do stand fast and persevere continually in
grace, or at least, that they may do so, and that they may come to such a
stability and firmness in grace, that they cannot fall away or be removed,
and therefore these exhortations are wholly against you.

The tenth objection that may be made against me, are John 8. 31. 51. If you
continue in my words, then are you my disciples indeed. If a man keep my
sayings he shall never see death, 1 Cor. 15. 2. By which word you are saved,
if you k^epe in memory what I preached unto you, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. If thou seek
him, he will be found of thee: but if thou forsake him, be will cast thee off
for over. Gal. 6. 9. In due time you shall reap if you faint not, Col. 1. 21,
22, 23. You that were sometimes alienated, and enemies by your wi^ked works,
yet now has he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present
you holy, unblameable, and irreprouable in his sight, if you continue in the
faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel
which you have heard, 1 These. 3. 8. now we live, if you stand fast in the
Lord, 1 Timothy 2. 25. Notwithstanding she shall be saved by childe-bearing, if
they continue in faith, in charity and holiness with sob^tie, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If
we deny him, he will also deny us, Hebr. 3. 6. whose house are we, if we
hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of the hope firmly unto the end, and 2
Pet. 1. 10. If you do these things you shall never fall. These condition all
places implie, that a true regenerate man may fall from grace, or else they
serve to little purpose, they are but idle and and superfluous. To this I
answer first, that none of these places were ever recorded or spoken to this
end, to prove that the true regenerate Saints of God might fall away from the
state of grace, neither do they intimate as much: For first, some of these
places prove no more but this, that none are truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, but such as persevere unto the end: this is the only end and scope
of them, as that of John 8. 31. Col. 1. 21, 22, 23. and Heb. 36 So that if you
collect any argument against me from them, it must be this: None are the true
regenerate Saints of God, none are reconciled truly unto God, none are the
house of God but those that continue and persevere unto the end: therefore, the
true regenerate Saints of God may fall from grace: which conse^uent is quite
contradictorie and repugnant to the Antecedent: whereas the only true
consequent from it is this, therefore the true Saints of God can never fall
from grace. Secondly, the greater number of these places are no more in sense,
and substance but this. Such as continue to the end, they shall be saved, as
John 8. 51. 1 Cor. 15. 2. Gal. 6. 9. Col. 1. 21, 22, 25. 1 Timothy 2. 15. Heb. 3.
6. 2 Pet. 1. 10. So that your argument from them can be but this. Such only as
continue to the end shall be saved: therefore the true regenerate Saints of
God may fall from grace: which is a mere ridiculous inconsequent; supposing
perseverance in grace, and the using of the means of salvation, to implie a
necessary possibility of falling from grace, and loosing of salvation.
Thirdly, the other places that are objected; as 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. 2 Timothy 2. 12.
and that of Romans 8. 13. If you live after the flesh you shall die: are no more
in sense and substance but this. That if men live ungodly lives, and do not
persevere unto the end, that then they shall not be saved: this is the only,
true, and proper sense and drift of these places and nothing else. What then
can you collect from them? Surely no more but this. Such as forsake God and
live in their sins shall die: therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may
fall from grace. Or, if the Saints of God forsake God, and live in their sins
without repentance, they shall die eternally, and God will cast them off for
ever. Therefore, they may fall from grace, a learned and profound inconsequent.
Reader, can thou forbear to wonder at such arguments as these, which are all
composed of such strange, ridiculous and absurd consequencies, as even children
and madmen would blush for to produce them? Yea, but our learned and profound
Antagonists, (who have such acute and piercing eyes, that they can pry and
diue beyond the reach of ordinary capacities, and beyond the sense and meaning
of the Scriptures) will object: Object.
that all these places are applied to the Saints of God: and therefore if these
Saints could not fall from the state of grace, these conditional Scriptures
would be idle. To this I answer Answ.
in the second place, that the general end of all these Scriptures, is not to
inform the Saints of God, that they may fall from grace, but to help and
further them to persevere in grace; by exhorting them, both by the profit and
the danger of perseuering, and not perseuering, to use those means, as care,
circumspection, and the auoy ding of those things which would hinder them in
this their perseverance, as might enable them to persevere both totally and
finally, without end or interruption, with greater security, alacrity, speed
and cheerfulness: Wherefore they do not necessarily implie, that the Saints
of God may fall away from grace. If a master should use these words unto a
servant, of whose care and faithfulness he is fully persuaded. If thou will be
faithful and trusty still, and careful in my business, I will then reward
thee well at last, but if thou prove false and negligent, I will cast thee off.
Or if a Father having an ingenuous, dutiful, and obedient son, of whose
dutiful and son-like carriage he did not doubt, should use these speeches to
him. Son, if thou continue to be such a one as thou have been hitherto, I
will make thee mine heir: if not, I will disinherit thee; would now the
servant or the son, or any other that should here these words, think that
the Master or the Father, did doubt of the servants or sons good carriage, or
that they did necessarily implie by these their words, that the servant and the
son would take ill courses? No man I dare say would be fo sottish as to make
such a construction of these words, but every one would take them as a great
encouragement, as a means to cause the servant and the son, to continue such
as they had bin before, and as an antidote to keep them from ill courses. Just
so stands the case between God and his Saints. He is their Master and their
Father, they are his servants and his children: When ther^ore they hear such
conditional speeches in the Scripturet as these, If you continue steadfast in
the faith, if you endure to the end, if you faint not, you shall be saved, but
if you forsake me, if you give over before you come unto your journies end, and
turn back unto your sins, I will then cast you off and you shall be damned.
What shall the Saints of God now make this exposition of these and such like
places, that God does distrust them, and doubt of their fidelity toward him,
that he is afraid that they will fall from grace, and cast off this yoke?
that these speeches of God do necessarily implie, that they may fall from
grace? God forbid, for this would breed such a jealousy between God and his
Saints, that one of them would never trust the other: God then should never
trust his Saints, and so they would never trust him with any thing, much less
with the keeping of their souls. We find by common experience, that no man
will trust another, nor yet believe another who dares not for to trust and
believe him; because he reputes such a one who dares not for to trust him as
his enemy, and as one that does vilify and disparage him: If God therefore
were jealous of his Saints, who are his friends, and his best beloved, to whom
he does communicate his secrets and his will, they would not, nay, they could
not put their trust ^n him, Yea, it would cause them for to call his promises
and truth into question, wherein he has promised to preserve them from
Apostacy, to keep them from falling, and to put his fear into their hearts
that they should not depart from him, and the like. Wherefore they must and
do, take all these Scriptures to be nothing else, but so many motives and
encouragements, both from the danger and the profit, to stir them up to a
final, constant, vigilant, circumspect, and cheerful perseverance in grace,
which is the true, the proper and only use and end of them: So that these
objections and arguments, which you ^rame from these and such like Scriptures,
are but frivolous and idle, they are but mere inconsequencies, and come not to
the purpose. Lastly, the Saints of God by the help and assistance of Gods
Spirit, do a^waies perfor^e these conditions; they do continue steadfast in
the faith, they do persevere unto the end, they are always adding one grace
unto another, they do still hold on their way, they still grow stronger and
stronger, they mount up with wings as Eagles, they run and are not weary,
they walk and do not faint, they walk in gods statutes, and they keep his
iuagements and do them. Job 17. 9. Isai. 49. 31. (...). 36. 27. therefore they
shall never fall, therefore they shall be saved: so that these conditional
speeches prove only, that they cannot fall from grace; because that God does
always enable them for to perform the conditions.

The eleventh objection which may be made against me is that of Heb. 10. 35,
38. Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of reward. If any
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. From whence this
argument may be framed. The Saints of God may cast away their confidence, draw
back from God, and loose Gods favor: therefore they may fall from grace. I
answer, that the Antecedent is false Answ.
and is not warranted by the text. That the Saints of God, may cast away their
confidence. I answer, first, that the text it self does not warrant it. For
two reasons. First, because these words, cast not away your confidence, etc.
are nothig else but an earnest exhortation which the Apostle makes to the
Hebrews, to cause them to continue constant in the faith, and in the assurance
of Gods love to them, mauger all those afflictions which did befall them: they
are nothing else but an exhortation unto constancy and perseverance in the
state of grace, and therefore they do not imply a fall from grace. All the
argument that you can have from these words in this sense is this. The Hebrews
are exhorted to persevere in grace, therefore they may fall from grace: which
is but a nugatory, and absurd inconsequent. Secondly, the Apostle tells us in
the former verse, that these Hebrews were assured of their salvation, and that
they kn^w that they had in heaven a far better and enduring substance, then
their earthly goods and possessions were: therefore these subsequent words of
the Apostle, do not necessarily intimate, that these Hebrews might fall from
grace, and so loose that heavenly substance and treasure of which they were
assured: for then this would contradict his former words, and take away that
certainty of salvation which he had attributed to them before. Secondly,
admit that these Hebrews might cast away their confidence and assurance of
Gods love, and call their salvation into question in times of pressure and
affliction, yet it follows not, that therefore they might cast away their
faith, and those habits and seeds of grace which were within them: for the
strongest faith may doubt and stagger now and then, and such as have most
grace, may in times of pressure and temptation, call Gods eternal love and
favor to them ^to question, and yet their faith and graces may not fail.
Christians may cast away or loose their confidence, and the comfortable
assurance of Gods love and favor for a time, (which is but a degree and fruit
of faith) though their faith and graces do habitually remain within them.
Wherefore make the most you can of this exhortation, your collection from it
will be only this. The Saints of God may loose the degrees and acts of grace;
therefore they may fall from the habits and state of grace: which is but a
mere Noniquitur. For the other part of the Antecedent, that the Saints of God
may draw back from God, and so loose his favor. I answer, that if you take
this word draw back, for nothing else, but the loss of the degrees of their
love, and union unto Christ, (which is not the meaning of the Apostle,) then I
agree it. But if you take it for a total withdrawing of their souls from God,
for a total Apostacy and falling from God, (which is the true and proper
meaning of the Apostle) then I deny it, because it is not warranted by the
text. For those that thus draw back, they are not any such as are true
believers, and truly ingra^ted into Jesus Christ, but only hypocrites and such
as made an outward formal show and profession of religion, and had never any
true and justifying faith at all within them; which appears most evidently by
these two reasons, taken from the very text it self. The just shall live by
faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. The
just men who have a true and living faith, are here put in opposition to those
that have it not, but only in outward show. Those that have this true and
saving faith, they live by it, their faith does live and hold out even in times
of persecu^ion, it never dies nor yet expires: those who have not this true and
living faith, and yet make an outward profession and show of faith in times of
peace, they always do and will draw back in times of trial; when
persecution arises because of the word of God, by and by they are offended,
like the stony ground. Math. 13. 2^. they will rather draw back from God then
suffer for him: therefore Gods soul shall have no pleasure in them. Which
Antithesis between the just, who live by faith, and those that draw back,
proves vndeniablie, that such as draw back are no true believers who live by
faith, but only hypocrites and such believers who had no truth of grace at all
within them. Secondly, it is evidently proved by the Antithesis in the next
ensuing verse. But we (that is we who are true believers) are not of them who
draw back unto perdition: we never fall from grace, nor yet deny the
profession of Gods name: but of them that believe to the saving of the soul:
our faith it always continues to the 1 Pet. 1. 9.
end, and we do always receive the end and fruit of it, even the salvation
of our souls. This opposition therefore between those that hold out, and those
that draw back, this distinguishing and seuering of them does evidently prove,
that such which draw back from God are only hypocrites, and not true
believers; so that your Antecedent is false, and no ways warranted by this
text of Scripture, which comes not home unto our purpose, and does no ways
make against me. Secondly, admit that these words are spoken of such as have
true faith in them, yet they are but conditional, If they draw back, not
absolute and positive: or they do draw back: and therefore they prove not any
thing against me.

The twelfth objection that may be made against me, is Dan. 11. 35. Some of
those of understanding (that is, some of the true and chosen Saints of God)
shall fall, to try them, to purge them and to make them white. From which words
this argument may be framed. The true Saints of God may fall: therefore they
may fall from the state of grace. I answer, Answ.
that the argument is false and follows not: because this fall which the
Prophet means in this place, is not a fall from the state of grace, but a fall
into afflictions and temptations: which appears evidently by these
unanswerable reasons. First, because it is said, that they shall fall to purge
them, to try them, and to make them white: now this a total and a final fall
from grace, or a fall into the mire and puddle of sin can never do, for these
falls do wholly contaminate and defile men, they never purge or purify them:
that fall which purges, tries, and makes men white, is a fall into the fire
of afflictions and temptations, and no fall else, 1 Pet. 1. 7 1 Cor. 3. 15.
James 1. 12. Ezech. 22. 18. to 23. and cap. 24. 13. therefore this fall here
must needs be a fall into affliction and temptation, and no other fall.
Secondly, it must needs be so by reason of the connection with the two former
verfes: where it is said: that those of understanding among the people shall
fall by the sword, by the famine, by captivity, and by the spoil for many
days: which is only a fall into afflictions, and is the same fall which is
meant in the 35. verse. Lastly, this must needs be intended of a fall into
affliction, and not of a fall from grace: because verse 32. it is said, that
those only that do wickedly against the covenant shall be corrupted with
flatteries, but the people which do know their God shall do exploites: they
shall not fall from God, they shall not be corrupted from the Lord. This place
then being only intended of a fall into affliction and not of a fall from
grace, your argument follows not, for it is no more in sub^tance but this. The
true regenerate Saints of God may fall into afflictions and temptations,
therefore they may fall from grace. So this text and argument does not hurt us,

The thirteenth objection that may be brought against Prou 24. 16. A just man
falls seven times: therefore a regenerate man may fall from the state of
grace. For answer, I shall deny the argument. For this fall here spoken of is
only a fall into affliction, and not a fall from grace. This Answ.
is evident both by the precedent and subsequent verses. Lay not weight (o
wicked man) against the dwelling of the righteous, spoil not his resting
place: for the righteous falls seven times, and rises up again: but the
wicked fall into mischief. Rejoice not when thine enemy falls; and let not
thine heart be glad when he^ stumbleth, least the Lord see it, etc: which
words do fully evidence this to be nothing else but a fall into outward
crosses and afflictions. Secondly, if this be not meant of a ^all into
afflictions, (which I grant not) yet make the most you can of it, it can be
but intended of a fall into the acts of sin, and not of a total and final
fall from grace. Lastly, when the righteous man falls he neither falls
totally nor finally. For the text tells us, that he never falls into mischief
as the wicked man does; and that he never falls, but presently he rises up
again. Wherefore take this place which way soever you will, yet it proves
nothing at all either for a final, or a total fall from the state of grace.

The fourteenth objection which may be pressed against Paul in the 1 Cor. 8.
11. Through thy knowledge shall a weak brother perish for whom Christ dyed. A
weak brother for whom Christ died, may perish by reason of scandal: therefore
a regenerate man may fall from grace. For answer Answ.
to this argument, I shall distinguish; of this word brother, and of this word
perish. There is a double fraternity and brotherhood among Christians: the one
internal and real, when as two; or more, are really and truly ingrafted into
Christ, and united and knit together in him: the other external, when as two
or more, are incorporated into one visible Church, but yet not really
incorporated and ingrafted into Christ him^lfe. Again, there is a double kind
of perishing: the one spiritual when as the soul and inward man: the other
corporal; when as the body and the outward man do perish and decay: either of
these may be sub-deuided into these two heads: into a partial perishing, when
as soul and body perish and decay in part: to a total perishing, when as they
perish wholly in every part, and not in some particular part; alone; and that
either for a time, or for ever. If you take a brother in this case, for one
that is a brother only in the Church, but not in Christ, I grant that such a
brother as this may perish both in the inward and outward man, in part or in
the whole, either for a time of for ever. But if you take a brother in this
place, for one that is a brother in Christ as well as in the Church, I grant
then that such a brother as this, may by reason of some scandalls perish in
part even in the inward man: that is, his conscience may be greiued and
offended, he may be provoked thereby to commit sin, to violate the law of
charity, to have un charitable thoughts of religious men, and to distaste them
for a time it may somewhat abate his zeal and feruencie in the practice of
religion, and cool his affection and love to God, and so may be destroyed in
part. But yet he cannot be totally destroyed, that seed and habit of grace
which is planted in his soul cannot be utterly abolished and rooted out by
reason of any scandalls whatsoever, though the acts and fruits of it may be
suppressed by them for a time. So that the meaning of this place of Paul, if we
compare it with the precedent and subsequent words, and with that place of
Math. 18. 6. 7. and Romans 14. 13. verse 20. is no more in substance and sense
but this. That stronger Christians must so much respect the weaker, as that
they must not give them any just occasion of scandal or offense, to wound and
vex their consciences, to breed any s^rupels or doubts in them, to weaken
their love to God, to discourage them in the practice of religion, or to
provoke them unto any sin: and not that scandals can make weak Christians in
whom there is any truth of grace begun, to Apostatize, or to renounce the
faith, or to fall finally or totally from grace: for this these scandals cannot
do: they cannot cause any of the true sheep of Christ, any that truly fear
the Lord, or belong unto the ^old of Christ to fall from grace, or to depart
from God and perish. John 10. 28. Ier. 32. 40. and 1 John 2. 19. To answer this
objection in a word. I answer, that there is a double perishing: the one in
respect of such as give the scandal and offense, the other in respect of such
as do receive it. A weak brother may utterly perish in respect of those that
give the scandal and offense: that is, they may do as much as in them lies to
cause him for to perish, and to renounce the faith; and therefore God will take
it as ill at their hands, as if he had actually perished: for it is only Gods
mercy which supports him, and not their scandal that offends him, that keeps
him from Apostacy: therefore God is as much offended with them as if they had
perished in good earnest. But yet such a brother does never actually perish in
respect of himself: he does never actually Apostatize and fall from grace.
This place proves on ely that he may perish in respect of him that gives the
offense, but yet not actually in respect of himself; and therefore it makes
not against me.

The fifteenth objection, is that of the 1 Timothy 5. 11, 12. The younger widows
refuse; for when they have begun to wax wanton they will marry, having
damnation because they have cast off their first faith. From whence this
argument may be framed. Regenerate men may cast off their first faith, and so
be damned for it: therefore they may fall away from the state of grace. To this
I answer, first, that the Antecedent is false and is not warranted Answ.
by this text. For Paul speaks not here of true regenerate men, and of such as
were really ingrafted into Christ, but of young petulant, and wanton widows,
whose light and unchaste behavior does evidently prove, that they had no grace
or faith at all within them. So that your argument hence can be no more but
this. Young, petulant, and wanton widows may fall from grace: therefore such
as are once truly regenerated may do so to: which is no good consequent.
Secondly, I answer, that faith in this place does not signify the grace of
true justifying and saving faith, but that vow of chastity and perpetual
widdowhood, which widows used for to make in former times, when as they had
their use and place in the Church of God; as appears by the very sense and
scope of the place. Again, damnation in his place signifies only blame or
reproof; or an Ecclesiastical censure or punishment, as excommunication, or
the like, which was used to be inflicted upon delinquents in this kind: and
not eternal condemnation of soul and body in hell, or the state of damnation.
So that the true and proper sense of the place is no more but this. Widows
that break the vow of chastity, either by marrying again, or by incontinency,
are to be blamed and censured by the Church for breach of this their vow,
because they are an occasion of scandal and reproach unto the Church. What
maket this to a total or final fall from grace? Surely nothing at all; and
therefore I pass it over, without any further answer.

The sixteenth objection is this. A man man receive the grace of God in vain,
and believe in vain, as appears by the 2 Cor. 6. 1. and 1 Cor. 15. 2.
Therefore he may fall from the Answ.
state of grace. I answer, first, that if you take the grace of God, for the
habitual graces of Gods Spirit, and belief for true and saving faith; then
the Antecedent is false, and is not warranted by these places of Scripture
which are quoted: but if you take grace for the word of grace, and the offer of
Christ to men in the Gospel, and belief, for an historical and common faith
(as they are taken here by the Apostle,) then the argument is false and
follows not. Now that this place of Paul is meant only of the word of grace,
and of the offer of grace to men in the Gospel, and not of the habitual
graces of Gods Spirit, it appears by the coherence and dependancie of the 2
Cor. 6. 1. upon the 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. God has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did be
seech you by us, we pray you in Christ's steed, be ye reconciled to God: we
then as workers together with him, befeech you also that ye receive not the
grace of God in vain: which proves, that this is only meant of the offer of
grace and Christ to men, and not of the habit and seed of grace it self. So
that your argument from hence, can be no more but this. Men may hear the word
of God in vain: therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may fall from the
state of grace: a strange in consequent. For that of the 1 Cor. 15. 2. unless
ye have believed in vain: it is not meant of a true, living, saving, and
justifying faith, but of an historicoll, fruitless, dead, and in-effectuall
faith or belief, which did never truly regenerate and transform the heart and
soul of those who did enjoy it. This does fully appeareby the opposition and
Antithesis in the sam^ verse. By which ye are saved, unless ye have believed
in vain: so that saving faith is here put in opposition to this vain belief,
which proves that this vain belief was no true and ustifying faith. So that
your argument from hence must be this. Men may loose a vain and ineffectuall
faith; therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may fall from the seeds and
habit of true and justifying faith. Secondly, I answer, that these two places
prove nothing for your conclusion admitting that they were meant of true
habitual grace and faith: for the one of them is but a mere exhortation, the
other, a bare exception and condition, neither of them is absolute and
positive. So that your argument from them can be but this. The Saints of God
are exhorted, not to receive the grace of God in vain: and they shall be
saved unless they believe in vain, therefore they may fall away from grace:
which is but an idle consequence, and rather deserves to be derided, then
answered. So that this objection, does nothing impeach the truth of this our
assertion.

The seventeenth objection against this present assertion, Psalm. 27. 9. 11.
Psalm. 51. 11. Psalm. 71. 9. and from other places and prayers of this nature,
and it is but this in substance. The regenerate Saints of God do always pray
to God, not to hide his face from them, not to put them away in his anger, not
to leave them nor forsake them, not to cast them off at last, nor to take away
his holy Spirit from them. Therefore they may fall from grace: or else these
prayers would be but vain and idle. I answer, that the argument Answ.
follows not, and the reason which you allege for to confirm it is but
friuilous. First, because that prayer is a chief means, to preserve the
Saints of God from Apostacy and backsliding, and to confirm and settle them
in the state of grace: therefore the use of prayer cannot imply a falling from
grace. This is no good argument. The Saints of God do use the means to
pe^seuere: therefore they may fall from grace: because the Saints cannot
persevere in grace but by using of the means, and the use of the means is the
cause of perseverance, not of Apostacy: this is your argument in effect. The
Saints of God do use prayer to God, which is a means of perseverance,
therefore they may fall from grace. What a ridiculous and absurd argument this
is, let all men judge. The perpetual care of God over his Saints, his
everlasting love toward them, his continual presence with them, together with
the guidance and direction of his Spirit, are the chiefest causes why the
Saints of God do thus persevere in grace, which though God has promised unto
them freely, and will be sure to make them good unto them, yet he will have
them for to pray unto him for the accomplishment and performance of them, that
so they may be thankful to him for them; that so they may prise them at an
higher rate, and ascribe the glory of them unto him. Therefore their prayers
unto God to have these promises accomplished, and made good unto them cannot
imply a final, or a total fall from grace. Secondly, The argument follows
not, nor yet the reason which is alleged, because it makes the promises of God
uncertain even in respect of God himself. God has promised not to leave, nor
yet forsake his children. Deuteronomy. 31 5. Josh. 1. 5. 1 Samuel 12. 22. and Heb. 13.
6. he has promised them not to cast them off. Job. 8. 20. Isay. 41. 9. 1 Samuel
12. 22. and John 6. 37. and that his spirit shall abide with them for ever.
John 14. 16, 17. do their prayers therefore unto God, make these promises of
God uncertain in themselves, and doubtful whether they shall be performed by
that God of truth and faithfulness that made them to them? God forbid: for
this would be nothing else but to make God a liar, and to make him subject
unto change and fickleness, in whom there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning I am. 1. 17. I would demand but this question of you, who press this
argument; whether your praying unto God for his presence and spirit, do imply
that God will not give them to you? If it does, how then can you pray in faith
without doubt James 16, 7.
and wa^ering, believing that you shall receive the thing you pray Math. 11. 24.
for? It is impossible for any man to pray in faith, if his prayer unto God,
did imply an incertaintie in Gods persormance of the thing he prays for; and
so it should be impossible for any man, to have any fruit or benefit by his
prayers, because they are not made in faith. So that if this were true, your
prayers must needs be faithless and fruitless; and all these gracious and
comfortable promises of God, concerning the hearing and answering of your
prayers, would be of no effect or truth. If it does not implie thus much, that
God will not grant the things you pray for, how then will this your Argument
follow, or stand good? If the prayers of the Saints to God, not to cast them
off, not to forsake them or deprive them of his presence or his Spirit, do not
implie, that God will ca^t them off, forsake them, and withdraw his Spirit from
them, then you can collect nothing at all against me from these prayers, no not
so much as a possibility of falling from the state of grace. Wherefore if you
will but recollect your senses, and weigh but this your Argument in an upright
balance, you cannot but acknowledge and confess it to be ridiculous, false,
and idle, and nothing to the present purpose.

The eighteenth objection that may be made against me, Paul, Gal. 5. 4. Christ
is become of none effect unto you, who ever of you are justified by the law; ye
are fallen from grace. The Saints of God may fall from grace in seeking to be
justified by the law; therefore they may fall away from grace. I answer, that
the Antecedent is Answ.
not warranted by this place which you allege: for the scope of this place,
and of this whole Epistle, is nothing else, but to dissuade the Galathians from
seeking justification and righteousness by the Law, and to seek justification
only by faith in Christ. So that this place alleged, is nothing else but a
dehortation, and no more in sense then this; Those that seek to be justified
by the law, shall have no benefit by the death of Christ, and therefore beware
how you seek to be justified by the law. What is this to our purpose? Surely
nothing at all. Yea, but you will say, Object.
that the Galathians fell from grace. Well, I grant it. But from Answ.
what grace was this? surely the grace of God offered unto them in the Gospel,
or the grace of the Gospel, which is not here in question; but not the true
and saving graces of Gods Spirit: they fell from the doctrine of grace in
cleaving to the law, not from the Spirit and habit of grace by cleaving unto
sin. The greater part, not all the Galathians fell from the Gospel to the
law; but that the true regenerate Saints of God which were among them did so
to, that they fell away from the state of Grace, this place is not sufficient
for to prove it, though you rack and wrest it to the utmost.

The nineteenth objection may be drawn from that prayer Agur. Pro. 30. 8. 9.
Give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me; left
I be full and deny thee, and say who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and
steal, and take the name of God in vain. Plenty or poverty may make a
regenerate man to fall from grace, as appears by this prayer of Agur.
therefore regenerate men may fall from grace. I answer: Answ.
first, that plenty or poverty may cause regenerate men to fall from grace, if
God should leave them to themselves, and not sanctify their prosperity or
poverty unto them: but God does never leave regenerate men unto themselves, he
does never leave them nor forsake them, and he does sanctify Heb. 13. 6.
all estates and conditions of life unto them, making them all to work
together for their good, Romans 8. 38. therefore they cannot cause them for to
fall from grace: Secondly, I answer, that these words of Agur do not prove
that plenty or poverty may cause regenerate men to fall from the state of
grace: they only prove that they may cause them to commit many sins against
God; which they may do, and yet not fall from grace. Hezechiah his heart was
lifted up with pride, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 26. yet he fell not away from the state
of grace, but repented him of this his sin. Plenty or poverty they may be
occasions of pride and discontent, thus much this prayer of Agur proves: it
proves that Christians ought for to desire a competencie, and to avoid, and
pray against all occasions of sin, and this is all it proves. What
consequence then can you infer from hence? What? that the true regenerate
Saints of God may fall from grace? because that Agur prays to God to keep him
from the occasions of sin? because he prays to God to give him perseverance,
and to remove those lets and obstacles which might hinder him in his
perseverance? What an absurdity would this be? Regenerate men pray to God, to
keep them from the occasions of sin, regenerate men use the means and
helps to persevere in grace, and remove the obstacles that might hinder them;
therefore they may fall from grace. This is all the argument that can be
collected from hence, and this all is nothing.

The twentieth Argument that may be objected against Paul, 1 These. 5. 19.
Quench not the spirit. The regenerate Saints of God may quench the Spirit of
God: therefore they may fall from grace. I answer, that there Answ.
is a double quenching of the Spirit, the one of the heat and feruencie, the
other of the habitual graces of Gods spirit: the Saints of God out of
idleness and negligence in Gods service, or by the commission of some sin or
other, or by the negligent and superficial performance of holy duties may
quench the feruencie, the heat and zeal of Gods Spirit, that is, of those
spiritual graces which are within them (which are no more but the degrees and
fruits of grace) but yet they can never extinguish the habitual graces of
Gods spirit, for they are of a divine nature, they are an incorruptible seed, a
seed which will remain within them, a spiritual fire which never fails, and
which many waters cannot quench, as you may read in the 1 Pet, 1. 23. 2 Pet.
1. 3. 1 John 3. 9. Luke 22, 32. 1 Cor. 13. 8. and Cant. 8. 6, 7. So that the
meaning of the Apostle in this place is only this, that the Saints of God must
not neglect the sweet and comfortable motions of Gods Spirit, when as they
feel them arising and springing up in their hearts: that they must beware of
abating of the edge, the feruencie, the strength, the heat and zeal of their
graces: and not that they may utterly extinguish and put out the habitual
graces of Gods spirit which are in them. So that your Argument from this place
of Paul can be but this. The Saints of God may suppress and neglect the sweet
and comfortable motions of Gods spirit, and lose the heat, the zeal, the
feruencie and degrees of grace, therefore they may lose the very habits and
seeds of grace; which is but a mere inconsequencie. Secondly, I answer, that
there is a double quenching of the Spirit: first, in respect of our selves,
secondly, in respect of the Spirit it self: The Saints of God may do as much
as in them lies to quench the Spirit of God, but yet they cannot actually
quench the Spirit: the Spirit of God will not be quenched by them, but will
still remain within them, though they themselves, out of incogitancie or
negligence (but never out of malice, and wilfulness) endeavor for to quench
it. Thirdly, I answer, that this quenching of the Spirit of God may have a
double construction: For a man may quench the motions of Gods spirit either in
respect of himself, or in respect of others. Now some good interpreters,
expound this place of Paul, of the quenching of Gods spirit merely in respect
of others, making this to be the meaning of the place. See that you encourage
the Ministers of the Gospel, and not cross, interrupt or discourage them in
their preaching by your unfruitfulness, or by opposing your selves against
them, or by your disreport and neglect of their ministry in not repairing to
their Sermons, joining it with the ensuing verse, Despise not prophecy. If you
^ake the place in this sense as well you may; your Argument can be no other
then this. The Saints of God may discourage and offend their Ministers,
therefore they may fall from the state of grace, which is a mere Nonsequitur.
Lastly, I answer, that this place of Paul; is but a bare admonition: he says
not, that the Saints of God do quench the spirit, but only admonish them not
to quench it. Which does not implie, that the Saints of God may quench the
spirit, because their diligent care in not quenching of the Spirit, is the
chiefest means for to preserve and keep the Spirit in them. The Saints of God
must use the means for to preserve the spirit in them, therefore they may
quite extinguish it, is but an absurd and contradictor^e Argument. So that take
this place of Paul in what sense you will it does not make against me.

The twenty one objection, is that of the 2 John 8. Look to your selves, that
we lose not those things which we ^aue wrought, but that we may receive a
full reward. Regenerate men may lose the things which they have wrought;
therefore they may fall from grace. I answer, that the Antecedent Ans^.
is not warranted or proved by this place: first, because these words are but a
mere caution, and exhortations to the Saints, to beware lest Antichrist should
seduce them: therefore this being but a mere exhortation to use the means to
persevere in grace, does not, nor cannot necessarily implie, that the saints of
God may fall from grace. Secondly, those to whom St. John does use this
exhortation; they were the elect saints of God, verse 1. the truth did dwell
with them, and shall be with them for ever, verse. 2. they were such as should
abide in the doctrine of Christ, verse 9. therefore this exhortation and
caution made to such as these, does not necessarily implie, that they may be
seduced and fall from grace. For it is impossible for the elect of God to be
seduced, Math. 24. 24. Mark 13. 22. Reu. 9. 4. cap. 17. 8. it is impossible
for them, in whom the truth does dwell and should abide for ever, for them that
should abide i^ the doctrine of Christ, to fall away from grace: therefore this
exhortation being made to such as these, cannot possibly implie that they
should fall from grace. So that take these words in your own sense and
meaning, as if they were applied to the parties themselves to whom St. John
writes, they do not make against me. But if we take them in their proper
sense, then they make less against me then before. For the Apostle does not
say, take heed lest you loose the things which you your selves have wrought,
but that ye receive a full reward: but look to your selves, that we lose not
the things which we have wrought, but that we may receive a full reward. So
that here is no losing of their own works, but of the works of others: not a
loss of their own reward, but of the reward of others: and that not simply
of a reward, for that cannot be lost, but only of a full and plenarie reward.
So that the true and proper sense of the Apostle in this place, is no more but
this. Brethren, the times are very dangerous, there are many Antichrists come
into the world, who will labor to seduce you: beware then that you be not
seduced and perverted by them; for then we who are the ministers of the
Gospel, and have preached Christ unto you, shall partly lose the fruit of our
labors, and not receive a full reward. We shall lose the joy, the fruit, and
comfort of our labor here, we shall have no joy at all in you, or in our
preaching, because you continue not in our doctrine: whereas if you did
continue in it, it would even comfort and rejoice our souls. For that which
gives us best content, and brings us greatest joy and comfort here, is to hear
that our children walk in truth, and continue constant in the faith: this is
our chiefest and our greatest joy, verse 4. and 3. John 3. 4. Yea, and we shall
lose some part of our reward hereafter: for the more those are who are
converted by our ministry, and the more constant and firm they are in the
profession of the faith, the greater shall our rejoicing, the greater shall our
reward and glory be in the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. 16. 1 These. 2. 19 28.
and Dan. 12. 3. Wherefore if you have any care or respect to us or to our good,
as well as to your own, then look to your selves, and take heed that ye be
not seduced, that so we may not lose the things which we have wrought, but
that we may receive a full reward of joy and comfort both here and hereafter;
This is the true, genuine, proper and only sense, scope, and meaning of this
place; and what makes this against me? Surely nothing at all: and therefore I
will forbear to give any further answer to it.

The twenty two Objection is that of Psalm. 119. 176. I have gone astray like a
sheep that is lost, o seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy
commandments. A regenerate man may go astray from God like to a lost sheep:
therefore he may finally or totally fall from grace. I answer, that this place
and argument Answ.
proves nothing at all against me. For first, though a regenerate man and
sheep of Christ may stray away for a time in some by-path of sin, yet he is
a sheep still: A sheep that strayeth away, is a sheep still; his straying
from the fold, does not alter and change his nature, and make him not to be a
sheep: So one that is once a true Saint of God, and a true sheep of Christ;
though he chance to stray aside into some by-path of sin for a fit, yet he
is still a Saint of God, and a sheep of Christ; this his straying away from
God and Christ, does not alter and change his nature, and make him not to be a
sheep of Christ, because he strayeth not away wilfully or of set purpose: so
that this very comparison and similitude of a lost sheep does make against
you: For Christ does account a lost sheep to be still a sheep, and does
always seek him out, until he find him, and bring him back again, as we
may see expressly, Ezech. 34. 16. Math. 18. 12, 13. 14. Luke 15. 4, 5. and John
17. 12. Seconly, I answer that if you take all the words of the Psalmist
together, this place is so far from making against me, as there cannot be a
stronger place produced for me: for though the Psalmist tells us, that he had
gone astray like a lost sheep, yet he certifieth us withal, that even then
when as he went astray, he did not forget Gods commandments: though in his
flesh he did Romans 7. 25.
serve the law of sin for a time, yet, in his mind, his heart and spirit,
he did always serve the law of God: and therefore did neither finally nor
totally fall from the state of grace. Lastly, the Psalmist informs us in the
three verses before this verse which is objected: that he had chosen Gods
precepts, that his soul did long for his salvation, and that his law was his
delight: therefore it is certain that he was neither finally nor totally
fallen from the state of grace, for then he could never have done thus. So
that this objection and place makes strongly for me, not against me.

The twenty three objection is this. A member of Christ may be made a member
of an harlot, 1 Cor. 6. 15, 16. therefore he may fall from grace. I answer,
that the Argument follows Answ.
not. For a member of Christ may be made a member of an harlot; that is, he
may commit fornication, and yet be a member of Christ still: (as we may see
by the example of David, which I shall come to hereafter.) he may be one body
with an harlot, and yet one spirit with Christ. Again, I answer, that Paul in
these words of his, does not intend and aim at this, that a true regenerate
man may fall quite away from grace, and be quite cut off from Christ by this
sin of fornication: this is not his drift and purpose: but the end of this
his speech, is to dissuade the Corinthians from this sin of fornication, to
which they were much addicted, because their very bodies as well as their
souls, were the members of Christ, and the temple of the holy Ghost, and
therefore they should not defile them with this sin of fornication, and make
them members of an harlot. This is the scope, this is the drift of the Apostle
in these words, this is the only thing he aims at, he did not so much as
think of your collection, of a fall from grace: and therefore unless you will
pervert and wrest the Scriptures, and give it such a sense and meaning, as was
never intended by the holy Ghost, and those that penned it, you cannot say that
this Scripture makes against me. I have now (good Reader) gone through most of
those Arguments that can be produced against me from the Scriptures: and if
thou will but weigh them with a judicious and impartial eye, thou shall find
them so disioynted, so incongruous, so indigestlie, so idle and absurd, so full
of inconsequies, and gross Nonsequiturs, so palpably miscollected, and
incongruously wrested and extorted from the places which are cited for to
warrant them, that thou can not choose but wonder at the injudiciousnesse,
and weakness of such as do produce them. For mine own part, I wonder, how
any that make a vaunt or show of judgment, wit, or learning, can be so
strangely besotted, and so much ouer-seene, as to build a point of faith, and
doctrine upon such slender and injuditious collections and grounds as these;
and to oppose a manifest and undeniable truth, with these weak, childish,
absurd, incongruous, injudicious and ridiculous arguments and collections,
which children and schoole-boyes would blush to urge. Certainly if it were not,
that some of this sect have a name of learning, wit, and judgment in the
world, I should think them very illiterate and simple, very childish, sottish,
and injudicious, to produce such strange collections, arguments, and conceits
as these, against so evident and clear a truth. But what shall I say? God
himself has beso^ted them with 2 These. 2. 10. 11.
these vain delusions, he has given them over to a reprobate and iniuditious
sense to believe those lies and fancies of their own, because they would not
receive the love of the truth, and submit their wills and judgments to his
word: and hence it is, that they are not ashamed to broach these vain
conceits, these false collections, and injuditious (if not absurd and
ridiculous,) arguments, which they themselves would scoff at, deride, and
utterly disclaim, if they were in their right senses, and had not their faces
steeled with impudency and boldness. I mention this but as an Item, on the
by. I now proceed to the ensuing arguments.

The twentyfourth argument which may be produced against me, is that which is
the very ground, the very head; of the final and total Apostacy of the
Saints: and it is only this. A true regenerate Saint of God may commit a
gross and unknown sin, and dye before he has particularly repented of it.
Therefore he may fall away, both finally, and totally from the state of grace.
For answer to this grand and Answ.
unanswerable objection (as our Antagonists repute it) I shall deny the
argument, for the inconsequencie of it. Now that this argument follows not, it
is evident by these ensuing reasons. First, because it requires a particular
and actual repentance, after every known and gross sin that a true member
of Christ commits, as absolutely necessary to salvation; which if I should
admit, it would necessarily follow, that no man could be saved. First, because
that there is no man whatsoever that can particularly repent, of all those
particular and mortal sins which he has committed from time to time.
Secondly, because the most righteous men in the world do no doubt commit some
actual and deadly sin or other, in thought, word, and deed, between the last
minute and instant of their death and their last actual repentance, of which
sins they have no time and space particularly to repent: if therefore an
actual repentance were absolutely required after every particular act of sin
that a child of God commit^, it would be then impossible for any to be saved:
a desperate and dismal consequent; which would make the very stoutest of our
Antagonists to quake and tremble, if it were admitted to be true, as they
pretend it for to be. Secondly, this argument follows not, because it would
either bring in that Popish distinction of venial and mortal sins, when as
the least sins that any man can commit, as idle words, and thoughts, are
mortal and deadly in their own proper nature, as appears by Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Ier. 17 9. Ezech. 18. 20. Math. 5. 28. cap. 12. 37, 38. Acts 8. 22. Gal. 3. 10.
and Ephesians. 5. 3, 7. Or else it would make every sin, yea, the very least
sin that a regenerate man commits, to sever and cut him off from Christ, and
to cast him down from the state of grace. For if any mortal sin whatsoever
may cut a man off from Christ, and cast him down from the state of grace, as
you affirm it may, why then should not every sin do it, as well as any
sin? Every sin is alike mortal in it felfe, and in its own nature: and
therefore every sin, as well ac any sin, should cut a man off from Christ,
and cast him down from the state of grace. That which makes any sin to cut a
man off from Christ is only this, that it is a mortal sin: now every sin
is a like mortal in its own essence and nature: therefore every sin should
cut a man off from Christ as well as any sin: where there is the same cause,
there must needs be the same effect. Now you your selves do grant, that every
sin which a Saint of God commits, does not sever and cut him off from Christ:
and if it were not so, in were impossible for any to be ingrafted into Christ,
or to be saved, for before he could repent him of one sin he would still
commit another, which would hinder his inscition into Christ, and his inuesting
into the state of grace, his sins would come so fast and thick upon him,
that he could never be ingrafted into Christ again, and so he could not be
saved. If therefore any deadly sin that a Saint commits does not sever him
from Christ, and cast him down from the state of grace, then no sin at all
can do it; because all sins are alike mortal in their own nature: and so
your argument does not follow. Thirdly, this argument follows not, because it
would make the sins of regenerate men, utterly to abolish and root out, that
immortal seed of grace which is planted in their hearts, and make them liable
to eternal condemnation: which cannot be. For Saint John does certify us in
express words, in the 1 John 3. 9. that whosoever is borne of God does not
commit sin, for his feed remains in him: neither can be sin, because
be is borne of God. that is, he cannot sin unto death, or to extirpate that
seed of grace which is within him. The seed of grace is an incorruptible and
immortal seed. 1 Pet. 1. 23. therefore no sins which the Saints of God
commit, can suffocate or quite extinguish it. True it is that the sins of
Gods children may cross, hinder, and in part suppress, the acts and fruits,
the increase and growth of grace for a time, but yet they cannot quell nor
quite extirpate that habit and seed of grace which is within them, they cannot
make them not to be the sons of God, the members of Christ, or the elect of
God; and therefore the argument follows not. Fourthly, the argument follows
not, because it would make repentance to be but a mere transient act, and not
an habitual grace, or at least it would make habitual repentance, to be of
no esteem in the sight of God: neither of which can be admitted. For if a new
and fresh repentance be necessarily required after every particular known
sin, as your argument surmiseth; then either the sin which is committed
must destroy that habitual repentance which is in men, or else the act of
repentance after those known sins committed, must be a fruit of that
habitual repentance which was in them before, or else it must be but a mere
transient act; or else it must follow, that such as have the habitual grace of
true repentance in the^ may be damned, or put into the state of damnation for
want of an outward act of this their habitual repentance, at that particular
time. If the sin committed does destroy that habitual repentance which was
in them: then you will make one act of sin to destroy an habit of grace,
which cannot be. If this actual repentance after the sin committed, (which
you say does cut men off from Christ, and cast them down from the state of
grace,) be but a fruit and effect of the former habit of r^pentance that was
in them, then they were not totally cut off from Christ, and cast down from
the state of grace, for they had still the grace and habit of repentance in
them. If this actual repentance afterward proceed not from an habit of
repentance which is wrought within them: then you make repentance to be but a
mere transient act, and not an habitual grace: which is contrary to the
Scriptures, which do make repentance to be an habitual grace. If you grant
repentance to be an habitual grace, and yet maintain, that the Saints of God
are in the state of damnation after any gross sin committed, before their
actual repentance, notwithstanding they have the habitual grace of repentance
in them: then you make the habit of true repentance, to wit; the inward
disposition and frame of the heart and soul, the inward hatred and antipathie
against sin, the inward tenderness, and the habitual sorrow and grief of
heart and soul; the constant purpose of heart to forsake all sin, and to
cleave inseperablie to Christ, to be nothing wor^h in the sight of God, and to
be nothing auailable to the Sa^nts: when as it is only the inward and
habitual disposition and inclination of the heart and soul that God requires
and regards, as an acceptable and pleasing sacrifice unto him, never respecting
the outward act of repentance, unless it proceed from that babit of repentance
which is within us: as you may see at large. 2^ Chro. 34. 27, 28. Ps. 51. 17.
Isa. 57. 15. c. 61, 1, 2, 3. Eze. 36. 26. and Mal. 3. 14. Wherefore, seeing that
this argument would make repentance to be a mere transient act, and not an
habitual grace; and seeing it would make the habitual grace of true
repentance to be of no effect, and not sufficient to free men from damnation,
it follows not. Fifthly, this argument follows not, because it would breed a
great fraction and interruption in a Christian man's estate: a regenerate man,
might then be one day in the state of grace, another day in the state of
damnation, a third day saved, a fourth day damned, a fifth day written in the
book of life, a sixth day rased out of it again: the state of grace should
then beefull of fractions and interruptions, full of inconstancy, and
fickleness, whereas the Scripture does inform us, that a regenerate man's
estate is a constant, stable, settled, permanent, and immutable estate, and so
well grounded, fixed, rooted, and established, that it cannot be shaken, moved,
or totally interrupted: as you may read at large. Psalm. 125. 1. Psalm. 37. 24.
Psalm. 89. 36, 37. Ier. 31. 36, 37. Math. 7. 24, 25. Luke 6. 48. Job. 36. 7.
Heb. 12, 28. Ephesians. 3. 17. Col. 1. 23. cap. 2. 5, 7. 2 Cor. 1, 21. Romans 5. 2. 1
Cor. 16. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 19 and 1 Pet. 5. 10. wherefore your
argument follows not. Sixthly, the argument follows not, because it would
severe the means from the end, or the end from the means: it would severe
Gods absolute positive and immutable decree and election, from the means that
should execute it, and so it would make it to be of no effect. For if
repentance be the means which God has appointed his children to obtain
salvation by, as we all know it is: then that God who has decreed, that his
elect, chosen, and true regenerated Saints should be saved, has likewise
decreed, that they should still repent, because else this decree of his could
not be executed. As God has given Christ unto his Saints and children, so he
does also together with him freely give them all things, that may tend to their
salvation. Romans 8. 32. as God has given them life and godliness, so he
has given them all things that belong unto them. 2 Pet. 1. 4. all things that
may preserve and keep them in them. So that all whom God has praedestinated to
eternal life, he has likewise praedestinated them to all things that are
needful and requisite for to obtain it, else this praedestination and decree
of his would be in vain, for want of means to execute it. Wherefore God
having praedestinated all such as are regenerated unto etern all life, he has
likewise praedestinated them for to repent of all their sins: and therefore
this argument of yours which would sever repentance from praedestination, and
suppose that a regenerate man elected to eternal life might die without
repentance, and so perish for ever must needs be false. Seventhly, this
argument follows not, neither can it be admitted, because it would sever and
divide those graces of Gods spirit which cannot be disioyned. It would sever
repentance, from faith and love, from justification and adoption, which cannot
be disioyned or severed from the other. For a man may commit a gross sin,
and yet have true and saving faith and love within him still: a man may be
stained with some foul and scandalous sin, and yet not loose his adoption
and that seed of grace which is within him: 1 John 3. 9. If therefore such a
man as is adopted and regenerated, such a one as has the seed of grace, and
the habit of faith and love within him, might fall from grace and perish, as
you pretend he may, then a man that is justified, a man that has true and
saving grace within him may be damned, and the graces of Gods spirit which are
concatinated and lincked together by an inseparable union, might be severed,
which were an absurd, and an impossible thing. Eighthly, this argument follows
not, because it derogates much from the merits and satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, it puts all upon one act of repentance, it makes our former repentance
and justification by faith in Christ to be nothing at all, it takes away all
from Christ's satisfaction and mediation, who is made unto us of God
righteousness and iustication and redemption: 1 Cor. 1. 30. 31. and suspendeth
all upon our actual repentance: which is contrary to the Scriptures. For when
a man is once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, though he does
afterward commit sin, yet this sin of his is not imputed to him, because God
looks upon him as he is in Christ, who has fully satisfied for all his
sins, both past, present, and to come. Hence is that of the 1 John 2. 1, 2.
If any man sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Christ Jesus be is our
ransom and attonment. Romans Romans 8. 39. 34.
3. 24, 25. and cap. 5. 11. it is he that justifies; who is he that
condemns? Those who are once in him, there is no condemnation due unto them
though they sin. Romans 7. 25. cap. 8. 1. the law of the spirit of life in
Christ, bath made them free from the law of sin and death. Romans 8. 2. and
therefore they cannot perish for want of one particular act of repentance, for
one particular act of sin as you pretend, unless that you will derogate much
from the merits and satisfaction of Christ death. Ninthly, the Antecedent is
false, because, it would make one act of sin for to destroy an whole habit of
grace, which cannot be: for if it be true of natural, acquisite and
artificial habits, that one or two acts that are contrary to them cannot
destroy them, and that they are so settled, rooted and grounded in those
subjects in which they are, that they are hard for to be lost again or rooted
out, much more must it be true, of divine, spiritual, celestial and infused
habits which are wrought in men's hearts by the holy Ghost, that they cannot be
rased or utterly abolished by one actual sin or two, especially when as they
are not committed with a full consent. Lastly, I answer, that this argument
follows not, because it does suppose, that true grace, and a gross notorious
and known sin can never stand together, which is false, and contrary to the
Scriptures. True it is, that truth of grace, and the whole body, power, and
dominion of sin can never stand together, they are incompatible, and cannot
stand together upon equal terms: but yet upon unequal and different terms
they may. Truth of grace it cannot stand together with the dominion of sin
and satan, or with the power and strength of sin: but where the kingedome of
sin and Satan is shaken and brought under, where the power and strength of
sin is curbed, weakened, mortified and subdued by the power and strength of
grace, where sin and Satan are subordinate to grace (as they are in all the
true regenerate Saints of God, who have crucified the flesh with the affections
Gal. 5. 24.
and lusts thereof) there they are not incompatible, they Col. 3. 5.
may stand both together. There is no man in the world so thoroughly mortified,
and sanctified, but there are still some remainders of the dody of sin, some
parts of the old man left within him. Every regenerate man has flesh in him as
well as spirit, and the one of these is always lusting and striving against
the other, so that they cannot do the things they would. Gal. 5. 16, 17. See
this in holy Paul Romans 7. 15. to the end. I know (says he) that in me, that
is in my flesh dwells no good thing. For to will is present with me, but how
to perform that which is good I find not. For the good that I would I do not,
but the evil that I would not that I do, I find then a law, that when I would
do good, evil is present with me: for I delight in the law of God after the
inward man: but I see another law in my members ^arring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of finne, which is my
members; which makes me to cry out: O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death; I thank God through Jesus Christ. So
then with the mind I my self do serve the law of God, but with my flesh the
law of sin. Paul had a body of sin within him, not wholly mortified and
subdued, and yet it stood together with his graces, and with his inwardman. So
David and Peter, they committed grievous sins, and yet they stood together
with their graces, as I shall prove anon. The Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus,
and Thyatira, they fell into such scandalous and gross sins as made God angry
with them, and yet they did not fall from grace: for they did labor still in
the Lords work without fainting: they did hold fast his name, and suffer
persecution for his sake: they did not deny the faith, but they kept their
faith, their charity and patience still, of which God takes special notice,
and their last works were more then their first: Reu. 2. 3. to 21. These
Churches they had many great sins within them, and yet they had many
excellent and precious graces joined with them. Ieho^aphat may commit a great
si^ne against the Lord, in helping of the ungodly, and in loving those that
hate the Lord, and yet there are good things found within him still. 2 Chronicles.
19. 2, 3. The acts of great, infamous, and notorious sins do sometimes meet
and stand together in the Saints of God, but the dominion, and the power, the
strength and babits of those finnes do never. The Saints of God may commit
such gross and scandalous sins, which are in their own nature peccata (...)
^alutis, and vastantia (...) (as Augustine and (...) style them) but yet they
never do so wast their consciences and spoil their graces, as to root out
the very feeds and habits of their graces, to cut them off from Christ, and to
disturb them in their state of grace; because they never do commit them with
an absolute and full consent and will; they never commit them out of a
deliberate purpose, and settled resolution; but the very bent and frame of their
hearts and souls, and of their inward man, which is their self, is always
set and bent against them, and turned to the Lord: they hate their sins and
resolve against them from their souls, though now and then out of the strength
of the temptation, and out of the policy of satan they are suddenly foiled,
though not utterly cast down and conquered with them. Wherefore seeing that
this argument does suppose, that the seeds, the habits and the truth of grace
can never stand together with the acts of any gross and known sin, which is
but a mere fiction and notion of our Antagonists, being ex diametro opposite
to the express testimony of the Scriptures, and having nothing else, but
their ipsi diximus to warrant it, there is just cause for to deny it, both for
the inconsequencies and falsenesse of it. But because this very argument (as I
am informed) has been lately pressed, and propounded in another manner. I
will propound it in the same manner as it was then urged, and so will answer
it. A true regenerate Object.
man and a member of Jesus Christ may lie long in a gross and known finne
without any actual repentance, as David and Solomon did: therefore he may
fall totally if not finally from the state of grace. The argument they prove to
be true by this reason. The true regenerate Saints of God committing any
gross and known sins and lying in them without repentance, from the time of
these sins committed, to the time of their actual repentance of them, are
not in the state of grace, but in the state of damnation: which they prove by
these two reasons. First, because these sins are mortal in themselves, and
exclude men quite from heaven, as appears by. Ezech. 18. 20. the soul that
sins it shall dye. and by the 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. those that commit ^nch things
and sins as these, shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Secondly, because
these sins of theirs are not forgiven before their actual repentance of
them, so that if they should die before their actual repentance of them, they
should be damned for them: so that in that Interim, and space of time between
the sin committed, and their actual repentance, they are in the state of
damnation, and not in the state of grace, because their sins are not
forgiven: and therefore the Argument follows. For answer to this maine
Objection, Answ.
which is the very sum and substance of all that can be objected, and the
very basis and foundation of our Antagonists Error. I shall deny the ground
and reasons which support this argument. First, I shall deny, that the Saints
of God committing any gross and known sin, and lying in it for a time
without any actual repentance, are during the space and time of this their
impenitencie in the state of damnation. And secondly I shall deny, that a
particular repentance is absolutely necessary to salvation, after every
particular gross, and known act of sin which the Saints of God commit, and
that those sins of theirs cannot be pardoned before their actual and
particular repentance.

For the first of these, it will be plain and manifest, if we sin unto
death, or sin so far as to put themselves into the state of damnation. He
that will sin unto death, or sin so far as to put himself into the state
of damnation; must sin so far, as utterly to separate, and cut off himself
from Christ, utterly to extirpate all the seeds and habits of true and saving
grace which are within him, and wholly to emancipate and inthrall himself to
the service of sin and Satan: For as long as any man abides in Christ, and
is not severed or cut off from him, as long as any man has any habits and
seeds of true and saving grace within him, and is not wholly inthralled and
imbondaged unto sin, and Satan, so that the whole entire wrath of God cannot
light and fall upon him; he is not in the state of damnation, but in the state
of grace. Now none of the true regenerate saints of God can sin so far, as
utterly to sever and cut off themselves from Christ, or utterly to root out
the very habit and seed of those true and saving graces that are within them,
and to inthrall themselves wholly to the service of sin and Satan, so that
the whole entire wrath of God cannot arise against them: therefore they can
never sin so fair, as to put themselves into the state of death and
damnation. This is evident by diverse pregnant places of Scripture, and by
diverse reasons. First, it is evident, that a true regenerate Saint of God can
never sin so far, as to put himself into the state of death and damnation,
no not for a time: because he can never sin so far, as to be utterly cast
down from the state of grace, to be utterly cut off from Christ, and to be
utterly deprived of the life of grace. David he informs us, ( Psalm. 37. 24.
) that a good man though he fall, yet he shall not be utterly cast down: for
the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand; and Paul he assures us, ( Romans 14. 4.
) that he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand. The Saints of
God, ( 2 Cor. 4. 9, 10.
) they may be troubled on every side, by reason of sin, but yet not
distressed, they may be cast down by sin, but not destroyed: they may be ( 2
Cor. 6. 9. 10.
) as dying men, and yet behold they live: as chastened, yet not killed: as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich: as having
nothing, and yet possessing all things: they may be like ( Luke 10. 30.
) the man that went down from Jerusalem to Ierico, and fell among thieves,
even wounded and half dead with sin: their graces like those of the ( Reu.
3. 2.
) Church of Sardis, may be ready to die: the Saints of God and their graces,
they may suffer a winter of temptation, they may be sick and languishing by
reason of sin: they may be ( Lib. 4. Epist. Epist. 2 Antoniano fratri.
) semianimes as Cyprian styles them, half dead, and half withered, but yet
they are never wholly dead in sins and trespasses: when they are at the worst
and lowest ebb, they are ( Isai. 42. 3.
) but bruised reeds, and smoking flax, they are never Math. 12. 20.
utterly broken, never utterly quenched and put out: there are still some
breathings of grace and spiritual life within their souls, there are graces
always mixed with their sins, Reu 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 9 13, 14. 15 19, 20.
there are still ( 2 Chronicles. 19. 2, 3.
) some good things in them, of which God takes special notice: there is still
a ( Reu 3. 2. 8.
) little strength within them, whereby they are enabled to recover themselves
again, to keep the word of God, and not to deny his name; and therefore by
the voice and testimony of all these Scriptures, the true regenerate Saints of
God, do never sin so far, as to put themselves into the state of death and
damnation; because they never sin so far, as to be utterly cast down from
the state of grace, to be utterly cut off from Christ, or to be wholly deprived
of the life of grace. Secondly, the Saints of God when as they fall into any
sins, they never go so far, as to put themselves into the state of death
and damnation by these their sins, because the seed of grace does still abide
within them: this is St. John's reason in the 1 John 3. 9. and cap. 5. 16, 17,
18. He that is borne of God does not commit sin: for his seed remains in
him: neither can he sin (that is, he cannot sin unto death) because he is
borne of God: The seed of grace, it is an immortal seed, 1 Pet. 2. 23. it is a
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. it will quench all the fiery darts of the wicked,
Ephesians. 6. 16. and it cannot be quenched or drowned, Cant. 8. 7. it is an
anointing that abides in men, 1 John 2. 27. it is such a seed, as can die no
more, death has no more dominion over it, John 11. 25, 26. and Romans 6. 9. 10.
11. 14. it is a seed that proceeds from the very power of God, and of the holy
Ghost, Romans 15 13. 1 Cor. 2. 5. it is wrought in us by the selfsame almighty
power of God, which raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, and set him at the
right hand of God in heavenly places, Ephesians. 1. 19. 20. and cap. 3. 20.
therefore it cannot be vanquished or destroyed by all the power and strength
of sin or Satan: the gates of hell cannot prevail against it, Math. 16. 18.
this power and grace of Christ in us, is sufficient for us, it is stronger then
sin or Satan, it is able to vanquish and subdue them, and to tread and
bruise them under our feet, 2 Cor. 10. 4. 5. cap. 12. 9, 10. Romans 16. 20.
Ephesians. 6. 16. 1 John 4. 4. and cap. 5. 4, 5. No sin that the Saints of God
commit, does utterly destroy and root this seed of Grace out of their hearts,
it still abides within them, and therefore they never sin so far, as to put
themselves into the state of damnation, or to fall wholly or totally from the
state of grace: He who amidst the very greatest of his sins, does retain
the very habit and seed of grace within him, it is certain that he falls not
wholly from the state of grace (for, for any man to fall totally from the state
of grace, and yet to retain the very habit and seed of grace within him still,
is a plain and manifest contradiction.) But the true regenerate Saints of God,
and such as are truly borne of God, even amidst the very greatest of their
sins, do still retain the habit and the seed of grace within them (as is
evident by the premises) therefore it is certain, that they fall not wholly
from the state of grace by these their sins. Thirdly, a true regenerate man
can never sin so far, as to fall totally from grace, and to put himself
into a state of death and damnation, because he never sins so far, as to
make himself a slave or servant unto sin: though sin be in him, yet it is
in him as a tyrant and a rebel, not a King or a friend, it rules and reigns
not in him, he obeyes it not in the lusts thereof, he never yields up himself
as a servant or a subject to it: Romans 6. 12. to 23. 2 Pet. 2. 19. John 8. 34.
though he walks after the slesh, or rather is drawn violently after the flesh
sometimes, yet he wars not after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 3. he is so far from
warring after it, that he always wars and fights against it: the very sin
and evil which he does commit, is the sin and evil which he would not do,
Romans 7. 15. to the end, and Gal. 5. 17. he never sins with a full, entire,
complete, resolved, and deliberate will, he never yields a full and perfect
assent unto his sin, there is a reluctancie, reuitancie, dislike and hatred
of it in his soul, and it his inner man, and therefore he never sins so
far, as to cast himself wholly down from the state of grace, and to put
himself into the state of death and damnation. Fourthly, Regenerate men they
never sin so far as to fall totally from the state of grace, no not for a
time, because they never sin so far, as to severe and cut off themselves
from Christ. Those who even then, when as they do commit sin, and whiles they
have the remainders of the old man, and of the body of sin continuing in
them, continue still in Christ, it is certain that they are in the state of
life and grace, and not in the state of death and damnation, (because he that
is in Christ the spring and fountain of all grace and life, has grace and
life within him, and he is wholly freed from the law of sin and death, John
5. 24. 1 John 5. 12. and Romans 8. 2. But the true regenerate Saints of God, even
then when as they do commit sin, and whiles they have the remainders of the
old man, and of the body of sin continuing in them, continue still in Christ:
as is evident by Romans 7. 15. to the end, compared with Romans 8. 1, 2. where Paul
making mention of that perpetual combat which is between the flesh and the
spirit in every true regenerate man, who did with their mind serve the law of
God, but with the flesh the law of sin: he concludes it with this Corollarie
or inference. There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: for though there be
much sin, and corruption in them, yet the law of the Spirit of life, has
made them free from the law of sin and death: There is now, no condemnation
to them, even now whiles there is much sin and corruption in them, because
they strive against this sin and corruption, they hate it, and are grieved
under it, they obey and serve it not; because there is an inner man, a
regenerate and sanctified part within them, which God does most respect, which
is always grapling and contending with those corruptions, and because they are
still in Christ who has freed them from the law of finne and death: Therefore
because the regenerate Saints of God, even then when as they do commit si^ne,
and whiles their corruptions are hanging on them, are still in Christ,
Therefore it is certain, that they are in the state of life and grace, and not
in the state of death and damnation. Fifthly, the true regenerate Saints of God,
when as they commit auy gross and known sin, even before their actual and
particular repentance for it, are still in the state of life and grace, and not
in the state of death and damnation, because they are still the elected Saints,
and the adopted sons of God, and their names are still enrolled in the book
of Life. Those who are still the elected and adopted sons of God, and have
their names enrolled in the Book of Life, it is certain, that they are
always in the state of grace and life, and not in the state of death and
damnation: (because their election and adoption, they are altogether immutable,
they cannot be altered or changed no more then God himself.) But all those who
are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, they are still the
elected and adopted sons of God, and their names are always enrolled in the
book of Life, Romans 8. 29. 30. Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. Luke 10. 20. Phil. 4. 3. Heb.
12. 13. Reu. 13. 18. and infinite other places. Therefore it is certain, that
they are always in the state of grace and life, and not in the state of death
and damnation, yea even then when as they lie in any gross, scandalous, and
known sin, without any particular and actual repentance. Sixthly, the true
regenerate Saint^ of God, can never sin so far, as to put them selves into
the state of death and damnation, or to cast themselves wholly from the state
of grace, because the eternal guilt and punishment of their sins is not
imputed to them, but it is always done away, and utterly abolished in Jesus
Christ, who is their Advocate, their Mediator, their satisfaction and
atonement. Those to whom the eternal guilt of sin is not imputed, it is
certain, that no sins of theirs which they do commit, can wholly cast them
down from the state of grace and life, into the state of death and damnation:
(because that no man can be in the state of death and damnation, but where the
eternal guilt and punishment of his sins may be imputed to him.) But to all
such who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, the eternal
guilt of sin is not imputed, (no not then, when as they lie in any actual
and known sin without particular repentance for it: because they are still in
Christ their Mediator, their Advocate, their surety, and the full and perfect
satisfaction, propitiation, and atonement for all their sins, which reason
is fully warranted and proved by Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. cap. 8. 1.
2. 33. 34. 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Col. 2. 13, 14. 1 John 2. 12. and cap.
3. 6, 9.) Therefore it is certain, that no sinne^ of theirs which they do
commit, can ever cast them down wholly from the state of grace and life, into
the state of death and damnation: no not for that time, when as they lie in any
gross and known sin, without any actual and particular repentance for it.
The Saints of God, when as they are once justified by faith in Christ, and
purged from their sins by his most (...) blood, they have no more (...) of
sins, Hebr. 10. 2. that is, their sins are not imputed to them: they are
then justified and sanctified, not for one day, one year or two, but for ever:
Christ by once offering of himself upon the Cross, has perfected for ever
those that are sanctified, Hebr. 10. 14. The justification and sanctification
of the Saints, extend not only unto some, but to all the parts and particles
of their whole lives, they are never reiterated and repeated. For as there is
but one natural birth, one faith, one baptism, one death and passion of Jesus
Ephesians. 4. 4, 5.
Christ, which cannot be multiplied or reiterated: so there is but one
spiritual regeneration, one inward baptism of the spirit, one death to sin,
one justification and sanctification in the Saints, when they are once
justified, sanctified, regenerated, and reconciled unto God in Christ, they are
justified, sanctisied, regenerated, and reconciled unto God for ever. God as he
is but one and single in his own essence, so he is but one, and single in his
works, he desires not to reiterate, and to do things twice: he made the
world but once; he redeemed the world but once: he will destroy the world but
once: he gives life and being to all his creatures but once: all creatures
they are borne but once, and they die but once: God never delights in
superfluities, or changes: he will do nothing in vain, and he never repents
him of his actions; and therefore he does things but once; he makes his works
perfect at the first: Deuteronomy. 3 2. 4 Whatsoever he does, it shall be for ever:
nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, Eccles. 3. 14. And
therefore those who are but once justified, sanctified, and reconciled unto God
in Christ, those who are but once truly and thoroughly ingrafted into Christ, who
of God is made unto them righteousness, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
justification, sanctification, and redemption: they are justified, sanctified,
and reconciled unto God in Christ for ever: all their iniquities are quite
forgiven, all their sins are covered; and so utterly abolished in the death
of Christ, that they shall be no more remembered, nor yet imputed to them, Psalm.
^2. 2, 2. Ier. 31. 34. and Hebr. 8. 12. therefore no sins that ever they do
commit, can separate them from the love of God, which is in Romans 8. 39.
Christ Jesus their Lord: or cast them down from the state of grace and
justification, into the state of death and damnation. And here you must observe
a difference between Legal justification, and Evangelical justification.
Legal justification, or justification by works and merits, it may be utterly
lost and abolished by some actual sin, as is evident by Ezech. 18. 24. For,
he that keeps the whole law, and yet offends in one point, is guilty of all,
and cursed is he that confirms not all the words of the law to do them:
Iam. 2. 10. and Deuteronomy. 27. 26. It is not so with Evangelical justification, or
justification only by faith in Christ: for this justification where once it is
in truth, is never abrogated, disanulled, or broken off by any sins which
those who do enjoy it do commit: This free gift, it is of many offenses unto
justification, Romans 5. 18. and the blood of Christ, it cleanses them, not from
some sorts of sin only, but from all sin, 1 John 1. 7. Christ by once
offering up of himself, has fully satisfied for all the sins of all his
Saints, therefore all the sins that ever they commit, are utterly abolished
and done away in him, they are not imputed to them, they are not put upon their
score. The justification of the Saints by Christ, it is of mere grace and
favor, through the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and not of any
works, merit, or disert of theirs: Christ therefore having fully satisfied for
all their sins both past, present, and to come, and God having accepted this
his satisfaction for them, in full recompense for all their sins, when as
these Saints of God do sin against him at any time, the eternal guilt and
punishment of these their sins is utterly abolished and done away in Christ
their Advocate and Surety, and not imputed to them (for if it were imputed to
them and not to Christ, it were vtt erly impossible for them to expiate it, or
to satisfy Gods justice for it, by all the prayers and tears which they could
make or shed, or by any other act of theirs) and therefore these sins of
theirs (especially since they are sins of infirmity and incogitancie, and
not of wilfulness, obstinacy, malice, or presumption) can never deprive and
spoil them of the state of grace and justification, nor yet put them into the
state of death and damnation, no not for that Interim and interuenient time,
which comes between their sins, and their repentance for them. Seventhly,
the true regenerate Saints of God, they are the true and living members of
Jesus Christ, they are bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, and spirit of his
Spirit: 1 Cor. 6. 15. 17. and Ephesians. 5. 28. to 37. they are the house, the
temple, and the habitation of God and of his Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. 1 Cor. 3.
16, 17. cap. 6. 19. Heb. 3. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5. and cap. 4. 17. the whole Trinity,
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, abide and dwell in them for ever. Ps. 68.
16. 2 Chronicles. 7. 16. Reu. 21. 3. Ephesians. 2. 22. John 14. 16, 17. Math 28. 20. 1
John 3. 24. Ephesians. 3, 17. and Col. 1. 27. and therefore when as they sin
against the Lord, and lie in any known and scandalous sin without
repentance, they are not in the state of death and condemnation, but in the
state of life and grace. True it is, that the members of Jesus Christ, they may
be feeble, sick, and languishing for a time, by reason of sin; but yet they
never die of sin; they are not severed from their head, and they never cease
for to be members; Christ Jesus himself he is their life, their lives are
inuolued and treasured up in his: Col. 3. 3, 4. John 11. 25, 26. and 1 John 5.
11, 12, 13. Christ Jesus he is their life, and lives in them; and the life
which they now live in the flesh, they live by the faith of the Son of God,
Gal. 2. 20. and therefore Christ himself must cease to live (which cannot be,
because he being raised from the dead dies no more, death Romans 6. 9.
has no more dominion over him) ere the Saints of God who Reu. 2. 18.
are his members, and have him for their life and soul, can die, and perish in
their sins. This I can with boldness testify and affirm, to the infinite
and unspeakable joy and comfort, of every true and faithful member of Jesus
Christ, that it is as impossible for any one, that is a true and living member
of Jesus Christ, to die and perish, and to be broken off from him again, as it
is for Christ himself to die or perish, or to cease to be: For there is the
same reason of the immortality and perpetuity of every faithful Christian and
member of Jesus Christ, as there is of Christ himself: The reason why the
humane nature of Jesus Christ, is immortal and perpetual, and can die no
more, is, because it is united and knit unto the Deity; because it is
animated, quickened, 1 Pet. 3. 18.
and inliuened by the eternal Spirit of God. Now every true Heb. 9. 14.
regenerate Saint of God, is united and knit unto the Deity it self, as well
as Christ's humane nature, through the humanity of Christ, though not in the
same degree: as we may see expressly, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. cap. 4. 13. 16.
Col. 2. 19. and 2 Pet. 1. 4. The selfsame Almighty power of God that raised
up Christ from the dead, and the very selfsame Spirit of God, which did
animate, quicken, and inliuen Christ himself, does raise up, animate, quicken,
and inliuen every true and faithful member of Jesus Christ, (even as the same
soul does animate and inform every part and member of the same body, and as
the selse-same sap does nourish the grift and the branches, which does
nourish the stock and the root,) as we may read in express terms: Ephesians.
1. 19, 20. cap. 2. 18, cap. 4. 4. 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 6. 17. Romans 8. 2. 9.
11. 1 John 4. 17. Gal. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 1 2. 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 3. 18. John 1. 4. 16.
cap. 17. 21. 22. 23. and infinite other places: and therefore seeing that all
such as are the true and faithful members of Jesus Christ, have the same union
with the Deity, the same life, soul, and spirit to animate and quicken them,
as the humanity of Christ has; seeing that Jesus Christ himself is their
life, and that they live and move, in him, and by him; seeing they are the
house and remple, the habitation and dwelling of the whole Trinity, it is
certain, that no sins which ever they do commit, can ever raze them or
destroy them, can ever sever or cut them off from Christ, can ever wholly
extinguish the life of grace within them, or cast them down from the state of
grace, into the state of death and damnation, no not for one minute, no^ for
that scantling of time, which comes between their sin and their actual and
particular repentance for it. Let all the devils in hell combine and plot
together, they cannot solue or answer this reason here alleged.

But now here comes in a threefold and (...) objection. Object.
First, that those sins which the Saints of God commit they are mortal and
deadly in themselves. Secondly, that they are not forgiven to the Saints before
that they have actually and particularly repented of them. Thirdly, that the
Saints of God may dye and perish in them before any actual and particular
repentance for them: and therefore the Saints of God so long as they lie in
their sins without any actual and particular repentance for them, are in the
state of death and damnation, and not in the state of life and grace.

To the first of these, I answer: that it is true, that the sins Answ. 1.
of the Saints of God are mortal and deadly in themselves, and that they are
so to all carnal and unregenerate men who do commit them, but yet they are
never mortal and deadly to the Saints. If you consider the sins of the
Saints as sins, or as they are abstracted from the Saints, then they are
mortal and deadly, and have damnation attending on them: but if you consider
them as they are the sins of the Saints, and as they have their existence and
being in the Saints, they are not mortal and deadly effectiue unto them.
First, because these sins of theirs (as I have formerly proved) are not
imputed to them, but they are always imputed to, and done away in Christ.
Secondly, because the sting and venom of these sins of theirs, is taken away
in Christ: for as the sting of death is sin, so the strength of sin is the
law, 1 Cor. 15 55.
Romans 7. 8, 9.
without which (...) it self is dead. Now Jesus Christ by his death and
passion has fulfilled and abrogated the law for all his Saints; he has
redeemed them from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for them, he has
blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against them, and taken it
out of the way, nayling it to his Cross; he has freed them from the law of
sin and death, and has taken away the poison, the strength and sting of sin
and death, as we may read: Gal. 4. 5. cap. 5. 1. Romans 8. 2. cap. 10. 4. Col.
2. 14. 15. Heb. 2. 14. and 1 Cor. 15. 57. and therefore they can boldly and
victoriously cry out, O death where is thy sting? o sin where is thy victory
and thy poison? becanse that Christ has pulled out the sting of sin, and
allayed the poison that was in it, so that it cannot hurt or kill him. Thirdly,
though the sins of the Saints are mortal in themselves, yet God will take no
advantage against them for them, he will pardon and forgive them; he will
pass them by, and remember them no more, and he will cast them all into the
depth of the sea. ler. 31. 34 and Mich. 7 18. 19. and therefore these their
sins cannot be mortal and deadly unto them. If a man should commit treason,
for which he deserves to dye, if the King will either pardon it, or take no
notice of it, it is not deadly unto him that does it, though it be deadly in
it self. God will pardon, or else pass by the sins of all his Saints, he
will not take advantage of them, and therefore though they are mortal and
deadly in themselves they are not so to them. Lastly, we have the express
testimony of Saint John, 1 John 3. 6. 9. and cap. 5. 16, 17, 18. that the
Saints of God, and such as are borne of God, can never sin unto death: and
therefore their sins can never put them into the state of death and
damnation, no not for a time. Neither will that of Ezech. 18. 20. the soul
that sins it shall dye: nor that of 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. make any thing to the
contrary: all that these two places prove is but this: that sin is mortal in
its own nature, that every one shall bear his own sins, and that the
unrighteous, and such as live and dye in the sins there specified, such as
make a common trade of those sins, being never washed, sanctified and
justified from them, shall not inherit the kingdom of God: neither of them
prove that the sins of the Saints are mortal unto them, or that they put
them into the state of death and damnation. Consider therefore the sins of
the Saints, as the sins of the Saints, as they are inherent in, and conjoined
with the Saints, and not as they are abstracted and divided from them; consider
how God has promised to forgive them in his mercy and to remember them no
more, and then you shall discover and discern your Error, and find your
selves to be ouer-reached with a Fallacy and quirke of Logic, in seuering
those things which should not be divided.

To the second clause of the objection, that the sins of the Saints are not
forgiven, before their actual and particular repentance for them, and
therefore after that they commit any gross and known sin till their actual
and particular repentance for it, they are in the state of death and damnation,
and not in the state of grace. I answer: first, that the argument it self is
false and follows not: which that you may the better and more perspicuously
understand. You must know, that when a regenerate man falls into any sin, his
repentance in this case is not required as a means to put a new life, and a
new estate and seed os grace into him; (as it was upon his first regeneration
and conversion unto God,) but it is only required, as physic is in a sick
man, to heal him and to cure him, and to preserve that life, that estate and
seed of grace was in him before, which by reason of this his sin, are like
the graces of the Church of Sardis, Reu. 3. 2. ready to dye, but yet not wholly
dead: and therefore even before his actual tepentance for his sin, he is not
wholly dead in trespasses and sins, he is not in the state of death and
damnation, but in the state of grace. I will evidence and make this clear by
some few familiar and common similitudes. Suppose a regenerate man should fail
into any mortal and deadly sickness, which might prove his death unless he
took some antidote and physic to expel it, you will not presently say, that
this man is but a dead man, or that he is in the state of death, because he
is fallen into this disease: or because he lies sick of it for a month or
two without recovery: for he has life within him still, he is still a living
man, and for ought you know he may recover, and therefore you do still
account him, call him, and repute him a living man. So if a regenerate man
commit a felony, for which his life may be drawn into question: you will not
forthwith determine, that heee is in the state of death and damnation, because
he has committed such a felony: for it may be, that no man will prosecute
him for this felony; or if he be prosecuted he may be either acquitted, or
pardoned, and so escape that death which he did deserve. So if a wife commit
adultery, for which she deserves to be deuorced from her husband, and so cease
to be his wife, you will not presently say, that this woman i^ deuorced, or
that she is no wife, for her husband may forgive her, and she is still a wife,
till the deuorce be sued out. So if a son does highly offend his gracious and
loving father, for which he does justly deserve to be disinherited, he does
not therefore cease to be a son, neither is he forthwith disinherited, but
he continues a son and an heir still; he only incurs his fathers anger for
the present, and perhaps he may receive some stripes and correction at his
hands, but never cease to be his son and heir, till he incnrre his fathers
hat^ed, his whole and final displeasure: till he be actually disinherited, and
utterly cast off. Just so is it in our present case. Sin in the regenerate
Saints of God, it is a deadly disease and sickness to the soul: it is such a
felony as may justly draw their lives into question before the bar of Gods
Tribunal: it is such an adultery as might justly cause the Lord their husband,
to sue out a bill of divorce against them: and it is such an offense as might
move their gracious and loving Father to disinherit and to cast them off. But
yet they are not presently dead, neither are they in the state of death because
they are sick of sin: for they may recover, and purge out this disease: yea,
it is certain, that they always do and shall recover: for the Lord himself
is their physician, he will recover them and raise them up, and restore them
to their health again, he will not suffer them to dye or perish in this
sickness of their sins: they have his own express word and promise for it.
Psalm. 41. 2, 3. John 6. 51, 58. cap. 10. 28. cap. 11. 25, 26, Hosea 14. 4. Mal.
4. 2. and 1 John. 5. 11, 12, 13. and he will surely perform and make good his
word to the uttermost. They are not presently in the state of death and
condemnation, when as they commit any treason or felony against the Lord,
before their actual repentance for it; for God may pass by their sins and
treasons, and take no notice of them, he may in his mercy pardon them, and not
arraigne them for them. Yea, he will be sure for to do it. For he is a God
that passes by the transgression of his heritage, he will forgive their
iniquities and remember their sins no more, because he delights in mercy,
and because it is his covenant so to do. Mich. 7. 18, 19. and Ier. 31. 33, 34.
If he does take notice of those sins of theirs as to scourge them for them,
yet he never draws them into question for their souls, he never brings them
into the judgment of eternal condemnation: as we may read expressly. Isay 45.
17 John 3. 19. cap. 5. 24. and Romans 8. 1, 2. wherefore though the Saints commit
treason against the Lord, for which they deserve to be perpetually condemned,
yet this their treason never puts them into the state of death and damnation.
So when the Saints of God commit adultery against him, and such sins as might
cause him to deuorce them from him: yet they are not presently deuorced,
because they do not presently repent: for God is a loving and kind husband to
them: he is not easily provoked to put them away, and to give them a bill of
deuorce upon every act of adultery which they do commit: as is evident by Ier.
3. 1. If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become another
man's, shall he return unto her again? but thou have played the harlot with
many lovers, yet return again to me says the Lord. The adulteries of the
Saints, do never break that bond of matrimony which is between God and
them, because God will not take advantage of them: he has married them unto
himself Hosea 2. 19.
for ever, in faithfulness, in loving kindness, and in mercies: therefore
will he love them, and not cast them off: therefore will he not sever or
deuorce them from him. He has commanded us, not to separate those whom he
has joined together: therefore he Math. 19. 7
himself will never sever nor deuorce those from himself whom he has
married and betrothed to himself for ever: but he will separate their sins
from them, that so they may not severe or divorce them from himself: and
therefore when as they sin against the Lord, they are not presently in the
state of death and damnation, because they are still married to, and not
deuorced from the Lord. So when the sons of God offend their gracious and
loving father by their sins, they do not therefore cease to be his sons,
neither are they forthwith disinherited: but they continue sons and heirs
still, and he continues to be a gracious father to them. It may be they may
incur his anger and displeasure for a time: it may be, he does ( 2 Samuel 7.
14. (...). Ps. 89. 26. to 38.
) chasten and correct them with the rods of men, and with the stripes of the
children of men, ( Prou. 3. 12.
) out of his fatherly care and love unto them, and out of a desire of their
good, ( 1 Cor. 11. 32.
) that so they may not be condemned with Heb. 12. 6. to 12
the world. But yet they never incur his hatred or his whole displeasure, he
never disinherits them or casts them out of doors: he always deals with
them as a gracious, merciful, and loving father, ( Mich. 7. 18.
) who delights in mercy, ( Psa 103. 8, 9, 10, 13. Mal. 3. 17.
) he will not always chide them, neither keeps he his anger forever he
will not deal with them after their sins, nor yet reward them according to
their iniquities, but will even pity, spare, and pardon them, as a father
pittieth, spares, and pardons his only son that serves him. And therefore
though they sin against their gracious Father, and lie perhaps in this their
sin for a time without repentance, yet they are not thereby disinherited nor
put from the state of grace, I will now contract all this into this Syllogism.
He that is still alive in Christ, and is but only sick and not dead of sin:
he that is only in a mere possibility to be questioned, arraigned,
divorced, and disinherited for his sin, and is not actually questioned,
arraigned, divorced, disinherited, and condemned for it. He that is more likely
to live and to recover, more likely to escape vnsentenced and uncondemned, more
likely to continue a wife and an heir unto God, then to dye of sin, and to
be perpetually condemned, divorced, and disinherited of God for sin. Nay he
that is sure to recover and never to die of sin, sure to escape scot-free, and
never to be condemned, divorced, or disinherited for sin, it is undoubtedly
true, that such a one is not in the state of death and damnation, but in the
state of life and grace. (For no man can be in the state of death and
damnation, but such a one as is either dead in trespasses and sins; such a one
as is actually condemned, divorced, and disinherited for his sins, or such a
one as is more likely to die, to be condemned, divorced, and disinherited, in
and for his sins; then to live, and to escape uncondemned, vndiuorced, and
vndisinherited for his sins.) But all those who are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, they are alive in Christ, and
even then when as they lie in any known sin without repentance; they are but
only sick and not dead of sin: they are only in a m^ere remote possibility; to
be questioned, arraigned, divorced, disinherited and condemned for their sin:
they are not actually questioned, arraigned, divorced, disinherited and
condemfor it. They are more likely to live and to recover, more likely to
escape vnsentenced and uncondemned: more likelyto continue wives and heirs
unto God, then to dye of sin, and to be perpetually condemned, divorced, and
disinherited of God for sin. Nay, they are sure to recover, and never for to
dye of sin: they are sure to escape scot-free, and never to be condemned,
divorced, or disinherited for sin, as is evident by the former premises.
Therefore it is undoubtedly true, that such as are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, even then when as they lie in
any known sin without repentance, are not in the state of death and
damnation, but in the state of life and grace: and so the argument which is
produced follows not.

Secondly, I answer, that the Antecedent is false. For these sins of the
Saints, they are and may be pardoned and actually forgiven without any
particular repentance for them. First, because when men are once truly
justified, the eternal guilt of these their sins is never imputed to them,
as I have formerly proved: therefore a particular actual repentance for them
is not necessarily and absolutely required for to save them and ^ree them from
damnation: Christ had made them free from the law of sin and (...) before,
being Rom 8. 2.
made a curse for them, that they might be made the righteousness of God in
him: therefore they might be saved without this 2 Cor. 5. 21.
this actual and particular repentance. Secondly, These their sins, as I have
formerly proved, did not put the Saints into the state of damnation: and
therefore a particular repentance for these sins of theirs, is not absolutely
necessary to salvation. Thirdly, a particular and actual repentance for these
sins, is not required as absolutely necessary to salvation, because a
general repentance, and an inward disposition of the soul, without this
particular, outward and actual repentance will serve the turn. If a Saint of
God commit any gross and known sin, let him have but an upright and sincere
heart, which is fully and resolutely set and bent against all sin, and
steadfastly set and fixed upon God with a desire to cleave fast and close to
him, and to do his will in all things: let him have but an humble, a broken,
and a contrite heart within him which trembles at Gods word, and is thoroughly
affected with the gross and general apprehension of his own vileness:
though he never pitch particularly upon this sin of his, nor humble his soul
before the Lord for this his sin, yet, I dare be bold to say, that this
general repentance of his and this inward frame, bent and disposition of his
heart and soul, shall sufficiently cleanse and purify his soul from this his
sin, and save him so that he shall never die or perish for it: for it is the
inward and habitual repentance, the inward frame, bent, and disposition of the
soul that God respects more then the outward act, as we may see by that of
David. Psalm. 32. 5. I said I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and
so thou for ga^est the iniquity of my sin: the inward purpose and disposition
of (...) heart for to repent, was sufficient to move God to forgive his sin,
before his outward, actual, and particular repentance was expressed. Which
proves, that though a particular confession and actual humiliation be very
fit and requisite and necessary, after every gross and known sin which the
Saints commit, yet it is not absolutely necessary to salvation for an inward
disposition and purpose of the heart for to repent or a general repentance and
humiliation without this particular will serve the turn. But of this see more
in the fourth answer to this argument, as it was, first propounded. Fourthly, a
particular, outward, and actual repentance for these sins of theirs is not
absolutely required of them as necessary to salvation, because God in his mercy
will pass by these actual sins, or acts of sins, and take no notice of
them, if they do chance to forget to repent and humble their souls
particularly for them: for God is a God that passes by the transgressions of
his people, Mich. 7. 18.
1 Pet. 4. 8.
as well as their lesser sins: he out of his charity and love unto his
Saints, does cover even a multitude of their sins and take no notice of them,
when as they forget for to repent particularly of them. So true is that of
Bernard, that the sin of the Saints of God, vel punitur (...) poenitentia, vel
in De (...) et lib. (...): tract.
charitate absconditur, it is either punished with condign repentance, or hid
in mercy. I could add more reasons for to prove, that there is no absolute
necessity of a particular repentance for every gross and known sin, but I
will pass them over, and refer you to the answers which are given to this
argument, as it is first propounded and objected.

For the last clause of this objection: that a regenerate man may dye in the
very act of sin, as he may murder himself, or God may smite him sudainly in
the act of any other sin, before his actual repentance, or any other
repentance else: and therefore he may dye and perish in his sins, and so fall
finally from grace. I answer, that the argument follows not. For let any one
that is a true regenerate Saint of God be taken away in the very act of any
known sin, before it is possible for him to repent, I make no doubt or
scruple of it, but that he shall as surely be saved as if he had lived to have
repented of it: and that for these reasons. First, because this saint of God
was truly praedestinated to eternal life, and therefore he cannot but be
saved, or else it would follow, that a man who is absolutely praedestinated to
eternal life might yet be damned, which can never be proved or admitted.
Secondly, because Christ has promised that none of his sheep shall perish,
that none of his Saints and children shall be confounded, but that they shall
be sure of heaven and eternal life. John 10. 28. Isay. 45. 17. John 5. 24. and
cap. 6. 39. 40. Now all those that are once truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ, though they are taken away in the very act of sin before any
^epentance at all, are the true Saints and sheep of Christ, and therefore they
do not, therefore they cannot perish in this their sin. Thirdly, it must needs
be so, because God will never require impossibilities at his childrens hands,
nor take the strictest course, and greatest advantage against them for their
sins. Now it it Gods own act to take away the Saints in their sins, and it
was impossible for them to repent at all of this their sin in respect of
their sudden surprisall: if they had had space and time to have repented, no
doubt but that they would have repented them of this their sin, and therefore
God seizing on them before they could repent, we should exceedingly eclispe
the riches of Gods mercy, and of his gracious dealing with his Saints, in
affirming that they should be damned when as they had not space to repent.
Fourthly, it must needs be so, because this one act of sin (as I have proved
to the full before) it does not severe and cut them off from Christ, or destroy
out of them those habits and seeds of grace which are planted, and settled in
their hearts, it does not put them into a state of death and damnation, or
cause their gracious and loving Father, who is always ready to pardon and to
pity them, to disinherite them and cast them off, especially seeing they never
sin against him out of precogitated malice, or out of the settled purpose and
resolution of their hearts: and therefore though death does cut them down in
this very act of sin, they cannot perish in this act, but their souls are
undoubtedly saved, and received into mercy. Fifthly, it must needs be so,
because this one act of sin, it does not take away their justification, or make
them not to be justified, but only in respect of this particular act: it
reuiues not all their former sins again, and therefore it puts them notinto
the state of death and damnation: a man may be an holy and religious man, he
may offend in many things: yet he may be holy and upright in Gods sight and
estimation, in respect of the constant holiness and integrity of his life,
though not in respect of those particular sins of his. Now God he always
looks unto the inward frame and disposition, the inward integrity and
synceritie of the heart, to the constant tenor and carriage of his Saints, and
not unto their particular fayles and slips: if their hearts, and the constant
tenor and carriage of their lives, be sincere, holy, blameless and unspotted,
God estimates and rates them according unto this, and takes no notice of their
private slips: he values them according to their grace and inward, not
according to their sins and outward man: and therefore God taking them away in
the very act, not in the habit and the trade of sin: he will estimate and
reward them according to their graces, and their inward man, according to the
inward purpose, bent and clination of their souls, according to the constant
course and practice of their lives, and not according to that particular and
private act of sin in which they dye; so that they do not perish
everlastingly for this act of sin, but they are certainly received unto life
everlasting. Sixthly, the thief which never did repent in all his life before,
was saved on the Cross, even at the last gasp and period of his life:
therefore that God and Savior who was so merciful to save a sinner that never
was a Saint, at the very last gasp: will always be so gracious, so loving and
compassionate, as to save a sinner at the last which was a Saint, a friend, a
brother, and a best beloved unto him before. Lastly, to shut up all in a word
or two. Admit that an actual and particular repentance were required as a
thing absolutely necessary to salvation of all the true regenerate Saints of
God, after any gross and known sin committed by them; yet then I say, that
when God does take away any of his Saints, in the very act of sin, he does
in that very instance which he takes them in give them such an actual and
particular repentance, as shall save their souls, for he has praedestinated
them unto everlasting life; and therefore having predestined them unto the
end, he does likewise predestinate them unto the means for to obtain it.
Wherefore as it is altogether impossible for to deprive them of the end, so
likewise is it impossible to deprive them of the means which are annexed
inseparably unto it: and therefore put the worst you can imagine, yet we may
safely say, that God does always give his Saints this actual repentance, even
in the very point and instant, when he cuts them off, (which the Pseudolut
herans, and those that defend only a total fall from grace, without a final
do confess and teach.) And therefore notwithstanding, all those sins they
do commit, notwithstanding, their lying in sin for a time, or their dying in
sin (I mean in the act, not in the habit and trade of some particular sin)
without any actual or particular repentance, for that sin of theirs, they
neither fall finally, nor yet totally from the state of grace. This is the
maine and principal argument, this is the very knot and hinge of the question,
and therefore pardon me (good Reader) though I have been so prolix and tedious
in my answer to it.

The twenty five Argument or objection that is made against Answ. 1.
that the Argument does not follow. For though excommunication may sever a
Saint of God from the society of the faithful, and the visible Church of God
for a time, to humble him for his sin, and to make him more circumspect in
his carriage for the time to come, yet it never does dissect or cut him off
from Christ; nay, it does not wholly sever and cut him off from being a member
of the visible Church; for then he ought not to be assailed or admitted into
the visible Church again, unless he were rebaptized: and during the time of
this his excommunication he should be no better, and no more a Christian than a
Turk or Heathen man: neither of which can be admitted: and therefore this
excommunication, if you take it in the true and primative use of it, (not as it
is now commonly abused, and made a common process upon petty and trifling
occasions) it only suspends men from being partakers of the privileges of the
Church, it never cuts them off from being members of it. This is the opinion of
Mr. Hooker: in his third book of Ecclesiastical policy, cap. 1. page 88. of
Bishop Abbot in his answer to Mr, Thompsons Diatriba, cap. 16. of Mr. Calvin in
the 14. book of his Institutions, cap. 12. section 9. 10. of Marlorat in his
Exposition upon the 1 Cor. 5. 5. And I know not any Divines either Modern or
Ancient of any note or credit, that do affirm the contrary; and therefore
your Argument follows not.

The twenty six Argument which may be made against Antagonists endeavor for
to do, by Scripture, and by the authority and Doctrine of our Church of
England. The maine place of Scripture which is alleged, is that of Gal. 3. 27.
As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: which
they say is full in point. And that this is also the Doctrine of the Church of
England, is proved by the form of baptism recorded in our Common prayer
Book: where the Minister before baptism, reciting how Christ did bless the
little children that were brought unto them, and rebuke his Disciples for
hindering such as would bring them to him, does from hence exhort the people in
these ensuing words. Doubt not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will
likewise favorably receive these present Infants, that he will embrace them
with the arms of his mercy, that he will give unto them the blessing of
eternal life, and make them partakers of his everlasting kingdom: And again,
when as the child is baptized, there is this form of thanksgiving there
prescribed to us. We yield thee hearty thanks most merciful Father, that it
has pleased thee to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit, to receive
him for thine own child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy
congregation. Which words do fully prove, that all such Infants as are
baptized, are truly regenerated: and so the Antecedent is fully proved to be
true. Because this is an argument in which our Antagonists do much triumph and
boast, as if we were not able to undergo the charge and vigor of it; I shall
endeavor to give a full and satisfactorie answer to it, in which I shall be
forced to be Answ.
somewhat large and tedious, in respect of those many particulars which I am to
give an answer to; I will reduce them unto these four heads: First, I shall
deny, that all Infants that are baptized, are truly regenerated and inwardly
ingrafted into Christ by virtue of their baptism. Secondly, I shall affirm,
that the place of the Galathians proves it not, nor yet any other text of
Scripture. Thirdly, I shall affirm, that it is not the Doctrine of the Church
of England, and that these words of the Common prayer Book do not warrant it:
And lastly, if all these fail me, I shall deny the Argument, and prove unto
you that it follows not: and that though the Antecedent and the Argument were
both true, yet that they are both impertinent to our present purpose. For the
first of these, that all Infants that are baptized are not by their very
Baptism truly regenerated, and ingrafted into Christ, but only Sacramentally,
I shall make it good by these subsequent reasons. First, because the Sacraments
do never convey any inward and spiritual grace, which may truly regenerate
and ingraft men into Christ, but where there is the hand of faith for to
receive them, and that grace which is conveyed by them. This is evident by Mark
16. 16. not he that is baptized only, but he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved; but he that believes not (though he be batized) shall be
damned; therefore it is not baptism of it self, but faith which does
regenerate and save men. So Acts 8. 36. 37. When the Ethiopian Eunuch demanded
of Philip: behold here is water, what does hinder me to be baptized? Philip
returns him this answer: If thou beleeuest withal thine heart thou may:
intimating, that his baptism without faith, would do him no good at all, that
it could not regenerate him, nor yet convey any grace into his soul. So Gal.
3. 26, 27. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus: for as
many of you as were baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. It was the
Galathians faith, and not their Baptism, which made them the adopted sons of
God: for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing (no nor yet
Baptism which succeeds it) neither uncircumcision, but faith which works
by love, Gal. 5. 6. Baptism without faith is in effectual: it may wash and
purify the body, but it can never wash, purify, regenerate, and cleanse the
soul, unless it be accompanied with faith which works by love, and with
true repentance. For it is faith only that purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 8. it
is Repentance, and not Baptism that does wash away our sins: Baptism
without repentance it cannot do it: therefore Peter, Acts 2. 36, 37, 38. does
join them both together. For when his auditors that were pricked at the heart,
demanded of him what they should do? He answers them thus: Repent, and be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye
shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. If Baptism without repentance had
been sufficient to have regenerated them, and purified them from their sins,
Peter would never have advised them for to repent withal, for that had been
superfluous: but his joining of repentance and baptism thus together,
intimates that the one is not effectual without the other. It is faith only
that does justify us, and ingraft us into Christ, Romans 4. 3. 5. cap. 5. 1. 2
Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 5. 6. and Ephesians. 2. 8. it is faith only that does make the
Sacraments effectual to regenerate us, and ingraft us into Christ: this I am
sure is the doctrine of our Church. Now all those Infants which are baptized,
(no nor all those that are baptized at their ripe years, be they An^baptists,
or such as are newly converted to the faith) they have not this grace of true,
saving, and justifying faith within them, and therefore they are not truly
regenerated by their baptism: As it is said of the word of God, Heb. 4. 2.
that it profited them not, because it was not mixed with faith in them that
heard it. So I may say of Baptism, that it regenerates not all Infants,
because all have not faith that do receive it. Secondly, all Infants that are
baptized, are not truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by their very
baptism, because this would make the Sacrament of baptism effectual to all
that do receive it, which cannot be. First, because that this would make
baptism to be quite different from all the other ordinances of God, and
means of grace: For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper it profits not all
alike, to all unworthy communicants, it is the cause of damnation; 1 Cor. 11.
27. 29.
it is a cause of grace to none, but such as do receive in a worthy manner: so
the word of God, though it be the savor of life unto life to some, yet it is
the savor of death unto death to others that do hear it, 2 Cor. 2: 16. So it
is of all the other means of grace whatsoever, they are not effectual to
work grace in all; and therefore Baptism cannot do it. There is the same
reason of all Gods ordinances, where one of them is effectual, all of them are
effectual; where one of them is ineffectuall, there all of them are
ineffectuall to; for else there should be a great confusion, and jarring in the
ordinances of God: a man should then be saved by one ordinance of God, suppose
by Baptism, and damned by another, by the unworthy receiving of the Lords
Supper, or by the unprofitable hearing of the word of God, which the God of
order, peace, and union can never suffer. There is a sweet harmony and mutual
agreement between all the means of grace, and ordinances of God, they always
go hand in hand together: they all work within the same sphere and compass,
one of them is no larger then the other: where one is effectual there the
others are, or at least may be to: Wherefore since the other ordinances of God,
are not effectual to regenerate, and to work grace in all, no more can
Baptism do it. Secondly, Baptism cannot regenerate all alike, because
circumcision which was a type of Baptism, did not do it. All those that were
circumcised with the outward circumcision of the flesh, were not circumcised
with the inward circumcision, of the heart and spirit, whose praise is not of
man but of God, Romans 2. 28, 29. therefore all those that are outwardly baptized
with water, are not inwardly baptized with the holy Ghost and with fire.
Baptism Math 3. 11.
is come in the place of circumcision, and therefore it must be of the same
effect as circumcision was, and so it is. For as there was an outward
circumcision of the flesh which was common to all, and an inward circumcision
of the heart, which was proper only to the elect of God: so there is an outward
Baptism, or putting away of the filth of the flesh only, 1 Pet. 3. 12.
which is common to all, but saues none: and an inward baptism of the Spirit,
which is the answer of a good conscience toward God: this is the Baptism
which does regenerate and save men, of which all that are baptized are not
partakers, but only such as are elected to salvation. Thirdly, all that are
baptized are not alike regenerated by their baptism, because this would take
away the liberty of Gods Spirit, which breaths when and where it lists,
John 3. 8. It is only the Spirit of God which does regenerate men: if men be
borne but of water, and not of water and the spirit both, they cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven, John 3. 5. If then every one that were baptized,
be by his baptism necessarily, and truly regenerated, the liberty and
freedom of Gods Spirit should be restrained, and must of necessity breathe
upon every one that is baptized whether it will or no, whereas Christ himself
tells us even in this very case of baptism and spiritual regeneration, that
the Spirit blows where he lists: he is not John 3. 8.
confined to any person, place, and ordinance, but has his own liberty to
work, when and where he will; which liberty this doctrine of yours would
restrain. Fourthly, all those who are baptized are not forthwith regenerated,
and ingrafted into Christ by virtue of their baptism: because this would take
away all election and reprobation: this would make all Infants that are
baptized to be necessarily saved, if they die before years of discretion,
though God has otherwise determined of them: or else it would sever true
regeneration, and sanctification from election, making such to be truly
sanctified and regenerated, as were never elected to salvation: which cannot
be, because election is the only cause of true regeneration; and true grace and
regeneration are proper only to the elect of God: (as I have proved at large in
my first Argument drawn from God,) or else it would make all men to be elected
to salvation, and so consequently to be saved: which as it is false and
contrary to the Scriptures, so it makes against you to, for then none could
fall from grace. Now none of these three consequencies can be admitted; and
therefore, your Antecedent, that all who are baptized, are truly regenerated
and ingrafted into Christ cannot be true. Fifthly, if your Antecedent were true,
it would bring in what popish doctrine, that the Sacraments do ex opere
operat^, convey grace to men, that the bare act of Baptism, or of receiving
the Lords Supper, should of it self, without any respect of the persons, that
are partakers of these Sacraments, convey grace to all that come unto them.
Sixthly, all Infants that are baptized, are not truly regenerated and ingrafted
into Christ by their very baptism, because then the time of their
regeneration, repentance, conversion, and effectual calling; should always be
accounted from the time of their baptism: but this we all know is false. For
some we know are regenerated, called, and converted in their youth, some in
their middle age, some in their old age, but all after Baptism; and we do
always account them to be regenerated, converted, and effectually called, not
from the time that they are baptized, but only from the time that they do
repent them of their sins, and turn from all their evil ways, to serve the
living God in holiness and newness of life: God and men account the time of
men's regeneration and ingrafting into Christ, not from the time that they are
baptized, but from the time that they are effectually called and converted unto
God, bebeing made new men, and new creatures, which they were not before:
therefore they were not truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by their
very baptism, for then, their effectual vocation should be accounted from
the time of their baptism only, and not from any other time. Seventhly, it is
plain and evident, that Infants who are baptized, are not always truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by their very baptism, because that
after their baptism, and before their effectual calling and conversion unto
God, the whole old man, the whole body of sin, and the lusts of the flesh,
are as strong and vigorous in them, as if they had never been baptized;
Christians that are baptized before they are called and converted, are for the
most part, as sinful, wicked, and every way as vicious and profane as
Heathens and Infidells, that never were baptized: therefore it is certain,
that they were never truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by baptism.
For true regeneration, it does always alter and change men's corrupt natures,
it makes them new men and new creatures: it mortifies their earthly members; it
casts out the old man, and the body of sin, and crucifies the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof: John 3. 5. 5. Romans 8 13. cap. 12. 1, 2. Gal. 5.
16. 24. and Col. 3. 5. 8, 9, 10. and therefore it is evident, that all Infants
are not truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by their very baptism:
because the old man, the body of sin, the flesh, and the lusts thereof, are
as strong and vigorous in them, from their very infancy to their conversion,
as if they had never been baptized. Eighthly, all Infants that are baptized
cannot be regenerated and really ingrafted into Christ himself by virtue of
their baptism, because they are not all elected to salvation, nor all included
within the covenant of grace. Baptism is effectual unto none, but to such as
are the true Spouse and Church of Christ, to such as are within the new
covenant of Grace, and to such as are the true and faithful seed of faithful
Abraham. For, Christ he gave himself only Ephesians. 5. 25. 26.
for the Church (which all the Fathers and Orthodox Divines, both of our own
and other Churches, affirm to be only the number of the elected Saints of
God, and no others) that he might sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing
of water by the Word; that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and
without blemish. Christ does wash and sanctify his body and his Church, and
none but they; now all that are baptized, they are not the true body and Church
of Christ, because they are not all elected to salvation, therefore they are
not truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by baptism. All that are
baptized are not within the new covenant of grace and mercy, they are not the
true seed of faithful Abraham, nor the true Israel of God. Many there are that
are baptized, that were never truly included within the covenant of grace: the
law ( Ier. 31. 31. 32.
) of God was never written in their hearts, nor yet engraven in their inward
parts: God did never ( Ezech. 36. 26. to 30.
) sprinkle them with pure water, nor yet cleanse them from all their
filthiness: he never gave them a new heart, nor yet an heart of flesh: he
never put his Spirit within them, nor caused them to walk in his statutes and
do them: he never saved them from all their uncleanness; he never became (
Ier. 31. 31.
) a husband to them: he never chose them to be ( 1 Pet. 2. 9.
) a royal Priesthood, an holy nation, a holy nation to himself: and therefore
they were never truly within the covenant of grace. Many there are who are
baptized, and yet they were never the heirs of promise, nor the faithful seed
of faithful Abraham: Ishmael was circumcised as well as Isaac, Genesis 17. 25,
26. yet he was not of the promised seed, he was borne after the flesh, and not
after the spirit, Gal. 4. 28, 29, 30. Simon Magus was baptized as well as any
others, and yet he was not regenerated, he was still in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Acts 8. 13. to 25. he was not an
heir and child of promise. All are not Israel which are of Israel: neither
because they are the seed of Abraham are they all children: but in Isaac shall
thy seed be called: That is, they which are the children of the flesh, those
are not the children of God: but the children of the promise are counted for
the seed, Romans 9. 6, 7. 8. The promises of God, and the covenant of God, belong
only to the sons of faithful Abraham, to the children of the promise, and the
righteous seed, which are only the elect of God, and such as the Lord our God
shall effectually call, Acts 2. 39. Tit. 1. 1. and Romans 4. 11, 12, 13. 16. 24.
Now all those that are baptized, they are not the elect of God, they are not
the righteous seed or children of promise, they are not within the new covenant
of grace, and therefore, they have no fruit not benefit, no true regeneration
and incision into Christ by their baptism. I will contract this reason into
this Syllogism. If all those that are baptized, are not of the true Church and
body of Christ, if they are not within the new covenant of grace, if they are
not the promised seed, and the elect of God, then all that are baptized are not
regenerated and ingrafted truly into Christ by their baptism, (For as
Circumcision was, so Baptism is, nothing else, but a seal of the Romans 4. 11.
new Covenant, and of the righteousness of faith: and so it does regenerate
and ingraft none into Christ, but by estating of them in this new Covenant of
grace.) Now none can be estated into this Covenant, but such as are within it,
such as are the righteous seed, the heirs of promise, the true Israel, the
true Church and body of Christ, and the elect of God; because the Covenant
belongs to none but them, and none can have any benefit by the Seal, that have
not an interest and share in the deed and Covenant it self.) But all those
that are baptized, are not of the true Church and body of Christ, they are not
within the new covenant of Grace, they are not the promised seed and the elect
of God: (as I have proved.) Therefore all that are baptized are not regenerated
and ingrafted truly into Christ by this their baptism. Lastly, the Scriptures
are express in it; that many are circumcised outwardly in the flesh, who were
never circumcised inwardly with the spirit, in the foreskin of their hearts:
Deuteronomy, 30. 6. Ier. 9. 26. and Romans 2. 28, 29. that many are outwardly baptized
and washed with water, which are not inwardly baptized with the holy Ghost and
with fire, nor washed with the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost, Math. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 21. and 2 Pet. 2. 3. And therefore all these
places of Scripture, which speak of this inward baptism of the Spirit, are
only attributed and appropriated to the elect and believing Saints of God, and
to no others, and not to all that are baptized: as you may see, Math. 3. 11,
Acts 2. 38, 39. Romans 6. 2. to 7. Gal. 3. 26, 27. Titus 3. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 21. John
3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Ezech. 36. 26, 27. Mark 16.
16. and Col. 2, 11, 12. Which will give an answer to all the Fathers which are
objected to the contrary. Who when they say of Baptism: that it is ( Tert. de
Baptis. lib. cap. 5. Basil Exhortatio ad baptis. Oration.
) the death and expiation of sin, the cause of regeneration and renouation,
the way of heaven, the regeneration of the soul, the grace of adoption and the
like: they say not that it is so to all that are baptized 1. Gregor. Nyss.
Oration de baptismo.
outwardly, but to the elect and chosen of God, and to the faithful in Christ
Jesus: Neither do they speak it of the outward baptism of water, but only of
the inward baptism of the Spirit, which is proper only to the elect of God.
And that all that are baptized, are not regenerated and ingrafted into Christ
by this their baptism, but only the elect of God, and such as are true
believers, it is evident by the express words and testimony of the Fathers:
of Tertullian lib. de baptismo, of Hilarie: Com: in Math. Canon. 10. of August:
cont. Donat. lib. 5. cap. 24. and de vnitat. Ecclesiae, cap. 19. and of
Hierome, Com. in Gal. lib. 2. upon the words of Paul, Gal. 3. 17. And of this
opinion is Peter Lumb. lib. 4. Did. 4. cap. 3. Calvin. Iustit. lib. 4. cap.
15. sect. 15. 17. 22. cap. 16. sect. 9. Marlorat; Exposit: in Acts 2. 38. in
Romans 2. 25. in 1 Cor. 12. 13. in Gal. 3. 27. and in 1 Pet. 3. 21. John Frith a
martyr in his treatise of Baptism: Hooker, lib. 5. of Eccles. Pol. sect. 58.
59. 63. 64. Dr. Abbot Bishop of Salisburie: In Thomps: Diatr. cap. 7. Dr.
Benefield de Persevere: Sanctorum, lib. 1. cap. 14. Zanchius, Bucer, Melanthon,
Beza, Dr. Francis white, Jewel, Willet, Master Fox. all other Orthodox
Divines, both of our own and other Protestant Churches are of the same
opinion; and I know not any Father, or orthodox writer, that holds the
contrary: yea, this is the express doctrine of our own, 27. Article, and it
is Mr. Rogers his observation in his second proposition raised from this
Article, and therefore we need not for to question it. But now you will object,
that the holy Object.
Ghost does always accompany the Sacraments, and works effectually in them,
if there be no impediment on our parts, but now in all infants that are
baptizad, there is no impediment to hinder the effectual working of the holy
Ghost; and therefore the holy Ghost works effectually in them to regenerate
them. I answer, that it is true that the holy Ghost Answ.
does always accompany the word and Sacraments (yet not as an effect, but as a
concomitant of them) where men are fitted and prepared to receive them, in a
godly, faithful, and religious manner; the holy Ghost does always work
effectually by them, when as they meet with such persons and subjects, as are
capable to receive them in a gracious and holy manner; but where men are not
fitted and prepared to receive these Sacraments and means of grace, there the
holy Ghost does not accompany them: as we may read at large, Ezech. 2. 5.
Math. 13. 4. to 10. 18. to 24. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. Heb. 4. 2. and c. 6. 7. 8. Now
all infants they are not fitted and prepared to receive the means of grace, or
the Spirit of grace which should regenerate them, because they want faith and
knowledge, to receive them and apply them: and therefore in respect of this
impediment, Baptism does not work effectually in them, to change them and
regenerate them. Secondly, admit that faith is not necessarily required to make
Baptism effectual, yet all Infants, nay most Insants that are baptized, are
not regenerated by their baptism, because they are not all elected and
ordained to eternal life. The means of grace, and the Spirit of grace which
accompanies them, do never work powerfully and effectually upon any, but upon
such as are predestined and ordained to eternal life, as you may see
expressly by Acts 2. 39 c. 13. 48. Romans 8. 28, 29. 30. cap. 11. 5. 7. 8. Ephesians.
1. 4. 5. and Tit. 1. 1. now all Infants that are baptized, are not
predestined to eternal life, for then they could never perish or fall from
grace; and therefore baptism and the holy Ghost do not work effectually on
them to regenerate them. But you will say, if Infants Object.
that are baptized are not regenerated, to what end and purpose is their
baptism? To this I answer first, that Answ.
though baptism does not truly regenerate all Infants that are baptized, and
ingraft them truly into Christ, yet it is of much use and purpose to them. For
first, it seals all the promises and covenants of God unto them, and gives
them an interest and right unto them, if they will embrace them when they come
to years: Secondly, it makes them Christians, and incorporates them into the
Church, making them visible members of the visible Church, and giving them an 1
Cor. 12. 13.
interest in all those privileges which the Church inioyes. Arti. 27.
Thirdly, when men are once in truth regenerated, it makes the match between
Christ and them to be of greater validity, it increases and strengthened
their faith, and knits them closer unto God: it makes them more careful to
avoid all kind of sin, and to obey and serve the Lord in all things: the
very remembrance of that vow and covenant which they have made to God in
baptism, will make them more diligent and careful for to please the Lord, and
to resign and give up their selves wholly unto him. Fourthly, I answer, that
though Infants that are baptized, are not truly regenerated by their baptism,
that is, they are not so far regenerated as to have any habit, stock, and
seed of true and saving grace wrought within them, yet those whom God has
ordained to eternal life are so far cleansed and washed by their baptism
from the guilt of original sin, that if they die in their infancy, before
their actual regeneration and real conversion unto God, they shall be saved:
and therefore though Infants are not really and truly regenerated by their
baptism, yet they receive much fruit and benefit by it in these four
respects, and so it is not to no purpose. Secondly, I answer, that the end of
baptism is not to regenerate men, neither was regeneration the end why
baptism was instituted. For if baptism had been instituted of purpose to
regenerate men, then men in the Apostles times should always have been
baptized before they did believe; but men in the Apostles times that were not
formerly converted unto Christ, nor borne of Christian parents, were not to be
baptized before they did believe: as is evident by Mark 16, 16. and by the
example of the Eunuch, of the 3000. conuerts, of Cornelius. the laylor and
others: as you may see Acts 2. 37, 38. cap. 8. 36. to 40. cap. 10. 44. to the
end, and cap 16. 31. 33. 34. therefore the end of baptism is not regeneration,
for then men should have been baptized before they did bele^us, that so they
might be regenerated, and not have been regenerated by (...) first, before
they had been baptized. Again, if the principal and chief end of Baptism
had been for to regenerate men, then those men who were regenerated, should
not have bin baptized, because they were regenerated before, and for their
baptism had bin (...) merely superfluous: but those who have bin truly
regenerated, have bin afterward baptized: as you may see by these express
testimonies of Scripture, Mat. 3. 6. Acts 2. 37. 38. ca 8. 36. to 40. ca. 10.
44. to the end; Acts 16. 14. 15. 31. 33. 34. therefore the end why baptism was
instituted, was not for to (...) men. Why then may Object.
you say was baptism instituted? I answer, that it was instituted Answ.
to the^s ends. First, it was instituted in the place of circumcision, to the
intent that it might seal the covenant and promises of God unto the Gentiles,
as circumcision did unto the Jews: for which read Acts 2. 39 and Romans 4. 11.
Secondly, it was instituted as a type and sign, to (...) unto us, that as the
water it self which we use in baptism does wash away the filth of our
bodies, so the blood of Jesus Christ does wash and purge away the filth and
corruption of our bodies, and the sin of our souls: as you may see Romans 4. 11:
Tit. 3. 5. Col. 2. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 3. 21. and 1 John 1. 7, 9. Thirdly, it was
(...), to incorporate men into the visible Church, and to interest them into
the privileges and benefits which the Church injoyes. Mat. 28. 19. Act. 2. 37.
38 39. (...). 18. 19. Fourthly, it was instituted to distinguish Christians,
from (...) (...) and Heat^ on mon: (...), it is the (...) (...) and (...)
Christians, where by they are distinguished from Turks and Infidels, it is the
outward (...) and seal whereby they are known to belong to Christ. Lastly, it
was instituted to knit men faster and to bring them (...) unto (...), and to
make them more (...) and careful for (...) and (...) (...) him, to abandon and
avoid all kind of sin, and to stick more fast and close unto the truth, by
considering that vow and conenant which they made to God when as they were
baptized: as you may see: Rom, 6. 1. to 9. Gal. 3. 27. Math. 28. 19, 20. and 1
Cor, 1. 13. these were the many ends why baptism was instituted and not of
purpose to regenerate men; and therefore though children are not regenerated by
their baptism, yet they must be baptized in obedience to Christ's institution,
and to these several ends which are useful, profitable and comfortable. And
thus much for the first thing the which I undertook to answer, that all
infants that are baptized are not regenerated.

I come now to the second, to prove, that Gal. 3. 27. As many of you as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, makes not against me. For
first, I say, that it is one thing to be baptized into Christ, and another
thing to be baptized in the name of Christ: to be baptized into Christ, is to
be incorporated and ingrafted into Christ by faith: as appears by verse 26.
28. for ye are all the children of God (not by baptism) but by faith in
Christ Jesus, and ye are all one in Christ: so that the connection of these
words with the precedent and subsequent verses proves, that to be baptized
into Christ, is not to be baptized with water in the name of Christ, but to be
ingrafted, and united unto Christ by faith: so that the sense of the place is
no more but this, those that are incorporated and ingrafted into Christ by
faith have but one Christ: and not, all of you who have been baptized have put
on Christ. Now that this should be the literal meaning of the words, I prove
it by two reasons. First from the very phrase which the Apostle uses: for this
phrase baptized into Christ, is used in no other text of Scripture. unless it
bein Romans 6. 3. where it signifies not the outward Sacrament and act of
baptism, as some would have it, but only our true (...) and ingrafting into
Christ: in all other texts of Scripture. besides these two: this phrase of
baptizing into Christ, is not used: all that is said is but this, they were
baptized, or baptized in the name of Christ, or in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost. So that the very phrase it self does sufficiently
prove, that to be baptized into Christ, is no more then to be incorporated and
ingrafted into him. Secondly, this is evident by that restriction and
limitation which Paul uses in both these places. You know that he wrote his
Epistles, to the whole Churches of Galatia, and Rome, and to all those that
were baptized among them, but not to any who were not baptized: now Paul does
not say either in Gal. 3. 27. or Romans 6. 3. that all that were baptized, were
baptized into Christ; or that all that were in those Churches had put on
Christ; but so many of us as were baptized into Christ, were baptized into his
death: and as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on
Christ: so that this restriction and limitation of Paul in both these places,
restraining this putting on of Christ, to those only that were baptized into
Christ, and not to all those to whom he wrote, or to all such as were baptized;
proves vndeniablie, that it is one thing to be baptized into Christ, and
another thing to be baptized: that all that are baptized, are not baptized into
Christ, and so not truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ by their very
baptism. But least this answer should not satisfy unquiet spirits, that I may
stop up their mouths and leave them no evasion. I answer. Secondly, that those
Galathians to whom Paul writes, who had put on Christ by their baptism, they
were men of ripe years, and they did repent and believe Christ Jesus before
they were baptized, because they were but newly converted from Gentilisme and
Idolatry unto the faith: and therefore they having faith and repentance before
they were baptized, might put on Christ by their baptism, that is, they might
put him on in a greater measure: and yet it follows not, that all infants that
are baptized do likewise put on Christ as well as they, because they want that
faith and repentance which those Galathians had. Thirdly. I answer: that these
words of Paul are only restrained to such of the Galathians as were the sons
of God by faith in Christ Jesus, and the true elect seed of faithful Abraham:
as is evident by ver. 26. 29. they are not spoken indefinitely to all the
Galathians that were baptized and admitted into the Church: therefore all that
these words prove, is only this; that the elect and faithful children of God,
do put on Christ in their baptism; and not that all wicked, reprobate, and
unregenerate men, or all that are baptized do so to. Fourthly, If you will
take this baptizing into Christ, for the mere outward Sacrament and act of
baptism, I answer then, that this putting on of Christ, here mentioned, is
nothing else but the putting on of the name, doctrine and prosession of Christ,
and not a putting on of the ^mage, the nature and the graces of Christ. So that
the Apostles words and meaning are in effect and substance no more then this.
As many of you as are baptized, have put on the name and profession of Jesus
Christ, you have vowed to forsake all other things and doctrines whatsoever,
and to be to him alone; you have couenanted to depend wholly upon him, and to
follow his counsel in all things: therefore seeing that you have put on the
name and profession of Jesus Christ, seeing you have sworn allegiance unto
him, and have taken him for your Priest, your Prophet, and your King: be ye
now directed, ruled and governed by that Word and Gospel which he has
delivered and commended to you; and not by the Law which was only a
Scoolemaster to bring you unto Christ: remember that Christ died for you, and
you were baptized into him, and not into the Law, and therefore seek your
justification, righteousness and happiness not from Moses or the Law, but
from Jesus Christ alone, who has redeemed and freed you from the Law. If you
will but consider the scope, and dri^t of the whole Chapter, you shall find
this to be the only thing that the Apostle aims at in these words, to be are
the Galathians from the Law, because they were baptized into Christ, and had
put on the profession of his name and Gospel, and not the profession of the
Law: wherefore this putting on of Christ, being not a putting on of his ^mage,
nature, and graces, but of the profession of his name and Gospel, this place
makes nothing to this position, that all such as are baptized are truly
regenerated by their baptism, because all that put on the outward profession
of the name of Christ, do not put on the inward ^mage, the inward graces and
spiritual nature of Christ. Lastly, I answer, that if you take this putting on
of Christ, for regeneration and the putting on of the nature, ^mage, and graces
of Christ, and this baptizing into Christ, for mere and common baptism, and
as the cause of this regeneration and putting on of Christ. I answer, that
these words of the Apostle do not warrant it. For first, the Apostle says not,
that as many as have been baptized have put on Christ by their baptism; all
he says is only this, that as many of them as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ: this they might do, and yet not by their baptism,
but by some other means, therefore this place proves nothing. Secondly, the
Apostle tells us, that they put on Christ, not by their baptism, but by their
faith: for he certifieth in the former verse. Ye are all the sons of God by
faith in Christ Jesus; and then come in these words with reference to the
former: for as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ: so that the Galathians did put on Christ by their faith, not by their
baptism. That which is the instrument and cause of putting Jesus Christ on,
must be that which makes men the sons of God, that which stampes the image of
Christ upon them, that which brings Christ into their souls, and ingrafts them
into Christ, that which inables men to take, and to receive Christ Jesus: now
it is not baptism, but faith only which does this: it is faith only that
ingrafts men into Christ, and makes them the sons of God. Gal. 3. 26. John 1.
12. it is faith only that brings Christ Jesus into men's souls. Gal. 2. 20.
Ephesians. 3. 17. it is the hand of faith only that takes Christ Jesus, that
applies him, and puts him on: in Jesus Christ neither circumcision a^aileth any
thing, nor uncircumcision but faith which works by love. Gal. 5. 6. And
therefore take this place of Paul how you will, it proves not, that all those
that are baptized are truly regenerated. If any other places of Scripture are
objected to the contrary, the former answers will fully satisfy them.

Thirdly, I say, that this is not the doctrine of the Church of England, and
those words which Mr. Mountague has cited out of the Common Prayer Book do
not prove it. For that which is said of infants which are to be baptized in
our Common Prayer Book in the form of baptism: doubt not therefore but
earnestly believe that Christ will embrace them with the arms of his mercy,
that he will give them the blessing of eternal life, and make them partakers
of his everlasting kingdom; if you take it in the right sense, it is no more
in effect then this. That it is Christ's will and pleasure that infants should
be baptized, and that he hath'a favor and respect unto them: but that all
infants that are baptized are in truth regenerated that it proves not: Mr.
Mountague Appeal. 34. 35.
indeed as if he were not acquainted with the Liturgy and public religious
seruise of our Church, unless it were to correct it, and to cauell at it, for
which he taxes and condemns others who are less guilty then himself:
would have the word in the preterperfect tence, citing this word has, for
wilt: because he would wrest the words to his purpose; but the words are in the
future tense, and are no more in effect then that which I have said before.
Indeed the words after baptism are in the preterperfect tence. We yield thee
hearty thanks most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee to regenerate
this infant with thy holy Spirit, to receive him for thine own child by
adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy congregation. Which words prove
not that all infants which are baptized are by their very baptism, truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ: because these words (and so the others
before baptism) are not general and universal, but they are limited and
restrained to one particular infant, or those particular infants which are then
to be baptized, whose absolute and definitive estate is only known to God and
not unto the Church. Our Church out of charity, because she knows nothing to
the contrary, does believe, that every particular infant that is baptized is
regenerated, that is, sacramentally, or (because you will have it so, Mr.
Mountague) really and spiritually, yet she believes not, that all infants
that are baptized are spiritually and truly regenerated by their baptism, and
ingrafted into Christ, that Mr. Mountague (as well read as he is in the
Common Prayer Book,) cannot show me. If you now object, that that which is
Object.
true of every individual is true of the whole species, and therefore i^ our
Church believe, that every particular infant that is baptized is regenerated,
therefore that she is of opinion that all are so. I answer, that the rule is
false: for Answ.
there are many things which may be said and predicated truly, or at least
charitablie of Indiuidualls, which are false of the whole species and cannot
be applied to it. A man may say, he ought to say of every particular, and
every individual man in the world, that he may believe, he may repent, and
he may be saved, because he has no warrant to the contrary, and he cannot
know whether God has otherwise disposed of him: yet a man cannot say that all
men shall be saved, that all men may believe and repent, because it is contrary
to the revealed will and word of God. So a man may and ought to say of every
particular infant which is baptized that he is regenerated, because he knows
not any thing to the contrary. (Indeed afterward if he see him live a wicked
and ungodly life, he may then safely say, that he was not regenerated by his
baptism, because his life and works declare as much) but yet no man can
safely say, that all that are baptized are spiritually, really and effect.
ually regenerated, because it is not so revealed in the Scriptures. This
charitable opinion then of the Church of England being restrained to
individual and particular infants, and not extended and enlarged to all such
as are baptized, warrants not Mr. Mountagues collection from it. That all
infants which are baptized, are truly spiritually and effectually regenerated.
Which answers likewise, the words in the Catechism: for there the child in
the second answer, answers only for himself, that by his baptism, (not all
that were baptized) but I was made a member of Christ, a child of God and an
inheritor of the kingdom of heaven: that is, I have a right and title to all
those by my baptism, if I will lay hold on them, and take possession of them
by faith: my baptism gives me a title to them, but does not give me actual
and full possession of them, For these words in the Rubricke before the
Catechism. That children being baptized have all things necessary for their
salvation: the meaning is no more but this. That ba^tisme without faith,
knowledge, lou^ and actual repentance is sufficient for to save such children
as dye before years of discretion, because God will not require
impossibilities at their hands, and such conditions which they were not able to
perform. Or else, that children by their baptism are admitted into the
Church, and have an interest in all those privileges and means of grace which
are necessary to salvation: what is this to purpose, that all infants that are
baptized are spiritually and truly regenerated? Yea, but the Rubricke says,
that if they dye before actual sin they shall be undoubtedly saved. That
is, such infants as are baptized and dye before actual sin are saved, because
our Church knows nothing to the contrary: she knows not whether God has
otherwise disposed of them. But yet it is not there recorded that all infants
that are baptized are regenerated and saved: or that such infants which fall
away from the sacramental grace which they received, should have been saved
if they had died before actual sin. Wherefore in any wise man's judgment
that has his wits and senses about him there is nothing in the Book of
Common Prayers to warrant this assertion. That all such a^ are baptized are
truly and spiritually regenerated: it is only Mr. Mountagues false and
brainsicke conceit who torments and rackes our Common prayer Book to defend
his Error. But admit, that this were the received opinion and doctrine of the
Church of England, that all infants are by their very baptism truly
regenerated and ingrafted into Christ; then Mr. Mountague you are in this
Dilemma: then you must grant this to be the doctrine of the Church of England,
that those who are truly regenerated may both totally and finally fall from
grace which I have proved to be false, or else you must of necessity grant,
that none who are baptized fall from grace, which is contrary to your own
assertion: or else you must needs grant, that all such as are baptized are not
regenerate, which is contrary to that for which you do so much contend: so that
turn which way you will, you are but in a maze and labyrinth, and fettred in
the gines of your own argument. Again I would but demand this question of
Master Mountague, whether this be an article of his Creed^, that all infants
that are baptized, are truly regenerated by the holy Ghost, that they are
partakers of eternal life, and of Christ's everlasting kingdom, as you say our
Common prayer book affirms? If you believe it not, why then do you press it
upon us; or why do you not believe, that which you say our Church beleiues? If
you believe it, how then can your doctrine of a total and final fall from
grace stand together with it? if you believe that all infants that are
baptized, shall have everlasting life, and be made partakers of Christ's
kingdom: you must of necessity believe, that they shall persevere in grace
unto the end: he that believes that the end shall certainly be obtained, must
as certainly believe that the means which must obtain this end shall be used
to: and therefore if you believe that all infants that are baptized shall have
everlasting life and enjoy Christ kingdom, you must likewise believe, that
they shall persevere, and never fall from grace. If you say, that you do not
absolutely believe, that Obicct.
they shall have everlasting life, and be made partakers of Christ's kingdom,
but only conditionally: if they persevere in the Answ.
grace received in their baptism. I answer, that if you do absolutely believe
that they are regenerated, why do you not as absolutely believe, that they
shall have everlasting life and be made partakers of Christ's kingdom? they are
both recorded in the same terms, they are knit together in one sentence, one
following upon the neck of another: they are both set down as absolutely and
positiuely as the other: therefore you must believe all of them to be alike
absolute, and then you cannot believe that ever they should fall from grace:
for then they could not be made partakers of Christ's kingdom and of
everlasting life: or else you must make them all conditional, and believe that
those infants which are baptized are regenerated if they persevere in grace,
else that they are not regenerated by their baptism, which would falsify this
your proposition, that all infants are truly regenerated by their baptism:
which proposition as you see, is no ways warranted by the Common prayer Book,
or by the Church of England.

Lastly, admit that all infants that are baptized are regenerated, Gal. 3. 27.
and by the doctrine of the Church of England, vet I say that this argument
follows not, nor is not to the purpose: for the question is not, whether
infants, and other men may fall totally or finally from that sacramental grace
which they receive inbaptisme: but whether vere fideles, whether such as are
truly regenerated and ingrafted truly into Christ by a lively faith, may fall
totally or finally from the state of grace, of the state or justifying faith?
Now sacramental grace and regeneration is one thing, and this state of true
and saving grace, and of justification by faith is another: if we admit that
infants once baptized have a sacramental grace within them, which is nothing
else but a freedom from the guilt of original sin: yet no man I think can
be so absurd as to say, that they have any habitual graces, or any living and
justifying faith within them; for they want reason and understanding to apply
the word and promises of God, and to use these means which should beget these
graces in them. And therefore seeing that the grace which children and others
receive from baptism is but sacramental, far different from the grace of
which our controversy and question is, if we grant the whole argument to be
true, yet it is nothing to the purpose. And so much in answer to this twenty
sixth argument, in which I have been over tedious, by reason that our
Antagonists rely so much upon it.

The twenty seventh argument which may be objected against Adam and the
Angels: the second, of particular and whole Churches: the third, of particular
and private Saints.

The first argument from Examples, is drawn from Adam Adam and the Angels who
were of an higher alloy then any regenerate Saints of God now are, they fell
from the state of grace: the one totally, the other finally. Therefore the true
regenerate Saints of God, whose grace, are inferior unto theirs, may fall
totally and finally from grace as well as they.

I answer, that the Argument follows not, because there Answ.
is a great difference between the graces which the regenerate Saints of God
enjoy, and that grace which Adam and the Angels had. For first, that grace
which Adam and the Tim. 1. 14. That good thing that was committed to thee,
keep by the holy Ghost which dwells in us: the holy Ghost himself who
begins, does likewise guard and keep the graces of the Saints. So in the 1 Pet.
1. 5. who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation: the power
of God, it does not only keep the Saints unto salvation, but it preserues and
keeps their faith to. So in the 1 Timothy 1. 12. I know-whom I have believed, and
I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day. The faith of the Saints it does not stand in the wisdom, and
custody of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor 2. 5. Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. and
cap. 3. 20. and the Saints of God they do not preserve and keep their graces,
or themselves, but their graces and their persons are guarded, preserved, and
protected by God himself, by Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and that
continually: as you may read Psalm. 4. 8. Psalm. 12. 7. Psalm. 66. 9. Ps. 121. 3.
to the end: Psalm. 125. 1, 2. Isai. 26. 3. Ier 32. 40. John 10. 28, 29. (...).
17. 11. 2. (...). 4. 7. 13. 19. Col. 2. 10. 19. c. 3. 3, 4. Phil. 1. 6. 1 These.
5. 23 24. 2. Tim. 4. 18. 1 Pet. 4. 19. Jude 1. 24. and Ier. 31. 9, 10. (all
comfortable and excellent places worth your reading:) therefore they cannot
fall from the state of grace, though Adam and the Angels did; whose graces and
persons, were kept and preserved only by themselves, and not by God. Secondly,
that grace which Adam and the Angels had, it was their own: they had free will
and liberty to dispose of it at their pleasure: they were Lords over that
grace the which they had, their grace had no Lordship and kingdom over them.
It is now far otherwise in the graces of the Saints: for their graces, they
are not their own, nor yet their persons, but their graces and their persons
they are Christ's: their graces they all flow and spring from Christ, and they
are but stewards, not owners of them. Yea, their graces they are above their
wills: they have a Lordship and kingdom in their souls: they are not Lords,
but subjects to their graces: Grace does rule and dispose of them, not they of
grace: see Gal. 5. 16. 17. 18, 25. Romans 8. 5. 14. Ezech. 36. 27. 1 Cor. 3. 23.
cap. 6. 19, 20. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. cap. 10. 4. 5. cap. 13. 8. Acts 4. 20. and
Col. 3, 15. all express to this purpose: therefore they cannot lose nor yet
cast out their graces, as Adam and the Angels did. Thirdly, that grace Adam and
the Angels had, it had no promise of perpetuity and perseverance annexed to
it, and therefore it is no great wonder though they fell from grace: but the
graces which the Saints of God have now, they have the promises of perseverance
and perpetuity annexed to them; (as you may see by all those gracious promises
which I have formerly mentioned,) therefore their graces cannot fail,
therefore they cannot fall from grace, though Adam and the Angels did.
Fourthly, that grace which Adam and the Angels it might not fail: but the
graces which the Saints now have, they had the benefit of Christ's prayer whiles
he was on earth; and they have the benefit of his everlasting intercession now
he is in heaven, Luke 22. 32, John 14. 16. cap. 16. 26. cap. 17. 11. 15. 21 23.
24. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 2. 17. cap. 4. 14, 15, 16. cap. 7. 25. and cap. 9. 24.
therefore they cannot fail, though Adam and the Angels did. Fifthly, that grace
which Ada^ and the Angels had, Romans 8. 29. 30 cap. 11. 7. Acts 13. 48. Ephesians. 1.
4, 5. cap. 2. 10. 1 These. 5. 9, 10. 2 These. 2. 13, 14. 1 Timothy 6. 12. 2 Timothy 1.
9. cap. 2. 19. 21. Titus 1. 1. 2 Cor. 2. 5. and 1 Pet. 1. 2. therefore they
cannot fall from grace, though Adam and the Angels did. Sixthly, that grace
which Adam and the purchased Ephesians. 1. 14.
possession, they are purchased by Christ himself at the hands of his Father,
that so they might be sure to all the seed, Romans 4. 16.
Christ who has purchased them for them, will preserve them in them, and
therefore they cannot fall from grace, though Adam and the Angels did. Lastly,
that grace Adam and the Angels had, it was no grace but nature, it had its
rise and being from themselves, and was incident unto their natures: therefore
they might lose it, and fall from it as they did. But the graces which the
Saints of God have now, they are transcendent and above nature: they stand not
in the wisdom, or nature of men, but in the power of God, 2 Cor. 2. 5. 2 Pet.
1 4. they have their rise from heaven, and from the mighty power of God,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. cap. 3. 20. and Romans 15. 13. not from humane nature: they are
part of the di^ine nature, and they flow from Jesus Christ, and the holy Ghost,
the spring and fountain of all grace: John 1. 16. cap. 4. 14. cap. 7. 38, 39.
Gal. 5. 22. Ephesians. 1. 23. and Col. 2. 9. 19. These graces which the Saints have
now, are of a more divine, heavenly, permanent, and spiritual nature, then
that natural grace which Adam and the Angels had, and they flow from such a
head and spring of grace which never fails, which is never drawn dry. And
therefore though Adam and the Angels fell from grace, yet you see for all
these reasons, that it follows not, that therefore the regenerate Saints of
God should fall as well as they. How ever, the question is not of natural
grace, or of that grace which Adam and the Angels had, whether that may be
lost (for that was no more but common nature, and nog grace:) but whether true,
justifying, and saving grace may be lost; and so this Argument is nothing to
the purpose, or the thing in question.

The second sort of examples are of whole Churches which

For answer to this argument, I must first distinguish of Answ.
this word Church: first, it is taken in a large and general sense, for all
such as make an outward profession of Christ, whether they are good or bad;
secondly, it is taken properly and strictly, for the whole company of the elect
and chosen Saints of God, and for them only; in which sense it is used in our
Creed. Secondly, I must distinguish of this word whole Church: for sometimes it
is taken universally for all and every one that is included and comprised
within the Church: other times it is taken for the Major and the greater part
only, and not for every individual and particular member. If you take now the
whole Church, in the largest sense, for every visible and particular member of
the Church both good and bad: or if you take the whole Church in the stricter
and more proper sense, for the company of the elect and chosen Saints of God,
then the Minor proposition is false: because none of the elect and chosen
Saints o^ God, can either totally or finally fall from grace. But if you take a
whole Church, for the greater part of a visible Church, for those who are
members of a visible Church, and yet are but goats, tares, and chafe, and no
members of the true and holy Church of Christ, then the sequel of the Major
proposition is false, and no more in substance then this. If hypocrites and
wicked men may fall from the show and shadow of grace, then the true regenerate
Saints of God may fall from the very habits and seed of true and saving grace:
which is but a mere Nonsequitur. True then it is, that all those of a whole
Church which are notregenerated, (which are far the greatest number) may
Apostatize and fall from the doctrine of grace: but yet the true regenerate
Saints of God in such a Church, do never fall from the habit and state of true
and saving grace: and therefore both the Major and the Minor proposition in
that sense as they are propounded, are false and unsound. Thus much for the
general.

The first example of any particular Church that is objected fatness of the
root and Olive tree Christ Jesus, were broken off and fell from grace: Romans
11. 16. to 25. therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may fall from grace,

I answer first, that the Antecedent is false: for the root Answ.
and Olive tree which the Apostle speaks of, is not Christ, but Abraham and
the Patriarchs. So Chrysostom, Bid, Anselme, Theodoret, Haymo, Calvin, Peter
Martyr, Beza, Pareus, Willet, Hyperius; and most of those that coment on this
place: and therefore it follows not, that because the Jews might be broken
off from Abraham, and be deprived of the promises and covenant made to him and
to his seed, that therefore the true believers may be broken off from Christ.
Secondly, admit that Christ himself and not Abraham, is the root and Olive
tree here mentioned, and that some of the Jews were broken off from him: yet I
answer, that those Jews and branches which were broken off, were such as were
never truly ingrafted into Christ, but only in common reputation, and in
outward show: which is evident by the same chapter. First, because it is said,
ver. 7. that such as were blinded and broken off were such as were never
elected: Secondly, because it is said v^ (...). that they (...) (...) (...)
through unbelief: if then those that were thus broken o^ were not elected, if
they were unbelievers, it is certain then that they were never truly ingrafted
into Christ, because they never had any true and lively faith. Thirdly, though
the greatest part of the Jews did Apostatize, and so were broken off, yet the
2. 5. 7. and 17. verses of this chapter certify us, that all the elect and
chosen Saints of God that were among them, all the true Israel of God
belonging to the election of grace, did still continue in the stock and root,
and were not broken off, they did not fall from grace: none but the
counterfeite and superficial branches were broken off, the true and living
branches did still continue. So that this example makes wholly for us, not
against us.

The second example is taken from the Galathians. The Galathians they were true
believers, and the true regenerate Saints of God. For they received the Spirit
of God, they began in the spirit, and suffered many things for Christ, Gal. 3.
2, 3, 4. yea, they were all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, and
they all had put on Christ, ver. 26. 27. But yet they fell from grace, they
ended in the flesh, they disobeyed the truth, and turned from the Gospel to
the law, and so made Christ of no effect unto them, Gal. 1. 6. cap. 3. 1. 3.
cap. 4. 9. and cap. 5. 2. 4. 7. Therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may
fall from grace. For answer to this example, I say sirst, that all the
Galathians to Answ.
whom Paul wrote were not regenerated: because there was never yet any Church
on earth (I mean any visible Church,) neither shall there ever be any, where
all the members of it are regenerated; for Christ himsele has certified us,
that there shall be chafe as well as wheat, goats as well as sheep, good
fish mixed with bad continually in his Church, even to the end of the world,
Math. 13. therefore it must needs be so in these Churches of Galatia to whom
Paul wrote. If you object, that Paul says, that they were all the children of
God by Object.
faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 26. therefore they were all regenerated. I
answer, that the meaning of these words of Paul, Answ.
is not to show unto us, that all the (...) were then in the (...) of
rege^eration and justification, (and if it were so, it would make quite against
you not for you, for if they were in this estate when as P^l wrote unto them,
then they were not fallen from grace as you pretend) but Paul's meaning there is
only this, That all such as are the regenerate and adopted sons of God in
Christ, they are so only in regard of faith, it is faith only that makes them
so, and not the works of the law; which is evident by the very scope of the
place: so that this place proves not, that all the Galathians were truly
regenerated. And so the Major proposition, that all the Galathians were
regenerated, i^ false. Secondly, I answer, that all those Galathians who were
regenerated, did persevere in grace, and did not turn away from the Gospel to
the Law, and that such as did Apostatize unto another Gospel, were such only
as had received the Gospel, but not the grace of Faith, and such as never were
regenerated. I would ask but this question of our Ant^gonists, whether all the
Galathians, or only the greater part of them fell from grace? If all, then
they were no Church, when as Paul did write unto them (for there cannot be a
Church but where there are some faithful ones continuing in the state of
grace.) If all of them did not fall from grace, then who were those which did
fall away? Who were they which did continue? did the true regenerate Saints of
God fall away, and the hypocrites only continue? or did the hypocrites fall
away, and the true regenerate Saints of God continue? If any fell away they
were certainly the hypocrites, and such as had no truth of grace within them:
for the true regenerate Saints of God they cannot be seduced, they cannot
depart from God, and they go not out from the fold and flock of Christ. Math.
24. 24. Ier. 32. 40 1 John 2 19. and Reu. 3. 12. If any did continue, they were
certainly the faithful Saints of God, for hypocrites and wicked men they hold
not out, but as the chafe before the wind they are blown away, Psalm. 1. 4.
and Math. 3. 12. Therefore if that the outward face only of the Church of
Galatia, if the greater part of them only; if the chafe of them, if the
Goats, and not the wheat and sheep among them fall away, this example proves
nothing at all against me. All that this example proves, if you rack it to the
utmost is only this; that men may fall from the word, the doctrine and Gospel,
of faith; but not that they may fall from the grace of faith.

The third example is taken from the Churches of Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira, and
Pergamus, these they lost their first love, and fell from grace. Reu. 2. 4, 5.
therefore the true regenerate Answ.
Saints of God may fall from grace. I answer, that neither of these Churches
fell from grace, though they fell into some sins, for which the Lord reproues
them by Saint John. For it is there said of the Church of Ephesus: verse, 2, 3.
that she had works, and labor, and patience: that she could not bear them
which were evil; that she had tried them which said they were Apostles, and
were not, and she found them to be liars: that she had patience, and that
she had labored for Gods name sake, and had not fainted; of which God took
special notice: and God himself tells her, that he had but somewhat to say
against her: all that was in her was not out of order, she was not generally
faulty, something only was amiss: and what was that? she had lost, not her
love, but her first love: that is, she had lost the degrees, the zeal, the
heat and feruencie of her love: her love was not so intense, so hot, so
zealous and so ardent as it was before: but yet the habit of her love was still
remaining in her: she had love in her still though not in that degree as she
had it before: yet she had it in such a degree, that she hated the deeds of
the Nicholitans, whom God hated, and she could not bear them which were
evil. verse 3, 6. which she could never have done, if this habit and grace of
love had been utterly extinguished and abolished in her: and therefore,
because that all things in her were not amiss, because there were many graces
and good things in her, of which God took special notice, it is most certain
that she was not fallen totally nor finally from the state of grace. The same
answer may serve for all the other Churches: for they had all, works, charity,
service, faith, patience; they did hold fast the name of Christ, and not deny
his faith: and their last works were (...) then their first: vers^ 9. 13, 19.
and of this God himself takes special notice: and can you think that these
Churches which had these things in them were fallen quite from grace? Can any
Church or person have all these graces in them, and yet be fallen totally from
the state of grace? Credat (...) Apella, non ego: others may believe it if they
will, but men of any judgment cannot do it: because it is a plain
contradiction, that a man should be fallen totally from grace, and yet have
many graces in him still. So that these examples prove nothing at all against
me. Yea, I may boldly say, they are unanswerable proofs and evidences for
me. For say I, if these Churches of God when as they fell into those sins
for which God reproues them, did not fall totally from the state of grace, (as
it is manifest they did not) then it is plain, that the Saints of God do
never fall from grace: (for if they fall not from the state of grace by falling
into sin, they fall not from it by any other means, and so they fall not
from it at all.) So that these maine examples and proofs on which you do
rely, they are the strongest evidences that make against you. Thus much for the
second sort of examples.

The third sort of examples are taken from some particular second and third
ground are produced against second and third ground, they had true grace and
faith: but they fell away from grace. Math. 13. 5, 6, 7, 20, 21, 22. Therefore
the true regenerate Saints of God may fall from grace. I answer, that the Major
is false: for though Answ.
they did receive the word with joy for a time, yet they had no true and saving
grace at all within them, as is evident by these reasons. First, because they
never came to that maturity and ripeness as to bring forth fruit, there was
only a blade and outward show of grace within them, there were only the buds
and leaves, but not the fruits of faith in them: now faith without fruits and
works is but a dead and empty faith, yea, no faith at all. 1 These. 1. 3. Iam.
2. 14, 17, 26. Secondly, because the faith the which they had, it did not altar
and change, it did not (...), (...) and (...) their hearts, it made them not
good and firtle gro^nd: they were but stony and thornie ground still, the word
the which they did receive, it wrought no chang or alteration in them, they
were still the same they were before. Now how is it possible, that such as were
never changed and regenerated, such as continued in their carnal and old
estate, being as bad as ever; such in whose hearts there was no alteration and
renouation wrought, that they should have true grace or faith within them? For
true grace and true faith, they do regenerate, transform and alter men, they
purify and (...) their hearts and souls, and make them new men and new
creatures. Romans 12. 2. Acts. 15. 9. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Ephesians. 4. 22, 23, 24. Gal. 5.
24. and Col. 3. 9, 10. and therefore these two grounds could have no true and
saving grace or faith, because they were not thus truly regenerated, purified,
and transformed into good ground, but continued stony and thornie as they were
before. Thirdly, because it is said of one of the grounds, that afflictions
and temptations made the seeds that was sown in it to wither away: and of the
other ground, that the thorns and weeds sprung up and choked the seed that
was sown in it. Now this is the property of true, justifying and saving
faith, that it makes men to abide the trial, and to hold out in times of
persecution, affliction and temptation. Iam. 1. 12. and 1 Pet. 1. 7. that it
ouercomes the world and the cares and troubles, and temptations of it. 1 John
5. 4 5. and therefore these two grounds which were overcome of temptations
persecutions and afflictions, and of the cares, the pleasures and riches of
this world, had no true, justifying and saving faith within them. Fourthly,
because that true, justifying and living faith (of which only our question is
intended,) is always rooted and grounded in the soul, so that it can never
wither, nor yet be rooted and weeded out: as we may read at large Ephesians. 3.
17. Col. 1. 23. cap. 2. 5. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 58. Ier. 17. 8. and Heb. 6. 19. but
the faith which these two grounds had, it had no root at all. Math. 13. 5, 6,
21. Luke. 18. 13. it was such a faith, or credulity rather, which was settled in
the vnd^rstanding, but was not rooted and grounded in the heart and spirit;
therefore it was no true, lively, justifying and saving faith. Fifthly, because
the faith of these two grounds is put by way of (...) and opposition to that of
the (...) and good gro^nd: these two temporary sorts of hearers are (...) and
distinguished from the fourth sort, who did with honest and good hearts not
only hear the word of God, but keep it to, and bring forth fruit with
patience, which the others did not. The text it self makes a kind of special
difference between the faith of the one, and of the other; and therefore their
faith could not be true, because it is distinguished and put in opposition to
the faith of the fourth ground. But if all this will not give you satisfaction.
I answer, that the difference in this parable is only intended and meant of
hearers not of believers: the parable informs us that there are four several
sorts of hearers, not four different sorts of believers. Now of all these
four sorts of hearers, there was but one sort of them that were true
believers, for in the other three sorts, the word preached did not profit them,
and why was this? because it was not mixed with faith in them that heard it.
Heb. 4. 2. therefore it is certain, that the three first sorts of hearers had
no faith at all, as you surmise they had: neither can there be four sorts of
true bel^euers, as you would hence collect: for as there is but one God, one
Lord, one spirit, and one body: so there is but one faith, one kind, one sort
and speci^s of true believers, who are not different and many, but all one in
Christ. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 12. 12, 27. Romans 15, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 1. 10. cap.
10. 17. 2 Cor. 13. 11. Phil. 1. 27. cap. 2. 2. Col. 3. 15. and therefore this
Scripture being only meant of several kinds of auditors, and not of several
kinds of believers, makes nothing at all against me.

The second example is of those, John 2. 23, 24. Those that (...) in the name
of Christ when as they saw his miracles had true iust^fying faith. But these
fell from grace: for Jesus did not commit ^imselfe unto them, for he k^ew all
^en: therefore the true regenerate Saints of God may fall from grace.

I answer, that these had not true justifying and living Answ
faith within them: which is evident by these reasons. First, because this
faith was wrought only by the sight of miracles without the preaching of the
Word, and it was no more but a belief that Christ was the true Messiah: but
true, living, justifying and saving faith, as it is always a fruit of the
spirit of God. Gal. 5. 22. so it is always wrought by the word of God. Romans
10. 14, 15, 27. whence it is styled, the word of faith. Gal. 3. 2. and 1 Timothy
4. 6. therefore this belief which was wrought merely by miracles without the
word and spirit of God, could be no true, justifying, and living faith.
Secondly, these men could be no true believers, because the text says, that
Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men: and needed
not that any should testify of man; for he knew what was in man: that is,
Christ knew them to be but hypocrites, he knew their hearts were not upright
toward him, and therefore he would not trust himself with them. Now will any
man dare to say, that those whom Christ himself knew to be hypocrites, that
those to whom Christ would not commit himself, were true believers? that they
had true and saving faith within them? if he does (as our Antagonists do)
what is this but to make Christ ignorant of the estates of men, and to make our
selves more skillful in discerning of men's hearts then he? Well mark these
words of the Evangelist. First he says, that Christ did not commit himself
unto them: therefore they had no true faith, therefore they were no true
believers. For Christ is so far from not committing of himself to true
believers, that he does even inhabit and dwell in their hearts by faith. Ephesians
3. 17. and 2 Cor. 13. 5. Secondly, he says that the reason why Christ did not
commit himself unto them was, because he knew all men: that is, he knew them
to be hypocrites, as most interpreters expound it: if they were hypocrites, and
not sound at heart, then they were no true believers: for true faith it
purifieth the heart, it makes it sincere and upright, and purges it from all
hypocrisy. Acts. 15. 9. Math. 23. 26. and 2 Cor. 2. 17. If you now object,
that they believed in his name: therefore this phrase implies that they had
true faith. I answer, that this phrase in this place, (for the reasons formerly
given) declares no more then this, that they had an historical faith, that
they believed him to be the Christ: and not that they did rely and trust upon
him, or take him for their Lord and Savior, and in this very sense it is
taken. Math 7. 21. 22. John. 6. 2. 14. cap. 11. 40, 41, 48. cap. 12. 42, 43.
cap. 5. 44 and James 2. 19. and so have all interpreters agreed it, upon this
place. But admit that these Jews here mentioned had true faith. Then I deny
your Minor, that they fell away from it again: the text says no such thing,
that they fell from grace; and you can produce no other text of Scripture, to
prove that these particular Jews which Saint John here mentions, fell away
from grace or faith; it is your own imagination and surmise: wherefore let
these be true believers, or no true believers, this their example proves
nothing against me. The third example is that of John 6. 66. Many of Christ's
Disciples went back, and walked no more with him: but these had true faith:
therefore those who have true faith may fall from grace.

I answer, that the Minor is false: for Christ himself informs Answ.
us. ver. 26, 27. That these Disciples which departed from him, did seek and
follow him, not for his doctrine or his miracles, or for that meat which
indureth unto everlasting life, but only because they did eat of the loaves
and were filled: and therefore when he exhorted them to eat his flesh, and
drink his blood; that is, to feed on him in their hearts by faith, this very
thing did so much offend them, that they departed from, him: which makes it
clear that they had no faith at all; for then they could not have taken
scandal at an exhortation unto faith. Yea, Christ himself does certify us:
verse 64: that those who departed did not believe: and it appears by Peter's
answer: verse 68, 69. that the reason why they did depart was only this,
because they did not believe, that Christ had the words of eternal life,
neither were they sure that he was that Christ, the son of the living God.
For the Disciples which did believe this did continue with him, even for this
very cause, because they did believe it: so that this example is impertinent,
because they were no true believers.

The fourth example is from David: David was a true regenerate to create a new
heart, and to renew a right spirit within him. Psalm. 51. 10. Secondly, he was
a murderer, and therefore had no eternal life abiding in him. 1 John 3. 14,
15. Thirdly, he was guilty of adultery, which disinherits men of heaven, 1
Cor. 6. 10 Gal. 5. 21. and Ephesians. 5. 5. Fourthly, he lay long in these sins
without repentance: therefore a true regenerate man and Saint of God may fall
from grace, as David did.

To this I answer, that the Minor is false, and that David Answ.
did not fall totally nor finally from grace in committing of these sins:
which I prove by these reasons. First, because it is not recorded in the whole
book of God, that David fell from the state of grace: true it is, it is
recorded how he fell into these sins, and I believe it to be true, because
the Scripture tells me so: but that David fell totally from grace in committing
of these sins, the holy Ghost has not recorded it, it is but a bare
collection of our Antagonists, and therefore it is not to be believed.
Doubtless if David had fallen totally or finally from the state of grace in
committing these his sins, the holy Ghost who has recorded his sin and
life, would have recorded this his fall unto us: since then the holy Ghost has
not recorded this his fall, it is a point of arrogancy and strange presumption
for our Antagonists, so confidently to determine, that David fell away from the
state of grace, when as the Scriptures do not warrant it. Secondly, it is
evident, that David fell not away from the state of grace, when as he lay in
these his sins; because in the midest of these his sins (which he fell into
out of infirmity, and not out of any precogitated malice) his heart was
upright toward God, and the whole bent and frame of his heart was turned
toward him: for God himself testifies of him, that he was a man after his
heart. Acts 13. 22. that he went fully after the Lord. 1 Kings 11: 6. and that
his heart was perfect with the Lord. verse 4. and therefore since that God
himself has given such Elogies, and testimonies of him, it cannot stand
together with them, that David should fall quite away from grace, though he
fell into these sins. Thirdly, it is evident and plain by Psalm. 51. 11. for
there he prays to God in his penitential Psalm (which was penned when as
the Prophet Nathan came unto him and informed him of his sins of murder and
adultery.) Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit
from me. If David then immediately upon the sight of these his sins, did pray
to God, not to take away his holy spirit from him: it is certain then that he
had the spirit of God abiding in him, notwithstanding these his sins; else
he would have prayed thus to God; restore and give me thy holy spirit o Lord;
and not, Lord take not thy holy spirit from me: if then the spirit of God were
still within him, then certainly he was not fallen totally from the state of
grace. Yea, but says Hunnius and some other of our Antagonists: Object.
the spirit of God which he lost by these his sins was now restored to him,
and therefore he prays to God not to take it away from him, not because he
lost it not before, but because it was now restored unto him again. I answer,
that this is but a mere cavil and an idle conceit, Answ.
not grounded on the Scripture. For if David had lost the Spirit by this sin,
or if God had restored it to him again, no doubt but the Scripture would have
mentioned it, and David himself would have expressed, or at least have
intimated it in this Psalm of his, which we see he does not do. Again, if
David had lost the Spirit of God by these his sins, I would demand of our
Antagonists when this holy Spirit of God returns unto him again: whether
before, or after his repentance, or in the very act of his repentance? If
before his repentance; then David was in the state of grace and not in the
state of damnation, before he did repent; which you your selves deny. If after
his repentance; that cannot be; for repentance is the work of the holy Ghost,
and unless David had had this holy Spirit of God, he could not have repented
thus: yea, then David's prayer had been in vain: for how could he have prayed
unto God, not to take away his holy Spirit from him; if he had it not as yet
restored to him? for when he penned this Psalm he did but begin, he had not
fully finished his repentance for these sin: therefore the holy Spirit of God
was not restored to him after his repentance. If it were restored unto him in
the very beginning, and act of his repentance, from whence does that appear?
sure I am, there is no ground in Scripture for to warrant it, and if it were
so; then it follows that the Spirit of God may be restored unto men before
their actual repentance, (which you deny) because the very beginning of
repentance, or a thought to repent, is no perfect actual repentance, no such
repentance as you require, to regaine the Spirit and the state of Grace. And
therefore, seeing that the Scripture informs us, that the holy Ghost abides
and dwells in men's hearts and souls for ever, John 14. 15. 16, and 1 John 1.
20. 27. we may safely say, that the holy Spirit of God was never taken away
from David, but continued in him still. Again, to what end should this prayer
of David serve, if God had now restored his Spirit to him? He had as yet
committed no such sin, since the restitution of the Spirit to him, as might
cause God to deprive him of it: and therefore this prayer of his was not so
fitting to the purpose in this sense: therefore we must take it in the ap^st
sense, and as David did intend it: David he was afraid left God should deprive
him of his holy Spirit, for those sins which he had committed against him
before, and this was the cause and ground of this his prayer now: therefore
this his prayer and the whole Psalm, having reference only to his former, and
not to his future sins: it must needs follow, that this prayer of David
extends merely to the Spirit, which he had before his sins committed, and
not to the Spirit newly restored to him: for that was not in danger to be lost
for any former sins. The holy spirit of God therefore continuing still in
David, it is certain that he did not fall totally from the state of Grace by
these sins of his: Fourthly, if David had fallen quite away from the state of
grace, he could not have repented so soon as now he did. For no sooner had
Nathan told him, thou art the man: but presently David he does confess his
sin to God. I have sinned (says he) against the Lord: and presently 2 Samuel
12. 7. 13
upon this confession of his, God returns him this answer by Nathan, the Lord
also has put away thy sin, thou shall not die: whence he records it of
himself, Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledge my sin unto the Lord, and my iniquity
have I not hid: I said, I will confess my transgression to the Lord, and thou
gorgauest the iniquity of my sin. Certainly, if David had been dead in
sins and trespasses, if he had had no life of grace within him, he had not
been so soon awaked and revived as now he was: he could not have penned such
a passionate and true poenitentiall Psalm as this. I will not stand to argue,
that David was borne of the immortal seed of grace, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
and therefore he could not sin unto death, because the seed of 1 John 3. 9.
Psalm. 37. 24.
grace remained in him, and because he was borne of God: or that he could not
fall from grace, because the Lord sustained, and vpheld him with his hand: the
former reasons are sufficient, for to do it. Now that David did not fall
totally from grace, nor yet lose the Spirit of God by this his fall: we have
the testimonies of Irenaeus, lib. 4 adu: Haereses: cap 45. Of Origin, hom: 4.
in Psalm. 36. of Basil: Scholia in Psa. 50. alias 51. Of Chrysostom, Hom. 44.
in 1 Cor. 16. Of Augustine, de Doctr: Christ: lib. 3. cap. 21. and Comment: in
Psalm. 50. alias 51. Of Anselme, Com: in Hebr. 6. Of Bernard de Natura and
dignitate amoris diuini: cap. 6. Of Luther in Psalm. 51. verse. 11. 12. Of Calvin
in Psa. 51. verse. 11. 12. Of Bucer in Psalm. 1. and in Romans 8. Of Marlorat
Exposit in Psalm. 51. 11, 12, 13. and in 1 John 39. Of Musculus in Psalm. 51 O^
Tyndall, in his Treatise of the manner of Election: Of Abbot, Benefield,
Scharpius, Prideaux, Zanchius Beza, Bastingius, and all other modern
Protestant and Orthodox writers. Tertullian, Cyprian, and the other ancient
Fathers, they only make mention of David's sin and repentance, but speak not
that he fell from grace: and therefore there is no great question, but that
David continued still in his estate of grace, notwithstanding that he fell into
these sins.

As for that which is objected by our Antagonists, that David Object.
prays to God to create in him a clean heart: therefore his heart was wholly
polluted before, and he was fallen quite from grace. I answer, that this word
create, though in its Answ.
proper acception it signifies, to make a thing out of nothing, yet here it
signifies no more then to renew, as the most and best expositers on this Psalm
agree: which is evident by the words which are coupled and conjoined with it:
for says the Psalmist: create in me a clean heart O Lord, and renew a right
spirit within me: now if David had not intended merely a renouation, but a
new creation of his heart and graces: he would have used only these words,
create in me a new heart: omitting these subsequent words: and renew a right
spirit within me: for else there were a contradiction in them: For creation is
to make a thing out of nothing: renouation is to repair and renew a thing that
was in being before: and therefore David joining them both together, his
meaning is no more but this. Lord repair the breaches of my heart and soul,
and renew those graces of thy Spirit in me which my sins have blurred and
d^aced: take then these words in their natural and proper sense, and then they
make for me not against me. Secondly, I answer, that David was here deeply
affected with his sins, and he beheld a great deal of filth, of sin, of
flesh and corruption in his heart, and therefore out of a godly zeal and
feruencie, and a detestation of his sin, he prays to God to give him a new
heart, and to create in him such an heart as might be clean, and free from all
corruption: and this he does not because there was no synceritie and grace in
his heart before, for then it is certain that he could not have prayed thus
to God: but because he did desire to have his heart better then it was before:
So that these words of David being but a prayer, they do not necessarily
implie that David had no grace in him before. I would ask our Antagonists but
this question: Whether this prayer of David, be not the daily prayer of every
true regenerate man? Do not those who are in the state of grace pray earnestly
to God. To create in them a new heart, and to renew a right spirit within them?
to make them new men and new creatures? and will you then conclude, that
because these true regenerate Saints of God do use this prayer, that therefore
they are not in the state of grace? If you should do so, you would but make
your selves ridiculous: and therefore if you cannot conclude that those Saints
of God which use this prayer as well as David, are not in the state of grace,
because they use it; neither can you conclude, that David was not in the state
of grace, because he used it. You know it is the usual custom of the Saints
of God to humble and debase themselves in the sense and feeling of their own
corruptions. Jacob he confesses, ( Genesis 47. 9.
) that the days of his pilgrimage were but few and evil. Holy Job the most
just and upright man upon the earth, he confesses himself ( Job 40. 4. and
42. 5.
) to be vile, and therefore he abhors himself, and repents in dust and ashes:
the holy Prophet Isaiah, he cries out, ( Isai. 6. 5.
) Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips. ( Luke 5. 8,
9.
) Peter he falls at Jesus feet, saying, depart from me, for I am a sinful man,
O Lord: and holy Paul records it of himself, ( Romans 7. 14. 18. 24.
) We know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin: for
I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing: and therefore
he cries out: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? I think now that no man will be so uncharitable, or absurd, as to
say, that Iaacob, Job, Isaiah, Peter, and Paul, had no grace at all within
them, that they were in the state of death and damnation, because they use
these words of themselves. And again, I suppose that no man will be so
ridiculous, as to affirm that every one which does use the Lords prayer, is
not in the state of grace and justification, because he prays to God, to
forgive him his trespasses, which may seem for to implie, that his sins are
not as yet forgiven, and so he is not justified. If men then will not be so
absurd and ridiculous, to collect such an inference and conclusion from these
forecited speeches and prayers, why then should they do it from this prayer of
David, create in me a new heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me,
which does not intimate or implie as much as they? Thirdly, I would demand of
our Antagonists whether David had not the Spirit of God within him, whether he
were not in the state of grace when as he penned this Psalm? If he had not the
Spirit of God within him, if he were not in the state of grace: how then could
this be a poenitentiall Psalm? (for no man can vnseignedly repent him of his
sins, but by the help and assistance of Gods Spirit:) If he had not the
Spirit of God within him, why then does he pray to God in the next verse, Cast
me not out of thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me? yea, why is
this Psalm recorded and received as Canonical Scripture if David, were not in
the state of grace, if he had not the Spirit of God within him (which is the
author of all Canonical Scripture) when as he penned it? If then David had the
holy spirit of God within him, when as he penned this Psalm (as our
Antagonists must needs grant, or else they must raze this Psalm out of the
Book of God) then it is certain, that these words of David, Create in me a
clean heart O God, and renew a right Spirit within me, cannot implie that
David was now fallen from the state of Grace by these his sins. So that the
first reason of our Antagonists, is vain and idle. For the second reason
drawn from John: that no murderer Object.
has eternal life abiding in him: therefore David being a murderer fell from
grace. I answer: first, that the scope of the Answ.
Apostle in this place, is no more but this: to prove that such as hate the
Saints of God, have no life and grace within them: this is the only aim of
the place, which cannot be applied to David, who was a lover, and an earnest
favorer of the Saints, as we may see Psalm. 16. 3. Psalm. 101. 6. and Psalm. 119.
79. and therefore by St. John's words, was passed from death to life, and did
dwell in God, and God in him: 1 John 3. 14. and 4. 16. Secondly, I answer, that
this is only true of such, as never were in the state of grace, and of such as
live and die without repentance in this sin, and not of the Saints, and
therefore it cannot be applied unto David: But because I would be as brief as
may be, for further answer to this, and to the other two reasons which our
Antagonists object; to prove that David fell from grace, I refer you to, my
answer of the twenty four Argument: where these three reasons are fully
answered: and to my two observations immediately before my answer to these
Arguments, where I have proved, that no true regenerate men can fall from
grace, and that such as do fall away, had never but a shadow, and no truth of
grace: All which being pondered and considered, together with my reasons here
alleged, will give you full satisfaction, that David did neither finally nor
totally fall from grace.

The fifth Example is Peter: Peter he was a true regenerate he denied him
thrice, and that with an oath; yea, with many oaths and execrations, Math. 26.
72, 73. 74. Now he that denies Christ before men, he has not the spirit of
Christ: and Christ will deny him before his Father which is in heaven, Romans 8.
9. 2 John 7. Math. 10 33. Luke 9. 26. and therefore Peter in denying Christ
thus fell from grace. Secondly, Christ himself intimates that he should fall
from grace in denying him, Luke 23. for he says unto him, with reference to
his denial: and when thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: Peter needed
a new conversion, therefore he fell from grace. Therefore true regenerate men
may fall from grace as well as Peter.

I answer, that the Minor is false, and that Peter in denying Answ.
Christ did not fall totally from grace, and that I shall evidence by these
reasons: First, because that Christ had prayed that his faith should not fail.
Luke 22. 32. If therefore Peter fell from grace, either Christ's prayer was not
heard, which is contrary to the Scriptures: for he himself informs us: John
11. 42. that his Father hears him always, or else Christ made no such
prayer: either of which makes Christ a liar. If you reply, that Christ's prayer
extended merely to a final, not to a total failing; that he prayed that
Peter's faith Answ.
should not fail finally, but not totally: I answer first, that Christ's prayer
extends as well to a total as a final falling: For, first the original
word it signifies to fail: So as the (...)
Sun or the Moon do in an eclipse, which are never wholly deptiued of
their light, nor so ecclipsed, but that they may be seen if the medium be
clear: and therefore Christ praying that his faith should not fail, no not as
the Sun or the Moon do in an eclipse: prays that it should not so much as
fail totally for a time, as well as that it should not finally fail.
Secondly, that which fails totally for a time, it is certain that it fails:
now Christ's prayer for Peter's faith, was not that it might not fail finally,
but that it might not fail: therefore that it might not fail totally as well
as that it might not finally fail (because that faith which fails totally,
does fail as much as that which fails finally) and therefore to make up the
words, and to give them their full and true signification, we must take it as
well for a total as for a final fall, else the words are not sufficiently
supplied and satisfied. Thirdly, faith cannot fail totally, but it must fail
finally to: If Peter's faith which he had before his denial of Christ were
wholly abolished and destroyed in him, it were impossible for the same
numericall faith which was utterly lost and abolished, to be restored to him
again; the faith which he had afterward must be a new faith, and not the
same numericall faith which he had before. And therefore since Peter's faith
could not fail totally, so as to be utterly abolished in him, but it must of
necessity fail finally to (because it was not in abeiance, nor yet transmitted
into any other subject for the time, but utterly lost and annihilated by this
his sin as you affirm) and therefore if this prayer of Christ extends to a
final failing (as your felues confess) it must needs extend to a total
failing to: and so as Peter's faith did not fail finally, so neither did it
fail totally as you surmise. Secondly, I answer, that this prayer and speech
of Christ (as will plainly appear by the context) had reference principally to
this very act of Peter's denial: Christ had prayed for him, that even now, when
as Satan did seek to sift him as wheat, in tempting of him to deny his
Master, that even in this particular temptation his ^aith might not fail in
his heart, though it did in his mouth. So that this speech and prayer of Christ
having reference to this very act of Peter's denial of him, that his faith
might not so much as fail in it, you cannot without great wrong to Peter, but
greater injury to Christ, affirm that his faith did totally fail at this
particular time: and so this your reply is vain and frivolous. Secondly, it
is manifest that Peter did not fall totally from grace in denying Christ,
because he did it only out of fear and infirmity, and not out of malice, or
infidelity: he did it being forced to it by carnal fear, and not with a
full consent: he denied him only in the flesh and in the tongue, and not in
the heart and soul. Now all will grant, that sins of infirmity and not of
malice. That sins committed by the flesh, against the consent and approbation
of the spirit, and the inward man, do never cast a man wholly down from the
state of grace: (or else none could stand in the state of grace so much as for
one hour) such a sin was Peter's, as all the Fathers and others do agree,
therefore this sin of his, though it were great and grievous, yet it could
not wholly deprive him of the state of grace. Thirdly, it is evident, that
Peter fell not totally from the state of grace, because one act of infidelity
cannot destroy an whole habit of grace, especially being in such a nature as
Peter's was. For Peter here, did not deny that Jesus was the Christ and Savior
of the world, he did not deny that he was God equal with the Father, he did
not deny any thing touching his Deity or humanity, or which did cross any
A^ticle of faith; he only denies that he was personally acquainted with
Christ, or that he was one of his companions or followers: and will you say
that such a denial of the personal knowledge of Christ as this, did utterly
destroy that habit and seed of grace and faith which was in Peter's heart, when
as he did believe in his heart, that Jesus was the Christ the Son of the
living God? when as this was no sin of infidelity, but of fear; and did
only argue not want of faith, but want of courage in Peter? will you make this
one act of cowardice in Peter, to abolish and destroy, the very seed and habit
of his faith: especially since he had no sooner denied Christ with his mouth,
but he presently bleeds for it at the heart? Certainly if you do it, it is a
sign you want the grace of charity, who judge so harshly of other men's sins,
and yet think so lightly of your own: Fourthly, it is evident that Peter fell
not totally from the state of grace by this his sin, both by his carriage in
and after this his sin: For as Peter showed his faith and love to Christ in
following him to the high Priests palace, when as all the other Disciples fled
away: so his unwillingness to forsake Christ, even then when as he was
suspected to be one of his friends and followers (which might have brought him
into danger) did show that he did still affect and love him in his heart, even
then when as he denied that he knew him with his mouth. I would demand but this
question of our Antagonists who do so much press this Example, whether Peter,
even at that very time when as he denied with an oath, that he knew not
Christ, did not believe on him, and rely on him, as on his only Lord and
Savior in his heart? If he did so (as it is more then probable, that he did by
John 6. 67, 68. Math. 16. 16, 17. and Luke 32. 32, 33. and by this his action
here, in that he did not leave him or forsake him) then it is certain that his
faith did not utterly sail him, that the habit and seed of grace and faith
were still within him, and so he fell not from the state of grace: If he did
not thus, if he did not rely upon him for salvation, but disclame him for his
Savior, let our Antagonists then prove the contrary by the Scriptures: that I
am sure they cannot do, and therefore I am not bound to believe their bare
assertion for it. Again, Peter's carriage after this his sin com^itted, proves
that he did not totally fall from grace: for no for had the Cock crowen, but
he presently remembers Math. 26. 75.
the words which Jesus spoke unto him, and he went forth and wept bitterly: I^
Peter had fallen totally from the state of grace by this his sin, if he had
had no habit, no seed, and no remainders of grace left in him, when as he had
denied Christ, it had been impossible for him to have been so apprehensiue
and sensible of his sin as now he was: No sooner had he committed this sin
of his, but presently the Cock crows: no sooner had the Cock crowen, but
forthwith he remembers the words of Christ, and was deeply affected with this
sin of his: He g^eth out and weeps bitterly: his repentance follows so
soon ^on his sin, that if his faith and ancient graces had not continued in
him no new infused grace could have come between his sin and his repentance:
and therefore Peter's carriage both in and after his sin committed, does prove
that he did not fall totally from grace by this his sin: Fistly, I would
demand this question of our Antagonists, whether the other Disciples did not
fall from gra^s well as Peter? for they denied him in deeds, in flying from
him: he denied him but in words, in saying, that he knew him not: If the other
Disciples fell from grace in flying from him, where then was the Church of God?
in what persons was it then existing? if they fell not from grace in flying
from him, then neither Peter in denying of him. Sixthly, the Scriptures make no
mention at all that Peter in denying Christ did fall from grace; strange then
that our Antagonists should so confidently affirm it, unless they have it by
some spetiall revelation. Is not this a strange kind of presumption in men, to
determine and judge of other men's estates in such a resolute and peremptory
manner, without a ground in Scripture for it? is not this a kind of folly and
arrogancy in them, to censure and judge of other men's estates which they never
were acquainted with, and in the mean time to neglect to s^arch and try their
own? Sure I am, the Scripture makes no mention that Peter fell from grace by
this his sin, therefore I may safely say he did not fall from grace, and may
well advise our Antagonists, to search and try their own estates, and to
forbear to censure and determine Peter's, till the Scriptures have defined it.
Lastly, that Peter fell fell not totally from the state of grace in denying
Christ, it is the express determination and resolution of most Divines both
ancient and modern. So it is resolved by Tertullian: De fuga in Persecutione.
lib. cap. 3. by Origin. Hom. 4. in Psalm. 36. et Hom. 3. in Math. by Hilarie in
Psalm. 54. by Basilius Magnut de Humilitate sermo. by Chrysostom. Homil. 88. in
Math. by Augustine de Corrept. et Gratia. lib. cap. 6. 7. and Contra Mendatinm
ad Consentium cap. 6. by Prosper in his Epist. de Liber^ Arbitrio ad Ruffinum.
page 12 (...) Leo de Passione Dom. sermo. 3. 9. by Gregorius Magnus Hom. 15. in
Ezech. et Morral. lib. 25. cap. 11. by Anselme in Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6. by
Theophylact in Luke 22. 32. by Bernard. De natura et dignitate amoris diuini.
cap. 6. by Luther in John 17. and Enarratio. in magno Comment. in cap 5. ad
Galatas. by Melanethon in 1 Cor. 10. by Bucer in Psalm 1. and in Romans 7. by
Tyndall in his Treatise of the manner of our Election. by Zanchius, Calvin,
Pareus, Mar^, (...), Abbot, and by all other modern writers of our side: yea,
and by most Pontificians to: and therefore we may rest in their judgments,
and not prefer the sentence and opinion of every factious Noueller before
them, who has nothing else but his own words and fancy for his warrant.

Now we have sufficiently proved, that Peter fell not totally from grace by
this his sin, I will answer the reasons that are objected to the contrary.
For the first of them, that such as deny Christ have not the spirit of Christ,
and that Object.
Christ will also deny them. I answer, that it is true of such as deny Christ
wilfully, of such as deny him both in word Answ.
and deed; of such as will not submit themselves unto him, and will not suffer
for the profession of his name. Now Perer he denies Christ only in words, but
not in heart and in deed; he denies him out of fear, and that but for a fit,
not out of disobedience, malice, or mere infidelity: he denied only the
knowledge of his person, not his diety, his offices and his attributes: he
denied him because God left him to himself, to humble him for his former
arrogancy and pride, and not for want of love and will to Christ; and
therefore these Scriptures reach not unto Peter, especially seeing he had no
sooner denied Christ, but he repented of it presently, even with great grief
and sorrow of heart. To the second objection, that Peter wanted a new Object.
conversion unto Christ: therefore he was fallen quite away Answ.
from grace. I answer, that this conversion here meant by Christ, is not a
conversion, from a state of sin death and damnation, unto a state of grace: or
a conversion from infidelity to faith: for in the same verse, Christ tells
Peter, that he had prayed for him that his faith might not fail: and then
these words follow upon it: and thou when thou art converted strengthen thy
brethren: which connection by this conjunction copulative, and; with the former
words, proves that Peter's conversion here, was only a conversion from that
sin of his in denying of Christ, to a confession and profession of his name:
and not a conversion from infidelity to faith: and so do the most and best
expound it. So that notwithstanding all these cauils, it is plain and evident,
that Peter fell not from the state of grace, and so his example makes for us,
not against us: and is as far from your purpose, as Peter was falling from
the state of grace.

The sixth Example is Judas. Judas was once a true regenerate Answ.
that the Major is false. For first, Judas was excluded from the number of
believers even by Christ himself. John 6. 68, 69, 70, 71. For there when as
Peter in the name of all the other Disciples had testified his faith and
belief in Christ, Christ to clear this scruple, that Judas had never any true
and justifying faith in him, no not at that very time gives this answer unto
the 12: have I not chosen you twelve, and one of you is (not shall be) a
devil: this (says the Evangelist) he spoke of Judas Iscariot which should
afterward betray him. If Judas were then a Devil, where then was that true
grace and faith the which you speak of? True it is, the diuills themselves
believe and tremble. Iam 2 19. it may be Judas did so to: but yet that Judas
who was a Devil, or that the Devils have any true grace and justifying faith
within them, I think that none but Diuills dare affirm. Secondly, Christ
himself styles Judas, the son of perdition. John 17. Romans 9. 22.
12. and therefore he being but a vessel of wrath fitted for destruction, was
never truly regenerated. Thirdly, he was always covetous, he loved the bag
better then the poor at Object
first, and that made him love it better then Christ himself at last, and
therefore he had never any truth of grace within him. But our Antagonists
object, that Judas was chosen of Christ, and given unto him of God. Ioh. 6. 70.
and 17. 12. therefore he was regenerated and in the state of grace. Surely
these Answ.
acute opponents, who leave no stone unmoved, know Judas better then Christ
ever did: he never took him but for a devil, and a son of perdition: they
like the ancient ( Contr. Har. lib 1. Tom. 3. Har. 38.
) Caianites mentioned by Epiphanius, adore him for a Saint: whether Christ or
they are to be believed be you the judges. But to answer this objection: I
say, that this election and choice of Judas was only to an office, to be a
Disciple, not a Saint: which is evident first by express Scriptures: as Mar.
3. 14. Luke. 6. 13. Acts 1. 20. John 6. 70. where Judas is mentioned among the
number of those twelve whom Christ did choose not to be his Saints, but his
Disciples. Secondly, it is evident that Judas was not chosen to be a Saint, but
a Disciple, because he was only chosen by Christ, not in Christ. Now all those
who are chosen to be Saints, are chosen by God the Father in Jesus Christ (not
by him) before the foundations of the world were laid (not when Christ was on
earth) Ephesians. 1. 4. therefore Judas being chosen by Christ only, not by the
Father, and that in the days of Christ's abode on earth, not from all eternity,
must needs be elected and chosen to an office only, and not to be a Saint.
Thirdly, Judas was appointed, and prophesied of long before Christ's coming, or
his own being, that he should betray Christ, and therefore he was never
elected or chosen to salvation. And whereas you say, that he was given by God
to Christ; true as a son of perdition (as the same text tells you) not as a
sheep of Christ; as a traitor, not as a friend: as a Disciple, not as a Saint:
as one ordained to destruction, that the Scripture, might be fulfilled, nor as
one elected to salvation: therefore this example comes as short of the purpose,
as Judas did of grace.

The seventh Example is Solomon: Solomon he was a regenerate Kings 11. 1. to
13. Therefore other regenerate men as well as he may fall from grace. To this
I Answ.
answer, that it is not fully agreed upon by Divines, whether Solomon, (though
God endued him with excellent parts and wisdom beyond all those that were
before or after him) were ever truly regenerated yea or no: if he were not
truly regenerated, then he is not within the verge and compass of our present
question: if he were regenerated, as most Divines do think. I answer, that
though Solomon in his old and doting age was led away unto idolatry, by reason
of those idolatrous wives the which he married, yet there is no place of
Scripture, that proves that he fell totally from grace, there are three places
which do strongly prove the contrary: to wit: the 1 Kings 11. 6. where it is
said, that Solomon went not fully after the Lord his God as did David his
father: which word fully implies, that he did still follow the Lord
notwithstanding his idolatry, but not so fully as he should have done, not so
fully as David did. Psalm. 68. 30. to 38. and 2 Samuel 7. 13. 14. where God binds
himself by his oath and covenant to David, that though Solomon should sin
against him, yet his mercy should not depart from him as he took it from
Saul: that he would not utterly take from him his loving kindness, nor suffer
his faithfulness to fail: that he would not break his covenant with him,
nor alter the thing that was gone out of his lips, but that he would establish
him for ever before him, though he did visit his iniquity with rods, and his
sin with scourges: which places being compared with his Ecclesiastes (which
most take to be a penetentiary book for his idolatry and other sins,) will
fully prove, that Solomon did neither finally nor totally fall from grace.

To avoid prolixity: and to end these examples: Saul, Asa, Ioash, Simon Magus,
The Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Demas, Hymeneus, and Alexander: Those of
whom Christ prophesied that their love should wax cold. Mat. 24. 12. Those of
whom Paul and Peter and lude prophesied, that they should depart from the
faith, and sed^ce many: all these say our Antagonists were true regenerate men,
they had the Spirit, and true faith. But all these they fell away from grace
either totally or finally. Therefore true regenerate men may fall from grace. I
answer, that the Major is false: these had no Answ.
true grace at all, they were never in the number of Christ's sheep; for then
they would have continued with the residue of his flock, that went not from
the fold; but they went out from them that it might be made manifest that they
were not of them 1 John 2. 19. If any of these by the verdict of the Scriptures
had the Spirit, it was but only the ordinary and common gifts, but not the
justifying, sanctifying, and saving graces of the Spirit. If any of them had
any faith, it was an historical, not a justifying and saving faith, and the
faith from which they departed was nothing else but the doctrine of faith, and
not the grace of justifying and living faith: as is evident by Acts 20. 30.
Phil. 1. 27. 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19, 20. cap. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Timothy 3. 8 9. and 2 Pet.
2. 1. 2, 3. Jude 3. The love the which they had it was but counterfeite: for
many waters cannot quench true love, neither can the floods drown it. Can. 8.
7. Yea, the very Scriptures, from which these examples are taken, do
distinguish them from the Saints of God, and reckon them as hypocrites; as
wicked and profane persons, as graceless men, as reprobates, as the seed and
children of the devil: so that I cannot choose but wonder at the impudency of
our Antagonists, who will canonize them for Saints and godly men, against the
manifest and revealed truth of God, as if they knew them better then God
himself: and therefore since God himself has branded them for hypocrites,
they come not to the point in question.

The twenty eight and last argument is drawn from those Bertius he enumerates
and musters up some sixteen of them, the most of which are but mere trifles
and not worth the answering. I will only cull out three of them which are the
chief, and most commonly objected by all our Antag^nists, and will waiue the
other as idle and impertinent. The first inconvenience which is objected is
this. That this our assertion Object.
would make men very bold and presumptious to commit sin when once they are
regenerated; because they could not fall from grace nor yet be damned for it.
I Answ.
answer, that you are much mistaken, and this your argument shows plainly to
the world, that you who urge and press it were never yet acquainted, either
with the nature or the power of true and saving grace, nor yet with the
mysteries and secrets of the word of God. For if ever you had bin acquainted
with the power and truth of grace, or with the Scriptures and the word of God,
you could never reason so carnally, so rawly and ignorantly as now you do: the
want of grace, and the ignorance of the Scriptures, is that which makes you
argue thus, that which makes you for to measure the Saints of God by your own
selves, when as they have not so learned Christ as you have done. If you were
but acquainted with the Scriptures, or with the nature of true and sanctifying
grace, you should find, that notwithstanding the true regenerate Saints of
God, could neither finally nor totally fall from grace, yet they dare not sin
either willingly or wittingly against the Lord, for these ensuing reasons.
First, because their hearts and natures are changed and regenerated, sin now
becomes as odious and distasteful unto them in their proportion and degree, as
it is to God himself: they hate and detest, yea they do utterly defy and
abhor from their very hearts and souls, all kind of sin; they hate it with
an implacable and perfect hatred, as an odious, dangerous and bitter thing, and
as the greatest enemy of their souls: therefore they will not, therefore they
cannot commit it. Strange it is that any man should so much mistake himself,
as to think that perseverance in the state of grace, (which is the only
means to keep men from committing sin) should cause them for to sin with
greater boldness and security? Is it not grace, and that only, that restraines
and keeps men back from sin? Is it not grace, and that only, which makes
men to detest, abhor and utterly renounce all sin? and dare you then affirm,
that perseverance in the state of grace, will imbolden and encourage men to
rush into all kind of sin? doubtless you are much mistaken and deceived in
affirming it; and it is an infallible argument, that you are so ^arre from
having any truth of grace within you, that as yet you know not what this true
grace is of which we now dispute. Secondly, regenerate men, they are dead to
sin: they have crucified the flesh with the (...) and lusts thereof: and
therefore though Gal (...). 24.
they cannot sall from grace, yet they cannot, yet they dare not sin against
the Lord. This is Paul's reason, Romans 61, 2. What shall we say then? shall we
continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid: how shall we that are
dead to sin, live any longer therein? the true regenerate Saints of God they
are dead to sin, therefore they cannot live any longer to it: they have put
off their coat, how then shall they put it on? they have washed (...). 5 3.
their (...), how then shall they defile them? they are regenerated sanctisied
and dead to sin: therefore they cannot, therefore they will not run into
it, though they cannot fall from grace. Thirdly, the true regenerate Saints of
God, they are ( 2 Cor. 5. 15.
) redeomed from their sins, that they might no longer live unto them, but
live unto the Lord: they are now ( Reu. 1. 5.
) made Kings and Priests unto God the Father, to offer up spiritual all
sacrifices 1 Pe^. 2. 5.
unto him; they are now quite other persons then they were before: and
therefore they scorn now to stoop to those base and filthy sins, which
might defile their souls, and (...) their professions: they are now the sons
of God, and heirs of heaven; they are now the ( 1 Cor 6. 19.
) vessels and ^emples of the holy Ghost: and they have vowed to fo^sake their
sins and lusts, and to ( Iam 1. 27.
) keep themselves unspotted from the world: and therefore now though they
cannot fall from grace, yet there is such an holy ingenuity and magnanimity
wrought within them, that (...) they scorn for to how and yield to sin, or to
sell themselves as slaves and (...) to it. Fourthly, the true regenerate Saints
of God, they hauethe love of God which is shed abroad in their hearts by the
Romans 5. 5.
holy Ghost, (which love is preserved and increased in their hearts and souls,
by the assurance of their constant and final perseverance in the state of
grace.) Now this love of God does so work upon their hearts and souls, and so
awe and curb them, that they dare not sin against the Lord, for fear of
greeuing and offending him, though God would never disinherite them for their
sins. A dutiful and loving fonne that honors and respects his father,
though he be sure of his fathers love and favor to him, yet he dares not to
offend him, because he honors and respects him: God is an exceeding good
gracious and loving Father unto all his Saints, and they are exceeding dutiful
and loving unto him, yea, they estimate his loving kindness better then life
it self. Psalm. 63. 3. and therefore though they cannot fall from grace, yet
they dare not, yet they will not sin against him, for fear of greeuing and
offending him. Fifthly, the true regenerate Saints of God, they have the holy
Spirit of God within them, who does sway and ouerrule their wills, their hearts
and souls, and will not so much as suffer them to do the sin and evil that
they would: when they have any evil and sinsull lusts or thoughts arising in
their hearts, the holy Ghost does crush and quell them: when they are running
on to any sinful actions, the holy Ghost does pull them back, and quite
restrain them, causing them to walk in his statutes, and to keep his
commandments and do them, so that they cannot will or do^ the evil that they
would: as you may read. Ezech. 32. 6. 27. Romans 7. 25. c. 8. 1, 2, 13, 14. Gal.
5. 16, 17 25. 1 John 3: 9. and 5. 18. therefore though they cannot fall from
grace, yet they will not, yet they cannot rush more boldly, into sin.
Sixthly, the true regenerate Saints of God, though they cannot fall from grace,
(because God will preserve them, and cause them for to use the means, which
should preserve them in the state of grace:) yet they know, that they cannot
persevere but by using of the means; they know that sin will hinder them
much in this their perseverance and therefore though they cannot fall from
grace, yet because they must use the means to persevere in grace, they dare
not plunge themselves presumptuously into any sin. Seventhly, though the
Saints of God can never fall from grace, yet they dare not to allow themselves
in any sin, because they know that every sin the which they do commit, it
does wound and pierce the sides of their gracious and loving Savior and
crucify him afresh: they know that he is wounded, payned, and grieved with
their sins, and therefore they dare not to commit them: but pray against them
as David did, Psalm. 19. Lord keep me^ from presumptuous ^nnes. When any good
Christian is tempted unto any sin, though the sin i^ self could never hurt
him, yet he reasons thus with himself, What has not my blessed Savior been
crucified already for my sins, have I not wounded and grieved him enough
already, but I must wound, and grieve, and crucify him yet once again? O no:
I will not, nay, I dare not do it, though I might gain a thousand worlds. I
will not show my self such a graceless and unthankful wretch. I will rather
die, I will rather do or suffer any thing, then sin against him. This is the
resolution of every Christian soul, and therefore though he cannot fall from
grace, yet he dares not, yet he will not sin. Lastly, to omit all other
reasons: The true regenerate Saints of God, though they cannot fall from grace,
yet they dare not sin against the Lord. For though the Lord has promised
never to disinherite or cast them off, never to take away his graces, or his
everlasting mercies from them: yet if they sin against him, he has threatened,
and he will perform it, that he will chastise them with the rod of men, and
with the stripes of the children of men, that he will visit their iniquity
with rods, and their sin with stripes, 2 Samuel 7 14, 15. and Psalm. 89. 30. to
34. God will chastise them as sons, though he condemns them not as enemies
and rebels: this his fatherly correction and chastisement then is sufficient
to keep them from presumption, and to restrain them from rushing into sin,
though God never disinherits or casts them off. And so you see what a false,
what a shallow, weak, and carnal inconvenience and pretense this is, which is
objected against our Orthodox and comfortable assertion.

The second pretense and inconvenience that is objected,

I answer you as Christ once answered the Sadduces in another Answ.
case, Math. 22. 29. Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of
God. For when once the seed of true and saving grace is sown in men's hearts,
it makes them much in action, and they cannot but be operative and stirring in
the work and service of the Lord. First, because the love of God is shed
abroad in their hearts by the holy Ghost, and it Romans 5. 5.
is much in larged and increased in them by this assurance of their total and
final perseverance in the state of grace. Now this love of God does so warm
and heat, and so enlarge the hearts and souls of all the Saints; and it is of
such an operative working and stirring nature, that it always stirs them up
to action, they cannot be idle though they would; this very love of God
constraines men for to please and serve the Lord, and to be exceeding fruitful
and abundant in his work and service: as you may read, Acts 2. 37. cap. 4.
20. Cant. 4. 9, 10. cap. 8. 6, 7. John 21 15. cap. 14 15. 22. 23. cap. 15. 10.
2 Cor. 5. 15. 1 These. 1. 4. Gal. 5. 6. and Ephesians. 3. 19. Therefore though the
Saints of God can never fall from grace, yet because this love of God is seated
and spread abroad in their hearts, they cannot be idle and sloathfull in the
work and service of the Lord. Secondly, though the true regenerate Saints of
God can never fall from grace, yet they cannot be idle and sloathfull in Gods
service, because it is the very joy, the very comfort and rejoicing of their
hearts and souls, their very heaven upon earth, and the very essence and
substance of their happiness, to obey and serve the Lord, and to be abundant
in his work. Nothing is there that brings so much delight and joy unto the
Saints, as frequencie in holy duties, and assiduitie and diligence in the
service of the Lord, as you may see, Prou. 3. 17. cap. 21. 15. Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
Psalm. 84. 1. 2. 10. Psa. 119. 97. Psalm. 122. 1. Isai. 26. 8. 9. and cap. 58.
13. Now that which a man does most of all delight and joy in, he will be sure
never to neglect and slight; he will be diligent and frequent in it, even for
the very joy and comfort that is in it: and therefore though the Saints of God
can never fall from grace, yet because their only joy and chiefest comfort
consists in serving God, they cannot but be operative, and diligent in his
service. Thirdly, though the true regenerate Saints of God can never fall from
grace, yet they cannot but be operative and stirring in his service, because
the Spirit of the Lord which is within them, will never suffer them to be idle,
but will always incite and stir them up to action: as you may find it in
the 1 Samuel 11. 6. Judges 14. 19. cap. 15. 10. Acts 4. 20. Isai. 1. 1. 2. Romans
8. 1. 11. 14. 15. 26. cap. 12. 11. and Gal. 5. 16. 17. 25. Fourthly, though the
Saints of God can never fall from grace, yet they cannot be idle and sloathfull
in Gods work, because it will be hurtful and prejudicial to themselves. The
less men are in the work and service of the Lord, the less joy and comfort
have they here, and the less glory hereafter, but the more fruitful and
abundant they are in all good works, the more joy and comfort have they here,
and the more glory shall they have hereafter. Dan. 12. 3. Math. 5. 12. and Luke
10. 17. Therefore though they cannot fall from grace, yet self-love, and the
care of their eternal happiness, will make them diligent and fruitful in
Gods service. Fifthly, though the true regenerate Saints of God can never fall
from grace, yet they cannot grow cold and negligent in his service, because
there is in every regenerate man, an ambitious and inward desire of attaining
to perfection, and to the utmost end, even to the very top and height of
grace. As it is in natural, so it is likewise in spiritual things, they both
desire accomplishment and perfection. And therefore a good Christian, does
always go from grace to grace, from faith to faith, and from strength to
strength: He forgets that which was before, and presses forwards toward the
mark of the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; indeauouring to
attain unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Psalm. 84. 7.
Psalm. 92. 12. 13. 14. Phil. 3. 13, 14, 15. and Ephesians. 4. 13. Therefore he cannot
be idle and sloathfull in Gods service, though he cannot fall from grace even
in this respect. Sixthly, though the Saints of God, can never fall from grace,
yet they cannot be negligent and careless in his service, because it is not
for Gods glory that they should be idle, and sloathfull in his work. The more
diligent and painful, that the Saints are in Gods service, the more honor
and glory do they bring to God, Math. 5. 16. Ioh. 17. 4. and Phil. 1. 11. Now
the true regenerate Saints of God, they tender Gods glory above all things
else, they will not suffer him to be dishonored upon any terms, and
therefore they cannot be negligent and backward in his service, though they
cannot fall from grace, because then they should dishonor God. Lastly, (to
omit all other reasons) though the Saints of God can never fall from grace, yet
they cannot be idle and sloathfull in Gods service, because that grace it self
is of an active, growing, stirring, and increasing nature; and will not suffer
any man to sit still and idle. Grace is that which makes us diligent and
careful in Gods service, it is that which incites and stirs us up to action;
and can any one then imagine, that grace should make men negligent and idle in
Gods service? This is all one, as if a man should say, that fire makes men
cold; that life makes men dead; that knowledge makes men ignorant; or that
reason makes them brutish: therefore since grace is of a stirring, lively,
growing and increasing nature, seeing it is the prime and only cause that
makes men diligent and active in Gods service; it is certain that this total
and final perseverance in the state of grace, can never make men negligent and
sloathfull in the work and business of the Lord. Yea, (as I have formerly
proved that this doctrine of a total and final fall from grace, is the only
means to make men idle, and sloathfull in the work and service of the Lord)
so now I will maintain it against our Autagonists that the only means to
make men diligent and careful in Gods service, is the assurance of their
total and final perseverance in the state of grace. This is cuident by that
speech of David, Psalm 27. 13. I had fainted, unless I had bel^eued to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. If David had not been sure of
salvation, and of his total and final perseverance in the state of grace, he
had then fainted, and utterly given over the work and service of the Lord; but
the assurance of his final and constant perseverance, and of Gods mercy to
him, was the only thing to strengthen, quicken, and rouse him up again. That
which made Paul to suffer so much for the Gospel, and not to be ashamed of it
was this: that he knew whom he had believed; and that be was persuaded that
he was able to keep that which be had committed to him against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12. Yea, the same Paul informs us; that the only thing which makes
the Saints to labor, 2 Co^. 5. 1. 6. 8. 9.
that whether present or absent, they may be accepted of the Lord, is this,
that they are confident of Gods love and favor to them, and that they know
that if their earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, yet they have a
building of God, not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: and therefore
Paul in the 1 Cor. 15. 58. exhorts the Corinthians, to be steadfast,
immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, even from this very
ground, for as much as they knew, that their labor was not in vain in the
Lord: intimating thus much unto us; that the only means to make men abound in
the work of the Lord, is to be assured that they shall persevere in grace, and
that their works shall be rewarded at the last. Hence also is the ground of
his other exhortation in the 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises
(Dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all pollution of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. The more assured men are of
their continuance in the state of grace, the more industrious are they for to
perfect and increase their graces. Hence is it that St. John informs us: in
the 1 John 3. 2. 3. That every man which bath this hope, that when Christ Jesus
shall appear, he shall be like to him, and see him as he is, is so far
from being idle in Gods service, that he purifieth himself, even as he is
pure. Was it ever known that the certainty and assurance of the end, should
make men slack and sloathfull in using of the means? Was there ever any
Soldier that was sloathfull and unwilling for to fight, becanse he was sure
for to win the field? Was there ever any Husbandman that was slack in
tilling of his ground, because he was sure for to reap the croppe? Was there
ever any Merchant who was unwilling for to traffic, because he was sure of a
safe return? Or was there ever any true regenerate Saint of God on earth that
grew idle, lazy, and secure, because he was sure not to fall srom grace? Who
more certain and sure of perseverance in the state of Grace then Paul? and yet
none so painful, none so laborious and industrious in the work of God as
he: Never was it heard as yet of any child of God, that grew secure,
negligent and sloathfull in Gods service, be^ cause he could not fall from
grace: the assurance of cons^ant and final perseverance, has always made the
Saints industrious, never idle and secure: and therefore this second pretense,
and inconvenience which our Opposites object, is vain, falfe, and idle, and
savors only of fleshly and carnal reason, not of heavenly, and spiritual.

The third and last pretended inconvenience of this our Answ.
our assertion does comfort and rejoice the hearts and souls of the Saints, it
breeds in them an holy magnanimity, which causes them to scorn and contemn
the world and all things in it, as base and worthless, and not worth the
seeking: it makes their minds more high, heavenly and generous in respect of
worldly things, then ever they were before: but yet it cannot make them proud
and arrogant for diverse reasons. First, because the more a Christian is assured
of Gods love and favor in Jesus Christ, and of his total and final
perseverance in the state of grace, the nearer does he always draw to God,
and therefore the more is he humbled and abased in his soul. The nearer any
Christian draws to God, and the more and greater favors he received from
him, the more he sees his own vileness and emptiness, the less is he
always in his own opinion, and the more is ho^ confounded and abased in
himself: this is evident by the example of David: 2 Samuel 7. 18. to 23. of Job:
Job. 42. 5, 6. and of the Prophet Isaiah: Isaiah 6. 1. to 6. who were never so
much humbled, abased and confounded in themselves, as when they saw the Lord in
his glory, and considered the greatness of his mercy to them. Therefore this
our assertion can never make men proud and arrogant as you surmise, because you
never felt the working of grace; and of Gods mercies on your hearts. Secondly,
it cannot make men proud and arrogant, because grace is always of an emptying
nature, it always emptieth us of our selves, and makes us always to ascribe
the praise and glory of our perseverance unto God who works it in us and for
us, and that out Psalm. (...). 1. To. (...). ^7.
of his mere grace and mercy to us, without any de^ert of ours. Lastly, the
Saints of God though they are sure that they shall never fall from grace, yet
they dare not to exalt themselves, they dare not swell and puff themselves
with pride, for fear the Lord should send a messenger of Satan for to buffet
them, as he did to Paul. 2 Cor. 12. 7. they know and are assured; that God does
always resist the proud, and gives grace to the humble. 1 Pet. 5. 5. and
therefore though they cannot fall from grace, yet they dare not swell
themselves with pride, least God should humble them and cast them down.

You see now, that all these pretended inconveniences are but friuilous, false
and idle: that this our present assertion, does neither make the Saints of God
presumptuous to commit sin, nor idle and slothful in Gods service, nor yet
proud and arrogant in themselves. What then though wicked men which have no
grace within them, abuse this sweet and comfortable assertion, as the (
Iren^us a^u. b^r lib. 1. cap. 1.
) Valentinians, and Anabaptists did? is it not therefore true, because that
they, (b Concordia. Iu^erana page 310. 574.
and not the Saints abuse it? Will you say the Scripture is not true, but
false, because some wrest it to their own confusion? (...) Pet. 3. 16.
or will you say, that Gods mercy is not true, because that most abuse it? I
tell you nay; the abuse of things that are true and good does never take away
the truth, the use, and goodness of them: and therefore these your cauills
against our present assertion, are but false and idle. And that you may know
them to be so in truth: look but upon the lives of those who are assured of
this their total and final perseverance, and upon the lives of such as do
oppose it, and then the controversy will be ended. Who more m^eke and humble,
who more diligent and painful in Gods service, who more vigilant and watchful
against all kind of sin, than those who are assured in their hearts, that
they shall never fall from grace? Who more proud, ambitious and arrogant? who
more negligent and sloathfull in Gods service? who more profane and dissolute
in their lives? who more fell and bitter enemies against the power and practice
of religion, then those who most violently oppose our present position? Show
me but one man among the whole pack of our Antagonists, in whose life the
power of 2 Timothy 3. 5.
godliness, and the truth of grace shines forth: show me but one among them
who is diligent and careful in Gods service, who is holy in all his ways, and
righteous and just in all his works: show me any one among them that excells
in piety, in grace and holiness, that is zealous and earnest sor the Lord of
hoasts, and forwards to advance his glory and enlarge his kingdom: certainly
there is not one such man among them to be found: and therefore their very
lives and actions do prove their doctrine, and these their cauells and
objections to be false.

I have now by Gods gracious assistance, waded through the depths and fords of
this great and weighty controversy, and that as syncerely, indifferently and
impartially as possibly I could. God who knows the very secret turnings of my
heart can testify, that I have not concealed, baulked, or om^ted any material
or substantial thing that might make for me or against me. And now I hope,
that I have so fully proved and confirmed this orthodox and comfortable
assertion: That those who are truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, can
neither finally or totally fall from grace: from Scripture, Fathers, Counsels,
and all Protestant Churches and Divines: and so satisfactorily and plainly
answered the principal and chief objections from Scripture and from reason,
that have or can be made against it, that there are none but obstinate or
ignorant readers but will subscribe unto it. And here I could very fitly, and I
would as willingly set up my rest, and take my farewell of this truth. But
because it is pity that so sweet a Theses and position, should pass without
some comfortable and useful application, I will give you one salute or two
with it at parting for manners sake, and so Adieu.

If this then be the estate and condition of all those that are Use 1.
once truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ, that they can never finally
nor totally fall from grace, how should this cause us for to prise and estimate
the state of grace and regeneration, which is now so undervalued and slighted
of the world? It is the part of wise and understanding men, to prise and
purchase such estates, as they are always sure to enjoy: now there is no
estate, no purchase in the world so sure and stable as the state of grace.
Friends, goods, riches, honors, morrall virtues, all worldly possessions and
heritances whatsoever, they are always subject to change and alteration: they
have their periods and their ends, they are or may be lost: but the state of
grace and regeneration, is such a good, such an honor, such an estate,
inheritance and po^session as never can be lost: no affliction, no temptation,
no cross or chance, no man or devil whatsoever, can rob, deprive, or
dispossess those of it, who do but once in truth enjoy it. It is such a
Divine and heavenly treasure, that no moth Math. 6. 20.
or canker can corrupt it, nor no thief purloine it: he who does but once
enjoy it, is made an happy man for ever after; He has such a firm, fixed,
sure and stable felicity, as all the powers of hell can never shake: he has
the very earnest, the very beginnings of heaven whiles he is on earth, and he
shall be sure to enjoy the whole ere long: and yet how few men are there in the
world who do estimate and prise this state of grace? Many are there in the
world, who are so far from prising it, that they do utterly abhor,
contemn, and vilify it, and all such as do in truth enjoy it. Most men do
so undervalue it, as to prefer their riches, their pleasures, and their
honors (which are subject to a thousand changes) far before it. All men do
so much debase it, as not to prise it at its true and proper worth. But now let
me request you (Christian Readers) to estimate and value it according to its
price and wor^h, to prefer it far before all treasures that the world
affords. For this estate of grace is such a treasure, such a possession and
inheritance as will still remain within you, to comfort, strengthen, and
support your selves, even then when all things else will quite forsake you.
When troubles, trialls, and temptations come, when stings and pricks of
conscience, when pangs of sickness and of death shall come upon you, (as they
will surely come ere long) then what will all your worldly inheritances and
possessions, what will all your honors, friends, pleasures, and riches do?
then they will all forsake you, then they will leave and fail you altogether:
they will not, nay, they cannot comsort you or do you good. But if you have
once this state of grace begun within you, this will never fail you nor
forsake you at your need: this will still abide within you, and bear you
company in all distresses: When you are in any asfliction or distress; this
will succor, comfort, and support you, that you sink not under it: when you
are assaulted by the devil, this will aid; and succor you, that he shall not
gain a conquest over you: when you are cast down and humbled in yonr souls,
in the sense and feeling of your sins, this will comfort and cheer up your
hearts, and raise you up again: When you lie a dying on your deathbeds, and
you have none to help and comfort you, then this will strengthen, pacify,
comfort and rejoice your souls. Grace will never leave you hopeless,
helpless, nor comfortless: it will not leave you nor forsake you, till it
brings you safe to heaven, where there is no end of joy and happiness. O then,
if you tender the wealth, the good, the joy and comfort of your souls, make
out for this estate of grace if that you want it, employ and bend your minds
and thoughts to get and purchase it, and rather part with all you have then be
without it. And as for you who now enjoy it, and have it in possession, learn
more and more to prise and value it, and to be more and more affected, joyed
and delighted with it. It is the only and chiefest treasure of your souls, it
is the only thing that makes you truly blessed, and that for ever: let God
then, and all men see how much you value it, by counting all things loss, yea,
dross and dunge, and worse then nothing in respect of it.

Secondly, if those who are once truly regenerated and ingrafted ^se 2.
into Christ by a true and lively faith can neither finally, nor totally fall
from grace; then this may serve to comfort and rejoice the hearts and souls of
all such men, as are thus truly regenerated and ingrafted into Christ. You that
can but truly say, that you are regenerated and made new creatures, that you
are ingrafted into Jesus Christ in synceritie and truth: yea, you who have but
the least spark and attome of true and saving grace began within you, and
planted in your hearts, what cause have you sor to rejoice and sing for joy?
You have such an heavenly treasure, such a firm, settled, and sure estate of
grace within your souls, as nothing shall be able to deprive you of it: let
all the devils in hell, or men on earth, combine and plot together to deprive
and spoil you of it, they are not able to effect it. The least spark (...)
that seed of true and saving grace which is within you, is of such a divine,
permanent, and immortal nature: that all the floods of prosperity, all the
waters of adversity, all the storms of temptation, all the malice of of men
or devils, cannot utterly extinguish or put it out again. What then should
ever daunt your hearts, or cause you for to fear? What is there that should
make you sad or heavy, or interrupt your joy? If once you have but the true
seed of grace within you, be it never so little, never so small, it is a sure
pledge and earnest of heaven, it gives you actual possession, and seison of
eternal life, it keeps you so that you can never perish. If once you have the
smallest dram of true and saving grace, you need not fear afflictions or
temptations, you need not fear the very King of terrors, hell and death: you
need not fear the most that men or devils can do to you: they cannot sever
you from the love of God, Romans 8. 38, 39.
which is in Christ Jesus your Lord, nor yet disturb you from the state of
Grace. Wherefore you (my brethren) who find and feel this seed and habit of
true and saving grace within your souls, reflect on what you have, and see
that matchless happiness the which you now enjoy: banish all anxious, sad,
and dolorous fears and doubts that cause your hands, your hearts and souls to
droope, and take your fill of joy and comfort: rejoice in the Lord always, and
again I Phil. 4. 4.
say rejoice, and let not any thing deprive and spoil you of that joy and
comfort which is due unto you. This is the fault of most, but specially of
young and tenderhearted Christians, that they dote too much upon their sins,
and that they do not so much prise their state of grace, nor take that joy and
comfort in it as they should: they are apt to be discouraged and dejected, apt
to suspect, and to grow jealous of their state of grace upon all occasions, as
if that they might lose it, and be deprived of it: and this makes them ^o
dull, so heavy, so dead and lumpish in Gods service. Wherefore now at last
endeavor for to know your happiness, and the worth and nature of your state of
grace. It is a state of joy and comfort: it is such an estate as you can never
lose or fall from: he that has the life of grace but once began within him,
can die no more, the second death shall have Reu. 20. 6.
no power over him. Establish then and settle this undoubted truth, and ingraue
it in your hearts and souls. That those who are once truly regenerated and
ingrafted into Christ by a true and lively faith, can neither finally nor
totally fall from grace; and this will strengthen and support, this will
comfort and rejoice your souls in all temptations and afflictions whatsoever,
in all extremities and times of need. We have all great cause as the times are
now, to stablish, ground and settle this truth within our souls: we see what
fears and dangers, what crosses and afflictions, what judgments and
calamities are like to come upon us: we see what miserable and woeful times
are likely to befall us; if then we have this truth engraven in our souls,
that the grace we have within us, is of an incorruptible and immortal nature,
that it cannot be lost or perish, O how will this establish, settle, comfort
and rejoice our souls, and strengthen and enable us to undergo asflictions
with patience, joy and comfort? This will make us for to fear no evil. Though
the earth beo moved, and Psalm. 46. 1. to 5.
the mountains carried into the midest of the Sea, though carnal and wicked
men shall be so amazed and affrighted, with the Luke 21. 25. 25.
miseries and afflictions that shall befall them, that they shall Isai. 2. 10.
19. 21
call to the rocks and mountains for to fall upon them, and cover them, and
be even at their wits ends for very fear, yet such as have this state of
grace within them, shall not fear, but they shall even rejoice and sing in the
midst of all their troubles and afflictions, and lift up their heads and
hearts with joy and comfort, because the day of their redemption draws Luke
21. 26. 28.
near. Wherefore beloved brethren, if you would fill your souls with joy and
comfort, and arm your selves against the evil day, be sure for to ground and
root this comfortable, sweet, and heavenly meditation in your hearts, that
come what will, you can never finally nor totally fall from Grace, nor yet be
severed and cut off from Christ, and this will comfort, strengthen, and rejoice
your souls in times of need, and bear them up in all extremities. And thus
adieu.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 3. line 36. for the, read these. p. 4, l. 1. for degrees: the degrees.
p. 5. l. 34. for have: raise. p. 49. l. 31. for this: his. p. 51. l. 27. for
title to: title. p. 59. l. 19. for one only: only. p. 61. l. 7. for anithesis:
antith^sis. p. 62. l. 15. for sons: sound. p. 70. l. 31. for those: these. p.
73. l. 23. for will his: will perform his. p. 77 l. 10. for keep them: keep.
l. 20. for himselse: him p. 83 l. 12. for that it: that he. p. 86. l. 7 for man
may: may p. 91. l. 34. for that: it. p. 96. l 3. for how true: how. p. 104. l.
19. for received: recorded. p. 105. l. 8. for these: those. p. 116. l. 2. for
but yet: yet. p. 125. l. 15. for has: have. p. 127. l. 31. for those: these.
p. 128. l 7. for, so sealed: so firmly: sealed; firmly. p. 136. l. 7. for
exposition: position. p. 137. l. 6. for but now: but. p. 138 l. 13. for gappe:
gasp. p. 141. l. 29. for: is that, is. p. 144. l. 29. for they: he. p. 148. l
36. for Becanius: Becanus. p. 141. l. 37. for those: these. p. 152. l. 32. for
enermare: ener^are. p. 158. l. 34. for 21. 11. p. 169. l. 17. for: 300. 390. l.
31. for: 220. to 212. 400. to. 412. p. 173 l. 25. 26. for omnibus: onibus. p.
175. l. 15. for serve: seem. p. 180 l. (...). for reddatur: impleatur. p. 198.
for his book: de Prouidentia. p 16. Loc: de Predest. cap. 8. l. 24. for
iustificatione and fide: de Ecclesia. quast. 1. p. 201 l 11. 37. p. 212. l. 27.
p. 229 l 35 p. 234. l. 24. 28. 32. p. 235. l. 1. 9. p. 245. l. 7. 8. p. 247. l.
13. 19. for Rhemists: Remonstrantes. p. 205. l. 35. for Augustane: Argentine.
p. 213. for opposition: position. p. 223. l. 6. for Lions: Leyden p. 225. l.
19. for Merh: Armath. p. 226 l. 10. for 640. 604 p. 228. l. 25. for excedere:
excidere. p. 232. l. 18. for vanished: v^quished. p. 233. l. 12. for them: the
articles. p. 250. l. 12. for That if: If. p. 265. l. 19 for inted: intend. p.
167. l 35. for removed: renewed. p. 270. l. 26. for them. him. p 271. l. 30.
for with: 10. p. 276 for John 5. John 15. p. 279 l. 6. for does necessarily:
does not necessarily. l. 21. for possibility: a possibility. p. 298. l. 28.
for thereto: into. p 299. l 13. for charitable: vucharitable. p. 301. l. 3. for
man man: man may. l. 37. for vstification, justification. p. 302. l. 7. for
are, a. p. 303. l. ^1. for it is, if his. p. 307. l. 27. for admonish, (...). p
311. l. 17 for indigestly, indigested. l 18. for inconsequies, inconsequencies.
p. 312. l. 1. for those, these l. 16 for unknown, known. p. 315. l. 15. for
love, frame. l. 19. for clear, cleave. 32 for faction, fraction. p. 342. l.
31. for assailed, assoyled. p. 343. l. 28. for them, him. p. 361. l. 36. for
those, these. l. 11. for he, and he. p. 363. l. 4. for gines, guies. p. 364
l. 15 for of the, or the. p. 365. l. 6. for grace, graces.


