GOD, NO IMPOSTOR NOR DELVDER: OR, AN ANSWER TO A Popish and Arminian Cavil,
in the defense of Free Will, and universal Grace; wherein God's tender of
Grace by the outward Ministry of the Gospel, to Reprobates who neither do, nor
can receive it; is vindicated from those aspersions of equivocation, falsitie,
and collusion, which some by way of Objection, cast upon it. By William Prynne,
an utter Barrester of Lincolnes Inn.

Numbers. 29. 19.God is not a Man that he should lie, neither the Son of man
that he should repent: has he said and shall he not do it? or has he spoken,
and shall he not make it good? Romans 3. 4.Yea let God be true, but every man a
liar, as it is written: That ^hou might be justified in thy sayings, and
might overcome when ^hou art judged. Printed, M. DC. XXIX.

God no Impostor nor Deluder.
IT is a common demand, which the patrons of universal Grace and free will use
to make, how God can be excused from hypocrisy, collusion and deceit, if he
has not seriously purposed and determined to convert and call all such to whom
the Gospel is preached, but only to the elect?

To give a full, a clear and satisfactory answer unto this demand, which
stumbles many: We must consider in the first place; that the glad tidings and
promises of the Gospel Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 2. 22.
to be the children of the promise, the seed of Abraham, and the promise of
faith by Jesus Christ; is said, to be given only to them which believe: John.
10. 3, 4, 27.
The voice of Christ is proper only to the sheep of Christ, who are the
elect: whence the faith of the Gospel is styled Tie. 1. 1.
the faith of Gods elect, as being proper and peculiar unto them alone: Christ
lesus has John. 17. 6, 8, 14, 17, 20, 26. Jude 3.
bequeathed his Gospel as a peculiar legacy to his Saints and chosen ones,
and delivered and committed it to them. Wherefore the Apostles did always
dedicate and direct their Epistles Romans 1. 7. 16, 1. c 8, 26 to 35 1 Cor. 1. 2.
2. Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1. 1. to 15. c. 2. 1. to the end. Phil. 1. 1. Col. 1.
1. 1 These. 1. 1, 3, 4. 2 These. 1. 1. 3. ca. 2. 13, 14. 1 Pet. 1. 1. to 24. ca
2. 7, 9, 10. 2 Pet. 1. 1, 10. 2 Ioh. 3. 3 Ioh. 2. 3. Jude 1. 3. Ps. 50. 16, 17.
to the elect, the chosen and faithful in Christ Jesus; to the Saints, the
sanctified, called and preserved in Christ Jesus, and to no others: to signify
that the Gospel is proper and peculiar unto them. Secondly, you must observe,
that though the ministers of the Gospel, are to Mark. 16. 16.
preach the Gospel to every creature, yet it is not with an intent to convert
all those that hear it unto God, but only the elect: Paul did preach and 2 Timothy 2. 10.
endure all things, not for all those to whom he preached; but only for the
elects sake; that they might obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus
with eternal glory: Ephe. 4. 11, 12
God has given some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some
Pastors and teachers; but this is not for the conversion and good of all men,
but it is only for the perfecting of the Saints, and for the edifying of the
body of Christ, Ephesians. 1 1, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 22, 23. c 1. 7, 10, 13, 19, 21,
22 c. 5. 2^, 29, 30. 1 Pet. 5 13 To. 8. 29, ^0. Hebr. 12 22, 23.
who are the elect. The preachers of the Gospel who are styled Angels, are
sent out only Matthew. 24. 31.
to gather the elect (not all men) from the fo^re Winds. from the one end of
heaven to the other: Heb. 1, 14 Reu. 7. 3. to 16.
they are all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them (and for them
only) who shall be heirs of salvation; not for reprobates and wicked men: they
are onley Acts. 10. 28. Ioh 21. 15, 16, 17. 2 Timothy 2. 10.
to feed the Church, the lambs, the sheep and flock of Christ; who are
only the elect, as the Scriptures and the Fathers have defined it: therefore
the milk and food of the word and Gospel is proper and peculiar unto them.
Thirdly, you must take notice, that though the Gospel be to be preached unto
every creature, yet it is not with an intent to convert and save all those that
Mat. 16, 15, 16.
Go ye (says he) into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature, he that belieueth, and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
belieueth not shall be damned: By which conditional clause and limitation,
its most apparent: that God did never intend that his Gospel should convert
and save all such as hear it preached, (as is further warranted by ler. 1. 10.
cap. 7. 26, 27, 28. Ezech. 2. 3. to 9, 10. Heb. 4. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16)
where God commanded his word to be preached to some that should not hear it
nor obey it, nor reap any profit or conversion from it:) but only such as
should believe and embrace it in their hearts. Now these are only the elect,
and no others; for Acts. 13 48. John 10. 26. Rom 8. 30.
they only do believe: Therefore the Gospel is intended unto them alone.

If this then be granted and yielded unto me, that the promises and glad
tidings of the Gospel are proper and peculiar to the elect alone; that the
ministers of the Gospel are sent out only to call and gather together the
elect: and that the preaching of the Gospel unto every creature, is not with
an intent to convert and save all such as hear it, but only such as do
believe it, who are always the lesser number, and only such as are elected:
then it follows ineuitably, that there is no repugnancy nor contradiction
between the secret and the revealed will of God; and that God deludes and
cozens none to whom the Gospel is preached, though they are not converted:
because he did never intend to convert all those that should be the heaters,
but only such as are the true embracers and beleiuers of his Gospel, who are
only the elect, in whom alone he works this grace of faith.

Yea but you will now object; that God does seriously Object.
exhort and entreat even reprobates and wicked men to repent and believe,
though he has determined to give no faith, nor yet repentance to them:
therefore if they cannot repert and believe of themselves (as we affirm) God
cannot but mock and dissemble with them, because he exhorts them unto that
which they of themselves (without Gods aid) can never do: and which himself
has decreed irreuocably that they shall never do.

To this I answer, that it is true; that if God himself Answ.
who knows the hearts and estates of all men, should tell any man from heaven
that he was a reprobate, and that he had irreuocably decreed it, that he would
never work any faith or repentance in him, and should come to such a man in
particular, and seriously exhort him to believe and repent that so he might be
saved: that then there were some show of mockery, falsehood and double dealing
in God: and this objection might stand good. But here the case stands
otherwise: For though God does often times seriously exhort and entreat even
such to believe and repent, as he has reprobated and for ever rejected in his
secret purpose and decree, yet here is no delusion nor deceit at all. First,
because the minister who is Gods agent and ambassador unto this reprobate, can
never determine but as to a chosen Saint of God for ought he knows. Secondly,
because this reprobate to whom this exhortation

Yea, but you will object; that God himself does certainly Object.
know that this very reprobate neither will, no^ can repent, because he has
decreed to work no faith nor repentance in him: therefore God must needs
delude and mock him, though man cannot discern it.

To this I answer; that if man cannot discern, that Answer. 1.
God deludes men in this his dealing; then how does it come to pass, that you
who prosecute this objection can charge God with delusion, and cousenage in his
dealing, when as man cannot discern it? what are you now translated into Gods
or Angels, that you can fathom and find out this mystery, which all the Saints
and reprobates in the world cannot epsy. Doubtless if there be never a
reprobate in the world, that can say God deals falsely with him, in desiring
his conversion when as he never did intend it, because he could not satisfy
himself whether he were a reprobate yea or no: then it is certain, that you
who make this mystical and strange objection, must cease to charge God with
collusion and double dealing, till you are able for to tax him of, or trace
him in it. Secondly, them, by inuiting, exhorting and persuading them to
repent, because that as God does not inuit them to faith and repentance as
they are reprobates, so his decree of reprobation is not the immediate cause of
their infidelity and impenitency, but their own corrupt and sinful natures,
which God is not bound to heal and cure. Indeed if God himself should
purposely bind them hand and foot in the chains and fetters of sin, and
then should bid them go, or walk, and run on toward him in a serious and
earnest manner, he might then be thought for to delude them: but this God does
not do, he casts no rubbes nor blocks into our way, but what we cast our
selves: if we come not in when as he inuites us, it is not because God himself
does not enable us, but because we have ensnared our selves in sins and
trespasses, and disabled our selves to come Genesis 18. 14, c. 17. 1. c. 35. 11 1 Chronicles 29 11, 12. 2 Chro. 20. 6, 7. Job. 12. 13. to the end. c. 9. 4. to 20.
cap. 23. 13, 14. c. 33. 12, 13. ca. 37. 7, 12. c. 40. 9 ca. 42. 2. Ps. 47. 3 P.
115 3. Psalm 135. 6. Prou. 21. 1. 30. Eccles. 9. 1. Isai. 4 27. ca. 40 10. to
18. 22. to 30. c 43. 13. Ier. 18. 3. to 11. cap 32. 27. c. 49 19. Ezech. 22.
14. Dan 2. 20, 21. c. 4. 35. ca. 5 29. Acts 5. 39. ca. 6. 10. c 11. 17 To. 9
19, 20, 21. Ioh 5. 21. 2 Cos 10. 4, 5. Ephesians. 1. 11, 19, 20, 21.
always executed, and cannot be resisted:) but he does only seriously declare
what things he does approve and require in us. A King may seriously wish and
desire that such a subject of his were a rich, a great and honorable person,
but yet he may not purpose and resolve to make him such a one: God does
earnestly command and desire that all men (but especially his Saints) should
not offend nor sin against him; but yet he does not purpose to cause them not
to sin: for James 3. 2. 2 Chronicles, 6. 36.
in many things we offend all; and there is no man that lives, and sins
not: God may desire something in his revealed will, which he has not purposed
nor decreed to effect and work in his secret will: he Eccch. 18. 23, 32.
desires not the death of a sinner; and yet sinners always die in sin,
without repentance: since therefore God may desire and require something in his
revealed will, which he has not purposed nor decreed to effect in his secret
will; it follows not, that God does therefore intend and purpose to work
effectually by his grace in hypocrites and reprobates, when as he offers grace
and mercy by his word: and so he moekes them not. Fifthly: the Gospel in which
God offers grace to men, though it be propounded in a common and universal
manner in respect of the hearing of it, from which none are excluded; yet it is
always propounded distributiuely, restrictiuely and conditionally in respect
of the benefit and comfort of it; not to men as they are men; nor to all
hearers or reprobates, as they are hearers and reprobates; but to all those,
and to those only that shall believe it, embrace it, and obey it in the
syncerity of their hearts. If then the Gospel be thus preached and propounded
to a whole congregation, can any man say that God deludes him? If he will
believe and apply the Gospel, he shall be sure to reap the fruit and comfort
of it; and so he cannot accuse God of collusion, because he has made good his
Gospel unto him: If he believe and receive it not at all, he cannot say that
God deludes him, or that he did not offer it seriously unto him; because he
propounded it with this prouiso, if he would believe and apply it to his own
eternal good; which prouiso and condition he has not yet fulfilled: and
therefore he cannot blame the Lord, who did not promise to fulfill it for him.

Yea but say you, a reprobate may thus object: I cannot Object.
receive nor believe the Gospel unless God give me an heart and will to do
it, which heart and will he has not determined to give me; therefore he does
but delude and cozen me in profering grace unto me upon such impossible terms
and conditions as these, which I cannot perform.

I answer, that it is true, that God must give men hearts to embrace and use
the means of grace in an effectual Answer. 7.
manner, or else they cannot do it: yet this I say with all; that even
reprobates themselves might have done more, then now they do, and been more
diligent in the outward means, had they put their whole might and strength
unto it, and prayed earnestly to God for his assistance: so that they cannot
truly say, that God was wanting unto them in altering of their hearts; but that
they were wanting to themselves, in being negligent in the use of means, and
in blocking up their hearts against the Lord by daily sins. Secondly, that
inability to believe; Adams fall: since therefore that impotency and
impossibility of getting and receiving grace which is in reprobates, proceeds
not from any fatal or necessitating decree of God, but only from that
original deprauation and natural imbecility which is in them; from which God
is not pleased for to free them: these reprobates cannot say, that God deludes
and mocks them in tendering grace unto them, though he denies them hearts and
wills for to embrace it; which he is not bound in justice for to give them: but
they must rather magnify his mercy toward them in offering grace unto them,
when as they have made themselves un worthy of it, and unable to receive it.
Thirdly, what reprobate is there that when God does offer grace unto him by his
ministers, can truly say that God has positiuely resolved not to give him an
heart or will for to embrace it? Is any reprobate privy unto Gods decrees, to
know what he has purposed concerning him? if not, then he can never say that
God deludes him, or that he decrees to give him no heart nor will to embrace
the grace which is thus tendered to him; because for ought he knows, he may
belong to Gods election: and if so, then God will surely change his heart, and
give him power to embrace his grace. Fourthly, if God should offer grace to
reprobates in a serious manner, yet he should See Ioh. 18. 40. Matthew. 22. 5, 6.
ca. 23. 37. Luke 13. 3 (...) 19, 15, 27. Act. 3. 14. c. 7. 51. ca. 13. 45, 46.
John 3. 19, 20. ca. 1, 10, 11.
utterly unwilling to receive this grace upon those terms that God does offer
it, although they had power to embrace it: Reprobates though they might have
grace for the very taking of it, yet they would not take it though they might
upon Gods conditions: therefore God does not delude them in tendering grace unto
them, though they cannot take it; because they would not take it though they
might. Fifthly, God does not Ephesians. 2. 12.
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant of
promise, having no hope: Reprobates who live under the Gospel have always
hope till their dying day, because they know not whether they are reprobates
yea or no till then; which hope and comfort all such as are deprived of the
Gospel want: therefore the preaching of the Gospel to them is not merely
vain. Secondly, Reprobates who Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
taste a sweetness in the word and promises, and in the powers of the world to
come: they know more then all the world besides, which is deprived of the
Gospel: now the very knowledge of God and Christ, and of their attributes,
promises, word and will, and of all those things which the Scriptures do
reveal unto reprobates, is an invaluable and matchless blessing; it is a
greater good and happiness then man by all the light of art and nature
(without the Scriptures) can attain unto: therefore no reprobates can say that
God deals hardly or falsely with them though his word does not convert them.
Thirdly, Reprobates though they are Job. 21. 7. to 17. Psalm. 73. 3. to 13.
great, (nay sometimes a greater) share and portion in those outward blessings
and privileges which the Gospel brings (which are great and many) as the
Saints themselves: The Gospel commonly brings peace and plenty, health and
safety, and all outward happiness and tranquillity with it: it is always
accompanied with many great and excellent blessings of which reprobates drink
as deep as any others: therefore it is not altogether in vain unto them,
though it convert them not. Fourthly, Reprobates though they in hell fire are
much extenuated and abated: therefore they cannot truly say, that the Gospel
is ineffectuall and fruitless to them, because their very souls reap much
advantage by it. Fifthly, Reprobates have often times many Mark. 6. 10. Matthew. 7.
22. See Mr. Perkins how far a repro bate may go.
many things for God, and to go very far in the outward practice and
profession of religion; insomuch that they seem to many to be the elect of
God, and the undoubted members of Jesus Christ: so that the Gospel is not
altogether in vain unto them, because it works some good upon them, though it
convert them not. Sixthly, Reprobates Gen 30. 30. c. 39. 5. 21, 23.
blesses reprobates, and Genesis 18. 23. 10 33.
keeps of judgments from them for the godly men's sake that live among them:
wherefore though the Gospel does not convert them to the Lord, yet it is not
in vain unto them even in this respect. Seventhly, Reprobates who for the
present, and gains respect and honor to them in the sight of men: since
therefore reprobates enjoy so many blessings, privileges and comforts by the
Gospel as these here mentioned, they have no cause to say that God deludes and
mockes them, when as he sends the Gospel to them; because though he gives no
inward efficacy nor power to it, to convert and save their souls, yet he
deriues many outward blessings, comforts, privileges and favors to them by it,
for which their souls and bodies fare the better.

If you now object, that the Gospel aggrauates the sins Object.
of reprobates, and makes their condemnation greater, because it leaves them
without excuse: therefore they are no gainers, but losers by the Gospel.

I answer, that it is true, that it had bin better for some Answ.
reprobates, yea for all those reprobates that go on in sinful and rebellious
courses without restraint, that they had never injoyd the Gospel by reason of
their disobedience to it: but as for others who are reclaimed by it, though it
aggrauates their condemnation one way, in adding to the greatness of their
sins; yet it extenuates it another way, in detracting from the multitude and
number of their sins, which they would have doubled and trebled, had not the
ministry and preaching of the word restrained them: so that they are far
greater gainers in this last respect, then losers by the first: All reprobates
fare the better for the Gospel here, in regard of those many outward blessings
and privileges that accompany it; many of them speed the better for it not
only here but hereafter to: those that fare the worser for it, it is from
their own defaults, they might have used it better if they would themselves,
in having more care and conscience to practice and obey it: so that the Gospel
is a blessing to them all, though it proves a curse and condemnation unto them
through their own defaults. Lastly, though God does not give men power should
receive it: for as God does not delude men in injoyning them not to sin, and
to observe his law in every point, though he gives them no power nor strength
to do it, and though it be impossible for them to fulfill it; no more can he
be said to delude or mock men in offering grace unto them by the Gospel,
though he gives them no power to receive it: because he commands them no more
then they had strength at first to do, which strength and power they lost
through their own defaults: and because the end of this command is to no other
purpose but to cause men for to see their own disability, and so to fly to him
for strength, for grace and mercy.

But you will now demand of me, if the Gospel does truly and of right belong
to none but the elect, if it conuerts Quest.
and saues none else but they, why then is it propounded so generally to all,
to reprobates as well as others? If it were proper and peculiar to the elect
alone, it should be preached to none else but they.

To this I answer, that the Gospel is thus generally propounded Answer.
unto all, not because it belongs alike to all, or because God intends that it
should be alike effectual unto all; but because it is the will, the pleasure
and command of God, that it should be thus propounded: as is evident by Mark
16. 16. Luke 10. 5, 6. cap. 24. 47. Matthew. 13. 3. to 24. Acts 1. 8. Col. 1. 6.
21. Now the reasons wherefore the Gospel is thus generally propounded unto
all, though it be principally intended for the conversion and salvation of the
elect alone, are these. First, because reprobates are Matthew. 13. 24. to the end.
intermixed and mingled with the elect, as the weeds and tares are with the
corn and grass, as the chafe is with the wheat, and as the stones are with
the mellow ground: now as the rain does oftimes fall upon the tares, the weeds
and stones, as well as on the corn, the grass, and mellow ground, not because
it is principally intended unto them, but because they are intermixed with the
grass, the corn, and fertile ground: and as the Mute. 3. 12.
fanue does blow upon the chafe as well as on the wheat, because its mixed
with the wheat, though it seatters the one, and purges the other: Even so the
pleasant showers and breathings of the Gospel do often times Heb 6. 4 to 9.
Alat. 13. 3. to 24
fall on reprobates and wicked men, (who are compared to weeds, to tares, to
rocks, and chafe throughout the Scripture) not with a determinate purpose to
convert and save them; but because they are mingled with the elect and chosen
Saints of God, (who are compared to wheat, to corn, to good and mellow
ground,) for whose effectual calling and conversion they are only sent.
August, dc Ciu. Dei lib. 21. e. 24. Si de aliquibus i. ta Ecclesia certa esset,
vt qui sunt illi etiam noscet, qui licet adhuc in vita sine constituti, tamen
predestinati sane in aeternum igne^ ir e cum Diabolo: twn pro it is non ordret,
quam nec pro ipso etc.
If the ministers could discern between the elect and reprobates, between
those that would embrace and willingly receive the Gospel, and such as would
reject it, they might then propound the Gospel to the elect alone; but because
they know not who are chosen and elected, nor who are reprobated: therefore
they must preach the Gospel unto all, that so those who are elected may be
effectually called and converted out of all. Thirdly, the Gospel must be thus
propounded, because else it would be vain and ineffectuall unto all; for if
the Gospel should be pronounced to the elect alone, (as he that is elected
shall be saved;) then no man could apply it to his own soul; for before a
man's conversion unto God, he can never truly say that he is elected: yea the
very elect Hebr. 4. 2. 3.
apply it to himself: therefore it is propounded generally unto all, that so
men might be able to apply it. Fourthly, the Gospel must be thus propounded,
that so no man 1 Pet. 1, 13.
mercy: If God should cull out his elect from among the reprobates, and make an
open division and separation of them here, preaching the Gospel unto them
alone, then all these reprobates must needs despair of his grace, and run
into some desperate course, knowing that they are designed and marked out for
hell: but now when as the Gospel is thus generally propounded unto all, it
always nourishes some hope in reprobates, and keeps them from despair.
Fifthly, the Gospel is thus generally preached Romans 1. 20 Ezech 2. 3. John 15.
22. Math. 10 18. cap. 24. 14. 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
may be left without excuse, laying all the blame upon themselves, and not on
God, who was not wanting to them in the means. Sixthly, the Gospel is thus
generally propounded unto all, though it becomes not effectual unto all,
because the Saints of God who are 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 11, 12.
and praise the Lord for making it effectual unto them, when as he has not
made it so to others. Seventhly, it is thus propounded unto all, because it is
a Gal 6. 16. To. 3. 27. cap. 7. 25. Psalm. 119. 9.
rule of life be judged at the last: John. 12. 48. Romans 2. 12, 16.
wherefore though it be effectual to none but the elect, yet it must be
preached unto all alike, because it is a rule and square of life and judgment
unto all. Eighthly, it is thus propounded unto all, See Ephesians. 7. 5. to 11.
Phil 2. 9, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16.
that so the 2 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16.
more God and Christ are glorified though it conuerts not all: because it does
more propagate and divulge those great, those glorious attributes and treasures
of goodness which are in them, and wins them a greater, a more awful and
commanding reverence and adoration in the hearts of men: there ore it is thus
preached unto all. Ninthly, it is propounded unto 1 Thessalonians. 1. 9. 10
atheism, their paganism, idolatries, profane and dissolete courses, and
from many other sins, into which they would have plunged themselves, had not
the Gospel pulled them back: we know it by experience, that the Gospel works
very far on many reprobates; it makes them Mark 6. 20.
do much, and part with many sins: and though it never works so rarre as
thoroughly to change and save their souls, yet it brings them nearer to
salvation then else they could have come: it makes their condemnation less by
lessening of the number of their sins. Tenthly, the Gospel must be thus
propounded, that Matthew 5 25.
enjoy the outward blessings and privileges which it brings, as well as the
elect: which they could never do, if it were propounded to the elect alone
Eleuenthly, the Gospel is thus propounded Matthew. 24. 14.
bear witness to it, and 1 Timothy 2. 4. Colloss 1. 6. 23. Matthew. 24. 14.
acknowledge God and Jesus Christ as well as others: If the Gospel had bin
preached to the elect alone, then many who profess the Gospel acknowledging
the deity of God and Christ, and the truth and holiness of the Gospel, had
layen still in darkness, and in their heathenish rites, and superstitious
worshipping of Devils, stocks, stones, and other creatures for Gods, and
embracing fabulous, blasph mous, absurd and idle poems and histories of their
Idoll-Gods, for sound divinity; by which the glory of God and Christ, and the
truth and testimony of the Gospel should have bin much ecclipsed: God
therefore commands the Gospel to be propounded unto all, and not to the elect
alone, that so all men might come to the acknowledgement of his truth and
deity, for the greater manifestation Romans 7. 7. 8, 9 10 17. Icr. 3. 25. Ioh. 9.
41. c. 16. 8. 9. Romans 3. 19. Matthew. 2^. 14.
convinced of their own weakness, wretchedness and perverseness in Gods
sight, and acknowledge that he deals justly in rejecting them, and in
inflicting vengeance on them for their sins: when a reprobate by the light of
Gods holy word shall see what he has lost in Adam, and what corruption he has
drawn from his Ioynes; when he shall discover by the brightness of the word,
the greatness bulk and infinite multitude of his sins; then he is even forced
Ps. 64. 8. 9. Ps. 58. 11. Exodus 9. 27. Ezech. 14. 22, 23.
to confess, that God deals justly with him: then his conscience stops his
mouth and makes him Matthew. 22. 12.
speachlesse, so that he has nothing to reply against God; but willingly
submits unto his doom, as being scarce proportionable to his sin: so that
there is great reason why the Gospel should be thus propounded unto all,
though it conuerts not all that hear it. Thirteenthly, the Sacraments are
administered 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28, 29, 30.
reprobates as well as to the elect: reprobates are baptized, and receive the
Sacrament of the Lords supper as well as any of Gods chosen ones: it is fit
therefore that the Gospel should be extended unto all as well as the
Sacraments, because they are both of the same extent and latitude, and go hand
in hand together, like twins that cannot be divided. Lastly, the Gospel is thus
propounded Romans 1 16. Acts 11. 24.
power of God to salvation, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16.
the savor of life unto life, and the effectual 1 Cor. 1. 18. 21. cap. 2. 5.
cap. 4. 15. James 1. 18. Col. 1. 12, 13.
means of their true conversion and salvation: to the wicked 2 Cor. 2. 16.
it is the sauorof death unto death, the rule of life and judgment, the
declaration of Gods will and pleasure, the cause Isay. 6. 9, 10. Ezech. 2. 10.
Ioh. 15. 22. To. 2. 20.
oftimes of their obduration and greater condemnation, by reason of their
contempt and neglect of it. Since therefore the Gospel has a work in reprobats
as well as in the elect, it is propounded to them both; yet not as unto elect
and reprobates, nor in absolute and posiciue terms, but as to men who are
capable of grace and salvation, if they repent, and believe that Gospel which
is preached to them, and of damnation if they do reject it: And thus you see
this grand objection cleared, That God is no deluder nor impostor, though he
has not purposed nor decreed to convert and call all such to whom the Gospel
is preached.

FINIS.

