PROSOPOPOEIA. Or, A CONFERENCE held at Angelo Castle, between the Pope, the
Emperor, and the King of Spain.
Pope. VVElcome dear Sons, unto our court of Rome,
blessing Apostolic and holy doom,
shield all the house of Austria from mischanee,
And both their fortunes and your crowns advance.

Emperor. Thy feet most holy Father do I kiss.
Of Church benediction if I miss,
The Imperial Crown from Austria will be gone,
which heaven forbid: for then we are all undone.
Bohemias rebels with Hungaria join
the Heretics from Danow to the Rhine,
their heads, their arms, their forces they combine,
against Rome and Austria: Oh the Palatine!
that cursed Calvinist with his partakers,
those damned Schismatics the Church forsakers,
upon our ruynes seek to build their fortune,
which makes me thus your Holiness importune.

Pope. The keys of Peter, and the sword of Paul,
shall shut, and open, cut in sunder all:
the gates of heaven, nations laws, and rights,
and turn clear days, into the darkest nights;
ere one of Caluines, or of Luthers sect,
with Roman Bays, or Aegles shall be decked.

Emperor. The threats and curses of the Catholics,
are now despised by these vile Heretics:
help by your counsel therefore Holy Sir,
and show us means to quiet all this stir.

Pope. Thou may by reasons, and Embassages,
by questions, answers, and like passages,
win time a while, but these are out of date:
Now swords, not words, do Kingdoms arbitrate.
To neighbor friends, and subjects quickly send,
that from surprise, thou may thy self defend.
My Nuntios and my Legates I Will dispatch,
more forces'mongst the Catholics to hatch,
Ments, Colen, Trier, Catholic Baviere,
have thou in Germany, with other there;
Thy uncle Albert, and the Polish King,
unto thee quickly may their forces bring.
And though my self with Florence may not send
our arms so soon; yet money will we lend.
The Cantons of the Switzers shall be waged,
which to our See do hold themselves engaged;
so is the Saxon Duke with his estate,
to thee in Dresden and the Electorate,
whose elder cosins hopes will make him fear,
and to thy fortunes, and thy house adhere:
I Will also send to Savoy, and to Venice,
to France our eldest son, and to S. Dennice,
I Will fetch the saints from heaven, The fiends from hell, Flectere si nequeo
sisperos, A^eronta mouebe.

but I Will those drunken Germane traitors quell:
Besides thy Spanish cousin present here,
whom Europe and the new found world do fear,
the Churches Atlas, and the Empires prop,
by strength, by wit, by friends, or gold will stop
these proud attempts and darings of the Dutch,
and break their forces, cost it nere so much.

K. of Spain. If Caesar and your Holiness have done,
observe the answer of your Spanish son.
Not Germane Prelates, nor Bavarie can,
nor King of Pole, your self, nor any man,
nor Tuskans Duke, nor Albert my poor brother,
nor Cantons Catholic, nor any other,
bring timely succors, against the conjuration
those Almaigne Graves have made in every Nation.
Expect not help from Savoy, nor Venetia,
who fear and deadly hate the house of Austria.
I look for nothing from my son of France,
for if he saw us down he would sing and dance.
And why should you from Saxon hope for more,
then Charles my grandsire reaped from his before;
who gave him all, and more then you do mention:
yet shortly after in the great contention,
twixt him and Germane rebels, he forsook
his Benefactor, and against him took.
And Caesar if at home thou look for aid,
thy Kingdoms both are lost, thy strength decade.
Thine Austrian subjects also are infected
with Luthers heresy, and have rejected
the Papal dignity, and may do thine,
and with their fellow Lutherans combine,
and if for succor thou do send to Thracia;
the faithless Turks, thou know do not love Austria.
Spain then must help, or what will Caesar do?
and how shall Spain help Rome and Caesar too?
Shall Indian armies, be recalled from thence,
Italian forces march away from hence,
leave Millaine, Naples, and our silver fountains
unguarded, naked, to march ore the mountains?
Through Grisons country lead the strength of Spain,
or venture our Armada once again,
to narrow Seas, and so at once loose more
then we have got, in sixscore years before?
So thou at Auspourgh, I in Arragon
may shave our crowns, turn Monks, and live alone.
You count your friends, but count not all your foes,
whose strength, whose number, you cannot oppose:
The Northern tract of Europe from Britania,
tending to East, as far as Transylvania,
(save Poleland and some trifles) is their own,
aye me, in fourscore years how they are grown.
Their Kingdoms, England, Scotland, Ireland, be,
with Denmark, Norway, Sweden, six you see:
besides those two which they have won from thee,
being eight in all, and our Kings are but three.
The number of their Princes, Dukes, and Countes,
with their free Lords, and States, ours far surmounts:
besides their many Palsgraves, and Burghgraves,
with all their Lantgraves, Reingraves, and Markgraves.
And as their numbers, so their spirits are,
made great with hopes, (...) 1618.
by the Prodigious star:
which Blazed over Almaigne last December,
portending change of states; and I remember
their expositions, and their calculations
of times, of Scriptures, and of situations.
of Rome, of Babel, and of hills and dales,
of beasts and dragons, and such fearful tales:
wherewith they cheer themselves, and their new King,
as if they Victors were, and bells do ring.
Alas for Rome, alas for Ferdinand,
Alas for Philip, must he needs withstand
his own, the Empires, and the Churches foes,
and so himself, the Church and Empire lose?
Have all my Ancestors to five descents,
by Conquest, wedlock, and like ligaments,
ty'de Earledomes, Dukedomes, Crowns and Empire fast,
hoping for Western Monarchy at last:
and is the period of our greatness past,
and our declyning now begin to have?
Ah Nassau, Nassau, hateful Son and Father;
Cursed be your name and house, you, you did gather
the hateful rebels, into warlike bands:
who now do State it in our Netherlands.
There, there you wrote nil Vltra once again,
and set up Esterne pillars, bars to Spain.

Emperor. Thus are our dangers, thus our fears related:
thus be our minds perplexed, our hearts amated.
If Rome have any secret wisdom hid
laid up for wicked times, or ever did
make wicked heretics feel Churches power,
then Father now is the time and this the hour.
Remember how two Fredericks heretofore
'frighted thy predecessors, this may more
hazard thy fortunes, utterly suppress
the Roman Church, thy self, and us (unless
by some prime Stratageme) fetched from the deep
thou do thy self and friends from danger keep.

Pope. And are our friends so few and so untrusty?
and be our foes so many and so lusty?
One Innocent of ^ome in former ages,
has used three Kings for lackeys and for pages:
And dare they now against our liking make
both Kings and Kaesars? then you furies wake:
Help me to store of pistols, poisons, knives,
to fire and powder, manacles and gives.
Bid Ravilltack and Clement hye them hither,
Let Gerad, Faux, and Garnet come together;
Come ye Ignatians bring Assasinates,
left handed Ehuds, that do rule the fates,
and cut the threads of Princes lives a sunder:
these Roman Scauola's shall make men wonder
to see the upstart King with his partakers,
in every nation slaughtred by massacres.
I Will raise up Swarez, 3. Famous Jesuits.
Parsons, Bellar mine,
Loyallas-selfe their father: and refine
all humane wit to one pure quintessence,
against whose virtue shall be no defense.
Therefore fair Sons at nothing be dismayed,
remember what your Father now has said:
You to Vienna, you to Civil go,
help as you may to give the fatal blow.

K. of Spain. Come LLerma: look not sadly on thy friend
But let us with Spanish patience wait the end.


