News from Ipswich. Discovering certain late detestable practices of some
domineering Lordly Prelates, to undermine the established doctrine and
discipline of our Church, extirpate all Orthodox sincere Preachers and
preaching of Gods Word, usher in Popery, Superstition and Idolatry; with their
late notorious purgations of the new Fastbooke, contrary to his Majesty's
Proclamation, and their intolerable affront therein offered to the most
Illustrious Lady Elizabeth, the King only Sister, and her Children, (even
whiles they are now royally entertained at Court) in blotting them out of the
Collect; and to his Majesty, his Queen and their Royal Progeny, in blotting
them out of the number of Gods Elect.

JER. 23. 1. We be unto the Pastors that destroy and scatter the Sheep of my
Pasture, says the Lord.

ACTS 20. 28, S9. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock
over the which the holy Ghost has made you Bishops, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my
departing shall grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock.

Printed at Ipswich, An. 1636.

CHristian Reader this is the deplorable News of our present age, that our
Presses formerly open only to Truth and Piety, are closed up against them both
of late, and patent for the most part, to naught but error, superstition, and
prophanes. Witness those Shelfords 5. Treatises, Rheeve Communion book
Catechisine expounded, Chounaeus Collect, A Coal from the Altar, The female
glory, Studley Dr. Lawrence, and Brownes Sermons, with others. Apparatus ad
hist. Ecclesiast.
many profane erroneous, impious books, printed within these 3. years by
authority, (pointblanke against the established doctrine of the Church of
England, and his Majesty's pious Before the 39 Articles and concerning the
Parlaments dissolution, p. 20, 21, 22, 42.
Declarations) in defense of Arminianisme, Popery, and Popish ceremonies; and
which is yet more impious and detestable, against The Treatise, History
Doctrine, and Discourse of the Sabbath; A sovereign Antidote. Dr. Primrose,
Rheeve Shelford, and Powel, in the life of King Iue.
the very morality of the Sabbath, and 4. Commandment: the divine institution
tule and entire religious sanctification of the Lord's Day SABBATH and the
necessity of frequent preaching, (exceedingly pressed in our Preface to them,
Of the right use of the Church
Homilies, and book of Exhortation to those that are to be made Ministers.
Ordination) which some of our unpreaching, domineering secular Prelates (out
of their Arch-piety toward God, Bp Latimers 2, 4. 5. 6. Sermons before King
Edward, and his sermon of the Plough.
and Arch-charity to the peoples souls which they seek to murder,) now so
far detest, that they not only give over preaching themselves, as no part of
their function; and suppress most weekday Lectures in diverse Countries; but
have likewise lately shut up the mouths of sundry of our most godly,
powerful, painful Preachers, (who have won more souls to God in a year,
than all the Lord Bishops in England or the world have done in diversages) out
of mere malice to religion, and the peoples salvation; contrary to the very
Laws of God and the Realm; and strictly prohibited; under pain of
suspention, in sundry Diocese, all afternoon Sermons on the Lords own Day;
tha^ so the profane vulgar might have more time to dance play, revell, drink,
and profane Gods Sabbaths, even in these days of plague and pestilence, Neh.
13. 17, 18 Levit. 26. 46. to 55. Ier. 17. 17. Ezech. 20 13. to 22. the
Fastbooke 1. Iacobi and Caroli, and the examples of of Gods judgments upon
Sabbath breakers.
to draw down more plagues and judgments on us, for this sin of
Sabbath-breaking, when as not only the Sessio 14
Synod of Dort, but Apud Bochel. Decreta Eccles. Gal l. 1. Tit. 3. c. 10. 11,
13, 16, 17, 18, 37, 52. and l. 4. Tit. 7. c. 26.
sundry Popish Synods and Bishops have bin so religious, as to prescribe TWO
SERMONS every Lordsday at least, in every parish Church, to keep the people
from such prophanations of this sacred Day. Alas what could Matthew 12. 24.
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, had he been an Archbishop or Lordly Prelate
here in England (as there were many Devils Bishops, at least, Bishops Devils,
in Sermo 33 in Cant, and in Council. Rhemensi.
Bernards age, and most fear there are too many now,) have done more against
the strict entire sanctification of the Christian Sabbath day, to Hom. 3.
against rebellion p. 293 and of the time and place of prayer.
make it the Devils day in stead of the Lords day and to advance his own
kingdom and service on it; or against the frequent powerful Preachers, and
preaching of Gods Word, and salvation of the peoples souls, then some
Luciferian Lord Bishops have lately done? whose impiety in this kind transcends
all presidents whatsoever in former ages. And yet these profane, atheistical
graceles persecutors of all holiness, piety, sincerity, godly Ministers, and
preaching of Gods Word (yea in these pestilentiall times, as means to spread
the plague, though the 2 Chronicles. 6. 28, 29, 30. c. 7, 13 14. Number. 25. 6. to 10
Joel 1 and 2 Zeph 2. 1. 2, 3.
Scripture, and See the Fast book 1 Iacobi.and Caroli.
all former ages have prescribed fasting, preaching, and praying, as the chief
antidots and cure against it) will needs be Lord Bishops Bp. Bancrofts Sermon,
and Bp. Whites. Treatise of the Sabba^h day, Epist. Ded.
lure divino by the holy Ghosts own institution, (who never yet instituted any
Act. 20. 28. 1. Tim. 3 2 c 4. 11. to 17. 2 Timothy 4. 1. to 4. Tit 1. 9. c. 2. 1.
^0 13. c. 3. 1. to 12 1 Pet. 5 1. 2, 3.
unpreaching, rarepreaching Prelates or persecutors and suppressors of
preaching) and shame not to style themselves, the Bp. White Epist. Ded. to his
Treatise of the Sabbath: and Rheeu ^ Epist. Ded. before his Exposition of his
Catechism in the Communion book, and p. 2.
godly holy Fathers of our Church, and Pillars of our faith, when as their
fruits and actions manifest them to be naught else but the very Step fathers
and Caterpillars, the very pests and plagues of both. Take out one fresh
instance for an example: these desperate Archagents for the Devil, and Pope of
Rome, and Master-underminers of our religion, as they were the only
instruments of delaying the present general fast in the beginning of the
pestilence, Zeph. 2. 1, 2 3. Number. 16. 46
when it was most acceptable and requisi^e; So, to show their inveterate malice
against preaching ( Bp Latimers 4. and 6. Sermons before King Edw which I
would our Prelates would now peruse and his Sermon of the Plough
the thing that the Devil wrastleth most against all whose study has been to
decay the office of preaching, which should not be deminished) they (contrary
to his Majesty's pious intention, who has so Declaration before the 39.
Articles, and of the dissolution of the Parliament. p. 21. 42.
often protested against all innovations) have cunningly caused all Sermons (the
very life and soul of a fast, as being the only means to humble men for their
sins: and bring them to repentance,) Zeph. 2. 1, 2. 3 Isay 58. 1 to 8. Ier. 23.
29. c. 36. 6. to 11. Acts. 16. 18. Heb. 4. 12, 13, 2 Timothy 2. 25. 26.
to be prohibited on the fast day, both in London and the Suburbs, and in all
other infected places, during the time of the infection in them; in parishes
not infected, (as if preaching only of all Gods ordinances were pestilenciall,
and that on the fastday, not on others;) contrary to the presidents of all
former ages, and the Order 6. for the Fast.
Orders sor the general fasts in the two last great plagues which prescribed
two Sermons, of one hour long apeece, forenoone and afternoon every fast day,
and that as well in parishes infected as others: even in the Summer season, when
the infection was more contagious and raging than now. By which device they
have not only made this fast distasteful to all Who style it a dumb fast and a
mockfast.
sorts of men in infected places, who have little heart unto it, robbed the
poor of much charitable relief, and deprived the people of the spiritual food
and Physic of their souls, when they need and desire it most, to their
intolerable grief and discontent, but quite suppressed all settled Wednesday
Lectures in London and other infected Towns, as long as the infection shall
continue in any one parish, though it should last these 7 years (the thing
they principally aimed at:) forced many Ministers and people to fly out of
infected places into the Country, to keep their fasts where there is preaching;
brought in a Amos 8 11,12.
famine of Gods Word, the greatest plague of all others, to the increasing and
further spreading of the present pestilence, and drawing down of Gods wrath
upon us to 1 These. 2 15,16 Isay 30 9 to 17 2 Chronicles. 34. 16.
the utter most, by inhibiting Ministers in the time of greatest need, to
preach unto the people that they may be saved. O heavens stand amazed at this
unparalleld practice of impious popish Prelates: But is this all? No verily. For
whereas his Majesty See the Proclamation
commanded that the book of Common prayer for the fast, formerly set forth by
his authority upon the like occasion should be reprinted, these Romish
Inquisitors have miserably gelded it, after it was new printed, in sundry
particulars. First, they have purged out the prayer for seasonable weather; one
cause of the shipwracks, and te^pestuous unseasonable weather ever since its
publication. Secondly, they have dashed The Collect for the Queen, etc
the Lady Elizabeth and her children, in the old Collect, quite out of the new;
as they have expunged both them, with our gracious King Queen, and their
children out of the catalogue of Gods elect, by blotting out this clause (who
art the father of thine elect and of their seed) out of the Collect for them in
this and all new Common prayer books, as if they were all reprobates, and none
of the number of Gods elect, either to a temporal or an eternal crown. O
intolerable impiety; affront, and horrid Treason. Thirdly, they have left out
this Collect: It had been best for us etc. in the new book, (though the most
effectual prayer of all) because it magnifies continual, often preaching of
Gods Word, and the Scriptures, and calls our powerful Preachers, Gods
servants. A sig^e these Prelates have conspired together like so many execrable
Traitors, to extirpate our frequent powerful Preachers and continual
preaching of Gods Word (as they have d^ne in many places of late) though
prescribed by 2 Timothy 4. 1 to 5 Lu 19. 47. c 21 37 John 18. ^o. Act. 2. 46. 47, c
5. 42.
God himself etc Of the right use of the Church
our Homili is Fourthly, they have dashed this remarkable clause out of the
first Collect. Thou have delivered us from superstition and idolatry (two grand
causes both of many Number. 25 1, to 10. c. 31. 16. Josh. 22. 17. 2 Chro. 21 13.
14. Psa. 106. 28. 29 Ezec. 5. 11 12. 17. c. 6. 11. 12 c. 12 16 c. 14. ^, 19,
21. Amos. 4. 4, 10.
former, and our present plagues no doubt) wherein we were utterly drowned, and
have brought us into the most clear and comfortable light of thy blessed Word;
by which we are taught how to serve and honor thee, and how to live orderly
with our neighbors in truth and verity: the rest of the Collect remaining as
before. Now what can be the cause of this strange purgation, but a resolved
professed conspiracy of these Romish Prelates, even now again utterly to drown
us in Witness their a^tering of the Gunpowder treason book, their pleading for
the Pope and church of Rome, and setting up Altars, lmages, Crucifixes, and
bowing to them in all Cathedrals, and elsewhere, and in their own Chapels.
popish superstition and idolatry (which have now drowned us in Gods
judgments, by their stupendous late increase among us) and to remove us out
of the most clear and comfortable light of Gods Word, by the which we are
taught how to serve and honor him (the true cause why they now suppress
Lectures, preaching, and suspend our powerfullest Preachers every where,) that
so we may walk on in romish hellish darkness, serving and honoring the Pope
and Devil in stead of God, and live in all disorder, without truth or verity.
Fifthly, in the 6. order for the fast, they have pared away this passage. To
avoid the inconvenience that may grow by the abuse of fasting; Some esteeming
it a meritorious work, others a good work, and of it self acceptable to God
without due regard of the end; Only to gratify the Papists whose Bellarmine
de Bonis Operibus. l 2 c. 11. Bonavent. Diet. sa c. 15.
doctrine this is, and to place some merit in this present fast:) adding this
clause to it; in places where Sermons are allowed by the Proclamation; of
purpose to put down Wednesday Lectures, and preaching in London and other
places where any parish is infected. If these Prelates then be thus desperately
wicked and popish, as to take advantage of Gods judgments to suppress the
preaching and Preachers of his Word when it is most necessary and useful, and
to countenance, justify, and set up Popery, superstition, idolatry, error and
disorder (the chief causes of our plagues) even in these days of pestilence,
and that in the very Fastbooke to abuse and Job 13 9 Gal. 6. 7.
mock God to his face, to dishonor his Majesty, and grieve his peoples souls;
how transcendently impious and popish will they prove, when God shall stay this
plague, if they be not now deservedly punished for these their notorious
impieties? And is it not high time then for his Majesty to hang up such
Archtraytors to our faith, Church, religion, and such truebred sons to the
Roman Antichrist, (from whom Sunday no Sabbath, p. 2. and 44.
Dr. Pocklington bosts they are lineally descended) and to execute judgment on
them for these strange purgations, and other their Romish Innovations, whereat
the whole Kingdom cry shame; which breed a general fear of a sudden
alteration of our religion? Certainly til his Majesty shall see these purgations
rectified, superstition and idolatry removed, Gods Sabbaths duly sanctified,
the suppressed Preachers and The honor and safety of the Kingdom. 2 Chronicles. 17.
7, 8, 9, 10.
preaching of Gods word restored, and hang up some of these Romish Prelates and
Inquisitors before the Lord, as the 2 Samuel 21. Number. 25. 4.
Gibeonites once did the 7. sons of Saul, we can never hope to abate any of
Gods plagues, or draw down any of his blessings on us by Isay 58. 3, 4, 5, etc.
such a fast, and Fastbook as this, but augment his plagu^s and judgments more
and more, which have strangely increased since this fast begun, contrary to al
human reason and probability, whereas it much decreased before; the total
number dying of the plague the week before the fast, being but 458. and 58
parishes infected, and the very first week of the fast 838 (treble the number
the 2. last greatest plagues) and 67 parishes infected, And that the very next
week after an Order there published, that every Scholar shoud bow to the
Altar and at the name of Jesus, under pain of expulsion out of the University
after two admonitions, an idolatrous and superstitious Order.
Cambridge, Norwich, Hampton, Bath, and other eminent places clear before,
being likewise visited since this fast begun; a clear evidence, that God is
much offended with these purgations and the restraint of preaching on the
fastday, against which some Prelates are so mad, that they have silenced and
persecuted diverse Ministers since the fast proclaimed, there being now so many
suspended in our Norwich Diocese, only for not yielding to popish innovations,
that in sundry Churches they have neither prayers, preaching, nor fasting:
which has brought the plague among them, and made the people at their wits
ends, many Ministers and people there having left the Kingdom, and thousands
more being ready to depart the Land, there being never such a persecution or
havoc made among Gods Ministers since Q Mary's days, as a lecherous proud
insolent Prelate has there lately made against all Laws of God and man, to
the astonishment of the whole Realm. What then can we expect but plagues upon
plagues, till such desperate persecurors be cut off, and Gods Word and
Ministers restored unto their former liberty, by our most gracious Sovereign,
persecution of Gods Ministers and people being one chief Ezech. 28 23, 24, c.
38. 28, 22. Ezech. 14. 12. Eusebius Eccles. Hist. ^. 9. cap 8. cent. Mag. 3. c.
3. p. 31 32. Cent. 4 c. 3. p. 156. Henry Holland his Spiritual preservatives
against the Plague.
cause of plagues; Wherefore O England, England, if ever thou will be free from
pests and judgments, take notice of these thy Antichristian Prelates desperate
practices innovations, and popish designs, to bewail oppose, redress them
with all thy force and power: O all ye English Nobles, Courtiers and others,
who have any love or spark of religion, piety, zeal, any tenderness of his
Majesty's honor, or care for the peoples, the Church or Kingdoms safety yet
remaining with in your generous breasts, put to your helping hands and prayers
to rescue our religion and faithful Ministers now suspended, from the jaws of
these devouring Act. 20 29.
wolves, and tyrannizing Lordly Prelates (raised from the dungh^^) who make
havoc of them both. O our most pious King Charles as thou have in two several
Before the 39. Articles: and of the dissolution of the Parliament, page 21. 42.
Declarations, protested before God to all thy loving Sub^ects, that thou will
never give way to the licensing or authorizing of any thing, whereby ANY
INNOVATION IN THE LEAST DEGREE may creep into our Church; nor ever connive at
ANY BACKSLIDING TO POPERY; and that it is thy hearts desire to be found worthy
of that title which thou esteemest the most glorious in all thy Crown,
Defender of the faith; to now behold these desperate innovations, purgations,
and Romish practices of thy Prelates, in open affront of these thy
Declarations; and now or never show thy self (as we all hope, believe, and
pray thou will) a Prince more worthy of this glorious Title, than any of thy
royal progenitors, by rooting all Popery, superstition, idolatry, errors,
innovations, out of this Church and and Kingdom, by restoring the preaching,
the Preachers of Gods word and purity of his worship, and Romans 13 4.
taking vengeance on these perfidious Prelates, who have thus gelded thy
fastbook, (and intend to make an Index expurgatorius upon all other ancient
English Writers ere they be reprinted, a thing considerable,) thus openly
abused thy only sister, and her children, now present with thee; oppressed and
grieved thy faithful subjects, dishonored thy God, betrayed thy religion,
increased the plague among thy people, and as much as in them lies, robbed
thee both of thy Gods and peoples loves, and pulled thy Crown off thy Royal
head, to set it on their own traiterous ambitious pates, by exercising all
ecclesiastical power, yea Papal jurisdiction over thy subjects in their own
names and rights alone; and by trampling all thy laws and Subjects liberties
like Cobwebs, thy subjects like Dogs and dirt, under their tyrannical Papal
feet. If thou thus Psalm. 106. 30.
execute judgment on them and ease thy people from their intolerable tyranny,
no doubt this plague shall be ceased, and this fast be pleasing to the Lord;
else he will not accept it, but proceed to plague us more and more. O blessed
Sovereign, that thou did but hear the several cries and outcries of thy
people against these persecuting Prelates in many places, especially in our
Norwich Diocese, where little Pope It signifies both a little King, a Wren,
and likewise a Serpent, called a Basiliske, socalled because like a tyrant he
kills men with his very scent.
Regulus has played such Rex, that he has suspended above 60. of our
sincerest painefullest conformable Ministers, both from their Office and
Benefice, so as many of our Churches (as the like was never since King John's
days) are quite shut up, and Lord have mercy upon us may be written on their
doors: the people cry for the bread of their souls, and their Ministers are
prohibited to give it them; This not only wounds but breaks their hearts, and
makes them amazed. O therefore gracious Sovereign help now, and hear the
petitions, cries, and tears of thy poor people, and hang up these Popelings
for these and other their innumerable oppressions, extortions, innovations and
harms, who suspend, imprison, and ruin others for mere toys and trifles,
yea for defending your royal Prerogative against their Papal usurpations.

This is all the news I shall now impart in this Coranto, the next week
God-willing, you shall hear of Mr. Dade his excommunicating of Ferdinando
Adams, a Churchwarden in our Town, for not blotting out this sentence of
Scripture written on Mr. Wards Church wall over his bawdy theevish Court.
Matthew. 21. 13.
It is written my house shall be called an house of prayer, but ye have made it
a den of thieves; which excommunication is of record in S^archamber; of our
Bishops commanding. 1 Cor 9. 16.
Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel out of Mr. Scots Church; and of the
strange proceedings at Colchester against Mr. Samuel Burrowes for inditing
Parson Necoman for railing in the Communion Table Altarwiso, and causing the
Communicants to come up to the rail to receive, in a new unaccustomed manner,
contrary to the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 2. and his Majesty's Declarations, this
last Michaelmas Sessions: which Indictment the Grand-Iury has found, but his
Majesty yet can get no judgment. In the mean time, I shall conclude my News
with the words of Patricke Adamson Archbishop of St. Andrtwes, in his Patricij
Adamsoni Palinodia p 55.
Public Recantation in the Synod of Fiffe, April 8, 1591. That the office of
a Diocesian Bishop has no authority at all to support it in ths Word of God;
that it is only founded on the politic divise of men; that the primacy of the
Pope or Antichrist sprung from it that it is worthily condemned and that it
has been for 500. years and more the chief original and instrument of
suppressing the preaching of Gods Word in all Kingdoms, as all Ecclesiastical
Historians testify: I therefore shall close up all with the Collect on S.
Matthias day; Almighty God, which in the place of the traitor Acts 1. 20,
Bishop Judas, did choose thy faithful servant Matthias, to be of the number
of the 12, Apostles: Grant that thy Church, being always preserved from false
Apostles, may be ordered and guided by faithful and true Pastors, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. And with the Collect on St. Peter's day; Almighty God,
which by thy Son Jesus Christ has given to thy Apostle St. Peter many
excellent gifts, and commandedst him earnestly to feed thy Flock: make (we
beseech thee) all Bishops and Pastors Whith few Bishops now do.
diligently to preach thy holy Word, and the people obediently to follow the
same, that they may receive the Crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord,

Amen.
From Ipswich November 12. 1636. Thine in the Lord, Matthew White.


