THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S EVILS, AND THE LORDS DELIVERANCES.

By GILBERT PRIMEROSE, Minister of the French Church of London.

PSALM. 129.2. Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have
not prevayled against me.

LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Nathanael Newberry, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star in Pope's Head Alley. Anno 1625.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, RIGHT HONORABLE, AND RIGHT RELIgious Lord, JAMES,
MARQVESS of HAMMILTON, Earl of Arran and Cambridge, Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter: Counselor of the Kings most honorable privy Council,
in both Realms of England and Scotland; Lord Great Steward of his Majesty's
household, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
WHat reading of holy Scripture and of Ecclesiastical stories, what experience
has taught me, of the Righteous man's Evils, and the Lords deliverances; that
I preached to my Church at London in nine Sermons, which in this book I have
dedicated to your Honor, as an acknowledgement of the heroical and Christian
virtues, which shine in your most Noble and Honorable person, and as an homage
due to them; not as having any worthiness and excellency from their author,
whereby he should presume to offer them to such a Lord, in whom all things
excel in worth, and shine in a most eminent degree of excellency.

In Empires, Kingdoms, States, Cities, Families, we read and see the truth of
the Oracle which said to ATTALVS King of Bithinia, THOU AND THY SON, NOT THE
SONS OF THY SON. His Majesty, who now holds the raines of this peaceable and
flourishing kingdom, is the only King known in the world by stories, who can
reckon near two thousand years since his royal Ancestors, of whom he is
lincally descended, wore Crowns and Scepters. In France they think it much,
if a man can prove his Nobility by four Descents. Since three hundred and
odd years that SIR GILBERT HAMMILTON came from England to Scotland, was there
advanced to all titles and degrees of honors, of dignities, of greatness
among the most noble and honorable of the Realm by the HEROES of those days,
and King without peer ROBERT BRVCE, who had known in England the antiquity
of his noble house, and of all men then living, could best judge of his
courage, martial acts, and deserts; and being preferred there to the marriage
of the only Daughter to my Lord Earl of Murray, the Kings Nephew by his
Princely Sister, became the Stock of the illustrious Race of the HAMMILTONS in
Scotland, whereof your Honor is the golden head; how many Descents, how many
generations, may be reckoned?

The fables tell of BELLEROPHON, how after he had done many feats of arms,
not so much by his own wisdom and strength, as by the help of his winged
Horse called PEGASVS, he waxed proud, and attempting with the same wings to
mount up to heaven, was flung to the earth, and brake his leg: whereby they
teach us in a mystical sense, that many, after they have been borne upon the
wings of their Princes favor, and thereby have done good services, conceive
too ambitious and proud hopes, and, as if favor were desert, aspiring to
ascend into heaven, to exalt their Throne above the rest of the stars, and to
be like unto their Maker, are cut down to the ground in an instant, where all
their pomp is laid in a grave of shame and dishonor; as the Scripture
speaks of the King of Babylon, under the name of LVCIFER. In all the ancient
stories hardly shall we find any great man, whose predecessors or himself
have not been stained with the blot of rebellion against their Sovereigns, or
of some negligence of their duty toward them: But your Honors forefathers
had ever their affections so addicted to our Kings, that King JAMES the third,
with the consent of the States, and applause of the whole Realm, thought them
worthy to be rewarded with the marriage of his only and dear Sister, whom he
gave in wedlock to JAMES Lord Hammilton, of whom your Lordship is come by many
lineall successions. This proximitie of blood to our Kings, has ever been to
your Ancesters, and to your own self, a most attractive Adamant, drawing and
tying inseparably your hearts, desires, wills, affections, duties, and services
to their will and desires in all innocence and uprightness, according to Gods
commandment: the practice whereof is the stay of the State, and the maintainer
of peace in the Church and Commonweal; FEAR GOD, AND THE KING; AND MEDDLE
NOT WITH FACTIOVS MEN. So that this may be the Poesy of the Cognizance of your
Honors most ancient and honorable Family, FIDEET OBSEQVIO.

Of this fidelity, of these long, profitable, and acceptable services to our
Kings, continued in your Lordships family from generation to generation, and
most effectually confirmed by your own generous, wise and good carriage in the
Court and in the State, the Kings Majesty is a most glorious witness, and a
most magnificent rewarder: For that affection which his Majesty shows to
your Honor, those Dignities wherewith he has honored you, namely this last
of LORD STEWARD of his royal House, what are they but public testimonies of
the continuation of your good, faithful and well liked services to his
Majesty's Royal person, to our most excellent and hopeful Prince his Royal
and only Son, and to the states of both kingdoms? In the Court you are to
his Majesty that which JOSEPH was to PHARAO King of Egypt, OBADIAH to ACHAB
King of Israel, MORDECAI to AHASVERVS King of Persia, and ELIAKIM, to whom God
gave the key of the house of DAVID, to the good King EZECHIAH, and most like
unto THEODORUS in the Court of VALENS Emperor of the Orient; who being come of
a most ancient and noble stock, and well brought up from the Cradle, was not
inferior to any of the Imperial Court in modesty, wisdom, erudition and
good carriage, ever seemed better than the charges and places whereunto he was
advanced, and was the only man whose tongue was never licentiously unbridled,
never spoke without consideration and foresight, yea was never shut through
fear of danger, or hope of preferment, and therefore was equally loved of
great and small, as your Lp. for the same virtues is much respected and loved
of all states and degrees in both nations: For, by Gods special and rare
blessing, you carry your self in all your demeanor at Court and abroad so
wisely, that I may boldly affirm, that to none, if not to you, does belong
that rare and wonderful praise which Cicero gives to BRUTUS, and Marcellin to
PRETEXTATVS, saying, that they did no thing to please, yet whatsoever they did,
pleased; and that other which all men gave to ANTHEMIVS Governor to the
religious Emperor ARCADIVS, HE SEEMED TO BE WISE, AND SO HE WAS. The Royal
Prophet David says most truly in the twelfth Psalm, that wicked men walk on
every side, when rascals are exalted among the sons of men: Then DAVID
flees, and DOEG triumphs. But innocence is protected, oppression is
repressed, the states flourish, kingdoms prosper, the people have peace; when
generous and worthy men, who hate covetousness, flattery, and envy, who
respect above all worldly things the honor of the King, who have no other end
of their actions but the weal of the State, are nearest to Kings. DARIUS King
of Persia, holding a Pomegranet in his hand, wished, in stead of all treasures,
to have as many ZOPYRES as there were grains in that Apple: showing, that
there is nothing so needful and profitable to Kings as faithful Counselors
and servants of the chief of the Nobility, such as ZOPYRVS was; and yet no
Jewel so rare to be found: For though there be many nobles about Kings, there
be few upon whose fidelity, wisdom and magnanimity Kings may rely.
Therefore blessed is this Realm, wherein so many ZOPYRES, so many of the heads
of the Nobility, are ever near our most wise, religious and righteous Kings
ears: Amongst whom your Honor shines as a radiant Planet among the bright
and glistering stars.

What are generositie, wisdom, faithfulness to the King, love to the native
soil, good and acceptable services to the State, but gorgeous and glittering
sins, if they be severed from true godliness, from faith in our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, from love to his beloved Church, from holiness of life and good
works, acceptable to God? What are Courtiers, what are the Nobles of the Land,
what are Kings themselves, without Christian virtues, but like a certain
people of Asia, which were wont to carry earthen vessels in golden Boxes? What
are all their riches, honors, dignities, pleasures, pastimes, delights, but
trifles but fair vanishing bubbles, which must give place to things more
solid, that bring to true believers an everlasting felicity and joy? For as
the shell of an Egg, howsoever it be white, smoothe, and well formed, must
be broken, that the Chicken may come out, and that, wherefore the shell was
made, appear: So the fashion and show of this world must pass away, that the
incomprehensible estate which God has laid up, and keeps in heaven for his
dear ones, may shine and be made manifest. Therefore where greatness and
godliness, where wordly prerogatives and celestial privileges, where carnal
and spiritual nobility, faith in Christ, and faithfulness to the King, love
to the State, and charity to the Church, a vehement passion for the
commonweal and true zeal to God, are joined and married together, as they are
in your Honors person; every man that sees them is bound to acknowledge, to
admire, and to praise them, and to render all honor and serviceable duties to
those whom God has so mercifully and wonderfully honored.

This then is the cause of the Dedication of these my Sermons to your Honor.
For who shall blame me, if so far as in me is, I honor with my Pen a Lord,
whom God has sorichly honored with his Gifts? And who shall deny, but that
Sermons of the righteous man's evils, and of the Lords deliverances, may, yea
should be dedicated to a Lord, who though living in the midst of worldly
contentments, eats the Paschall Lamb, not only with unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth, but also with the bitter herbs of godly sorrow, ever
sighing, ever sobbing before God for the affliction of Joseph, ever praying,
ever crying to heaven for the deliverance and restoration of Jerusalem lapping
of the glib-sliding pleasures of this transitory and fugitive life, as GEDEONS
soldiers lapped of the running waters, and tasting them with thanksgiving as
temporal gifts of God, but drinking great draughts of tears flowing from the
eyes of spiritual sadness, ever expecting with a most firm hope the
accomplishment of the Prophecies by the ruin of Babylon, and deliverance of
the Church; ever hastening and setting forward that necessary and glorious
work, by courageous and faithful counsels, and all other means lawful and
possible.

I cannot omit that which touches my self: For being banished from France for
the Gospel of Christ, and for my nations sake, and coming to his Majesty's
Court, where like unto ENDIMION after his long sleep, I saw nothing but new
faces, and seemed to my self as a man fallen out of the Clouds; your Honor
embraced me with such kindness and humanity, and recommended me to his
Majesty with such affection, that I should be justly condemned of ingratitude,
if I did ever forget it.

Let that foul vice go and bury it self in the gulf of hell where it was
bred; I had rather be esteemed clownish and homebred, by rendering to your
Honor, in these unpolished sheets, such thanks as I can, than called
unthankefull by neglecting of my duty. The poor woman with her mite, was as
acceptable to God, as the rich men with their rich gifts, because she gave
what she had with a free heart: And great Lords receive of their Vassals
strawes, and trifles for homage of great tenements. I doubt not but this small
and unworthy hommage shall find in your most worthy Lordship, the like
acceptance; as coming from one, who with a true heart, poures out his prayers
to God for the increasing of all the blessings of this life, and of the life to
come, upon your most honorable Person, and illustrious Family, and who is

Your Honors most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate Servant,
Gilbert Primerose.

THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S EVILS. AND THE LORDS DELIVERANCES.
THE FIRST SERMON. Of Evils incident to man, as he is man; and of the Righteous
man.
PSALM. 34. VER. 19. Many are the evils of the righteous: but the LORD
delivers him out of them all.


I. ALl men are subject to many evils:

II. Kings, Princes, great men,

III. As well as other men.

IV. David ascribes to the righteous man mo evils than to other men.

V. If the righteous man be examined according to the rules of the Law, there
is none righteous.

VI. If in Gods merciful acceptance of the will for the deed, all true
Christians are righteous.

VII. Description of the righteous, negatively and affirmatively.

VIII. He that is righteous and holy, may call himself so:

IX. Although hypocrites and wicked men claim that name to themselves.

X. The true characters of wicked men.

XI. Their best works are great sins.

XII. The Church is the Congregation of righteous men, and is assaulted with
many evils.

XIII. Exhortation to righteousness.

I IF we take but a slight view of man, who in his own pride and loftiness of
mind, has taken to himself the glorious title of the Little world, if we
consider him in his person and in his state; we shall find, that he is but a
cage of rottenness, a sink of filth, and a world of wretchedness.

The seed whereof he comes, is a stinking excrement; and the ground wherein he
is sown, is a quagmire of dirt, a sink of uncleanenesse, a strait and dark
pit of loathsome and pestilent putrefaction, from whence he does not escape,
but is thrust out as a noisome and troublesome guest, who neither can be kept
longer, nor set at liberty without unspeakeable torments, both to the mother
who has conceived, borne and nourished him so long in her womb; and to
himself, and oftentimes without death to both.

When he is thus cast forth with sorrow and pains, if he had the use of
understanding, to know the miseries whereunto he is borne; and of speech, to
utter what he thinks of them, he would make his moan, with Jeremy, Ierem.
20. verse. 18.
That he came forth out of the womb, to see labor and sorrow: and, Job 3.
ver. 2.
cursing the day wherein he was borne, would wish, with Job, Job 10. ver. 19.
to have been carried from the womb to the grave. For he does no sooner open
his nostrils, to breathe and suck up the refreshing moisture of the air, but
he is encountered and beset on all sides with unavoidable dangers: he is borne
in tears, he lives in misery, and dies in grief: hunger and thirst, cold
and heat, nakedness and weakness, labor and weariness, greasiness and
sweat, waking and sleeping, fevers and consumptions are the first deputies,
who at his first entry into the world go meet and welcome him, to make the
first solemnities of this palace of vanity and mourning; wherein he has
seant set the first foot, when ignorance and forgetfulness, vain hope and
trembling fear, senslesnesse and despair, joy and sadness, despite and
cholor, burning lust and cold disdain, a thousand combersome passions, ten
thousand pricking cares, troop together, and join themselves to the first
band, to conduct and lead him by certain journies and stations, incht to some
longer, to some shorter, to the king of terrors, to the manor of darkness,
to the land of the shadow of death, where Job 17.14.
he shall say to the grave, Thou art my father: and to the worm, Thou art my
mother, and my sister.

II. Whom can you name to me, that has spent the short days of this life, and
has not walked upon the briars, wherewith it is strewed; nor felt their pricks?
Kings are the first amongst men; but they are men. And ye shall sooner find
the sea without billows, the air without moving, the bramble without
prickles, than man without evils: for what is man's life but an Ocean of
miseries, wherein there is no drop of true delight and happiness?

When ye cast your eyes upon Kings and Princes, heed not the precious Crown
which glittereth upon their heads, nor the shining Purple which covers their
nakedness, nor the legionaries and squadrons of soldiers which guard them,
nor the Nobility which hedgeth them on all sides, nor the glory of their
servants, nor the magnificence of their fare, nor the excellency of their
palaces, nor the gorgeous pomp of their Court. Pierce further in, thrust your
eyes within the center of their hearts; consider their deeds and carriage, and
you shall see at one sight a head crowned with gold, and a heart scorched with
grief: The flower of Purple, the brightness of Scarlet, the glistering
plate-laces of Gold, the twinkling lewels, dazeling the eyes of the beholders;
and pensiveness, blacking the soul of him that bears them: Men environed
with guards without, and besieged with fears and terrors within, ever laying
some new plot, and many times crossed in their designs; notwithstanding their
great power, not able to do all that they would, and often constrained to do
what they would not; making a fair show to those whom they hate, mistrusting
those in whom they must needs trust; suspecting now their wives, now their
children, fearing all those that fear them, TIBERIUS, Timeo incustoditos
aditus, timeo and ipsos cufiodes.
dreading all entries which are not kept, yea, and dreading also their own
keepers; passing the days in painful labors, in trouble of mind, in many
dangers between shameless flatterers, crafty calumniators, and aposted
assasms; and seeking, in the darkness of the night, the rest which a
remorsefull remembrance of things past, a gnawing fear of things to come, and
a thousand other perplexities pull away violently from their eyelids. Pro.
14.13.
Even in laughter their heart is sorrowful: and the end of their mirth is
heaviness. They drink Wormwood in a cup of Gold; the Sugar of their delights
is embittered with the Gall of discontent, and when they glut themselves with
voluptuous pleasures, and swallow down the most rare and costly dainties, as
Behemoth draws up Jordan into his throat, either fear death, as if they had
the sharp point of a naked sword hanging by a hair above their heads; or long
for it, to make a doleful end of the huge heap of their manifold and woeful
miseries, which extract from them now and then a vehement disdain of their
royal Robes, with this true exclamation, O nobilem magis quam felicem pannum,
etc.
O cloth more glorious than happy! the lowziest beggar of the country would
not stoop downward to lift thee from the ground, if he knew with how many
cares, frights, and vexations of spirit thou art lyned.

All the Tragedies, though fabulously written, are made of the true miseries
and strange calamities of Kings, Princes, and other great men of the world.
Run through the stories of Heathen men: of so many Kings, how few shall ye
find, whom a dry and peaceable death has sent to the grave, where now the
worm feeds sweetly on them! In the Scriptures ye see Saul, possessed with
the Devil, murdering the Lords Priests, smiting with the edge of the sword the
whole City of Nob, men and women, children and sucklings, Oxen, Asses and
Sheep, seeking to kill his own son and heir, and finally imbruing his
unmercifull and pitiless hands with his own blood. There ye see Ishbosheth
slain by his own Captains, in whom he had special affiance. There ye see
the good and godly King David no sooner unpestered of one war, but he is
entangled into another: ye see him overwhelmed with domestical calamities,
constrained to behold and suffer the incests, parricides, rebellions revolts of
his own children, and to be upon his guard against them who should have
guarded him. There ye see Solomon, the wisest, but not the best of the sons
of men, after he had taken a deep draught in the crystaline cup of worldly
prosperities, and given his heart to seek and search out by wise-dome all
things that are done under heaven, upbraiding them all with this true saying;
Eccles. 1.14.
Behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. The life of all the Kings of
luda was nothing else but as a web woven; as a baudrick interlaced with evils:
what was the state of the Kings of Israel, but an hideous spectacle of most
horrible calamities? Neither shall ye find any amongst the Politicians and
Statesmen, living amongst the wearisome turmoile of imploiments, who once in
his life finds not whereupon to sing to his perplexed soul Salomons
complaint, which Gilimer the last King of the Vandales harped with a mourning
and sorrow-full tune, to the Emperor Justinian, whose prisoner he then was,
Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of vanities, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

III. If such be the condition of Kings, of Princes, of Courtiers, of Statesmen
who have their portion in this life, and seem to be in a safe harbor against
all kinds of storms, and in all weathers; who is able to relate all the
troubles which disquiet the minds of other men, and steep the few drams of
worldly comforts, which they taste but seldom in their lives, with a quintall
of gall? One bewaileth the death of his only son: another curses the day
wherein he was made the father of a man child: this man complains of his
wives disloyalty: that man conveyeth his wife to the sepulcher, with sadness
and tears. He who lived in ease, is ashamed to see himself stripped of all that
he had; and he who spoiled him, is amazed when he is also spoiled by another
stronger than himself. One amongst an hundred, mourns for the death of his
friend, who was to him more faithful and steadable than a brother; but many
fret and are much moved, when they see their familiar friends, in whom they
trusted, and in whose bosom they did lay all their secrets, lift up their
heels against them.

To be short, there is no tongue that can fully ex press all the evils that
are incident to man in his person and state; neither is there any man, who
feels not, with pain, the portion of those evils which is shared unto him.
As they that sail in shallow waters, amongst rocks and shelves of sand, are
not void of danger and of fear; so they that hoyse up sails amongst the
waves and surges of the tempestuous sea of this life, are not freed from
annoyes and discontentments: all their pleasures are like the Locusts, whereof
mention is made in the Revelation, which Revel. 9* 8, 10.
had hair as the hair of women, to entice with goodly shows; and tails like
unto Scorpions, to sting with mortal discontent. They shall leave off to be
mortal men, when evil shall leave off to pursue them: and tears shall not be
wipt from their eyes, until death has closed their eye lids; Job 5.7.
For man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks rise up to fly, and Psalm. 90.10.
the strength of his days is labor and sorrow.

IV. But amongst and above all men, many are the evils of the righteous man, as
David said when he was forced, through fear, 1. Sam. 21.13.
to change his behavior before Abimelech King of Gath, and faining himself
mad, escaped his enemies indignation, for he fears not to call himself
righteous: and calling to memory the great number of evils, which he had
endured from the first day of his anointing till then, he pronounces, that
many are the evils of the righteous. Which he speaks so of himself, that he
extends it to all those who can claim the title of righteous men to
themselves. And because this saying is confirmed by the experience of all ages,
and therefore it may seem very strange, that a righteous man should be so
storm-beaten with afflictions, he mitigateth the bitterness of this averred
sentence, with the sweetness of this no less experimented conclusion; But the
Lord delivers him out of them all.

So the Text takes you by the hand, and points out to you, first, a
righteous man, and his manifold afflictions; secondly, the LORD and his
deliveries: whereunto if ye add a question, which is employed in the first
part, why the LORD permits the righteous man to be so roughly used; ye shall
have in these parts the matter of sundry Sermons: the first, of the righteous
man, and of the characters whereby he is known. The second and third, of the
evils wherewith the righteous man is on all sides thunder-stricken. The fourth
and fifth, of the causes wherefore Almighty GOD, and his loving father,
suffers him to be pushed and tossed to and fro with so many evils. The rest
shall be of the Lords deliverances. Let us then begin at the first part; and
our beginning and help be in the Name of the Lord, who has made heaven and
earth. Amen.

V. If ye define and describe exactly the righteous man, by the rules of the
Law, which ascribes this glorious and most excellent title to those only,
whose persons are (from the womb) without spot, whose actions are without
sin, and in whose lives Gods all-seeing eyes can perceive no blemish; let
Papists say what they will, we will truly say with David in the Old Testament,
Psalm 14.10.
There is none that does good, no not one: and with S. Paul in the New
Testament, Romans 3.10.
There is none righteous, no not one.

For if Papists speak of such men as are by S. Jude called Jude ver. 19.
sensual, not having the spirit, and say, That they may keep the Law of God,
if they will: the holy and true Apostle gives them the lie, saying in the New
Testament, that 1. Cor. 2.14.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Now if he cannot know them, what ability can he have to do them?
And therefore Eliphaz says of such a man, in the Old Testament, that Job 15.16.
he is abominable and filthy, drinking iniquity like water: for he is flesh, he
is nothing but flesh, nothing but corruption and sin. and Romans 8.7.
the affection of the flesh, is enmity against God: for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be. If then we fit to these carnal men, the
words which Jeremy spoke to his auditors; asking of them, Ier. 13.23.
r Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may you
also do good, that are accustomed to do evil; we shall convert them to their
own use: because that Tit. 1.15.
being infidels, their mind and conscience is defiled, and, Romans 8.5.
being after the flesh, they mind the things of the flesh,

If they speak of those of whom the Apostle says, that they are after the
spirit, and mind the things of the spirit, and affirm of them, that if they
would, they might keep the law; seeing they keep it not, and that the holiest
man that ever was, could not say truly, Pro. 20.9
I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin: then according to this
saying, good men are ill men, honest men are knaves, upright men are malicious
men: for Iam. 4.17.
to him that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. And
never did any, but a despitefull wicked man, say, I might do good if I would;
but I will not do it: whereas much otherwise, the godly and honest hearted man
says, Romans 7.18, 19.
The will is present with me: but how to perform that which is good, I find
not. For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not,
that I do. Whereof the Apostle renders this reason, writing to the
Galathians; Gal. 5.17.
for the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh:
and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things
that ye would. teaching most clearly, that the sins of the spiritual man
come from his weakness, and not from his will: otherwise they should be
sins of malice, and not of infirmity. I conclude then, that if man's
righteousness be strictly examined in the balance of the Law, there never was,
and Eccles. 7.20.
there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins not, saving
our Lord Jesus Christ, who through the prerogative of his immaculate
conception, by the wonderful operation of the holy Spirit, was Romans 8.3.
in the likeness of sinful flesh, Heb. 7.26.
holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners: and for that cause is
called Act. 3.14.
the Righteous; that title belonging only to him in that respect. 1. Ioh. 2.1.


VI. But what godly men cannot claim to themselves in the rigorous strictness
of the Law, that they find in Gods merciful acceptance, and in the
modification of his blessed Gospel, wherein he entitleth his beloved children,
with this honorable name of Righteous men: judging of them, not by the
imperfect perfection of their righteousnesses, Esa. 64.6.
which are as filthy rags; but by their affection and earnest endeavor to be
such as they should, and which they strive with might and maine to be, Phil.
3.7, 13, 14.
forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things
which are before, and so pressing toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. For God, who shows himself in the Law
clothed with the majestuous and inexorable severitie of a Judge; represents
himself in the Gospel as a Father, arrayed with meekness and mercy:
regarding the willingness of his children, rather than any perfection which
may besought, but shall not be found in their obedidience, so long as they are
in the way to their home.

For in the faithful and true Christian, there are two men: Ephesians. 4.22, 24.
The old man, which we carry with us from our mothers womb, when we are first
borne; and the new man, which is given to us when we are borne again. That
man is Satan's work, and the bitter fruit of the rebellion of the first Adam.
This man is the work of Gods Spirit, and the sweet fruit of the obedience of
the second Adam. That man is corrupt by deceitful lusts, and therefore is ever
busied in drawing us away from goodness, and entising us to evil. This man is
created after God in righteousness and true holiness, and is ever thrusting
us forward from evil to good. That man is strong and mighty: This man is
feeble, and withstandeth with great difficulty. That man, though very
powerful and hard to be overcome, waxes old and decays from day to day,
until he be altogether destroyed: This man increases every day in might and
vigor; and like the people of Israel, when they were upon their journey,
ascending to appear before God in Sion, goes Psalm. 84.7.
from strength to strength, till he come Ephesians. 4.13.
unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
So that man is at the last subdued, overthrown and killed by this man, as the
monstrous Giant Goliath was by little David. That man, where he reigns,
brings forth for fruit Romans 6.21, 22.
shame, and his end is death: This man has his fruit in holiness, and his end
is everlasting life.

From hence it is, that God, when he is to speak and make us know what account
he makes of his servants, considers them not according unto those relickes
of the old man, whose strength is weakened, and whose life decays and dies
every day, to call them Sinners and wicked ones: but for his Phil. 1.6.
own good works sake, which he has begun in them, and will perform until
the day of Jesus Christ, calls them Saints, Righteous, Perfect. For the
Devils work in us, is not so considerable to defame us publicly with the
disgraceful name of Sinners and wicked men, as Gods work is to grace us with
the honorable title of Saints and Righteous men: namely, seeing the Lord
maintains, sets forward, and performs his own good work, and at length
destroys Satan's work in us, as I have said. What wonder then if he qualifieth
us with titles of honor, according as we are already, and shall be hereafter
for ever and ever, through his power and grace; and not according as Satan has
made us, and as we shall not be always, and for evermore? For this cause it
is written, that Numb. 23.21.
He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in
Israel. Not that there is none, but because Mich. 7.18
he pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant if his
heritage; covering it with the precious robe of the righteousness of his dear
Son, Col. 1.22.
in whom he has made us holy, unblameable, unreproveable, and Coloss. 2.10.
complete in his own fight: And therefore righteous and perfect in Christ, of
unrighteous and uncomplete in our selves.

VII. The man whom God calls righteous in this sense, is pourtrayed by the
holy Spirit, as well negatively as affirmatively. David says of him
negatively, that Psalm. 1.1.
he walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of
sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful, and, Psalm. 119 3.
does no iniquity. S. John says, that 1. Ioh. 3.6, 9.
be sins not, or, as he explaineth himself, does not commit sin, that is
to say, he sins not with pleasure and content. Whereof the holy Apostle
renders two reasons: for the first he says, that he that commits sin, is
of the Devil; he is Satan's bond slave, for the Devil sins from the
beginning: he has ever been, is, and shall be busied in ill doing.

Therefore whosoever sins as he does, is his, and not Gods. But the
righteous man is delivered out of his claws, through our Lord Jesus Christ the
Son of God, Verse. 8.
who for this purpose was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil. His second reason is this; Verse. 9.
Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin: for his seed, the seed of
his predestination and of his Spirit remains in him: and he cannot sin,
because he is borne of God. Bern. de natu^a and digai. tat. amo^. c. 6.
Piccatum patitur potius quam facit, quiex Deo nature est.
Bernard says, That he rather suffers sin, than commits it: According
to that saying of the Apostle; Romans 7.20.
If I do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me. Neither can he persevere and abide in sin, because the law of
his mind, warring against the law of his members, finally overmastereth in him
the law of sin. And therefore all his sin come either from ignorance, or
from infirmity, and lie so heavy upon his wearied soul that he cannot choofe
but desire death to be freed of them; crying, as the Apostle did in the like
case, Romans 7.24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

David describes this man affirmatively, by all his inward and outward parts.
By his heart; Psalm. 1.2.
His delight is in the Law of the LORD, and in his Law does he meditate day and
night. By his tongue; Psalm. 119.13, 46.
He declares with his lips all the judgments of his mouth: he speaks of his
testimonies before Kings, and is not ashamed. By his hands; Psalm. 26.6.
He washes his hands in innocence, Psalm. 37.21.
he shows mercy, and gives. By his feet; Psalm. 119.32.
He runs the way of Gods commandments, etc.

Therefore his Righteousness is not only a religious abstinence, and
refraining from evil; but also a careful and conscionabe employment in all
things which are good: for 1. Ioh. 3.7.
he that does righteousness, is righteous. As Job was Job 1.8.
a perfect and an upright man, fearing God, and eschuing evil: and such as
Zacharias and Elizabeth were, to whom the Scripture bears witness, that Luke
1.6.
they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord blameless.

VIII. David challenges and takes upon him this title of a Righteous man:
for, as I have said, he speaks not only of others; but also and principally
of himself. He spoke thus truly, and he spoke thus inspired by the Holy
Ghost: Then this speech was no bragging; for the Spirit of God is neither liar
nor boaster. When Hezekiah brayed unto the LORD, that Isa. 38.3.
he would remember how he had walked before him in truth, and with a perfect
heart: shall we say, that like the Peacock (who, in the height of his pride,
covers himself all over with his taste) he took pleasure to display his
righteousness before God, and to glass himself vain-gloriously in his own
works, as the Luke 18.12.
Pharisee gloried in his ordinary fasting, and liberal giving of tithes of all
that he possessed?

Surely Papists, when they nickname us with their own titles of pride and
presumption, because we call our selves Righteous men, will not stand (me
thinks) to print the same stamp upon these godly men's foreheads: and seeing,
in their opinion, it is great presumption and high pride to any man living, to
call himself a Righteous and holy man; they must needs have a very bad conceit
of themselves, and confess that they are unrighteous, unholy, and wicked men.
whereupon they may take time to advise.

As for us, we may learn by this example of David, and many mo which are to
be found in the Scripture, that August. de verb. Domini, Sermon. 28. Non ergohic
arrogantia est, sed fides: predicare quod acceperis, non est superbia, sed
devotio.
to preach what thou have received, is not arrogance, but faith: is not pride,
but devotion; as Augustine says wisely: this caveat being kept, That thou seek
not in it thy owneglory, as the Pharisee did; but the glory of I am. 1.17.
the father of lights, of whom comes from above every good and perfect gift,
as David, and Hezekiah did, and as the holy Apostles did, when they feared not
to say, that 2. Cor. 5.14.
the love of Christ constrained them: and to speak many good things of
themselves, not through loftiness of mind, that they might be praised; but
through free and true humility, that the gift of Christ might be known of all
men, and thanks rendered to him: as Ambrose observes well upon that place. If
we were taught to glory in the perfection of our works, merits, and
superogations, as Papists are, then every one should repulse that false
doctrine of pride, and say with Ambrose, Ambros. de Iacobo, and vua b^a^a. lib.
1. cap. 6.
I have no good works wherein I should glory: I have no thing whereof I may
brag, and therefore I will glory in Christ: I will not glory because I am
righteous; but I will glory because I am redeemed: I will glory, not because I
am void of sin, but because my sin are forgiven me: I will not glory
because any man has been profitable to me, or I to any man, but because
Christ is an Advocate with the Father for me, but because the blood of Christ
was shed for me. But when we are taught to confess, that when we were like
wandering sheep, the Lord sought us: when we were lost, he did find us: when we
were sick, he healed us: when we were stinking and filthy, he made us clean:
when we were captives, he delivered us: when we were sold under sin, he
redeemed us: when we were dead, he gave us life: when were unrighteous and
prone to all evil, he made us righteous, and inclined our hearts to his
service: when we were the Devils Stews, he made us his own Temple: when we
were damned, he saved us: If any say that such teachers set us upon the pinnacle
of pride, and lead us not into the Temple of humility; they must confess
that they never had a lively feeling of any saving grace of God in themselves,
or that they have never learned what it is to give thanks unto God: for how
shall I give thanks to God for those gifts, which through humility, as they
say, I must deny to have received?

If we should say, that the Sun shines at midday; though it be most true,
Papists will not believe it, except we bring some old Father with us, to
witness that it is so. Let them therefore heed the speech of August. in Psalm.
85.2.
S. Augustine, who explaining this prayer of David in the beginning of the 85.
Psalm, which in Hebrew and in our translation, is the 86. Preserve my soul,
because I am holy: after that he has shown, that it is true in Christ, who
forgiveth all sins, and never committed any; asks, Dare I also say, For I
am holy? answers thus: If holy as sanctifying, Peccatoru^ omnium non
commissor, sed demissor.
and not having need of any to sanctify me, I am a proud man and a liar: But
if holy, as being sanctified (i. made holy) according to that which is written,
1. Pet. 1. Be ye holy, for I am holy. Let also the body of Christ, is a let the
man that cries from the ends of the earth, say with his head and under his
head, I am holy: for he has received the grace of holiness, the grace of
baptism, and of forgiveness of sin. And such were some of you, says the
Apostle, 1. Cor. 6. reckoning many fins, light and heavy, usual and horrible:
And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified. If then he
say that they are sanctified, let every believer say, I am holy. This is not
pride of one that is haughty, Non est ista superb^^^^^^, sed confessio non
ingrat^.
but a confession of one that is not unthankefull: for if thou say that thou
art holy of thy self; thou art proud: Again, believing in Christ, and being
a member of Christ, if thou say not that thou art holy, thou art unthankefull.
For the Apostle reproving pride, says not, Thou have not, but he says, 1.
Cor. 4. What have thou that thou did not receive? Thou wast not reproved, for
saying that thou had that which thou had not, but because thou would
have of thy self that which thou had: yea acknowledge both that thou had,
and that thou have nothing of thy self, to the end that thou be neither proud
nor unthankefull. Dic Deo tuoe Sanctus sum, quia sanctifieastime: quia accepi,
non quia habu^: quia in dedist, non quia ego meru^.
Say to thy God, I am holy, because thou have sanctified me: because I have
received it not, because I had it: because thou have given it, not because I
have deserved it. For on the other part, thou beginnest to offer an injury to
our Lord Jesus Christ himself: For if all Christians, and believers, and all
that are baptized in him have put him on, as the Apostle says, Gal. 3. As many
of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: if they be made
members of his body, and say that they are not holy, they offer a wrong to the
head it self, whose members are holy. Look now where thou art, and take
dignity from thy head. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are ye light
in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. He says, Ye were sometimes darkness: but have ye
remained darkness? He that enlightneth, is he come, that ye should remain
darkness, or that ye should be light in him? Let therefore every Christian
say, yea let the whole body of Christ say, Let him that suffers tribulations,
diverse tentations, and innumerable scandals, cry and say, Preserve my soul,
because I am holy.

IX. It is no matter what many men, which are not righteous, think and speak
of themselves: every fool is a wise man in his own eyes. Many beggars have
kings hearts, and will brag much of their antiquity, and worthiness of
their kindred, and of the glory of their riches. At Athens there was a certain
man, called Athenae. lib. 12.
Thrasylaus, who (detained with a pleasant madness) deemed that all the ships
which arrived there, were his; and in this same town there is a fool, who
thinks verily that he is King of great Britanne: If a fool think that he is
wise, shall a wise man call himself a fool? If a beggar say that he is rich,
shall a rich man say of himself that he is poor? If a man, troubled in his
hypochondres, imagines that he is King of this Island, shall the King mistake
himself, and put in question whether he be King or no? If an hypocrite or a
wicked man crack much of his own righteousness, shall he whom God has
mercifully clothed with this wedding garment, deny what he has received, and
say to his benefactor who has bought him, Thou art not my father?

X. We must not weigh such men in the deceiving weights of their own
imaginations, but take the true balances of Gods word, and weigh them therein.
There you shall read of them, that which was said to Belschatsar King of
Babylon: Dan. 5.27.
Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting. There you shall find
them set out in very dark, smoakie, and hellish colors, both in their inside
and outside. Psalm 59.
Their inward part is very wickedness. There is no faithfulness in their
mouth: their throat is an open sepulcher, they flatter with their tongue: 2
Pet. 2.14.
Their eyes are full of adultery: Ier. 5 8.
They are as fed horses, when they rise in the morning; every one neigheth
after his neighbors wife: Psalm. 144.8.
Their right hand is a right hand of falsehood: Esa. 59.7, 8.
Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood: Their
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their paths:
The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their goings. With
all this, having in themselves Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19.
a root bearing gall and wormwood, they add drunkenness to thirst, hardness
of heart and contempt of God, to sin. Job 21.14, 15.
They say unto God, Depart from us: for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways: What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should
we have, if we pray unto him? The cause of all is, Psalm. 36.1, 2, 3, 4.
The transgression of the wicked says within my heart, There is no fear of
God before his eyes. For he flattereth himself in his own eyes, when his
iniquity is found to be hated. The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit:
he has left off to be wise, and to do good. He devises mischief upon his
bed, he sets himself in a way that is not good, he abhors not evil. For
this cause, such men are called Psalm. 14.4.
workers of iniquity; God judging of them, and qualifying them, not according
to the ill which they do, but according to the ill which they are willing to
do. For as righteous men do not the good which they would do, and do the
evil which they would not do: so they contrariwise do often the good which
they would not do, and do not all the evil which they would do.

XI. For being servile and base minded, often thorough a slavish fear of
punishment, they abstain from evil, and now and then through a mercenary hope
of reward, they do some good; like unto the Scribes and Pharisees, whom Christ
cursed with many woes for their manifold sins: and namely, because Matt.
23.25.
they made clean the outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they
were full of extortion and excess. Such men's works, which have a goodly show,
what are they else, but, as one of the ancient Doctors of the Latin Church
called them, Splendida peccata.
Glorious and glistering sins? Therefore Christ said to his Disciples, Mat.
5.20.
that except their righteousness should exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no case enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. Nevertheless, both hypocrites, who abstain from ill-doing through
fear, and Matt. 23.5.
do all their works to be seen of men; having a 2. Tim. 3.5.
show of godliness, but denying the power thereof: and profane men, who make
no scruple of ill-doing, live in prosperity, and Psalm. 10.3.
boast of their hearts desire. But,

Many are the Evils of the Righteous.

XII. What is the Church of God, but the Congregation of righteous men? Wicked
men are in the Church, but they are not of the Church: as Lice, Fleas, Worms
are in the body, and are engendered of the corruption thereof, but are no part
of the body: therefore the Church is called Deu. 33.5.
IESURUN, that is, the Righteous, or the Upright, when it is said of Moses,
that he was a king in Iesurun. i. amongst the upright. Ier. 8.22.
Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? If there be none
there, where shall ye seek them? If there be no righteous men in the Church,
where shall ye find them? It is true, that it may be often excepted against
the Church, considered by great and in the multitude, that Deuteronomy. 32.15.
IESURUN, the upright waxed fat and kicked; that when he was grown big, fat,
and thick, he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of
his salvation: Matt. 20.15.
for many be called, but few be chosen. And these which are chosen, have their
own moles and blemishes: they are Isa. 48.8.
all transgressors from the womb. But if they be compared with other men,
they are terrestrial Angels, and celestial men, as Chrysostom called Paul:
And we may say in that respect with the Prophet Habakkuk, that Habak. 1.13.
the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he.

Notwithstanding that, the congregation of righteous men, the Church of God,
the dear spouse of our Lord Jesus Christ, is so vexed and turmoiled with
evils, that her God and husband names her by them, as if they were her
christened name; calling upon her, and saying. Esa. 54.11.
Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted: So that not only
this or that righteous man, but the whole company of the righteous, if they
were to make choice of a Liverie, might take for their device the Gules or red
color; or, as we use here in England, the red Cross, which is the right
badge whereby Christ will have his followers to be known, saying unto them, and
of them, Matt. 16.24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross,
and follow me. And if they were to seek a word to their device, amongst
thousands which may be found, they shall find none fitter, or at least truer
than this, Many are the afflictions of the Righteous.

XIII. What then? were it not better to send a bill of divorce to
righteousness, and bid it farewell, that we may be eased of these many evils?
for to the righteous the Lord has said, Ioh. 16.20.
Ye shall weep and lament: but of the wicked he says, The world shall
rejoice. Is not rejoicing better than weeping? Is it not better to feast with
Herod, and to dance with Herodias daughter, than to fast, to lie in prison, and
to lose the head for righteousness sake, with John Baptist? The world does so,
because the world judges so.

But ye, welbeloved, know, both by your fathers and your own experience, that
Psalm. 58.11.
verily there is fruit for the righteous: he has his reward within himself, a
full pleasure and delight in the peace of an upright conscience, Pro. 15.15.
which is a continual feast: he lives in this present World, Tit. 2.12.
godly toward God; who is the most excellent object that his mind can choose,
and most worthy to be loved, praised, and served in heart, words and deeds:
Righteously toward his neighbor, who is his own flesh, and to the purchasing
of whose good he is bound by the bands of nature, and inward suggestion of his
own conscience: Soberly in his own person, to whom he owes a decent and
respectuous care, that he never do any thing misbecoming a man, unbeseeming a
Christian, and unworthy of the rank wherein God has placed him. For whom
shall he not neglect, if he neglect his own honesty? and whom shall he
respect, if he respect not his own honor? Living so, he has 1. Tim. 6.6.
godliness with contentment, which is great gain: for Esa. 32.17.
the work of righteousness, shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness,
quietness and assurance for ever. But Esa. 57.21.
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God.

And in the end of the world, when the Lord Jesus shall come Mat. 3.12.
with his Fan in his hand, and thoroughly purge his floor, then he will
gather his Wheat into the Garner; but will burn up the chafe with
unquenchable fire. Matt. 25.32. etc.
Then, in his most righteous judgment, he will sunder the good from the lewd,
the upright from the froward, the righteous from the wicked. Then he shall set
the righteous on his right hand, and the wicked on the left. Then, then, by the
power of the unchangeable sentence of his most righteous mouth, all the wicked
shall depart from him, into everlasting fire; and all the righteous shall go
into eternal life: The wicked to burn eternally with the Devil; the
righteous to reign for ever and ever with their Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Therefore Hos. 10.12.
sow to your selves in righteousness, and ye shall reap in mercy,
contentment, peace, joy, eternal life, through the merits of our Lord Jesus
Christ; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all power, honor and
glory world without end. Amen.

SERMON II, Of the many evils of the Righteous man.
PSALM. XXXIV.XIX. Many are the Evils of the Righteous.


1. THe Righteous man has the evils of sin, and of punishment.

2 The evil of sin is worse than the evil of punishment.

3 The righteous man has fewer sins, and less sinful than the wicked man;
yet he has mo Evils of punishment.

4 He is slandered of heresy and blasphemy against God, whereof there are many
examples in the ancient Church,

5 And in ours.

6 He is also slandered of rebellion against the high powers, and of all the
evils that are in the world. So it was:

7 So it is.

8 Hence all kind of Evils come upon him:

9 Whereof Job is a very clear example.

10 Under the Old Testament the faithful were tried by loss of goods,

11 By many afflictions in their bodies,

12 And by shameful reproaches.

13 The Christians also have been tried after the same manner, with loss of
goods,

14 And of their lives:

15 Namely, under ten heavy persecutions.

16 Great cruelties practiced against the Reformed Churches of Germany and of
France.

17 Exhortation to pray for the peace of the Church.

1. THe Righteous man's Evils are of two kinds: The evils which he does, the
evils which he suffers. In the Schools we call them Malum culpae, malum
poenae.
the Evils of offense, and the Evils of punishment: Those are sins. These
are the pain inflicted for sin. One of the most righteous men that ever was,
said of himself, and of all his fellows, 1. Ioh. 1.8.
If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us. Neither was there ever any of the most holy and perfect, who was ashamed
to beg of God, to cry to heaven for forgiveness of his sins; and who did
not esteem that Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 26. Ipsa iustitia nostra,
qua^vis ve^a sit propter ve^i boni finem ad quam refectur, tamen tanta est in
hac vita, ut potius peccatorum remis. sione constet, quam perfectione virtutum.
his righteousness consisted rather in the forgiveness of his sins, than in
the perfection of his virtues. For all the Saints which have been before us,
had; all the Saints which are in the world, have; and all those who shall come
after us, shall have in themselves the evil of sin: what marvel then if all
had, if all have, torum remissione constet, quam perfectione virtutum.
if all shall have also the evil of pain? Where the cause is present and
working, no wonder if the effect follow hard, and tread it on the heels. The
evil of sin is in all, why then should not the evil of pain be in all?

2 Sin is morally evil: Punishment is but naturally evil. Sin is an
offense to God: the punishment of sin is an hurt and grief to man. What is
man, but a worm? what is the son of man, but a little worm? what then are all
the evils which all men suffer? what is death it self? Romans 6.23.
death, which is the wages of sin; death, which is the last evil, wherein
all the evils that are incident to man, do meet and end? what is the
damnation of all Angels, and all men, compared to the least offense given unto
the infinite Majesty of Almighty God? Not so much as a drop of water, matched
with the great and huge Ocean. Sin is the destruction of the well-being of
man, which consists in his union with God, through the conformity of his
will with the will of God. The punishment of his sin is but the destruction
of his being, consisting in the union of his body with his soul. He that
heeded not his well-being, he that has refused to remain united to his God by
obedience and holiness of life; deserved he not to lose his being, which he
received for his well-being? Or to speak more popularly: He who was created to
know and serve God; he whose felicity consisted in the knowledge and service
of God; he who scorned to be happy after that manner, merited he not, by all
right and reason, to be deprived of his life, which he received for that end,
and to be miserable and unhappy for ever? Let men speak as they will: to speak
properly, the afflictions of this life, are evils in our feeling only; but
sin against God, who is the sovereign good, is evil in it self, and the
evil of evils, whether we feel it, or we feel it not. Who then shall be
allowed to complain, if the great evil which he has committed, be rewarded
with the small evil which he suffers?

3 Yet the righteous man has fewer sins than other men have, and (if ye will
permit me so to speak) less sinful. Sin reigns in the men of the world: it
is weakened and mortified in Gods children. Sin in worldlings, flows from
the stinking puddle of their hardened and malicious heart: To do evil, they
find nothing too hot; nothing too cold. Psalm. 10.^ 3, 4, 5.
The wicked blesses the covetous, because they are like himself; he puffs
at all his enemies. Through the pride of his countenance, he will not seek
after God; for all his thoughts are, that There is no God: neither will he
suffer to be admonished; as ye may learn by the examples of Ahaz, Ahab,
Manasses, and of daily experience. The spring of sin in a righteous man, is
his infirmity; and therefore it is no sooner set before his eyes, but he
breaks it off by repentance, as David and Peter did.

If then we compare men with men, and not with God, wicked men's sins are like
unto Mat. 7.3.
beams; whereas the righteous man's sins are but motes, and light faults. God
registreth, in the book of his rigorous judgment, the sins of the wicked,
and will Psalm. 50.21.
reprove them, and set them in order before their eyes: but he has made a
covenant with the righteous, Ier. 31.34.
that he will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sin no more;
and that for Jesus Christ his dear Sons sake, Ephesians. 1.7.
in whom we have redemption, i. the forgiveness of sins through his blood,
according to the riches of his grace. And yet (a strange thing, and a matter of
much astonishment!) the Psalm. 10.5.
ways of the wicked prosper always, and Gods judgments are far above out
of his sight: On the other side, Many are the Evils of the Righteous.

4 His evils, or (as they are called in the translation) his afflictions, are
so many, that it is uneasy to number them all. They hold one another by the
hand, and conspire together to swallow up the righteous: yet we may reduce
them to two heads: for they are either external, in loss of honor, of goods,
and of life; or internal, in great heaviness and anguish of mind.

The Devils first care is to darken with calumnies the reputation of the
righteous man, and (as David speaks) Psalm. 4.2.
to turn his glory into shame; that they who shine in the glorious light of
their own conscience, being spotted and blemished by false reports, may be
rendered odious to all men, and unprofitable for the setting forward of Christ's
kingdom in their callings.

The first accusation is against their Religion, as being the fittest to stir
up and kindle the hatred of a superstitious people against them, and to stop
the course of the heavenly doctrine. This accusation is stuffed with many
common places of antiquity, of multitude, of glory, of honors, of riches, of
succession, of union of Kings, Princes, people, of their agreement and
combination to maintain the old doctrine of the Fathers, against the new Sect
of the little flock, of a few poor snakes, of an handful of forlorn
fellows, men of a vile condition, of no birth, of less gifts. 1. Pet. 3.20.
Noah was esteemed a mad fellow, because of his lowliness. The citizens of
Sodom rejected Genesis 19.9.
Lots admonition, and threatened him, because he was a forreiner and so journer
amongst them. Genesis 31.53.
Laban swearing by the gods of Abraham, and the gods of Nacor, that is, by the
gods of their father Their, laid covertly in Abraham's, Isaacs, and Jacobs dish,
the reproach of apostasy and defection from the ancient, but too stale,
religion of their forefathers: whereunto Jacob had no regard, but swear by the
fear of his father Isaac, assured of the truth of his Religion; which could
not be outworne, neither by length of time, nor by inveterate custom, which is
nothing else Cyprian. ad Pompeiu^, Epist. 74. Consuetudo sine veritate vetustas
erroris est.
but oldnesse of error. The maine point of Hamans accusation against the Jews,
was; that Est. 3.9.
their laws were diverse from all people: neither did they keep the Kings
laws.

Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of the heavenly Father, when he came into the
world to bear witness unto the truth, appealed (without any difficulty) unto
the conscience of every man, Ioh 8.46
and defied his enemies to prove him faulty in any thing; yet he could not
eschew the venomous poison of reviling tongues. The heads of accusations
against his innocent and glorious person, were, that Mat. 21.23.
he preached, and did all things without authority: that both Luke 6.2.
his Disciples and Ioh. 5.16
he, did that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day: that Matt. 26.64,
65.
he blasphemed, because he called himself the Son of God, and Mat. 9.3.
forgave sins: John. 7.41
that being of Galilee, he affirmed that he was the Christ: that John 7.48.
none of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him. When he conversed
with sinners, to convert them, they said, Mat. 11.19.
Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.
When they could not refute his doctrine, they would cast in his teeth, that
John 7.52.
he was of Galilee, Mar. 6.3.
a Carpenter, and Matt. 27.63.
a deceiver. When he delivered those who were possessed with Devils, there said,
Matt. 12.24
This fellow does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils. Neither did he, or said he any thing so well, but his adversaries
maligned it with ill constructions. When he spoke Ioh. 2.19
of the destroying of the Temple of his body, and raising of it up in three
days, Matt. 26.61.
they accused him to have spoken of the Temple of Jerusalem; and when he
convinced them of their sins, they cried, that Ioh. 8.48.
he was a Samaritane, and had a Devil,

Christ foretold his Disciples, that Mat. 5.11
men should revile them, and say all manner of evil against them falsely for his
sake: for, said he, Matt. 10.25.
if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall
they call them of his household? And it did fall out so: false witnesses accused
Steven, Act 6.11, 13.
to have spoken blasphemous words against the Law of Moses, against the holy
place, and against God. It was laid to Paul's charge, that he was Act. 24.5, 6.
a pestilent fellow, a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens, who had gone
about to profane the Temple; 2. Cor. 6.8.
and was a deceiver.

As this holy religion did rid way, and increase among the Gentiles; there is
no kind of calumny, which the Devil did not devise to make it hateful. Then
the Christians were upbraided with many heinous and foul crimes: that they
sacrificed to Tertull. Apologet. cap. 7.8. Eusebius. h^st. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Ibid. lib. 9. cap. 5. Minu^ius Felix in Octavio.
Bacchus and Ceres, because they celebrated the Lords Supper with Bread and
Wine: that they killed little children, and in their congregations did cate
their flesh, and drink their blood, because in the Lords Supper mention was
made of the spiritual eating of Christ's body, and drinking of his blood: that
in their assemblies, which (for fear of persecution) they held in the night
time, their dogs, tied to the Candlesticks, were enticed (by some collops
cast before them) to leap forward, that bounding they might beat down the
lights at the time prefixed, and so the darkness might cover and hide from
their eyes the shame of their incests with their mothers, sisters, and others
of their nearest kindred; and did many mo things which they shunned to name,
and, as may be deemed, came never in any man's mind to do them since the
beginning of the world. Besides all these calumnies, many other exceptions were
taken against them; as Tertull. cap. 10. etc. Eusebius histor. Eccles lib. 8. cap.
18. Idem lib. 9. cap. 7.
their apostasy and defection from the religion of their predecessors; their
contempt of the gods, and of all honor given to them; the profession of an
accursed vanity, of a blind error, of a most abominable and execrable
religion, etc.

5 When God, in the bowels of this mercy, made the truth of his religion to
spring up again in Germany, in France, in this Island; were not all these
crimes imputed to our forefathers, whose eyes were first opened to see and
embrace the glorious light thereof? And although time, the mother of truth,
has swept away the imputations of eating of Pigges after the manner of the
Passover, of the extinguishing of the Torches and Candles, of incestuous
villainy, wherewith our ancestors were injuriously blemished: yet Christ's
enemies forbear not to spew out of the open sepulcher of their stinking
throats, in our faces, the reproach of heresy, noveltie, factions against God,
schism against the Church, and such like mustie defamations of very old date;
which we wipe away with the same Sponge wherewith Eusebius. histor. Eccles. lib.
1. cap. 1.
the first Christians did blot them out, saying and verifying by the holy
Scriptures, That our Religion is the same which God from the beginning did
preach to Adam, which Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their offspring professed,
which was foretold by the Prophets, published by the Apostles to all nations,
believed in the world, and is come from them to us, who possess it as we have
received it of them in the holy Scripture: That all doctrines introduced in the
time between are but errors, untruthes, jugglings, and novelties broached by
the Devil; which shall be clearly verified, when our adversaries (leaving off
their bloody persecutions) shall be willing to take a patient trial, whether
of our Religions will abide the hammering of Gods word.

6 But the dimnesse of untruth, fearing (above all things) to come to the light
of the Scriptures, hates unto death all those which light the candle, and,
putting it on the candlestick, ^^^rie it before the eyes of men, to enlighten
their darkness. And therefore as whoores, seeking the renown of chastity,
are accustomed to exprobrate to honest women the vices wherewith they are
polluted themselves: so the Devils limbs publish abroad against Gods servants,
the crimes whereof they know themselves to be guilty; as these of heresy, of
blasphemy, of high treason against God, whereof I have already spoken.
whereunto they add the crimination of rebellion against the higher powers, of
sedition against the State, of contriving of plots against their native soil;
that the Kings and Princes of the earth, thinking their States to be much
interessed by the doctrine of godliness, may be moved to join hands for the
extirpation thereof. To that purpose Satan had never want of Doegs.

So Ahimelech the high Priest was accused to have conspired with David against
Saul their King, because 1. Sam. 21.10, 13.
Ahimelech in his innocence had given victuals and the sword of Goliath to
David, and had enquired of the Lord for him. So Ahab imputed to the Prophet
Eliah, that 1. King. 18.17.
he troubled Israel: so he confessed that 1. King. 22.8.
he hated the Prophet Micaiah, because he did not prophecy good concerning
him, but evil: So Amazia the Priest of Bethel, sent to Jeroboam king of
Israel, saying, Amos 7.10, 13.
Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel; the land
is not able to bear all his words; because Amos prophesied against the
Idolatry of the ten tribes, and that in Bethel, which was the Kings Sanctuary,
and the Kings Court: So Sanballat did write calumniously of Nehemiah, that
Nehem. 6.6, 7.
he and the Jews thought to rebel, that he might be King; and that he had
appointed Prophets to preach of him at Jerusalem, that he was King in Judah: So
the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, to hinder the building of Jerusalem,
writ to Artaxerxes; Ezr. 4.12, 13, 15.
Be it known unto thee, o King, that if this rebellious and bad city be
builded, and the walls set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute and
custom: for this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto Kings and
Provinces, and they have moved sedition within the same of old time; for which
cause was this City destroyed, etc. This was Hamans common place against the
Jews: Est. 3.8
They keep not the Kings laws, therefore it is not for the Kings profit to
suffer them. Because Ier. 37.17.
Jeremiah warned the people of Jerusalem to yield to the King of Babylon,
according to the oath of fidelity which they had made unto him; he was deemed
to be a traitor, who had fallen away to the Caldeans. Because Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego would not worship the golden Image which the King had set up,
their enemies went presently to the King, and said, Dan. 3.12.
O King, they have not regarded thee. So the Presidents and Princes of Persia,
finding no occasion against Daniel concerning his carriage in the Kings
affairs, charged him with contempt of the King, saying, Dan. 6.13.
He regards not thee, o King, nor the decree that thou have signed, but
makes his petition three times a day.

The Jews, dreading that Pilate would not be much moved with all the
accusations which they should set on foot against Christ, for matters of
Religion shuffled the second table with the first; rebellion against Casar,
with blasphemy against God, and said unto him, Luke 23.2
We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to
Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a king. And again: Ioh. 19.12.
If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend: whosoever makes
himself a King, speaks against Caesar. They held the same course against
Christ's Disciples, for seeking the means to wrap them in rebellion. The Rulers
Act. 4.18.
commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the Name of Jesus: whereunto
refusing to obey, they Act. 5.28, 40.
were arraigned before the Council, and condemned to be beaten for their
rebellion. The Jews of Thessalonica set all the city on an uprore against
Paul and Silas, slandering them and all the Christians of the town, that Act.
17.7.
they all did contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another
King, one Jesus. After that the tyrant Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
Nero had at diverse times set the town of Rome on fire, to please his wicked
humor withal, and purchased by such execrable acts the ill will of the whole
people, he shifted them off himself, and suborned false witnesses to lay them
upon the Christians. At that time, and long after, the Tertull Apologet. c. 40.
Cyprian ad Demot. Arnob. advers. Gentes, lib. 1. Aug. de Civ. Dei. li. 2. c. 3.
Christians were accused to be the cause of all public calamities, and popular
incommodities. If at Rome the river Tibris, running over his banks, overflowed
the walls: If in Egypt the river Nilus did not rise to a just height, that
overflowing the whole country, it might make it fertile: If the heavens were
turned into brass, and refused to distill their dew upon the dry and dustie
ground: If the earth, hardened into iron, disappointed the painful labors of
the husbandman, and defrauded the sower of the expected crop: If the plague of
famine, if wars, if any epidemicall sickness went ransacking men and beasts;
who were blamed but the Christians? Christians, said they, are the authors,
Christians are the causes of all our mischiefs.

7 This has ever been since the reformation, the heavy accusation against
our fathers and us: that as we are blasphemers against God; so we are
rebellious against the high powers, unprofitable to our selves, offensive to
our neighbors, enemies to all mankind: So the Jesuits, and other Romish
Clergy, persuaded the young King of France, who knew us not, that we were
plotting to set up a State within his State, a Democracie within his Monarchy,
and intended to cast off the yoke of subjects, that we might become
Reipublicanes, subject to none but to our own lusts and wills, like the
Swissers. So when rain falls seldom upon the earth; when the earth is
unpleasant with the sluttishnesse of dust; when the meddowes, drawn dry with
heat, make the owners to sigh, and the mowers to weep; when the hayle
finisheth the vintage before it begin; when the stormy whirlewindes pluck up
the fruitful trees by the roots, and beat down houses; when the air
infected breaths a mortal plague upon men and beasts; when the licentious
soldier steps into his neighbors house, as if it were his own; when going
out of it he leaves nothing behind him but his own filth and the cobwebs,
and forgets nothing but to reckon with his Host, and bid him farewell: all
ages, all orders upbraid the Huguenots, or, as they call us now in France, the
Parpaillants, that is to say, Butter-flies, as authors of all, because we
believe a new Law, and will not hold the good old Law of our fathers, who were
as honest men, and had as much insight into matters of Religion, and more
devotion than we have. The old world was a good world; our fathers, who
worshipped our Lady the Queen of heaven, and all the Angels and Saints which
the Pope has sent thither; our fathers, who were content to believe as the
Church believed; our good fathers, who turned and whirled about so devoutly
their Paternosters, and mumbled them so religiously before the holy Images,
which these new upstart fellows call abominable Idols; had bread and drink
enough: but now, since prayers are made to God alone in a known tongue; since
a few unlearned rascals and outcasts of the world, begin to prate most fondly
of heavenly things; to flirt the holy Father on the nose, and call him the
Antichrist; to beat down Altars, to break Images, as LEON the fourth
Emperor of the Orient did, etc. we starve for hunger and thirst, and are diven
to such misery, that our state cannot be worse. This was the Jews answer to
Jeremiah: Ier. 44.17, 18.
We will burn incense unto the Queen of heaven, and pour out drink
offerings unto her as we have done, we and our fathers, our Kings and our
Princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem. For then had
we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil: but since we left off
to burn incense to the Queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings
unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword and
by the famine.

8 Solomon says, Prove. 25.18.
that a man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is a hammer, a
sword, and a sharp arrow: he is a hammer to the hearer, who yields attention
unto his slandering; he casts him, with the blows of his viperous tongue,
into many dangerous symptoms and perplexitles of mind, as if he felled an
Ox: he is a sword to his own soul, which he kills with such artificial
lies: he is a sharp arrow to the innocent man whom he thus slandereth,
shooting at his reputation a far off, to breed him harm in one thing or
other. for Psalm. 27.12.
false witnesses breathe out cruelty: Psalm. 64.3, 4, 5.
They whet their tongue like a sword, and shoot in stead of their arrows,
bitter words: that they may shoot in secret at the perfect; suddenly do they
shoot at him, and fear not. They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they
commune of laying snares privily: they say, Who shall see them?

From hence arise most cruel persecutions. Then ye see nothing but kindling
of fires, but sharpning of Swords, but smoothing of Pikes, but clearing of
Partisans, but preparing of Muskets, but ravenous Harpies flying into the
houses, and fowling the righteous man's goods: Then ye hear nothing but edicts
of proscription, but Spoil, spoil; Ransack, ransack; Kill, kill, with all
kind of reproaches, curses, and execrations: Then wheresoever ye shall turn
your face, ye shall meet with nothing but with faces inflamed with threatenings
and slaughter, as Act. 9.1, 2.
Saul's was, when he went to Damascus to bind the Disciples of the Lord: ye shall
mark nothing but woodnesse, but outragiousnesse, but a woeful and sorrowful
face of all things, but hell opened, the Devils unchained, and all their fiery
malice displayed against the righteous; but ravishing of goods, defiling of
married women, deflowring of Virgins; banishing, murdering, exquisite
punishments, grievous tortures, new kinds of death, and, which is most
insupportable to an honest heart, scoffing, upbraiding, despitefull railing;
or, if you will have the roll which the Apostle has made of the righteous man's
evils, Romans 8.35.
tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword,
without exception of sex, without pity toward little children and sucklings,
without any reverence to the gray hair and old age.

The Apostle, speaking of the godly and righteous men which lived under the
tyranny of the Idolatrous Kings of Judah and Israel, and under the Kings of
Syria and of Egypt; says, that Heb 11.36, 37, 38.
they had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and
imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawen asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the sword: they wandered about in sheep skins and goat skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented. Of whom the world was not worthy: they
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth.
What is dear to the righteous man in this world? His goods. What more dear
than his goods? His life. What dearer to him, what much more esteemed of him
than his goods, his life, and all the world? Gods glory, and his own
reputation. Mark in this catalogue of evils, the righteous man bereft of all
these things.

9 The first unexpected message that the bringers of ill news reported to Job,
was of the loss of all his goods: the second, of the unlooked-for and violent
death of all his children. And, as if all that had been but sport and play,
Job 2.7.
the devil smote him with so many sore biles, that from the sole of his foot,
even unto the crown of his head, there was nothing found in him but the skin
of his teeth. Job 19.12. etc.
His byles were so loathsome to the eyes, so stinking to smell, that his breath
became strange to his wife; his servants, and those that dwelled in his house,
counted him for a stranger, and when he called them, gave him no answer: his
acquaintance were estranged from him, his familiar friends forgot him; the men
to whom he committed his secrets, abhorred him; the young children despised
and spoke against him; his familiar friends, which came to comfort him, gaped
upon him with their mouth, and, adding affliction to the afflicted, vexed his
soul with reviling words; calling him an oppressor of the poor, a wicked man,
an hypocrite, and disputed eagerly against him, that the hypocrites and wicked
men are the mere and only object of afflictions: yea, his own wife scorned
his godliness and uprightness, and mocking him with ironicall and pinching
words, Job 2.9.
Do thou still, said she, retain thine integrity? Bless God, and die.
Besides that, Job 7.13.
when he thought that his bed should comfort him, and his couch should ease
his complaint, then he was scared with dreams, and terrified through visions;
so that he consumed like rotten wood, and as a garment that is moath-eaten. It
seems that God had made him an example and pattern of the many evils
wherewith the righteous are compassed and besieged on all sides.

10 If ye read the story of David's life, ye shall judge that his own
sensible experience of the many evils, which lay heads and hands together to
overthrow the righteous man, whereof he speaks in this Psalm; made him to
cry with grief in another Psalm: Ps. 42.7.
Deep calls unto deep at the noise of thy water spouts: all thy waves and
thy billows are gone over me. Consider 2. Sam. 23.12.
him, consider 1. Kin. 19.4, 9.
Elijah the Prophet, consider the 1. Mac. 1.28, 29.
Maccabees, and all those worthy Confessors and Martyrs, whom the blessed
Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews recommendeth, to the blessed and
perpetual memory of the Church: behold them destitute of meat to fill their
bellies, and of honest clothing to go abroad; eye them shrowding their
nakedness basely and poorly under sheep and goat-skinnes; view them, now
flying to the deserts and high mountains, now hiding themselves in dens and
caves of the earth, to save their lives. Remember 1. Kin. 18.13.
the hundred Prophets, which Obadiah hid by fifties in two caves, feeding them
with bread and water. The Saints were thus put unto the pinch, when their
enemies and persecuters were full-gorging themselves with their goods.

11 Behold the whips and scourges wherewith Exodus 5.13.
Pharaohs merciless task masters teared and rent the flesh from the bones of
Gods people. Were not 1. Kin. 22.27.
Micaiah and Ier. 20.2. Ier. 37.15, 16.
Jeremiah, the Prophets of the Lord, cast into a strait prison, and there fed
with bread and water of affliction, to starve? 1. King. 21.13.
Naboth, was he not killed with stones for his Vineyard? Was not that the hyre
wherewith 2. Chro. 24.22.
Ioash the Apostat paid Zachariah son of Iehoiada the high Priest, for his
conservation and education, and requited the kindness which Iehoiada had done
to him? Origin. in Matthew. cap. 23.
Isaiah was cut through the middle with a Saw by Manasses. Jesus Christ charged
the Jews and Jerusalem, with Matt. 23.34, 37.
scourging, killing, crucifying, stoning, persecuting of the Prophets, wise
men, and Scribes, wichwere sent unto them. How many hellish and horrible
torments found out the Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes against the Jews, who would
not leave the Law of the Lord their God? Ye know 2. Macc. 7.
the story of the seven brethren, and of their godly mother, whom he commanded
first to be maimed, then the skin to be pulled off their head with the hair,
and finally to be brought to the fire, and fried in a hot Caldron.

12 Solomon says truly, that Eccles. 7.1.
a good name is better than precious ointment: Neither is there any
honest-hearted man, but he finds comfort in his poverty, in his baseness,
in all his most sharp and pricking afflictions, in death it self; so that his
reputation be kept spotless, and that in his calamity he may shun to be made
a mocking-stock. For ye shall find few men or women who desire to outlive
their own dishonor and shame: and there is no righteous man, who can abide the
disgracing injuries wherewith God is pierced, through his side. Nevertheless
discredit, infamy, shame is also the righteous man's share. No affliction did
nip Job 16.10. Job 17 6. Job 19 18. Job 2.9.
Job so sensibly, as when he saw himself to be made a laughing stock to young
children, a byword of the people, a Tabret before all men, a Butt of
reproaches to his best friends, and to his own wife. Judge. 16.21, 25.
Sampson suffered patiently the pulling out of his eyes, the binding of his
arms and feet with fetters of brass, and the vile and toylsome grinding in
the prisonhouse: But when the Lords of the Philistines sent for him, that he
might make them sport, and when he heard them thanking Dagon their fishie god
for the affliction wherewith his God, the God of heaven, which has made the sea
and the dry land, had visited him; he forgate patience, and cried to heaven for
vengeance. David complained of his enemies, because Psalm. 35.21.
they opened their mouth wide against him, and said, Aha, Aha, Our eye has
seen him, etc: But Psalm. 42.10.
it was a sword in his bones, whilst they said daily unto him, Where is thy
God? Then he cries to his God: Psalm. 69.9.
The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me. The Prophet
Elisha cursed, in the name of the Lord, the little children who mocked him,
crying, 2. Kin. 2.23, 24.
Go up thou bald head, go up thou bald head; and called for the Bears of the
wood to tear them. Lament. 1.7, 8.
Jerusalem sighed when all that honored her in her prosperity, despised her
in her adversity, because they had seen her nakedness, and did mock at her
Sabbaths: Then Jerusalem, then the Church complained, Psalm. 79.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
O God, the Heathen are come into thine inheritances thy holy Temple have they
defiled: they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. The dead bodies of thy servants
have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven: the flesh of thy
Saints unto the beasts of the earth. Their blood have they shed like water
round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them. We are become a
reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round about
us. Then they all cried, How long, LORD! will thou be angry for ever? Shall thy
jealousy burn like fire? But that which lay heaviest upon their hearts, was,
Psalm. 74.4, 5, 6, 7, 10.
to hear Gods enemies roaring in the midst of his congregations; to see them
set up their Ensigns for signs, their arms lifting up axes upon the
interlaced timber of the Sanctuary, breaking down with axes and hammers the
carved work thereof, and burning it into ashes, with all the Synagogues of God
in the land. Then they could not choose but mourn and cry, O God, how long shall
the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy Name for ever?

13 All the righteous men of the Christian Church, have in all times been
tried with these three kinds of tentations. The Lord Jesus, our Master and
head, Matt. 8.20.
had not where to lay his head. Neither would his persecuters Ioh. 19.23.
suffer him to dye in the garments which he had, but stripped him of them,
leaving him nothing to hide his nakedness. The blessed Apostles, the Rams and
ringleaders of Christ's flock, Act. 3.6.
had neither gold nor silver, but did 1. Cor. 4.11, 12.
hunger and thirst, and were naked, and had no certain dwelling place, and
labored, working with their own hands. In the primitive Church, whosoever had
goods, were made a prey to Christ's enemies; and the Apostle bears them
witness, that Heb. 10.34.
they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods. Many of you to whom I speak,
have heard your fathers relate, how many quarrels were maliciously picked
against them, to beggar them, and undo their estates; and how (leaving all in
Babylon, as Lot did in Sodom) to escape the burning thereof, and save their
souls, they came to this blessed refuge and Sanctuary of Gods people in their
shirts, as Jacob passed the river Jordan, and came to Laban, having no other
provisions and helps for his journey and peregrination, but his staff alone.
In these last troubles of France, I (who now speak to you) have seen towns,
which before were girded with Walls, fortified with Bulwarks, flanked with
Turrets, sown with the seed of true Christians; defaced, levelled to the
ground, turned into ashes: and now there is nothing to be seen where they
stood, but dens of Foynes and Foxes, but heaps of unprofitable stones, but
thickets of thistles, nettles, and briars. I have seen many great and honest
families brought, by the barbarous and rude soldier, to cleanenes of teeth, and
constrained to beg, when these Horse-leeches were feeding upon their spoils.
To how many have ye, even ye your selves, enlarged your merciful and
charitable bowels; who were accustomed to be bountiful unto others, and who
come to you to be the glorious object of the forwardness and overflowing grace
of your cheerful and liberal charity, after that they were compelled, like
Mark. 14 51, 52.
the young man in the Gospel, to leave, in the hands of the robbers, the sheet
which others (less cruel) had left them to cover their nakedness, and to fly
from them naked; thinking themselves happy to be like unto Ier. 39.18
Ebed-melech and Ier. 45.5.
Baruch, after the^ destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, and to have
their life for a prey!

14 But that also is not granted to all: for the blood-thirstie cruelty of the
wicked cannot be quenched, but with the blood of the righteous. The Lord Jesus,
the author and finisher of our Faith, the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls;
after that Heb. 12.2.
he had endured the contradiction of sinners against himself, was at the last
set to sale by one of his own Disciples, betrayed with a kiss, delivered unto
the insolency of the soldiers, tied hard with cords, beaten spitefully,
crowned with thorns, scourged most cruelly, and brought forth to the Jews,
disfigured with streams of blood, flowing from the most parts of his wounded
body: an ugly spectacle to make Rocks to cleave, Tygres to weep, and the
Devils themselves to quake and start back with sorrow. But all that cannot
satisfy these more than stony-hearted and hellish Cannibals: forthwith they
cry, Ioh. 19.15.
Away with him, away with him, crucify him. His death they thirst after;
neither can any thing slake their thirst, but the blood of his death.

His Disciples fared not better than he; Act. 7.59
Steven the first Martyr was stoned for his sake: What welcome his Apostles got
of those to whom they preached the good tidings of peace, ye may judge by the
relation which the Apostle makes of the Feasts wherewith he was entertained at
his first coming to them: 2. Cor. 11.24, 25, 26, 27.
Of the Jews, says he, five times received I forty stripes, save one: thrice
was I beaten with rods: once was I stoned: thrice I suffered shipwreck: a
night and a day I have been in the deep. In iournying often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own country men, in perils
by the heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren. In weariness and
painfulnesse, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in
cold and nakedness. Behold, I pray you, in this one Apostle a threefold
universalitie, of the evils which he suffered, of the places where he suffered,
of the persons of whom he suffered: he suffered hunger, thirst, nakedness, cold,
imprisonment, scourges, and whips, stoning, shipwreck. No place was a place of
refuge to him against so many evils: he suffered by sea, by land, in the city,
in the wilderness: Lo, wheresoever he came to preach, there he found a cross
to take up, and to be laid upon his shoulders. All kind of persons had a
quarrel to him: the Gentiles, and the Jews of his own nation, known enemies,
and false brethren. They conspired all, they concurred all to bereave him of
his life, and prevailed: for after that he had passed through the burning
Furnace of all other evils, he was beheaded at Rome by the commandment of the
Emperor Nero. When one Apostle, one member of Christ's Church, was so hardly
used, think ye that the rest, who sailed with him in the same ship, did sleep
upon a calm and quiet sea, without wagging, and danger of shipwreck?

Act. 12.2.
Herod killed James the brother of John with the sword. Rev. 10.
John was relegated into the Isle of Patmos, for the word of God, and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ; Act. 5.40, 41.
after that he, and the rest of the Apostles, had been beaten, and had suffered
shame for Christ's Name at Jerusalem. Ioh. 21.18, 19.
The Lord foretold Peter, that he should glorify him by a violent death, but
where we know not; for the probabilities be many that he was never at Rome. The
Ecclesiastical Stories tell us, that Dorotkgus in Synopsi. Cyprian de duplici
Martyrio. Sabellicus, Aeneid. 7. lib. 2. etc.
Andrew his brother was crucified at Patros: Bartholomew was flayed quick in a
town of Armenia, called Albana: Philip was tied to a post, and stoned to death
at Hierapolis: Thomas was put to death by the Indians, to whom he preached the
Gospel. Matthew was nailed quick to the ground at Myrmena: James, the son of
Alpheus, was cast headlong from the pinnacle of the temple of Jerusalem, and
felled with stones and clubs: Jude Lebbeus, called also Thaddeus, laid down
his life for the Gospel at Beryta, after that he had preached Christ to the
Edesseniens, and all Mesopotamia: Simon the Cannite suffered martyrdom in
Mauritania: Matthias was executed amongst the Aethiopians: Mark the Evangelist
was trailed through the streets of Alexandria in Egypt, with a halter about his
neck, and afterward burnt quick: Luke was hanged upon an Olive tree. All the
Apostles, all the Evangelists, sealed the doctrine of the Gospel with their
innocent blood.

15 The cruel tyrant Nero sowed the Christians in Wolves, in Bears, and other
wild beasts skins, and, uncoupling his Hounds and Mastiffes after them, made
the tearing and dismembring of innocent and godly men, a game for the people to
behold. Others he took, and heaping them one upon another (as so many Fagots)
set them on fire, that they might serve for fire to warm, and for light to
shine by night to those which walked through the streets of Rome. Ters.
Apologet. cap. 5. Sed tali dedicatore damnationis nostrae etiam gloriamur, etc.
We glory, says Tertullian, in this setter forth of our condemnation: for
whosoever knows him, may judge, that nothing could be condemned by Nero, but
that which is a very good thing. I should be too prolixe and tedious, if I
should name particularly all the circumstances of ten heavy persecutions,
which lasted 318. years, from the eighth year of that lump of clay soked in
blood, called Nero, unto Constantine the Great; under Nero, Domitian, Traian,
Antoninus Verus, Severus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerian, Aurelian, Dioclesian, in
whose time so much blood was shed in one day, that the executioners were weary
and faint with killing; as Eusebius hist. Eccles. lib. 8. cap. 9.
Eusebius, who was an eye witness of these doleful spectacles, reports.
Then the persecution was so eager, that in one month it consumed seventeene
thousand Christians: whereby ye may judge, what havoc and murder was made of
them in ten years together that it lasted, being fostered by the divisions
which were in the Church, and secret treacheries of false brethren; whereof
Dioclesian the tyrant took occasion to undo our Religion, and had utterly
overthrown it, if God had not opposed, to his wicked sleights and raging
fury, the sword of Constantine the Great, first redresser of the Church, and
defender of the true faith. Socrat. hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 10.11.13.
Julian the Apostate depriving the Christians of all dignities, promotions and
honors, forbidding by severe edicts their children to be taught in humane
letters, and received into the public Schools, impoverishing them with great
fines and exactions of money above their power; did more harm to the Church in
one year, than Dioclesian did in ten by his bloody persecutions, though his
one years Empire was not innocent of Christian blood. Who can express, how
many Christians were put to death, by the Emperors who were infected with the
most abominable heresy of Arius? I overpasse imprisonments, relegations,
banishments; which were called favors, courtesies, and works of mercy, by
the tyrants: for Pro. 12.10.
the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. I omit the drowning, the hanging,
the mangling the rosting, the broyling on Gridirons, the scorching, the burning
with fire those who all the night were frozen with cold, and a thousand more
cruel tortures, whereby the Emperors and their people bent their minds, to
smother the Christian Religion, as Herod sought to kill Christ in the cradle.

16. In vain go we to seek in antiquity, examples of monstrous cruelties
against the true Christians, when the last age wherein our fathers and
restorers of the true Christian Religion lived, affords to us an huge number
which cannot be numbered: If ye have read the story of the Albigenses, ye
shall find there, how some of them were not burnt, but roasted fair and
softly, that they might feel their death; some were burned quick, some
tormented after a strange manner by beetles and such like worms, which, laid
upon their navills, and covered with a dish, gnawed their bellies, and boaring
them through even into their intralls, caused to these poor creatures a
languishing, but a most sensible and dolorous death. All the faithful of
Merindoll were murdered upon an arrest or decree of the Parliament of Aix in
Province: Forty five of their wives, which were great with child, were shut up
in a barn, and burnt there: thirty others were torn in pieces by the first
Presidents commandment, and the little children, as they were thrust out of
their wombes, trampled, and made to breathe in their first, before they had
leisure to breathe in their first air. Florent Venot, after that he was a
great while racked in an engine sharpe-topped at the lower end, which they
called Chausse d' Hypocras, was made an unchristian show in the midst of a
bone-fire to the Christian King at his first entry into the Capital town of
his realm: Nicolaus Nail was first basted with hot scalding oil and lead, and
afterward burnt quick: The Tennis-Court-keeper of Avignon, was kept in a cage
hanging in the great street; by night at the cold air, by day at the burning
heat of the sun, and so vexed a long time, either singing Psalms to God
more harmoniously than the Nightingale, or reprooving the superstitions and
idolatries of the people which gazed upon him: In the book of Martyrs, ye may
read how John Hooper. Doctor in Divinity, was burnt at three times: how Thomas
Noris and a Priest with him, was led barefooted upon briars and thorns from
the prison unto the place appointed for their execution, that in them might be
fulfilled the Prophecy of Hosea, Hos. 2.6.
Behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns: how sundry were stiff and
frozen with extreme cold in the night, and the next day after sent to the
fire: how the Archbishop of Canterbury did withold all kind of meat and
drink from his prisoners, while they starved and dyed of hunger.

If I should relate unto you the Tragical Massacres of France, in the year of
Christ 1572. the slaughtering of an hundred thousand men and women like beasts,
the rocking of little babes a-sleepe with present death, the stilling and
pacifying of them with merciless destruction, the incestuous defyling of
chaste Virgins, the despightfull using of grave Matrons, the pitiless
regarding of old age, the welcoming of infants as they came out of their
murdered mothers wombs, with sword and fire, the pulling of others from the
milk of their mothers breasts, to suck them with their own blood. If I
should set out in true colors the principal towns of that great kingdom, as
they were then; what should ye hear but blaspheming, but roaring, in the one
part; but weeping, but lamenting, but crying to heaven for mercy and help, on
the other? What should'ye see but fire, swords, murder, bloodshed, dead
carcases, but roaring lions, but fiery dragons, but rayenous wolves, but 2.
Kin. 8. v. 12.
Hazael and his Courtiers, killing, slaying murdering young and old, dashing
little children, ripping up women with child; but great rivers stained and
surrounded with innocent blood?

If I should but draw unto you the first lines of the calamities of the
Palatinate, and of the late desolation of the Churches of France; if I should
speak unto you of honest women, first misused in that which is their most
precious jewel, and then murdered, or blown up in the air, with gunpowder
thrust and stopped in their wombes; of young Virgins disguised in men's
apparel, with doublet, breeches, the Lackeys cap upon their close shaven
heads, the dagger upon their loins, and constrained to follow the armies,
neither daring, neither knowing to whom to make their moan; of sucklings,
pulled violently from their mothers breasts, and murdered before the faces of
their doubly-desolate parents; of some of them thrown in the air, and
received upon the points of pykes for a sport; of others, upon a wager who
should cast them farthest off, flung into the waters, when the poor innocents
were laughing upon their murderers, and playing with their beards; of many more
sold to these couseners, which we are accustomed to call Egyptians, at
eighteen pence a piece; of men and women inthralled to the Mahumetans for a
little sum of money: as it is written, Psalm. 44. v. 12.
Thou sellest thy people for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their
price: In a word, if I should but report what things I have heard, read, or
seen, your minds would quake, your hearts would start back with sorrow;
neither should ye find tears enough to bewail, nor I words sufficient to
display and unfold unto you the crushing and bruising of Joseph.

17. Therefore let us lay over it the veil of silence, and make here a pause,
ending this action with hearty prayers to God for the peace and prosperity of
Jerusalem: O Lord our God, thou have fed us with ashes for bread: thou have
given us tears to drink in great measure. Thou have been angry against our
prayers: we have cried unto thee, and thou have not listened unto our
supplications: But now, O Lord; but now turn thine ear unto us, and turn our
hearts unto thee: Cause thy face to shine upon us, and we shall be saved
through the merits of our only Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with thee and the
holy Ghost be all honor and glory both now and for ever. Amen.

SERMON III. Of the righteous man's Evils.
PSALM XXXIV. XIX. Many are the Evils of the Righteous.


1. HOw Christ was upbraided and dishonored in his death;

2 As likewise the holy Apostles, and the first Christians.

3 How our brethren are abused in Spain, and elsowhere.

4 The righteous man's evils tread one another on the heels.

5 He has many enemies, which are the cause of the great number of his evils.

6 His greatest enemies are his nearest kinsmen.

7 All kind of persons were enemies to Christ;

8 And to his Apostles and their disciples.

9 All kind of men are enemies to the Church of our time.

10 Hence come the inward evils, which disquiet the righteous man.

11 The righteous is persecuted unrighteously;

12 Howsoever his persecuters judge, or speak otherwise.

13 The vanity of many accusations set on foot against him.

14 The iniquity of the Judges proceeding against him.

15 How these which live in peace, as we in England, may be said to have many
evils.

16 Exhortation to thankfulness, and godliness of life.

I. THat which is most grievous to the righteous man, in all the evils whereof
I have spoken, is the upbraiding, disgrace, and shame wherewith he is
exercised. For whereas all criminalls find pity and commiseration in those
that behold them, who either accompany their death with tears, or behold it
with silence: The faithful and the righteous man can neither live nor die, but
he shall be followed with opprobrious hues and cries. Genesis 21. v. 9.
Ismael mocked Isaac, that is, according to Paul's exposition, Gal 4. v. 29.
persecuted him. When the Apostle faith, that Heb. 11. v. 26.
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt; he gives us to understand, that the Church has been from the
beginning subject to contempt, defamations, taunts, and dishonor for Christ's
sake: It was of Christ that Isaiah prophesied, Isa. 8. v. 18 Heb. 2. v. 13
Behold I, and the children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and for
wonders in Israel: of him first, and then of his children.

He was upbraided in his life time with the nickenames of a seducer, a
drunkard, a glutton, a sorcerer, and of Beelzebub the Prince of the devils;
but he was most outragously mocked in his death. In Luke 22. v. 64.
Caiphas house they blindfolded him, they struck him on the face, they asked
him, saying; Prophecye, Who is it that smote thee? In Luke 23. v. 11.
Herod's Court he was set at naught, mocked, and arrayed in a white gorgeous
robe, as a fool. In 28, 29, 30.
Pilats common hall, the soldiers stripped him, Mat. 27.
to put on him a skarlet robe; and when they had platted a crown of thorns,
they put it upon his head, with a reed in his right hand: then they bowed the
knee before him, and mocked him, crying, Hail King of the Jews; then they
spat upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head. In Golgotha. where
he was crucified between two thieves, as if he had been a malefactor, they
that passed by, reviled him, and wagged their heads, saying, v. 39.40, 41, 42,
43, 44, 46, 47.
Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy
self: If thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross: likewise the
chief Priests, the Scribes, and Elders, mocking him, said, y He saved others,
himself he cannot save: If he be the King of Israel, let him now come down
from the cross, and we will believe him: He trusted in God, let him deliver
him now, if he will have him. The thieves also which were crucified with him,
cast the same in his teeth. Last of all, some of them perverted his words,
saying, that he called for Elias, when he prayed, Eli, Eli, My God, my God,
etc. Then was fulfilled that which he spoke by David, saying, Psalm. 21. v. 6,
7, 8.
I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people: All
they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake the
head, saying, He trusted on the Lord, that he would deliver him: let him
deliver him, seeing he delighted in him.

II. His children, his holy Apostles received no better entertainment of the
men of the world: for what were they but 1 Cor. 4. v. 9, 13.
a spectacle unto the world, to Angels, and to men? Complain they not, that
they were made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things;
walking 2. Cor. 6. v. 8, 9.
by honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good report; as deceivers, and
yet true; as unknown, and yet well known? The Apostles disciples, fared they
better? No, no. The Apostle writes of the Hebrews, that Heb. 10. v. 33.
they were made a gazing stock by reproaches and afflictions; which I take
literally: for we know, that the custom was to draw Christians to the
threatres and public play houses; to carry them ridiculously disguised from
scaffold to scaffold for a show; to set them on pillories to disgrace them, and
then to cast them naked to the Lions to be dismembered and devoured in the eyes
of the people: which delighting insuch spectacles, were accustomed to cry,
Tertul. Apologet. cap. 40.
Christianos ad Leonem: The Christians to the Lion. Tantos ad unum? So many to
one? says Tertullian. Ioid. cap. ultima. Ad Lenone^ damnando Christianam,
potius quam ad Leonem, etc. Ambe. tom. 3. sermon 90. Eusebius. hi^t. Ec^l. lib. 8.
cap. 11.
And because the Governors and Magistrates perceived that to Christian women,
the defiling of their chastity was more horrible and grievous than all kinds
of torments, and most exquisite deaths; they condemned them rather to serve
bawdes in stews, than to be torn by Lions: which many of them prevented by
killing of themselves: Ibid. c. 9.
Others they stripped, Aug. de civ. Dei. l. 1. c. 26.
and tying them by one foot, hoised them up in the air, their heads downward;
and letting them hang so while they died, made of their naked bodies a most
filthy and cruel spectacle to all those that passed by: Ibid. c. 12.
Of some men they would pull out the right eye, and put out of joint the left
leg, and let them live, that they might be both ridiculous and miserable.

III. The Inquisitors of Spain, send to the fire the reformed Christians
arrayed in a yellow garment, called the Sambenit, which is all set and covered
over with crosses and black Devils, and misshapen after a fashion so ridiculous
and monstrous to be seen, that some of the beholders cannot hold from
laughter; some are scared, and fly away, believing the poor men to be so
many Devils come out of hell: none is touched with commiseration toward them.
How often have the Papists welcomed their Kings with the honor, or rather
horror of such pageants, at their first entrance into their towns? as it is
written of the Idolatrous people of Samaria, Hos. 7.3
They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their lies.
Shall a Minister go through the streets in Popish towns, in the deepest peace,
and not be hooted and hurried with most intolerable contumelies, although they
be arrayed like the rest of the people? Can any burial be convoyed there
without such showting and out-crying? How often have these most inhumane and
cruel Tygres, denied the honor of burial to our brethren; accomplishing that
which is written of them in Rev. 11.8, 9, 10.
the Revelation, by not suffering their dead bodies to be put in graves? How
often have they unburied them, and made the Church to cry to God with sighs
and sobs,

Psalm. 79.2.
The bodies of thy Saints most dear,
Abroad to birds they cast:
The flesh of such as do thee fear,
The beasts devour and waste?
When as these carrion-eater-harpies were rejoicing over them, and making
merry, and sending gifts one to another; as questionless the chief Priests,
the Scribes, the Pharisees, the Elders of the Jews, and the whole people did,
after they had crucified and reviled most shamefully the Lord of glory, the
Savior of the Church, the Immanuel our Lord Jesus Christ. What Psalms, think
ye, are now sung in the Palatinate, and in the Churches of France? Surely the
forty four, the seventie four, the seventie nine, the foure-score, and
others; where, amongst many more complaints, they pour forth of a sad and
broken heart, with trembling words and many tears, into Gods bosom, this
heavy, but too true moan;

Unto our neighbors thou have made
Of us a laughing stock,
And they that round about us dwell,
At us do grin and mock.
Thus we serve for none other use,
But for a common talk:
They mock, they scorn, they nod their heads,
Where ever they go or walk.
So is verified not only that which Solomon says, that Eccl 8.14.
there be inst men, unto whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked; but also that which David says in my text, Many are the Evils of the
righteous.

IV. For as the devil tempted Christ eft-soones, and gave him no respit,
stirring up against him all kind of enemies, until he nailed him upon the
cross; even so, he lets never Christ's members alone, but brings evils
upon them, one on the neck of another, and ever contriveth against them some
new mischief, watching heedfully now to harm them, when they look for some
slackening. Thence is this pitiful lamentation of the Church, Psalm. 129.3.
The Plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows: Psalm. 44.22.
For thy sake we are killed all the day long. Thence is this wailefull plaint
of every righteous man, Psalm. 7.14
All the day long I have been beaten, and my chastisement returned every day:
So that not only in diversity, and hugeness, but also in continuance, from
the first day of the righteous man's spiritual birth, unto the last gasp of
his mortal life, Many are the Evils of the righteous.

V. They must be many; for many lay their heads together to devise them: which,
as it is said by the Prophet Micah, Mi^h. 2.2.
forge iniquitiein their beds: and when the morning is light, they practice it;
because they have power to do it in their hands. The Spirit which inspires
them, is the devil, the spoyler of all good, architect and master of all
evil; who 1 Pet. 5.8.
as a roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour. He breathes into
the unrighteous men's hearts all kinds of devices and tricks against the
righteous man. Thence it is, that Psalm. 37.12, 14, 32.
the wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth:
The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow to cast down the
poor and needy, and to slay such as be upright in their way: The wicked
watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him. Thence it is, that Psalm. 2.1,
2, 3.
the heathen rage, the people imagine vain things, the Kings of the earth set
themselves, the rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his
anointed: saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us: Psalm. 1.2
For lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon their
string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart. David was but one
man: and he complains, that Psalm.119 157.
his persecuters and enemies were many: yea so many, that he was amazed at it,
and cried to God with astonishment, Psalm. 3.1.
Lord, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that rise up
against me. Of what nation were they? Psalm. 118 10.
All nations, says he, compassed me about.

Had David alone so many enemies? It is no wonder then, if the Church wherein
there are many David's, makes her prayer with this heavy complaint to God,
Psalm. 83.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Keep not thou silence, O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God:
for lo, thine enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee, have lift up
their heads: They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted
against thy hidden ones: They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from
being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance: for they
consulted together with one consent, they are confederate against thee. What
men are these which dare attempt matters so high and impossible? v. 6, 7, 8.
The Tabernacles of Edom, of the Ishmaelites, of Moab, of the Hagarens: Gebal
and Ammon, and Amaleck: The Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tire: Assure
also is joined with them: they have helped the children of Lot: All alike
enemies to Gods people; and yet some of them the Idumeans, Ishmaelites,
Moabites, Ammonits, kinsmen to Gods people: the Idumeans, the nearest, and
withal the most malicious and cruel of all; who not being able of themselves,
to do any harm to the Church, joined with the Babylonians, who besieged
Jerusalem and as if they had been Trumpets to sound the Alarm, heartned them:
crying, Psalm. 37 7.
Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.

VI. Such has ever been the condition both of every righteous man, whose
abode is Ezec. 2 6
with briers, thorns, and scorpions; and of the whole Church, which is Cane.
2.2.
as the lilly among the thorns. Pro. 17.17
A friend loves at all times, and he shall be borne as a brother in
adversity. The righteous man finds seldom such friends: kinsmen and
friends, who should love and protect him, are either the first to procure unto
him all kind of mischief; or behold his adversity, as if they were fremm
bodies. And, which is worthy your observation, they which have or challenge to
themselves the title and right of the eldest and first borne, have ever
persecuted their youngers, because they were their betters.

Was it not 1. Ioh. 3.12.
Cain the first borne, who murdered his innocent brother Abel? Gal. 4.29
Ismael, borne after the flesh, persecuted he not Isaac, who was borne after
the spirit? Genesis 27.41.
Esau, hated he not his younger brother Jacob? and was not this his vow, I will
slay my brother Jacob? This hatred, was it not propagated to all their
progeny? Had ever the Israelites, descended of Jacob, more fierce and
mischievous enemies than the viperous brood of Esau? As soon as David was
anointed King over Israel, 1. Sam. 17.28.
Eliab his elder brother envied him: the 1. Sam. 23.19.
Ziphims, men of his own Tribe, treacherously betrayed him: 1. Sam. 22.3, 4.
Neither could he find any place of refuge for his father and mother in all
Israel, but was constrained to seek a safeguard for them in Moab. He is no
sooner peaceable in his kingdom, 2. Sam. 15.13, 31.
but his own son seeks his life; but Achitophel, his governor, his
familiar, who was privy to all his secrets, secondeth the Parricide with his
pernicious counsel; but the whole people followed their deadly attempts. 2.
Chro. 13.8. etc.
The ten Tribes, after their revolt from God and from the King, challenged to
themselves the glorious title of Israel, and under that name which before was
common to the twelve, persecuted the other two; which retaining the purity of
Gods service, were constrained to discern themselves from these Apostates by
the new name of Iowes. When Jerusalem was destroyed by the Babylonians, Lam.
1.2.
She wept sore in the night, and her tears were on her cheeks: among all her
lovers she had none to comfort her; all her friends dealt treacherously with
her: they were become her enemies; Ye hear Christ's spouse complaining in the
song of Solomon: Cant. 1.6
My mothers children were angry with me: They made me the keeper of the
vineyard, but mine own vineyard have I not kept. Cant. 5.7.
the watch men that went about the city found me, they smote me, they wounded
me: the keepers of the walls took away my vitile from me.

VII. Christ comes no sooner into the world, but Mat. 2.16
Herod seeks to make him away, and for his sake slays all the children of
Bethlehem; yea, he laid violent hands on his own son, borne of a woman of the
Tribe of Judah: and therefore Augustus Caesar said, that, It was safer to be
Herod's pork, than his son. Mat. 14.10
Herod Antipas, the beheader of John the Baptist, Luke 23.11
mocked him, and sent him again to Pilate, who condemned him. The whole people
of the Jews, who should have adored him, cried, John 19.6, 15.
Away with him: crucify him, crucisie bum. If ye seek the first Actors of
this Tragedy, ye shall find, that the Pharisees were the first who Mat. 12.14.
took counsel against him, how they might destroy him; that Mat. 21.15.
the chief Priests and Scribes envied him; Mat. 26.3
that they assembled together, with the Elders of the people, unto the Palace
of the High Priest, who was called Caiphas, and consulted to kill him; ver. 65,
66
that the High Priest condemned him of blasphemy; that all together they
pronounced him to be guilty of death, Mat. 27.2, 12, 20.
delivered him to Pontius Pilate the Governor, accused him, persuaded the
people that they should ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus. So was fulfilled that
which is written in the Psalms; Psalm. 118.22.
The stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the
corner. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. John 7.5.
His own brethren not only believed not in him, but also Mar. 3 21
they went out to lay hold on him: for they said, He is beside himself.
Likewise Mat. 26.23.
one of his own Disciples, who dipped his hand in the dish with him, betrayed
him. And therefore John says, that John 1.23
He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

VIII. Look what intertainment the Master received of his own, the same
received his disciples, not of the lees of the people only, but also of those
which sat at the rudder, and held the stern of the commonwealth and of the
Church. Christ foretold it should be so, saying, Mat. 10.17, 18.
Beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the Councels, and they will
scourge you in their Synagogues: And ye shall be brought before Governors and
Kings for my sake. The first and most violent enemies which they found, were
they Rev. 3.9
which said they were Jews, and were not; but the Synagogue of Satan: Their
Ringleaders were the Acts 4.1 Acts 5.17, 24, 40.
High Priest, with all the rest of the Priests, the Captain of the Temple, the
Sadducees and Pharisees. Wheresoever the Apostles came, that cursed Nation
egged against them all kind of folks; Act. 13.50.
devout and honorable women, the chief men of cities, Acts 14 19.
the whole people. As 2 These. 2.15, 16.
they both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets; so, says the
Apostle, have they persecuted us: They please not GOD, and are contrary to all
men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved.

Had the Church at that time no other persecuters? The Churches of the Gentiles
verse 14
suffered like things of their own contrymen. At 2 Cor. 11 32.
Damascus, the Governer under Aretas the King, sought to apprehend Paul. At
Acts 17.5
Thessalonica, all the lewd fellows of the baser sort, made an uprore against
him. At Acts 16.19.
Philippi, the Masters of the Pythonissa, seeing the hope of their gain gone,
because Paul had cast the spirit of divination out of her, egged the
Magistrates against him and Silas. At Acts 19.24.
Ephesus, Demetrius the Silver-smith, for a like cause, raised no small stir
against him. Acts 24.1
Tertullus the Orator accused him. 2 Timothy 4 14.
Alexander the Copper-smith did him much evil. At Rome he was presented before
the bloody Tyrant Nero, whom he calls ver. 16.17
a Lion: Then no man stood with him, but all men forsook him: Then his friends
abandoned him, and the Tyrant put him to death. What the rest of the Apostles
suffered by false brethren and open enemies, ye may read in the Acts, and in
their lives.

IX. What the Church was to suffer after them by Rev. 11.7
the Beast fighting against the Saints, and killing them; by the Whore of
Babylon, Rev. 17.4, 6.
drunken with the blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus; by Rev.
20.8.
Gog and Magog, compassing about the beloved city; S. Ioh. has foretold in the
Revelation. What our Fathers, what we have suffered, not of the Turks,
Persians, Tartarians, Americans, and other sworn enemies of Christian
Religion, but of those bloody butchers which call themselves Catholics; the
heavens have seen; the earth, which has drunk up our blood, can speak; the
murderers, which have shed it, can bear record; our own experience can best
of all testify. What policy, what craft has been practiced to undermine and
wholly undo us by our own brethren, of our own kindred, family, religion,
hardly would ye believe, if I should tell it. Christ's prediction has been
accomplished: Luke 21.16.
Ye shall be betrayed both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and
friends; and some of you shall they cause to be put to death, and ye shall be
hated of all men for my Names sake. Our brethren have sold us for money, as
flesh is sold at the shambles; and we have been less regarded than slaves by
those which bought us: whose humanity, like Dracon's Laws, is printed in all
Christendom with our Fathers and our blood; and whose affection and loyalty
toward us, is written upon the running waters. What wonder then, if, among so
many professed enemies and cunning traitors, Many are the Evils of the
righteous?

X. The Righteous, considering how he is thus besieged on all sides, and
hurried in all fashions by foes and friends, is often overtaken with diverse
thoughts and surmises, more dangerous than all the external Evils which may
befall unto him. Worldlings judge of God's favor to men, by their prosperity;
and of his hatred toward them, by their adversity. When Abimelech King of
Gerar saw Abraham thrive, he said unto him, Genesis 21.22.
God is with thee in all that thou do. What he said, was true; but the
ground whereupon he built it, was sand: for, Luke 16.19, 20.
the rich Glutton in the Gospel thrived; and Lazarus, who was laid at his gate
full of sores, thrived not; yet that glutto^ is in hell, because God was not
with him: and Lazarus is in Abraham's bosom, because God was with him. The
Scribes and Pharisees, evil Doctors of the good Law, concluded, Mat. 27.41, 42.
That God was not with Christ, because he delivered him not from the cross.
The righteous man himself, when his affliction is long and heavy, takes like
conclusions against himself. When the Angel of the Lord said to Gideon, Judge.
6.12, 13.
The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valor: Gideon answered, Oh my Lord,
if the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? The Lord has
forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of the Midianites. Ye read Jobs
complaints; Job 6.4.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me: He teareth me
in his wrath, Job 16.9
he hates me, he gnasheth upon me with his teeth, Job 19.11.
and he counts me unto him, as one of his enemies. Ye hear David crying out
pitifully, Psalm. 22.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, and from the words of my roaring? Jeremiah bemoaned the state of the Church
after the same manner, Lam. ^.20.
Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long time? And now
in the Palatinate, and now in France, do not all the faithful mourn and cry;
do we not cry with them, and for them, O Lord how long?

The wicked, when God crosses them in their desires and projects, are
accustomed to say; Mal. 3.14, 14.
It is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his
ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of bosts? And now
we call the proud happy: yea, they that work, wickedness, are set up; yea,
they that tempt God. ^e even delivered: The righteous Asaph held the ^^me
speech in his great affliction, and said, Psalm. 73.13.
Verily (...) have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands (...)
innocence.

Moreover, these internal ^^lls take such hold of the righteous man, that he
will bring Gods word, which he has believed, in question, doubt whether it be
true; if the Religion which he professes, be of God; if the cause which he
sustaineth, and for which he does undergo so many evils, be good: for if it
be good, if it be of God, why does he not uphold it? David being brought to his
wits end, and even to the pits brinke by Saul, deemed that Gods Prophets had
deceived him, and said, Psalm. 116.11.
All men are liars. What greater evil, I pray you, can befall a Christian man,
than to bring in controversy Gods providence, and the perpetual care which he
has of his Church? than to think that godliness, which he has sucked with
his mothers milk, is but a fable, a dream, an invention of man? than to
imagine that hitherto he has embraced a shadow for the body, has sought the
truth in a lie, has esteemed vanity and wind, to be Gods word? than to frame
such conceits against the honor of God, and his own salvation?

If such doubts come not in his mind; if he believe that the religion which he
professes, is from above, that Psalm 34.15.
the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry; that light, peace, joy, salvation is sown for the upright man; it seems
unto him, that he is none of that number: and gathering out of the store and
greatness of his evils, most dangerous presumptions, he pronounces against
himself, That he has been an Hypocrite, a vile reprobate, and castaway. I
know that such perplexities are but short symptoms to the righteous man,
whereof he recovereth by the powerful assistance of Gods Spirit; when as they
are deadly convulsions to the wicked, and woeful prefaces to a doleful
Tragedy, which they shall everlastingly act, and nev^r end: yet howsoever they
be short, they are sensible, and lie so heavy upon the wearied soul of the
righteous m^n that in comparison, his outward evils seem unto him ^^ter than
a feather, wherewith the wind plays in the air. So I have showed you, that
both by external grievances, and internal griefs, Many are the Evils of the
Righteous.

XI. Now the righteous man may say to the wicked, as David said to Saul, 1.
Sam. 24.11.
Know thou and see, that there is neither evil nor transgression in mine hand,
and I have not sinned against thee, yet thou huntest my soul to take it; and
as Dan. 6.22
Daniel said to Darius, who had cast him into the Lions den; Before thee, O
King, I have done no hurt. For although it pertained to Christ alone, to say to
his adversaries; Ioh. 8.46.
Which of you convinces me of sin? yet all the righteous men may say of
their persecuters, that which David said of his enemies, Psalm. 35.7.
Without cause have they hid for me their not in a pit: without cause they have
dug for my soul. And when they pray, they fear not to protest of their
innocence in that hehalfe, and to say to God; Psalm. 58.3, 4.
They lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against me, not for my
transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord: They run and prepare themselves without
my fault: awake to help me, and behold.

The rule of the righteous man's life, is Christ's commandment and example. His
commandment is, Mat. 5.39, 42, 44.
Resist not evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to
him the other also, etc. Give to him that asks thee: Love your enemies,
bless them that curse, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you. The same commandment he gave by his
Apostle, saying: Romans 12.21.
Be not overcome of evil; but overcome evil with good. What he commanded,
that he practiced in his life: 1. Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.
He suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps:
who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who, when he was
reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. Yea, not only he did them no harm,
but also he did them all kind of good: He went about all Judea, teaching the
Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, healing all manner of sickness, and all
manner of disease among the people, made the blind to see, the deaf to hear,
the lame to walk; cleansed the lepers, raised up the dead, fed, by the
miraculous multiplication of bread, at diverse times, many thousand souls;
restored the ear to Malcus, which came to take him, prayed for those which
crucified him; and therefore asked of his enemies, who took up stones to throw
at him: Ioh. 10.32
Many good works have I showed you from my Father: for which of those works
do you stone me?

What ill did the Apostles, wherefore they should be used so cruelly? They
went through the whole world, converting men from darkness unto the marvelous
light of the Gospel, and did so many wonders amongst the people, that thence
Act. 14.11
some Idolaters took occasion to worship them; but the Jews, to persuade the
people to stone them. 1. Cor. 4.11, 12.
Being reviled, they blessed; being persecuted, they suffered it; being
defamed, they entreated. Much good did they to many: ill they did to none.

Read more ancient examples of Genesis 13.8.
Abraham, yielding for peace-sake to his Nephew Lot; of Genesis 49.5, 6, 7.
Jacob, cursing his own sons, Simeon and Levi for their bloody anger
against the Sichemites, though having a goodly show of righteous vengeance; of
1. Sam. 25 7, 8.15, 16.
David, leading with his soldiers a most innocent life amongst Nabals herds
of cattle, and flocks of sheep; sparing Saul's life, who sought his, and
bringing him to this true confession, 1. Sam. 24.17.
Thou art more righteous than I: for thou have rewarded me good, whereas I have
rewarded thee evil; Psalm 38.12.
being as a deaf man, when his enemies spoke mischievous things against him,
Psalm 35.12, 13.
clothing himself with sackecloth, humbling his soul with fasting, praying
most affectuously, when his enemies, which rewarded him evil for good, were
sick.

If ye desire examples of the Christians carriage, during ten persecutions in
the space of three hundred and odd years; Tert. Apol. cap. 1. and 37
When the people invaded them, they resisted not; when the Magistrate condemned
them, they gave thanks: when the dead bodies of their brethren and kinsmen were
drawn out of the rest of their graves, were pulled away from the Sanctuary of
death, they sought no revenge; albeit they were in greater number than their
enemies, and might with a few little firebrands set on fire all the Towns,
Boroughes, Villages, Castles of the Empire, if Christian Religion did not
forbid all private men Romans 12.19.
to avenge themselves, because it is written; Vengeance is mine, I will repay
it, says the Lord. For this cause the holy Spirit often calls the
afflictions of the righteous, Sufferings: because they suffer the evil which
is done unto them, but they do no evil to any man: whereunto also Christ has
bound them, when he callth then Mat. 10.26.
Sheep; insnuating, that they should be sheep in simplicity, to never think
any evil; in innocence, to never do any evil; in patience, to bear all
evils meekly without grudging and murmuring; in utilitie and commodity, to
feed with their milk, to cloth with their wool whosoever stands in need of
their help, to do ill unto no man, Gal. 6.10.
to do good unto all men: especially unto them who are of the household of
faith. Alas, alas! the number of such sheep, of such righteous men, how rare
is it? how many suffer not 1. Pet. 3.17. 1 Pet. 4.29.
for well doing, as Christians and righteous men: but for evil doing, as
murderers, thieves, robbers, and ravenous wolves, rather than sheep? (how
many cannot abide to suffer, but thinking it a shame to pack up an injury,
will needs be avenged of their enemies? how many do seek to defend the
Gospel against persecuters, by burning, killing, murdering, filling the house
of innocent peasants, of poor country folks, with orbitie, desolation, and
mourning? intending to cure one sin with another sin, taking the way of
hell to go to heaven, and thinking to defend the Gospel by unlawful means.
which the Gospel has condemned. For it is not he which suffers evil, but
he which does it, that sins; And therefore the true righteous man is ever a
patient, not an agent in evil; and the wicked not only have no cause wherefore
they should hate him, but have, in his manifold good deeds, a good cause
wherefore they should love him: and yet not withstanding his innocent and good
carriage, Many are the Evils of the Righteous.

XII. Sometimes many, blind-folded with ignorance, deem that the righteous man
is the most unrighteous that lives in the world, and that Gods dearest
servants are his greatest enemies: according to Christ saying; Ioh. 16.2^
The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
service. Yet it befalls often, that the authors of the righteous man's evils,
cover their private quarrels, and mischievous attempts against him, with the
cloak of justice. Paul said of himself truly, that Phil. 3.6.
through zeal he had persecuted the Church, because 1. Tim. 1.12.
he did it ignorantly in unbeleefe: And the Jews answering to Christ, Ioh.
10.33.
for a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because that thou
being a man, make thy self God; believed verily that he was a blasphemer.
Likewise the Gentiles, who persecuted the Christians, thought them to be
enemies to mankind, whereas they showed themselves enemies Tect Apol. cap. 37.
hosts maluistis vocare generis humani potius quam erroris numani.
to man's error, not to man's nature. Contrary, when 1. Sam. 22.8.
Saul said, that his son had made a league with the son of Iesse against
him; 2. Sam 15.3.
when Absalom accused his father that he was not careful to do justice; when
the Scribes and Pharisees laid many crimes to Christ's charge; when the Guisards
in the first and second troubles of France; when in these last troubles the
Jesuits accused us, that we were plotting to set up a state in the state, a
democracie in the Monarchy, they knew that they lied. But such is the force
and glory of justice, and of righteousness, that the wicked, when they know
they do wickedly, cloak their wicked courses against the righteous man with
the glorious title of justice. Now whatsoever the persecuters think of their
own proceedings, the righteous man rests upon his own innocence; knowing
that there is not so great weight in the despightfull girds of venomous
tongues, as in the testimony of his own conscience: and if he were admitted
to make an Apology for himself, how easy a matter were it unto him to
maintain his own innocence, and to show the falsehood of all the accusations,
whereby he is made odious; and the manifest vanity of the most part of them?

XIII. It was a vain accusation to impute unto Christians the cause of
pestilence, of famine, of wars, of breaking out of waters, of the decaying of
all things, has waxed old; Cypr. ad Demetrianum.
as if any such plague had never been in the world before Christ was named in
it: as if old men might not, with as good reason, move a process against us;
because they hear not, see not, pase not so well, are not so nimble, so
quick, so bigge-membred, so strong as when they were young; because their
decaying age is not so green and livelie as their fathers was; because also
they live not so long as their fathers did, and extend not the days of an
healthful life to seven, eight, nine hundred, and so many odd years, which
were the ordinary days of men's lives in the first age of the world. And why
may not he, who is tormented with the gowt in his joints, racked with the
gravel in his kidneyes, tortured with the stone in his bladder; or he who
melts drop after drop by a languishing consumption; he who is made one of the
forked order by his wife; he whose son is made, for his lewd like, the
decking of a gallows, etc. cry out against us, A faggot for the Huguenauts, a
heap of wood to burn the Parpaillants? as the ancient Idolaters, and
forefathers of the new Idolaters of this time, were wont to cry against our
predecessors, The Christians to the Lion.

XIV. Let our enemies be our Judges: when they have received all manner of
accusations against us, when we are arraigned as enemies to God, to the high
Powers, to the Laws, to good manners, to nature it self; Tert Apologetico,
cap. 2.
why are we used other ways than all other guilty persons are?

1. It is permitted to all others which are arraigned, to speak in their own
defense whatsoever they can or may; or if they cannot speak, to hyre the
mercenary tongue of some Lawyer, who without any suspicious of crime may
answer, contradict, say whatsoever he thinks fittest for the commendation of
the innocence of his Client, though known to be guilty, and worthy of death:
for the Laws will not suffer, that any man should be condemned, not heard, and
without a free defense. We are the only men whose mouths are shut, and often
gagged, for fear that we speak too clearly: They will not have us to speak,
because they are resolved to condemn us; knowing, that if we speak, our
innocence will shine like the beams of the Sun in a fair summer day, and
they cannot choose but absolve us.

2. Though he who is arraigned, take the crime upon him, he is not, upon his
simple confession, sent to the gallows; but the Judge knowing that there are
many perire volentes, who desire to die, to clear his own conscience,
inquireth diligently of the antecedents, the consequents, the place, the time,
the manner, the accomplices and partakers, and all other qualities and
circumstances of the fact. There is no such inquiry made for or against us;
wherein we have offended the high Powers, where and when we pat out the
candles, how many Virgins we have defiled, with which of our kinswomen we have
committed incest: we are called Huguenauts, which to our Judges, without
further inquisition, is a name and proving of all crimes.

3. All other criminalls if they deny, are tortured until they confess: The
end of racking is to wring out confession. If it be prevented by confession, it
has no use: when it has extorted confession, it cease. Amongst Tyrants
only, racking is a punishment: we confess freely what we are, we tell our
Judges that we are reformed Christians, or as ye speak here, Protestants: we
speak the truth, and lie not. Our Judges will not hear what we are: they will
have us lie, and to confess what we are not. Therefore they rack us, to make
us deny. If other criminals deny, they believe them not: if we deny our selves
to be Protestants, if we lie falsely, and say we are Rome Catholics, they be
leeve us.

4. There is no Judge unpartiall, which desires to absolve other malefactors;
and therefore they are not constrained to deny, but racked until they
confess, that they may be condemned: we only are forced to deny, that we may
be absolved: when we speak the truth, and confess what we are, we are put to
death: when yielding to their violence, we feign, and deny our Religion, not
only they suffer us to live, but also they reward us for our lying. Art thou
and Huguenaut? Yea: Rack him. Art thou an Huguenaut? Alas, no, no. Hangman
unbinde him, let him go; he is an honest man, and must be recompensed. Whereby
it is most evident, that we are clean of all crimes laid to our charge,
except our Judges will confess, that in our persons, when we deny our
Religion, they punish not high treason, adulteries, incests, murder, and a
great many more crimes, whereof we are daily accused. If that were iniquity
against the common wealth, and the State, they must needs grant that we are
guilty of our Religion only, or rather of the only name thereof. For it is
condemned when it is not known; when it is known, it is embraced: And
therefore our Persecuters will not know it, because they will condemn it;
perceiving that all those which have condemned it, when they knew it not, have
ceased to condemn it, yea professed and protected it, when they knew it.

5. The Emperor Traian, well informed of the innocence of Christians, sent to
Plin. Secundus epist. lib. 10. Epist. 103. and 104. Conquirendi non sunt: Si
deferantur, and arguaentur, puniendi sunt.
Plinius Secundus Governor of Bythinia, after this manner; They must not be
searched: if they be appeached and accused, they must be punished. Tert. Apol.
cap. 2. O sententiam necessuate confusam! etc.
O sentence confused with contradiction! he forbids to search them as
innocent, he commands to punish them as guilty; he spares and rages; he
dissembleth, and punishes: If they be guilty, why are they not searched? If
they be innocent, why are they punished? How many such decrees have been given
out against us? how many Edicts of pacification have been made with us, as
with honest men? and forthwith how many fires kindled, swords sharpened,
gallowses prepared against us, as against malefactors? Yesterday we were the
stay and props of the State, and must be cherished: This day we are the plague
and undoing of the State, and must be killed: Though we are this day, as we
were yesterday; except that we strive ever to be better, and shun to decay in
goodness, or to grow worse. But so it was from the beginning, so it is, so it
shall be until the end of the world, that Many are the Evils of the Righteous.

XV. Not so, may some say: we that live here in a peaceable and blessed
nation, and who, as we hope, are righteous men, have no evils, being guarded
and hedged round about with Gods bountiful and merciful protection, through
the daily care of our peaceable and most Religious King. It is true,
well-beloved, that Psalm. 125.3.
the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous: lest the
righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity; Your fathers had the evils, and
ye possess the good things of the land: But will ye say, against your selves,
that ye are of the number of these belly-gods, which eating, drinking, dancing,
and spending merrily the short days of their brittle life, Amos 6.6.
are not grieved with the affliction of Iosepht God forbid, that ye should
speak so unnaturally, and so falsely against your own souls.

Is it not written, Romans 12.15.
Weep with them that weep: Heb. 13.3
Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them: and them which suffer
adversity, as being your selves also in the body? Have ye not read of Nehem.
1.3, 4. Nehe. 2.2.
Nehemiah, that understanding the great affliction and reproach, wherein the
Jews lived after their return to Jerusalem, he wept, mourned, fasted, and
prayed with such sorrow of heart, that his countenance was very sad in the
Kings presence, with whom he had great credit and favor? Ye know that the
Apostle writes to the Hebrews, and of them, that Heb. 10.32, 33.
they endured a great fight of afflictions, partly whilst they were made a
gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilst they
became companions of them that were so used. Know you not also that Saint Paul
said, Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? This
is a great evidence and demonstration of the Communion of the Saints.

And who have given more evident demonstrations of a true sympathy, and
fellow-feeling of the miseries of your brethren beyond Seas, than you? Have ye
not wept? have ye not mourned? have ye not fasted? have ye not prayed to God
for them? have ye not opened your bowels, and purses unto them? have ye not
been much moved for their adversity? have ye not, not only according to your
power, but also above your power, relieved their necessity? Every oppression
which they suffer, when it comes to your ears, is it not a rack unto you?
As many oppressions, are they not as many tortures to your vexed souls? What
does this whole Island desire with sighs and sobs, but to be at war with
Christ's enemies, which oppress them, that is to say, to spend lives and goods
for their relief? Because, as Constantius, father of Constantine the Great,
first deliverer of the Christian Religion from the bloody persecutions of
Tyrants, came from great Britanne; so it seems by the holy, vehement, and
constant affection which God has put in all the peoples hearts of this most
flourishing Island, toward their afflicted brethren beyond Seas, that he has
ordained that delivetie shall come to them from us: In the mean time, in what
grief, in what anguish, in what perplexities, and vexation of mind are ye not?
what rivers of tears do ye not still power out before God? what ejaculations?
what prayers, and how fervent doye not dart toward the heavens for them? Then
in you also is fulfilled this most true saying, Many are the Evils of the
Righteous.

XVI. Thank God with heart and mouth for this long and blessed peace wherein
ye live; bless him for his bountiful mercy, whereby ye hear, and see not; ye
feel the affliction of Joseph, and suffer not any in your own persons, and
are enabled to succor Christ's distressed members which have no hope, after
God, but in the Churches of this Island. Pray to God for the King, by whose
care ye enjoy this blessedness: Pray for the increasing of our godly,
courageous, and hopeful Prince in all Christian, Princely, and Majesticall
gifts: Pray for the flourishing peace of this State, that in the ne^ce thereof
ye may have peace: so If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget it
self. Psalm. 137.5, 6.
If I do not remember thee, let my torgue cle^ve to the (...) of my mouth* If
I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy: O weep, and pray unto God for
his Church, and be not unthankful for his gifts: be subject to the King, and
to the Prince, be faithful to the S^^^^ be obedient and loving to your
teachers, be innocent in your callings, be modest in your behavior, be more
and more bountiful to the poor: so the King of Kings, so the God of peace, so
the Spouse of the Church, so the Protector of Monarchies, so the father of the
poor, shall bless you, shield you, and remain with you for ever. So be it;
even so be it.

SERMON IV. Of the causes of the righteous man's Evils.
PSALM XXXIV. XIX. Many are the Evils of the Righteous.


1. A All the Evils of the Righteous man, and of the Church, are foretold in
the Scriptures.

2. The cause of the righteous man's evils, is the Antipathie which is between
him and the wicked.

3. As soon as a man begins to serve God, he is persecuted.

4. Satan is most incensed against those which have some special charge in the
State, or in the Church.

5. Christ forewarneth us of persecutions, that we may wait for them; knowing
that they are the way to heaven.

6. It is strange, that God not only suffers the righteous man to have so
many evils, but also will be called the author of them all.

7. God does it for the righteous man's sake, for other men's sakes, for his own
sake.

8. He corrects the righteous man of his former sins.

9. He withdraws him from sin in time to come;

10. And therewith tries him.

11. Often, without any regard to sin, his only end is to try him:

12. As it is prooved by the examples of Job,

13. Of the spouse in the Canticles,

14. And of Saint Paul.

15. Great trial of the Churches of the Palatinat, and of France.

16. Moreover afflictions are the exercise of the righteous man's Faith,
Meekness, Charity, Patience, Prayers, Hope.

17. And wonderful constancy.

18. Difference betweens the Righteous man, and the Hypocrite.

19. Prayer.

I. THE manifold Evils which are incident to Gods dear ones, howsoever they be
so extreme, that they are sometimes driven by them upon the brim of the sleep
downfall of despairing; yet this consideration, me thinks, is forcible, and most
able to blunt the sharpest edge of most vehement sorrows, to sweeten their
gall, to assuage their violence, and make their seeming intolerable heaviness,
easy to be borne: that they come not at unawares, and unlooked for; but, if we
have ears to hear, and eyes to see, may be both foreknowne, and foreseen.

Surely our Lord Jesus Christ was no sooner presented to the Lord in the
Temple, but Simeon prophesied of him, that Luke 2.34
he was set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign
which shall be spoken against. And Christ himself foretold his Disciples, that
Mat. 10.16, 17, 18.
he sent them forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves. that they should be
delivered up to the Counsels, scourged in the Synagogues, brought before
Governors and Kings for his sake: yea, Ioh 16.2
that whosoever killed them, should think that he did God service. Neither
speaks he of his Apostles only, which were then present to hear his words,
but in the parable of the marriage of the Kings son, he forewarneth all his
servants, which he is to send forth to call men to the wedding, that Mat. 22.6
they shall be entreated spitefully, and slain: And compares his Church,
which is the Congregation of righteous men, Mat. 7.25
to an house builded upon the rock, which is storme-beaten with the floods of
crosses, and winds of persecutions.

Therefore the holy Apostles exhorted the Disciples to continue in the faith,
showing them, that Act. 14.22.
we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. Which we? All
righteous men, all true Christians: for gall that will live godly in Jesus
Christ, shall suffer persecution. 2. Tim. 3.12.
The Lord himself shows for what end such things are foretold us, saying,
Ioh. 16.4
These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember
that I told you of them: for lest we should be overtaken with afflictions, he
advertiseth us that they shall come, and therefore advises us to look for
them; that fore-casting and expecting them, we may be upon our guard, and
according to the exhortation of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.13.
take unto us the whole armor of God, that we may be able to withstand in the
evil day, and having overcome all, stand still, like the rock in the sea,
which all the foaming waves of the Ocean, all the thundering tempests of the
air, all the spite and might of all the elements cannot shake. When poverty,
orbitie, shameful and smarting diseases, when all kind of mischiefs rushed
upon Job, with such sudddainesse, that he had no leisure to hear and consider
the particulars of any one of them, how could he have worshipped God, how could
he have faid, Job 1.21.
The Lord gave, the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord; if,
when he was at ease, he had not exercised himself, with the conceit of all
evils which are incident to man? if he had not harped often upon this
meditation; God may deprive thee of all thy children, bring thee to leanness
of teeth, pull away thy soul from thy body? he has done so to many other; why
not to thee? Nothing, in my opinion, made Paul more forward to suffer
afflictions, more bold to resist them, more strong to overcome them, than the
forewarnings Act. 20.23.
which the Holy Ghost gave him, that in every city bonds and afflictions
waited for him. All they waited for him, he waited for them: and when they
they thought to steal upon him, they found him ready to buckle with them, and
lend them his neck.

Brethren, Jesus Christ has not deceived us; he has not made to his Disciples
stately and lofty promises of riches, of honors, of worldly preferments, as
Cyrus the younger did to his followers: ye hear him speaking aloud, Luke
14.16, 27.
If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and
children, and brethren, and sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple: and whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot
be my Disciple. What the Lord has foretold, experience has made good: Rev. 6.
At the opening of every seal of the sealed book, which is the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ, John saw some new plague follow thereupon; and we see
nothing round about us, in foreign countries where that book is unsealed, but
wars, but dearth, but death, but all kind of miseries. Consider then, I pray
you, and weigh well upon what conditions ye have mustered among the companies of
Christ's soldiers; where your pay is loss of all your goods, your gain is
death, your victory is not of things seen, your triumph is disgrace, infamy,
and shame. For if Luke 14.33.
ye forsake not all that ye have, goods, life, honors, dignities, ye cannot be
Christ's Disciples,

II. Look what antipathie, what contrariety of humors is in nature betwixt
plants and plants; as betwixt the Vine and the Colewort; betwixt the Colewort,
and the Herb grace: betwixt the plants and beasts; as betwixt the Serpent,
and the Ash-tree, the serpent and the Rue: betwixt beasts and beasts; as
betwixt the Catte and the Mouse, betwixt the Wolf and the sheep: betwixt man
and beasts; as betwixt the serpent and man: the like disagreement, and far
greater, is betwixt the righteous and the wicked man: for Pro. 29.27.
an unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is upright in the
way, is abomination to the wicked. These contrary inclinations had their
beginning with the world, and shall not have an end until the worlds end. God
is justice, and righteousness it self; and the devil professed enmity
against him from the beginning. What wonder then if he be an enemy to the
righteous man, who is but Gods creature? As soon as man was created, he
seduced and supplanted him. Then God proclaimed unreconcileable war between
them, saying to the devil, who was shrouded under the shape of a serpent; Gen
3.15.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman: and between thy seed, and her
seed: It shall bruise thy head; and thou shall bruise his heel. The serpents
seed, is the brood of wicked men, which have been from the beginning, namely,
those which persecute the Gospel. The seed of the woman, is our Lord Jesus
Christ, with the whole band of righteous men. John saw a battle in heaven: Rev.
12.17
Michael and his Angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon fought and
his Angels. Jesus Christ, who only is this Michael, because he only is like
unto God, and his Angels and Saints, fought against the devil, and all the
hellish rabble of wicked men, and of devils like unto himself.

There is no manifest cause known of the Antipathies and contrariety of
dispositions which are in nature: but the causes of disagreement between the
righteous and unrighteous man, are known. They flow from contrary springs; and
therefore their affections, their actions, their effects, their ends are
contrary. Are not God and the devil enemies? The wicked man 1. Ioh. 3.8
is of the devil: the righteous man Ver 9.
is borne of God. Hence it is, that the children bear out their fathers
quarrel: the wicked is hud-winked with ignorance: Ioh. 16.3
He knows no the Father, nor the Son; neither will he know them: Psalm.
36.3.
he will not learn to be wise, that he may do good.

Ioh. 17.8.
The righteous man knows surely, that Christ is come out from the Father, and
believes that the Father has sent him: Rom 8 5
The wicked is after the flesh, and therefore he minds the things of the flesh
The righteous being after the spirit, minds the things of the spirit: The
wicked man's works are Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
the works of the flesh, which are these: Adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witcheraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, reuilings, and
such like. The righteous man's works are Ve. 22, 23
the fruits of the spirit, that is to wit, Love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Where there is so great a
contrariety and repugnancie of affections, of actions, of works; what wonder
if there be great enmity? The righteous man is light in the Lord; and Ioh. 3.20
every man that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be discovered: for that cause he hates the righteous
man, as the Pharisees hated Jesus Christ, because he reprooved them of their
vices. The righteous man likewise hates the wicked: Psalm. 139.21, 22.
Do I not hate them, O Lord, says David, that hate thee? and am not I grieved
with those that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred: I count
them mine enemies. When heat and cold, moisture and drought, hardness and
softness, light and darkness, shall leave off to be at variance; then, then
shall the righteous and wicked man join hands, and enter into confederacy one
with another: 2. Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.
for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with Beliall?
and what part has he that believes with an Infidel? and what agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols? In this discord, there is this notable
difference; that the righteous man hates rather the vice, than the person of
the wicked, and seeks by prayers to God, by exhortations, admonitions, good
examples, to convert him: whereas the wicked hates both the virtues, and the
person of the righteous, and seeks to destroy him.

III. From thence it is, that as soon as a man begins to apply his mind and
heart unto righteousness, Satan and the wicked world conspire to undo him:
for like as Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.
Nebuchadnezzar was filled with fury, and the form of his visage was changed
against Shadrac, Meshac, and Habednego, when to his face they refused to fall
down, and worship the image which he had made, and commanded, that the furnace
wherein they were to be cast, should be kindled seven times more than it was
wont to be heat: even so, as soon as a man begins to draw his neck out of Satan's
collar, to shun the company of wicked men, to draw near unto God by
repentance and newness of life, and to register his name in the Church book,
that he may be saved in the communion of the Saints; Satan sets all his malice
on a flame to devour him, and the wicked rush upon him with bill and claw, to
tear him in pieces. For as thieves break not into an house where there is
nothing but straw, hay, stubble; but only into such places where there is
gold, silver, precious stones, and rich furniture: so the devil and his limbs
heed not rascals, and scurvie fellows; but if any man be a worshipper of
God, and does his will, they lie in wait secretly, as a Lion in his den,
they hide the snare in his way, they crouch, they stoop to catch him into
their net.

As soon as Christ was borne, Mat. 2.16
Herod became out of his wits, seeking to slay him; to teach us, that as soon
as we become Christians by a spiritual birth, we shall not have want of
Herod's to seek our lives. As soon as the Rev. 12.3, etc.
red dragon saw the woman with child traveling in her birth, and ready to be
delivered, he stood before her, that he might devour her child as soon as it
was borne: but her child being caught up unto God, and she taking her self to
her wings, to save her life by flying into the wilderness, he cast out of his
mouth a flood of water to drown her. What was this vision but a type of the
Church, against whom the devil stirs up a world of wicked men, as so many
waves of an overflowing river, to swallow her up, when after a long barrenness
she conceives again, and brings forth children to God? Then ye hear nothing
amongst those blood thirsty butchers, but crying, Ier. 11, 19
Let us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof: let us cut him off from the
land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.

IV. Amongst the righteous men, Satan is most incensed against those whom God
pickes out from amongst the rest, and separates for some special and excellent
work in the Church, or in the State. For as Pirates sail by Barks, and small
ships, and board Carrackes, and other huge ships laden with the riches of the
Orient: so Satan lies in wait for those principally, on whom God has bestowed
greatest plenty of gifts, and preferred to the most eminent places in his
Church. As long as Jacob meddled with nothing at home, Esau lived peaceably
with him: Sought he, and obtained he his fathers blessing? then Esau vowed to
kill him. Whilst Jesus Christ led a private life, and made no show of those
treasures of heavenly graces which were hid in him, the devil considered him
not: but when the Spirit lighted upon him in the bodily shape of adove; when
his Fathers voice was heard from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; when by the Baptism of water, and of the Spirit, he
was installed in the dignity and employment of Mediator betwixt God and man,
then the devil heeded him, tempred him, set on foot against him as many
enemies, as there were men which knew him When Saul was a Pharisee, exceedingly
zealous of the traditions of his fathers, and a persecuter of the Church, he
was much regarded and honored of the Jews: but when of a Captain, he became
an Apostle; of a violent Persecuter, a most zealous Preacher; of a Jew, a
Christian; of Saul, Paul; he became therewith a mark whereat the devil and his
Angels did shoot all the venomous and fiery arrows of their indignation.
What wonder then, if the devil, who has ever his bow bent and ready, aims
chiefly at the Rams and Leaders of Christ's flock? he knows by long
experience, and too too many trials, that it is not written in vain, Zac.
13.7. Mat. 26.31
I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered
abroad.

V. Ye see then again, upon what condition ye are, and name your selves
Christians. Ioh. 15.19,
If, says Christ, ye were of the world, the world would love his own: but
because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the World,
therefore the World hates you. Tribulation, trouble, sorrow, grief, tears,
all the evils that the devils malice can find out, are the Christian man's
portion in this world. His hopes are not of this life: for no reward is
promised unto him, but in the world to come. As the bird-catcher casts a
little corn before the birds, and hides the net wherewith he involves them;
and as the fisher covers the fish-hooke with the mortal bait, whereunto he
knows the fish will speedily swim: so these which mind to deceive, promise
always pleasant things; and like unto the Syrenes of the Poets, they sing most
sweet songs to charm the simple ones, whom they go about to entrap; but the
venom is in the tail, and he who listeneth unto them, is amazed to see how
by too much credulity he has bin drawn upon the dangers, and is sunk among
the shelves of stinging cares, and killing evils.

Genesis 3.4, 5.
The devil spoke of nothing to Eve, but of knowledge of good and evil, but of
immortality, but of eternity of life, but of being like unto God himself:
what-she found, ye know all; Ignorance, death, resemblance to the imposter who
had deceived her, was the reward of the lightness of her belief. Mat 4.8, 9.
The Tempter showed to Christ all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, and promised them all unto him, so that he would fall down and worship
him. Mat. 7.15.
The false Prophets come in sheep clothing, that when opportunity shall
serve; they may dismember the whole flock. The Papists, and other Heretics of
this age, cover their deadly poison of false doctrine with the sugar of
entising words, and show to those which have not their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil, a golden cup of most delightful and pleasant
promises; which when they put to their head, they drink nothing but gall and
wormwood.

Fathers do not so to their children: they send them to the school, give them
Pedagogues and Tutors to instruct them, and hold them in awe; keep them under
a most severe and rigorous discipline, until they come to man's age, and be
able to do good service: Then, and no sooner, they look upon them with a
clear face, they use them familiarly, they open to them their purses, they
advance them to honors and dignities, they make them their heirs. After this
manner, our heavenly Father at the beginning speaks to us most roughly of
sorrows and vexations: he schools us in Christ's College, where afflictions
are our Tutors, and rods our lessons: Mat 7.14.
He forewarneth us, that the way wherein we are to walk, till we come to the
pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore, is narrow, and spread over
with thorns; that the gate whereby we must enter, if we desire to enter into
the kingdom of his glory, is very strait and low: to the end that when we
find such a way, wherein there is nothing but narrowness, grinnes, and
briars, and such a gate wherein we cannot enter without pressing, thrusting,
and stooping; we may say one to another, as it is written in the Prophet; Isa.
30.21
This is the way, walk ye in it, whether ye turn to the right hand, and
whether ye turn to the left; and concluding with rejoicing, as Jacob did in
his great affliction, Genesis 8.17
This is the gate of heaven, pray and say with David, Psalm. 118.18, 19.
Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them: I will praise
the Lord: this is the gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter.

VI. Flesh and blood cannot abstain from controlling of this wise and fatherly
course, which Almighty God takes with his beloved children. It is a strange
and most uncouth thing to man's conceit, that God not only permits, that his
Saints which fear his Majesty, which do his will, which lead among men an
Angelical life, and are heaven upon earth, should be thus exposed to so many
calumnies, vexations, torments, losses, in commodities of this life, and most
dangerous tentations; but also will be called the Author and cause of them all:
for it is he, he himself, which asks, Amos 3 6.
Shall there be any evil in the city, and shall not the Lord do it? Lam.
3.38.
Evil and good, proceed they not out of the mouth of the most High? May he
not repress the raging fury of our adversaries? may he not convert them all,
as he did Paul? If he will not convert them, may he not destroy them at
unawares, as he did Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, Sodom, Gomorrha, Senacheribs
host? Psalm. 77.8, 9.
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has
God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies?

Who can blame us if we ask, why the holy Apostles which went through the
whole world, sowing it with the seed of Christians, planting Churches,
building living Temples to the living God, raising the dead, healing the sick,
casting out devils, doing good to all men, ill to none, confirming their
doctrine with signs, wonders, diverse miracles, and distributions of the Holy
Ghost, according to Gods own will; why such celestial, Angelical, and most
wonderful men, were bound, imprisoned, scourged, set on pillories, mocked,
abused, and cruelly murdered? Could they not have done better service to God
being at liberty, than tied with cords in a dark and solitary prison? being
alive, than dead? If it was far better for them to depart, and to be with
Christ; their longer aboade in the flesh, was it not more needful for the
Church, Phil. 1.23, 24.
as the Apostle says of himself? The perpetual care which they had of all
the Churches, deserved it not a better entertainment? their innocent and
fruitful life, was it not worthy of a more calm and quiet death, and of a
more honorable end?

Was it not more fit that the righteous Job, Job 31.17, 18, 19, 20.
who called the fatherless to eat with him, who covered the nakedness of the
poor, and warmed them with the fleece of his own sheep, should have remained
owner and dispenser of his own goods, then the Sabeans and Caldeans, who took
them away for no good use? How many in the Palatinate, how many in France, were
there like unto Act. 9.36.
Tabitha, full of good works, and alms which they did, which have been stripped
and spoiled of all their goods, and brought to the less blessed condition of
asking and receiving! would not their goods have been better in their own
hands, to distribute them to the poor, than in the hands of thieves, of
robbers, of soldiers, which play them at cards and dice, and waste them upon
their lusts?

This question is very difficult; Though the faithful know, that Ier. 12.1.
God is righteous, and that Job 33.13.
he gives not account of all bis deeds, yet they plead with him, and often
control his judgments. The weaker sort, seeing the righteous man beaten in
pieces like a potsheard, are dismayed and scandalized. The dog. Atheists take
occasion thereby to deny Gods providence, and to flowt poor Christians, asking
of them, Just. Apologet. 1. Clement Stromat. lib. 4.
If God regards you, why suffer ye persecution? why are ye put to death? If ye
answer, as some did in the primitive Church, that it is not Gods will that we
be persecuted, but that he has foretold, by manner of prophecy, the things
which we are to suffer, to prepare us to patience; ye shall find some Julian
who will tell you out of the Scriptures, that Matt. 10.30.
the very hairs of your head are all numbered, and that one of them shall not
fall on the ground without your Father.

VII. Ps. 77.13.
Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary: There we find, that Deu. 32.4.
all his ways are judgment: that he is a God of truth, and without
iniquity; that he is just and right: yea, that Ps. 25.10
all the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his
Covenant, and his Testimonies. Let us then enter into Gods Sanctuary, and there
we shall learn: or because we are already entered in his Sanctuary, and are
here present before his Majesty in his holy Temple, to hear him speak in his
own cause, let us learn of his own mouth, that he stirs righteous men up
and down, haleth them through the water, the fire, the swords, casts them in
a puddle of tribulations, out of which they find no issue, for their sake, for
other men's sake, for his own sake: for their sake, because he will either
correct, or weane, or try, or exercise, or honor them; for our sake, because
he will instruct us: for his own sake, because he will show his justice in
the correction, his wisdom in the direction, his strength in the erection and
lifting up, his glory in the wonderful protection of his distrested Children.

VIII. Many men are of a slavish and naughty disposition. Pro. 29.19.
A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he understand, he will
not answer: except the rod whizze upon his shoulders, he will not stir. A
Pro. 26.3.
whip for the horse, a halter for the ass, and a rod for the fools back. Genesis
16.4.
Agar was proud in Abraham's house, she was brought low in the wilderness:
Manasses was incorrigible so long as he was peaceable in Jerusalem, but when he
was bound with fetters, carried to Babylon, and cast into a dark prison, 2.
Chro. 33.11, 12.
he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of
his Fathers. Then was fulfilled that which is written in the Psalms, Psalm.
107.10, 11, 12, 13.
Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in
affliction and iron, because they rebelled against the words of God, and
contemned the counsel of the most high: Therefore he brought down their heart
with labor: they fell down, and there was none to help. Then they cried unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses. Matthew.
4.24, 25.
Those which were taken with diverse diseases and torments, followed Christ to
be healed: they that were whole, contemned him.

The same befalls the most righteous, who often slumber, and, if they were not
awaked by afflictions, should die in their sins. Joseph's brethren never
bethought themselves of their sin, until they were rudely used in Egypt:
then they called unto mind their iniquity, and said one to another, Genesis
42.21.
We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of
his soul, when he besought us, and we would not be are: Therefore is this
distress come upon us: So David said, Psalm 119.67.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word. So Ion
1.5.
Jonas slept profoundly in the ship; but Ion. 2.1.
he prayed in the fishes belly: for prosperity Iulls men asleep, but
adversity rouzeth them up: Therefore God said of his people which had sinned
against him, Hos. 5.15.
I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and
seek my face: In their affliction they will seek me early. And Isaiah
witnesses of his time, that such whiskers whistled not in vain about the
Churches ears, saying, Isa. 26.16
Lord, in trouble they have remembered thee: they powered out their humble prayer
when thy chastening was upon them. Look what the biting collyre is to the pin
in the eyes, the scorching cauter to the headache and catharres, the sharp
pricking of the Surgeons launcet, and bitter physic to a continual fever, the
Creuset and the fire to gold and silver; the same are afflictions to the
righteous man's sins, which are a suffusion and web upon the eye of the mind,
a theume choking Gods Spirit, and suffocating the heart, the Pleurisy and
pestilent fever of the soul, the dross and tin of all godly affections.

So Number. 12 1, 2, 10.
Miriam was healed of her pride by leprosy: So 2. Sam. 12.11.
David learned to be chaste, by the incests of his own sons: so Jonas learned
obedience in the Whales belly: So Luke 1.20.
Zacharias, by the loss of his speech, was cured of his incredulity, and
taught, not to open his mouth in time to come, but to praise and bless the
Lord his God: So the whole Church of Judah Lev. 26.4.
was humbled under the mighty hand of God; and, accepting of the punishment of
her iniquity, learned to say with heart and mouth, Micah 7.9.
I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him:
So the Churches of France by these last troubles were brought low, and taught
to walk in Gods presence with fear and trembling: for howsoever they were
innocent of the crime of rebellion laid to their charge; their vanity, their
ambition, their pride, their filthy covetousness, their loathing of the
Gospel, their security, was become so exceeding great, that God could not
bear with them any longer: They trusted in their little paltrie holds and
forts, which they had raised as high as the clouds, and said not only in their
hearts, as Edom did, but with their mouths also, Obad. 3.
Who shall bring us down to the ground? The Lord heard the words of their
pride, and in the turning of an hand, turned them topsie turvie; leaving only
some ruins, as traces of his indignation, whereby their Children may know,
that there dwelt their Fathers. Then we acknowledged, then we said, Pro. 18.10.
The Name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs into it, and is
safe.

For this cause, S. Peter calls Persecutions 1. Pet. 4.17.
Gods judgments: Christ calls them Rev. 3.19.
his chastisements: and S. Paul gives the one and the other name to all kind
of afflictions, saying that 1. Cor. 11.31, 32.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: But when we are
judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. I say then, that the first cause of the righteous man's Evils, is his
own sins; and their first end, is his correction and amendment.

IX. Now he is not only guilty of sins past, for which he is chastised, but
also he is prone to fall in sin again, as bearing in his breast the seed of
all iniquity: Alas, Alas! Job 15.16.
how abominable and filthy is man, which drinks iniquity like water!
Therefore God, like an expert Physician, mingleth unto him a cup of
afflictions, not only to cure him of former diseases, but also to preserve him
from diseases to come. For tribulations are not only medicines, but also
antidotes and preservatives against the poison of sin. They are bitter
potions in taste, but they either restore or preserve health. Job 33.14, 15,
16, 17, 18.
Elihu says in the book of Job, that God speaks once, yea twice: yet man
perceives it not. He instructs men by his word, he sends to them his
servants once, twice, thrice, to advise them of their duty, and they yield
not attention unto his admonitions: Then he opens the ears of men, and
seals his chastisement upon them: that he may withdraw man from his purpose,
and drive away pride from man. So he keeps back his soul from the pit, and
his life from perishing by the sword; seasoning him with the salt of
afflictions, that he rot not.

I will not enroll Genesis 12.17.
Pharao king of Egypt, nor Genesis 20.6, 7.
Abimelech, king of Gerar, among righteous men: yet when they would have sinned
against God, by abusing Sara, Abraham's wife, God plagued them with so great
plagues, that they were affraide to touch her. Surely David was a righteous
man, and ye may perceive how in Absolems rebellion against him, God gave him
with one stone two blows: he chastised him for the murder and adultery which
he had committed, and restrained him from sin for the time to come. The one
and the other for his good, as he confessed, saying, Psalm. 119.73.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes. Who was more righteous then Paul? yet confessing his own infirmity,
and acknowledging how he was by nature inclined to pride, he says, that 2.
Cor. 12.7.
there was given to him a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, lest he should be exalted above measure. This Angel of Satan was not the
devil himself, but, as Chrysostom ibi, and Homil. 1. ad popul. Antiochen.
Chrysostom esteems, wicked men inspired of the devil, such as was
Alexander the Coppersmith, which did him much evil: such as were also the
Jews, the Gentiles, the Tyrants, and all Infidells, which persecuted him
beyond all measure. This then is as if he had said, The Lord might stay all
persecutions, and hand-fetter all those which vex me; but because I was caught
up into Paradise, and heard there unspeakeable words, and might have waxed
proud through the excellency of revelations, be has permitted these Angels of
Satan to buffet me by diverse persecutions and tribulations.

Because then that Peter and Paul, and their mates, howsoever they be
wonderful among men in holiness, in righteousness, and in most rare gifts,
still are men, and easy to be overtaken with sin; they have need to be held
in with the curb of a sharp and rigorous discipline, lest they suffer
themselves to be carried away by the boisterous wind of their own vanity and
pride: for as serpents are bred in man, of that which is most inward to him,
even of the marrow of his bones; so arrogancy, and loftiness of mind, is
engendered in holy men, of the knowledge which they have of their own
excellency and righteousness: then they begin to look too much at themselves,
and too little to themselves: then they begin to rely upon their own
excellency, and to forget their maker, as Adam and Eve did, and as it befell
the good king 2. Chro. 32.31. Isa. 38.2.
Hezekiah; when he showed his treasures to the King of Babylons Ambassadors.
This is the high and broad way to hell, and therefore God, with bit and bridle,
draws his chosen ones back from it, and manageth them with rods and spurs?
not for any sin which they have done, but for that which they would do, if
they left the narrow and strait way of humility and modesty. Hear again
what the Apostle says of himself: 2 Cor. 1.8, 9.
We were, says he, pressed out of measure, above our strength: insomuch that
we despaired even of life: yea, we had the sentence of death in our selves.
Why did God suffer a man so holy, a servant so profitable, an Apostle so
excellent, to be so hardly entreated? God permitted it, says he, that we
should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead.

If God did curb after this manner his holy Apostle, what wonder if he tie
others which are not so holy, to an iron chain, and tame them with many
oppressions? For as standing water breeds frogs, toads, and stinking mud;
as the ground which is not tilled, yields nothing but brambles, thorns, and
thistles; and as the Vine which is not cut, waxes naught, and, in stead of
good and sweet Raisins, brings forth wild Grapes: even so righteous men,
when they are not like racked wine, drawn with crosses out of the lees of
their natural corruption, they degenerate from their former righteousness,
and become filthy, stinking, loathsome to God, and to man. But when, by
manifold afflictions, 1. Cor. 4.16.
our outward man is subdued and brought under; the inward man is renewed day by
day, 1. Pet. 4.2.
that we no longer live the rest of our time in the flesh to the lusts of men,
but to the will of God, and so Heb. 12.10.
be made partakers of his holiness. Therefore let us reform our judgments,
refrain our tongues, and conclude with Jeremiah: Lam. 3.27.
It is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth.

X. Sometimes God shakes his whips, and scourges about the ears of the
righteous man, not only to correct him of sins past, to weane him from
sins to come, but also to try him, and to know what is in his heart. Deuteronomy. 8.2
Thou shall remember, says Moses to the people of Israel, all the way which
the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the wilderness to humble
thee, and to prove thee, and to know what was in thine heart, whether thou
would keep his commandments, or no. See in one affliction, three ends
whereunto God aimed: The first was, Number. 14.29, 33, 34, 35.
to correct them of their murmuring against him: The seoond, to humble them,
and keep them in obedience for the time to come: The third, to prove them, and
to know what was in their hearts. Not that he is ignorant of the most secret
thoughts of men's hearts, Psalm. 7.9.
for the righteous God tries the hearts and reins, but because he is said to
know, when he makes that which is in them, known both to themselves, and to
others: As when he said to Abraham, Genesis 22.12.
Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me: his meaning was, Now I have made thy faith in me,
thy fear of me, thy love toward me, so manifest, that all the world hereafter
shall acknowledge it, speak of it, and wonder at it.

XI. Now it is certain, that often God casts his children into a sea of
afflictions, not to cleanse them of any sin wherewith they were soyled, not to
keep them clean from any sin wherewith they might be defiled; but only to
make trial of them by diverse temptations, which he does for two respects:

First, as a Surgeon by plasters draws out into the skin the inward
impostume which is hid in the flesh, that by suppuration it may be healed: so
God by temptations brings men to the acknowledgement of their hid sins and
natural weakness; that finding how prone they are to evil, and how weak to
resist it, they trust not any more in themselves, but in God, 2 Cor. 12.9.
whose strength is made perfect in weakness. So it is written of Hezekiah,
that when the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon were sent unto him, to
enquire of the wonder that was done in the land, 2. Chron. 32, 31.
God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart. Then
he was puffed up with vain glory: whereof being advised by the Prophet, and
threatened with a most heavy punishment, he humbled himself, and answered, Isa.
38.8.
Good is the word of the Lord, which he has spoken. So Peter perceiving how
soon, and upon how light a cause he had denied his good master, whom he loved
most tenderly, and that after such bragging, that Mat. 26.33, 35, 75.
though all men should be offended because of him, yet would he never be
offended, yea, though he should dye with him, yet would he not deny him; was
confounded within himself, and astonished at his childish weakness, went out,
and wept bitterly. What the worhy Martyrs of Christ, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Anne de Bourg, Counselor of the Parliament at Paris,
thought of themselves, when for fear of death they recanted, how they were
abashed and ashamed of their lightness, the stories of their Martyrdomes bear
witness. Twice and thrice happy had been the young man in the Gospel, to
whom the Lord said, Mat. 19.21.
If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor,
and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me; if he had come
by this commandment to the knowledge of the covetousness, which lay lurking
in his narrow heart: for then he had not gone away sorrowful, but had
acknowledged his hidden corruption, and cried to the Lord, Help my weakness.
For that commandment was not a precept requiring actual obedience; but a
precept of Trial, to disclose his insatiate avarice, and make it known to
himself and others.

Secondly, as the Arabian incense, and most excellent spices perfume not the
air with their sweet smelling savor, till they be rubbed, brayed, or cast into
the fire: and as the most precious jewels have a more shining gloss, and
graceful bright color, in the darkness of the night, than in the most
radiant sunshine of a fair summer-day; so the jewels of Gods graces,
wherewith the righteous man is adorned, have not such a glistering and grace in
the radiant and beame-shining day of his prosperity, as in the gloomie and
clowdy night of his adversity. Therefore Saint James says, Iam. 1.2, 3.
My brebrethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse tentations: whereof
he rendereth this reason; knowing, that the trying of your faith, works
patience: for if there were no adversity, where should patience be? and if the
righteous man were not broken and brayed with crosses, and tribulations, how
should the good smell of his patience, of his faith, of his humility, bemuske
the Church of God? Gold is gold wheresoever it be, and keeps its own beauty
and gracefulness: but put it in the Creuset, cast it in the fire, and it shall
cast a more glistering brightness than it did before. The righteous man is
Gods gold, and a precious jewel in his Treasure: In all states, his innoceny,
integrity, meekness, is known to some men; but specially his faith is made
manifest when he is in the fiery furnace of tribulation: then his dross and
tin is evaporated, and vanishes away like smoke; then the goodly metal of
Gods graces holds firm: then they give more light, and show more grace, than
all the gold of Ophir. As it is written in the eleventh chapter of the Prophecy
of Daniel, v. 35. That some of them of understanding, shall fall, to try them,
and to purge and make them white, even to the time of the end: and as it is
said in the third chapter of Malachy, v. 2, 3. That the Lord is like a Resiners
fire, and like Fullers soape: and he shall sit as a Refiner and purifier of
silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and
silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.
Therefore Saint Peter calls our crosses 1. Pet. 1.7.
trials of our faith, much more precious than of gold that perishes, though
it be tried with fire: And Saint Paul calls them Romans 5.3
Tribulations or Pressings, because that whatsoever persecuters intend, they
are the Lords wine press, whereby the heavenly liquor of spiritual graces
lurking in righteous men, which are the sweet grapes of Christ's Vineyard,
planted with his own hand, are expressed and imparted to others, who find it
to be of a sweet and most excellent relish.

XII. Let us bring two or three examples to illustrate the truth of this
doctrine: Can we seek, or if we seek, shall we find any more fit and
convenient to our purpose, than the example of Job? he shines like gold, even
in the eyes of God, in his greatest prosperity: and God himself is his
witness before the Angels of heaven, and Satan who had thrust himself among
them, that then, even then, Job 1.^.
there was none like him in the earth; a perfect and an upright man, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil. The truth spoke, but Satan believed him not:
what God witnessed of Job; that he was before men, and Satan could not deny
but he seemed so: what then could he say against him? Nothing which was true:
yet which he knew to be, and shall ever be too true of many men in the world;
and which he suspected, might be true in him also: Job 1.9, 10, 11.
Does Job, says he, fear God for naught? have thou not made a hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? thou have
blessed the work of his hands, and his cattle is increased in the land: but
put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will curse thee to
thy face. The sum of the accusation is this: Job is an Hypocrite, he serves
thee, because thou blessest him: take thy blessings from him, and he will curse
thee.

Therefore God, to show that his Saints are not slaves, or hirelings, serving
him for the reward, but loving and respectuous children, walking before him
with an upright heart for conscience sake; gives all that Job had, into Satan's
hands. When Champions and Master-wrestlers walk abroad, arrayed in soft and
precious clothing; it is hard to judge of the health, integrity, and
dispositions of their bodies, and of the ability and strength of their limbs:
but when they come naked from the girdle upward to the lists or wrestling
place, all the beholders see the proportion of their members; and as they
perceive them to be bigge-membred, and their limbs well set, judge of their
vigor and might: So when Job was clothed with Gods goods, as with a garment,
his patience, his faith, his constancy was known of few: but when the devil
stripped him of all, when he came naked to the theater to wrestle with the foyler
and overthrower of mankind; when then he cried aloud, Job 1.21 2.2
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord; when
speaking so, he sinned not, and attributed nothing undecent to God; his
prowess and valor was made manifest to Angels and men, who rejoiced for his
victory: and God himself, as it were clapping his hands, and applauding him,
upbraided his enemy, saying with a nipping scoff, Job 2.3.
Have thou considered my servant Job, how still he holds fast his integrity?
The crafty and cunning fox is not discountenanced for this first foil, and
bitter jest, but replying, V. 4, 5, 6.
Skin for skin, yea, all that a man has, will he give for his life: but
put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will curse
thee to thy face; he checked God, as being the cause of his overthrow, and of
Jobs victory: as if he had said, What wonder if Job have not cursed thee? for
thou have spared him: but now touch him in his health, which is most sensible
unto him: let me rack his sinews, bruise his bones, tear his flesh in
pieces, and I undertake he shall curse thee by and by. See again these two
champions in the place of battle, in the presence of God, of his holy Angels,
and of men: Satan smote him with sore biles, from the sole of his foot unto his
crown; he stirred up his wife, his special friends, his servants, little
children, all that knew him against him, to tempt him, to mock him, to revile
him. When they slept, and he hoped that the night should ease his complaint,
his adversary scared him with dreams, and terrified him through visions: ye
see with what slight and might his enemy struggleth with him, how he
endeavors to supplant him, to wring out of him some uncomely word against
God. But he remaining immooveable in his integrity, Job 2.10.
What, says he? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not
receive evil? Job 13.15, 16.
though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: I will maintain mine own ways
before him: he also shall be my salvation. In all this did he not sin with
his lips, and spoke nothing unbeseeming a Saint, and unworthie of the Lord
his God.

Then was fulfilled that which he said, Job 23.10.
When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold. Then Satan overcome,
shows a fair pair of heels, and, putting his finger on his mouth, appeared
no more before God, to craake. Satan, why have thou remooved thy foot? why
have thou made head to thy adversary with thy heels? have thou not done
against him all that thou could? thou have blasted with lightening and
thunder, or carried away, by the violent hands of robbers, all his goods: thou
have made him desolate, and without children: there is no part of his body
which thou have spared; and it seems that thou do not let him live, but to
bewail his own disaster: wherefore then do thou not follow thy thrust, and
prosecute thy designs? Alas! says he, I have done all that I could: I have
done nothing of that which I intended, for he has not cursed God: for this I
plotted all these mischiefs against him. And I am so far from gaining any
thing thereby, that much otherwise, casting him in the burning furnace of most
sensible and smarting tribulations, I have made him more beautiful and
glorious. I deemed that he should curse God, and lo he blesses him. I thought
to bring him in contempt upon the ashes: and lo, lo, he is more righteous,
more constant, more worshipful upon the dunghill, than he was in his goodly
and gorgeous house, in the honorable company of his wife, children, friends,
and servants. The oriental pearls are not so fair as his pockes: the
smelling of roses is not so sweet as the stink of his breath; his sores are
cleerer and brighter than the beams of the Sun. I have (alas!) procured unto
him an eternal renown upon the face of the whole earth: I am cause, that he
shall be from henceforth to all men a pattern and example of faith, of
patience, of constancy in their most heavy calamities. I have dug a pit
for him, and I am fallen into the ditch which I have made: he is exalted, and I
am confounded.

XIII. This example is sufficient. Add unto it that which is written of the
Bride in the song of Solomon. She is so inflamed with the love of her Spouse,
that Cant. 1.2.
her only desire is to be led into his chamber, that there he may kiss her
with the kisses of his mouth, that there she may be glad, and rejoice in his
love. But when he is absent from her, as he seems to be in her affliction;
when Cant. 3.2.
she rises, and goes about the city in the streets, and in the broad ways,
to seek him whom her soul loves; Cant. 5.7
when the watch men that go about the city, find her, and smite her, and
wound her; when the keepers of the walls take away her veil from her, and yet
she leaves not off to cry to them, Saw ye him whom my soul loves? the flames
of her love make a fairer blaze, and cast a greater heat. Then, then, all they
which behold her, see evidently, that Cant. 8.6, 7.
love is strong as death, that jealousy is hard as the grave: the coals
thereof are coals of fire, and a most vehement flame. Many waters cannot
quench that love, neither can the floods drown it: If a man give all the
substance of his house for love, it would utterly be contemned.

XIV. How should the love, the patience, the zeal, the constancy of Paul have
bin known, if God had not crushed and ground him with continual tentations and
afflictions? wheresoever he went, he was advertised by the holy Ghost, Act.
20.23, 24.
that bonds and afflictions waited for him. O how unpleasant and fearful a
message would that be to many at this day? and he what? But, faith he, none of
these things moove me, neither count I my life dear unto my felfe, so that I
might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Act. 21.11, 22, 13.
The Disciples besought him with tears, not to go up to Jerusalem, where
Agabus had prophesied that he should be bound: But he rebuking them.
answered, What mean ye to weep, and break mine heart? for I am ready, not to
be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

XV. When the Palatinate was in peace, when the Churches of France lived in
their towns of surety without fear, what wonder if they professed the
Gospel publicly? But now when their sorts are levelled and cast down to the
ground, when their towns are dismantled, when they are curbed with strong
Citadels, when they are disarmed among armed enemies, when they see nothing in
their streets but the plagues of Egypt, but swarms of Priests, which are a
most noisome mixture of filthy and slinking flies, but great store of Jesuits,
which like loathsome frogs come unsent for, leaping and croaking into their
houses, and bed-chambers, but an infinite multitude of Monks, which as so many
locusts eat up all their substance, but armies of soldiers, which are to them
the louzie disease wherewith their bodies are pestered, their flesh is
consumed, all the blood of their veins is sucked up: when they look for
nothing but present death, when a toy shall take their enemies in the head, to
compel them once again to solemnize with tears, and shedding of their
innocent blood, S. Bartholomewes feast; Then to persevere in the faith, then to
maintain steadfastly and stoutly the Gospel, then to abhor more and more
Papistry, and the man of sin, to contemn the contempt of insolent Papists,
to shut up their ears against the charming voice of the crafty Jesuit, to
hold their mouths open to confess Jesus Christ, and to bless God, is a
manifest demonstration of true faith, and of that constancy which is worthy of
a Christian. Wherefore as Moses said to the people of Israel, that God would
suffer Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.
false Prophets, and dreamers of dreams to arise among them, to prove them,
and to know whether they loved the Lord their God with all their heart, and
with all their soul: And as the Apostle said to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.19.
There must be heresies amongst you, that they which are approoved, may be made
manifest among you: So I say, that the righteous man must have many evils,
that it may be known that he serves God, neither for the present goods which
he has received of his bountiful hand, neither for hope of any worldly
benefit to come, but for his own sake: as a lover seeks no recompense of
his love, but that which he finds in the dignity and excellency of the
thing beloved.

XVI. Moreover, these many evils are as so many exercises and practices of the
manifold graces wherewith God has copiously furnished and graced the righteous
man. God that said to him, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee, 1. Faith.
nor forsake thee. If he believe that, when his Garners are full of Corn, when
his Canes burst with Wine, when he sits in peace among his own people, it
is no wonder but here, here is a good exercise of his faith, to believe so when
he sees nothing on the left, nothing on the right hand, nothing before,
nothing behind, but needinesse, but want, but beggerie: when he is threatened
with present death, to believe certainly, to say resolutely, as the three
Salamanders did to Nebucadnezzar, Dan. 3.17
Our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King. When the deep gulf of the red
sea is before our faces; when Pharao, and his most dreadful and cruel army,
follows us hotly at the heels; when high and steep mountains run along by
our sides, and bereave us of all hope of flight, then to say, Exodus 14 13.
Fear ye not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show you to day: In a present evil to look for present deliverie; in the
midst of the valley of the shadow of death, to see, to embrace life; Heb. 11
24, 25, 26.
to refuse great riches and honors, for the denying of Christ: to choose
poverty by confessing him: to prefer suffering of affliction with the people
of God, to the enjoying of the pleasures of sin for a season: to esteem the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, as Moses did,
and as many Christians have done, and do still, is a most wonderful and
special exercise of true faith.

What Virtues are more commanded unto us by precept, 2. Meeknes, charity
and recommended unto us by most excellent examples of the Patriarchs, of the
Prophets, of David, of Jesus Christ, of his holy Apostles, than humility,
meekness, charity? where find ye better occasion to practice them, than in
your greatest adversity? 1. Cor. 4 11, 12.
Ye are reviled, and ye bless: ye are defamed, and ye entreat, as Paul did: ye
are stoned to death, as Steven was, and ye kneel down, and cry with a loud
voice, Acts 7.6
Lord lay not this sin to their charge. This is true meekness: this is true
charity.

We are tossed to and fro with most grievous and tedious tribulations; 3.
Patience
then, as the Apostle says, Heb. 10.36.
we have need of patience, that after we have done the will of God, we may
receive the promise: then it is time to be that which we profess. We say, that
Patience is the fairest flower of of the Christian man's garden. Other flowers
delight in fair weather, and grow not but in ground well weeded and gnibbed
up: This grows among the brairs and thistles of stinging tribulations, and
spreads most fair, when the weather is most foul. Frost and Snow, Hail and
Lightning Storms and Tempests make it to blossom with a most pleasant show,
and to breathe a most sweet sent. Then the righteous man, not looking to the
stone that hurts him, but lifting up his eyes to the almighty hand of the
heavenly Father which threw it, says, as David said of Shimei who cursed him,
2. Sam. 16.10.
So let him curse: for the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then
say, Wherefore have thou done so? Men have their mischeivous ends when they
afflict the righteous man, and it may be that they molest him wrongfully.
Tribulations also may come upon him by his own faults, and many other ways;
yet God has an hand in all, and his most wise providence guides them. Shall
he then repine? shall he kick against the pricks? God forbid: But rather,
knowing that his sufferings are Gods own work, and that Deu. 32.4.
all his ways are judgment, he takes David for his President, and says with
him, I was Psalm. 39.9
dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Here, here then is the
wonderful patience of the Saints, who bridle their mouths from grudging
against God, and open them not in their temptations, but to pour out their
humble requests and prayers before him:

Prayers, 4. Prayers.
which faint and as it were droope in the fair summer-dayes of our peace and
wealth, but recover their vigor, yea, redouble their force in the fleeting and
freezing winter of our calamity. God says to the righteous man, Psalm. 50.15
Call upon me in the day of trouble so he does Jonas Ioh. 2.1.
snorted in the ship, but he was awake, and prayed in the Whales belly. The
Disciples, so long as the sea was calm and quiet, prayed not; but when the
tempest arose, and the winds spoke loud, and the surges threatened the ship with
sinking, then they prayed, then they cried, Matt. 8.25.
Lord save us, we perish. So Peter walked a little while upon the sea without
praying: but when he saw the wind boistrous, and began to sink, he cried,
Matt. 14 30.
Lord save me. Prayer is the mean whereby God bestows his blessings upon us:
It is the bucket which we dive and thrust far into the undraynable fountain
of his graces, that we may receive of his fullness, and grace for grace. Then
tribulations are behoovefull unto us, that by them knowing our need, we may be
moved to pray.

Are we not saved Romans 8.24.
by hope? 5. Hope.
what hope, what desire can we have of heavenly things, when all things laugh
upon us in the world? the present enjoying of the one, expells out of our
hearts the desire and hope of the other. Therefore by the counterpoize of the
evils of this life, God stirs up in us a most vehement desire of the life to
come, and holds our hope perpetually busied in praying and crying, Rev. 22.20.
Even so; Come Lord Jesus.

XVII. All these graces without perseverance are nothing: for Matt. 24.13.
he that shall endure unto the end, 6. Perseverance, Constancy.
shall be saved: And there is no perseverance without constancy. The maine
object of Constancy, is tribulation: neither is it seen but in things very
difficult to undertake, or to overcome. 2. Mac. 7.
Consider the courage of seven brethren suffering all kinds of most cruel
torments, because they would not, at the Kings commandment, transgress Gods
commandment, and eat swines flesh. Wonder at the constancy of their
marveilous mother, who, with a manly heart in a woman's breast, exhorted them to
take their death cheerfully for Gods cause; and after their execution, went
joyfully to the burning caldron, and sealed also the truth with her blood. How
many fair promises were made unto them! But Heb. 11.35.
they refused to be delivered, that they might obtain a better resurrection.

In the Ecclesiastical stories of Christians, such examples are infinite. At
Eusebius. hister. Eccles. lib. 5. c. 1. Sanctus.
Vienne in France, a Deacon of the Church, called Sanctus, being torn in
pieces with hot pincers, being at diverse times so cruelly racked, that he was
nothing but wounds, but bruises, but putrefying fores, but a piece of swollen
flesh, without almost any figure or shape of a man; could never be compelled to
tell his name, his family, his dwelling place. His only answer to all their
rackings, scorchings, burnings, was, I am a Christian. Neither could the
Executioners, by the Tympan, by the hot and burning pans, by the teeth of wild
beasts, wring out of Blandina a maid, and servant to a Dame of that same town,
any word but this, Blandina.
I am a Christian, and we do no evil. When Decius persecuted the Church,
Babylas Bishop of Antioch, Babylas.
led to the place of execution with his three sons, desired that they should
be first put to death, to the end that he might exhort and confirm them: which
when he had done, his wife comforted him; and after she had seen her husband
and three children suffer death for Christ's sake, buried them together. Much
otherwise, the Father and the Son with whom I was familiar; The Father
beseeched that he should die first, that his Son, who was a godly and learned
Preacher, might comfort him. Then it was a wonderful spectacle to Papists, to
see the Son at the foot of the gallows, preaching to his Father the merits
of the death of Christ, the virtue of his resurrection, the vanity of the
world, the unspeakable joys of Paradise; to hear him crying alowd, Father, ye
cannot so soon knock at the gate of heaven, but Christ will open: ye cannot
so soon enter, but I shall follow; to hear and behold the old and venerable
Father answering with a cheerful countenance, Son, I see the heavens open,
and Jesus Christ at the right hand of God. Then they were amazed to mark
again the young Minister forgetting himself, and with a constant face
preaching to other, two which were also in the executioners hands, the
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and life everlasting: To
consider how constantly the four died, with what fervencie of celestial
prayers they commended their spirits into Gods hands; Then the chief of the
Capuchin Monks said to his companions, Si coelum Huguenotis datur, istis
debetur: If heaven be given to Huguenots, it is due to these men: Then some
Gentlemen cried, O happy religion, which breeds in men a contempt of death,
which we dread most, and a most sure hope of salvation! who would not, who
should not fight manfully for the defense, and suffer constantly for the
confession of such a religion? This day only have we begun to know Christ:
Condemned men have been our Preachers: We shall never hate Huguenotes any more.

XVIII. Learn of all this discourse, what difference there is betwixt the
upright man and the hypocrite John the Baptist calls afflictions Mat. 3.12.
Gods fan, wherewith when he has thoroughly purged his floor, the chafe
flies away into the air, and finally is burnt up with unquenchable fire: but
the wheat is gathered into the garner. Hypocrites are chafe, lying in time of
peace intermixed with the faithful, which are Gods wheat: but Psalm. 1.4, 5.
the wind of persecution drives them away, neither can they stand in the
congregation of the righteous: for then there is nothing to be seen but
Apostasies, defections, abjuring of the truth, renouncing of the Gospel,
forsaking of all Communion with the Church. Jesus Christ compares tribulation
and persecution Mat 13.5, 6, 8, 20, 21, 23.
to the burning Sun, scorching the seed which has no deepnesse of earth, so
that it withers away; but warming the seed which falls into good ground, and
making it to bring forth fruit; some an hundred fold, some sixty fold, some
thirty fold. The Hypocrite receives the word with joy, but because he has
not in himself the root of an upright conscience; when persecution arises
because of word, he is offended, and starteth back. The righteous man is the
good ground: the sun of persecution may blacken him, but it cannot burn him.
In the most hot days of tribulation, he is most plentious in good works:
therefore the whole Church cries in the Canticles, Cant. 1.5, 6.
O ye daughters of Jerusalem, I am black, but comely: Bernar. in Cant. ser, 25.
Black in your judgment; Comely in the judgment of God and Angels. Black
without, Vestro maleficio.
by your mischief; for the Sun of persecution has looked upon me: my
mothers children were angry with me: these good Catholics have persecuted me:
Comely within, Dei beneficio.
through Gods benefit: for Psalm. 45.13.
the Kings daughter is all glorious within: As the tents of of Kedar, as the
curtains of Solomon, which are all black and dustie without; but within are
decked with most precious implements.

To conclude, cast gold in water: it keeps its own yellow shining: cast it
in the fire, and melt it, it becomes brighter. Cast earth in water, it is by
and by changed into mud: cast hay in water, it will suddenly rot: cast earth in
the fire, it is instantly turned into dust, and made a sport to the wind: cast
hay into the fire, with a blaze it is made smoke and ashes. So befalls it to
the righteous man and the hypocrite. The hypocrit, when he thriveth most, and
full-gorgeth himself with pleasures, is like hay and a lump of earth in the
water, he is nothing but rottenness and putrefaction: when Gods hand is upon
him, he howles, he despites God, he curses him to his face, and in the
stirring of an eye is consumed; he perishes, he vanishes like earth and straw
in the fire. But the righteous man in his greatest prosperity shines in all
godliness before men, as gold in water: and when he is cast in the fiery
furnace of tribulation, he is like gold in the fire: his works then yield a
more radiant luster than before.

XIX. The Lord in his mercy sanctify us, and make us thoroughly righteous, that
when the day of our trial shall come, we may be found to be fine metal; and
abiding the hammer, the scissers, and the fire, may through faith and patience
inherit the promises of grace, peace, and eternal life, through the merits of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who 1. Ioh. 5.20.
is the true God and eternal life: to whom is due, and to whom let us render,
now and for evermore, all praise, honor and glory. Amen.

SERMON V. Of the causes of the righteous man's Evils.
PSALM XXXIV. XIX. Many are the Evils of the Righteous.


1. THe righteous man when he suffers for righteousness sake, is honored.

2. It is a great glory to suffer for a good cause;

3. Namely for God, as many have done.

4. To suffer for the Gospel is most glorious of all.

5. Of those which suffer for the Gospel, some are Confessors, some Martyrs.

6. What it is to be a Martyr.

7. Three conditions required in a Martyr.

8. The great glory of Martyrdom, in that it makes the Martyrs resemble the
Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints;

9. Yea, and Jesus Christ himself, yet with four differences.

10. God afflicts righteous men for other men's sake; 1. That they may be
converted;

11.2. That they may be instructed, not to worship righteous men;

12.3. That they may be spurred to imitate their Christian virtues;

13.4. That they may consider Gods wrath against sin, and fear.

14. Finally, God afflicts the righteous man for his own glory, whereof
there are many examples in the old Testament,

15. And principally in the new Testament.

16. The afflictions of the righteous are no tokens of Gods wrath, but of his
love.

17. Carriage of the Churches of France in their affliction.

18. Exhortation to bear Christ's cross courageously.

19. Prayer.

I.GOD often loades the righteous man with crosses, to honor him: when he
bears his own cross, Luke 22.33, 40, 41.
as the malefactors which were crucified with Christ did, then he is chastised;
and as one of them said, We receive the due reward of our deeds, so may he:
when he is persecuted for righteousness sake, as David was by Saul, and Job
by the Devil; or bears Christ's cross, as Mat. 27.32.
Simon the Cyrenian did, then his faith, hope, charity is tried; then his
patience and constancy is exercised, then he is very much honored.

II. Ye know, that Cain slew his brother: 1. Ioh. 3.12.
and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his
brothers righteous. Genesis 19.9
Lot was threatened by the vicious Sodomites, because that, being a forreiner
and stranger, he rebuked them. Genesis 37.2
Joseph was hated and sold of his brethren, because he advertised his father of
their misdemeanour: Genesis 39.9
he was also cast in prison, because he would not sin with his masters wife.
David complained of his enemies, saying, Psalm. 38.20.
They that render evil for good, are mine adversaries, because I follow the
thing that good is. John Baptist was beheaded, because he said to Herod, Mat.
14.4, 10.
It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife. All these suffered for
righteousness sake, and for the uprightness of a good conscience before God;
but they suffered not for God. There be degrees in righteousness: The first is,
when a man suffers for any good cause: Is not that honorable and glorious
before God and men? 1. Pet. 2.9, 20.
For (as Peter, writing to servants, says) this is thanke-worthy, if a man,
for conscience toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully: for what glory
is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but
if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God.

III. The second is, when he suffers immediately for God, for the public
profession of his holy Word. When Dan. 3.18.
the three children did choose rather to be burnt in the furnace, than to
worship Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, they suffered for God: when Dan. 6.16
David was cast into the Lions den, because he would not obey the Kings
idolatrous decree, he suffered for God: when 2. Mac. 6.19.
Eleazar, one of the principal Scribes, chused rather to dye gloriously, than
to live stained with the eating of Swines flesh, he suffered for God: when the
2. Mac. 7.
the seven brethren and their mother were fried, scorched, dismembered, because
they would not transgress the Law, they suffered for God: when the whole
Church at that time made her moan to God, and said, Psalm. 44.22.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter, she suffered for God. If it be glorious to suffer for a good cause,
is it not more glorious to suffer for Gods cause?

IV. But to suffer for the Gospel, is the most glorious of all. Romans 1.17.
For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. There
is evidently before our eyes set forth our Lord Jesus Christ, who because he
Dan 9.14
has brought unto us everlasting righteousness, and 1. Cor. 1.30.
is made unto us of God wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption, is with good and just cause called, ler. 23.6.
the Lord our righteousness: Therefore he who suffers for Christ, is said
after a most special manner to suffer for righteousness sake. Of such
speaks Christ, where he says, Mat. 5.10.11.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven What that righteousness is, he shows in these words
following: Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

When Rev. 1.9.
John was telegated into the Isle of Pathmos, for the word of God, and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ, he suffered for righteousness: when Ioh. 9.3.4
the man that was borne blind, and restored to sight by Christ, was cast out of
the Synagogue, and excommunicated for Christ's sake, he suffered for
righteousness: when Ioh. 12.10, 11.
the chief Priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus to death, because
that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on Jesus, he
suffered for righteousness: when Ephesians. 3.13 2. Tim. 2.9, 10.
Paul was cast into prison for preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles, and
endured many troubles for the Elects sake, that they might obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory, he suffered for
righteousness: Rev. 6.9.
Those that were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held, whose souls John saw under the altar, suffered for righteousness sake.

V. Of such some are Confessors, some are Martyrs. The faithful who were shut
up in prison for Christ's sake, but were not yet tortured; as also those which
leaving their families, goods, friends, and native soil, fled to foreign
nations, lest they should be constrained to deny Christ; were called Cypr.
epist. 9. and 21.
Confessors. All those which endured horrible and great torments for the
Gospels sake, though they were not put to death, were named Martyrs. Tertullian
calls them Tert. ad Martyrs, cap. 1.
Martyrs designatos, appointed to be Martyrs. Eusebius hist. Ec. l. lib. 5. cap.
2.
The Martyrs of Vienne in France, after they had endured all kind of most cruel
and ignominious torments for Christ's sake, taking to themselves the name of
Confessors, refused to be called Martyrs, saying, that the name of Martyrs
pertaines to those only which have sealed their confession by their death: even
as Christ calls Rev. 2.13
Antipas his faithful martyr, because he was slain in Pergamus for the Gospel.

VI. In a general signification, Martyr is a witness. The Gospel whereunto
testimony is given, is called Isa. 8.20. 1. Ioh 5.11.
the Testimony, and, the Rev. 19.10.
Testimony of Jesus. Therefore it is said of John, Ioh. 1.7, 8
that he came for a witness, to bear witness of the light. And Christ says
of himself, Ioh. 18.37.
I came into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth: yea, he
calls himself Rev. 3.14
the Amen, the faithful and true witness: Title, which the Eusebius. hist.
Eccles. lib. 5. c. 2.
Martyrs of Vienne esteemed to be proper unto him, because he not only bare
witness to the truth, but also sealed it with his most precious blood. So all
true Christians are Christ's Martyrs, because their whole life is nothing else
but a martyrdom, that is to say, a testimony which they render to the Gospel,
Martyrium vitae.
that it is of God; and to Jesus Christ, that he is the Son of God:
Testimony, which they bare with such fervencie and zeal, that they would choose
rather to be scorched, racked, torn in pieces, and die the most cruel death
that man's wit can invent, than to leave off to glorify their God and Savior
by public confession, and holiness of life. Such men are Martyrs in affection
before God, who judges of men not according to the event of things, but
according to their will and intention. If any man live in the Church, meaning
to deny Christ, rather than to suffer loss of goods, or any bodily pain for
his sake, he is an Apostate in Gods eyes, though he never be put to that
trial, and die peaceably in his bed, confessing Christ with his mouth. So he
that is resolved to make less account of his life, than of the Gospel, is a
true Martyr before God, 1. Sam. 15.7.
who looks on the heart; though God spare him, and preserve his life from the
hands of the wicked. If Paul said truly of Priscilla and Aquila, that Romans
16.4.
for his life they had laid down their own necks, because they feared not to
undergo all dangers for his releasing: shall God, 1. Reg. 8.39.
who only knows the hearts of all the children of men, neglect the zeal and
affection which his faithful servants have to his service?

Martyrium sanguinis.
Notwithstanding the Church, which diveth not into men's hearts, gives not this
glorious name of Martyrs, but to those which are Martyrs in action; which, I
say, cannot by most exquisite torments, and painful deaths, be driven back
from their profession, which they sealed most constantly with their innocent
blood: which though Christ did, yet we give not the name of Martyrdom to his
death, because it had a more special end, and is the ransom of mankind. The
Church has ever called Steven the first Martyr, as being the first which
suffered death for Christ's cause. Act. 12.2.
James, the brother of John, was the second.

VII. In them ye find the three qualities which are necessarily required in
them whom Christ honoreth with this glorious title: 1. They were full of faith,
and of the holy Ghost. I say, that they were godly men: for a good conscience,
a godly and an upright life, is so needful in this case, that the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 13.3.
Though he give his body to be burned, and have not charity, it profits him
nothing. This is called by some the Martyrdom of life, and is more difficult
than the Martyrdom of blood: for it is not so easy to a man to kill sin in
himself, to burn his covetousness, his pride, his ambition, his lusts and
unlawful desires in the fire of the Spirit, as to suffer the executioner to
cast his body in a fire of wood. Which I pray you all to lay to your hearts,
that in this time of outward peace with men, ye may be Martyrs inward with
God: Martyrs, not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; having your praise, not of
men but of God.

2. They suffered for the best cause that ever any innocent man suffered for.
Suffered they not for the Son of God, who is Psalm. 45.
fairer than all the children of men? Suffered they not for the Gospel, which
is Romans 2.16.
the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes; and therefore
more excellent than the Law, for which the Jews suffered? Let no man say, that
the thief upon the cross was a Martyr, because he repented, and confessed
Christ: for repentance changes not the nature of crosses; neither can it be
said truly, that all those which repent at the hour of their death, are
Martyrs. The thief, confessed he not that Luke 23.41.
he suffered justly, and received the due reward of his deeds? And have we not
this commandment of the holy Ghost, 1. Pet 4.15, 16.
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or
as a busie-body in other men's matters: yet if any man suffer as a Christian,
let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf? Aug. Epi. 61.
and 166.
It is the cause which makes the Martyr, not the punishment. Eusebius. lib. 5
cap. 16. Aug. de correctione Donatistarum, cap. 7.
Let not the Montanists, the Pepusians, the Marcionites, the Donatists, the
Circumcellions, and other heretics brag of their Martyrs: there was never
any heresy so blockish, so ridiculous, so impious, but there was found some
obstinate fellow, who offered to dye willingly for it. Men in our days have
gone to the fire with a merry countenance for maintaining of Atheism. For the
devil has also his Martyrs, whom an ancient Doctor calls most properly,
Martyrs Sataricae virtutis.
Martyrs of a diabolical courage: and therefore Aug. in Psalm. 68.
all the praise of Martyrdom is in the goodness of the cause, not in the
grievousnes of the pain. Martyrs make not their cause to be good, or their
doctrine to be the Gospel: it is the good cause, it is the Gospel that makes
Martyrs. Our sufferings make not our cause just: but a just cause will make our
sufferings glorious.

3. They had the choice of death and life: if they would have recanted, and
joined themselves to the Jews against Christ, they had not been killed. If a
Christ an be put to death for Christ's sake, without offer of life upon
condition of abjuring, the Church calls him not a Martyr; for who knows
what he would have done, if the option of life had been given unto him? Mat.
2.16
The innocent babes which Herod slew for Christ's sake, were not Martyrs,
because they had no such election, neither could they in that age have accepted
it, if it had been offered. Our fathers also which were massacred tumultuously
without any accusation, examination, exhortation, promise of life, for the same
cause were not Martyrs: These, these only which seeing on the right hand the
Priest, the Altar, the Incense to offer, the breaden God to worship; and on the
left, the hangman stirring the fire, unsheathing and shaking threatningly the
fatal sword, erecting the gibbet, or the scaffold, trussing his arm to hit
right a deadly blow, spet at the Idols, fly from the Altars, run to the fire,
to the sword, to the gallows, to the water, cry as Montalchino did at Milan;
Let Christ, let Christ live, and Montalchino dye: these, I say, these are the
men whom the Church has honored with the excellent title of Martyrs, who dye
in Christ, with Christ, for Christ: in Christ holily, with Christ wisely, for
Christ gloriously. O how glorious before God is the death of Martyrs! Psalm. 116
15.
Precious in the sight of God is the death of his Saints; but namely of his
Martyrs, which dye in him, with him, for him.

Weenest thou that it is but a slender glory, that Christ has chosen thee, one
among a thousand, to be his Martyr? that he will have thee to suffer, not only
with him, as do all those which suffer for righteousness sake, but also for
him? that as he Ioh. 21.19.
forewarned Peter, by what death he should glorify him; so he takes thee by
the hand, and says to thee, Come, I have picked thee out from many millions,
to bear witness to the truth of my word before the great men of the earth, to
seal the faith thou have in me with thy blood, to honor me with thy death?
When Genesis 32.6, 7, 8.
Jacob was advertised that his brother Esau was coming to meet him, and four
hundred men with him, he was greatly afraid, and divided the people that were
with him, and the Flocks, and the Herds, and the Camels, into two bands: them
he set foremost in the front of the battle: Genesis 33.2, 3.
the second place he gave to the hand-maides and their children: the third, to
Lea and her children; but he put Rachel and Joseph hindermost, because he
loved them best: he adventureth all that he has, to save these two. God does
far otherwise with his people: he sets foremost a little number of chosen
men, to whom he has distributed his graces in a greater scantling, than to
the rest: them he sets in the front to be his Martyrs, and to fight against
the powers of the world; sparing the multitude to be the seed-plot and
nurserie of his Church.

IIX. Who can conceive sufficiently the greatness of this honor? Luke 6.23
When year hated, excommunicated, reproached, put to death for the Son of
man's sake, Christ bids you rejoice, and leap for joy, because the Prophets
were used in like manner. Heb. 11.32, etc.
The Apostle, in his epistle to the Hebrews, makes a catalogue of many
Worthies, which under the Law suffered for the word of God, of whom the world
was not worthy; that we may esteem our selves most happy when God conformeth
us to them. Iam. 5.10, 11.
S. James wills us to take them for an example of suffering affliction, and
of patience; that as we count them happy, so we may make it a part of our
happiness to be like unto them. 1. Pet. 5.9
S. Peter will have us to know, that the same afflictions are accomplished in
our brethren that are in the world: And S. Paul will have us to remember, that
by tribulations for the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 2.14.
we become followers of the Churches of God; which is no small honor. It is
said in the Song of Solomon, that Cant. 4.13.
the plants of the Church are an Orchard of Pomegranates. A Pomegranate has
within it sundry partitions, and as it were little mansions, with many grains
in each of them, of a sweet taste and red color, orderly set one by another,
and all together infolded and shut up under one outward skin; which has at
the top a little round circle like a crown. A most excellent Emblem of the
faithful, who are as so many grains set orderly together by the unity of one
faith, and by the bond of perfectness, which is charity; having a sweet taste
in the holiness of their life, and a red color in the conformity of bloody
persecution, in the several Churches where God has planted them, under the
Catholic Church, whereof the head is our Lord Jesus Christ; who as he was
first crowned with thorns upon earth, so is he now crowned with glory in
heaven.

IX. To him must we look principally, as the grains of the Pomegranate look
upward to the head of the skin wherein they are wrapped; and, according to
Peter's exhortation, 1. Pet. 4.12, 13.
rejoice when we are in the furnace for our trial, in at much as we are
partakers of Christ's sufferings: for, Romans 8.28.
whom God did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image
of his Son: first in crosses for him, next in crowns through him: Romans 8.17.
2. Tim. 2.11.
the one and the other with him. In this Realm, men of good birth hold it no
little honor to bear the liverie of the Kings Favorite; and how much more the
Kings own liverie? Shall we not then account it a most special honor and
glory to bear Christ's liverie, in whom God is well pleased, and who is the
King of kings; to be for him made like unto him, to be a curse among men for
him, who was a curse before God for us; to dye that we may glorify him, who is
dead to save us? Should not the members be ashamed to take their sports and
delights under a head crowned with thorns?

I confess, that there is a great difference betwixt Christ's sufferings and
ours. First, he is God and man, we are but men: Secondly, he was in his
manhood without sin: there was never man so holy, but he was a sinner:
Thirdly. Gal. 3.1 3.
he in his torments was made a curse, and drunk the full cup of Gods wrath,
which was so bitter to his soul, that he cried, Mat. 26.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? All the Saints and Martyrs have
always in all their heaviest crosses been comforted and supported of God.
Fourthly, he suffered for the expiation of sin, and his death is the life of
the world. All the Martyrs Rev. 7.14, 15.
have washed their robes, and made them white in his blood, therefore are they
before the throne of God. They have all suffered, to bear witness, that he
suffered for the sins of the world: none of them have suffered for the sins
of the world. Leo. 1. epist. 83, ad Palestinos Episcopos.
For though the death of many Saints has been precious in Gods eyes, yet has
not the killing of any Saint been the propitiation of the world. The righteous
have received, but they have not given crowns: and the fortitude of the
faithful has brought forth examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness.
The death of each one of them was several: neither did any by his own end,
pay the debt of another; considering, that among the^ sons of men, Jesus
Christ our Lord alone is he, in whom all are crutified, all are dead, all
buried, all raised up: of whom he said, Ioh. 12.32
If I be lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me.

Yet in this is the conformity of our sufferings with Christ's sufferings: that
as when Christ suffered for our sake, and in our room, we suffered in him; so
when we suffer for Christ's sake, he suffers in us: as when the head
suffers, all the members suffer; and when the members suffer, the head
suffers. Is not Christ the head? are we not the members of his body? This was
the cause why the Apostles, after they were beaten, Act. 5.41.
rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name: for
this same cause the Apostle rejoiced, that he was Ephesians. 4.1.
the prisoner of the Lord, that Gal 6.17.
he bare in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus, that Col. 1.24
he filled up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ: for though
all Christ's sufferings be accomplished and Ioh 19.30
finished in capite, in the head, for the redemption of the Church; yet they
are not all fulfilled in corpore, in the body, for the edification of the
Church: but as long as there shall be in the world one faithful to suffer,
Christ shall have some evil to suffer; because Christ and the faithful are
one. S. Paul was scholed with this Iesson before his entry into the Church,
when the Lord Jesus cried unto him, Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? even as when ye tread a man upon the
foot, the head will cry, Why treadest thou on me? What wonder then, if Phil.
3.8, 10.
he counted all things but doung, that he might know Christ, and the fellowship
of his sufferings, that he might be made conformable unto his death; and if he
rendered testimony to all the Christians of his time, that Romans 5.3.
they gloried in tribulations?

O bonds, more honorable than the Diadems of Kings! O tribulations, more
glorious than the glory of Solomon! Is there any golden chain so glistering,
as the irons wherewith the Confessors are shackled for Christ? Is there any
glory to be matched with the glory of the blessed Martyrs, suffering with
Christ, and in their sufferings made conformable to his image? The Pagans say,
that it is sweet and honorable to dye for our country: The soldiers glory
in the wounds which they have received for the defense of their chimneyes: And
those which are led to the gallows for the service of their King, feel glory
in their shame, and profess that they di^content, seeing they die for their
Sovereigns sake. What is our native soil, compared with the Church? what is
the most glorious King of the earth, paragoned with Christ? Less than nothing.
We glory in our death for men, which, when we are dead, cannot reward us: and
shall we be ashamed to dye for Christ, who, when we are dead, gives us life,
and satiateth with immortal honors those which honor him? for Romans 8.17.
if we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified with him. For this cause,
Tert. Apologet. cap. 1.46. and ult. Just. Apol, 1.
the first Christians when they were condemned, thanked their Judges; but
principally they thanked God, saying, Aug. ser. de Cypriano.
Deo gratias, Thanks be to God: so did our fathers; and so must we do.

So then ye have heard the causes why God will have his children to suffer for
their own sakes. He will either chastise them for the sins which they have
committed, or restrain them from the sins which they might perpetrate, or
try them, to make known how they can carry themselves in affliction, or put in
practice the manifold graces wherewith he has endued them, or honor them
with the glory of his Confessors and Martyrs.

X. When they are thus afflicted, God has also regard to other men. First,
their afflictions are means whereby the Elect are converted to God. Christ,
when he was persecuted in one Town, fled into another, and preached there: He
Mat. 10.23.
commanded his Disciples to do the like. By occasion of the persecution in
Jerusalem, Act. 8.1, 4 Act. 11.19, 20.
the brethren were scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea, of
Samaria, of Phenice, of Cyprus, of Antioch, where they preached the Lord Jesus;
and the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed, and turned
unto the Lord. Why were Act. 16.19, 31.
Paul and Silas cast into prison at Philippi? The event showed, that God did it
for the conversion of the Iaylor, who was one of his Elect. And therefore Paul
said, 2 Timothy 2 10.
that he endured all things for the Elects sake, that they might also obtain
the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. And writing to the
Philippians from the prison at Rome, where he received the glorious crown of
Martyrdom, he says, Phil. 1.13
that the things which happened unto him, had fallen out to the furtherance of
the Gospel; so that his bonds in Christ were manifest to all Cesars Court, and
in all other places. For howsoever he was 2. Tim. 2.14.
bound, the word of God was not bound. The prison was his Church: there he
preached, and there he converted many.

Thus the Albigenses of France, being dispersed by a most furious and violent
persecution, went preaching the Gospel in Germany, in Bohemia, in England. All
the flourishing Churches in Europe, at this day; are the harvest which they
sowed: but especially Tert. Apologet. ca. ult. Idem ad Scapul. cap. ult.
Clemens Alex. Strom. 4.
the seed of the Church, is the blood of Christians: for those which behold
their constancy, wonder; wondering, they inquire the cause thereof; inquiring,
they learn it; learning it, they are converted. Justin. Apolog. 1. Eusebius. lib.
4. cap. 8.
Just. Mart. beholding the unexpugnable constancy of Christians in the
atrocitie and extremity of their torments, said to himself, that such men
which made no account of death, could not be men given to pleasures and
wickedness; because voluptuous men, being timorous and faint-hearted, cannot
suffer any thing which is grievous to be felt; and above all things, fear
death. thereupon he was converted, and became of an Idolater, a Christian; of a
Philosopher, a Martyr

I might relate unto you a most true story of a Noble man converted by the
wonderful constancy of those of whom I spoke in my last Sermon, and protesting
at the hour of his death, that he dyed in their faith. But by this which I
have said, ye see, that the temporal death of Gods Saints, is eternal life
and salvation to many of Gods Elect.

Likewise their constancy and wonderful boldness to maintain the Gospel
against all the wisdom and power of the world, their holy stoutnesse to die
for it, is no small comfort to the Church, and a great confirmation to the
weak brethren: which use the Apostle found in his bonds, as he says, That
Phil 1.14
by them many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident, were much more bold
to speak the word without fear. For this cause, Saint John says, that 1.
Ioh. 3.16.
as Christ laid down his life for us, so we ought to lay down our lives for
the brethren. Who would not be glad to exchange his transitory and frail
life, for the salvation and everlasting life of Gods Elect? And who would not
choose to die, to Iam 5.20
convert a sinner from the error of his way, to cover a multitude of sins,
and to save a soul from death? Therein is both honor and profit: Honor to the
Confessors and Martyrs, by whose bands and death, so me are converted, many are
confirmed. Profit to Gods Elect, which by such means are saved. There is not in
this world any honor so profitable, any profit so honorable: and therefore
the Apostle considering the honor which comes of this profit, and the profit
which flows from this honor, writ to the Colossians, that Col. 1.24.
he rejoiced in his sufferings for them, i. e. for their conversion to the
faith, and confirmation in the faith, as being Christ's Minister in the one and
in the other. Let, I pray you, let the same mind be in us, which was in such
holy men: Let us all be for this end Christ's Martyrs in affection, and thank
the Lord our God for this liberty of his Gospel in this Realm, wherein there
is no Tyrant, no persecuter to make us Martyrs in action.

XI. Secondly, men readily conceive extravagant opinions of those whom God has
furnished with rarest gifts; and as they are inclined to superstition, canonize
them, and send up commandment to the heavens to receive them for their gods.
Thus the Gentiles erected Temples, dedicated Altars, instituted new honors and
religious worship to some odd men among their Ancestors, of whom they had
received some special benefit. Thus Act. 3.12
the Jews held their eyes fixed on Peter and John, who had restored a lame man
to his feet, as if by their power and holiness that miracle had been
wrought. Thus Act. 10. ^^. 25, 26*
Cornelius, though a devout man, and one that feared God with all his house,
fell down at Peter's feet, and worshipped him, as if he had been more than a
man. Thus Act. 14.10, 11, 12, 13
the Idolaters of Lystra, called Barnabas, Jupiter; and Paul, Mercurius, and
would have offered sacrifice unto them, because they healed a cripple, who
never had walked. Thus the Pope and his Cardinals canonize and register with
the Saints some special men, of whose holiness and miracles, they say they
have sufficient warrant, and give express commandment to the people to
worship them.

God, foreseeing that the devil through his malice, would do his utmost
endeavor to re-establish Idolatry again in these same holy men's persons, by
whom he had banished it out of the world; even when they did greatest miracles,
turmoyled them with greatest afflictions, that those which saw them in such a
miserable state, might judge and say that they were men like unto themselves,
and that they wrought such wonders by Gods finger, and not by their own power.
For the same cause, the evils which they suffered, are registered in holy
Scripture: that as S. Panl, after he had begun to tell how he was taken up
into Paradise, brake off his discourse in the midst, saying, 2. Cor. 12.6.
I forbear, lest any man should think of me above that which he sees me to
be, or that he hears of me: so we may say of them, that which they
acknowledged themselves to be, that Act. 14.15
they were also men of like passion with us; for that which they were by grace,
should not make us forget that which they were by nature, even mortal men like
our selves.

XII. Whereupon, Chrysostom. Homi. 1. rd popul. Antiochen.
Chrysostom gives us another advertisement: for when we exhort you to imitate
David, Elias, Paul, Peter, such or such a Saint, your custom is to answer; I
am not Peter, I am not Paul: as if Peter and Paul had been of some other
stuff than ye are, as if they had not been mortal, feeble, and sinful men
as ye are. Therefore to take from you all excuse, when ye cover your
carelessness and sloth with such vain excuses; God has exercised with most
infirmities those on whom he has bestowed greatest graces: that seeing they
have been like unto us in weakness, diseases, afflictions and passions
belonging to man, we despair not of attaining to the resemblance of the
heavenly and saving graces wherewith they were garnished. For this end S. James
propounds unto us the example of Elias, of whom he says, that I am. 5.17, 18.
he was subject to like passions as we are; that if we pray with fervencie, as
he did, we be assured that we shall speed as he did.

XIII. To these three reasons we may* add the fourth, taken from afflictions
as they are corrections and chastisements of Gods dearest servants; that God
will have us to consider them as testimonies of his wrath against sin* and to
say to our selves, Has God dealt so roughly with so holy men when they
offended him, and shall he bear with us? or as Christ said, Luke 23.33.
If these things be done in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? This
reason is so clear, that S. Peter urges it as an infallible demonstration,
saying, 1. Pet. 4.17, 18.
The time is come, that judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it
first begin at us, what shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of
God? Wherefore let us lay this to our hearts, and learn by such manifest
tokens of Gods wrath against sin, to prevent his indignation by an unfeigned
amendment of life. Esaias says, that Esa. 26.9.
when Gods judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will
learn righteousness. God grant, that as we are of the number of these
inhabitants of the world, so we may be of the number of those Students, which
are schooled by their brethrens afflictions, to learn righteousness, to stand
in awe of God, and to serve him with an upright heart, before his face all the
days of our life.

XIV. Finally, God by the afflictions of his dear ones, namely, by those which
they suffer for righteousness sake, manifests the infallible truth of his
promises, and the excellency of his mighty power in their deliverie from the
evil day, and from all the plots, conspiracies, secret practices, malicious
attempts, violent invasions of theirs and his enemies; which then are
constrained to avouch, that it is by the finger of God, and not by the hand of
man, that the Church subsisteth upon earth, and, as it is said in the Psalms,
that Psalm. 10.2
Christ in the mids of his enemies. He says, Esa. 43.2, 3.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee: and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: for I am the Lord
thy God, the holy One of Israel, thy Savior.

How he accomplisheth this promise, it is both wonderful and profitable to
consider: for when he will show his strength; that which he does, seems
contrary to that which he intends to do. When he came to lighten and
gladden Abraham's soul, by the confirmation of his promises, he sent Genesis 15.12.
an horror of great darkness upon him. Genesis 32.25.
When he came to bless Jacob, he wrestled with him, and put his thigh out of
joint. 2. Kin. 2.21.
Elisha sweetened the unholsome waters with salt. Ioh 9.6.
Jesus Christ, putting clay on the eyes of a blind man, restored him to his
sight: Marc. 7.33.
he put his fingers into the ears of a man that was deaf, and they were
opened.

Even so he debased and abated Joseph to the lowest pit of the prison, that his
power might be marvelled at in advancing of him to the highest dignity of
Pharaos Court. He winked at Pharao and his army, when they persecuted and
pursued his people into the midst of the red sea; that when with the blast of
his nostrils the sea came and covered them, and they sunk as lead in the
mighty waters, his people might sing unto him, Exodus 15.11.
Who is like unto thee, O LORD, amongst the gods? who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? and his enemies might say of
him, that Josh. 2.11
he is God of Heaven above, and in earth beneath. He permitted Senacherib
King of Assyria to take all the defensed cities of Judah, and to bring Hezakiah
to such extremity, that he had not two thousand men to withstand him: then
he sent his Angel from Heaven to deliver him: then Esa. 37.20.
all the kingdoms of the earth knew, that he is the Lord, even he only.

Consider Nebucadnezzar in his rage and fury, comanding to heat the burning
fiery furnace seven times more than it was wont to be heat, and to cast the
three Confessors into it, saying to them, Dan. 3.15.
Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands? His mind was to
destroy the bodies of these Saints. But, O miracle of the almighty power and
virtue of God! the fire was a rampire and wall to guard them, the flame was a
garment to clothe them, the furnace was a fountain to refresh them. Mortal
bodies were cast into the fire, and they were not hurt thereby, as if they had
bin immortal: the flames received them tied, and untying them, were tied
themselves. They spared the hands and the feet, whereof they burned the bands:
They slew the men that cast these Salamanders into the furnace; for the furnace
was exceeding hot: to teach you, that the strength of the fire was neither
extinguished nor abated: yet they touched not the bodies of the Saints; not
changing their nature, but bearing respect to their godliness: yea and such
respect, that there was not an hair of their head singed, neither were their
coats changed, neither had the smell of fire passed on them; which goes beyond
all admiration. The fire dared not touch, but their bands. The Tyrant fettered
them, the fire unfettered them; that ye may see the cruelty of the Tyrant, and
the obedience of the element. The Princes and Governors of the kingdom were
come thither to see the great solemnity of the dedication of the golden image
but they saw that which they could never have thought of. They came to worship
the idol: they went home admiring and worshipping the power of God. The king
himself, who ere-while had cast in the fire these three Confessors, because
they would not serve his gods, nor worship the golden image which he had set
up, was constrained to worship their God, and to confess, that Verse. ^9.
there is none other God that can deliver after this sort. So Satan was
confounded in his malice, seeing his power abated by his own craft, whereby he
labored to overthrow the servants of the living God: and Gods Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, Providence, was glorified in their deliverie.

God 1. Kin. 17 4.
spoke to the ravenous Ravens, and they fed Elijah: He Ion. 2.10
spoke to the Whale, and it vomited out Jonas upon the dry land. When his
people was scattered hither and thither among the Chaldeans, Assyrians, Medes,
Persians, and other Nations, Esa. 43.6
be said to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back: bring my
sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. So was fulfilled
that which is written in the Psalms, Ps 76.11
Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee.

XV. Such examples of the glorious power of God in the afflictions of righteous
men, are most frequent in the New Testament. As in the creation he commanded
light to shine out of darkness: So in the redemption of mankind he made our
Savior a curse for us, that he might bless us: and put to death the Prince
of life, that through his death he might give life to those which were dead.
His enemies sealed and guarded the Sepulcher where he was buried, and said,
Psalm 3.2.
There is no help for him in God: But Romans 1.4
he was declared to be the Son of God, with power, according to the Spirit
of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead; and was more glorious in his
death, than he was in his life.

So his Church is never so wonderful as in the persecution. Then Exodus 3.2, 3,
4.
ye see the great sight which made Moses amazed; The bush burning with fire,
and yet not consumed. What more vile than a bush? what more contemp tible in
the eyes of men, than the Church? what more susceptible of burning, than a
bush? what so easy to be overthrown as the Church; as the little flock of
weak sheep enclosed with an army of strong and cruel wolves? yet the bush
was not burnt, because God was in the midst of the bush: So the Church cannot
be destroyed, because Christ has said, Matthew. 28
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.

Consider Act. 16.22.
Paul and Silas torn with stripes, thrust into the inner prison, and their
feet made fast in the stocks. The infidels might have said, that the God, who
suffers his servants to be thus abused, is either weak and impotent, or
unrighteous and malicious. But see and behold in this permission a most
wonderful work of his power, goodness and mercy. His Saints had their feet
in the stocks, their hands in the gyves: Their heart was frank, their tongue
was free. The Devil was then a prentise, and had not learned to gag: Their
heart was inditing a good matter: Their tongue was the pen of a ready writer.
At midnight, they were waking. What did they while they waked? did they howl
for grief and pain? complained they of their contumelies? accused they the
cruelty of the blood-thirstie Governors? blamed they the rigor of the
pitilesse laylour? No, No. They prayed; they sang praises unto God so loud,
that the prisoners heard them. Then (O mavelous power of God!) Ver. 26.
suddenly there was a great earthquake: the foundations of the prison were
shaken: all the doors were opened, and every man's bands were loosed. If they
had been unbound, if they had walked with full liberty up and down in the
prison; if they had taken hold of the pillars thereof, as Samson did, and
shaken them, the miracle had not bin so conspicuous: but when they are thrown
down into the lowest prison, when they are laden with cloggs, when they are
bound so fast that they cannot budge, when through their only prayer the earth
trembles, the foundations of the dark dungeon skip like a young Unicorn, when
all the prisoners bands burst, and are broken asunder, as a thread of Tow is
broken when it touches the fire; when all those which were tied, were loosed,
and the laylor who had bound them, was himself tied with terror and despair,
and finally delivered from the bondage of sin, and honored with the glorious
liberty of the children of God, by the preaching of these two most
contemptible prisoners; Gods power shined more bright than the Sun in the
fairest Summers day, and showed it self always most wonderful.

Can ye but wonder, when ye see Act. 24.25.
Felix sitting to judge Paul, and yet trembling at the words which Paul spoke,
as if Paul had judged him? when Festus is amazed, Act. 26.24, 28.
and Agrippa is almost persuaded, by this prisoner arraigned before them, to be
a Christian? The Doctor is tied; his speech is on wings, and flies abroad: the
Preacher is shut up in prison; his doctrine runs swiftly every where. Can
ye bind the beams of the Sun, and imprison them? when that shall be done,
Tyrants shall shackle the Gospel, and unfeather it that it fly not.

Ye may behold the same marvel of Gods power, mercy, and wisdom in the rest
of the Apostles, and in the whole Christian Church. 1. Cor. 1.27, 28.
Learning has been instructed by ignorance: Wisdom has been confounded by
foolishness. By weakness, the might of the world has bin destroyed: 2 Cor.
10.5.
every thought is brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ; and in
us, unto this day, is fulfilled that which the Lord said to Paul, 2. Cor. 12.9.
My strength is made perfect in weakness: That both in the conversion of the
world, and protection of the Church, 2. Cor. 4.7.
the excellency of this power may be of God, and not of us.

XVI. Where then are they which judge of a man's bliss and happiness by his
prosperity, and esteem those who with Paul and the rest of the Apostles, 1.
Cor. 4.11.
hunger and thirst, are naked, are buffeted, have no certain dwelling place,
etc. to be miserable, unhappie, and as odious to God, as they are heinous to
men? Will they say, Pro. 3.11, 12.
the wise man and Heb. 12.5, 6.
the holy Apostle say far otherwise, My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, and faint not when thou art rebuked of him: for whom
the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives. Are
ye not the sons of God? Look to all Gods children who have been before you:
Have they not all groned under Gods chastising hand, some in one manner, some
in another? Therefore Ver 7, 8.
if ye endure chastening, God deals you as with sons: for what son is he
whom the father chasteneth not? Then when ye ask, if God does well to use you
hardly; if ye be children, your question is answered: But if ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.

Ver. 9, 10.
we have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of
Spirits, and live? for they verily for a few days chastened us, after their
own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his
holiness: that not only we may be corrected of sins past, but also
preserved and witholden from sinning in time to come, and so lead a godly life
before God and men.

Now Ver. 11.
no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous:
Nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto
them which are exercised thereby: Their faith, their hope, their charity,
their constancy, their patience, their humility, their devotion, are both
tried and exercised. Has not experience taught you, that the vine, when it is
bared at the root, purged; weeded, husbanded carefully, becomes more
fruitful, and at the vintage fills the Fats with sweet wine? Even so* says
Christ, Ioh. 15.2.
my Father purges every branch that bears fruit, that it may bring forth
more fruit. Cast gold into the fire, and a Goldsmith shall make a ring of it.
If ye will build a house for good service, for comeliness, for pleasure and
honor, the stones must be hewn smooth, the timber must be squared and carved
with the hammer and chisel: Even so God melts and purifieth us in the fire of
affliction, to make us precious jewels for his cabinet; he polisheth and
smootheth us with the hammer and chisel of tribulations, to make us living
stones in his heavenly Jerusalem, which grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord.

XVII. If ye had seen the Churches of France in their affliction, ye should
have marked in them a wonderful change, and would have said, that these evils
had befallen them for their greater good. Their damages were great, as ye have
heard: but their advantages were greater. They became more honest, and meek,
more heedfull to the word, more zealous to Gods service, more prone and bent to
all the duties of charity: All foolish and filthy talking was banished from
their mouths: their tongues infected no more the air with lascivious and
wanton songs: Sighing, sobbing, groaning to God, was their delight; prayers,
singing of Psalms, mutual exhortations to amendment of life, was their
ordinary speech. Those, whose habitation before that time was night and day in
the Tavernes, departed not from the holy assemblies, crying to God for grace,
mercy and peace, with fasting and prayers night and day. Drunkenness gave
place to sobriety, pride to humility, dissolution to modesty, cruelty to
humanity. Our enmities and dissentions were turned into kisses of charity,
into brotherly imbracements, into all indevours and good offices of true
friendship in the communion of Saints: Our doors were shut to all riot,
dissoluteness, insolency. Our hearts were open to God: Our houses were become
Churches, where God was religiously and with true zeal worshipped by parents
and children, by masters and servants, by old and young The Papists saw it,
and wondered, that the fire of persecution had not consumed, but kindled and
inflamed our zeal: and some of them were converted. So we were corrected, our
devotion was increased, Papists were amazed, God was glorified,

XVIII. Wherefore Heb. 12.12.
lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees. Though we live here
in peace, yet we have no lease of peace: yea, in this public peace every one
should look for a great fight of afflictions: flagging hands are not fit for
the battle: trembling knees cannot stand fast and upright at a meeting and
encounter of our enemies. Let us then imitate wise and prudent soldiers which
in time of peace enure themselves, by the exercises of war, to sustain the
brunt and coping of armed enemies in the day of battle. When Ps. 91.7.
a thousand shall fall at our side, and ten thousand at our right hand: when
Rev. 12.4.
the Dragon shall with his tail sweep the heavens, and cast to the earth the
third part of the stars: when every where ye shall see nothing but
apostasies and defections of great men, of wise men, of Church men, which are
stars in the heaven of the Church, stand not still gazing upon them, as 2.
Sam. 2.23.
Ioabs soldiers did upon Hasael whom Abner had slain, and lost the fruit of
the victory: But as 2. Sam. 20.11, 12, 13.
Ioabs servant removed Amaza whom Ioab had slain, out of the high way into the
field, and cast a cloth upon him, when he saw that every one that came by him,
stood still; and as he cried, He that favors Ioab, and he that is for
David, let him go after Ioab; whereupon all the people went on after Ioab, to
pursue after the traitor Sheba: So let us remove all scandals from before our
eyes, and casting upon them the cloak of forgetfulness, let us follow our
General, our Lord Jesus Christ the Prince and Captain of the Lords Host, who
goes before us fighting for the Lord our God against the Devil, sin, and
the world. Whosoever favors Christ, whosoever is for God, let him follow
Christ, Let 1. Tim. 1.18, 19.
us all war a good warfare, holding for shield, faith; and forsword, the word
of God, not pausing on these Hymenees and Alexanders; which loosing the rudder
of a good conscience, what wonder if they have made shipwreck of their faith:
yea, let us tread upon their stinking carkases, and trampling on the ghastly
examples of their lamentable revolts, let us Psalm. 3.14.
press toward the mark for the prince of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus; That being, through Gods powerful and merciful assistance, each of us
enabled to say truly with Paul, 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.
I have fought a good sight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith,
we may thereupon infer this sweet and blessed conclusion with Paul;
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing.

XIX. O almighty and most gracious Father, bestow this saving grace upon this
thy people which is here present before thee, through the all-sufficient merits
of thy only and dear Son, and our only and most powerful Savior Jesus
Christ our Lord: to whom, with thee and the holy Ghost be all power, all
honor, and all glory for ever and ever. Amen.

SERMON VI. Of the Lords Deliverances.
PSALM XXXIV. XIX. But the Lord delivers him out of them all.


1. THe Church compared to the Moon, by reason of the vicissitude of her
evils, and the Lords deliverances:

2. Whereof there be many examples in the old Tastament,

3. And in the new.

4. Six principal points to be considered in the Lords deliverances.

5. The deliverer of the Church, is the LORD; called JEHOVAH in the Heb. tongue.

6. The word JEHOVAH leads us to the knowledge of the eternity of Gods
being, and of that eternal virtue whereby he gives being to all things, and
namely to his promises.

7. All the qualities required in a deliverer, are in the LORD.

8. Thence the righteous man receives a most sensible and unspeakable comfort

9. God alone is the deliverer of the Church, and needs not the help of any.

10. What is the nature of his deliverances.

11. Exhortation not to fear men.

12. Exhortation to fear God alone.

13. Exhortation not to trust in men, neither living,

14. Nor dead, though they be in heaven.

15. Exhortation to trust in the Lord alone.

16. Those who^ the Lord delivers, are the Righteous only.

17. Their righteousness is no cause meritorious of their deliverances.

18. Notwithstanding, it is a righteous thing with God to deliver them, and
that for three causes.

19. The Lord gives many blessings and deliverances to wicked men, for
righteous men's sake.

20. Exhortation to righteousness.

1. EXcellent and many are the titles wherewith the Church is adorned in holy
Scripture: Amongst all, that wherewith she is graced, when the wise K. Solomon
intitles her Cant 6.10.
fair as the Moon, is the fittest to expresle her condition in this world. She
is fair indeed, and very pleasant to behold, as the Moon is: She shines
among the people that walk in the darkness of ignorance; as the Moon
shines in the night. Her shining light is intermixed with dark stains of
sin; as the bright shining light of the Moon is intermingled with black
spots. She has her spots of her self, as the Moon has; but Ambr. Hexam. lib
4 cap. 8.
she borrows the light of immortality and of grace from the ay-during light
of her brother, the Lord Jesus Christ; as the light of the Moon comes from
the Sun. O Hos 139
Israel, thou have destroyed by thy self, but in me is thy help, says GOD
to his Church. Sin is of ourselves: destruction and death is from our sin.
But Psalm. 121.2.
our help is from the Lord, which made heaven and earth, even from the Lord
Jesus, who is Mal. 1.2.
the Sun of righteousness, Luke 1.78.
the day spring from on high, in whose wings is health, Psalm. 36.9.
in whose light we see light, and through whose light l. 2.15.
we shine as lights in the world: so that we say, Gal. 2.20.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.

The Moon has her rising and setting, and in each of them her increasing, her
fullness, her decreasing, her disappearing for a few days, when she is in her
conjunction with the Sun: So the Church of Christ, rising in one place, goes
down in another; and wheresoever she rises, is subject to many variations,
to growing bigger and bigger, to waning, to disappearing. Then, through the
violence of persecutions, she is constrained to obey Gods commandment; Esa.
26.20.
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about thee:
hide thy felfe as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be
overpast. Then wings are given her, Rev. 12.14.
that she may fly into the wilderness, into her place, from the face of the
serpent, and be nourished there for a time, and times, and half a time, even
for the time of Gods good pleasure. Then having her back turned to the world,
and her face to God; then being in her conjunction with Jesus Christ her Sun,
she possesses in him a secret, but a most clear and perfect light: Then is
fulfilled in her that which is written in the Psalms, Psalm. 45.13.
The kings daughter is all glorious within. She remains not always thus: but
after the few days of her vanishing out of the sight of the world, like a
bride coming out of her chamber, she rejoices to begin her race again, and
to quicken with her light them that dwell in the valley of the shadow of death;
having nothing firm, nothing constant in this world, but the inconstancy of
her unsteadfast estate.

As there is a vicissitude and interchangeable course of light and darkness,
of the day and the night, of Summer and Winter: As Eccles. 1.6, 9.
the thing that has bin, is that which shall be: and that which is done, is
that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun; all
things having in their inequality this equality that they go and come, like
the wind which whirleth about continually from the South to the North, and
returns again according to his circutes: So the Church of God, so righteous
men which are in the Church, have their alterations and changings from good to
evil, from evil to good, and again from good to evil; from prosperity to
adversity, from adversity to prosperity by a perpetual and most constant
revolution, till the great and long looked-for day of refreshing come, and put
an end to all our evils, ingulfing them in the eternal joys of heavenly
goods. And therefore David tells us in our text by form of history, through
his own experience, and fortelleth us by form of prophecy, that Many are the
Evils of the Righteous: But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

II. Peruse all the ancient histories, and ye shall find that it has ever
been so. The first man was scarcely come out of Gods hands, and created after
the likeness of his maker, when Satan tempted, seduced, overthrew, and plunged
him into an Ocean of evils and woes. Then he might have wept, because Many are
the evils of the Righteous. Look how soon he is cast down to the ground by
Satan's malice, he is as soon lifted up by the mighty power of Gods hand, and
the merciful promise of the seed of the woman: Then he might have sung for
joy, because the Lord delivers him out of them all.

The promise was a prediction of the vicissitude of evils and of goods shared
to the Church. Genesis 3 15.
I will (says God to the serpent) put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed: It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel. The seed of the woman, is Jesus Christ the righteous, and
the Church of righteous men with him and under him. The serpent shall bruise
the Churches heel: Many are the Evils of the Righteous. The seed of the woman
shall bruise his head: But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

Genesis 4.8.25.
Cain, killing Abel his righteous brother, caused a heartbreaking sorrow to
his righteous parents, Adam and Eve: Many are the Evils of the Righteous. God
gave them another seed in stead of Abel whom Cain slew, and they called him
Seth; But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

When the world was drowned in a deluge of waters, Noah was constrained to see
all his kindred, and all the children of God overwhelmed by the flood, and to
lie prisoner in the Arc with his family, Genesis 8.13
the space of a year among all kind of beasts, to save his life: Many are the
Evils of the Righteous. At the years end God remembered him, and drying up the
waters, brought him out of that captivity, and Genesis 9.9.
established a new covenant with him: But the Lord delivers him out of them
all.

Genesis 12 1, 4. Heb. 11.8, 9
Abraham, obeying Gods calling, left his country, his kindred, and fathers
house, and went out, not knowing whither he went: he sojourned in the land of
promise, as in a strange country, dwelling in tabernacles, which he removed
from one nation to another, from one kingdom to another people: His wife was
twice ravished: the country people abused him: his nephew Lot rewarded his
good deeds with unthankfulnes: with all this, his wife was barren, and he had
no children: Many are the Evils of the Righteous. In the midst of his
afflictions, as it were in the fit of an ague, Genesis 24 35.
God gave him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and camels, and asses,
and menservants, and maidservants, in so great a number, that Genesis 14.14.
he armed of his servants borne in his own house, three hundred and eighteen
for the rescuing of Lot. Psalm. 105 14, 15.
God suffered no man to do him wrong, he rebuked Kings for his sake, saying,
Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. He constrained them to
render him his wife undefiled: he gave him a son in his old age to make him
laugh. But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

God prophesied to Abraham, that Genesis 15.13, 14.
his seed should be a stranger in a land that was not theirs, and should serve
them, and be afflicted by them four hundred years. So it was: And so was
averred this saying of David; Many are the evils of the Righteous. Hear also
the prophecy of the Catastrophe; And also that nation whom they shall serve,
will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great substance. So was it
also: But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

When the people had taken possession of the Land of promise flowing with milk
and honey, how many times were they beaten, vanquished, subdued, oppressed by
the Philistines, Amorites, Moabites, and other neighbors! Many are the evils
of the Righteous: They cried to God, and he heard their requests; he sent them
men clothed with his Spirit, which delivered them; he gave them as many days
of peace, as they had of war: But the Lord delivers him out of all.

Ye have heard in what troubles, in what dangers, in what disquiet and
perplexities David lived a great while after he was anointed King of Israel;
and what afflictions he had in his own family: ye know also what was the
event of them all, and that he spoke by his own experience, when he said, Many
are the evils of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all.

Ye have read the promise which God made to David; saying, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32,
33, 34.
If his children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments: If they break
my statutes, and keep not my commandments: Then will I visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes: Nevertheless^ my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail: my covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips. Thence it was, that David's children were often chastened, ever delivered;
that good Kings succeeded bad; that many affl^^tions were followed with notable
deliveries; that seventy years of captivity ended in a most glorious and
wonderful liberty; that the four hundred years following, had sadness
seasoned with joy, tears mingled with laughter, spears changed into sithes,
swords beaten into mattockes, prayers in the time of persecution ending in
thankesgiving for peace; until the land being destitute and void of righteous
men, vomited out for ever and ever all her inhabitants: for wheresoever are
righteous men, there Many are the evils of the Righteous, But the Lord
delivers him out of them all.

III. The Christian Church has succeeded both to the evils and deliveries of
the Church of Israel and of Judah, as the Lord himself has experimented in his
own person, and has forewarned us: 1. Pet. 3.18.
He was put to death in the flesh: Many are the evils of the Righteous. He was
quickened by the Spirit: The Lord delivers him out of them all. He says to
us, Ioh. 16.10.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world
shall rejoice: And ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. Ye shall be sorrowful, because many are the evils of the
Righteous: your sorrow shall be turned into joy, because the Lord delivers
him out of them all.

I have declared to you how many evils the Christian Church suffered at diverse
times by ten bloody persecutions, by false brethren, by the wicked heresy of
Arrius. But by diverse means the Lord delivered her out of them all.

At last, the Antichrist is come, according to the Scriptures; and the
prophecy of the revelation concerning Rev. 11.7. etc.
the two witnesses of God, has been fulfilled: where it is said, that the
beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them,
and shall overcome them, and kill them; that their dead bodies shall lie in the
street of the great City three days and a half; that the people and nations
shall see them, and shall not suffer them to be put in graves; that they that
dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send
gifts one to another, because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on
the earth: That after three days and an half, the Spirit of life from God,
entered into them: and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon
them which saw them, and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their
enemies beheld them. Alas! what evils has not the beast practiced against
these two witnesses, against the little handful of those which professed the
Gospel of Christ? How often has she fought, vanquished, killed them? How often
also has God raised them from the dead in their successors? what was this last
peace of France, but a most wonderful resurrection?

The world for the first draught fills a cup of good wine; but after that, it
gives nothing to drink but poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of aspes.
Contrariwise the Ioh 2.10.
Lord Jesus gives the best wine last. He Job 5.18.
makes sore, to bind up: he wounds, to make whole. 1. Sam. 2.6.
He kills, to make alive: He brings men down to the grave, that he may
bring them up again. Weeping Psalm. 30.5.
may endure for a night; but singing comes in the morning. Psalm. 126.6.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that goes forth, and weepeth,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing
his sheaves with him. As in Music contrary voices give a pleasant sound, and
by a discordant concord make a most delectable harmony: So these alterations
and interchanges of evil and good in our lives, make the pleasures more
acceptable, when God sends them; when, after that the righteous man has
been shaken and tossed with afflictions, The Lord delivers him out of them
all.

IIII. He which does this work, is the LORD: his work is deliverance: he
whom he delivers, is the righteous man: The Evils out of which he delivers
him, are all the evils which befall him. Add to these, the manner how, and the
time when he delivers the righteous man out of all his evils, and ye shall
have six principal heads of doctrine to be handled in the exposition of the
second part of this text.

V. The deliverer of the Church is the LORD: The Hebrew word is JEHOVAH, which
is Gods Name. The use of names is to put distinction between things that are
of one kind: and therefore when Jacob asked of God what was his Name, he
rebuked him, saying, Wherefore Genesis 32.29.
is it that thou do ask after my Name? The Jews say, that he would not tell
him his Name, because the tongue of a mortal man neither should, nor can
express it. For that same cause, say they, when Manoah Samsons father desired
to know his Name, he repressed his curiosity with this answer, Judge. 13.17, 18.
Why ask thou after my Name; seeing it is wonderful? But to speak properly,
he has no Name, because he is alone, and there are no other gods with him:
His Name is his own self; and therefore wonderful above all wondering: And
so he would have Jacob and Manoah, who took him for one of the Angels, to
think of him.

But when Moses asked by what name he should call him, when he should speak of
him unto the children of Israel; he commanded him to say unto them, EHEIE Exo
d. 3 14.
has sent me unto you: which word in our Bibles is translated, IAM: In the
greek of the Septuagint, (...), He that is: which Plato learned in Syria, and
called him Justin. Cohortat. ad Graec.
(...), That which is: It is the first person of the future tense, and may be
translated, He that shall be.

God spoke further unto Moses, Exodus 3.15.
Thus shall thou say unthe Children of Israel; JEHOVAH, the God of your
fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent
me unto you: This is my Name for ever, and this is my Memorial unto all ages.
So God called himself, and so Exodus 4.30.
Moses named him to the people, and to Exodus 5.1, 2.
Pharao: who hearing the Name which he never heard before, answered, Who is
JEHOVAH? I know (...) JEHOVAH; and so despised God, whom by this new name he
judged to be a new God; though the Name was not new, but was from the beginning
known to the Church, and God served by it.

Therefore the Jews are too superstitious, when they maintain it to be so
secret, that no man can; and if any could, none should be so bold as to
pronounce it. How it was pronounced, it is hard to tell: but that it was
pronounced, we know by the relation of Pagans: for how could Biblioth. li. 1.
part. 2. cap. 5. Apud Iudaeos Moses a Deo, qui vocetur IAO, acceptas leges
daere praese ferebat.
Diodorus Siculus know that the God of the Jews was called IAO, if he never
heard that Name? And who doubts, but the Latin Name IOVIS, whereby the Romans
worshipped the God of gods, was taken from this Name JEHOVAH, which they
pronounced as we would do, if it were written IOWIS? and it may be that the
Hebrews pronounced IHOWA, and not JEHOVAH. Surely Clemen. Strom. lib. 5.
Clement Alexandrin. though a Christian, miscarried, as well as Diodorus
Siculus a Pagan, both in the writing, and in the pronu^ciation; when
transposing the letters, he says, that the name of four letters which the
Priests did bear on their foreheads, was IAOV.

VI. But he hitteth the mark when he writes, that that Name signifies as much
as (...), i. he that is, and that shall be: God calling himself so, not to
describe his essence, which is infinite and incomprehensible, but, as Just.
cohortat. ad Graecos.
Justin observes, to make an opposition between himself, and all other gods,
which have no being at all. In our Bibles out of the Greek it is turned LORD.
In the French Bibles it is most properly translated ETERNAL, because, though
no name can express the essence of the least and most contemptible of all the
creatures, far less of the glorious Majesty of the Creator; yet it tells
us, that God has an eternal being of himself, and so leads us to the
consideration of the eternity o^ his being.

Esaiah says, that Esaias 57 15
he enhabiteth eternity: and he says of himself exclusively to all those which
are called gods, Esa. 44.6. Esa. 48.13.
I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. For this
cause John calls him, Rev. 1.4.
He which is, which was, and which is to come: He which was without beginning:
Psalm. 90.2.
Before the mountains were brought forth, ere ever thou had formed the
earth, and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art God: He
which is without alteration: for Iam. 1.17
with him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning: And which is to come
without end: Psalm. 102 25, 26, 27.
Of old have thou laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thy hands: They shall perish, but thou shall endure, yea, all of them
shall wax old like a garment: as a vesture shall thou change them, and they
shall be changed: But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end. And
therefore he calls himself in a most proper sense, Exodus 3.14.
I am: for neither loses he any thing by the time which is past: neither
gains he any thing by that which is to come; but is ever like unto himself,
is ever present with himself, having an eternal being of himself, from
himself, in himself, to himself.

It is also the name of his almighty power, whereby he gives being to all
things. Esa. 40.12, 21, 22, 23.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven
with a spanne, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed
the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance? Have ye not known? have
ye not heard? has it not bin told you from the beginning? have ye not
understood from the foundation of the earth? It is he that sits upon the
circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as a grassehopper: he that
stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to
dwell in; that brings the Princes to nothing; that makes the Judges of the
earth as vanity.

Moreover, it is the Name of his fidelity, constancy, and truth in all his
promises, threatenings, commandments, exhortations, words, deeds. Esa. 14.27.
For the LORD of hoastes has purposed, and who shall disannull it? And his
hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? And therefore when he was
to deliver his people out of the bondage of Egypt, according to his promises
made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, he said unto Moses, Exodus 6, 2.3.
I am the LORD: and I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the
name of God almighty; but by my name JEHOVAH was I not known to them. Not but
they knew him, and worshipped him with that Name, as you may read in their
lives: but he speaks of an experimental knowledge, and says, that they knew
him not, because in their time he had not given a real being to the promises
which he made them: which when he did by Moses, and had led his people through the
red sea, they sang, Exodus 15.3.
The LORD is a man of war: the LORD is his Name. where his Name JEHOVAH, is
turned LORD. For that cause, when he threatened to smite all the first born in
the land of Egypt, and promised to spare his own people, he said, Exodus
12.12.
I am the LORD. For the same cause, the Prophets ordinarily begin and end their
prophecies of promises, and of threatenings, saying, The LORD has spoken, the
mouth of the LORD has spoken. Whereunto I doubt not but David had regard, when
he says, that the LORD delivers the righteous man out of all his evils: He
has promised to deliver him, saying, Psalm. 91.14, 15, 16.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him on high, because he has known my Name: He shall call upon me, and I
will answer him: I will be with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and honor
him: With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. He is the
LORD, and will perform his promise: Number. 23 19,
God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should
repent: has he said, and shall be not do it? or, has he spoken, and shall he
not make it good?

VII. In this Name then are comprehended all the qualities required in him who
challenges the title of a Deliverer. He is All-wife, All-mighty, All-righteous,
All good. All-wise: Psalm. 147 4, 5.
He tells the number of the stars: he calls them all by their Names:
Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is infinite: How much
more knows he the plots of our enemies, and our evils? Psalm. 138.6.
Though the LORD be high, yet has he respect unto the Lowly: but the proud he
knows afar off.

Almighty, without a peer in heaven among the Angels, in earth among the most
dreadful creatures, as the Church sings: Psalm. 89. 6, 8, 9, 11, 13
For who in heaven can be compared unto the LORD? Who, among the sons of the
mighty, can be likened unto the LORD? OLORD God of Hosts, who is a strong LORD
like unto thee? or to thy faithfulness round about thee? Thou rulest the
raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou stillest them: The
heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: As for the world, and the fullness
thereof, thou have founded them: Thou have a mighty arm, strong is thy hand,
and high is thy right hand. When we complain, and make our moan to God,
Psalm. 93.3, 4.
The floods have lifted up, O LORD, the floods have lifted up their voice: the
floods lift up their waves; we are taught to comfort our selves, and to say,
The LORD, who is on high, is mightier than many waters: yea, than the mighty
waves of the sea.

All-righteous, for Psalm. 103.16.
the LORD executes righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.

All-good, and most willing to deliver us: for he is the LORD our God. Psalm.
50.1.7.
The mighty God, even the LORD, has spoken, saying, I am God, even thy God:
he is appeased to wards us, he is reconciled with us through the blood of the
cross of his dear Son: Our cause is his cause. We are persecuted for
righteousness sake: Righteousness is the daughter of God. We are persecuted
for the Gospel: The Gospel is his word. We are persecuted for Christ's sake:
Christ is his Son, his dear Soon, his only Son. I say then, that he is
All-wise, and can: All-mighty, and may: All-good, and will deliver us.
Whatsoever he is, he is it to us, and for us; because he is the LORD our God.
He has delivered all our fathers and predecessors. Psalm. 22.4.
Our fathers, says David, trusted in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou
did deliver them: He will also deliver us. And therefore every righteous man
prays, Psalm. 106.4.
Remember me, OLORD, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may
rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.

IIX. Here is the comfort, here is the consolation of the Church, and of every
righteous man in her, that God hears their prayers, and delivers them, even
then, and namely then when they are forsaken of all men. Jacob was alone when
he fled from his fathers house; because his brother Esau had vowed to kill him.
Then the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, and said unto him, Genesis 28.15.
Behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou go,
and will bring thee again into the land: for I will not leave thee, until I
have done that which I have spoken to thee of. David complains, that Psalm.
25.16.
he was desolate and afflicted: yet he seeks comfort in the assurance of
Gods assistance, and says, Psalm. 27.10.
When my father and my mother forsake me, then the LORD will take me up. What
extremity was the Church brought into, under the persecution of the cruel
Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes, Dan. 11 32, 45.
who corrupted by flatteries such as did wickedly against the covenant, and
afflicted those which were upright, so cruelly, and so puissantly, that there
was none to help them? Then the Church prayed, Psalm. 74.1.
O God, why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture? Then Sion said again, Esa. 49. 14, 15.
The LORD bath forsaken me, and my LORD has forgotten me. Then the Lord
answered again, Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not
forget thee. For then was fulfilled that Prophecy of Daniel: Dan. 12.1.
At that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for the
children of thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was
since there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that time thy people
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book. Who is
this Michael? who like unto God? who but our Lord Jesus Christ, the great
Prince which stands and fights for his people, when they can neither stand
nor fight for themselves?

Was it not he which cried from heaven to Saul, Act. 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? When an host came from the King of
Syria, and compassed the City of Dothan where Elisha was, to take him, his
servant was affrighted, and said, 2. Kin. 6.15, 16.
Alas! my master, how shall we do? But he answered, Fear not: for they that
be with us, are more than they that be with them. After the same manner, when
the king Hezekiah was brought by Senacheribs army to such a pinch, that he was
constrained to enclose himself within the walls of Jerusalem for the safety
of his life, all his kingdom being taken from him, and having no power to
resist; fortified himself in the Lord his God, and heartned his people,
saying, 2. Chron. 32.7, 8.
Be strong and courageous, be not afraid, nor dismayed for the King of Assyria,
nor for all the multitude that is with him, for there be more with us, then with
him. With him is the arm of flesh, but with us is the LORD our God to help
us, and to fight our battles. Ye see a good and godly king: see also a good
and godly people: And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah,
king of Judah. i.e. notwithstanding their weakness and fewness, they leaned
upon God, and were delivered.

S. Raul with good reason did complain of all his followers, that at his first
answer before Nero, 2. Tim. 4.16.
No man stood with him, but all men forsook him. Was he for that destitute,
and left alone? Notwithstanding, says he, the Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me. And therefore when he saw all the powers of hell, and all the
malice of the earth uncoupled after poor Christians, he defied them, saying,
Romans 8.30.
If God be for us, who can be against us? Even as David said: Psalm. 27.1, 3.
The LORD is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The LORD is the
strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? though an host should encampe
against me, my heart shall not fear: though war should rise against me, in
this will I be confident: and as Jesus Christ said to his Disciples, Ioh. 16.32.
Ye shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with
me. He is not alone, who has God with him.

IX. Senacherib was mad, when he sent Rabshakeh to blaspheme the Lord, and to
say to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: Esa. 36.18, 19, 20.
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, The LORD will deliver us, etc. Has
any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the King
of Assyria? Where are the gods of Hamath and Arphad? where are the gods of
Sepharuaim? and have they delivered Samaria out of my hand? Who are they
amongst all the gods of these lands, that have delivered their land out of my
hand, that the LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? But the Lord
answered him, Esa. 37.23, 29.
Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou exalted
thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against the holy One of
Israel, etc. Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is come up into mine
cares, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips,
and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came. Then Hezekiah
might have served him in his own dish, and asked him; Where is Nisroch the god
of Assyria? has he delivered thee out of the hands of the Lord our God?
Nebuchadnezzar was so furious, and besides himself, that in his rage he asked
of Shadrach, Meschah, and Abednego, Dan. 5.15, 17, 29.
Who is that God that shall deliver you out of my hands? They answered, Our God
whom we serve is able to deliver us: and he learned ere long to spell that
lesson, and to say, There is none other God that can deliver after this sort.

In France, the Papists seeing our scarcity and neediness, lack of men, lack
of treasures which are the sinews of the war, did cast in our teeth, that we
had but God for all kind of pottages, i. for all purposes: for men, God; for
treasures, God; for holds and fortresses, God; for all help, for all relief,
God. O Lord, Psalm. 74.18.
remember this, that the enemy has reproached the LORD, and that the foolish
people has blasphemed thy name. O the good pottage, O the excellent
restorative, wherein the principal ingredient is God, wherein God is the only
ingredient! Psalm, 18.31.
for who is God, save the LORD? or who is a rock, save our God? The soldiers
rely upon the wariness and watchfulness of their Captain. The flock
sleeps in peace under the staff of their Shepherd. Passengers, which fail
in great waters, are without fear under the protection and care of a
well-experienced Pilot. Little children dread no ill when they are fast by
their fathers.

We sight under the Standard of him, who is 1. Sam. 15 45.
the LORD of hosts. Antigonus king of Syria, being ready to give battle by
sea, hard by the Isle called Andros, answered to one of his men, who advertifed
him, that his enemies had more ships than he, Plutarch in Pelopida.
For how many ships reckonest thou me? for the dignity of the General is much
to be esteemed, when it is sorted with prowess and experience. Where is there
prowess, where experience, if it be not in God? 9.4.
He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who has hardued himself against
him, and has prospered? Therefore when our enemies threaten us with their
armor and armies, we send them the defiance of the ancient Church, Esa. 8, 9, 10
Associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces: and
give care, all ye of far countries: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken
in pieces: gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces: take counsel
together, and it shall come to naught: speak the word, and it shall not stand;
for God is with us.

We are his sheep, and he is the shepherd, Psalm. 121.4.
the keeper of Israel which shall neither slumber nor sleep: of whom, and to
whose eternal glory, we sing, Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 3, 4.
The LORD is my shepherd, I shall not want: he makes me to lie down in
green pastures: he leads me beside the still waters: he restores my soul:
he leads me in the paths of righteousness for his names sake. Yea, though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for
thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.

The skiffe wherein we sail, Psalm 46. 2, 3, 5.
is his. Therefore will we not fear, though the earth be remooved, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters
thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof: God is in the midst of her: she shall not be moved: God shall help
her right early: the LORD of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.
Selah. Mat. 8.24, 25, 26.
When the winds blow hard, when the tempest arises, and the waves cover her,
if we cry to him, he will arise, and rebuke the winds and the sea, and there
shall be a great calm.

We are his children: he is our father, lying hard Luke 11.7.
by the door of his own house, waking when we sleep, hearing us when we
cry, rising speedily to help us when we call upon him. And therefore in our
distress we cry unto him, Esa. 63.15, 16.
Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and
of thy glory: where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy
bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? Doubtless thou
art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us
not: Thou, O LORD, art our Father: our Redeemer is thy name from everlasting.

X. Our Redeemer is his name, and his only. Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation belongs unto the LORD: all his deliverances are either temporal
salvations from the evil of affliction, or eternal salvations from the evil
of sin: In the one and other sense is that true which he says, Esa. 43.11,
13.
I, even I, am the Lord, and beside me there is no Savior: for as none can
deliver out of his hand, so Dan. 3.29.
none can deliver as he can. Psalm. 5.12.
He compasses the righteous with favor, as with a shield: he Psalm 22.19.
is strength to him that is weak, Psalm. 9.9.
a refuge for the oppressed, Psalm. 91.2.9.
a fortress for those which are persecuted, a shadow to those which are sun
burnt with afflictions, a most pleasant, strong, and well furnished habitation
to those which are exiled for righteousness sake. To him only belongs that
which David says, Psalm. 18.2.
The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my strength,
in whom I will trust: my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high
tower.

His deliveries are not palliative cures, easing for a while, and not healing
altogether; nor anodins, taking away for some hours all sense of pain, and
not the pain it self. They are salvations, and as it were resurrections from
among the dead. Dan. 6.27.
He delivers and resoueth, and he works signs and wonders in heaven and in
earth. Such were the deliveries of Israel out of the land of Egypt, of David
from Saul, of Hezekiah and Iosaphat from their enemies, of Shadrac, Meshac, and
Habed-nego, out of the burning furnace, of Daniel from the power of the Lions,
of his people out of the captivity of Babylon; such have ever been the
deliveries of the Church; such was this last deliverie of the Churches of
France.

XI. Having such a Deliverer, such a Redeemer, such a Savior, let us neither
fear men, nor trust in them: yea, let us not fear the devil himself. For
the devil was not so hardy, as to do violence to Job 1.12.
Job, or Mat. 8.29.
to enter into the swine, without Gods leave: The devils Ephesians. 6.12.
are principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places, and
yet we should not fear all their spiritual and powerful wickedness, because
God, who is our deliverer, is stronger: Shall we then fear men which are
borne, which live, which dye in weakness? What can the mightiest of them all do
without the Lord? what can they all do against the Lord? If he be with us, if
he be against them, who shall be against us? who shall be for them?

What fear thou? their multitude and number? If thou have received grace to
say with David, Psalm. 3.5, 6.
the Lord sustained me, thou have also received grace to say with him, I will
not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me.

What fear thou? Their strength and great might? Could Genesis 6.4, 7.
the Giants which were on the earth in the days of Noah, keep themselves from
the flood of Gods wrath? Numb. 13.32, 33. Number. 14, 19
The people of Israel feared the people of Canaan, because these were men of
great stature, and among them were the Giants, the sons of Anak, and they
were as grasshoppers compared to them. Then Joshua and Caleb said to them, Fear
not the people of the Land, for they are bread for us: their defense is
departed from them, and the LORD is with us: fear them not. Conformably
whereunto Ios. 11.21.
Ioshuah cut off the Anakims, and destroyed them utterly with their cities, and
there was none of them left in the land of the children of Israel. When Deuteronomy.
3.1, 2, 11.
Og king of Bashan came against the people of Israel with all his people, the
people had occasion to fear: for Og was of the remnant of giants: his bed-sted
was of iron: the length thereof was nine cubits, and the breadth four cubits,
after the cubit of a man. But God said to Moses, Fear him not: for I will
deliver him, and all his people, and his land into thy hand. What did then all
his ^^gnesse and tallnesse avail him? Could it hinder the children of Israel
from singing to God, Psalm. 136.18, 19, 20.
He slew famous kings: for his mercy endures for ever; Sihon king of the
Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever; and Og the king of Bashan: for his
mercy endures for ever? 1. Sam. 17.4, 7, 11, 32.
When the Israelites saw the great and huge monster Goliath, the staff of whose
spear was like a weavers beam, and the head thereof weighed six hundred
shekels of iron, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. But David, led with
another spirit, said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail, because of him: thy
servant will go, and fight with this Philistine: and he went with a sling in
his hand; and with a stone which he flung at him, he slew him, according as he
had said, Ver. 47.
The Lord saves not with sword and spear? for the battellis the LORDS.

What fear thou? their prudence, their wisdom, their slight and shifting
devices? Fear not. Psalm. 94.11.
The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. He blows upon
them, and they vanish away with their authors. For Pro. 21.30, 31.
there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the LORD: Job
12.13, 17, 20, 21.
with him is wisdom and strength he has counsel and understanding: he
leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: he remooveth
away the speech of the trusty, and takes away the understanding of the aged:
he powers contempt upon Princes, and weakeneth the strength of the mighty.

Finally, Psalm. 90.3
he turns man to destruction, and says, Return ye children of men. And
therefore he says to his children, when they fear the power of his enemies,
Esa. 51.7, 8.
Hearken unto me ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
law: fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings:
for the moth shall eat them up like a garment; and the worm shall eat them
like wool: but my righteousness shall before ever, and my salvation from
generation to generation. Wicked and mighty men build their designs upon the
hope of long life, and learn not by so many examples of the mortality of the
greatest among men, that Esa. 40.23, 24.
the Lord brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of the earth
as vanity: yea, they shall not be planted: yea, they shall not be sown: yea,
their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also blow upon
them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take them away as
stubble. This was 1. King. 22.27, 28.
Achabs trust, when he commanded to put Micaiah in prison, and to feed him with
bread and water of affliction, until he came back in peace: but Micaiah
answered with great confidence, If thou return at all in peace, the LORD has
not spoken at all by me. The wicked and malicious Apostate Julian threatened the
Christians, whom he called Galileans in derision, with many evils and
mischiefs, as soon as he should come back from his expedition against the
Persians, trusting in the predictions of the Magicians, and in the ambiguous
oracles of his gods: But the Christians feared him, not, knowing that he was a
mortal man, or, as Athanasius called him, Nubeculacito transitura, a cloud
which is soon gone. Henry II. King of France, said that he should see with
his own eyes Anne de Bourg burnt quick: That same day he received at the
tilting a stroke with a spear in the eye, whereof he died. His son Francis
II. erected the scaffold for the martyrizing of the Prince of Conde, Prince of
his own blood. That same night a pain in his ear killed him, and the Prince
escaped.

For these causes taken from Gods deliveries, and men's weakness and mortality,
God forbids us to fear men. Esa. 40.10, 11, 13.
Fear thou not, (says he,) for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee
with the right hand of my righteousness: Bebold all they that were incensed
against thee, shall be ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing, and
they that strive with thee, shall perish, etc. for I the LORD thy God will hold
thy right hand, saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee. Such
exhortations and promises are frequent in the Scripture, and upon them we
ground our selves when we fear not men, yea we seek comfort and strength
against fear, in Gods precedent deliveries. Of time past we say with David,
Psalm 118.5, 6.
I called upon the LORD in my distress: The LORD answered me, and set me in a
large place. Therefore we conclude as he did, for the time which is to come.
The LORD is on my side, I will not fear: what can man do unto me?

XII. What then? shall we be without fear? Not so. s;a. 8.12, 13.
Say ye not, A confederacy to all them, to whom this people shall say, A
confederacy: neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid: Sanctify the LORD
of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and him be your dread: Fear not
men, for Psalm. 39.4, 6.
verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity: Surely every man
walks in a vain shew^ surely they are disquieted in vain. Fear God, of
whom and to whom Jeremiah says, Ier. 10.6, 7.
For as much as there is none like unto thee, O LORD, thou art great, and thy
Name is great in might; Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? for to
thee does it appertain, for as much as among all these wise men of the
nations, and in all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee. Therefore as
Christ said to his Disciples, so say we to you, Matt. 10.28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.

XIII. As we should not fear men for the causes aforesaid, so should we not
for the same causes put our trust in them, as it is written, Psalm. 146.2, 4.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man, in whom there is no
help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his
thoughts perish.

First it is said, Put not your trust in Princes: wherefore? Are they not
strong, mighty, wealthy? Has not God said of them, and to them. Psalm. 82.6
I have said ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most High? All
that is true. Romans 4.17.
God calls those things which be not, as though they were: They are gods, but
earthly gods, but weak and mortal gods: to whom God says also in that same
place, Psalm. 82.7.
But ye shall die like men, and ye that are Princes, shall fall like another.
And therefore when in the vanity of their hearts they dare call themselves
gods, God answers them as he did the K. of Tire, saying, Ezech. 28.2.
Thou art a man, and not God.

That is the meaning of the words following, Nor in any son of man: The
sons of men are men: the Princes are sons of men; they are men: And ye
know, that Ier 17.5.
thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts in men, and makes slesh
his arm. Be faithful to your Princes: Obey and keep their commandments,
render to them their dues, tribute, custom, fear, honor; Matt. 22.21.
give to Caesar that which is Cesars. Pray to God for them: but give not unto
them Gods tribute. Render not to any creature the homage of trust, which is
proper to God alone: He can deliver.

But as for the sons of men, in them there is no help. Though they be
called gods, none of them Matt. 6.27.
can by their godhead add one cubit unto their stature, Psa. 49.7
nor by any means redeem their brother, nor give to God a ransom for him.
Yea, after that Plutarch. in Alexand.
Alexander the Great has published abroad, that he is son to Jupiter
Hammon, when he shall see the humor running down from his wounds, he shall be
constrained to say, This is (...), and not (...), the blood of a man, and not
of God; and when he shall smell the stink of his own filth, he shall ask of
his flatterers, The gods yield they such a sent? What gained Marcellin. lib. 17.
Sapor King of Persia, by taking to himself the proud titles of King of kings,
Brother to the Sun and Moon, Partaker of the Stars? etc. where is he now?
has his pretended brotherhood with the Sun and Moon, his consanguinitie
with the stars delivered him from the grave, where now death feeds on him?
Let Herod delight for a moment in the shouting and crying of his flatterers,
Act 12.22, 23.
The voice of a God, and not of a man: by and by the worms shall eat him
quick, and constrain him to say to his claw-backes, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 19.
cap. 7. Eusebius. Hist. Eceles. lib. 1. cap. 9.
He whom ye called God, ends his life like men, and this immortal dies. Let
the Canonists fawn on the Pope, and say that he is neither God nor man: he
knows that he is the son of man; and we know that he 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
is the man of sin; and that there is no help, that there is nothing but
perdition in him. What is man, but vanity? Psalm. 60.
Surely men of low degree are vanity; and men of high degree are a lie: To be
laid in the ballence, they are altogether lighter than vanity. And therefore
Psalm. 60.11.
the help of man is vanity. For this cause God cursed the jews when they
trusted to Egypt, saying, Esa. 31.1, 3.
Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and trust
in charets because they are many: Now, the Egyptians are men, and not God; and
their horses flesh, and not Spirit. When the Lord shall stretch out his hand,
both he that helps, shall fall; and he that is helped, shall fall down, and
they all shall fail together.

What if man had power and will to help? for all that, trust not in him: His
breath goes forth, he returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts
perish: all his designs, and all the trust thou had in him, dies with him:
for then he cannot help himself, and how should he help thee? Job 14.1, 2.
Man, that is borne of woman, is of few dayess, and full of trouble: he comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down: he flies also as a shadow, and
continues not. Wherefore Esa. 2.22.
cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein is he to be
accounted of, that ye should put your trust in him?

XIIII. Must we not trust in men which are living, and which are with us, to
help us? Much less should we trust in them which are dead: cles. 9.6.
Their love, their hatred, their envy, to me, to thee severally, is now
perished: neither have they any more portion for ever in any thing that is done
under the Sun: Job 14.21.
Their sons come to honor, and they know it not: and they are brought low,
but they perceive it not of them.

I except not those, even those blessed souls which enjoy a perfect felicity
in the vision of God: for Rev. 14.13.
they rest from their labors, and Esa. 57.1.
are taken away from that which is evil; their felicity consisting in this,
that their minds are filled with the perfect knowledge of God, their hearts
with his love, and all the powers of their soul are ravished with a perpetual
meditation and contemplation of his infinite goodness, which is never
distracted with the disquieting cares of things which go to and fro in this
valley of miseries, and world of vanity.

XV. In whom then shall we trust? In whom, but in the Lord? Psalm. 128.8, 9.
It is better to trust in the LORD, than to put confidence in Princes. David
speaking of the forefathers of Gods people, says of them, Psalm. 22.4.
Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted, and thou did deliver them. Of
himself he says, Psalm. 4.9.
I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for thou LORD only make me
dwell in safety: Thou only, not Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; not any Angel, any
Archangell; not any living among men. Psalm. 18.27, 28.
Thou will save the afflicted people, but wilt bring down high looks: Thou will light my candle; the LORD my God will lighten my darkness. And therefore
Psalm. 25.15.
mine eyes are ever toward the LORD, not toward the Saints, nor the Angels:
for he shall pluck my feet out of the net: Psalm. 42.11.
he is the health of my countenance, the help whereunto Psalm. 42.11.
look, and my God: Psalm. 73.25.
whom have I in heaven? and there is none upon earth, that I desire besides
thee. And therefore he says again, Psalm. 121.1, 2.
I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help. Say
not, that these hills are the Angels or Saints; for headdeth, My help comes
from the LORD, which made heaven and earth: from the LORD alone Psalm. 62.11, 12.
God has spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power belongs unto God:
also unto thee, O LORD, belongs mercy: Power and mercy, two qualities
required in our Redeemer, Deliverer, and Savior, and belonging to God alone;
who may deliver us, because power is his; and will deliver us, because mercy
also is his. Psalm. 46.1.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

Therefore let worldlings Psalm. 20.7.
trust in their chariots, and in their horses: let Papists trust in Saints in
Angels, in Monks cowles, in merits. we will remember the Name of the LORD our
God, that we may be blessed. For Ierem. 17.7.
blessed is the man that trusts in the LORD, and whose hope the LORD is.

XVI. Let us only take heed that we be of those whom the Lord delivers.
Pro. 13.10.
The Name of the LORD is a strong tower: The righteous runs unto it, and is
safe. The righteous man has many evils, but the LORD delivers HIM. I taught
you in my first Sermon the characters and true marks of a righteous man: If
when thou art afflicted, thou say with David, that Psalm. 9.9, 10.
the LORD will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble,
consider and mark well how he describes these oppressed, to whom the Lord is
a refuge. Read these words following, And they that know thy Name, will put
their trust in thee: for thou LORD have not forsaken them that seek thee.

I have seen many in their affliction bragging of Gods predestination, and
saying, that Gods Elect cannot perish. That which they say is true: for Gods
Angel forewarning Daniel of the great troubles wherewith the Church was to be
vexed by the Tyrant Antiochus Epiphanes said unto him, Dan. 12.1.
At that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found
written in the book: And ye read in the Revelation, that Rev. 20.15.
whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of
fire: as also on the other side, that those only enter into the holy City,
Rev. 21.27
which are written in the Lambs book of life. But this predestination is hid
in the unsearchable secrecy of Gods breast, and many brag of it, which have
no part in it. Therefore David will have us to enter into our own breasts, and
to search there the marks of our predestination, which God has shut up in the
unmeasurable and infinite depth of his own breast: Romans 8.30
for whom he did predestinate, them he also called; giving them an effectual
and sanctifying knowledge of his most blessed and holy Name: so that when he
says to them, Zech. 13.9.
Thou art my people, they answer presently, The LORD is my God. This is to know
God, and to seek God, and David says, that the Lord is a refuge to the
oppressed, which know his Name, and seek him.

This is the knowledge of faith, which takes the blood of the Lamb of God,
and Heb. 12.24. 1. Pet 1.2.
besprinkleth our souls with it: that Exodus 12.13.
as when God saw the blood of the Paschall Lamb upon the houses where the
IsrAelites were, he passed over them, and the plague was not upon them, when he
smote all the first borne in the land of Egypt; so he delivers us from the
hands of our enemies, and the evils of this life, and of the life to come, by
the virtue of that blood, according to the promise, Zec. 9.11.
As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.

This faith Act. 15.9
puristeth the hearts, it is the mother of uprightness and sincerity before
God in the performance of all duties of the first and second Table: and
therefore if thou look for Gods deliverance, cleanse thy heart in such sort,
that thou may be able to say with David, Psalm. 7.10, 11.
My defense is of God, which saves the upright in heart: for God judges the
righteous, and God is angry every day against the wicked.

1. Tim. 1 5.
From this knowledge, and faith unfeigned, comes charity; a vehement love of
God, and of man for Gods sake: and therefore God describes the righteous man
whom he delivers, by those two marks of knowledge, and of love, saying,
Psalm. 91.14.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set
him on high, because he has known my Name.

This love is conjoined with a great reverence and respectuous fear of God,
and the keeping of his most holy commandments in the simplicity of an upright
life. Will thou then be assured of Gods salvation? Psalm. 85.9
Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him. Psalm. 103.17, 18.
The mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear
him, and his righteousness unto childrens children to such as keep his
Covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them. Psalm. 116.6.
The LORD preserves the simple.

Such righteous cannot with dry eyes behold the sins of the world whereby God
is exceedingly offended: but they mourn and weep before God, and in their
weeping have a most sure mark of Gods love and care toward them. When God
turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, 2. Pet. 2.7, 8.
He delivered the righteous Lot, who was vexed with the filthy conversation of
the wicked: for that righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing,
vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. When he
was to destroy Jerusalem, he gave commandment to his Angel, saying, Ezech.
9.4.
Go through the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and mark a
mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all the
abominations that be done in the midst thereof.

If the righteous man sigheth for the abominations that be done in the world,
he is no way a complice in them: therefore God said to Elijah, 1. King. 19, ^8.
I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed
unto Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him.

If these marks of a righteous man be in thee, they are sufficient to make
thee partaker of Gods deliveries: he looks not to thy qualities which make
thee to be redoubted or contemned among men. Psalm. 147 10, 11.
He delights not in the strength of the horse, he takes not pleasure in the
legs of a man: the LORD takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mercy. Luke 16.19.
The purple and fine linne, sumptuous and dainty fare, music and dancing
could not deliver the rich man from the torments of hell, because he was
wicked: Poverty, beggerie, nakedness, pining sickness could not bar
Lazarus from the everlasting pleasures of Paradise, because he was righteous.
Pro. 11.3, 4, 6.
The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the perverseness of
transgressors shall destroy them. Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but
righteousness delivers from death. The righteousness of the upright shall
deliver them: but transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.

XVII. The righteousness of the upright delivers him, not as a cause
meritorious of deliverie, as the Papists would persuade you, for it is stained
with many spots and blemishes of sin, as ye have learned in the first
sermon; but as a quality requisite in him whom the Lord will deliver: for if we
seek the true causes of our deliveries, God says first negatively, that Deuteronomy.
9.4
it is not for our righteousness: Next he says affirmatively, that it is
Ezech. 20.9, 14, 44 Ezec. 36.22
for his own Names sake. If temporal deliverie from the evil of affliction
come not from our merits, can eternal deliverie from sin and hell be the
merit of any man's righteousness? The bread for which we sweat, before we can
have it to eat, is the gift of God, and we ask it of God in that quality:
and shall the bread of life be the reward of an hireling? No, no: Romans 6.23.
The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

If Papists say, that David prays, Psalm. 7.8.
Judge me, O LORD, according to my righteousness, and according to mine
integrity that is in me, and says plainly, Psalm. 18.19, 20.
The LORD rewarded me according to my righteousness: according to the
cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me, etc. Answer, that in these and
such like places which are infinite, he declares that he was enriched with the
qualities, wherewith he that waits on the Lords deliverance, must be graced;
but speaks nothing of the causes of his deliverance, which in the end of the
18. Psalm, he acknowledges to be Gods free mercy, saying, Ver 50.
Great deliverance gives he to his King, and shows mercy to his anointed,
to David, and to his seed for evermore. And elsewhere confesses, that it is
Gods righteousness, and not his, when he prays thus, Psalm. 143.1, 2.
Answer me in thy righteousness, and enter not into judgment with thy
servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. So he forsakes all
merits, and asks grace, when in another part he prays, Psalm. 25.18.
O bring thou me out of my distresses: look upon mine affliction and my pain,
and forgive all my sins. Such prayers, are they not most frequent in the
Psalms? When the Papist sings in the Church a de Profundis, if he
understand what he says, will he not be moved to deny all merits, when he
considers this prayer of righteous. David? Psalm. 130.2, 3, 4, 7.
Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications: If thou, LORD* should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand? but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared. Let
Israel hope in the LORD: And why? because forsooth, there is a great deal of
righteousness in Israel. Not so: why then? because with the Lord there is
mercy, and with him is plentious redemption. Let us also acknowledge and
confess with heart and mouth, that Iam. 3.22.
it is of the LORDS mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not.

XIIX Though this doctrine of the nullitie of the righteous man's merits, and of
the efficacy of the saving mercies of our righteous God, be most true, yet 2.
These. 1.6.
it is a righteous thing with God to deliver the righteous man, 1. because
being just by nature, Psalm. 45.7
he loves righteousness, and hates wickedness, and is as sensible of the
one to protect it, as of the other to punish it. Psalm 34.15, 16.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous: and his ears are open unto their
cry: the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth.

2. Because the cause for which righteous men suffer, is his, and his
righteousness cannot but moove him to undertake the defense thereof. Upon this
foundation the Church made this prayer to God, Psalm. 44.22, 23.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter: awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise, cast us not off for ever.

3. Because he has promised to deliver the righteous, and it is a part of his
righteousness to keep his promise. Hence is this prayer of David, Psalm. 71.2.
Deliver me in thy righteousness: Psalm. 143, 1.
answer me in thy righteousness. Hence is this excellent saying of the blessed
Apostle, 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give at that day, and not to me only, but unto them
also that love his appearing. Sweet Bern. de gratia and libero arbitrio, in
fine.
Bernard: How calls he the crown which he presumes to be laid up for him,
the crown of righteousness? Is it not because that which is promised gratis,
of mere good will, is asked righteously, and as a thing due? Finally, he
says, 2. Tim. 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep
depositum meum, that which I have committed unto him. He calls Gods promise
his depost, and because he believed him who had made the promise, he redemands
considently the thing promised; promised through mercy, but now to be paid
through righteousness: The crown then which Paul looks for, is the crown
of righteousness; but of the righteousness of God, not of his own
righteousness: for it is a righteous thing that he render that which he owes:
and he owes that which he has promised: this then is the righteousness
whereof the Apostle thinks so well, even the promise of God. For this cause
David called Gods promises, the word of his righteousness, saying, Psalm. 119
123.
Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy righteousness.

XIX. Now God not only delivers the righteous man, but also delivers
wicked men, and fills them with many blessings for the righteous sake. Genesis 7.7.
He saved Ham in the Arc, for Noah his fathers sake, Genesis 6.9.
who was a just man, and perfect in his generations, walking with God. Genesis
18.32.
If there had been ten righteous men in Sodom, God would not have destroyed
it for tennes sake, Genesis 19.22.
neither could he destroy it as long as righteous Lot was in it. Genesis 17.20.
Ismael was blessed for Abraham his fathers sake. Genesis 30.27.
Laban confessed that the Lord had blessed him for Jacobs sake. Genesis 29.5
He blessed Potiphars house for Joseph's sake. How often was the people of
Israel saved from the fiery Wrath of God, through the prayers of Exodus 32.14.
Number. 14.13. Psalm. 106.13.
Moses? Were not 2. King. 2.12. 2. King. 13, 14.
Elijah and Elisha, the Charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, more
steedable to their people than an army of horsemen? Act. 27.24, 37.
God, gave he not to Paul all them that sailed with him, which were two
hundred, threescore and sixteen souls? When it was said to the souls that
were under the Altar, that Rev. 6.11.
they should roast yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also,
and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.
This is to teach us, that Gods Elect, and the righteous men which are in the
world, are the upholders thereof; and that it must finish when they shall be
taken away from it: as if ye pull from a ruinous house the props wherewith it
is supported, it goes swiftly to the ground.

XX. Therefore let us above all things set our minds and hearts upon
righteousness, and endeavor to attain to true holiness of life, that, as it
was said to Abraham, Genesis 12.2
Thou shall be a blessing, so may we be a blessing both to our selves and
others, namely, that in the dark day of Gods indignation, we may be Psalm. 1.5.
able to stand in judgment, and with the congregation of the righteous Psalm.
118.19, 20.
enter into the gates of righteousness, and dwell forever 2. Pet. 3.13.
in these new heavens, promised unto us, wherein dwells righteousness, and
that through the most precious and powerful merits of our only Lord and
Savior 1. Ioh. 2.2.
Jesus Christ the righteous: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, be
all praise, glory, and honor, both now and evermore. Amen.

SERMON. VII. Of the infinite number, and of the diverse means of the Lords
deliveries.
PSALM XXXIV. XIX. But the Lord delivers him out of them all.


1 THe righteous man's evils, and the Lords deliverances, are the exposition of
Sampsons riddle.

2. As many evils, as many deliverances; yea, of each evil many deliverances.

3. Exhortation to hope and trust in the Lord.

4. The Lord delivers by means, against means, without means.

5. He delivers by weak means, as by flight, whereof shall be spoken in the
next Sermon.

6. He opposes men to men, and delivers his Church by the sword.

7. He makes his creatures of all kinds to fight for his Church.

8. He is wonderful in the delivering of his Church, against the nature of the
means,

9. He delivers also without means.

10. When his Church is destitute of all help, and of all hope, he alone
delivers her without any visible help.

11. When the righteous man is overcome, he overcommeth his enemies, and so is
delivered,

12. As it is most evident by the examples of Shadrach, Meschah, and Abednego,

13. Of Eleazer,

14. Of the seven brethren, and of their mother, mentioned in the second book
of the Maccabees,

15. As also of Christians in great number, as of Steven,

16. Of many Martyrs in the Primitive Church,

17. And since the reformation.

18. Such victories come of faith, love, and zeal.

19. Prayer.

1 THis text is a clear exposition of Sampsons riddle, Judge. 14.14.
Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness: afflictions are the eaters, and as it seems to men, the destroyers
of the righteous man: and what is stronger than death? what meat so good, so
seasonable, of so excellent a relish as comfort in affliction, as joy in the
midst of sorrow, as glory and honor in shame? what so sweet, as to find
heaven in hell, content in discontent, life in death? Many are the evils of
the righteous man: There is the roaring Lion rising up against him: not one
lion, but many: there is the eater, or rather there be the eaters 1. Pet. 5.8.
which walk about seeking to devour him; But the LORD delivers him out of
them all: there is meat, there is sweetness. In darkness, he finds light,
in weakness strength, in despair hope, in trouble peace of conscience, in
raging and roaring fury patience, in evil good, in the devils most grimme and
dreadful mannonr, the joys and pleasures of paradise, in all his afflictions
most powerful, most wonderful, most joyful deliveries: his afflictions are
many,

But the Lord delivers him out of them all.

II. His afflictions are many, they are almost infinite, they are enchained,
and follow one another so hard and so nigh, that he complains with Job in his
grief, Job 9.18.
He will not suffer me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness:
But who can relate the Lords deliveries and salvations, whereof David, which
had passed through so many evils, confessed that Psalm. 71.15.
he knew not the number? Think not that any affliction severally, that all the
afflictions which are incident to men, though they were camped and set in battle
against thee, can surmount his force and good will toward thee.

Fear thou, to starve for hunger? 1. Kin. 17 4, 6, 14.
Commanded he not the Ravens to feed Elijah at the brook of Cherith? increased
he not the handful of meal in the widows barrel, and the little oil which
was in her Cruse? Psalm. 147.9.
He gives to the beast his food, and to the young Ravens, which cry; and shall
he forsake thee, for whom his dear Son Jesus Christ is dead? Psalm. 33.18, 19.
Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope
in his mercy, to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in
famine. Art thou dried up with thirst? Remember that he opened Genesis 21.19.
Agars eyes, and she saw a well of water: Exodus 17.6. Psalm. 105.41
That he smote the rock in Horeb, and the waters gushed out, they ran in the
dry places like a river, and quenched the thirst of his people; that Judge.
15.19.
he clave one of the grinders that was in the jaw bone of the ass, and made
water to come thereout for Samson.

Fear thou the plague, which round about thee makes havoc of man and
beast, and would, but can not, practice the common precept, Cito, long,
tarde, Quickly, far, late? The heat of the Sun, the moistnes of the Moon, do
they annoy thee? Psalm 91.5, 6, 7.
Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that
flees by day, nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the
destruction that wastes at Noone day: A thousand shall fall at thy side, and
ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee. Psalm. 121.5,
6.
The LORD is thy keeper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right hand. The Sun
shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by night.

Art thou exiled for Christ's sake? Art thou constrained to live amongst a
people, whose tongue thou understandest not? God, who Psalm 56.8
numbered David's wanderings, Psalm. 147.2.
will gather together the outcasts of Israel: Esa. 43.6.
He will say to the North, Give up: and to the South, Keep not back: bring
my Sons from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth. In the mean
while he will follow thee in thine exile, and bless thee, as Genesis 46.4
he went down with Jacob into Egypt, and blessed him there.

Art thou cast in a low pit, where thou sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death being bound in stocks and fetters, among swearers, blasphemers,
robbers, and other malefactors? he which put in Genesis 41.9
a Courtiers heart to speak for Joseph, which sent Act. 12.7
his Angel to deliver Peter whom Herod had imprisoned; Act. 16.26.
He which shook all the foundations of the prison where Paul and Silas were
laid in the stocks, opened the doors, and loosed the prisoners bonds, has a
thousand means to break the gates of brass, to cut the bars of iron in
sunder, to loose thy bands, and bring thee out of darkness, out of the dungeon
of the shadow of death.

Art thou a seafaring man, one of those of whom Pittacus.
one of the seven wise men said, that they are neither among the living, nor
amongst the dead, ever living within four inches of death, and therefore ever
dying? When Psalm. 107.25, 26, 27, etc.
God commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves
thereof: They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, then
soul is melted because of trouble: They reele to and fro, and stagger like a
drunken man, and are at their wits end: Then they cry unto the LORD in their
trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses: He makes the storm a
calm, so that the waves thereof are still: Then are they glad, because they
be quiet: So he brings them unto their desired haven. Do thou the like: cry
to the Lord as the Disciples did, Matthew. 8.25, 26.
Lord save us, we perish, and he will arise and rebuke the Winds and the Sea,
and there shall be a great calm.

Art thou fallen into the Turks pitiless hands? Art thou taken in war, and
condemned to the miserable slaverie of rowing night and day in the galleys,
hearing and feeling nothing but whips whistling and reeling upon thy naked
shoulders? Be of a good courage, and wait upon the Lord, who in his own time
will say of thee, as he said of Joseph, Psalm. 81.6, 7.
I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands were delivered from the
pots: Thou call in trouble, and I delivered thee: I answered thee in the
secret place of thunder.

Thy heart is it torn in pieces with calumnies and revilings? The day shall
come, I speak by mine own experience, and therefore I say the day shall come,
when thou shall sing to God, Psalm. 31.19, 20.
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee,
which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before the sons of men!
Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man, thou
shall keep them secretly in a pavillion from the strife of tongues.

The wicked, trayleth he, hayleth he thee before the Judges without cause?
wonder not at that. Psalm. 37.32, 33, 34.
The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him. The LORD will not
leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged: wait on the LORD,
and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the Land: when the
wicked are cut off, thou shall see it.

Art thou sick of a mortal disease, as 2 Kin. 20 1, 2.
Hezekiah was? turn thy face to the wall, as he did: pray unto the Lord, as he
did: Cry to God as David did, Psalm. 41.4
LORD be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee, and
he Psalm. 107.20
will send his word, and heal thee, and deliver thee from the tomb.

See thou the evil days of war? be not discouraged, but say confidently
upon that which thou have seen in France, of that which thou shall see in the
Palatinat, Psalm. 46.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
The LORD of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah. Come,
behold the works of the LORD, what desolations he has made in the earth: He
makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth: He breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder: he burns the chariot in the fire. Be still,
says he, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heathen: I will
be exalted in the earth: The LORD of hosts is with us: The God of Jacob is our
refuge. Is there any thing impossible to the LORD? Psalm. 76.12.
Heshall cut off the spirit of Princes: He is terrible to the Kings of the
earth. After so many deliveries we sing to the glory of his power, Psalm. 74.13,
14.
Thou did divide the sea by thy strength, thou breakest the heads of the
Whales in the waters: Thou breakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces, and
give him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness. If there rise
Zech. 1.19, 20, 21.
four horns to scatter Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem, there shall also arise
four smiths to fray and break them: how often have we seen such things! We
shall see them again and again, for the Lord of hosts is with us.

Can there any affliction so great befall us, as to be deprived of Gods Word?
your fathers felt the prick and smart of it in Philip the second, Charles the
ninth, and Queen Mary's days. Now is fulfilled in France and in the Palatinat
the prophecy of Esaiah, Esa. 30.20, 21.
Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction,
yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more, but thine eyes
shall see thy Teachers: and thine ears shall hear a voice behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and
when ye turn to the left. Blessed be God, who in this country gives us
with the bread of his Word, the bread of prosperity: Psalm. 110 2.
He rules there in the midst of his enemies. Here he is like a father in the
midst of his children.

The greatest of all our evils, is sin. And we sing unto him morning and
evening with heart and mouth, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3.
O my soul, bless the LORD, and all that is within me bless his holy Name:
Bless the LORD, o my soul, and forget not all his benefits, who forgiveth ALL
thine iniquities, who heals ALL thy diseases, etc.

Have thou any other evil which neither is in my knowledge, nor in my memory?
Exodus 14.21. Exodus 15.4, 6.
He who made the sea dry land, and whose right hand dashed in pieces Pharao
and his host: Josh. 3.15, 16.
He that made the waters of Jordan rise up upon an heap, and stand still, even
then when they overflowed all the banks: Dan. 3.25
He who gave refreshing to the three Confessors in the midst of the burning
furnace: Dan, 6.22.
He who delivered Daniel from the jaws of the Lions: Ion. 2.2, 11.
He who kept Jonah alive in the Whales belly, and turned into a custody that
hell where he looked for present death: Ezec. 37.7, 8, 9, 10.
He who puts breath into dry bones, who tyeth them together with sinews,
who covers them with flesh and skin, who by a mavelous resurrection sets
them upon their feet, and makes them an exceeding great army, is not like
unto Isaac, unto whom Esau said, Genesis 27.38.
Have thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, even me also, O my father. As
he has judgments Deu. 32.34.
laid up in store, and sealed up among his treasures: so has he Deu. 28.32.
a good treasure of deliveries, which cannot be dried up. Psalm. 106, 2.
Who can utter the mighty acts of the LORD? who can show forth all his
praise? Psalm. 139.17, 18.
How precious, o God; are my thoughts of them! how great is the sum of them! If
I should count them, they are mo in number than the sand: when I awake, I am
still with thee: my spirit cannot conceive the number of thy deliveries.

III. I say then to you all, as David said of old to his people, Psalm. 130.7, 8.
Let Israel hope in the LORD, for with the LORD there is mercy, much good will
to deliver your brethren which are now afflicted, and to deliver you when he
shall also sit as a refiner to try and purify you: And with him is plentious
redemption: With him is force and strength to redeem: he may do it, he can
do it, he will do it. He shall redeem Israel from ALL his iniquities. 1.
Cor. 10 13.
He will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but will with the
tentation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Yea Psalm.
121 7, 8.
the LORD shall preserve thee from ALL evil: he shall preserve thy soul: The
LORD shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in, from this time forth,
and even for evermore.

IV. But how shall we keep reckoning of the LORDS deliveries, seeing the
manner of them goes beyond all our wit and understanding? for they are not all
of one sort, and the least and smallest of them is wonderful. Sometimes he
works by means, that we neglect them not: Now and then he gives most
miraculous deliveries besides and contrary to all means, that we put not our
hope and confidence in them: Often he delivers the righteous man without all
means, to teach us to trust in him only.

V. His means are diverse, and in their diversity so many, that it is almost
impossible to reduce them into certain heads. In some ye see nothing but
weakness; In others, might and strength: In some wisdom, in others folly:
In each of them such a variety, that neither am I able to express, nor ye to
conceive them.

He saved Moses, David, Elijah, Jesus Christ, Paul at diverse times, many
zealous men among the Jews under the bloody persecution of Antiochus
Epiphanes, many Confessors and faithful brethren among the Christians in the
primitive Church; in our Fathers days and in ours, by flight, a most weak,
tedious, and troublesome mean, but yet a mean lawful and approved of him, as
we shall see in the next Sermon.

VI. Psalm. 33.16, 17.
There is no King saved by the multitude of any host: a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength: An horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall
he deliver any by his great strength. Yet God imployeth often men, horses,
hosts, for the safety of the king, and deliverie of his people, opposing men to
men, flesh to flesh, vanity to vanity. Thus he introduced his people into the
land of Canaan by Joshua, and delivered them often by the Judges, by David, and
other good Kings: Thus after he had tried the faith, patience, and constancy
of the christian Church for the space of 3. hundred years by x. most heavy
persecutions, he stird up Constantine the Great to deliver them by the sword
from their enemies.

In these skirmishes and combats men fight, but 1. Sam. 17.17.
the battle is the LORDS. It is he which gives the victory to them on whose
side he is, as the scales of a balance hang upon that side where there is most
weight. This was that which Moses prophesied to his people, Deuteronomy. 33.27.
The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms: and
he shall thrust out thy enemies from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.
This was the confession of the Church of Israel with prayer and thanksgiving;
Psalm. 44.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Our Fathers got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of
thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them. Thou art my King, O
God: command deliverances for Jacob: Through thee will we push down our
enemies. Through thy Name will we tread them under that rise up against us:
for I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me: But thou have
saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that bated us: In God we
boast all the day long, and praise thy Name for ever. Selah.

Look on what side God is, there few are enough, there two are enough, there one
is enough. Few are enough: Gedeon and three hundred men were sufficient against
the Midianites, because Judge. 6.16.
the LORD said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the
Midianites as one man. Therefore when he was going to fight, he commanded his
soldiers to cry, Judge. 7.18.
The sword of the LORD, and of Gedeon. First, the sword of the LORD, as being
the principal combatant; Next, of Gedeon, as of a weak instrument in Gods
hands; and as the Midianite dreamed, Verse. 23.
a cake of barley bread, which tumbling into the host of Midian, smote it, and
put it to flight. Three hundred Albigenses of Angrogne defended themselves in a
meadow against seven thousand Papists; and having no other armor but slings,
gave them the chase. Two are enough, as 1. Sam. 14.6.
Jonathan, and the young man that bare his armor against the garrison of the
Philistines. For, as he faid, there is no restraint to the LORD, to save by
many or by few.

When it is Gods pleasure to deliver by one, one is enough. Judge. 15.15.
Samson, with the jaw bone of an Ass, slew a thousand Philistines, and Judge.
16.27, 30.
pulling down the house upon three thousand of them, slew them all. Wonderful
were the exploits of David's Worthies, but principally of 2. Sam. 23.8.
the first three: for each of them being aloue, slew many hundred of Gods
enemies, because God was with them.

But where God is not with men, there a great host is as weak as one man: And
therefore when God drew himself back from the Jews by reason of their sins,
they made their moan, and said, Psalm 44.9, 10.
Thou have cast us off, and put us to shame, and go not forth with our
armies: Thou make us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us,
spoil for themselves.

VII. Sometimes God armeth his creatures, and they fight against the enemies of
his people either alone, or jointly with them. He fought against Pharao by
turning of the river into blood, by Frogs, by Lice, by swarms of Flies, by the
murraine of Beasts, by the plague of Boyles and Blanes, of Hail, Thunder, and
Lightning, of Locusts, and Darkness: at last by his Angel, which smote all
the firstborn of Egypt from men unto the cattle. Hezekiah being enclosed in
Jerusalem, and not able to resist against Senacherib and his army, 2. Kin.
19.35.
the Angel of the LORD went out, and smote, in the camp of the Assyrians, an
hundred, four score, and five thousand. When, of these champions of the
heave^ly host, one alone does so great deeds, what would not do all Psalm.
68.17.
the Chivalrie of God, which is of twenty thousands, even of thousands of
Angels, Psalm. 34.7.
which encampe round about them that fear God? Wherefore David prayed the Lord
Psalm. 35.5.
to send his Angel to chase his enemies. t. 12.7
One Angel delivered Peter: a multitude of Angels delivered 2. King. 6.17.
Elisha, and carried Luke 16.22.
Lazarus into Abraham's bosom.

When Joshua was fighting against five kings of Canaan, Josh. 10.11.
the LORD cast down great stones from heaven upon them, and they were more
which dyed with hail stones, than they whom the children of Israel slew with
the swords. When in the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart,
and sundry other tribes through laziness followed not Deborah and Barak in the
war against Iabin and Sisera, the heavens and the stars fought with them
against those puissant enemies.

IIX. Often God works besides all means, yea and against the nature of
means. Joseph is sold by his brethren, and cast into a loathsome prison, that
he may be exalted to the highest glory that is in Kings Courts. The sea was a
safeguard to the people of Israel, even then when the Egyptians were overthrown
in the midst of it. The blowing of trumpets, and the burning lamps were
fitter to discover Gedeon with his three hundred disarmed men to the host of
the Midianites, than to discomfit it. The Josh, 6.4.
blowing of rams horns was not so fit to cast down the walls of Jericho,
as to advertise the Citizens to be upon their guard, and to watch to hold them
up. What could David's sling serve against Goliaths spear? and who would not
have mocked the three hundred Albigenses fighting with slings against seven
thousand men well armed, as if they had been as many birds in a hemp-yard? It
pleases God to deliver so, that his Church vaunt not against him, saying,
Judge. 7.2.
Mine own hand has saved med, and so rely upon the means, and make him a
co-partner only of the deliverie, and not author thereof. When the Lions spare
Daniel, when the fire bears respect to the three Confessors, when the Whale
swalloweth up Jonah, and three days, and three nights after, vomiteth him out
of her belly upon the dry land without any harm, who can deny but that such
deliveries were against the nature of means, and cannot be ascribed but to the
most wonderful power of God?

I put in this rank the confusion and disorder which God sends amongst his
enemies, when he will deliver his people. The Midianites come to fight against
Israel, but Ver. 22.
the LORD set every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the
host. When 2. Chron. 20.2, 22, 23, 25.
the Moabites, Ammonites, and Idumeans with one consent sought to destroy
Iehoshaphat and his people, the Lord troubled them with the spirit of division
after such a manner, that the Moabites and Ammonites slew and destroyed the
Idumeans, and after that, every one helped to destroy another: so that
Iehoshaphat and his people had no more to do, but to go and take away the
spoil, and give thanks unto the Lord. How often, by such divisions, God has
saved the reformed Churches in foreign nations, and namely in France, we all
know.

IX. When God delivers against the nature of means, he will teach us that he
stands not in any need of means when his pleasure is to deliver. And
therefore now and then he delivers without means. Pro. 16.7.
When a man's ways please the LORD, he makes even his enemies to be at peace
with him. He delivered Genesis 33.4
Jacob from Esau, changing his heart, and appeasing his wrath, which was
suddenly turned into imbracements, kissing, and weeping. He delivered David
from Saul by many means: but when the messengers which were sent by Saul to
take him, prophesied, and thought no more on him, what help of man, what
visible means were there? When he preferred Joseph in the Court of Pharao,
Daniel and his fellows in the Court of Nebuchadnezzar, and of Darius, Nehemiah
and Mordecai in the Court of Artaxerxes, by what means did he it? The Psalmist
says, that Psalm. 106 46.
he made them to be pittyed of all those that carried them captives. He
converted Saul, and of a persecuter, made him a Christian; of a Captain, an
Apostle; of a Ringleader of most cruel and bloody Wolves, a most vigilant and
faithful shepherd of Christ's flock.

David, speaking through his own experience, says to the man which is
persecuted wrongfully, Psalm. 37.5, 6.
Commit thy way unto the LORD: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass: and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgments as the noone day. We may wonder that he does it: but how he does
it, who can tell? How Saul knew David's innocence, we can tell, 1. Sam. 24.18.
1. Sam. 26.21.
because when he might, he killed him not: but it is wonderful to consider, by
what unknown ways of Gods secret providence, Saul fell twice into his hands.
Henry the third, King of France, spoke of us at Tours, as Saul spoke of David,
and said, that we were more righteous than he, because we had rewarded him
good, whereas he had rewarded us evil. It was the wonderful and immediate
work of GOD, that he could not be saved but by them whose fathers he had
killed; and was resolved to be the protector of those whom he had persecuted,
if the Monks impoisoned knife had not cut too too soon for us the brittle
thread of his mortal life. God be praised, that amongst us there are no
Clements, no Barrauts, no Chatels, no Ravaillacs: for 2. Sam. 26.9.
who can stretch forth his hand against the LORDS anointed, and be guiltless?

X. How often has the Church been afflicted, stormed, forsaken of all
creatures, destitute of all help, of all counsel, of all comfort; and he, he
alone has come on a sudden, and both comforted and delivered her? He
prophesied by Daniel, that under the persecution of Antiochus, his people
should be brought to such extremity, that Dan. 11.45.
none should help them. What then? shall they perish for want of help? It
follows in the next chapter, Dan. 12.1
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince which stands for
the children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a nation, even to that same time: and at that time thy
people shall be delivered, every one that shall be written in the book. Who is
this Michael? who but our Lord Jesus Christ, called elsewhere, Josh 5.14, 15.
the Prince of the host of the LORD? If all the Angels of heaven, if all the
men of the world should stand still with their arms crossed, if all the
creatures should with hold their help from us, our Michael says unto us, Mat.
28.18, 20.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth: and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world. Though he be Phil. 2.9, 10.
highly exalted, though he have a Name which is above every name, though he
Psalm. 47.7
be king of all the earth, and that at his Name every knee must bow, of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; yet he is our high
Priest, and bears us into the most high and inmost heavens, yea wears us as
an ornament upon his shoulders and upon his breast, and, as the Apostle says,
Heb. 2.11
is not ashamed to call us his brethren.

When all things seem to be desperate, and past hope of recoverie, when the
faithful are nothing but a skeliton, but a carcass Ezech. 37.2, etc.
of dry bones, as the people of Judah was in the captivity of Babylon, if it
please him to speak the word only, they shall come together again, bone to
bone; they shall live, rise again, and be a great Army. He has by his word
done things greater and more wonderful. By his word he has made heaven and
earth: by his word he heaped plagues upon plagues, while they had destroyed
Pharao and his people: they that are sick, cry unto him, Psalm. 107 7.
he sends his word and heals them. Mat. 9.6, 20, 22.
By his word only he cured one sick of the palsy, and the woman diseased
with an issue of blood. By his word only he quieted the winds, calmed the
roaring seas, rendered sight and light to the blind, raised the dead. By his
word only he restored his people to the land of Canaan. By his word, he saves
the Church. By his word, by his only power and good will, without any visible
and known means, he has given peace to the Churches of France: for when we
were betrayed, and sold by sundry of our brethren, forsaken of many, pursued by
a great army, he was for us, and delivered us: Then we sung with thanksgiving
the hundredth twenty and fourth Psalm.

XI. There is yet another kind of deliverie which comes immediately of God,
and is most wonderful of all. How he delivers us by the ruin of our
enemies; how by death he giveeh us life, we shall hear in the next Sermon:
but that he delivers us, when to man's opinion we are overcome, it is a
paradoxe to the world, and yet a most certain and verified truth in the
Church. In the second and third of the Revelation, many excellent promises were
made to him that overcommeth. When the persecutions were most fervent and
frequent, and many were put to death for Christ's sake: then they were exhorted
to fight, to stand fast; and when they stood fast, it is said that they
overcame. It is written of Christ's two witnesses, that Rev. 11.7
the beast should make war against them, and overcome them, and kill them. It
is also written of Rev. 7.9, 14.
those which stood before the throne, that they came out of great tribulation,
and yet had palms in their hands. They came out of great tribulation, they
were vanquished: they had palms, in their hands, they were vanquishers. Eve^
as Romans 8.36, 37.
the Apostle says out of the forty fourth Psalm, For thy sake we are killed
all the day long, we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter: then we are
subdued and surmounted. Yet he adds, Nay, in all these things we are more
than Conquerors, through him that loved us. This is very strange: we are
overcome by our enemies when they slay us: and yet at that same time we are
overcommers.

How shall we reconcile this contrariety? ye will all grant, that the General
of an Army, fighting against his enemies, whatsoever damage and harm he
causes and procures unto them, prevails not, but rather is overcome of
them, if still they keep fast that wherefore he fights, and which he hoped
to pull away from them by violence. So it is with us. The devil, great
General of the world, stirs up against us the armies of Gog and Magog, all
the fiends of hell, all the wickedness of the earth, not to torment us, to
spoil us of our goods, to kill us, for neither is he covetous of our goods,
nor enemy to our persons, which he loves when we are like to himself; but by
such racking, spoiling, killing, to wring out of us a denying of our religion,
and so to separate us from the love of God, and make us to lose our salvation
which is in Christ. When then we hold fast the shield of faith, wherewith we
quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, when we remain faithful unto
death, when in the midst of our greatest anguishes, and of most exquisite
deaths, we challenge, and defy all our enemies, and cry to them all, Romans 8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? I say
that we are Conquerours, and Satan with all his brood is conquered.

XII. A few examples will make this truth more clear. We have already spoken of
Job, out of whose mouth the devil by so many tentations could not wring one
evil word against God, as he intended: who then was victorious? Satan or Job?
surely Job, who stood fast in the place of combat, when Satan fled, and was no
more seen.

The example of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego is no less wonderful. The
devil put in Dan. 3.
Nebuchadnezzars heart to set up, in the plain of Dura, in the Province of
Babylon, an image of gold, whose height was threescore cubits, and the breadth
thereof six cubits, to call to the dedication of that Idol the Princes,
Governors, all the Rulers of the Provinces, to dedicate it with the melodious
and most pleasant sound of the Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sackbut, Psalterie,
Dulcimer. and all kinds of music, to command to all peoples, nations, and
languages there present, to fall down and worship it at what time they should
hear the consort of music; to add to this command a most fearful threat,
that whosoever fell not down and worshipped, should the same hour be cast
into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. For whom was made all this pomp,
all this glorious show? for whom did the instruments of music sound so
sweetly? for whom did the furnace burn so exceedingly? For these three only:
for the devil knew that all the rest of the Kings subjects would obey, and
worship the image. Ye see a combat very difficult, ambushes most dangerous, a
gulf profound, a bottomless pit, a downright pitch on both sides, pleasure
and fear; the delectable harmony of all kinds of music, to allure the simple
ones; the frightfull sight of a burning furnace, to appall and amaze the most
inflexible and obdurate courages. See the event: there is nothing but obedience
amongst all: All bow, all kneel, all worship; three only stand upright, and
kneel not. Whereupon they are accused by certain Caldeans. The accusation is
important: There are, say they, certain Jews, not thy natural Subjects, but
strangers, and thy slaves, whom thou have set over the affairs of the Province
of Babylon, preferring them to thy natural Subjects, and the great men of thy
country, even Shadrach, Meschah, and Abednego: these men, O King, have not
regarded thee. These base and unthankefull fellows have contemned and despised
thee. What accusation could be more cunningly plaited? but as many
accusations, as many praises: As many crimes intended, as many commendations of
godliness: the King frets, chafes, threatens, If, says he, ye fall not
down, and worship not the image which I have made, ye shall be cast the same
hour into the midst of a fiery furnace, and who is that God that shall
deliver you out of my hands? As many threats, as many victories: as many
beholders, as many witnesses of their triumphs. They fight alone, they vanquish
alone, they triumph alone. And that which makes their combat admirable, and
their victory glorious, after that all have yielded, all have bowed their
knees to the Idol, they stand firm, and stir not. They dispute not with
themselves; Lo, all the honorable, all the wise, all the rich men of the
Realm, and all the people obey the King, what will men think of us, if we
alone struggle and be stubborn? If we had gone foremost to honor the Image, we
might be called too forward: but if after so many thousands we yield to
necessity; if we follow the multitude and the best sort, who can justly blame
us? Moreover, if we frame our wills to the Kings will, we may releeve and
further our brethren: whereas our obstinacy will make their bondage more
grievous than it was. Such political considerations come not in their minds,
far less in their mouths: but they answer with a more than manly courage,
Our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace:
yea, he is able to deliver us out of thine hand, O King: but if not, be it
known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy
golden Image which thou have set up. O faith in God, O love to God, O constancy
for God! The devil is confounded, the King is overcome, they triumph.

XIII. Read the story of the valiant courage of Eleazar, one of the
principal Scribes in the days of the blood-thirstie Tyrant Antiochus
Epiphanes: 2. Maccab. 6.21, etc.
He was besought by the Kings officers, for the old acquaintance they had with
him, to bring flesh of his own provision, such as was lawful for him to use,
and make, as if he did eat of the flesh taken from the sacrifice commanded by
the King, that in so doing, he might be delivered from death, and for the old
friendship with them, find favor. A friendly counsel, if ye consider the
men which gave it; but if ye consider the intention of the devil who suggested
it, a most violent assault, and crafty tentation: what so sweet as life? what
so desirable as to save it, without any real offense? what so plausible, or at
least more excusable, than to make a show of an evil, which indeed thou do
not; to shun to be made a public show of the evil, which otherwise thou must
suffer with shame and great torments? Flesh and blood will say to Eleazar, that
in this there was no sin: The Pope which gives dispense to the Papists of
this Realm, to dissemble and deny their Religion, will say that it was but a
venial sin, and of the number of those which are most pardonable.

Eleazar led with another Spirit, even with Esa. 11.3.
the Spirit of the Lord, which is the spirit of knowledge, of wisdom, of
counsel, of might, and of the fear of the Lord, says not so: but considering
the holy Law made and given by God; It becomes not our age, said he, in any
wise to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think, that ELEAZAR being
fourscore years old and ten, was now gone to a strange religion; and so
they, through mine hypocrisy, and desire to live a little time, and a moment
longer should be deceived by me, and I get astaine to mine old age, and make it
abominable: for though for the present time I should be delivered from the
punishment of men, yet should I not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither
alive nor dead: wherefore now manfully changing this life, I will show my self
such an one as mine age requires, and leave a notable example to such as be
young, to dye willingly and courageously for the honorable and holy laws.
This seemed madness and despair to his Judges, which changing the good will
they bare him into hatred, and their meekness into fury and rage, let him
straight ways to the Tympan, which was a most cruel kind of torture;
whereupon being ready to dye of the stripes which he had received, ceived, he
groaned and said, It is manifest unto the Lord, that has the holy knowledge,
that whereas I might have been delivered from death, I now endure sore pains
in body, by being beaten; but in soul am well content to suffer these things,
because I fear him.

XIV. Read also the story of the cruel death and constancy 2. Macc. 7
of the seven brethren, and their mother, at that same time. the Tyrant
himself marvelled at their courage; for that neither the scourges and whips
wherewith they were torn, nor the cutting out of their tongues, nor the
mangling and maiming of all their members, nor the pulling off of the skin of
their heads with the hair, nor the hot pannes and caldrons, wherein they were
fried, being yet alive, could compel them against the law of God to eat
swines flesh. The eldest heir, worthy of the prerogative of the firstborn,
answered to the Tyrants threats, to the Hangmans whips, and to all the
tortures, We are ready to dye, rather than to transgress the laws of our
fathers; and exhorted his brethren, as they exhorted him, to dye manfully for
the law of God. And to make you know that this was not madness of mind, but
faith, the second said to the King, Thou, like a fury, take us out of this
present life, but the King of the world shall raise us up, which have dyed for
his laws, unto everlasting life. So spoke the third, so the fourth, and the
rest: but the youngest was most wonderful of all; for neither could the
promises of riches and honors tickle him, nor the cruel torments which he had
seen his brethren suffer, shake his constancy, but being encouraged by his
most wonderful mother, he cried to the executioners, Whom wait ye for? I will
not obey the Kings commandment: but I will obey the commandment of the law
that was given unto our Fathers by Moses. So they dyed: so dyed last of all
their mavelous mother, after that she had been to them in stead of a Levite,
or Priest, and had exhorted and comforted them with a most excellent speech
concerning the resurrection: And therefore the Apostle ascribes their
victorious constancy to their faith, saying, Heb. 11.35.
that by faith they were tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they might
obtain a better resurrection.

XV. The Christian Church abounds in such examples of most wonderful
victory against the flesh, the world, and the devil. In it this is to be
admired; that men which may live in honor by denying Christ, choose shame and
dishonor, prefer torments to ease, sorrow to joy, pain to pleasure, death to
life, kissethe posts and other instruments of their punishments, look upon
the torments with a cheerful face, run to the fires as joyfully as
worldings do to a bridal feast, and not only rejoice, but also Romans 53
glory in tribulations; which is the highest degree of pleasure and joy.

Steven stopping his ears to the murmuring of the people, which like a swarm
of Hornets and Waspes made a humming noise about him, shutting his eyes to the
stones wherewith they were armed to fell him, and overcomming by faith the
horrors of death, Act. 7.55 56, 59, 60.
looked up steadfastly into heaven, and seeing there the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God, cried with a triumphing voice, Behold, I see
the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.
Neither could their showting, nor the stones which hayled upon him, stay him to
kneel down, and to call upon God, both for himself and for them.

XVI. If ye search the Ecclesiastical histories of the Martyrs of the
primitive Church and of ours, the examples of such victories are infinite. S.
Ignace Bishop of Antiochia hearing the roaring of the hungry Lions, and seeing
them stretching forth their claws to tear him, and opening their throats to
devour his flesh, cried with a loud voice, Iren adv. here is. sib. 5.
Because I am Christ's wheat, now shall I be ground with the teeth of beasts,
that I may be found to be the pure bread of God.

Eusebius. hist. E^cl. lib. 4. cap. 15.
Policarpe Bishop of Smyrna answered to those which now entreated him with many
promises, now impotuned him with threats, to call the Emperor My Lord, and to
deny Christ to be his Lord; I have served him fourscore and six years, and
he has never done me any harm, how then should I curse my King, which has
saved me?

Tert. Apol^get. c. 1. and 46. and 49.
All the Christians, when they were condemned gave thanks, as for a great
benefit. Just. Mart. Apol. 1.
Lucius thanked Vrbicius which had condemned him to die for Christ's sake,
because, said he, being delivered from evil masters, I am going to my Father
the King of heaven.

Amongst all, is wonderful the constancy of Felicitas, a Widow of Rome, and
like unto that of the Mother and of the seven children, of whom I have already
spoken; for she also had seven sons. Gregor. 1. hom. 3. in Euang. tom. 2.
Other mothers fear lest their children die before them: She fears lest her
sons live after her: She converted them to Christ: being taken with them, she
confirmed them in the confession and faith of Christ. Publius the Governor of
the town, with fair words sought to entice her: Have pity, says he, of thy
self, at least pity these thy seven sons. After, with rough words, he
thought to astonish her: But she, having in a woman's body a man's breast;
Neither, says she, are thy promises able to tickle me, nor thy threats to
terrify me. And choosing rather to loose all her Children, than to see then
loose Christ; of a mother she became a Preacher unto them: and after she had
seen them all glorify the Lord Jesus by their death, the love of Christ
surmounting in her the grief which she received of her orbitie, she went also
with dry eyes, a laughing countenance, and a most heroical courage, to the
place of execution, and received there the crown of Martyrdom. And therefore
as Christ said of John Baptiste, that Mat 11 9
he was a Prophet, yea more than a Prophet; so may we say of her, that she was
a Martyr, yea more than a Martyr. Consider the tender love of a mother, and ye
shall confess that the death of each of her sons was a martyrdom unto her.
She was then seven times Martyr in her seven sons, and the eighth time in her
own person.

After I have spoken of such a woman, shall I go back to men? Shall I speak of
Eusebius. hist Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Attalus, one of the Martyrs of Vienne in France, in the time of Antonius
Verus, the year of Christ 178. who, being set in a burning chair of iron,
preached to the Romans, as if he had bin in a pulpit; teaching them what God
is, reproving their cruelty, maintaining the innocence of Christians, and
saying, This which you do, is eating and swallowing of men's flesh; but we eat
not men's flesh, neither do we harm to any man.

Shall I forget Laurentius Deacon of the Church of Rome, who being laid upon an
iron grate, and a slow burning fire under it, that he might feel his death,
This side, said he, is enough roasted, turn me upon the other: which being done
after some space, he said again to the Governor, Prudent. in hymno. Coctum
devora, Et experimentu^ cape, Sit crudum an assum suavius.
Now both sides are well roasted, come, eat, and try which is sweetest, raw or
roasted.

It was a common thing to all Christians in those days, Tertull, de Idolat.
cap. 11. Quo ore Christianus thurarius si per Templa transibit, quo ore
flumantes aras despuet, and exsufflabit, quibus ipse prospexit. Minut Felix.
deos despuu^t: ride^t sacra.
when the hangmen would hale them violently to the Temples of their Idols,
when the Judges would command them to bow down to the Altars, and to worship
the Idols, if they had hands and feet free, to break the Images, fling away
the Censers, trample on the sweet smelling incense: and if they were bound,
they would puff at the Temples, spit at the abominable Images, with great
contempt; wagg their heads at all the diabolical superstition. All this did
the holy woman and courageous Martyr Prud. in Martyrio Eulalia. Martyr ad ista
n^hil, sed enim I^fremit, in que tyranni oculos S^uta iacit, simulacra dehinc.
Eulalia: She did more; she spat upon the Governors face, who by all kind of
most cruel torments, went about to constrain her to idolatry. And this
puffing and spitting at the only naming of the false religion, was most usual
in those days among the brethren. O Faith! O Courage! O Victory! O gods of
wood, of stone, of metal! where is your Majesty! O Tyrants, where your power!
O cruel Executioners, Dissipat, impositamque molam
where is your fury! Lo, not men only, but women, but young children contemn
you, fight against you, Thuribulis pede prosubigit.
overcome you.

XVII. Shall pass under silence our own Martyrs? to begin with one of the
first: even Jerome of Prague, condemned to be burnt quick by the bloody
council of Constantia, How the stood before his passionate and ignorant Judges
without fear, not only contemning death, but also lusting after it; Poggius
Florent. ep. 3
a Papist, which was an eyewitness of all the acts of that Tragedy,
relates with admiration and praise. He went to death with a cheerful
countenance, and when he came to the place of execution, he embraced the post
whereunto he was tied, and kissed it. Perceiving the hangman going behind his
back to set the wood on fire, lest he should see it, he cried unto him, Come
here, come here, and kindle the fire before my face: for if I had dreaded it, I
should never have come to this place, which I might have shunned. Then with a
most holy and wonderful joy he sung a Psalm to God, which the fire and the
smoke had much ado to interrupt.

Patricke Hammilton, a young Gentleman of Scotland, as he was going to the
fire, by his words and looks affrighted in such sort Alexander Cambell, a
Dominican Friar his accuser, that he became besides himself, and died mad.

George Baynam and John Frith, Englishmen, embraced and kissed their fagots,
and Laurent Sanders embraced with great joy the post whereunto the hangman was
tying him, and said, O cross of my good Lord.

In France Steven Brun, after that his Judges had pronounced against him the
sentence of death, cried with a loud voice, My Judges have condemned me to
live. And John Baron, being advertised by his Judges, which had condemned him,
to appeal from them unto the Court of Parliament, Can ye not, said he, be
content to have your own hands defiled with my blood, but ye will have other
men's hands polluted with it also? Amongst all, I admire most the peasant of
Lynri, which meeting some prisoners condemned for the Religion, after he had
asked and known of them the cause of their condemnation, leapt upon the
chariot, and went to dye with them.

Above all, the victories of women are most wonderful: As the hangman was ready
to put to death a loving couple of Martyrs, John Bailey and his wife; the wife
encouraged the husband, saying, Sweet heart, heave a good heart; for this day
our marriage with our Lord Jesus shall be accomplished. The religious
Gentlewoman Graveron called the day of her martyrdom, the day of her marriage
with Christ: and seeing her companions refuse to give their tongues, because
there was no such thing mentioned in their sentence, she being but a woman,
resolved them, saying, It is reasonable and sit, that the tongue which has the
privilege to praise God, should also have the prerogative to leap first upon
the Altar of burnt offering. So Claude Tierry, called the halter which was put
about her neck, the Carkanet, and the rope wherewith she was bound to the
post, the girdle of her marriage with Jesus Christ: and thereupon made a most
excellent discourse of the spiritual marriage of the Lord Jesus with his
Church, which begins here in the valley of death, and is consummated in the
mountains of spices. Minut Felix. Quam ^ulchrum spectacadum Deo, cum Ch^^^ia
(...) Congrea^us, etc. V^it enim qut quod con^en^it, obtinu^.


O how pleasant a sight is it in the eyes of God, when a Christian buckles with
grief and p ine; when he sets himself in array against threats, punishments,
torments; when he scoffingly ieasts at the dreadful name of death, at the
lowering countenance of the pitilesse hangman; when he holds up his liberty
against Kings and Princes, and yields to none but to God, to whom he belongs;
when, like a most glorious Triumpher and Conqueror, he insults and triumphs
over his Judge who has condemned him! For he which has obtained that
wherefore he fought, has vainquished.

XIIX. There is nothing difficile, where faith in God is; nothing dreadful,
where the love of God is; nothing dolorous, where true zeal to the glory of
God is. As the light of the sun dimmeth all other lights; and as the heat of
the sun cools all other heats: so the light of faith dimmeth that which
worldly men call the light of reason. Reason says, as the Proconsull said to
Cyprian, Take time and advise: Faith answers, as Cyprian did, In rebus Dei
non est delibecandum.
In Gods affairs no man must advise. Reason says, it is a sweet thing to
live: Faith says, it is better to dye for Christ, than to live without Christ.
So also the heat of love and true zeal, extinguisheth the heat of most burning
fires. When natural sense says, it is burning; Love answers, it is not so
much as hot. These are the victories of the faithful in their most sensible
torments: they are so ravished and transported by faith, with the love of their
Savior, that, as it were, it benummeth them so, that they heed not their
pains, as if they were senseless: for 1. Ioh. 5.4.
whatsoever is borne of God, overcommeth the world: and this is the victory
that overcommeth the world, even our faith.

XIX The Lord in his great mercy increase our faith, whereby in this surceasing
of outward enemies, we may fight valiantly against our inward and spiritual
foes, which are more dangerous; closing our hearts to all the suggestions of
Satan, to covetousness, to pride, to choler, to all the ticklings of filthy
lust: shutting our eyes to vanity, stopping our ears to calumnies, flatterers,
all evil counsels, keeping our spirits, our souls, our bodies blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. That fighting so, we may overcome;
overcomming, triumph; triumphing, receive the crown of glory, and of
immortality, which God has prepared for us before the beginning of the world,
through the precious merits of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, to whom with the Father
and the Holy Ghost, be all praise, all glory, all honor, both now and for
evermore. Amen.

SERMON. VIII. Of the manner and time of the righteous man's Deliverances.
ESAIAH. XXVI. 20. Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the
indignation be overpast.

21. For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to visit the inhabitants of
the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her blood, and
shall no more cover her slain.


1. THe Church, like unto the Phoenix, finds life in death;

2. Because God, according to his promise in this text, reviveth her.

3. He saves her often by flight, which sometimes is not lawful.

4. At other times is lawful and necessary, and is commanded by God in this
text, according to the literal sense;

5. Is also confirmed by the examples of godly men in the time of the old
Testament.

6. In the new Testament, Christ himself has commanded to fly in time of
persecution.

7. And has confirmed his commandment by his own example, the examples of his
Apostles, and many other most constant and courageous Christians.

8. Flying prooved lawful by three reasons.

9. Fleeing is not a forsaking and denying, but a confessing of Christ.

10. This text, in a figurative and allegorical sense, is an exhortation to
patience.

11. The first argument mooving us to patience, is the will of God.

12. The second, is his wisdom, whereby he converteth all evils to the good
of his Church.

13. The third is, the truth of his promises.

14. In the second part of this text, he promises that the persecution shall
last but a moment.

15. He reckons the years, the months, the days, the moments of the
affliction of his Church.

16. How affliction, which to us seems so long, is said to continue but for a
moment.

17. Till that moment expire, we must rely upon the truth of Gods promise.

I. AS of the ashes of the Phoenix, when it seems to be nothing but dust,
grows up another: So when the Church to man's judgment is gone, lost, and
past all hope of recoverie, when the persecuters say of her, that which the
Traitor Absalom, Psalm. 22.8 Mat. 27.43.
and the treacherous Rebels that followed him, said of David, and the chief
Priests, Scribes, and Elders of Christ, He trusted on the LORD, that he would
deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he delighted in him. Then, then God by
a most excellent and wonderful deliverance reviveth her, and makes her to
spring up again more beautiful and glorious than she was before.

The third day of the Massacre of Paris, Thuan. lib. 53.
which was the Sunday, in the month of August, a bramble flourished in St.
Innocents Churchyard: The Papists ran to gaze upon it, but could not tell
wherefore, and how a dry thorn blossomed in harvest out of due time and
feason, except that some took it as a token, that God approoved their most
unnatural and savage cruelty: but the wisest and best sort remembering, that
Numb. 17.8.
Aarans rod, which was but a dry piece of wood, budded and blossomed, and
yielded almonds, when the Lord confirmed the Priesthood in the house of Levi,
and that the condition of the Church was represented unto Exodus 3.2.
Moses by a burning bush, because it is no more esteemed in the world than a
bush of briars which the shepherds set on fire; said far otherwise, that
the blood of those Innocents which was then shed, should be to the Church as
the dew of heaven, or as the rain of the first and last season, and make it to
budde, to blossom, and bring forth fruit yet again more wonderfully and
gloriously than before: as it came to pass, against all hope.

II. For even then, God spoke to many of his Saints, as he did to the Jews in
their tribulation, and commanded them to hide themselves in their cabinets,
until the time of indignation were overpast, because the^ the Lord would come
certainly, and punish all their persecuters for their iniquity, and namely,
the authors of such bloodshedding, and so join with their overthrow, the
deliverie of his Church. The remnant of the Church hid themselves, the moment
of the Lords wrath past, Gods enemies were destroyed, the Church was delivered,
and still flourishes and yields most excellent fruit, to the glory of the
Lord our deliverer, and to the eternal shame and confusion of our persecuters.

Here is then a new matter to be handled, concerning the manner and the time of
the Lords deliveries, which is set down by the Prophet in three several
points: The first is a commandment which God gives to his people, saying,
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chamber, and shut thy doors about thee.
The second is, how long they must lie hid after this manner: not for ever, not
for a long time, but for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast.
The third is the reason why they must lurk till then: because then God will
be avenged of their enemies. For behold the Lord comes out of his place, to
punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, etc.

III. God speaks to his people by his Prophet, and gives them a most
excellent counsel, to enter into their cabinets, and to shut their doors
about them: which if ye take literally, is a counsel of holy prudence; if ye
take it allegorically, it is a counsel of godly patience.

Christian and holy prudence is the rule of the righteous man's actions,
teaching him how to carry himself in all occurrences of times, places, and
persons, and how to frame and fit unto them all his actions, privy and public,
domestical, civil, and religious. As in time of persecution, it will teach
him neither to be too timorous to forsake his vocation, whereunto God has
called him; nor yet too rash, and foole-hardy to tempt God, by casting himself
into unnecessarie dangers, whereof the word of God (which David called Psalm.
119 105.
a lamp unto his feet, and a light unto his path) gives both precepts and
examples.

When we are assured, that God calls us to confess his holy Name, and to
glorify his Majesty, either by professing openly his word, and preaching of
it, or by suffering for it; then we must not ask, and far less take
counsel, of flesh and blood, but remember the commandment, Math. 10.28.
Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell. Worldly
prudence will say: These men to whom God sends thee, are mighty and cruel,
and will kill thee; therefore take heed to thy self, and fly. Sanctified
prudence will answer; God which has sent me, is stronger, and therefore will I
not fly. Psalm. 11.1.
In the LORD put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your
mountain? When God sent Samuel to anoint David, worldly wisdom answered in
him, 1. Sam. 16.2.
How can I go? If Saul hear it, he will kill me. God spoke unto him again,
and confirmed him: then he gave place to the commandment, and went. It
seems, that Amazia gave a wise counsel to Amos, saying, Amos 7.12, 13, 14,
15, 16.
O thou Seer, go, flee thou away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread,
and prophecy there: but prophecy not again any more at Bethel: for it is the
Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court. Yet Amos, ruled by another Spirit,
rejected it, and said, The LORD said unto me, Go, prophecy unto my people
Israel, that is to say, I will obey the Lord, and not thee. And therefore Ion.
1.2, 3.
Jonah yields too much to his own discourse, and too little to Gods
commandment, when, being sent to Niniveh, he took shipping to flee unto
Tarshish from the presence of the Lord: which would have been a foul fault in
any private man instructed in the ways of the Lord, how much more was it
heinous in a Prophet? for who is so negligently and slightly imbrued with the
knowledge of God, but he will subscribe to that saying of David, Psalm. 139.7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: If I make my bed in hell,
behold thou art there: If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall
hold me: If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me: even the night shall be
light about me: yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines
as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. Jonah learned
by an experimental knowledge this to be true, when the ship wherein he thought
to flee from the presence of the Lord, was unto him as a pair of stocks to
hold him fast.

Therefore Christ, a more complete pattern to imitate, and a more excellent
president to follow than Jonah, Mat. 16.21, 22, 23.
when his time was come to be killed at Jerusalem, reprooved Peter, and called
him Satan, for dissuading him from it. Likewise Act. 21.11, 12, 13, 14.
Paul would not by any means be dissuaded from going to Jerusalem, though
Agabus had prophesied unto him that the Jews should bind him, and deliver him
into the hands of the Gentiles: whereof the reason was, that he went thither
Act. 20.22.
bound in the Spirit, that is to say, by particular revelation of the Spirit of
the eternal and most wise God.

When we have such a revelation, or by any other means are certified, that God
will have us to remain and confess, then this precept of Esaiah, of hiding
our selves in our closets, is no ways directed unto us, but rather this of
Christ, Mar. 10.27.
What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in
the ear, that preach ye upon the house tops. Then we must not only go, but
run with great cheerfulness and alacrity, through floods fires, swords, to
obey Gods commandments, and say as David said, Psalm. 139.32.
I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

IV. But when we have no certain knowledge of Gods will, and are so disposed,
that we may say with S. Paul, Phil. 1.21.
Christ to me to live, and to die, is gain: when, I say, we are resolved to
suffer all extreamities, and a thousand deaths, rather than to deny him, then
the practice of this commandment is not only lawful, but also necessary:
then not only we may, but also should try, if hiding of our selves, and
fleeing, be the means which God has appointed to deliver us from the present
evil of persecution. God gave an express commandment to the people of
Israel, Exodus 12.32.
that none of them should go out at the door of his house, until the morning
of that night wherein he smote the firstborn of Egypt: The like commandment
was given to Rachab, Josh. 2.19
that none of her family should go out of the doors of her house into the
street, lest they should perish in the destruction of the town of Jericho. I
confess that we have not any such personal commandment directed unto us:
but I say, that this general commandment, Come my people, enter thou into thy
chamber, etc. is sufficient, and a good warrant for all Gods people, till he
choose such as pleases him, and make them to know manifestly, that he will have
them to be public Confessors and Martyrs, whereof, they cannot make question,
if once they be taken, and laid in bonds for Christ's sake: for then they must
drink the cup which the Lord sets to their heads more gladly and
courageously then Socrates did the Hemlocke. Till then they may convey
themselves out of their enemies hands, by lurking in some hid and unknown
place, by fleeing, or any other way which is not unlawful.

V. Genesis 27.43.
Rebeckah advertised that Esau had vowed to slay Jacob, counseled him to flee
to Laban her brother, and he did so. Exodus 2.15.
Moses knowing that Pharaoh sought to slay him, fled from the face of Pharao,
and dwelt in the land of Midian; not forsaking his calling, but waiting till
God gave him a more clear declaration of his will thereupon: which after he
had received, he returned into Egypt, nothing dreading the fear of Pharao, and
of all his Court. How often did 1. Sam. 19.22.27. 2. Sam. 15.14.
David flee from place to place, to shun the wrath of his King, and the
conspiracy of his own son, not for lack of courage, but though godly
prudence and foreseeing advisednesse? David which had the promise of the
kingdom of Israel, fled: David which knew that his kingdom could not be taken
from him, fled: Oh how many excellent Psalms did he make at those times!
whereby ye may know, that he mistrusted not the truth of Gods promise, yet would
not tempt him, by trying of his power. 1. King. 17.1. Judge. 5.17.
Elijah, which by his prayers shut the heavens, and it rained not upon the
earth by the space of three years and six months: 1. King. 17.22.
Elijah, which raised from death the widows son of Sarepta: 1. King.
1.10.12.
Elijah, which brought fire from heaven upon the Kings Captains and their
fifties: That wise, godly, and wonderful Prophet, when he was threatened by
Iezebel, 1. King. 19.2, 3.
fled he not for his life to Beersheba in Judah, and from thence to the
wilderness? At that time 1. King. 18.13.
Obadiah, hid he not an hundred men of the Lords Prophets, by fifty in a cave,
when Iezebel sought them, to kill them? what can be said against those holy
Fathers, which in the time of the cruel persecuter Antiochus Epiphanes, Heb.
11.38.
wandered in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth,
and, of whom the Apostle says, that the world was not worthy?

VI. If any say, That such precepts and examples are of the old Testament, and
should not be fitted to Christians which live under the Gospel; I answer,
That in the new Testament, the commandments are more formal, and the examples
more frequent and enforcing.

Christ, gave he not this express commandment to his Apostles, Mat. 10.17,
23.
Beware of men; and, when they persecute you in this City, flee ye into
another? Tert. de fugain persecutione cap. 6.
Some say, that this commandment was temporal, and given to the Apostles
only, and for that time only when they were sent to preach the Gospel to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, even as that other commandment in the
beginning of the Chapter, Mat. 10.5.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans enter
ye not, which is now abolished. True; the commandment forbidding to preach the
Gospel to the Gentiles and Samaritans, is abrogated, but by another
commandment, Mark. 16.15.
Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. Tell us
now where, how, and when the commandment of fleeing in persecution has been
recalled: And if it be not annulled by another commandment, why it should not
stand for ever, as the rest do which are in that chapter (that one of not
preaching the Gospel to the nations, excepted)

What have they to answer to this other commandment, Mat. 24.15.
When ye shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, stand in the holy place, (whosoever reads, let him understand) then let
them which be in Judea, flee into the mountains? etc. Had the Apostles any
thing to do with it? Were they in Jerusalem when the town was besieged? There
were many Christians; to them it pertained, to it they obeyed, for Atha^as.
Apolog. de fug acontra Arianos. Hic est hominum terminus ad perfectionemducens,
ut quod Deus iubet, hoc faciant.
this is the way to perfection, to do that which God commands.

But to come back to the 10. chapter of Mat. Said he to the Apostles only; or
rather, has he not said to the Apostles first, next to all Preachers of the
Gospel, and consequently to all Christians; Matt. 10.16.
Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves: Be ye therefore
wise as Serpents, and simple as Doves? What is that to be simple as Doves? It
is to be harmless: what to be wise as Serpents? To keep our selves from
harm, and as it follows, to beware of men; when they persecute us in one
City, to flee into another.

What? are their ears stopped with incredulity, when this other commandment is
read unto them, Matt. 7.6
Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again, and
rent you? Is this a commandment of fleeing and of hiding of our selves? why
not? why shall I remain, but to walk abroad? Why walk abroad, but to
confess? I must not confess before Epicureans and belly-gods: That were as if
I should cast pearls unto swine. Nor also before wickedly and cruelly disposed
men: That were as if one should cast that which is holy unto dogs. What then
shall I do? I will put up the holy things, I will pack up my Pearls, and
withdraw my self the most advisedly I can, till the dirtie and muddie swine be
out of the way, and the dogs leave off barking and biting: Or I will remove to
some other place, and display my sewels there, to see and assay if I can find
a better market elsewhere. For Christ gives us not commandments of fear,
whereby we should forsake our callings to save our lives, but of holy wisdom,
whereby we should be careful to save our lives, that at another time, or in
another place, we may more commodiously and effectually practice our callings,
and so go back to leap the better.

VII. Such commandments are not in the Church without most glorious
precedents, and examples most worthy to be followed. Can we have any so
perfect, so excellent, as of Christ himself? Of him the Angel said to Joseph,
Matthew. 2.13.
Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be
thou there until I bring thee word. b When he had shown himself to be God by
restoring the withered hand, Matt. 12.13, 14, 15.
the Pharisees went out, and held a counsel against him, how they might
destroy him: But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence. The
inhabitants of Nazareth led him unto the brow of an hill, that they might cast
him down headlong: Luke 4.30.
But be passing through the midst of them, went his way. In the Temple of
Jerusalem, the Jews took up stones to cast at him: John 8.59.
But Jesus hid himself, and went out of the Temple, going through the midst of
them, and so passed by. The chief Priests and the Pharisees took counsel to
put him to death, after that he had raised Lazarus. Ioh. 11.54.
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews: but went thence into a
country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there
continued with his disciples. Wherefore hid he himself? wherefore fled he?
Because Ioh. 2.4. Ioh. 7.6.
his hour was not yet come: for when his hour was come, not only he fled
not, but Ioh. 18.4.
knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and rendered
himself to his enemies, which neither knew him, nor were able to take him. And
where he fled until his time was come, there he preached, healed the sick,
and did good to all men.

So when there was a great persecution against the Church at Jerusalem, the
Christians Act. 8.1.4. Act. 11.19, 20.
were scattered abroad throughout the region of Judea, and Samaria, and went
every where preaching the word. So Paul being at Damascus, and knowing that the
Jews watched the gates day and night to kill him, Act. 9.24, 25.
The Disciples took him by night, and let him down by the wall in a basquet.
So when he was Act. 14.5, 6.
at Iconium with Barnabas, and knew that the Jews and Gentiles, with their
Rulers, had made an assault to use them despitefully, and to stone them; they
were ware of it, and fled unto Lystra. So when in the uprore which Demetrius
had raised against him at Ephesus, Act. 19.30, 31.
he would have entered in unto the people; the Disciples suffered him not, and
he followed their counsel. So seeing he could not stay there without great
ieopardie, Act. 20.1.
he departed from thence, and went into Macedonia, and preached the Gospel
there. So Act. 23.6, 7.
perceiving that his enemies were resolved to do him some mischief, he found
a subtle, but lawful policy to put them by the ears, and so escaped. So v.
17.
advertised that forty naughty men had bound themselves under a curse, that
they would neither eat nor drink till they had killed him, he shunned that
conspiracy by a most wise counsel. So Act. 25.11.
knowing the corruption of his Judge, he appealed unto Caesar, not forsaking
his calling, but desiring to live for his callings sake. So S. John writes,
that Rev. 12.6
the woman which was delivered of a child, fled into the wilderness: And that
ye may know that her flight was approved of God, it is said, that there she
had a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand, two
hundred, and threescore days.

So S. Cyprian seeing that the people cried incessantly, Cyprian. Epist. 15.
Cyprianum ad Leonem, Cyprian to the Lion, withdrew himself from the fury of
the people, and fled; not so much for his own safety, as for the peace of the
Church. So S. Athanasius fled out of Alexandria, where the Emperor had sent to
take him. So Policarpus, so S. Chrysostom by their flight saved the Pastors
for their Churches, and the Churches for their Pastors. So the Albigenses
fleeing the persecution in France, went through Germany, Bohemia, and England,
and planted there the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Of whom is this
flourishing Church composed? Of strangers which have forsaken their own
countries, and commodities, and have sought in this Sanctuary security for
their lives, and food for their souls, and of whom I may say truly, that God
has sent them before their distressed brethren, to save their lives; even as
Joseph said to his brethren, Genesis 45.7
God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save
your lives by a great deliverance.

VIII. It is a natural thing to all living creatures to provide for their own
safety: Neither has God, the author of nature, abolished that natural
instinct in his Saints, but sanctified it, directing them by his word and by
his Spirit to do lawfully and holily, that is to say, by good means and for a
good end, that whereunto they are inclined by nature.

If they did otherwise, might they not be justly accused of tempting of the
Lord their God, of preventing his providence, of seeking through vainglory
and ostentation to be Christ's Martyrs, when he craveth no such duty at their
hands? Peter being too bold out of season, denied his Master. The rest of the
Disciples which fled, and kept themselves quiet, shunned that mischief. For
God blesses rather a modest fleeing, than a presumptuous abode. When Peter
rusht into Caiphas Hall, the Spirit of God left him: But when Ioh 20.19.
he was hid with the rest in a chamber, the doors being shut for fear of the
Jews, Jesus came to them, and Act 2.1.4.
the holy Ghost descended upon them. In Cyprians time, there was a kind of
heretics, called Circumcellions, which ran every where seeking the
martyrdom: and the Franciscane Friars write of Francis their Patron, that he
went to Maiorka, Minorka, and other places occupied by the Maliumetanes,
desirous to be killed for Christ's sake: But he returned as he went, because
none of those miscreants would debase themselves to flay such a calfe. Now what
was that desire, but giddiness, but rashness, but presumption and vaineglory?
A wise and experimented Pilot will never run his ship upon the shelves and
rocks: If the storm drive him upon the dangers, then he shows his courage
and skill: So a modest man will not, to show his courage, cast himself into
the fire of affliction, and draw upon himself unnecessarie evils: but if he be
apprehended, if the glory of God, if the edification of the Church; if the
necessity of his calling bind him to suffer for Christ's sake, then he will
show that when he lurked, courage was not wanting to his wariness, but his
wariness ruled his courage, and commanded it to wait upon the Lord. He which
seeks enemies wilfully and rashly, is a seditious and factious fellow: But he
which has enemies, and seeks them not, which is persecuted without cause, or
for Gods cause; He which cannot shun them, nor have peace with them, except he
forsake his station, deny Christ, scandalize the Church, and then chooses
rather an honest and glorious death, than a dishonest life, is the truly wise
and courageous man. Therefore Cyprian. Epist. 83.
Cyprian warned his Church to be wary, that they offered not themselves to
their enemies; but if they were taken, to confess constantly.

Wherein there is also a duty of Charity which we owe to our enemies. 3.
For howsoever not only it is not an ill thing, but rather a most glorious
thing, and a Phil. 1.29.
gift of God to suffer for Christ, and to be his Martyr, Eusebius. hist. Ecclis.
lib 4. cap. 15.
as the Martyrs themselves acknowledged, when they thanked God for that honor:
Clemens, Alexandr. lib. 4. Stromatum.
yet notwithstanding we must not give any occasion to our enemies, to heap sin
upon sin, by shedding of our innocent blood, which we should do if we
prevented their malice, going to them when they seek us not, or betraying our
selves to them when they cannot find us, and crying, Here, here I am, come,
rack, kill, hang, burn, as the Circumcellions did; Wherein also we should
become wilful murderers of our own selves, for there is no great difference
between killing of our selves, and provoking other men to kill us.

IX. Neither should we be much moved with the reviling of those which cast in
our teeth, that by fleeing we deny Christ, and so fall into the pit whereof he
has forewarned us, saying, Matthew. 10.33.
Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in heaven: ver. 38.
And he that takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of
me. For such preachers of magnanimity and constancy, are either enemies, or
of our own folks.

If enemies, answer as Athanas. Apolog. de fuga.
Athanasius did to the Arrians: Ye are forsooth scandalized, because we flee
the persecution. Lay your hands to your hearts, and confess that ye are sorry
and much discontented, that we have prevented your malice, and by our flight
have hindered the intention ye had to kill us: If we do ill to flee, ye do
worse to persecute us: Leave off to seek our lives, and we shall leave off to
flee for the safety of our lives. For what is our fleeing, but a testimony of
your persecution?

If friends, take heed that they preach not against fleeing, because they would
be glad that all remained to deny Christ, as they are resolved to do, rather
then to lose their commodities: It is not good to tempt God. Many which tarry
at home, go to the Mass, lest they should bear Christ's cross, and fall into
that inconvenience whereof they will seem to be affrighted for us: But he that
flees, leaving his goods and all that he has among his enemies, forsaking his
friends for Christ's sake, seeking with a thousand incommodities, liberty of
conscience among an unknown people, has a most heavy cross upon his
shoulders, and not only denies not Christ, but makes known to all men his
faith in him, his love to him, his zeal for him. And therefore the ancient
Church called such men Confessors, whereas the persecutors, and hypocrites,
call them Denyers. If they were willing to deny, would they flee? would they
leave their goods, forsake their friends, hazard their lives to deny? Wherefore
flee they? because they shun all occasions whereby they may be compelled
through the weakness of the flesh to deny Christ, and seek elsewhere, with
loss of goods, danger of their lives, much grief and anguish of mind, among
men of an unknown tongue, whose conditions, fashions, customs are contrary
unto theirs, liberty to confess him; resolved not only to flee, but also to
die, rather then they should renounce that faith, that hope, that confidence
which they have in Gods mercies, and in Christ's merits. For as Chrysostom
says, Chrysrst. ad popul. Autiochen. homil. 67.
The Christian man's life should be full of blood, not by shedding of other
men's blood, but by a strong resolution to shed his own blood for Christ, when
it shall be needful. He that is thus disposed, is not led with 2. Tim. 1.7.
the Spirit of fear, as our enemies, hypocrites, and ignorantly zealous
brethren say, but with the Spirit of power, of love, and of a sound mind; The
occasions will teach him, when Gods will is that he flee, when that he slay to
die: Therefore we should pray one for another, as Paul did for Timothy, 2.
Tim. 1.7.
The Lord give thee understanding in all things.

X. If these words be taken in a figurative and allegorical sense, then, as I
have said, they are an exhortation to patience, like unto many others, which ye
read in the Psalms, and in the Prophets. David says, Psalm. 37.7
Be silent to the Lord, and wait patiently for him. Esaiah said to the Jews,
Isam. 30.15.
In quietness and confidence shall be your strength. Ye read in the
Lamentations of Jeremiah, Lament. 3.26, 27, 28, 29.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord: It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth: He
sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has borne it upon him: He
puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope. Which figurative
manner of speeches are thus set down elsewhere in proper words, Luke 21.19.
In your patience possess ye your souls: ye have need of patience, that after
ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise.

But the Spirit of God uses such figurative speeches in this matter, because
they are very popular, and most fit to express the nature of patience: for
because the people was to be led captive into Babylon, and to be inthralled
there the space of threescore and ten years, the Prophet shows them what
they must do then. For as they that traffic by sea, when they see the storm
coming, sail to some haven, and anchor there until the storm be past; or as
the people of Israel, when the Angel of the Lord destroyed the first borne of
Egypt, and Rahab at the sack of Ierico, kept themselves quiet in their houses,
the doors being shut: So, says the Prophet, must ye do in the great and
heavy storm of affliction, which is to come upon you: Enter into your
chambers, shut the doors about you, hide your selves there, let none go
forth, haste to the haven of salvation, lest ye perish. What chambers, what
havens are these? Can there be any so sure and safe as God himself, of whom,
and to whom David says, Psalm. 31.19, 20.
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee; which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of
men! Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence, from the pride of man:
thou shall keep them secretly in a pavillion, from the strife of tongues. And
therefore applying this to himself, he said, Psalm. 91.1, 2.
He that dwells in the secret place of the most high, shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty: I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my
fortress, my God in whom I will trust. For, Pro. 8.10
the Name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runs into it, and is
safe. After the same manner, and in the same sense, Habacuc said, Hab. 2.1.
I will stand upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see
what he will say to me. These things were then spoken, but they belong to all
ages, and are to us this day examples and instructions, to rely upon God in
our tribulations with patience, and quietness of mind.

XI. Many are the reasons which should moove us to a most humble and quiet
subjection of our spirits, without fretting of our selves, without murmuring,
when we are afflicted, and they which afflict us, prosper: but especially there
be four: The first is taken from the will of God; the second from his
wisdom; the third from his truth; the fourth from his justice.

The first thing we must look unto in our afflictions, is the will of God. For
as Jeremiah, after the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, and burning
of the Temple to ashes, withdrew his eyes from the earth, and lifting them up
above all the visible heavens, settled them upon God, and asked, Lam. 3.37, 38.
Who is he that says, This is come to pass, and the Lord has not commanded
it? evil and good, proceeds it not out of the mouth of the Lord? so must we
all think, so must we all speak. The wicked prosper, because it is Gods will:
we are oppressed, because it is Gods will. Our master and Doctor has taught us
both by precept, and by example, to think and to speak so. Has he not
commanded us to pray, Thy will be done? It is his will, that we be so
unworthily vexed and tormented. Math. 10.29, 30.
Are not, says he, two sparrowes: sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your father? but the very hairs of your head
are all numbered. As if he had said, Far less shall any evil befall you
without the will of your Father. Therefore he submitted himself unto his
Fathers will, when he was to dye for us sinners, saying, Mat. 26.39.
Not as I will, but as thou will; and commanded Peter, which drew the sword to
defend him, to put up his sword into the sheath, with this reason, Ioh. 18.11.
The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? So he said to
the Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24, 26.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
why ought he? because forsooth it was the will of God.

In this meditation, we must not only say of God, as Nebuchadnezzar did, that
Dan 4.35.
he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants
of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? but
acknowledge also with the Apostle, that Rom 12.2.
his will is good, acceptable, and perfect, and therefore most worthy that our
wills be offered up in a burnt sacrifice unto it. This was the shield wherewith
that Tert. de patientia. ca. 14. operarius ill^ victoria^um Dei.
most worthy atchiever of the victories of God, that rare and wonderful
pattern of patience, extinguished all the fiery darts, which either by the
loss of his goods, or by the death of his children, or by the stinking and
filthy sores of his body, or by the chiding of his wife, or by the contempt of
his servants, or by the uncourteous and churlish comforts of his friends, or by
affrighting dreams the devil threw at him. He repelled them all with this one
word, Job 1.21
Blessed be the name of the Lord. So the brethren knowing that the will of God
was, that Paul should go up to Jerusalem, and be there bound, and delivered
into the hands of the Gentiles, ceased to dissuade him, saying, Act. 21.14.
The will of the Lord be done. For God is a Father: neither would it be his
will that we should be afflicted, except it were for our good. We sing first,
Psalm. 135 3, 5, 6.
Praise the LORD, for the LORD is good. Then we add: For I know that the LORD
is great, and that our LORD is above all gods: whatsoever the LORD pleased,
that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places. This
then is the first reason to moove us to patience: It is the will of the
Almighty God, who to us is a loving Father, that we be toyled and hurryed with
many afflictions: and we owe all submission, all obedience to his will.

XII. Is he only Almighty and all good? Is he not also All-wise? Doubtless he
is Has he not made light to shine out of darkness, benediction to spring out
of malediction, life to rise out of death? He bridleth the unbridled affections
of men, he sets in order all their disordered actions: when they fight
against his will, he does his will, not in them, but by them. The Scribes and
Pharisees with the Priests conspire against Christ: Judas sells him: Pilat
condemns him: the soldiers crucify him: how many diverse intentions, how
many disagreeing ends of these wicked men in the tormenting of one man? God the
great and experimented Physician, makes of all these sins a most excellent
antidote against sin; of all these poisons, a sovereign and singular
medicine for the health of the soul. When the wicked persecute the Church,
their mind is to destroy it for ever: but God, by the persecutions, chastises
the security, tries the faith, exercises the patience of his children, and
sets forth his own glory in their delivery, as ye have heard in the fourth
Sermon. He has ever done so, he will do so unto the worlds end: and
therefore let us in all our heavy displeasures rely upon his wisdom, as it is
written, Psalm. 37.5
Commit thy way unto to the LORD: trust also in him, and he shall bring it to
pass: Then our own experience shall enforce us to confess, that Rom 8.28.
we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them
who are called according to his purpose. So in Gods wisdom we have a second
reason to move us to patience.

XIII. Thirdly, we should ever set before our eyes his truth, which is more
firm and constant than heaven and earth, and all things that are therein: men
may be disloyal and false. But 2. Tim 2.13.
if we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. He is 1.
Sam. 15.29.
the strength of Israel, he will not lie, nor repent: for he is not a man, that
he should repent. He has wisdom to foresee the events before he promise: he
has power to perform whatsoever he promises: he is goodness it self, and
therefore he will thoroughly fulfill all his promises. Esa. 55.10, 11.
For as the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud, that it
may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater So, says he, shall my word
be that goes forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto
I sent it.

XIV. We have his promise in the second part of our text: for when he bids
us hide our selves as it were for little moment, until the indignation be
overpast: he implies in the commandment a most comfortable promise, that the
affliction of the Church shall last but for a moment; which being expired, his
indignation shall overpasse, and the Church shall be delivered. This promise,
and the exhortation grounded upon it, is very formal in Habacuc, where God
speaks after this manner: Hab. 2.3.
The vision is yet for an appointed time: but at the end it shall speak, and
not lie: Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry. The promise is, that the vision, the prediction concerning the
deliverance of the Church, has (...) appointed time; which being expired, God
will fulfill it: the exhortation is, Therefore wait upon it: This time is not
a long time: it is but a moment. Psalm. 30.5
For his anger endures but a moment: In his favor is life: weeping may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning: as David says in the thirty
Psalm. Ye have the like promise in the fifty and fourth chapter of Isaith:
Esa. 54.7, 8.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee. I have hid my face from thee for a little, in the moment of wrath: but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the LORD thy
redeemer.

XV. Here then we have solid comfort, and a sovereign remedy against
impatience in tribulation. Psalm. 125.3.
For the rod of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous? lest
the righteous put forth their hands into iniquity: we hear the promise, and
howsoever we believe it, we think the time to be very long, and we cry, as
David often in the Psalms, And thou Lord, how long? for one hour of
affliction is more sensible unto us, than a year of prosperity. Therefore God
Psalm. 103.14.
knowing our frame, and remembering bring that we are but dust, speaks unto us
according to our hearts desire, and tells us, that he has a time appointed
for our deliverance, whereof he keeps a most exact reckoning, and shall not
lose the least parcel thereof.

Eccl. 3.1
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
heaven. A time to be afflicted, a time to be delivered: the time of affliction
is to some shorter, to some longer. To Noah and to his family in the Arc, Genesis
7.11 Genesis 1.13, 14.
it was of one year and ten days. To the people of Israel in Egypt, Genesis
15.13.
four hundred years. To the lews in Babylon, Ier. 25.12. Ier. 29.10. Dan. 5.2.
seaventy years. To the woman diseased with the bloody Mar. 9.20
issue, twelve years. To the impotent, whom the Lord cured at the poole of
Jerusalem, Ioh. 5.5.
thirty and eight years. To the woman delivered of her child to be fed in the
wilderness, Rev. 12.14.
a time, and times, and half a time, which are three years, and an half. To
Moses to be hid Exodus 2.2.
three months. Hosea, speaking of the time of Gods deliveries, says, Hos 6.2.
After two days will he revive us: In the third day will he raise us up, and
we shall live in his sight. Ioh. 11.39.
Lazarus was in the grave four days: Luke 18.33.
The Lord was put to death, and buried, and rose again the third day. He
advertised the Church of Smyrna, that she should have tribulation Rev. 2.10
ten days. He spoke of his hour, when he said to his mother, Ioh. 2.4.
Mine hour is not yet come. He said to his Disciples, Ioh. 16.16.
A little while, and ye shall not see me, and again a little while, and ye
shall see me. In our text God speaks of a little moment. David says, Psalm.
37.10.
Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be. The Apostle says, that 2.
Cor. 4.17.
our affliction is light, and is but for a moment: He says again, Heb. 10.37,
Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. S.
Peter writes to the faithful of his time, that 1. Pet. 1.6.
for a season they were in heaviness through manifold temptations. And it was
said to the souls that were under the Altar, that Rev.
they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also,
and their brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled:
that is to say, until the end of the world, which to flesh and blood is very
long: for if these blessed souls thought the time which was between their
death, and this vision of John, so long, that they cried, ver 10.
How long O Lord? what wonder if men leading a most wearisome and tedious life
under the cross, cry to God as David did, Psalm. 119 82.
Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When will thou comfort me?

XVI. The comfort to them all is this, that their affliction, which to them is
too too long, is but a moment, not only in respect of God, 2. Pet. 3.8
with whom one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day;
but also in regard of the eternity of unspeakeable glory, wherewith it shall be
swallowed up. Rom 8.18.
For I reckon, says the Apostle, that the sufferings of this present time are
not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us; Glory
which these sufferings work in us. 2. Cor. 4.17.
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, even so far as it subdueth our
pride, mortifieth our lusts, and is the Lords high way unto our eternal
bliss. Whereunto if ye add the promise of deliverance, even in this life,
nothing shall be wanting to our full comfort.

XVII. What then shall we do, till the Lord come and deliver us? what, but
wait upon the Lords pleasure? The jews knew by revelation from God, the time
of their bondage in Egypt, and captivity in Babylon; which being come to an
end, they said confidently to God, Psalm. 102.13.
Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for the time to favor her, yea,
the set time is come. We have no such revelation: and therefore we must be
content to rely upon Gods general promise, and say with David, Psalm. 130.5.
I wait for the LORD: my soul does wait, and in his word do I hope;
assured, that howsoever it seem, that heaven and earth conspire against us,
and that we are brought to the pinch, he shall put a new song in our mouths,
and give us a most plentiful subject to sing as David did, Psalm. 40.1
In waiting, I waited for the LORD, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry:
Heb. 10.23.
For he is faithful that promised. And Luke 1.37.
with him no word is impossible.

The Lord in his great mercies give us this patient hope and assurance, for
Christ Jesus his dear sons sake, who with him and the holy Ghost, lives and
reigns God blessed for evermore. Amen.

SERMON. IX. Of Gods Judgments upon Persecuters, and of the last deliverance of
the Church.
ESAIAH XXVI. 21. For behold the LORD comes out of his place, to visit the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her
blood, and shall no more cover her slain.


1. THe last motive to patience, is taken from the Judgments of God.

2. The Lord is said to come, when he judges.

3. He is said to come out of his place, when his judgments and mercies are
made conspicuous.

4. He visits the inhabitants of the earth, either in judgment, or in mercy.

5. Wicked men are called the inhabitants of the earth: for godly men are
strangers here.

6. God will visit the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity, which they
think to be good service to God.

7. God will be avenged of those which shed the blood of his dear ones,

8. Because he is righteous and faithful.

9. Great judgments on persecuters,

10. Namely, on great men under the law,

11. And principally on those who have persecuted the Christian Church.

12. Prosperity in this world, is a token of Gods indignation, rather than of
his love.

13. The torments* of hell prepared for wicked men.

14. Their conscience tells them there is a hell.

15. Hell is a place penal in its own self.

16. There is there pain of damage most unsufferable.

17. As likewise unconceiveable pain of sense,

18. Which is universal,

19. And everlasting.

20. Persecuters, above all others, shall be tortured there with most exquisite
torments.

21. Great shall be in that day the glory of Gods Saints, and terrible to their
Persecuters.

22. Great difference between the life and the end of wicked and of godly men.

23. The Church cannot be destroyed.

24. Exhortation and consolation.

1. AS the words of this text are from God the last, so should they be in your
hearts a most powerful motive to a patient tarrying for the blessed time,
which the wisdom of the Lord has appointed for the glorious and final
relief of his Church from all misery.

Ye may call the text DAN, i e. Judgment: for it threatens, with no small
mischief, all bloody and cruel persecuters, and by their overthrow promises
deliverance to them which are persecuted. The time of the one, and of the
other, is not a time of many years, months, weeks, days: The afflictions of
the Church shall be gone in a moment, as ye have heard. In a moment also shall
come the destruction of those that persecute her, who in their greatest
prosperity are Minut. Felix. ut victima ad supplicium saginantur: ut hostia ad
poenam cor^nantur.
like beasts fatted, Zeph. 1.8.
and crowned with garlands for the day of the Lords sacrifice: wherein, says
the Lord, I will punish the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as
are clothed with strange apparel.

II. For behold the Lord comes. O open the eyes of your mind, o bid your
faith rise from her sleep to behold, in the immutable truth of the Lords
threats, in the inevitable power of his justice, in the innumerable judgments
which he has already dispatched against wicked oppressors, in his more than
motherly love to his dear ones; his promptness and readiness to deliver his
Church, by the overthrow of all her enemies. He, he himself, he who is the
Lord will destroy them. Neither shall they be able to shield themselves against
the Lord: He will not tarry, he will not delay his coming: Behold be comes;
he is already on his journey.

III. From whence comes he? Out of his place. O Lord, Art thou so in one
place, that thou art not at the same time in all places? O infinite Majesty,
August. ad Volusian. Epist. 3. Novit ubique totus esse, and nullo contmeri
loco. Novit venire, non recedendo ubi erat. Novit abire, non desere^do quo
venerat. Miratur hoc men's humaena, and quia non capit, fortasse non credit.
thou can be every where at one time: and yet thou art do where. Thou fillest
with thy presence every place: and lo, thou art not contained in any place.
Thou can come, and not go from the place where thou wast: Thou can depart,
and not leave the place whereunto thou did come. Our souls wonder at this,
but because of their narrowness, they cannot comprehend it: O Lord grant that
we may believe it: And tell us, how thou who have the heaven for Esa. 66.1.
thy throne, and the earth for thy footstool, thou who say of thy self,
Do I not fill the heaven and the earth? O most wonderful God, teach us how
thou come and go? Do thou not speak so, not of thy nature, but of the
works of thy judgments and mercies?

Brethren, Iearne, and wonder. Men speak so of God: And therefore God
borrows men's phrases; and as they speak of him, so speaks he of his own
self. Ier. 23.24.
Wicked men when they spoil, kill, and abuse most licentiously the righteous
man, do say, Psalm. 94.7.
The LORD shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. As if he
were in his Closet fast asleep, or busied with other matters, when they reele
to and fro to do mischief: or as if he dwelt so far off from them, that he
cannot see them. What, say they, Job 22.12, 13, 14.
Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the stars how
high they are: how does God know? Can he judge through the dark cloud? Thick
clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not, and he walks in the circuit
of heaven.

For this cause God says, that seeing they think and speak so, he will come
out of his place to visit, i.e. to punish the Inhabitants of the earth for
their iniquity: Even as it is said, when the Giants were building the Tower of
Babel, that Genesis 11.5, 7.
the LORD came down to see the City and the Tower, which the children of men
builded, and said, Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language:
And as when he was to destroy Sodom and Gomorrha, he said to Abraham, Genesis
18.21.
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to
the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know: As likewise when
his time was come to take vengeance of Pharao, and deliver his people, he said
to Moses, Exodus 3.7, 8.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry, by reason of their taske-masters: for I know their sorrows,
and I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians. When he
withdraws his care from his children, and suffers his enemies to afflict
them, he says in Hosea, Hos. 5.15.
I will go, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense. And
then they acknowledging their own folly, cry unto him, Psalm. 60.1
O turn thy self to us again: Psalm. 80.14.
Return, we beseech thee, o God of hosts: look down from heaven, and
behold, and visit this Vine. After the same manner, when he destroys their
persecuters, he delivers them, and says, that he comes out of his place to
visit them; them who are his children, in his favor; them who are his enemies,
and the oppressors of his children, in the extremity of his anger.

IV. He calls the one and the other, his visitation. For, 1 Timothy 6.16.
he dwells in the light, which no man can approach unto; and cannot be seen
of us, but by his works: which when he displayeth not, we think and we say,
that he is absent: But when we see and feel them, then we say he is present,
and has visited us. As we speak of him, so speaks he of himself, though
Act. 17.27, 28.
he be not far from every one of us: for in him we live, and move, and have
our being. Or rather he teaches us, that he does all things by rule, by
number, and by balance; that first he takes a perfect notice of our estate,
and afterward sets his works forward.

The works whereby he visits us, are either of mercy, or of judgment. And
therefore his visitations are taken in the Scriptures, sometimes for his
mercies, sometimes for his judgments. And it is said that he visits us,
either when he gives us conspicuous testimonies of his favor, or when he
punishes us for our sins.

In the first sense it is said, that Genesis 21.1
the LORD visited Sarah, as he had said: which in the words following is thus
explained, And the Lord did unto Sarah as he had spoken: Because he fulfilled
his promise, and gave a Son to Sarah, the Scripture says, that he visited
Sarah. In the same sense, Joseph said to his brethren, Genesis 50.25.
God will surely visit you. i.e. deliver you. And so is the word expounded by
Zacharias in his song, where he says, that Luke 1.68.
God has visited, and redeemed his people. Ye read the like in the Acts,
where it is written, that Act 15.14
God did visit the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for his Name. For
their calling to the light of the Gospel, was their visitation. When Jerusalem
made light of that light, Christ said, that Luke 19.44.
she knew not the time of her visitation.

In the second sense, visitation of punishment is double: The one is of love
and of grace, whereby God visits his own dear children, as he said to
David, Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33.
If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: then will I visit
their transgression with the rod, and their imquitie with stripes:
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. We have heard heretofore, that this kind of
visitation is most useful. It is not so much Minut. Felix. Non est poena,
militia est. Fortitudo enim infirmitatibus roboratur: Et calamitas saepius
disciplina virtutis est.
a punishment to the Church, as her warfare. For fortitude is corroborated by
infirmities: And often affliction and calamity is the school and mistress of
virtue. It is ever so to the Church.

The other comes from Gods heavy wrath and indignation, and has for end,
not the correction, but the destruction of the sinner: As when God said that
he Hos. 1.4.
would visit the blood of Iezreel upon the house of Iehu, he threatened the
Kings house with a total and final overthrow; as he says in the words
following, that he would cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel. In
this sense David made this prayer to God, Psalm. 59.5
O LORD God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen: for
he adds by way of exposition, Be not merciful to any wicked transgressors.
This word is so taken in this text, when the Prophet says, that the Lord
comes out of his place to visit, i. e. to punish in his anger, and hot
displeasure. Whom will he visit?

V. The inhabitants of the earth. What? Are not all men, are not Gods servants
inhabitants of the earth, as well as other men? No men, to speak properly, are
inhabitants of the earth. For we are all tenants at the will of the great Lands
Lord, not owners: and our life is a soiourning, rather than a dwelling on earth.

All true believers acknowledge this truth, and say in their prayers to God, 1
Chro. 29.15.
We are strangers before thee, and soiourners, as were all our fathers: Our
days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is none abiding. Earth is only
the place of their peregrination. Ioh. 17.11, 16.
They are, says Christ, in the world, but they are not of the world. Heaven is
their home. Heb. 13.14.
For here have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come. Every day we
hear God saying unto us, Micha 2.10.
Arise ye and depart, for this is not your rest. Therefore as 1 Kings 19.8.
Eliah walked forty days and forty nights till he came unto Horeb the mount
of God: So we walk apace, and go still forward, till we come to the heavenly
Manor, whereof the Apostle says, that Heb. 4.9.
there remains a rest to the people of God. Matt. 6.21
There is our treasure, there is our heart also: As a wayfaring man's heart is
at home, because at home are his wife, his children, and whatsoever he loves.
There is Phil. 3.20
our conversation, though our bodies be here.

The wicked may see that which we believe, and daily experience teaches them
to say with the women of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14.14.
We must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be
gathered up again. Yet notwithstanding, they Phil. 3.19
mind earthly things. Psalm. 49.11.
Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling places to all generations: They call their lands after their own
Names. Therefore seeing they have nothing before their eyes, no end of their
thoughts and actions, but the earth, it is no wonder that they should be called
the inhabitants of the earth. Out of the earth were they taken. In earth they
dwell, in earth they have their portion, to earth shall their bodies return,
and if hell be in the center of the earth, as many say, there shall they have
their last and eternal habitation.

VI. For what cause will the Lord visit them so rigorously? For their
iniquity, that is to say, for the excessivenesse of their most immoderate
sins, as the word must be taken here: what sins were those? Questionless
too too many amongst a people enemies to God and to his Church: but above all,
the persecution of the Church.

They thought undoubtedly that all the harm which they did to the Church, was
righteousness, and good service done to their gods: As Christ has forewarned
us, that they who shall kill us, will deem Ioh. 2.16.
that they do God service: But God calls this their pretended service,
iniquity, a most heinous and enormous sin: and if ye desire a specification
of the kind of this sin, God in the text calls it blood, or according to the
Hebrew word, bloods: for by that word God signifies the extreme and
unquenchable thirst of blood, wherewith these murderers were so dry, that when
they had shed it all, they would have gladly shed more, and wished that each of
those whom they had slain, had possessed a hundred lives, to furnish to them
more blood to spill. They kill, because they take pleasure in killing, like
unto the Tyrant Caligula, who wished that the people of Rome had all one neck,
that at one blow he might cut it off.

VII. O Tyrants, O bloud-thirstie butchers! ye slay the Saints of God under
coolur of justice: and ye think, that not only God will not avenge it, but
that he will rather allow and reward it. Whereas God says, that the earth
shall disclose her bloods, and shall no more discover her slain. The earth it
self shall open her womb, and unfold her bowels, and cry to God, Lo, here
is the innocent blood which thy enemies have shed: Lo, here are the bodies of
thy beloved servants, whom these Massacrers have slain: Job 26.6.
Hell is naked before him: and destruction has no covering. O then shall the
earth conceal your murders from him?

Have ye not read, that Psalm. 5.6.
the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man? Doubt not, but that which
is written is true. Psalm. 116.1^.
Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of all his Saints; and
therefore he will with an hand of iron thrust hard together the bellies of
those horse-leeches, which have drunk their blood, and strain them till they
spue it out of their bloody throats.

He has said, that Genesis 9.5, 6.
he will require the life of man at the hand of every beast, and at the hand of
every man's brother. How much more will he require the life of his dear
servants at the hands of their murderers? He has ordained before the law of
a most just and inexorable law, that who so sheddeth man's blood, by man his
blood shall be sbed: whereof he renders two reasons; The first, that men's
lives are in their blood; The second, that in the image of God made he man.
Under the Law he confirmed this Law by another law, and said, Number 35.33.
that blood unjustly shed, defiles the land, though it be the blood of an ill
man. And the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by
the blood of him that shed it. This law is irrevocable: for Christ has also
said in the Gospel, that Mat. 26.52.
all they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. If men put it not
in execution, God will: and till he do it, the land where the blood of his
Saints, who are restored to his image, is shed, shall remain polluted. Genesis
4.10
The voice of Abels blood cryod unto him from the ground, and he listened unto
it. The souls of a great many Abels, which are under the Altar, cry unto him
with a loud voice, Rev. 6.9, 10.
How long, O Lord, holy and true! do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth? And will he not hear them? He will, he will:
Rev. 13.10.
for he that kills with the sword, must be killed with the sword. Here is the
patience and the faith of the Saints: They expect with patience; it shall be
so, because they know by faith it must be so.

IIX. God who has spoken it, is truth it self: he is strength it self: 1.
Sam. 15.29.
The strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent: for he is not a man, that he
should repent. Therefore it must be so. He is justice it self; therefore it
shall be so.

For howsoever we be sinners, the cause for which we are molested and vexed, is
his: His who is Almighty and just: his who loves it: his who will not suffer
it to be overthrown by the malice and wickedness of men: his who will defend
them who maintain it, and destroy them who seek to overthrow it. This is the
comfort which the Apostle gives to the Thessallonians, who bare a cross as
heavy then, as your brethren beyond seas do now; saying unto them, 2. These.
1.6, 7.
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with the Angels of his power. We must apply this
comfort to us: for we shall never be without enemies.

But we have our warranter and protector in heaven, who fore warnes us not only
of their enterprises, but also of their overthrow. Esa. 54.15, 16, 17.
Behold, says he, they shall surely gather together, but not by me whosoever
shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake. Behold, I have
created the Smith that blows the coals in the fire, and that brings forth
an instrument for his work: And I have created the destroyer to destroy. No
weapon that is formed against thee, shall prosper: and every tongue that shall
rise against thee in judgment, shou shall condemn. This is the heritage of
the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness of me, says the Lord.

IX. The Church is an Anvile which has broken in pieces many hammers: Or, as
Zechariah says, Zach. 12.3.
it is a burdensome stone for all people: all that burden themselves with it,
shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together
against it. Where are now the four Monarchies which persecuted the Church?
Has not Dan. 2.34, 35, 44, 45.
the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, has not the Church of
Christ, the Church which is come down from Gods holy mountain, even from
heaven, the Church which is not the work of any man, but of God, the Church
which is but like a little stone in the eyes of the world, has not this little
stone broken them all to pieces, and consumed them like chafe which the wind
carries away? But it is become a great mountain which fills the whole
earth. It is a spiritual kingdom which the Lord of heaven has set up, and
therefore shall never be destroyed.

God said to mount Seir, to the people of Edom, the children of Esau, Because
thou have had a perpetual hatred, and have shed the blood of the children of
Israel by the force of the sword, in the time of their calamity, in the time
that their iniquity had an end: Therefore, as I live, says the Lord God,
Ezech. 35.5.
I will prepare thee unto blood, and blood shall pursue thee: since thou have
not hated blood, blood shall pursue thee.

Have any of the Massacrers of our fathers prospered? How many wonderful
judgments of God, upon them and their children, might I relate unto you, if
time could permit. The gaggers have been gagged, and strangled with worms
bursting out of their stinking throats: those which imbrued their hands with
innocent blood, have swumme in their own blood; the children of persecuters
were seen begging at the doors of your fathers, whom their fathers had
spoiled; Many, pursued by the devil, did run up and down like mad men,
crying, that they were damned, because they had persecuted the Church, and shed
innocent blood. Then the Church sang to God, Psalm. 92.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep: A brutish
man knows not, neither does a fool understand this: when the wicked springs
as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish; it is, that
they shall be destroyed for ever: but thou, O LORD, art most high for evermore:
for lo thine enemies, O LORD, for lo, thine enemies shall perish: All the
workers of iniquity shall be scattered, but my horn shall thou exalt like the
horn of the Unicorn. etc.

X. The author of the book of Wisdom, says, that Sap. 6.5.
sharp judgment shall be to them that be in high places: And experience
teaches, that the judgments of God on them have been most sharp;
conspicuous, and wonderful. 1. King. 21.19 and 22.38.
In the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, which Achab shed,
there they licked Achabs blood. Proud 2. King. 9.35, 36.
Iezabel after she had slain the Prophets of the Lord, was eaten by dogs.
Neither was there left in the family of Achab so much as a dog that pissed
against the wall. In the beginning of the twenty seventh chapter following our
text, the Prophet says, that Esa. 29.1.
in that day, the LORD with his sore, and great, and strong sword shall punish
Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan that crooked serpent, and he
shall slay the dragon that is in the sea. He calls so the Kings of Assyria,
and of Babylon, which were the most cruel, subtle, and venomous persecuters
of his Church. Consider and see how he punished them. 2. King. 19.
Senacharib was slain by his own sons in the house of Nisroch his God: And
Herodot. Euterp^. (...).
after his death, the Egyptians whom he had oppressed, erected unto him an
image of stone, with this inscription, Whosoever looks upon me, let him fear
God. His third son Esar Haddon, was slain by Merodach Baladan, who transported
the Empire from Nimveh in Assyria to Babylon in Chaldea. Dan 5.1.
Belshazzar the first and last of Merodaches race, was killed among the goblets
and dishes, and in the midst of his Courtiers and Concubines, whilst he was
blaspheming the name of God, and the Monarchy was by Cyrus and Darius
translated to the Medes and Persians. 2. Macc. 9.9.
Antiochus Epiphanes, famous for his most unnatural and barbarous cruelty
against the Church of the Jews, was smitten with the incurable and remediless
sickness of worms and lice, which rising up out of his bowels and all the
parts of his body, consumed his flesh with many and strange torments, and such
a stinking smell, that he himself could not abide it. Thus dying a most
miserable death, he left his Realm to his children, amongst whom God sent the
Spirit of division and discord, which left them never in peace till they were
consumed one by another.

XI. Herodees, Joseph. Antiquit. Iudaic. lib. 17. cap. 8. Idem de bello
Iudaico. lib. 1. ca. 21.
murderer of the children of Bethelem, through the righteous judgment of God,
became parricide of his own children; and at last, after he had been long
tortured with a cholike passion, and unspeakeable torments in his entrails, and
all disfigured with the dropsy and scurfe wherewith his whole body was spread
over, was gnawen by swarms of lice and worms, which bursting forth out of
those parts of his body, which natural shame commanded him to hide, and
doleful necessity constrained him to discover, made him a most filthy and
stinking spectacle to his Courtiers, and a most loathsome guest to himself.
Joseph. Autiq. lib. 18. cap. 9.
Herodes Antypas, who beheaded John Baptist, was relegated to Lion with his
incestuous wife Herodias, and ended there his wicked life, by a wretched and
miserable death. Eusebius h^st. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Pontius Pilat, who condemned Christ to dye, was overwhelmed with so many
miseries, that to be delivered of them all at once, he followed the example of
Judas, and killed himself. Act. 12.
Herodes Agrippa, after he had for a while persecuted the Christians, killed
James, imprisoned Peter, taking to himself the honor due to God, was stricken
by an Angel, and was eaten of worms; whose pitiless teeth taught him, that
he was a medden of putrefaction, and not God.

Suet on. in Nerone. cap. 47. and 49.
Nero the first persecuter of Christians among the Gentiles, after that he had
set Rome on fire, put his wise and learned master to death, rifled his mothers
entrails to see where he lay when he was in her womb, taking life from her
that gave him life; burnt quick, or dismembered with the teeth of his dogs,
many thousands of Christians, murdered all his friends, and filled the whole
Empire with orbity, desolation, and mourning, having no friend but murder and
cruelty, finding no foe that would kill him, Ergo ego, inquit, nic amicum
habeo, nee unimicum.
thrust himself through with his own sword, and was to himself his own
Hangman.

Suet. in Domitiano. ca. 13. and 14.
Domitian, who worshipped no other God but himself, who erected Temples and
Altars to his own mortal deity, who constrained his people to call him the
Lord our God, and persecuted the Christians, because they would not give that
title to any other but to our Lord Jesus Christ, nor worship any but God; was
betrayed of his own wife, in whom he trusted, was slain by his own
servants, was buried without honor, like a filthy carrion.

I should be too tedious, if I should relate to you the tragical deaths of
Adria^, of Severus, of Decius, of Valerian, of Dioclesian, of Maximinian, of
Maxentius, of Maximin, of Julian the Apostate, of Valens Arrian heretic, who
were prodigious examples of Gods vengeance against persecuters. Which of you
has not heard or read the strange deaths of Kings and Princes, who by
murdering of our fathers, sought to murder, once again, Christ in the
cradle, and to give life to the beast which had been wounded to death? In them
all was, in all them that follow their bloody footsteps, shall be fulfilled
that which is written in the Psalms, Psalm. 21.8, 9, 10.
Thine hand, O Lord, shall find out all thine enemies, thy right hand shall
find out those that hate thee. Thou shall make them as a fiery oven in the
time of thine anger: The Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire
shall devour them: Their fruit shall thou destroy from the earth, and their
seed from among the children of men. Have we not heard it? Our own eyes, have
they not seen it?

XII. The best of us all is like unto Asaph, Psalm 73.2, 3, 5, 6.7, 8, 9.
we are envious at the foolish, our steps slip when we see the prosperity of
the wicked: They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they plagued
(...) other men. Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain^^ violence
covers them as a garment: their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more
than heart could wish. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning
oppression; they speak loftily: they set their mouth against the heavens, and
their tongue walks through the earth. Then we begin to fret, to murmr, to
deny Gods providence, to ask, Is there knowledge in the most high? These men
which prosper are ungodly, but we who cleanse our hearts, and wash our hands
in innocence, are plagued all the day long; our chastisement returns turns
every morning. They are happy, but we are miserable.

When we judge, when we speak so, are we not foolish and ignorant, like unto
little children? are we not as beasts before our God? If any man have a deadly
wound, whether is most to be feared, the putrefaction and impostume, or the
Chirurgions Launcet and Rasor, the searing hot iron, or the Gangrene? What is
sin, but the corruption and impostume of the soul? what is affliction, but
the heavenly Physicians Rasor and cauter? As then a wise man will say, that he
whose impostume is not launced, is in danger of his life; and he who feels
every day the smart of the Rasor, is in hope of recovery: howsoever ignorant
children will judge otherwise, and will choose rather a lingering and
insensible death, than a sharp cure: So will he which enters into the
Sanctuary of God, judge and say that sinners, when the Lords hand is heavy upon
them, are happy, because they are chastised for their correction, as when a man
sick of the dropsy, is kept under a strict and pinching diet. But he who
covers his face with fatness, who spends his days in mirth, and feels
not the smart of the Lords rod, is so much more miserable than the sick man,
who being swollen up and defaced with the dropsy, lives in the Tavernes, and
every day overchargeth his decaying body with surfeiting and drunkenness, as
the soul is more precious than the body. For what are such men, but as fatted
swine for the great day of the Lords slaughter, as I have said? And why does
the Lord Minut. Felix Miseri in hoc altius tolluntur ut decidant altius.
heave them up, and, as it were, set them on the pinnacle of worldly pleasures
and honors, but to cast them down into destruction, and make their fall more
remarkable, as was the fall of Haman, persecuter of the Jews, and of Iezabel,
murderer of the Prophets?

XIII. But what although some of them Job 21.13, 23, 24.
spend their days in wealth, having still their breasts full of milk, and
their bones moistened with marrow? What although they dye in their full
strength, and after the long days of a joyful life, being wholly at ease and
quiet, in a moment they go down to the grave, without the least pricking of
grief, without any feeling of the smart of death; which may happen to some few
in this world? Shall they also escape the dint of the wrath and vengeance of
the great and righteous Judge in the world to come? When God, through a most
wonderful patience, and long suffering, has given unto them many years to
repent, as he gave to the men of the first world in the days of Genesis 6.3.
Noah, an hundred and twenty years to amend their lives; and they spend them
all in riot, in licentiousness, in persecuting of his Church, in presumptuous
sins against his Majesty, selling themselves to work wickedness in his
sight, as 1. King. 21.25.
Ahab did; will he not turn his patience into fury, and pay them home at once,
requiting them with the unconceiveable punishment of eternal damnation?

XIV. I know they do what they can to shake out of their thoughts the fear of
that judgment, and to make their hearts believe, that there is no such matter;
Iuvenal. Sat. 2. Esse aliquos manes, and subterranea regna. Nec pueri credunt.
that whatsoever was spoken of old amongst the Gentiles, is written in the
Scriptures, is believed in the Church, of devils, of hell, of everlasting
torments, is but a bug-beare or scarecrow, to fear superstitious folks, and
hold them in awe. But they strive unprofitably against the stream of their
own consciences, which with a roaring voice does summon them day and night to
appear before the judgment seat of the inexorable and Almighty Judge. Of all
men those fear hell most, who say there is no hell. The sound of a shaking
leaf, makes their hearts to shake for fear, when there is none to pursue
them. And even then when they preach to men that hell is a fable, they find a
most direful hell within themselves, burning up the most secret bowels of
their wretched souls. Why did Judas hang himself, when there was none upon
earth to do him any harm, if there be no hell? Death was more tolerable unto
him, than the fear of the unestimable torments which now he suffers there.
What were Suet, in Nerone. c. 46
the monstrous dreams of Nero? What Xiphilinus Epitome Dionis.
the hideous and most ugly ghosts of those whom he had slain, which he saw a
little before his death, bounding out of the earth, and leaping to his throat,
but a warning to appear the next day in judgment to give an account of so
much Christian and innocent blood, which he had most wickedly shed? If there
be no judgment after this life, from whence came it, that Pro copius de bello
Gothico, lib. 1.
Theodoricke king of the Goths, Protector of the wicked heresy of the
Arrians, after he had put to death the 2. worthy Senators of Rome, Symmachus
and Boethius, because they maintained the true faith, could not look upon the
head of a great fish that was set upon his table, crying that it was the head
of Symmachus, which with most horrible yawning, and fiery eyes, sought to
devour him? That was a citing indeed: for suddenly he was taken to his bed;
and from thence to the grave. Thuanus lib. 57. Aubig. 2. tom. lib. 1.
The Authors of the Massacres of France, could not be at quiet many days after
that bloody Tragedy, for the horrible sight of great multitudes of ugly Ravens,
hovering about the Louure; and voices which cried incessantly in their ears,
Murder, murder, murder: suing them to come personally before him who sits
on the throne, and before the Lamb whom they had slain in his members.

It Is a truth not only Audreas Liba. de cruentatione Cadaverum. Levinus
Lemnius de occultis natura miraculis. lib. 2. cap. 7.
ascertained by books, but also averred by daily experience in all nations,
That if a murderer come in sight of the person whom he has slain, the
Coarse, though almost rotten and stinking, will bleed, and disclose him. What
is that bleeding, but a testimony, that, if men will not, Psalm. 58.11.
There is a God that judges in the earth, and in his own time will be avenged
of all murderers, namely of them who lay violent hands upon his dear ones?
Therefore when the souls under the Altar, cried for vengeance against the
persecuters, who had stained their hands with their innocent blood, Rev. 6.11
it was said unto them, that they should rest yet for a little season, until
their fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed as they
were should be fulfilled.

For as God spared the Genesis 15.16.
Amorites, till their iniquity was full, and as the Lord said to the Scribes
and Pharisees. Mat. 23.32.
Fillye up the measure of your fathers; because then all the righteous blood
which their fathers had shed, was to come upon them: So the Lord has a time
appointed for the full deliverance of his Church, and everlasting destruction
of his enemies; even the last and great day of this decaying world, 2. These.
1.7, 8, 9, 10
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with the Angels of his
power, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired
in all that believe in that day.

XV. Day, which is a day of wrath, Zephan. 1.15.
a day of trouble and distress, a day of vastness and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominesse, a day of clouds and thick darkness: A night rather
than a day; yea both a day and a night. A day wherein Gods judgments against
all ungodly men, shall shine cleerer than the noone day: A night, because of
the place, of the extremity, of the universalitie, of the eternity, of the
effects of the pain whereunto they shall be condemned by this thundering
voice, and unrecallable sentence of their righteous ludge, Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his Angels.

To hell must they go, even to the dark and ugly 1. Pet. 3.19.
prison, which shall be the last habitation of all ungodly sinners. How
pleasant, how fair soever a prison be, we say, that there were never fair
prisons. And therefore what will not a man suffer, rather than to go to
prison? he will flee, he will give all that he has, he will run to his
friends, and cry for succor. Aug. de verbis Aposto li. sermon. 18 Contremiscis,
c onturbaris, pallescis, etc.
S. Augustine says, that in his time they would flee to the Church, run to
the Bishop, fall down, lie wallowing at his feet, cry with a pale
countenance, with a trembling voice, My Lord, I am troubled: my Lord, I am to
be cast in prison, take pity of me, relieve me. So hard, so unsufferable a
pain does it seem to all men to be in prison, though it there were no other
pain to be suffered, but to be closed up: Yea our own houses would be
hateful unto us, if our liberty of going abroad were restrained: O then, how
huge, how intolerable shall be the torments of those bloody butchers, who have
shed the blood of Gods Saints like water, when they shall be cast headlong
into the hellish prison, which may be most properly called Job 10.21, 22.
the land of darkness, and of the shadow of death. Where there is no order,
and where light it self is darkness? O how shall they tremble, how shall they
cry and tear their souls, when they shall be violently thrown down into
the Luke 18.31.
deep and bottomless pit; which Aug. in 50. Homilius. hom. 16. ^u^ sine
poenitentiae remedio infoelices peccatores exceperit, etc.
when it has received impenitent sinners, shall be, says S. Augustine, shut
upward, and open downward: where the deeper they shall sink, Rev. 9.2.
the more shall it inlargeit self, that they may never find an end of sinking?
The devils themselves are afraid to go there: how much more men, whose bones
shall crack, whose teeth shall clatter, whose hearts shall quake at the only
naming of it.

XVI. Woe, woe be unto them: for no heart can imagine, no tongue can iutter the
tortures and torments which are impossible to be endured, and which needs they must
endure there, Alas! what ease shall they find, and where; when they shall be
banished from the quickening sight of the living God, never to see his face
again, but inflamed with fury and indignation against them? when it shall be
said unto them, Depart from me ye cursed; when they shall shall cry, Mat.
25.11, 12.
Lord, Lord, open to us: and he shall answer, Verily I say unto you, I know you
not: Aug. ibid. Vltra nescientur a Deo qui Deum scire noluerunt.
Ye knew not me in your life, and I know you not in your death.

If God shall not know them, to aid them, shall any of his creatures know
them? If the Sun of righteousness, who has healing in his wings, shall
refuse to embright them with the least glance of the beams of his glorious
face, shall he suffer the light of this visible sun, moon, and stars, to
shine upon them? If he, who is called Romans 15 5.
the God of consolation, shall forsake them, shall the blessed Angels, shall
the holy men of God be more merciful than their maker, who is mercy it self?
Shall any of the creatures which are in heaven above, or in the earth beneath,
or in the water under the earth, come and comfort them? As when the woman in
the fearful famine of Samaria, cried to the King, 2. King. 6.26, 27.
Help my Lord, O King: he answered, If the Lord do not help thee, whence
shall I help thee? out of the barne-floore, or out of the wine press? So when
these damned wights shall cry to the creatures for help; grim and froward
faces, frowning brows, an universal refusal shall be their first and last
answer: Our Creator, shall they say, is your enemy, shall we be your friends?
As he has commanded you to depart from him, so get you hence, and depart from
us. Yea, the Lord himself teaches us in the parable of Luke 16.24.
the rich glutton, that if they should ask but one drop of water to cool
their tongue, it shall not be given unto them.

Aug. de Tempore 252.
Consider, I pray you, says S. Augustine, if a man were cast out of the
congregation of this Church for some crime, with how great forrow, with how
many agonies would his soul be vexed, though out of the Church he may eat,
drink, converse with men, and have some hope to be received into it again?
Surely, this pain seemed so heavy to Cain, the first murderer of Gods Saints,
that he cried through despair, and great grief of heart, Genesis 4.13.
My punishment is greater than I can bear. Oh then how many terrors, how
great anguish of mind shall wring and wrest the spirits of those, who for their
crimes shall be excommunicated for ever, from the glorious Church which is in
heaven, from the innumerable company of Angels, from the congregation of all
the Saints, and from all the unspeakeable joys of the heavenly Jerusalem?
Divines call this punishment Poena damni, The pain of loss or damage, and
say, that it is but the first part of the unconceiveable torments which are
prepared for the devils, and for the viperous brood of wicked men.

XVII. It goes not alone. It is joined with that which the same Divines call
Poena sensus, the pain of sense, or of feeling. Can they lose the favor of
God, with the comfortable use of all his creatures, and not feel the redoubled
blows of the heavy sword of his indignation? When Est er 7.7, 8.
the king Ahasuerus in his wrath turned his back to Haman, the Kings servants
covered Hamans face, and heaved him away to the gallows: So when God shall
withdraw the light of his face from these thrice unhappy bodies, the devils,
who are the executioners of his high justice, shall Mat. 22.13.
bind them hands and feet, and take them away, and cast them into utter
darkness; that as they delighted in the inward darkness of their minds, and
Ioh. 3.19, 20.
hated the light, and would not come unto it, because their deeds were evil,
and lest they should be reprooved, so they may be tormented with utter
darkness, more palpable than the fogges of Egypt, and so thick, that no
sunshine of any worldly or heavenly comfort shall be able to sparkle through
them.

If ye desire to know how great is the pain of sense, or of feeling, which is
there; the Scripture calls it, Rev. 14.19.
the great wine press of the wrath of God, which shall be trodden till blood
come out of it, even unto the horse bridles: It calls it also Esa. 66.15, 16.
a fire, and flame of fire, whereby the Lord will plead against his enemies:
fire, which ver. 24.
shall never be quenched, because it shall never lack either matter to kindle
it, or a mighty breather to blow it. It Is a Rev. 21.8.
lake which burns with fire and brimstone: It Is Esa. 30.33.
Tophet ordemed of old, made deep and large, the pile whereof is fire and much
wood, and the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, does kindle it.
It Is a Mat. 5.22.
Gehenna of fire. What pain so sensible; as to be burnt alive? and what pain
so terrible and pitiful, as when the Jews Buxtorf. ex libro Ialcutam
Ie^emiam. ca. 7.
took their young children, and offering them in sacrifice to Molec, gave them
to one of the Priests, who laid them upon the arms of the brazen Idol, after
it was set on fire, and glowing red, the rest of the Priests in the mean
while, sounding with Drums, Trumpets, Timbrels, and other loud instruments,
lest the parents should hear the pitiful cries of their children, and be
touched with compassion: by reason of which sounding, the place was called
Tophet, and because it was in a valley belonging to Hinnom; it was called
Gehinnom, or Gehenna, i. the valley of Hinnom* a name most usual amongst the
Jews in Christ's days, and long before, to signify the place and the pains
of the damned: As they were wont to call the devil, Principem Gehennae, The
Prince of Gehenna, or of hell: where, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.
If any man worship the beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is powered out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and
he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy
Angels: and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever: and
they have no rest day nor night.

In vain shall they strive and struggle to rid themselves from the eternal
chains of darkness, wherewith they are tied in that bottomless Mine: for,
like unto fishprickt with the Anglers hook, the more they wrench and wriggle
to escape, faster and faster are they entangled, and sink deeper into the
burning lake of death and damnation.

Are not darkness, blood, fire, brimstone, burning alive, torments fearful
enough, to make the hair to bristle, and the stoutest heart to melt as wax
against the fire? and yet all these are but shadows and counterfeits of the
extremity of pain, wherewith the damned are racked in hell. If
Nebuchadnezzars hot glowing furnaces: if Antiochus caldrons of boiling oil: if
Phalaris fiery brazen Bull: if David's sawes, harrowes of iron, and mortars; if
the needles, the pinsers, the burning iron grates and brazen chaires; if the
tympan, the spits, the flaying of living men, and other torments practiced by
Tyrants against Christians, were so fell and hideous; if daily men invent new
tortures more fierce and terrible than those were, doubtless the pains of
hell which the devil devises, or rather which are of Gods own invention, are
ten thousand times more horrible than man's heart can imagine. As in all Gods
works, Aug. epist 3. ad Volasianum. Tota ratio facti, potentia facientis.
Considera authorem: toll dubitanone^.
the reason of the doing, is the power of the doer: So in this, let Atheists
consider the author, and all their doubts will cease. God has said it, and
will he not perform it?

XIIX. As every member, joint, and part of wicked men conspire together in
sin to offend God: so the righteous and Almighty God has bequeathed to each
of them a several torment. The mind shall be racked with the consideration of
the unexpugnable wrath of God, and contemplation of its own endless
infelicity. The memory shall be continually tormented with the remembrance of
the manifold and foul sins, which were causes of such plagues. The
conscience shall feel a Esa 66.24. Mar. 9.44.
worm ever gnawing it with a most bitter, but unfruitful remorse of sin.
The fantasy shall be troubled with ghastly visions.

The eyes shall see nothing but ugly devils, and damned persons. The ears
shall hear nothing but roarings of the infernal spirits, but shriekes and
dreadful cries of tortured malefactors. What the palate shall taste, what the
nostrils shall smell, what the hands shall catch hold of, what the other parts
of the body shall suffer in that dark dungeon of Gods wrath, I know not: This I
know, that as 1. Cor. 3.9.
eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into into the heart of
man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, in the kingdom
of light, with his own self: so no tongue can utter, yea no heart can imagine
the manifold and bitter plagues which the justice of God has reserved for them
that hate him, in the kingdom of darkness, with the Job 18.14.
King of terrors.

XIX. Happy would they think themselves, if after many myriades of years they
might hope for some relief: but to fill up the unmeasurable measure of their
miseries, they know that God has called the fire wherein they burn, Mat.
25.41.
everlasting; the death whereunto they are condemned, 2. These. 1.9.
everlasting destruction, and qualifieth with the same title the worm, which
gnaweth their neverdying conscience, saying, that Mark 9.48.
it dies not. They know that the entrance into hell is large and easy, but
the regresse impossible. They know that the power and justice of God has
appointed unto them an immortal death, an endless end, everlasting darkness
in the midst of an ay-burning fire, poison of dragons, cruel venime of
aspes, bitterness it self, to eat and to drink in the blackenesse of an
eternal night; whereupon the cloud of Gods curse, and the shadow of death
shall dwell for ever, and the light of comfort shall never shine.

XX. This is the share allotted to all them that fear not God; to Luke 16.19.
the rich man, who did no harm to Lazarus, but only refused to give him
meat, and to Mat. 25.41, 42.
all his mates; to Mat. 25.30.
the unprofitable servant, to him who goes to the marriage feast without Mat.
22.11, 12, 13.
a wedding garment. O then two and threefold more shall be children of hell,
all those which throw the crummes of bread out of Lazarus mouth, which are
never weary of ill doing, which have all their garments stained with the blood
of Gods servants. Shall it Mat. 10.15. Mat. 11.22.24.
be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment,
than for those who receive not the Preachers of the Gospel, and refuse to
hear the word? Oh then how intolearble shall be then the plagues of God upon
the Neroes, Dioclesians, and all the persecuters of the Gospel? Psalm. 11.5, 6.
The Lord tries the righteous: but the wicked, and him that loves violence,
his soul hates. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone,
and an horrible tempest: that shall be the portion of their cup.

Then, then Rev. 16.10.
they shall gnaw their tongues for pain: then nothing shall be heard and seen
amongst them but Mat. 12.13.
weeping and gnashing of teeth, but crying Rev. 6.16.
to mountains and rocks to fall upon them, and to death to come and kill
them, when Rev. 3.6.
death shall flee from them. Aug. de Tempore sermon. 252. Quta quibus in hoc
seculo vita offertur, and nolunt accipere: in inferno quaerent mortem, and non
poterint invenire.
When in this world life is offered unto them, they refuse to accept it:
Therefore in hell they shall seek death, and shall not find it. In that desire
as there is a great sin, so there is in it a great pain. It is a righteous
thing with God to punish sin: therefore it is a sin in the prisoners of
hell, to desire to shake off the punishment of sin. Again, Quid tam poenale,
qua^ semper velle quod nu^quam erit, etc.
What is more penal, says Bernard, than ever to desire that which never shall
be, and ever to be unwilling to that which shall never but be? They shall never
obtain what they would; and evermore sustain what they would not.

XXI. Add unto all those punishments one, which shall be to all the
persecuters of the Church a deadly wound ever bleeding: for in that great day,
Esa. 26.19. Rev. 20.13.
the earth, the grave, the sea, death it self shall deliver up the dead which
are in them, and the Martyrs whom these murderers have slain shall arise, and
be received into eternal glory in the presence of their enemies, with this
welcome from the eternal Judge, Mat. 25 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world.

O most wonderful inheritance! Aug. Hareditas Domini nou minuitur multitudine
possessorian: tanta singulis, quanta universis.
It is not diminished by the multitude of those which possess it: It is as
large to every one apart, as to the whole multitude together. O most excellent
and glorious inheritance! It is a kingdom, wherein our darkness shall be
converted into light, our sorrow into joy, our trouble into peace, our
weakness into strength, our dishonor into honor, our ignominy into glory,
our misery into happiness, our death into life, our patient hope into the
real enjoying of all good, our prayers into thanksgiving.

Where the heavens shall receive us, the holy Angels welcome us, the blessed
Saints join themselves unto us: where our bodies being made of mortal
immortal, of natural spiritual, of burdensome nimble, shall shine brighter
than the fairest summer-day.

Where 1. Cor. 15.28.
God himself without any means, shall be all in all, perfect and absolute
knowledge to our minds, an ocean of love to our hearts, sovereign good, and
the blessed center of eternal rest to all our restless affections; where he
himself, after a most wonderful and glorious manner which cannot be imagined,
shall be light in our eyes, melody in our ears, the wished and longed-for
object of all our senses: where he says, That Rev. 21.3
he himself shall be with us, and be our God, Aug. de. Civit Dei. li. 22.
capaile.
i. he shall be unto us all whereby we may be satisfied, and whatsoever all may
honestly desire; life, salvation, meat, drink, riches, glory, honor, peace,
and all good. Which David expressed in few words, saying, Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence is fullness of joy: at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore. And again, Psa. 17.15
As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I will be satisfied, when
I awake, with thy likeness.

For then God shall be the end of all our desires: then Aug. idid. Ipse finis
evit desideriorum nostrorum, qui sine fine vide bitur, sine faslidio amabitur,
sine fatigatione laud abitur.
We shall see him without end, we shall love him without loathing, we shall
praise him without wearying. Then also our enemies shall see our glory in him,
and with him: and as the Author of the book of Wisdom says; Sap. 5.2.
When they see it, they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be
amazed at the strangeness of our salvation, so far beyond all that they
looked for, etc.

XXII. O then dearly beloved, let us learn to discern wisely Mal. 3.18.
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not.

Solomon says, that Pro. 13.9.
the lamp of the wicked shall be put out: comparing wicked men to a candle,
which when it begins to burn, gives a fair light, but ends in stinking
smoke and caligiousnesse: for their end is worse than their beginning, because
Job 21.30.
they are reserved to the day of destruction, to the day when wrath shall be
brought forth.

On the other side, Psalm. 37.37, 39, 40.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace, because the salvation of the righteous is of the LORD: he is their
strength in the time of trouble: and the Lord shall help them, and deliver
them; he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust
in him,

The short days of man's fading and dying life, me thinks, may be most
conveniently compared to a stageplay: wherein often Kings sons mount on the
scaffold, disguised in poor men's rags; and beggars march with a stately pase,
attired in sumptuous robes about their greasy bodies; hiding scurvie heads
under crowns of gold, and stretching forth a royal Scepter with scabbed hands:
but when the curtains are remooved, when the Tragedy is ended, and the Players
are stripped of their borrowed apparel, he that made so many vain glorious
shows, and called himself Hercules, or Agamemnon, is known to be poor Irus,
who goes begging through the streets, and crackling crusts of brown bread
between his muddie and rotten teeth: and he that was thought to be Irus, is
known to be the royal son of Aeacus.

It Is even so between the Church and the world: when Luke 16.19, 20.
Lazarus starves for hunger at the rich man's gate, and the rich man jetteth in
his purple, and makes good cheer: when Mat. 27.39.
Christ is nailed upon the cross, and his enemies stand hard by, reviling him:
when the Rev. 11.9 10, 11, 12.
dead bodies of Christ's two witnesses lie unburied in the streets of the great
City, and they that dwell upon the earth, rejoice over them, and thank their
gods of gold, silver, brass, because they have overcome them, it seems that
those which are thus afflicted, are but poor snakes forsaken of God; and that
those others, which swim with content in the Ocean of worldly pleasures, are
Gods dear ones.

But when the devils shall bury the rich Glutton in the lowest pit of hell,
when boiling there in the lake of fire and brimstone, he shall lift up his
eyes, and see Lazarus in Abraham's bosom abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of the house of God, and drinking great draughts in the river of his pleasures:
when the spirit of life from God shall enter into his two witnesses: when they
shall rise again, stand upon their feet, and ascend up to heaven: when Mat.
24.30.
Jesus Christ shall come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory:
when he shall set his sheep on his right hand, and the goats on the left:
when Rev. 1.7.
they which pierced him, shall see him, and by him shall be thrown down into
the rich Mine of eternal torments, Aug. 50. homil. Homil. 16. Morituri vitae,
and morti sine sine victuri.
to dye there unto life, and to live unto death world without: when those Sap.
5.4, 5
whose life they accounted madness, and their end disgrace, shall be received
into the haven of eternal security; then, then all the Bulls of Bashan shall
know, that al their life was but a ridiculous move-merry, their pleasures but a
show, their felicity but the glympse of a shadow, and that those whom they had
sometimes in derision, and who were in their mouths a Proverb of reproach, are
Gods beloved children, and his most precious jewels.

XXIII. O then where are they that think to overthrow the Church? And when
will they listen to this truth? Mind they to rain down upon the Church a
deluge of persecutions? Know they not, that she is Genesis 8.4
the Lord's Ark, which, as the water increases, mounteth up higher and higher,
and cannot be submerged? Undertake they to beat her with stormy winds, and
with the violent streams of afflictions? Experience might have taught them
long ago, that she is Mat 7.24, 25.
the Lords house, founded upon the rock, and that the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her. Have they dismantled her populous towns, and laid her
open to the violence of all her enemies? I, Zech. 2.5.
says the LORD, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, and will be the
glory in the midst of her. Is she Rev. 11.11. Rev. 13.7.
overcome by the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, and thrust
down into the grave of death, and of eternal oblivion? As the belly of the
Whale was a safe habitation to Ion. 1.17.
Jonah: so the graves shall been most sure lodging and bed of rest to them,
till he who Ion. 2.10.
spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonas upon the dry land, shall speak
to the earth, to the sea, to the fire, to all the creatures that have the least
bone of his faithful servants committed unto them, and Esa. 43.6.
say to the North, Give up; and to the South, Keep not back: bring my sons,
from farrre, and my daughters from the ends of the earth. Thou the Church shall
rise again to the great astonishment of those that persecuted her, and shall
remain upon the earth, till her time be come to be received into the glory of
her spouse, where she is already in many thousands of her members, which now
Rev. 7.9
stand before the thrane, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and
palms in their hands.

This is her hope; this is her trust which shall not be disappointed: and
therefore when the sharp rods of affliction whizze with multiplied blows upon
her back and ears, she comfort her self, and says, Mich. 7.7, 8, 9, 10.
I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God
will hear me: Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall
arise: when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will
bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he
plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his righteousness: Then she that is mine enemy shall
see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy
God? mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be trodden down as the mire of
the streets.

XXIV. 1. Use.
Let us all, dearly beloved, rest in this hope, and possess our souls with
patience, whereof we have a Tertul. de Patientia. c. 15. Satis idoneus
Patientiae sequester Deus. Si iniuria^ deposueris penes tum, ultor est, etc.
Guardian most excellent, most trusty, most sure, even God himself: If thou
commit unto him thy injury, he is a revenger; If thy damage, he is a
restorer; If thy pain, he is a Physician; If thy death, he is a raiser up from
the dead: what cannot patience do, which has God for debtor? It will hope
against hope; when it is brought to the red sea, and seeerh nothing before,
behind, on all sides, but present death, it will Exodus 14.13.
stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord; knowing, that he with draws
his healing hand till the wound be desperate; that it is his glory to deliver
out of danger, 2. Use.
when it is come to the height, and cannot be shunned by the wit and strength
of man; that his power is more conspicuous, where there is no wine, he turns
water into wine, and raises Lazarus when he is dead, buried, and stinking.

He has said of the afflicted man, who calls upon him, Psalm. 51.15.
I will be with him in trouble: let us thank him for his promise, and choose
Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. sermon. 17. Bonum est in cammo habere te mecum, quam
esse sine te velin coelo.
rather to be with him in the midst of Nebuchadnezzars burning furnace, than
in heaven without him, saying as David said, Psalm. 73.25.
Whom have I in heaven, but thee? and there is none in earth that I desire
besides thee.

And because he is faithful in all his promises, and 2. Cor. 1.4.
comfort us in all our tribulations, let us look with the eye of a steadfast
faith for the sweet fruit of this bitter seed, 2. Cor. 4.17.
for the eternity of blessedness, which is hid in the moment of our
afflictions, for the exceeding weight of glory, which these light wounds of
weak and mortal men's hands work in us. O let us this day Romans 8.23. 2. Cor.
5.2.
groan within our selves most earnestly, and cry to heaven for the coming of
the great day, wherein Rev. 20.14, 15.
death and hell, and whosoever shall not be found written in the book of life,
shall be cast into the lake of fire, which is the second death, and we 1. These.
4.17.
shall be caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall
we ever be with the Lord, by a most fruitful and glorious exchange: For
whereas he is now with us in the fullness of grace, to show us the paths of
life, we shall be then with him in the fullness of glory; and living with him
for ever, shall with one heart and mouth sing this song of David,

Full many be the miseries
That righteous men do suffer:
But out of all adversities,
The Lord does them deliver.
O Lord, this is the desire of our hearts, this is our request unto thee. Hear
us and answer us, through the precious and infinite merits of Jesus Christ thy
Son: to whom, with thee and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor and glory,
both now and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 66. l. 8. for sent r writ. p. 71. l. 28. r. cleannes. l. 34. As. l. 35.
d. they. p. 95. l. 34. Caves. p 97. l. 3. d. of. p, 104. l. 16. d. the. p. 107.
l. 5. r. seal. l. 28. inwardly. p. 124. l 7. with you. p. 130. l. 6. circuits.
p. 198. l 18. d. not. p. 204 l. 6. a little. p. 125. l. 2* d. of.


