THE SCHOOL of honest and virtuous life: Profitable and necessary for all
estates and degrees, to be trained in: but (cheefely) for the petty Scholars,
the younger sort, of both kinds; be they men or Women. by T. P.

Also, a laudable and learned Discourse, of the worthynesse of honorable
Wedlock, written in the behalf of all (as well) Maids as Wydowes, (generally)
for their singular instruction, to choose them virtuous and honest Husbands:
But (most specially) sent written as a Jewel unto a worthy Gentlewoman, in the
time of her widowhood, to direct and guide her in the new election of her
second Husband. By her approved friend and kinseman. I. R.

Imprinted at London by Richard Johnes, and are to be sold at his shop over
against S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate.

Printed in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth Vide P. 41.

To the worshipful Master Richard Euerard: Thomas Pritchard wishes
continuance of health, wealth, and prosperity.
IF benefits bountifullye beestowed, may whet dulled senses, or taste of
received courtesies, spur the cowarde Knight to hazard him self: I have good
cause and occasion to venture the reproach of people, rather than to suffer so
lyberall a Micenas to lose deserved fame, or my self to be spotted with
ingratitude, the Mother of vices: which the Romans so spited and envied at,
that they attached therewith, were as fellones fully executed to death.
Supposinge therefore, it to be least approchfull, to set forth to the gaze of
people my ignorance, and to participate with the world my silly sentences: than
that, my ungrateful acceptions of your liberality, should either impair so
laudable a quality, grafted in your mind, or stop the same to my Successors.
Wherefore, though that your Worships children be so virtuously trained up, that
they need not the instructions of so base a Book: yet J hope it may reclayme
the rude rablement of people, to lead a better and more lawdable lot of life.
Whose reconciliacion to Virtue, can not be, with out your condign praise,
that disdayned not to patronise my travel, tendering the same. Which though
grosely fumbled up, yet your courtesy is such: that you will consider of my
meaning, and weye good will more than this papers Pamphlet, declaringe the
same. Alexander King of Macedonia did not weye the cup of water which Synaetes
imparted upon him, but his good will, so J trust my pretense will be accepted
more than the thing J greet you with all. And thereupon I commit you to Gods
good government.

Yours to command. Tho. Pritchard.

What is an honest life: of what it consistes, and what it profits.
Chap. 1.
AFter that Christ created all things, for the behoof of man: as Brastes,
and Birds: fish and flesh, in the precinctes of the wicked world: Lastly,
our Savior made man, governor of all: and as a Steward, to use these his
creatures, to satisfy nature, not lust: to set forth his glory, and not to
feed his gluttony: to publishe and blaze abroad Christ, his potencie, and not
like epicures impiously to abuse the same. The better to busy him in his
stewardship, to the intent he might give just account thereof, to his Creator:
he has, need of the habit of honesty, to exile traitorous inventions, and
to bathe him self in the Font of Virtue, to abandon conspiring affections.
And having flighted the tumult of vices, hurliburly of sin, and qualitied the
flames of the flesh, to addicte him self to lawful and honest lot of life.
Which integrity of living, is nothing else but in a trade of loyal life, to
pass brutish creatures, and to apply our selves to that, which is to God
gladsome, and associate to Virtue. Virtue, is to flee vice, and to keep your
selves in the bands and bulwarks of honesty.

Saint Austine teaches virtue, to be the prescribed mean to live well and
godly.

Mantuan the Poet, largely deciphereth, what virtue is, utters these words
in her own person.

I vigent virtue, do dash the doom of fierce fortune, the scourge of vices,
the banisher of iniquity, do dight and trim the mortal, with the fine and
fresh hue, of perpetuity: I list and exalte man, made of dust and ashes, to
participate joys immortal. The Sun can do nothing with his bright beams,
and splendant goulden Banner: the Moon with her light, and crystal
clearenesse: the Stars with their twinkling glances, without my presence: If
I perish, mischief mounteth, gluttony gloryeth, vice vaunteth, pride is
pampred, faith infeebled, religion contempned, and finally, for demure manners,
miraculous murders: for piety, prauitie: and for heavenly contemplation,
invasion of wickedness.

Plutarch, in his Book of bringing up youth, shows the effects thereof,
defininge her, under the habit and title of Philosophy: saying, yt Virtue
does declare what is good and godly, foul and fulsome: how we should behave
our selves toward our Parents, our elders, strangers, Officers, and
Magistrates, friends, servant, and all others. As to give God duetifull
reverence, to Parents humble obeisance, to Magistrates lawful obedience, to
be modest to inferiors, not puffed with pride in prosperity, nor desperate in
poverty, not prone to pleasure, meek and gentle, still obseruinge the merry
mean, adjudged virtue.

Lucillius that passing Poet, says that it is a virtue, to know the good from
the bad: to decline from vicious and insatiable affections, and to labor to
attain honor, through newness of life, and amendment of manners.

The division of Virtue.
CIcero, that gay Gardener, and cunning Arborer, has grafted upon this Tree of
Virtue: four brave branches: out of which, bud many springing sproutes, very
necessary and spectant to perfection, and heal the miserable maymes of man's
life. That is, Prudence, Justice, Temperance, and Fortitude: which four, as in
appellations diverse, so in proof and practice dissonant. Yet the true
genitors of honest life, and mean method, of living, which Macrob.
witnesses: in his Book De somnio Scipionis, particularly imparting, to each
of them: a several goodly guist of action.

To Prudence, polliticke conueiance, and duetifull direction to will, that is
good and godly, sincere and sauery: and to dissanull naught and noisome, and
with divine providence, to be prompte and ready, to shun iminent dangers.

To doughty Dame Fortitude, it is as duty addicted, not to fear fainting
fittes, not to be dismayde, but with criminous assertions, or fulsome factes,
not to be lulled in the Cradell of Security, in pleasant prosperity: nor
yoked with misery, to pant in poverty. This Fortitude is not man's might, or
stubberne strength of the arms only, but it must grow to the habit of
vigent Virtue, and be guarded and governed, with precepts of reason, environed
with the institutions of mild manners, and merry mean, which shall yield the
possessor magnanimity in countenance, constancy in assertions, and
couenauntes, bountiful magnificencie, and vaunted valyantnesse.

To Lady Temperance, is adjoined this sway in man's life, that the possessor may
not covet things worthy repentance, nor perpetrat the desert of Peccaui:
inthraling his affections to the yoke of reason. This loyal Lady, has to her
associate and handmaydes, Modesty, Shamefastness, Abstinence, Chastity,
Honesty, Moderation, and Sobriety.

To the peereles pearl Justice, is highted for gallaunt gift, to contribute
to every man his own: from which bewtified branch of Virtue, these jolly
Gemmes, have original: Innocence, Amity, Concord, Piety, Religion,
Affection, and Humanity.

Cicero, the Father of fluent and filed Phrase of speakeinge, attributes to
this virtue, many pretty profitable properties. First, not to injury any man,
without great adhibited cause and occasion. Secondarily, to use things common,
commonly: not diducting them to private profit or pleasure. This according to
Tullie, is grounded on Gravity, founded on Fidelity, and seasoned with
Sobriety.

Lactantius, in his sixth Book, alotteth to Justice, double function: first, to
annexe, and to unite us to God, through Religion. Secondly with man, through
pure passions of pity and humanity.

The reward of Virtue or honest life.
IF any dowltish dullarde, be so blind and bleared of sight, so incarcered,
in the Den of darkness: that he can not see the bright beams, and royal
reward of virtuous and honest life: I wish him to know the princely presence
of Virtue, and the honorable harbor of Honesty, to bathe there tenante in the
bliss of felicity, to advance him by the goulden gay guifte of promotion, in
this world: And as the peerless Poet Virgill says, in the world to come, to
ascend the starry sky, to have perpetual fruition of joys everlasting.

Lactantius to the virtuous, ascribes this renowned reward, to be able for
to infring and repel, the outrageous onset of woeful wrath, to moderate and
bow back with the bit of honesty, the sore assaults of lecherous lust, to dash
the devilish dint of dreadful desires.

Plautus writes that virtue excels all things: life, liberty, health,
wealth, depend and have their beeinge thereof.

Claudianus extollinge virtue: affirms, that she has no need of Torches or
lightsome Linkes, to bewray her splendant hue in the night, nor store of
glistering gould in the day, to clime the stears of preferment: but houering on
the stately stages of dignity and honor: inuiteth her folowers, to taste the
blisfull fruit of their toil and travel. Will not this hale the Howlets that
delight in darkness, to the embrasing of virtue, and inspired with her
verdure, by little and little attain the perfection thereof. Labor for light:
damn your dark delights, and toil for this treasure.

The hinderance of virtue, and how it is attained. Chap. 2.
THe famous and learned, trowpe of Philosophers, discoursing of fclicitie,
composed of multitude of virtues, as of singular simples, have interdicted the
students of Dame Virtue, of the contaminatinge contraries, or extremes
thereof. Among whom, Cicero, a princely pillar of Philosophy: commendinge
Abstinence, the freendly forderer of virtuous actions, bountifully abandoneth,
and carefully condempneth poysoninge pleasures, as baytes of vice, and heaper
of harms, and says: the voluptuous man can not atchiue to the tipe of Virtue.

Valerius Max. sworn to Abstinence, avouches that the City cituated on
pleasure, drowned with delight, can not long last nor maintain her liberties,
and freedoms.

Lactantius Chronicled in his fourth Book, three ways to come by Virtue: the
first, to abstain from lewd labors and wicked works: The second, from
wilful wicked words, corrupting good manners: The third, from the muse and
meditacion of mischief. He that ascends the first step of these steares,
is adjudged just: the second, virtuous: the third, shows his ascendent to
have the perfect patron of God, his Creator.

Horace commending Abstinence, says, Virtue to be nothing but abstaining from
vice: therefore, leaving it a Guide to the Gods virtue, my Pen posteth to
Patience, as an instrument neat and necessary, to accost this habit of
Virtue, and honest tried trade of life. As the ruddy Rose odoriferous in sweet
smell, is growinge in brierie bushes, harming the hand that catches thereat:
So is Dame Virtue placed in difficulte Dales, and can not be obtained without
great labors, sweates and tiringe travels. Which (as Hesiodus witnesses) as
the pearcing pricks of Briers, persuade the lustned eyes to leave the Rose,
for fear of hurt happeninge thereby: so continual contemplation of goodness,
still in conflict with vice, laborious abstinence, and the wirisomnesse of
mind, will insinuat the student, to pass and post to pleasures: yea, that few
or none without curidus caueats of enchanryng enfisements, can persist and
perfeuer, to arine in the puissant princely Port of Virtue, and heavenly haven
of Honesty. In saylyng to this Harbor, the Philosophers spent more Water,
than Wine, addicted to due diet, not to delicious delights.

Laertius, in his book of the lives of Philosophers, reports, every
discipline and royal regiment of lawful life, to want three things, nature,
documents, good practice: that is to wit, science, and exercise.

First to discourse of wit, and wise disposition, Plato proves, that
pregnant wit, is an instrument of Virtue, and that there is no parfect prudent
parson, but that exceedyngly excels all others. And if you peruse the
lawdable lives of famous Philosophers, even there shall ye find, princely
praise highted their personages, and gallantly glorified for pregnancie of wit.
Of which Lactantius appoynteth two freendly functions: the one, to bewray
falsehood, and covert conueance: the other, to further fidelity and truth.
And by wit, we must differ from brutish beastliness, whose heads heaped
with humors, respect only present pleasures.

Tully, toyling to know and find out the most apparent proofs of Virtue in
man, faith, in his Tusculanes questions, it to be wit: And if the Selles and
Sellers of the remples of the Head, be seasoned with the Odoriferous verdure
thereof: the pure and perfect pattern of virtue must spring therefro.

The Philosophers would not almost admit to the Lore of learning any, but
such as by proof passed, and by trial had the trim treasure of wit.

Quintilian, says: That if a man lack this harbinger of Virtue, precepts and
rules of discipline, avail as mutche, as Tillage, to bare and barren soil:
whose frui^te and increase, may not counteruayle the toil and tranell therein.

Erasmus, whom tracte of time made more subtle searcher of ingenious impes,
says: That the dull witted boy, may by diligence, whet it, to attempt
excellent exploytes of Discipline: For it is apparent, that Nature may be
repelled (though Horace hold the contrary.)

For Demosthenes, blab and bleat of speech, by putting of certain stones
into his mouth, to cure and fill up the imperfection and mayme of Nature,
attained to the vrterance and sugared speech of honored Orators, through
adhibited deed and diligence. To mitigate and alaye, the rayge of this cold
comfort, touching the sleepie pated persons: we read that Isocrates, had two
scholars, Ephorus, and Theopompius, the one, ingenious and egre to attain
knowledge: the other, needyng the spur, to aspier the attempted scope. To
conclude, this tracte of wit, and praised promptness of conceiuynge: by
soundest sentence, and by opinion of Philosophers, I gather, the soonest ripe,
to be sooner rotten: and the hard headded fellow, having attained the habitte of
perfection, and edge of excellency, to pass him whom first, I braued with
bragges. Erasmus, highly had in honor, for his knowledge and iollie judgment
in faculties, by reason of broad blown blaze of commendation: had a boy of
ripe wit, presented by his friends, to declayme before him. The freendely
furtherers of the buysied boy, expectynge his judgment, were answered by him:
Timely ripe, timely rotten.

But, the overthrow of ripe conceauinge, comes by security, and over great
confidence therein: for trusting to the maturitie of wit, they so long linger
in laysinesse, that either they amit and quench the quality thereof, or with
strayning it with extraordinary means, mayme and mar the same.

Of instruction.
AS an Horse or Coult, be he never so tame and apt of nature, cannot serve yt
use of man without breaking: So a man, be he never so ingenious and
inritched, by wit and ripe conceauing, without precepts and institution can
not scale, nor ascend the high and haughty Hill of Pernassus, to be acquainted
with the Ladies of learning, nor climb the craggie Cliffes and clymates of
knowledge: which position, Cicero sincerely fortifieth saying: That instruction
does corroborate and fortify the gift of wit and nature, and for that cause,
Gentilis commanded first, Schools to be errected in Athence, a City in
Greece, that the couente of youth, might be there instructed.

Aristippus a learned Philosopher, compared the unlearned to a stone: and
being demanded by a foolish Father, what learning auayled his Son: he
answered, that a stone had no place in their Theators, or place of
pre-eminence, meaning the unlearned.

The Ethnickes, studious of erudicion and knowledge, kept an instructor in
their houses, to train up their youths in the pleasant pathe of Nurtur and
knowledge: which thing, so well lyked the Athenians, that it was, as Law
enacted, that the children, which were not traded up in erudicion, ought not to
favor their Fathers, or tender courtesies to them, infeebled with age.

To attain the treasure of Virtue, and gain the gladfome gift of Discipline,
there be two kinds of instructions: one mute, the other sowndable: mute, as
when we study our selves, discoursinge without words, the carved carracters,
and works of others: The other, when the instructor or teacher, with sounding
voice, opens the mysteries and hidden hardness, of others labors. This last
manner of instructing, the learned lore, above others commend: Pythagoras,
Empedocles, Democritus, and Plato, his Peregrinations, sailing over Surge and
Sirtes of Seas, to hear Lectures, verify the same: who were not content to
like of their private studies. Least I should spend my wind in waste, in
discoursinge of instruction, and pass the Camp, in which, youths and others
ought to be trained up: I decipher them as follows.

Pithie Poemes, heroyicall wholesome Histories, Princely Philosophy, sacred and
sincere Scripture, the salve of sinful sores, and pathe to Paradise.

The gracious Grecians, thought (only) Poets to be wise, and therefore in honest
Poetry did first season the tender ingenie of Impes, the better to aspire to
further felicity of Science.

And Horace, singularly seen in the art, in his Epistles, exhorts Children
to be first instructed in Poetry, as an Instrument necessary, to pollice and
file away the imperfection of lisping nature, and that it sows and planteth
in their heedy heads, the seed of Sapience, wisdom, and knowledge.

Diodorus said, it was a fine and famous thing, for man by others crimes and
faults, to cure him of that care, and medicine and heal his infirmities,
which the reading of Histories, Monumentes, deeds of other men shall guide us
to do.

Baeroaldus says, that Histories inflameth a man to honesty, enamoreth him
with virtue, reprooueth the wicked, and exileth vice.

To stand upon choice of Philosophy, the very Ecimologie of the world, which
we interpret and conster, a Lover of knowledge, or imbracer of wisdom,
foretells all Books of that noble Science, to be spectant to surueye the
life of man: As the Ethickes of Aristotle, impugning the rebellion of vice,
brydling the frenzy fits of flaming flesh, with the bit of Nurture and
manners, The Pollitickes instruct us, called to the function of a Magistrate,
to minister Justice, to the exilement of vice, and inhaunsing of Virtue.

Lactantius writ a worthy work of Divine institutions. Erasmus, of the
institutinge of a christian Prince? with infinite others, commodious for the
regiment of the life of man.

Lastly, fitly furnished, and decently decked with institutions of the
surueyed Sciences: we must employ our selves, to view the valleys of sacred
Scriptures, which teach us to know our Savior, and him only to worship:
which as Lactantius writes, is the true Philosophy.

Poverty impareth not Virtue.
EXperience having taught me, a silly sort of foolish fellows to withdraw
them selves from study, to heed handy crafts, I thought by excellent
examples, and rated reasons, to heal that passion of infirmity, and to
fortify their faynting fittes, the better to abide the yoke of knowledge.

Apuleus says in his time, none became famous, but such as were annoyed with
nakedness, and cloyde with careful diet, from the hour of birthe: And he
boldly blazeth this commendacion of Poverty, that in those days, it was the
builder of Cities, the maintainer of Equity and Science.

We read a worthy example of Cleanthes a Philosopher, who pinched with
poverty in youth: in the night season haled up water in Buckets, which he
sold in the day to maintain his study. If our English Fathers were so
inflamed with the love of Learning: no doubt our Realm royally ruled, would
be a precious patron to all Europe.

Seneca, says, Virtue to have a sting, meaning labor, which plucked away by
sufficiency of knowledge, batheth the bier in bliss.

Here may rise a question, whither the unlearned may attain Virtue or no, the
which question is resolved by Tullie in his Orations, who says that he had
society with a multitude of men, both godly, honest, and virtuous, yea,
altogether void of knowledge: I annexed this Sentence to my matter, least
desperation should be infixed, and grievously ingrafted in the hearts of
unlearned dottrels.

Of use and exercise.
IF a man be armed with the fine furniture of bountiful Dame Nature,
beautified with the gaye Gowns of Wit, and Disposition: yet if Diligence be
dismiste, and Practice put aside, all is vain, for the beeinge and continuance
of Virtue, is in action and exercise.

Cicero, whose doughty diligence, advanced to dignity and high calling among
the Romans: instructs us in his Rhetorickes, that precepts and rules of
disciplines anayle nothing, without daily diligence and paynefull practice
thereof.

Lactantius, in his third Book, writes that Arts be learned and laid for,
that gotten, agreeable practice and conversation may arise thereof.

For Tullie says, it is a small praise to know Virtue, and not to do
thereafter. Man mindful of Virtue, and studious thereof, must imitate the
busy Bees, who in flagrante Summer, flee abroad tastinge of diverse Flowers,
and of each pickinge relief, store up, and heap much Honny: So ought a man
exercise him seife daily, until he has gotten the trim treasure of Virtue
and Learning, and the better to attain to your purpose: in youthful years,
use four ways.

The first, in readinge, selecte and pick out of learned Authors, fine filed
Phrases, and least the treasurs house of Man, I mean his memory, be robbed
thereof, have them Chronicled in the skirtes of a Book. And so of every Science.

Which thing Plynie practiced, of whom writes his Uncle, the second of that
name.

The second is, to follow Macrobius Precepts, teaching us to use and exercise
the good, and to banish the evil: for what so ever are written. they be for
our learning: for as the meat lodged in the mouth, or clungde in the
stomach, feeds not the body, nor has not concoction, for lack of natural
heat, to digest the same into good blood and mayntenance of the body. So does
not reading profit, except it be converted to the behoof of the weal public,
neither is the students conscience discharged: For Tullie says in his Offices,
that we be borne partly to pleasure and profit our friends, our Parents,
and most of all, our native Country.

The third, is to do some thing (worth the while) every day, as Appelles the
conning Paynter, who though cloyed and ouercharged with a heap of hindraunces,
yet daily drue a line, and painted some precious protrature, worthy fame.

Hesiodus says: Many littels makes a mickell. Neither must we greedily
gapinge, gulpe up knowledge to bury it in our bellyes, as churles do their
substance and money: but employ it so, that the Innocente may reap thereby
utility and salvation: and we must make flow speed, according to Augustus
Caesar's Adaige, least before we be fully grounded, we babble to draw others
to errors, a cause of sundry sects in England this day, more is the pity.

It is far better, by diligence to read a little well, and with addisement,
than running (as they say) at randon, void of reason, to talk of the Moon
shine in the water, supposinge though their heads be filled with humors of
vain glory, that they perceive not their doultish delights and vanity of
speech: that others of sound judgment, will not condemn them as vain
glorious bablers.

I can compare such fellows to a bragginge Paynter, who in the presence of
Appelles, chief of the Science, brau'd it out with bragges, that suddenly and
in the twincklinge of an eye, he had made a fine well proportioned Image:
Appelles knowing his singlenes of skill, answered: Such paultry protratures,
thou caust make enough: than viewing it, said: it was done quick enough, if
well enough.

That sage saying of Cato the wise, may abate and qualify the hot courage of
over hasty Ministers now a days: which press to preach, before they have the
ground of their work, or know the foundation of true religion, patronised by
our royal and gracious Queen? How sprang up sedicious sects in the Church,
but through hasty impudent bablers, presuminge to go to Pulpit when the Carte
cried for them.

The fourth kind of exercise, Philelphus said, Cato the wise sage Senate to
have used: which was at night to repeat and survey his travel that day, and
to require account of his own reading: and it was decreede among the
Lacedaemonians, that the Table covered and meat brought and laid thereon, that
the Masters and cheese of every City, should call the youths in, and
demand and exigate, what they had profited that day: and he that had done
nothing, was barde their company, as unworthy to eat.

Apuleius wishes men, and specially Church men, and Scholars, with the
students of Virtue: to imitate the nature of the Sheep, which at night
incarcered with hurdels, and closets, chue the kud: yea all the grass eaten
and geathered that day: which chuynge, yields a second fruit or milk to the
sheep Master: so should every man do of his reading: for at night they
should call it to mind, to employ it to the second use or profit, that is, to
the common wealth to edify the unlearned people, which ignorantly run headlong
to vice.

What decent behavior, Virtue, and honesty is to be observed in our proper
persons, and in every age. Chap. 3.
MAcrobius says, that Virtue does consiste in two things, that is, in honest
behavior and show of him self, and in godly disposition toward others: for
a man must of necessity be able to govern himself, before he be admitted
and thought worthy to have submission of others. First, we must bridell our
own licentious lewd living, and inthrall to the yoke of reason, our furious
affections, err we be highted to the dignity of the facred seat of a
magistrate. Hereupon, a wise man, espiynge a wanton witless magistrate, spurd
a question to Thales Milesius the Philosopher: Who was a kind king and worthy
his seat? He answered: He that governs well him self. That every one may
learn to rule him self, I wish these precepts following to be observed, and
imprinted in the plotte of Memory.

First, that a man be addicted to scilence, more than to talk: for
taciturnitie argues wisdom: and bablyng bewraieth a fool. Macrobius said, a
Philosopher to make as great a sign and shoe of Learning by scilence, as by
talk. Apuleius does write, that Pythagoras, a singular instructor of youth,
was wont, first to season the twatlyng tungues of his disciples, with the
virtue scilence.

Socrates, demanded, how man might become wise? He adjured the person to
observe two precepts: the one to huysht rather than to speak: the other, for
to learn how to speak.

Dame Nature provident of the virtue scilence, and of the consequent
commodities thereof, incarcered our tungues in a Turret, environed with sharp
teethe, to revenge, if like witless wives it should miscarie to annoy any man,
with staynyng hue or blottes of defame. And we have two ears and one tongue,
to hear more than we should vnadnisedly blabbe abroad.

The Romans, embracers of this virtue, had erected in their trim Temples,
lofted on Theaters Angerona Goddess of Scilence, with her lips seard up. And
the Egiptians so honored Harpocrates, God of taciturnitie, that his princely
protrature, was painted in every house with his singers lockyng his lips.

Xenocrates, scilent in company, was asked the cause of his sadness and
scilence? He shapte this answer: That there with he was never annoyed, but
inconvenience accident by talk, graueld him daily, and duly. If a man be
spurred to speak: let him have speech of things fit for the place, time, and
company: Next, interrupt none in their talk, nor correct it, least thou be
deemed a busy body. An other precept we have enjoined us, to keep that which
is a mean and measurable order in our talk which Terence commends in his
Comedy, called Andria, with these words: I think a mean to be commodious
in man's life, and worthy embracinge: thereupon the learned said, Virtue to be
the same, the which Horace does confess in his Epistles, saying: Est modus in
rebus etc. Englished thus:

In things there is a merry mean, and bounds for to be kept, The which to pass
or to impair, no virtue may be reapt.
WHen the seven wise Philosophers, imprinted their sapient and politic
Posies upon the walls of the Senate house, Cleobulus Lyndus, one and chief of
the number, with his fine fingers writ this sage Sentence: The mean is best in
all things, as an instruction worthy advertisement and impression in the
memory of man.

Another Caveat I will adioyne, that in talking we do not carpe nor quip some
silly soul, as subject to vice or infirmity, which other of sharper
intelligence epsy in us: for Diogenes warned us to exile our presence, that
vice which we reprove as foul and fulfome in an other.

And Cicero says, that he ought to be spotless, that with dire defame
surueyeth others infirmities: If a man view both ends of the Wallet, he shall be
so over charged with the weight of vices packt behind, that he will not annoy
with nippes, others of honester lyuinge: For it behocueth a man to pull the
beam out of his own eye, ere he can espy the mote in his Brothers. As
annexed to this crime, I admonish the gentle Reader that he be settled in
state, not pufte up with the blissull blast of fawning Fortune, nor dolefully
endure distress, imitating Socrates: who was never moved, to hear of his
heavy happes, nor proud, praised for excellent exploytes.

Plato was demanded how a wise man was known? He answered: he that is not
angry, beeinge discommended, nor proud for adhibited praise. And why? because
that pride and wrath be the extremes of Virtue, and the fair mannered man,
knows them not. If a man perpend and consider the event of pleasure, and
sawning bliss of froward Fortune, he had more need to follow the deed and
dooinge of Hermolaus, who in prosperity mourned, than others that glow and
glory therein: For after fair weather, comes rain: and there is no such
fullness, but after comes as great an ebb. Fortune is variable, as appears
by Camenus a ritche man, who so bathed him self in bliss, and abundance of
wealth, that he never tasted of woe, or mischaunce.

Upon a time for repast, he went to see silly Fishermen castinge their Nets,
and fingering their trash to feed his humors, his Signet fell into the Sea:
well said he, now I know that evil Fortune does reign: The second day, as
they drue their Nets, they caught a goodly Cod, which for a rare and goodly
gift, they imparted upon the Gentleman: His Cook gobbetinge the same, in his
entrayles found his Masters Signet, who with exceedinge gladness, and
cheerful grace, presented it to his Master: who blinded with the bliss of
Fortune, joyfully received it, imparting upon his Servant a jolly Iuell,
named, Nihil, and persuaded him self that Fortune so favored his Maistership,
that he could not miscarry in any exployte, or attempt, To be fully resolved
of desembling Fortune: he took a cord, I mean a Halter, and in a bravery,
assayed how it became a rich man, or how that gallant cheyne, would fit
Fortunes heir or dandled dottrell: standing upon a stool, Fortune burdened
and laden with the care of this life, champion like, he tisped his feet
beside: Fortune frowning at his folly, suffered her long lulled lubber, to
stranguish and hang to death.

Thus ought we to conceive no pride in felicitis, nor despair in distress
and poverty: It was well and wisely said of Plautus in Amph. that it seemed
good to ye Gods, yt after pleasure, should succeed pain: as after labor, ease.

This excellent example, may batter the buildinges of Fortune in our days, and
may disgrace them inhaunsed thereby. Wherefore, let every man labor to live
virtuously, to the example of others: And as coye Curtezans and dainty Dames,
have their glistering Glasses to beeholde and correct their attier, or cumly
countenance, so should every man have a godly person, for a pattern to live
by, whose steps studied on, should guide him to virtue.

Of the diversity of ages and years, and what manners is proper to them.
KNowinge by the aduertisment of Terence, and other learned Authors, that
change of years, requires discrepancy of manners, and alteration of
conditions: I thought it to be worth the while, to Chronickle in the skirtes
of this base Book, the several duties of all ages: Findinge in Authors, the
years of man to be divided into six several ways, and manners of living: I
will anchore and annexe to them their proper functions.

And first, to begin with Infancy, or Babeship, who for weakness of nature
is not reformable, though sinful: therefore we will commit his governance, to
the discretion of his Mother or Nurce.

Next and second, is childehood, having the use of speaking, whose toungs and
minds like a Painters cloth, is fit for to receive every hue or color.
Wherefore their senses are to be seasoned with the verdure of Virtue, even from
their Cradels: for ye new vessel will taste ever, or long of the first lickor:
they must than be taught to prove and grow a Christian, as they do in
strength and years.

Apuleius saydithe child that proves strong in bones, by benefit of
bountiful nature, and a Mouster in manners, to be better unborn, then to have
fruition of life to comaculat, with defame and imperfect behavior his pleyfers
and friends. For one rotten sheep annoyeth a thousand: In Greece it was used,
that the Father and Master, was punished for the childs offense, if fondly
they favored crime committed, worthy chasticemente, and correction.

Diogenes espying a Scholar playing the wanton, with his staff beat his
Master.

If pampering Parents, were at this day so executed, it would fare better with
youths and teachers. They will not follow the right path of education of
children, set forth by Philel. who in his Book of Education of children,
instructs foolish Fathers, and mad Mothers, to instruct their children to
know God their Creator, to be obediente to them in word and deed, to be
humble to their Superiors, gentle to their equals, mild in manners, not
teachinge the^, to babble, to lie, to be slothful, to go slouenly in their
aparrel, unwashed or fulsome any way, if vortuously they be traded up, being
tender twigs, and impes, they must of necessity grow to persection of manners
in tract of time.

The third age, is called of the Latenistes, Iuuentus, of Iuuo, for the child
passinge the time of seven years, is able to aid his Parents, according to
the english of Iuuo, to aid: In which, Quintilian writes, that such as be
used in that time and years, to curious cates, confectes, sweet meats, will
ever look for the same: and judges that to be the cause of murders, theftes,
and roberies: For youths so delicately nusted, coming to man's estate, will by
hook or by crook, come by and maintain the same: for such as be used to
delicate diet, except good qualities adorn and boulster it out, their sugared
lust will condemn their bodies. We read of one Maxillus a Noble man, whose
princely Parents knowinge their Son to be borne to large liuinges, and
printly possessions, deliciously dandled these auster auspring to man's state,
without any good governance, or instruction: after the decease of his Parents,
rulinge by rigor, his subjects, hatinge him for extremity, perpetrated and
done to them, with force bannisht him his Land: The poor Pilgrim used to
fine fare, having not vnde, as the Latenistes say, fell to robbing, to
maintain daintines of diet, and taken with the manner, was dampened to die: By
this you may see, that the assertion of learned Quintilian was true: that what
so ever they be used unto, such they will still have.

In this age of Iuuentus, the youths of the Romans, accustomed to hang up
upon the Pinackles of their Temples, certain colors, or laces: as Monumentes
of passed age, and in tokens of virilitie taken on them, and were clothed in
fair white gowns, to signify to the assembled troop and company, that they
would lead a cleaner and sadder life, consonant to their attier and external
habit.

This care the ancient Romans took, to train up their children in Virtue,
which may be for the reformation of English Fathers, and freendly fortherers
of youth. As in all ages God is to be honored, Parents obeyed, instructors
heeded unto, so I wish it in this, that being fathers them selves, they may to
Gods glory, and their fame, and ease, prudently trade up their own.

The fourth is Adolescencie, having trod under foot.xiiij. years, in which we
begin to fantsie and seek after worldly pleasures, as gallaunt Geluings,
hounds, to rowse the lodged Bucke, or hunt the Haare and other exercises: in
which years man may have great guess, and conjecture of nature and
disposition: This age continues till, xviij. in which all vices be grafted
and planted: as to haunt harlots, to prove prodigal, proud, lascivious: and to
end: than be they careless, subject to sail with every blaste: in this they
have most need of the spur, to reclaim them from vices: the vigor and
feruency of youthful Adosescencie is such, that it so inflameth their buisie
bodies, to lust, after transitory trash: it so blinds their bleared eyes,
that moylyng and wilfully wallowynge in the lothesome lake of Letcherie, and
sink of sin, they cannot see, nor discern the pleasant pathe of righteous
and godly conversation. Even as the fume of Claret wine, boylyng through
excess in the stomach, bleareth the eyes, so does the hurtful heat of
adolescencie, that they cannot see to diuerte, from the puddle of perdition.
Therefore, it is pertinent to the true touch of masters, and specially
spectant to parents, whom care admonishes to cure their infirmities: to warn
them, if they be floted with seemelinesse of shape, comeliness of complexion,
proper compaction, and fine framynge of lusty limbs, that they trust not
thereto. For Virgill, espyinge the pride of a boy, by means of his fair face,
said: My fair boy, trust not too mutche to beauty, for it soon fades:
Beauty is but a blast, there is no florishyng flower so vigent and fresh of
hue, but in space it decays. And Diogenes said: The fair black was better
accepted, then the foul white: Meaning the black man fair conditioned, and
well nurtured, to be better than a bewtifull boy, fowly fed, void of good
behavior.

Socrates, a schoolmaster, had a Glass in his School, and every day, he
caused his Schoolers to behold their faces, saying to him that was fair, see
that thy beauty be allotted and allied to like conditions. If the face had
been hardly favored, he wished him so to behave himself, that the purity of
mild manners, should bewtifie and adorn his evil favored visage.

Glicon, lustely limmed, pretely proportioned, conceived such pride therein,
that he thought nature had forgot to moulde or make the like: forneying
(sommond by necessary business) through a craggie and roughe way, his
stately steed fell, and so martird his fine lively limbs, that the worste in
the town, felt and tasted of more ease than he. Than did he inueigh against
pride, and his folly exceeding therein. By these examples, all may learn, that
nothing is eternal, but Virtue: Beauty soon blown away, propernesse of
parsonage presently perishes. Fond Adolescencie, should therefore repose no
credit therein. As for riches and wealth, who would brag of them? which Cicero
says, be not worthy to be the handmayde of Virtue.

Cresus, King of the Lidianes, was exceedingly ritche, but quickly quailed
with pinching poverty.

Thales the Philosopher, was demanded what was best for young men to learn?
He answered, that which they may be commended for, and honored in age:
meaning Virtue and probitie of manners.

Plato had this Posie, painted upon the School wall: Happy is he whom others
harms do make to beware: And all his assembly of Scholars, should read it
duly and daily, to the intent, that they seeing others executed for lyinge,
Fornication, Adultery, and other cryminall offenses, might in reading the same,
reform themselves. Finding by reading, the Romans to be studious of Virtue,
and careful of rude Adolescencie, I find that these youths of these years,
should be brought to the Market and there should see the virtuous honored, and
the vicious punished, to encourage them to labor for virtue.

The high renowned Hercules in his spring of years and manly might: beeinge
brought to open assembly, to see the royal reward of honest livers, persuaded
him self to do thereafter, as Cicero writes of him: and in time came so
noble, that at this day he is not forgotten. Parents ought to show unto
their children, the state linesse of their stock, and how long it was
boulstered out with Virtue: and that like wise it must be vpholden by them: as
we read of Eneas, in the 12. of the Eneidos, to have wished his son
Ascanius, to learn virtue of him, and fortune of others: And if he be base
of birth, yea, the heir of a Donge Carte, his Parents may show, how many
poor Peisantes and children, came by virtue to high honor and dignity. As
David, from a Shepherd to be a king, with many others. They must follow
Virtue, as Horace says, in his Epittle: I bone quo virtus tua te ducit in pede
fausto. Lastly, let praise for well doing be given them. For Cicero says: The
mind of man to be mutche moved thereby, and desirous thereof.

Ovid, in his first book De tristibus, says: Praise to yield no small force,
to spur a man to goodness. Quintilian and many others, be of the same
opinion: therefore as due, dedicate it to them.

As far as knowledge will give me leave, I will decipher their duties,
dieted to them by the virtuous forerunners, as follows:

Cicero ascribes to them for a duty, to obey their elders: graye hears must
be honored.

Secondlye, to choose a virtuous Regimente of life, and trim trade of living:
as Hercules did after the Roman fashion. Thirdely, to forget all childishness,
and vanity, remembryng his state, and that lewd behavior, does not only
annoy him, but also his friends and folowers.

The first age is Virilitie, in Latten called vir: to the which word addinge
a syllable tus, Virtue is denominated: as of Vir, Virtue. In this age, Virtue
must abound, for years yield courage: the mind is fit to further out Virtue.
In this age, man must be fully clothed with the habit of Virtue, as Prudence,
Justice, Temperance, and Fortitude. Prudence, to instruct him to season his
speech there with, to record deeds done: to dispose present affairs, and
to survey prudently all his business in his vocation, to commendable end. For
it is the part of an vndesereete man to say, I had not wist: or to prove a
Trojan wise, too late.

Terence says in Adelph. It is a poincte of wisdom, not to look to present,
but to foresee future casualties. Justice shall school him to patience,
concord, humanity, and faithful dealyng, the ground of Virtues.

Temperance to observe a mean in all enterprises, sobriety, modesty and
chastity.

Fortitude, not of body, but of courageous mind and valiant stout stomach,
to countenance forth the fury and fiercenes of fawning fortune, with a goodly
grace being pitifully pinched with poverty: and especially to keep under
foot wicked wrath, and odious indignation of mad meaning minds, with rules of
reason: Plato adjudged him most valiaunte, that could govern him self
spurred to anger.

The last Caveat and rule, rated for virilitie, is so to behave him self, as
he wishes to be esteemed of, and accounted, and to labor to lead his life
in loyal league of honestye, hatinge access to the hateful hue, that
dighteth man with dire defame, and spiteful spots of stained stem of living.

Old Age being the sixth, and last leave taking, for the excellent experience
and trim trial had in expired lot of life, must be so furnished with the
guiding governance of Prudence, that they so compass all and singular their
affairs, in such wise and subtle forte, as young impes, may be instructed
therewith.

Cicero reports, that old men in his days, were so expert and skilful in
the common wealth, that the guided and governed the same, without any cause of
strife, or occasion of War.

Romulus, the bountiful builder of Rome, chose an hundredth old Fathers, whom
of Senectus he called Senates, to rule the same: that their crystal like
lyuinge, might be an excellent example of proved probitie to the youth
thereof: and they as Princely pictures, and Images of honorable honesty, had
highted homage of surueyinge the same. And although they knew this yrkesome age
to be rotten ripe, to season and dounge the ground, yet least the nature of
man inthraled to the soueraignties of subtle Satan, should be blinded
therewith: they had prorotrahed upon their Judicial Seats, this Posie.

Remember man that thou art but dust, and daily drawest on thertoo: Further,
there was an old withered wretch painted, resemblinge these bendinge backs to
embrace their Mother the ground, ready to the grave, that beholdinge it, they
might not choose but execute Justice aright.

The view of old age, kept them back from pinching the poor, or iniuringe
their Neighbors: they followed Horace his good advice, for deprauinge them
selves of worldly bliss, they gyrded them to their Graves, daily expecting the
onset of doleful Death.

What decency is due to God, and honesty toward all men Chap. 4.
THe true tutche of Virtue does not consist in the knowledge and science
thereof: but in exhibiting the same, to reclaim the retchlesse, or rather the
graceless Grooms, that flowrish the Flag of Vices, and sin: And Cicero
says, in dooinge thereafter, which maintayneth the stay and state thereof:
Seeinge therefore, that the excellent essence, and beautiful being of vigent
Virtue, consists in action, and daily deed of honesty: I will show how the
acts of man have their course, or ought to be directed toward God and man,
and every sorts of people.

Virtuous obeisance toward God.
HOnesty toward God, martired for the wicked transgressions of spightful
meaning man, cruelly crucified, rufully racked, lothesomly lashed with
stinginge stripes, by lewd forlorn sinners, consists in prayer, and piety
toward his personage, in humble inthralment to his mercy, crauinge at his
hands, to wash and mundises with the Well water of meare mercy, our soul
soncke by reason of the freight of sin, and surge of sorrows, to the pit of
Perdicion, and gapinge gulf of dread, and dampnation. To request with
trickling tears, as David did, that he of his benignant beauty, will rid us
of that heavy heritage and duty due by our rufull race, runned from the
stock of Adam.

Lactantius in his third Book, ascribes us a second duty, or service
toward our Savior: That is, to be fervent in his cause, reuealers of true
Religion, and publishers of practiced piety: For this only cause, and service
to God, were we borne and created: was learning invented, and all things
fashioned and framed of Christ? In this is wisdom, as Liuie, and Valerius
witnesses: and as Paul teaches, and all other things vain and
transitorious.

Our duty toward man.
Christ in his Gospel says: Love the Lord thy God, and thy Neighbor as thy
self: By which we learn, that the first duty is to him wards: The second
toward mankind.

Lactantius listening to the words of the Gospel, affirms the first function
of Justice, to be due to God, the second to man: which beeinge so, if a man
wax cruel to his Brother, or tirannously tire him with vexacions, greefes, or
other anxieties of mind: let him persuade him self, to be forsaken of God
his Savior, and to soiorne in the dangerous Den of Dampnation: least we
should be ignorant of our duty, Paul that precious Pearl of the Church,
and posting Preacher of God, shows that we must cloth the naked, harbor the
vagrant, bury the dead, feed the hungry, visit captives with comfort, give
drink to the tirstie: which forrunners of faith, brings bliss to the
faithful soul of man. In doing these things, we should prove our selves
second Gods, kind and courteous, amorous fortherers of firm and fast
freendship one to another: abhorring fightinge, brawlinge, spite, envy,
malice, as prouokers of death, and frying in the Furnace of Satan.

Toward our native Country.
PHilolius in his fourth Book affirms, that the old Philosophers did set
more by their native soil, than by their Parents: Therefore Plato said, that
our Country chalengeth part of our life: for we are borne to prosite the same,
and that five ways.

The first in traveling for the honor and ryal renown of the same: The
instinct and inclination of nature foretells the same. For if we come in
place where our Country is defaced by twatlinge mates, or detected of crime:
Nature aduersant to such assertions, will boil in man, and the fresh floish of
blood, appearinge in moved mood, will bewray the same, and cause conflictes
of parties, as often times it has been known, the like accidents to come to
pass.

Secondly, in instructing the same with politic council, which I take to be
addicted, as particular function to Preachers, who of nature ought to labor
therein, for that their friends and Fathers, be inhabitants therein.

Thirdly to profit the same, by word and deed to deliver it from bondage and
captivity.

Fourthly, to defend the same with maine force, and to repel all violence and
injury offered thertoo.

Lastly, to dye for the honor of thy Country, as there are many of the
Romans and others Chronicled in Liuie at this day, for the doughty defense,
and sacrificed blood, in the behalf of their native Land, and that caused
Horace to say: It is a meet thing tody for our Country: Why are valiant
Captains honored? but that they be prompt, to hazard life and limbs, in the
defense of their Country: as Sir William Drurie, who manfully ravished the
long beseeged Castle of Edenborughe of his maidenhood, an act worthy highted
honor, and perpetual praise: Captain Morgan, Captain Chester, Captain
Barkley, Captain Frobusher, with many other worthy English Captains, and
valiant Gentlemen that live in flourishing fame, who so valianntly in foreign
Lands, finished their conflictes and bloody broils, that for sear of their
manhood, from time to time, foreign enemies have sainted to mollest England
with wars. Who has not hard of the hardy enterprise of famous Frobusher,
and his fortunate company, who have by their travel inritched this Land, and
Country.

These and many such others, worthy warriors, set more by fame and
immortallitie of commendacion, then fumbling fear, and loss of life: By such
came the Pronerbe: It is better to dye with honor, than to live with shame.
Such (I say) be the gay Gardes of England, their Country, being worthy
members thereof. By the aid of these, the Churles sweat and fry at the fire,
tasting of ease, when they freese with frost, and chilling cold, in danger of
death. As Tullie said, that Rome was happy to have such a consul as he was:
so may England rejoice to have procreated such valiant Captains, to serve
so good and gracious a Prince, as cause and occasion, at any time does require.

Duty due to our Parents.
We are not only admonished by profane writers, to feed the humors of of
our Parents, but by sacred Scripture and last true Testament of our Savior
Christ, and there in not only in rated Law, set forth by Moses, the messenger
of Jesus Christ, but in places depending upon the performable promises of
Christ Iesn, and his meare mercy. Wherefore, who void of grace, grievously
graueleth his Parents, is not dampened to die the second death (only) by the
Law of the Lord: but is endangered of the fruition of his manifold mercy
promised to the seed of Adam. And as the children be bound to obey, and do as
duty defines to them, so Parents must not will, but such things as be
honest, virtuous, and lawful and consonant to the word of God: For we must
leave father and mother, and cleeue unto the Lord, we read of many soolish
fathers, who beeinge enemies to the Cross and Gospel of Christ, at the hour
of death, moved upon their blessings, that their children should persist
therein, a wicked and detestable decree of Parents.

Parents ought not to command their children, nothing but that, which is
honest, godly, and fit for their years and calling. And in such, God
commands us to be serviceable at their need, in word, in deed, to cure
their care to lay, to relieve them pressed with poverty: and to beehaue our
selves to adorn their calling, and qualities, by our excellency of living,
that their dulled humors, may be indulged by us, and not impaired: that they
may glory in us, and not loathe us: that they may joy in our presence, and not
wish our absence, or dissolution of life. Cicero says, what is piety and
godliness, but obedience to our parents?

Philellius writing of the duties of children toward their parents, says:
although we can never repaye like courtesies, and bestow upon them, matchable
benignant benefits: yet children must endeavor as far as lies in them, to
regratifie them, as in seruyng, following, and accompanyng with them, in
executing their wills, in patience and performance: and if they command
things unlawful, ungodly, and indecent: not to snarre or snap, quippe or
carpe them for it: but modestly to persuade them, to the contrary, with
reformable terms, or to let it slip, it passing with patience.

Of such pnnishments as were appointed for vnobedient children.
IT will not only decipher the loss of long life promised by God, in his
commandments, by shameful death: for disobedience perpatred toward our
parents: which may sufficiently, reclayme us therefro: but I will add how
odious a thing it was adjudged, among the Heathens and Insidels, to miscarie
toward them. Orestes Grecus, for killynge of his Mother Clitemnestra, was
changed into a feende or furious ugly Monster: Nero was for the like deed
doing, counted a terrible Tyrant, worse than brute beasts: for the Storke
being a brutish and senseless bird, will feene her Dam and progenitors, over
egged and worn with age. Among the Romans, be that molested his Parents,
or payned them to death, was wretchedly wrapped in a Bulls skin, associated
with a Serpent, and thrown into the deapth of the Sea.

Duties toward their Schoolemaisters.
IVuenall a Poet, pregnant of wit, peerless for passing pleasanntnesse of
Phrase, and Method of Writing, says in his Satyrs, that many honored their
Masters and teachers, as they did their Parents: for as progenitors give by
Gods aid, bodily being, so teachers the lively life of the mind, garnished
with the guard and company of virtues, beautified with mildenes of manners, and
nurture. And truly if we had nothingels, but flesh and bones, which we have
by benefit of Parents, we should prove inferior to senseless creatures: for
what is it but the sincke of sin, and open sepulcher and grave of greefes,
without instruction and institutions of a Teacher? Wherefore next to Parents, I
find them to be reave renced of old time, though now a days peeuishly
paltred withal.

Philelius commends obedience, and reverence toward their Instructors, as a
mean to obtain Learning, and he explaineth it by the example of Troianus, the
Emperor, who in all poinctes highly honored his teacher.

Plutarch, in so much that beeinge Emperor he preferred him before him, in
all places.

Marcus Antonius, a Roman peer, so honored his instructors, that being
dead, he had their Images made of glisteringe Gold, and erected in his
Cubickle and Chamber.

Cicero, the Father of fine Phrase, and fluent speech, makes mention in every
of his Books, of his Masters, and furtherers in Learning.

These men knew what learning was, and what benefit there was by it atchiued:
but hammer headed horders of money, set more by a penny, than by the excellency
of lyberall Arts and Sciences. To cast Pearls among Swine is plain pity,
and not loyal liberality: I will compare them to Esopes Cock, who in the
Dounghill found a precious Pearl: he looked upon it, saw it clear and
bright, yet knew not the precious use, and vallure thereof: Oh (says he) I
had rather have one grain of Barley, or other corn, than a bushel of these
bright stones. So it fares with the Country clownes, they had rather save a
penny, then profit their Children in learning: the reason is, because they know
not how excellent it is, and that a man without learning is an Image of death.

Of those which contempned their Masters and teachers.
WIcked Nero, whose devilish deed to his Motherward, condempneth for a
reprobate and abiecte, is noted of all writers of ingratitude toward his
Master: for he was the death of Seneca his Teacher: that lewds lob and
dissolute Tirantt, bad him choose his death: he took a Pen knife and launced
all the veins of his body, and so killed him self as his name sounds, for
Senecaus is his name, that is slayinge him self.

Beroaldus in prouerbiall discourse, inueyinge against the tyranny of wicked
Nero, says: he is to be spitted and spited at, that will infame his teacher,
or Master: they fret and fume, chide and chafe, to pleasure and profit their
Scholars, wherefore of right they may require, and of duty, demand
furtherance at their hands.

Duties toward ourfreendes.
EXperience having taught me, that very friends allied by nature, and
adoption for courteous behaniour, to have sallen at debate, and with dint of
beyslerens blooddy blows, to have clean battered the Forte of freendshippe
and Bulwarks of professed amity: I think and suppose that fury, to have
issued of ignorance, and lack of duty allotted to the professed virtue, to
exile such falsehood in fellowship and bloody bickermentes, I will show how they
harboring in the Haven of Amity, may escape the surge and Sirtes of
Dissension, and for the maintaynance of the loyal league of true love, let
them observe six principal precepts.

First, do not exigate or demand, at thy associate in loving league, any
dishonest exployte, or perpetrate and commit a deed of naughty demeanure, to
crack his credit, or sommon him shame.

Secondly, not like a fleeting Swallow, to accompany thy friend in prosperity,
and to further a fair face of friendship: and in dule, and dire distress, to
suffer him to cast the cards of cold comfort alone. In the Summer a man may
have the chirping chat of the swallow, but in Winter, compared to adversity,
she utterly forsakes thee: Such be flatterers, and not friends.

Thirdely, to will and nill all one thing, one study, one exercise, for Cicero
says: diversity of things, ask diversity of lyuinge.

Fourthly, that we do not to our friend, but as we would, he should do to
us, for true and trusty friends: have one mind, one heart in two bodies.

Fifthly, not to love or bear a sign and show of freendship, in hope of
happy reward: for we ought rather to gine, than to ask.

Last of all, freendly obeysaunce, according to calling, not as some, which
because they think a man to be their freende, will presume to rob him of
his honor, upon which, spronge up the Proverb: To much familiarity, breeds
a contempt: Such be not friends but robbers of man's honor, and Thieves,
having the Cloak of freendshippe on, under which, they steal a man's
worship or calling from him.

In the choosing of a friend in deed, we must know him to be of good
conversation and behavior, than we must have an eye to his manners, gestures,
and conueyances, and examine them, whither they be sufferable, and whither
without grudge of conscience, we may tolerate them: else we were better never
to associate our selves to such a mate, for it will be an occasion of
sedition and anger: It is aduersaunt to the rule of Freendship, to correct thy
adopted friends, before a congregation, or to give him hase terms inferior to
his calling, which may ingrasse the like boldness in the hearers, to afforde
thy friend the like: and so thou shall be a means of lowtishnesse to him, whom
thou seem to love: Finally, I must admonish friends not opprobriously to
object kindness, tendered them in their adversity, nor having imparted upon
them, some good turn to misuse the party, supposing him bound to obey, for
the receipt thereof: which I have noted in a froward friend of mine. Such
kindenes Cicero repineth against, saying: true freendship abstayneth from cause
of dissension.

Duty toward old age.
THe Romans schooled in Cicero his trim tracte of duties, made a Law, that
whosoever passed by the elder sort of Citizens, without obeisance of Benet,
and bowinge of bones, should be punished by the head: which, as I conster, to
be beheaded, or else to stand a shameful Anathemat yoaked in Pillory, to the
utter crack of their credit: Age is the crown of honor, for that it is the
Cheste of prudente experience, and supposition of honesty, else had he been
cut off before he had attained thereto.

Ovid says, that they are to be borne withal, for the infirmity of age, and
abundance of choler, collected through the want of natural heat, to digest
humors heaped in their crushed carcasses. And for that the state of the common
Wealth is, and has ever been, committed to their discreet rule and
governance: not only profane Authors ascribe them duetifull reverence, but it
is specified in Scriptures, that we might more reverently accomplish and
perform the same.

Toward Matrones and Women.
I Am not ignorant, that dowltish dottrels, have spitefully sought to spoil
Women of their honor, inferring paltry proffers, to forder their furious
frowardness, and spite conceived against them, out of canckered peeuishe
Poettes: which altogether void of good nature, manifestly show the mayme of
nature, which so greenously graueleth them, that they endeavor to insinuate and
flatter mankind to forsake woman, the only solace, joy, and Jewel of the
world: Among whom, Albertus that malicious man, bewrayed their imperfection,
more of spite, than of necessity or thing spectant to the knowledge of man:
his beastliness shall condemn him a Traitor to Women, and they the trim
treasure of man: foul and fulsome, lewd and loathsome is that beastly bird,
which besmerth his own neast. What word is so base? what term so wicked? or
name so odious, as may fit this forderer of mischief to woman kind, being his
nusted neast, and carefullest kindred.

O odious Albert, and you abiecte outcast kistrels, who forgettinge your birth
and beeinge, to have depended of women, ryotously rave, and desperately devise,
indiscreetly to discover their natural impersections: as though it lay in them
to be rid thereof. Recante ye silly cinicall sects, your eyes condemn your
work, your toungues at the view of beautiful dainty Diamondes, cry
Peccanimus: Your Pen pants for grief, to have inueyed against honest
Matrones: yea, as shame of Albertus, his deed weynd him to woe, and misery, so
no (doubt) such mischeeuous searchers of maymes toward their own Mothers,
shall be dismisde with the like reward.

Saint Peter, a man of milder opiuion, said: A woman to be a crown of honor
to a man: and to be borne with all as the weaker vessel, and should not
extend cruelty toward them, neither in word, nor deed. For there is is no
Tiger so terrible or fierce, no lion so lewd or cruel: no Bear so bare and
void of gentilenesse, or natural clemency, as to pain or pinche, grieve or
molest their pammes, mutche less man, endued with reason. I can compare them
to no creature, but to vipers which recompense their dammes which bare them, in
gnawyng their guts. Because there be but few that so sclander onslie defame
the stately stemne of women, the only port of the world, and sure sollace of
man: I will be take me to scilence.

Duty toward our enemies.
IT may seem strange to the nature of man, so siercely given to revenge, that
any league or loyalty, or manhood should be observed between furious snes, or
enemies Except he has read it in Historiagraphers, who exhibitted, to the gaze
of men's bluddie broils, and warlike tradicions: in which is specified the
law of arms, how truce is concluded (estsoones) a certain space: which to
violate or defile the courage and valiant stout stomach of venterous
Captains, cannot be brought or persuaded unto.

Cicero affirms in his first book of duties, that faith boluntarie plighted,
and advisedly given, to our foes, is to be observed, and part performed, and
in very deed, it is a point of brutish beastelinesse, for to strike without
admonishion or caueate.

Terence said, the wiseman will demurre of the matter, before he fight. But
Virtue admonishes us, not to fight, but to be armed with her handemayde, dame
Patience, but if Choler spur thee to it, I thought good to show how infierce
dealing we must prove men, and not beasts.

Liuie, the Marciasist Poet says: That we ought not to fight but for Peace,
and quietness. And forgeuynge is the noblest revenge that may be. Men ought
not to jar or iangle for euerte triffle: for of sufferaunce comes ease. And
as the English man says: It is good slepynge in a whole skin.

Duty due to Strangers, or Traueilers.
DOughtie and dutiful Dido, Queen of Carthage, to the instruction of people,
how they should entertain strangers, and tired trauelers: So feasted Eneas,
and his accompanied troop of trim Troianes, with dainty diet, and royal
hospitality, that to this day her bountifulness toward strangers, is fresh
and vigent, in memories of men.

And Virgill, thought it worth the while, to Chronicle in his book so notable
a fact, and to waste his wind in deciphyring the manners thereof.

The Romans forward in good deeds and courteous conueiance, who endeavored to
prove famous for executynge vertuons actions, gave and imparted the office of
the Consulshippe upon Torquinius: and the Pretorshippe to Numa Pompeius, being
strangers: which argues great lenity and force of Virtue, habitante in them.

And Beroaldus, and Liuie affirm: that Jupiter was feared of such, as
miscarried toward poor Peregrines and strayinge strangers. And the Gentiles
kept hospitality, consecrated to Jupiter, the revenger of distoyaltie offered
them.

Plautus in his Commedie called Paen. Reproves one sharperely for deridynge
and scornyng of siraungers.

Plato pardoned no fault done to them: the Scripture say: He is accursed that
leads the blind, which is a very stranger out of his way: but now they have
given him Drums intertainment, soon in at doors, and sorier out: light
come, light go: None is so derided, mocked, and laughed at, as strangers, now
in England they be punished, whipped, plagued, on every side: there is no sparks
of Roman kindness in them, no whit of Dido his bountifulness, byding in
them: which is an occasion of slander, to this our native Soil.

Duty toward our Masters, whom we serve bound or free.
ALl that go under the name of Servants, must observe these four ways,
toward their Masters, whom they daily feed upon, and recreate their bodies
by their provision, as well in nightfull rest, as daylis diet.

First, it is spectant to the execution of servile function, to be pressed
ready, and willing to finish the rated business of their Masters, not as
Snayles, slowly settinge it forward, but with courageous diligence,
delightinge therein.

Secondly, not glaueringe or flattering their Masters in their presence, and
in their absence fraudilently to deceane them, a thing though it escape the
chasticement of man, yet it can not pass the just reuengement of God, for he
hates the wicked dissemblinge man, and falsehood stinketh in his presence,
provoking his deep displeasure.

The third, Plautus teaches us, saying: a servant must forsake and
abolishe from his mind, all private gain, and only heed his Masters
profit, and deal justly therein.

Fourthly, to be silent, when they be moved, though choler so blinds
them, that they swerve from the truth and not to answer, Quid pro quo, as
their equals: and not to blab abroad their fables, talks, or survey in
compassinge of matters, prouokinge their just displeasure, or lewdly lust after
their Wives or Servants.

The last duty is toward Magistrates and Officers.
MAgistrates and Officers, beeinge the lively limbs and members of our
gracious Queen, and Godly Gouernesse, are dutifully to be obeyed: for where
there is no order, says Oliuerus Carnaruonensis, there is sempiternall horror,
and pathe to perdition. In what do we differ from brutish beasts, but in
order and lawful league of life.

Liuie says: if the arms, and feet, and other man's members, fall out with ye
head, they must all perish: if the Subjects contempne Magistrates,
executioners of the Law, both Prince and Subjects, must taste the gale
thereof. God send the breach of order be not the overthrow of England, and
stubbernesse against our Princes Laws.

Decency devised to fit all seasons.
TO advance honesty, and show Dame Virtue to be fully famylied and habitant
in us, we must have respect and consideration of time and place: for if our
talk be not consonant to them both, it argues little learning or hoped hap of
Virtue: A learned and virtuous man (in deed) needs no further commendacion,
but to press in place where he may show his actions allied to Virtue and
knowledge, arguinge probitie of life, and perfect published manners.

Macrobius says: the due observation of time and place, to be the surest
sign of wisdom.

And Pyttacus Mitillus, wishes a man before he enterprise any exployte, to
consider and pithily to perpende, to whom he sueth, what he sueth for, and
when. As we read of one Clobulus, who came to Caesar inthralled to wrath, to
request admission, to have dominion in a Promontarie appertaining to his
Empire: Caesar fretting at other losses, commanded him to be hanged, saying:
it is better to hang thee by the neck, than thou should spoil the
Country, and spur many thereto.

Thus it falls out with such, as desire so dasieth, that they can not see, or
to observe time fitting their purpose.

Hereupon Terence said: I came in season, which is the cheifest thing of all.
Which that it may the better be heeded of children and others, I will speak
somewhat of.

How to use thy self at a Banquet.
AT Banckets or feasts, where multitude of men are resembled, and towled to
repast: have consideration of the Guestes, of their calling, wealth and
honesty, and prefer not thy self, before them: If thou by continuance of
auncestrie, Noble or Worshipful, and others lately loyalled with worship or
honor in place: Disdain them not, in possessinge the seat of Soueraignitie,
for they exalted by their own endeavor and virtue, be better than thou
descended of nobility, being ignoble, degenerating from thy stately stacke.
Every man will take thee as they find thee: placed to thy contentation, babble
not of Scriptures, as mean Ministers will, but follow rather the example of
Socrates, a singular Philosopher, who requested to speak at a Bancket: he
answered, I am not skilled in things fit for the place and season, adiudgeinge
Philosophy unworthy to be uttered among Cup Gossips, neither did it become
his gravity, to twatle of vanities or old Wives Tales, as some of higher
profession will do. And if mirthe move thee to wade, and pass in pleasure
and jest: let it be so handled, that it redownd to no man's discredit or
gravel any guest invited or bidden to the Bancket. For Anagiris said, that a
man is sooner mooned to choler and anger, being occupied in drinking and
feastinge than other wise: which experience explayneth daily, for drunken
frayes be common. Next, a man must so diet his stomach, that it belch not,
nor boil up, as charged with overplus or gluttony, to annoy the hearers
squeasie stomachs, nor ply the Pot to often, drinkinge dishonor to him and
his: Neither is it meet for thee to common abroad private Fables, or tales
told in thy presence, for thereby thou infamest thy self, taken of them for a
secret well meaning man.

Beroaldus says, that the Gentiles celebratinge feasts, did show the
Threshall to the guestes: wishing that what soever was done or said there,
should go no further.

Horace biddinge Torquatus to bancket with him, and his friends wished him to
bring such as they might be merry: for in deed, it is no hearty mirthe, when
a man may not for fear utter his mind, or least it be blazed abroad: which
dear Reader, if it seem odious unto thee follow it the less.

How to use thy self in sober company.
THe whole drift of Arts, and sum of sweet Science is, to know much, and to
survey his trade of living so among men, that they may daily associate them
selves with him, to reap some benefit of his virtue, for attayning of which
lot of loyal life, we must observe seven poynctes. First, to tolerate the
fretting fits of men and manners, and to pass them with patience, and not
bark at the shakinge of every reed. Secondly, in bounds of bounty and
honest life, to will and nill with them, and to shun that loatheth them: and
labor for that, which gets gain to thee or them. Thirdly, in word, deed
and living, we resemble the Method and manner of their lyuinge, for than
shall thou be partaker of the praise attributed them. Fourthly, not to take in
dudgion any matter, without great and approved cause and occasion. Fifthly,
in humility and submission, to handle and deal with all men, dooinge to
others, as thou would wish them to do toward thee.

Sixthly, to be thankeful for courtesies tasted, which shall provoke thy further
gain, and good will.

Lastly, to speak well of all men: These things be the Ladder to climb into
credit with the sobrest sort of men, which be not enticed with vanity, to
wish the fellowship of man, but only with Virtue.

Observations in mutual talk or communicacion.
TAke heed thou do not overthwart a man in his tale or interrupt him with
an other, which argues imperfection and want of manners in thee: Carpe not,
nor iyebe not a man tellinge the sum of his meaning, as thou could dash
him out of countenance: for the greatest and greeuousest theeuery is, to rob a
man of his majesty or countenance. Be not an oppen accuser of the common
people, or coyner of lies, and flyinge fables, and father them not upon others,
in thy talk had with others privately, for thinking to hurt others, thou
hurtest thy self. Search not after the secreates of other men: for being
revealed unto thee, they will animate thee, to do him mischief: and in hope
of gain and lewd lucre, or to bring him under feet, will kindle thy wrath
against him. And if the party be thy better, give Diu guard, salutation
fittinge his calling, else may be take it for a mockery: and before a Noble
man or Magistrate, so frame the state of thy body, that you stand upright, not
reelinge this way nor that way, not ytching, nor rubbinge, nor fauouringe on
leg, more one than another, not bytinge or smacking thy lips, not
scratching thy head, nor pickinge thy ears, not lowringe in looks, nor
glauncinge thine eyes too and fro, not sad nor fierce, but meek and merry,
showinge good disposition and nature, to be habitant and graciously grafted in
thee.

In iourneyinge.
WHat calling so ever a man be, high or low, mirth will become him well, in
travel, so it be good and honest: for a merrye wayfaringe mate, is as good as
a Weyne or Charret: but take heed your mirth reach not to scorn such as
meet with you, or to any man his hurt or danger: but refresh your selves
with Stories and merry tales, invented to exile the languor of limbs and
stiffness of tired members.

Cato gives this edicte and commandment to trauelers, to salute gently such
as meet you, not iustling them into the mire, or grauelling them with
misdemeanure.

Of Time.
AS all things are not fit for every man, so be they not decent for all
seasons: for iestinge Spirits, be not accepted among mourners or sobbinge
Saints: neither is the sad Sot or meagre moved man, esteemed among such as
set Coppe on Hoope: wherefore it is pertinent to the polliticke person, to
change his coat as the company do: But the royal rules of famous Philosophy
do instruct us to use a mean, the Method and sum of my book, for in
prosperity lofted by fawning Fortune we ought to perpend and consider, that
after much drouth and fair weather, follows rain with tempestuous change:
and eftsoons, the mind is drowned with the enchaunting dalyinge delights of
fawninge Fortune, that the party can not see time to praise God. Whereupon was
it said: It is easier for a Cammell to go through the eye of a Nedle, than for
a ritche man to go or ascend to the high presence of God: And it planteth in
the plat of Secrecy, Pomp and Pride, to disdain such as be pressed with
poverty, and gloriously to crow over their heads.

In adversity, a tymorous time, and heavy happes of silly man, we have to
follow valiaunte Eneas example, who tossed in unknown Coasts, in dangers of
Sirtes in surging Seas, bitterly bayted by spiteful Fortune, to the great
recreation of fayntinge fellows, said: God will end these sorrows. So man
must hope well, which though it be the Key of Desperation: yet a blisful blast
and gladsome gale, will deliver the hardy heart from gulphe of gaul and
sorrow. Surely, patiencie passes, and is the best Buckler a man can have.
Therefore to end, take time as time is, countenance thy self to time: let it
be thy trim Tailor, to shape thy countenance in all places.

NOw (gentle Reader) I will add three Poinctes, the conseruatiues of Virtue.

Always accept of Virtue, and Honesty.

Do nothing that thou doubtest of.

Do not accompany nor associat thy self to the wilful: Which if thou observe,
it will so (perhaps) lighten thee to the Pathe of Virtue, that not only here
thou shall be accepted, but in the presence of GOD, to whom be all praise and
honor for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Pithie Epistle and learned discourse, of the worthiness of honorable
VVedlocke, sent written (as a Iuell) unto a worthy Gentlewoman, in the time of
her widowhoode, to direct and guide her in the new election of her second
husband, etc.
IF God (which is the only giver of all good things, had endewed me with the
divine gift of so great eloquence, ye I might without any reprehension,
compare with that worthy and famous Grecian Pericles, whose sugared vain of
filed eloquence was so excellent: whose pronunciacion and utterance was so
pleasant: whose words and sentences were so ponderous and vehement, that in
persuading and disswadynge, he had so great and wonderful grace, that all
men ye herd him, gave their whole consent unto him: in so mutche, that many
learned clerks of great renown, have reported of him, that he did use so
excellently, and with such wonderful force, to fulminate and thunder out his
words and sentences, that for his surpassyng grace and marvelous facility in
perswadynge, no man was ever yet able therein to match with him: If now my
barren skill, were fully comparable with the great cunning and surpassynge
knowledge of this worthy Pericles, yet here I freely confess, I should appear
mutche more barbarous, then the rude and gross Garamantes, if I should take
upon me, to set forth the dignity of honorable wedlock, and holy
Matrimony, according to the deserts thereof, or go about to paint it out
with such high commendations, as it has always been thought worthy of, even
amongste those that have most flowrished with pregnant wits, and have
excelled withal kind of knowledge, hothe Divine and humane.

But though I am not able, according to the worthiness thereof, to entreat of it,
nor to set forth the worthy effects and fruits of the same, according to my
wished desire: yet will I show my mind and determinate purpose thereof,
according to the dutiful honor and reverence I bear unto the deserved
dignity of it.

Let other praise Chastity so mutch as they list, which (they say) fills
Heaven: (I pray God it do so) yet will I commend Matrimony, which (I am
sure) replenisheth and fills both Heaven and Earth.

Let other set forth single life, with so many praises as they can heap and
tumble one in an others neck, because (they say) it is void of all careful
trouble and disquietnesse: Yet will I for evermore commend the happy state of
honorable wedlock, which refuses no kind of pain and trouble, so that it
may bring any profit at all to the public weal of Christendom.

Let other praise that kind of life, whereby mankind decays, and in
process of time should be utterly destroyed: Yet will I commend that manner
of life, which begets and brings forth, excellent Kings, noble Princes,
princely Dukes, puissant Lords, valiant Knights, worthy Gentlemen, conning
Artificers, to maintain the common weal, and learned wits, to govern the
same.

Let others advance that life, whereby Monarchies, Empyres, and Kyngedomes, are
made desolate, barren, and unfruitful: Yet will I most of all praise that
life, which makes Realms to flowrish with innumerable thousands of people,
whereby the Public weal is preserved in safe estate. And what thing can there
be more necessary then Matrimony, which concerns the felicity of man's life,
the flower of perfect freendship, the preseruacion of Realms, the glory of
Princes, and that which is greatest, it causes immortality? Can christian
Matrimony be any otherwise then a thing of great excellency, and
incomparable dignity, seeing it was ordained, neither of that ancient Mynos
king of Crete, nor of Licurgus, the law maker of Lacedemonia: nor yet of Solon
the sage and wise Athenian, but of the most high and immortal God himself,
and by him alone commended unto mankind, in so mutche that men may seem to
be allured, moved and stirred unto this state of living, by a certain
inspiration of the holy ghost? In Paradise also that Garden of pleasure was
it instituted, yea, and that before any sin rayned in this world, to show
that it brings unto man, great joy, wealth, felicity, and quietness: and
ever since that time has it been had in great estimation, not only among
them that profess unfeigned faith in the living God, but also among so many
as were led by the only instinct of nature: in so much, that it has been
always recounted a thing of mutch ignominy and reproach, to live without the
estate of wedlock. It is manifest by the report of hystories, of how great
estimation holy Wedlock has been, ever since the first beginning of the
world, among al degrees of persons.

Who will not commend honorable Wedlock, as a thing of great excellency?
Who will not think it a state of living worthy high praise and commendation?
Yea, who will not judge that it ought to be embraced with meetyng and folded
arms, seeing that by it, so many notable treasures do happen unto us? Virtue is
mainteyned, Vice is eschewed, howses are replenished, Cities are inhabited, the
ground is tilled, Sciences are practiced, Kingdoms florishe, Amity is
preserved, the Public weal is defended, natural succession is continued,
good Arts are taught, honest order is kept, Christendom is enlarged, Gods
wordere is promoted, the consience is quieted, lewd life is avoided, and the
glory of God is highly advanced and set forth? And who ever wanted, that
lived according to Gods word in Christian Matrimony? God leaves none
succourlesse that put their trust in him. Did not Christ turn the water into
sweet Wine at a certain Marriage in Cana, to show that as many as live in holy
matrimony according to his word shall never want? The water of the River,
shall sooner be turned into wine, and the stones of the street into bread,
then the faithful shall lack or be found succourlesse. Did not God feed the
people of Israel with meat from he auen? did he not give them drink out of
the hard rock? Did he not make a Crow to bring meat to the Prophet Elyas,
and so wonderfully fed him twice a day? Even so will he do with us, if we be
faithful, and seek to live according to his word. The blessyng of God makes
men rich (says Solomon.) The man that fears God (says David) all the time
of his life, shows mercy unto the poor, and lends unto them that have
need, and yet has he gods plenty and enough for his children that succeed
him. These goodly properties and fruitful effects, these manyfolds
commodities and special great benefits, these divine blessings and
wonderful graces, besides an iufinite number more treasures then I am able
here to recite, whichs spryng out of holy and christian Matrimony, me thinks
are able and sufficient enough, to encourage and win all kind of persons,
both men and women, widows, and widowars, batchelers, and maidens, willingely
to embrace and take upon them the comfortable estate of honorable wedlock.

wherefore (good cosen) having now troubled you thus far with a rude discourse
of wedlock, whereof I know well you have had a more certain and perfect
proof, then I am able by pen to painte forth, because you have been a wedded
woman a long and happy time, and have enjoyed the blessed benifit of so good
a husband, as by him I doubt not but you have had the full experience, as well
of these manifold felicities and great commodities by me recited, as of many
other mo surpassyng treasures, which happen to faithful married couples, not
able by me to be expressed, by reason I never tasted yet the happy blessedness
of honorable wedlock: I will now hasten toward other matter, and cease to
proceed any further in the commendation of this high degree of holy matrimony:
whose worthy excellency, does more sufficiently set forth and commend it
self, then my inuencion is able to devise. And whereas (good cosen) in this
mine attempt, I may perhaps be thought somewhat bold, to trouble you with this
long and tedious treatise in writing, yet if it will please you to think well
of mine enterprise, and peruse it over with good aduisement, I trust you shall
find the matter such, as all your labor shall not be lost, though the
inue^cion be found but simple. It is only good will and christian charity (my
beloved Cosen) ye has enforced me to frame my pen thus much to trouble you,
wherein I beseeke you to pardon my boldness, and to take in good part my
simple entente. The curious cook does dight yt rude morsel with some conceit
of his cunning, but I have no other sugar or sauce of savor to grace my simple
dish withal, but the never vading and ever growyng grain of good will, which I
beseeke you to take in good part, and to accept this simple invention, as ye
perfect pledge thereof, growyng out of mine own barren ground, no far fet
thing, neither dearly bought, and therefore perchance not meet for you,
especially if you be very lady fine: it is no greater then came out of mine
own pen, no more precious, then may be kept and carried in a few leaves of
paper, of no further form and fashion, then mine own hands could frame, of no
better inue^tion the^ mine own simple wit might devise: wherefore as you see,
so shall you taste: and as you like ye qualities, so accept my present. I
thought it my part (if it will please you to take it well) not to spare pen,
paper nor pains in writing unto you. And though it were more meet for me, to
treat of trifles, then mysteries, things of small force, then matters of
weight and great importance, yet considering your person, whose case requires
even in enforced trifles to seek a gravity, and being loathe that lost
labor should run with lost time (for lost time I accounte lost lands) I
beethought my self to devise some matter, that happily might quite your
labor in Readyng, and not to be altogether frutelesse for wit: so that my
words might not altogether seem as wasted wind, but that I might be somewhat
better occupied, then as one that did but tell the clockes, and watch the
Sun how he shadoweth the Dial. Considering therefore, the state of your life,
the case wherein you now stand, that is, toward the world: A woman once a
wife, now a wydow: And therefore having of God, leave and liberty by marriage to
become a wife again: for when the husband is dead, the woman may lawfully
betake her self unto another, as Saint Paul reports to the Corinthians:
This your case I have so mutch thought upon, that I may not like a careless
stranger stand dombe, but as a careful and faithful well willer, open my
mouth, and utter my mind unto you, not that I mean in hasty sort to
persuade you to Marriage, any otherwise then your own wisdom with good
aduisement shall think convenient, for therein you may best be your own judge,
for you know best where your shoe wringeth you: neither need you any
Counsaylour to bid you cut where it does wringe you: But whereas you know it
lawful, if you shall think it also expedient, that of a widow you become a
wife, then ought you to take good aduisement, how you do bestow your self,
least you both marry and mar your self in one day, and of an happy widow,
become an unhappy wife. I need not seek far to show you the dangers ye
such leapte into, that in this matter rashly leaped before they wisely
looked: because the common experience in others, may lead you through the
consideracion hereof, even as straight as a line. And therefore I will not
counsel you as nedelesse to aduisement, but rather commend you that you have
hitherto stand so stayed with such advised deliberacion.

Only this point I find in you, which needs a knot, to consider how you
might do most advisedly, what match were most meet for you to be made, that
repentance follow not, to what mark you ought to direct your counsel,
aduisement, and deliberation, that the success might answer your hope, that
is, that it might turn to continual comfort, and to the glory of God.

This verily I wot well, is a case of such importance to consider, and has
so many hard knottes to work on, that it were more fit for gray hears, sage
wits, and deep Divines, to take in hand, then for my simplicity to
adventure. I am (in this case) of like opinion with Marcus Aurelius the
Emperor of Rome, who said: If all the wise men in the world were molten
together in a Furnace, they could not give one good counsel to make a
Marriage. What counsel then may you look to have at my hands: if a wise man,
if many wise men, if all the wise, be not wise inoughe in any point well to
advertise you in this behalf? Wherefore I beseeke you, impute not that for
presumption unto me, which only good will does force me to adventure,
desiryng you rather to way the will then the wit, which here by me shall be
shown. And if I shall ouershoote my self by any point of folly, (as of
likelyhoode I shall) yet let such wisdom rest in you, that you make not
that open and common, which beetwixte us is private and privy. Therefore to
enter my purpose, because that of many, yet must but one ioygne with one, and
because where one is to be chosen, it is good to see which amongste all, if it
might be: I will be so bold, to set before you four such suitors, as may
represent unto you all the rest that may happen hereafter to come unto you.
Consider all by four, try four, and trust one.

There are three marks generally, which are to be considered in man, whereat
you may shoot out your game: The inward mind of the man, the outewarde
personage, and the state wherein he stands of things apperteinyng to the
world. By this rule I will sever and single out the sorts of men, that after
the division, you may with less doubt make your choice. And therefore to
begin with the worste: there are men that live neither well nor welthy, being
in a desperate state, both toward God and the world, paste hope, and paste
shame? But we may set these aside out of our number, as we find them, so let
us leave them, for I doubt not, but as they are naught worthy, so you will
not have to do with them, none of these I think will come unto you in the
name of a suitor.

The next man is not so well favored, nor so wise, as wealthy, not so
courteous, as covetous, not so well manered, as monied, and he having hope
through his wealth, peradventure will attempt you, for what case is desperate
in this world, to such as Fortune laugheth upon. This man you may soon
epsy, where his treasure is, there is his heart, even such kind of wooing
shall you have of him, as Satan used to our Savior Christ, in the fourth of
Matthew: If thou will fall down and worship me, I will give you (says he)
all these, you shall be my Mistress of so many Sheep, so many Oxen, and thus
mutche Money shall be yours as mine own, so harpeth he upon his halfepenie. But
let us set him aside a while, and bring an other in place, such a one that
is handsome of personage, a tall Gentleman, a proper man, well borne, graced
with some courtely behavior, well spoken, having a pretty natural wit,
adorned and graced with other such qualities of the body, and yet
peradventure Virtue has taken little or no root in him, he worshippeth God at
leisure, and has some civil godliness in him, his religion he uses as ye
market serves, and thus does he reckon his game: I see not (says he to
himself) why I should despair, I see not but I am worthy of as good as she
is, I come of as good an house as she, mine auncesters were al gentlemen, and
worshipful: I doubt not the misliking of my behauior, for I have not been so
ill brought up, but I know how to entertayne a gentlewoman, I shall se well
enough that my demeanor be courteous and courtely, as for my personage and
countenance, I force not who behold it: So to himself he says, when to you he
shall commend himself with some more manerly modesty, as to say, he is not
disfigured, nor maimed. And what he cannot for shame say of himself, some other
freende of his shall set out in playner terms: his friends indeed
(peradventure not yours) will so blaze his arms, as though they should sell
him unto you, as if you should take him at their word, besettinge him with
these and such like flowers: if you respect the personage of a man, if you
refuse him, you shall not be so matched again: mark him and view him well, se
what deformity you may find in him: is there any part of him out of joint,
or out of square? Mark what a ioly complexion he has, see whether you may
epsy any warte or blemish in his visage: consider whether he be not a very
gentleman in his behavior, forget not his qualities how commendable they are,
his actiuitie, his merry conceits, his pretty practices: see how clenly and
trim he is in his apparel, how skilful and neat he is about his horse, his
hawks, and his hounds: his exercise also that he uses is gentlemanlike,
abroad he uses his bow, within doors he can singe and play on the Lute, and
as for learning, though peradventure he has little or none at al, yet will they
say he has enough for a gentleman: and here peradventure ye wise saying of
Solomon, shall be scarce wisely alleged in the seventh chapter of
Ecclesiasticus. Be not too wise. If he have a good wit indeed, then shall
there be great compasses of comparisons fet: if he be but mean in that
respect, then will they say, he is no fool, no natural: If he be
peradventure somewhat stained in Fame, you shall have that issue strait
stopped with some plaster of excuse: if it be not manifest, then will they
say it is false and forged, no man is hable to charge him so, the best are
most subject to corruption, the sinest clothe may be soonest stained, the
honestest man may be soonest slaundred: and if it be not denied, yet it shall be
excused, as the toys and pranckes that run in common course among young men:
then will it be fayde that a man is not to be rejected, but to be borne
withal in such cases: and so, if there appear any good gift, it shall be set
out as it were a sonnyng to behold: But if there be any suspicion of vice, or
otherwise any want or defecte, that shall either be let slip with silence,
or else the broken pieces shall be glewed together in some kind of sort, that
which is unseemly or unsightly, shall have a better color set on it with
some glosinge tale: the want of wit shall be supplied with abundance of
wealth: evil manners with mutche money. If his life be suspected, you must
look in his face, for with some women, the pleasing personage satisfies for
it self, and also for virtue: And good qualities for learning in a Gentleman.
If the quiver be well furnished, if it be well in the Stable, the Mewe and the
Kenell, it does not mutche force what is in the House, the Chamber, and the
Study. Such verily is the Table talk now adays among Gentlemen. Such
boltes shootes suitors, and suitors friends, and with such traynes some
women are entrapped, with such winlesses are some driven into the net of
mishap: But I trust your eye sight serves you better, then to be dimmed with
such mistes, or dazzled with such short sonneshinynges.

Now in the degree of my suitors, the third remains, whom if you only judge
by the eye, that discerns no farther then the face: or if you way the worth
of your marriage with weightes of silver, this man perchance shall soon be put
out of countenance and hope, he shall soon be counteruailed and wayed down to
the ground, for he may singe saynct Peter's song, Silver and gold have I
little or none: He cannot number his Lands, his Leases, his Farms, nor his
Tenements: He has a competente living, but not aboundinge, or flowyng with
full stream: He is no Knight, nor Alderman, but a plain Gentleman: not highly
borne, but very well brought up: not so worshipful, as worship worthy: not
of great estimacion, but of singular honesty: not so long trained in ye
court, as conversant in the school: his Lands are not so great, as his
learning: his chest is not so stored with money, as his head and mind
possessed and furnished with the trusty treasure of truth, and the
inestimable wealth of wisdom: his demaynes with others are not comparable,
but his demeanor above others commendable: his countenance is not wanton or
alluringe, but yet he has a manly visage, a face in which appears more
grace then favor: more gravity then beauty: his tongue speedinge words no
faster then they may seem well bestowed, having his mouth in his heart, and not
his heart in his mouth: he is not so well freended of men, as favored of GOD:
his body is not so handsome of making, as his soul is well fashioned and
framed to Godward: his leg not so clean, as his life without spot: his hand
not so white to see, as his heart sure to trust: not high of stature, yet his
wit not short: his body not so straight, as his conscience upright: not so
brave in his apparel, as grave in his behavior: not curious and neat, but
honest and cleanly: not so well faced, as well lived: I mean, not so well
attyred in the outward man, as clothed in the inward man.

These are me thinks the degrees of men to be considered in our purpose, for
I can reckon no other marks whereunto Women direct their eyes and thoughts.
But there are some to be found, I think, if we secke far, in whom Virtue,
Fortune, and favor have made a Marriage: and such a one, if my prayer might be
heard, you should soon attain: But such Startes shoot not often, such Birds
fly seldom abroad: yet if there happen any such whereupon your consideration
shall stand, my counsel is, that you follow the example of the Physician, who
to know the whole estate of a man, opens and cutteth him up, and deuideth him
into parts, and thereby grows into a greater knowledge: so I wish you to
make an Anatomy of him that you have in hand, make no confusion of wealth,
wit, body, soul, life, and living, for so you may soon deceive your self.
In one man therefore, you may consider three things, as I said before: the
inward mind, the outward person, and the state wherein he stands, of
things appertaininge to the world: of the which three, you ought to choose but
one, least perhaps you mistake your right mark, and leese your game: least
in steed of a man, you find but the shadow of a man. Refer your self to the
pattern of those persons, which I have rudely described unto you: compare unto
them, and those betwixt themselves. Wherefore to enter the comparison, if you
ask my judgment: the Poets to lay the foundation of a farther invention,
fained there were three Goddesses in contention for their beauty, who did most
excel: Juno who had the disposition of honor and dignity: Pallas at whose
pleasure were all the guiftes of wifedome: and Venus the Lady of Love. To end
this strife, it pleased Jupiter and other Gods, to refer the judgment hereof
to one Paris a Shapeherde, conuayinge to him a golden Apple, with this
inscription or Sentence engraned: Let it be given to the fairest. The
foresaid Goddesses presented themselves before this their appointed Judge,
and offered every one their reward, to have sentence on their side: Juno would
make him the highest: Pallas the wisest: and Venus a husband of the fairest.
Venus here prevailed, she was pronounced the fairest. Paris had his reward,
that was the beautiful Helena, who (they say) was the cause of the destruction
of the Trojans. Now if your Marriage stood upon the guifte and delivery of an
Apple, I trust you would not play Paris part, that Venus should vanquish you.
Wherefore, my counsel is, that rather you cncline to Pallas for some reward of
wit, then either to Juno for her honor, or Venus for pleasure. And besides
these, there is one that by right has greater interest in the Apple, then any
of the other, although she strive not so much for the matter, I mean the Lady
Virtue. Wherefore, if she come in place, withholde not your hand from her for
fear of the other, if she offer not her self at the first, yet be not rash
or hasty, but call unto God that he may send her unto you, and he no doubt,
as his ears are always open unto the prayers of the faithful, shall bring
her even home to you: and she, I think, is for your purpose: to her (as you
ought) deliver up your Apple, if you intend to give it to the fairest, to the
best, and to the most worthy. Wherefore consider well my last purtrayed person,
standinge in the place of my third suitor, of whom although I have not set so
fair a color, yet if he were to be sold, I would hold as dearest: who though
he be not formed of the finest fashion, yet is he made of the finest
metal: whom peradventure Juno may jest at, Venus have little to vaunt of, and
Plutus whom they call the God of riches passes not on: yet if Virtue may
prevail with you, as I hope it shall, you shall be his, and Virtue shall be yours,
yea, Pallas also pleads on his part. Wherefore I counsel you, as you would
give the Apple unto Virtue, so give your wedding Ringe to be worn of the
virtuous. For if it be so, as the Philosopher truly disputes, that freendship
cannot consist but betwixt the good: how slender a Marriage will that be, where
Virtue knitteth not the knot? where honesty is not called to counsel? and
godliness is not bid to the Brydall? The Son of Sirache says in the
sixteenth Chapter: That man is blessed that has a virtuous Wife, for the
number of his years shall be double. I doubt not but you are so virtuously
disposed, that you entend to make a happy Husband: see then that he do as
much for you, as you for him: whereas you shall make him happy, foresee that he
for want of virtue, turn not the course of your estate: but whereas you shall
double his days, take heed yt he cut not of yours by the middle. You have I
am sure some good flowers growinge, take heed they be not ouergrowen and
choked, with the evil weeder that he shall bring into your ground. You are (I
doubt not) disposed to godliness, match not with the contrary disposition: for
then shall you be as the yoke of Oxen that draws diverse ways. Vice and
Virtue were never yet friends, it caused hatred in Brethren, as in Cayne and
Abell, Esau and Jacob: How can the Lamb and the Woolfe agree together? no
more can the ungodly with the righteous: he that touches Pitch, shall be
defiled therewith. Think not then that the virtuous and the vicious may make a
good Marriage. Can you set fire and water together, but that they shall stir
and strive for the mastery, each to consume the other? Stand therefore, make
no haste, for fear of the worst: It is better to look long, then to leap
lightly: rake up the ashes thoroughly, and turn them too and fro, that you be
sure there remain no spark of burning vice, or at the least leave as little as
you may, and sweep as clean as you can. And mark well, I wish, what
condition S. Paul sets, when he gives you your license to marry, in the
seventh Chapter to the Corinthians. The wife (says he) is bound by the Law as
long as her Husband lives, but if her Husband be dead, she is at liberty to
marry in the Lord. Wey well this restraint of your liberty, or rather I may
say the sure stay of your liberty, least by abuse, you turn this liberty
into a bondage. For unless you have God before your eyes, you shall change
your liberty into strayte bondage: whereas you soke comfort, you shall find a
curse: whereas you hope for ease and rest, you shall enter into disease and
trouble: above all therefore, have a special and a steadfast eye upon this rule,
that you marry in the Lord. God did make the first Marriage that ever was made,
and I doubt not but he made the first that you made: and if he make the
second also, then shall you be sure never to repent you of your bargain. He
did institute Marriage as a thing most holy, to his glory, and to the comfort
of man: See therefore that you in this case be boyde of all fleshly affection
as near as you may, that you profane not that which is holy, to your own
discomforte, and the dishonor of God. Christ our Savior was present at a
Marriage in Cana, where besides his presence, he honored it with his first
miracle: he turned Water into Wine. I pray you make your wedding place as like
Cana as you can, let Christ be present with you: I mean, to guide your
spitit with his holy spirit: turn not his miracle, make not, I mean, Water
of Wine, but let that which God has instituted to your comfort, be godly
handled of you to his glory. Whereas Matrimony is honorable amongst all men,
provide that it turn not to your shame and confusion, as you see in some. I
need not here (as it were to long) particulerly to give you precepts, to
rehearse the virtues to be embraced, and the vices to be detested in men. But
shortly as our Savior Christ answered, thou know the commandments, do
this and thou shall live: So I, you know the commandments, meet the length
of their feet, by that measure shall you well perceive, whether his shoe will
serve your foot. And one thing more in this behalf I must ad, not of mistrust,
but to make a double knot of a single, or a treble of a double: for the surer,
the better: the warier, the wiser. Be wise then and beware, that you put not
your head under the gyrdle of the ungodly, neither so burden your self, as
to bear the yoke with an Infidel. For then it may seem that you kept not S.
Pawles Rule, as to marry in the Lord, for that is his counsel. And what
Marriage may righteousness make with unrighteousness? light with darkness?
Christ with Belyall? the unfeigned Children with the faithless Infidel? For
here besides the danger of discord, and bodily trouble thereof ensuing, there
is also apparent perrill that may pearce the soul. For so says the Lord to
his People Israel, concerning their joining with strange Nations of foreign
faith and religion in the seventh of Deuteronomy. Thou shall make no covenant
with them (says he) neither shall thou make Marriages with them, neither give
thy Daughter unto his Son, nor take his Daughter unto thy Son, for they
will cause thy son to turn away from me, and to serve other Gods: then will
the wrath of the Lord wax hot against thee, and distroy thee suddenly. You
are no Isralite, here might be said: how then? yet a Christian I trow, and by
faith, the Daughter of Abraham: then this must you reckon to be written for
your learning. There are no Hethytes, no Amorites, no Cananites to be feared:
yet are there many in our days both faithless and godless, as the obstinate
adversary of the Gospel of God, and the double dealing, false dissembling
Gospeller, in whom there is no less danger of deceit, then is in the heath
nish Hethites, and currish Cananites: and although the persons be not one, yet
there seems to be little difference in the cause: for first mark the reason,
and then apply it.

The Marriage of a Cananite was forbidden the Isralite for fear least he
should be withdrawn from the true worship of the true God of Israel. And do
we not see in experience, that the wicked wife, corrupts such men as we
judge sometime most upright in life and steadfast in profession of the truth?
and how much more danger is there least the vnbeleeuinge and wicked man,
alter the good nature of the honest woman, into his own perverse nature,
seeing that to him she is subject, as the body to the head? you must of
necessity be one in flesh with him whom you shall choose: Foresee therefore
by wisdom, that his relygion be christian and godly with yours: see that you
change not your manners with your name, but choose you such a Make, as fears
God, imbraceth and loves his holy word, and sets his whole delight in his
Laws and testimonies. Presume not of your self herein: you are not wiser then
Solomon, yet as it appears in the nynth Chapter of the first Book of Kings:
His wisdom was so bewitched by the means of those foreign women with whom
he matched in Marriage, that he became a fond Idolater, and so fell into the
hands of God. Of this example, I trust you will take sufficient warning, so
that herein I need not to make many words: unless you object unto me, or
some other unto you, the place of Saint Pawle in the seventh Chapter to the
Corinthians, where he says: The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the
Wife, and the unbelieving Wife, is sanctified by the Husband. If we mark the
purpose of Saint Pawle, the answer shall not be hard: the Verse next before,
does contain his purpose, which is, that the beleeuinge Woman already married
to the vnbeleeuinge man, should not use the infidelity of her Husband, as an
occasion to depart from him, the words are these.

The Woman which has an Husband that believes not, if he be content to
dwell with her, let her not forsake him: and then he joins the former
sentence, as a reason to confirm this other sentence, so that that place
serves to this end and purpose, that if you and your husband were first both
of you unbelievers, afterward it pleased God to call you to the knowledge of
his truth, your Husband continuing in his infidelity, or if now being
grounded, you should adventure to marry with an ungodly person, you ought not
being married together, to seek a separation, because there is hope of
sanctification. For as you should do ill to yoke your self with an ungodly
person, so should you do worse to shake him off, being joined unto you by
Marriage, without some iuster cause, because there is hope of sanctification.
And although it be not a sufficient cause to break the knot, that by Marriage
is knit, yet it is a just and necessary cause, wherefore to refrain Marriage.
For the Marriage of an ungodly person I grant is a marriage, and not lightly to
be dissolved: but yet an ungodly Marriage, and that which lacks
sanctification, as may easily be gathered of the words of Saint Pawle,
before alleged. Wherefore as I would counsel you to continue, for the hope
of sanctification, if your head were fast in the yoke, that you might win
your husband: so now standing free, tempt not God I say, presume not, match
not with any that you know to be out of the household of faith, for fear of
corruption, least you leese your self, before you win an other.

Thus have I spoken hitherto for my third wooer, who pleads honesty, virtue,
and godliness, who I doubt not shall speed, because that God is on his side.
And here if you demand of me, whether I would have you so precise, as only to
regard the honesty and virtue, without any further respect. Truly, although
(peradventure) I shall seem to spiritual in this point, yet if you had your
eyes fully fixed upon that mark, without wanering other ways, no doubt but
God would prosper you the better, in as much as he shall thereby have trial,
that you depend wholly upon him and his prouideuce, and then shall you be left in
danger of snares. And of this, that it ought to be so, we may take an example
and warning of the manner that God used in the first Marriage making, in the
second Chapter of Genesis: For while he was providing for Adam, the Woman that
should be his wife and his comfort, he caused an heavy fleepe to fall upon the
Man, and while he was a sleep, he took out that Ryb whereof he framed the
Woman. So verily I would think that God did most work with you, if you laid
Adam a fleepe, I mean, if you removed all carnal affections, and worldly
respects which proceed as earthly from Adam, while that this bargain were a
dryuing. This I know is far wide from worldly wisdom, but this way you shall
go nearest, to make a Marriage of Paradise, and so shall you seem most to marry
in the Lord. And if you may not abide so straight binding, yet swerve as little
as you may: If this be not your whole building, yet at the least, let it be
your chief foundation: if this be your ground, have no doubt but there will
grow and follow other good flowers sufficiently. So then I think you shall
geather a good sum, if you cast your accountes in this wise: If Virtue come
alone, she is not to be refused: if she come with the company of such as the
world estemeth, not as a Servant, but as a Mistress, which is hard and
seldom, she is also to be embraced. But if you stand on this point, you are in
great danger to slide: for Virtue clothed, is not so sure to trust, as if it
be naked and bare. Then a little virtue exceeding in one, may not be supplied
with great store of goods, and haboundance of riches in another: for we must
in our doings first seeks the kingdom of Heaven, as for other things, after
them seek the Gentiles: If they be sought with care, even when we think us
nearest, we are oftentimes farthest off, and shoot to short: If we attain the
thing desired, yet we lack the fruition, as when we wanted the thing: If we
enjoy it, yet the space is short: but if they come as unbidden guestes, then
are they most welcome: yea if we seek the^ not, the promise is, they shall be
cast unto us: and if they be cast, then come they in their kind. Now then to
speak somewhat of other respects severally, you may remember, the suitor whom
I commended unto you, I did so qualify, that as I would not have him godless,
so I wish him not to be witless, for that I reckon a most honest respect, so
that you discern the true wisdom from the false, so that the simplicity of
the Dooue, do not join with the wilines of the Serpent: neither shall this
hinder my honest and godly Wooer in his suit, but rather further him. For as
fools are fortunate, so the virtuous commonly have less want of wisdom: the
fear of the Lord is wisdom. Christ is the wisdom of God the Father:
therefore if you make account of true wisdom, in this behalf you shall be best
sped in the true godly christian. I need not make comparison between the
godly and the wise, so that you use your wisdom, to judge and discern aright
of wisdom, for the right wisdom, the godly righteous has obtained. Only if
the comparison stand betwixt the wise, and the wealthy or hansome, let Solomon
be your Counsailour therein, who says in the eyghth Chapter of his Proverbs.
Wisdom is better then precious Stones, and all pleasures are not to be
compared unto her: and in the sixteenth Chapter. It is much better to get
wisdom then Gold, and to get understanding, is more to be desired then
Silver. And in yt seventh Chapter of Ecclesiasticus he says: The excellency
of the knowledge of wisdom, gives life to the possessers thereof.

Now if the righteous and the rich stand in comparison, yet I trust my poor
spirited suitor shall not be out faced, you sitting as Judge, and such I trust
shall be your sentence, as was the wise Themistocles answer: For when it was
demanded of him, whether a man should bestow his Daughter upon a good poor
man, or upon a rich man not so honest? his answer was, I had rather like the
man that lacks money, then money that wants a man. So little thought he that
riches and substance did make a matter of Marriage, that it seemed to him, she
did not marry for any regard of the man, that had such respect of riches: and
that she that married not an honest man, did scarce marry a man. Some in
deed have their fancy so led, as though money made men: but let this be your
Poesy rather when you make your Marriage: Manners makes Men. Consider the
saying of the Prophet David in the.xxxvij. Psalm. A small thing that the just
man has is better the^ great riches of the ungodly wicked and mighty. I wish
you wealth and riches, for I know they are the good gifts of God: but I fear
least Virtue will be overwhelmed, where such floods break out. He that will
tarry for the company of a rich man to go to Heaven, it will perhaps be long
ere he come there, for his way is as straight as the eye of a Needell, and he
himself as huge as a Camel. Solomon in the twenty and twenty one Chapters
of Ecclesiasticus, makes a marvel of the rich upright man. Therefore I wish
you, have not this mind with you, as to seek a ritche Marriage, for then you
miss of the right mark of Marriage ordained for your comfort, there lies not
the way leading to rest and quietness. For they that will be rich, fall into
snares and temptations, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction. Use oftentimes rather to repeat this
sentence with your self: The desire of money, is the root of all evil. Take
heed that that root ouergrow not other good flowers: but harken to the
sentence yt our Savior pronounces, in the sixth Chapter of Saint Lukes
Gospel. VVoe be unto you that are ritche, for you have received your
consolation. These are the bounds that S. Pawle appoints us: If we have
(says he) food and raiment, let us therewith be content. And truly herein
consists not true riches, to possess this earthly treasure, the meat of
Mothes, and the bayte of Thieves. But such as my commended suitor possesses,
if you may be partaker thereof, the^ may you say: my lot is fallen to me on a
fair ground, and that you have got a goodly possession. Godliness (says the
Apostle) is great gain, if a man be content with that he has: even that is
it which my suitor brings, godliness with contentacion. Wherefore then should
you desire the marriage of the rich? you see it brings no rest: you see
godliness is the true riches: and God of his goodness having already blessed
you with sufficient store and great haboundance, I doubt not but you have so
good a mind with you, that you are rather virtuously desirous, wisely to
employ and bestow your goods and riches, then greedily covetous, to hoard them
up, and lay heap upon heap, with an insatiable desire to increase them. Do
you seek to establish to you and yours an inheritance? harken then what the
Prophet David says in the.xxxvij. Psalm. The evil dooers (says he) shall be
cut off, but they that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the Land.
Again: The meek men (says he) shall inherit and possess the earth. And
again: The Lord knows the days of upright men, and their inheritance shall be
perpetual. Do you seek a continuance and perpetuity in things? S. James
says: Like as when the Sun ryseth with heat, the Grass withers, his
flowerfalleth away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perishes, even so
shall the ritche man fade away in all his ways: but the just they flourish
like the Palm tree, they are like the Bay tree, even green and fresh like
themselves: the root of the righteous shall not be moved. Do you desire to
have such a head as may best defend you from injuries and oppressions? who is
of more might then the righteous and godly? David says in the.xxxiiij. Psalm.
The Angel of the Lord pitecheth his Tente round about them that fear him,
and delivers them in all their necessities. And again: The cares of the Lord
are open unto their prayers, and he will hear their cry, yea, he keeps
their bones that none of them be broken, he numbreth the hairs of their heads
that none of them be lost. Do you fear perrill or penury? of the godly
righteous thus says David in the.xxxvij. Psalm. They shall be confounded in
the perrilous time, and in the days of famine they shall have enough. You will
peradventure say, for my self I can hold me well enough content, but my
Childrens case moves me.

Harken then what David speaks of his experience in the xxxvij Psalm. I have
been young (says he) and am now old, yet saw I never the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begginge their bread. Doubtless God shall provide for you and
yours sufficiently and haboundantly, if you casts away all such worldly
respects, and much more then otherwise. Now I think these shall suffice to
underset and stay you up that you fall not on this side.

The next care concerns my fourth Suitor, that hes take you not with the
bayt of beauty, whereby many wise Women and Men have bin deceived, and with a
short pleasure have purchased long and desperate repentance.

This caused Solomon to commit folly, as appears in the second Chapter of
the first Book of Kings. This cooled the mighty Sampsons courage, as is
manifested by the sixteenth Chapter of the Book of Judges. Did not the beauty
of Bethsaba so rauishe the eyes of holy David, that he committed with her most
habominable Adultery, and made himself gyltie of bloodshed? so it is written
in the second Chapter of the second Book of Samuel. He saw a Woman washinge
her self, and the Woman was very beautiful to look upon. etc. You might
abuse these examples to folly, as to say: These men were notable, for
strength, for wisdom, for godliness: marvel not then (might you say) though
I be overcome in that case. Not so, good Cousin, but this consider in these
examples, that if such of so excellent graces, have been led away with these
traynes: you have hereby a fair warninge, to beware, and to be very
circumspecte, in so subtle a point, and so dangerous a case: if you give
place to such fancies that they overcome reason, you may soon slip into those
inconveniences that you see in the examples of others, you may pluck the house
on your own head, as Sampson did. As you choose your mark, so goes your
game: as you make your foundation, so will your buildinge be: if the one be
steadfast, the other will not lightly shake: but if the one be not surely
grounded, a little blast marreth mutch work. Surely the hansome person of man
is not of long continuance: besides that it is subject to corruption by
inuulnerable means. Wherefore, if your Marriage hang upon that knot, a little
force will break it, a little labor will undo it, and of it self it will decay
and wear away. If this fancy be the leader of your love, you follow a blind
guide, you may soon slide, and wander out of the right way. Many an unsavory
wood, bears a fair blossom: and so under a fair face, their lies hidden
many a foul fault, and with a sound look, oftentimes is covered the holow
heart, full of all hatred, whereof you may read a lovely example of Absolon,
in the fourseenth Chapter of the second Book of Samuel. I have read an
History of one Paulus Aemilius a Noble man of Rome, matched with a Wife called
Papiria, both for birth and beauty (to judge) worthy such a Husband: howbeit
hes deuorced her, and when her friends infreated for her, demanding of him
what should be the cause that moved him so to do, for they saw none, seeinge
that she was to behold, mannerly and moodest, fair and fruitful. Then he
for answer, thrusts out his foot, and says: behold, see my shoe, is it not
fair? is it not new? yet none of you wotteth where it does wringe me. Belike
there was some secret fault in that Woman not to be borne with, which was so
loathsome unto the Husband, as her beauty could be pleasant, Be advised
therefore, least you find that your handsome husband have that, which this man
found in his fair Wife. If you will not that your shoe wringe you, measure him
before you buy, and judge not of him by the color: but measure him rather
within the^ without, least you wring for it afterward. The goodly personage
without wisdom and virtue, what is it better then a painted man? Plato the
wise Philosopher, thus said to Alcibiades: He that at any time has loved
Alcibiades body, has not loved Alcibiades himself: but he that loves thee,
loves thy mind and soul. And the wise Tully says: Man is as his mind is,
and not that form and figure which may be pointed at with the finger. For man
consists of two parts: the one is the mind endued with reason, and bears
the Image of God: the other is the body, which we have common with brute
Beasts. David compares that man that lacks understanding, unto Horse and
Mule: and me thinks, I may well compare such lusty lads, whose commendacion is
only in their personage, and lacks learning wit and honesty, unto Platoes
man, as Diogenes scoffingly termed. For when that Plato in his School had
defined a man in this wise, to be a living and two footed creature, made
upright and without any feathers: Diogenes thinkinge that he had not well
defined or expressed the nature of man, because he suppressed that which was
most propper to man, and did concern the mind and gift of reason: he
plucked a Capon bare of all his feathers, and turned him into the School,
saying: behold Platoes man.

Thus is a man if you consider not his mind, a fool: What is he but an
unfeathered foul. A man without manners, what is he better then a Capon
without feathers? wherefore if you meet any such in your dishe, esteem him
as you list, I have told you the price. Trust not to soon those fair faces,
which come like Capons upon Soppes and Sugar. That brave apparel, what is it
else but Peacockes feathers? The good complexion, the strength of the body, the
white hand, the clean leg, what are they all, but fadinge flatteringe
flowers? what but baytes to deceive the foolish fish? All these do serve but
to please the eye, and to satisfy the fantacy of the flesh. Consider that
which is written in the sirte Chapter of Genesis. The Sons of God saw the
Daughters of men that they were fair, and they took them Wives of all that
they Iyked. Therefore the Lord said: my spirit shall not always strive with
man. etc. Behold that fleshly fancy even of Marriage it self, because thereby
they abused and polluted the holy ordenaunce of God, is expressed there, as one
of the causes, that provoked God, so to power out the rain of his wrath, and
to destroy all flesh from the face of the earth. Wherefore in this point I end
with the exhortation of Saint John, in the second Chapter of his first
Epistle. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: if any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him: for all that is in the
world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
is not of the Father, but is of the world: and the world passes away, and the
lust thereof: but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever. By
these you may consider the true and sure way you have to walk: you have the by
ways yt may cause you to wander, in some part stopped up: you may see, if it
please yon, the good, and the bad, although set forth but in a rude glass.
Singe not now Medeas song, who said: I see and allow the better, but yet I
follow the worse. Give not Venus your Apple, but give the virtuous your
weddinge Ringe. And then see how you have headed your Arrow: see the blessed
state you stand in: he is yours, for better, for worser, forritcher, for
poorer, in sickness and in health: he shall be to you an Husband, to your
Children a Father, to your friends a favorer, to your enemies a terror: he
shall willingly bear part of all your blows and burdens: he shall double
your prosperity: he shall mourn when you weep: he shall laugh when you are
glad: his love is sure sealed, even joined by God him slfe. He is not like the
ritche, of whom the Son of Sirache says in the thirteenth Chapter. If thou
be for his profit, he uses thee, but if thou have nothing, he forsakes
thee. He is not like the light lover of Beauty, of whom the wise Plato says:
He that loves thee for thy favor, when that decays he will give thee
over. But he shall be one wit^ you both body and soul, he shall walk forth
with you all your Pilgrimage here on earth, and shall lead you the way to
eternal rest.) He shall be blessed in all his affairs, for so says David in
the hundred and fourteenth Psalm: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord,
and delights in his commandments, the generation of him shall be blessed,
riches and treasures shall be in his house, and his righteousness shall endure.
And in the hundred and twenty eight Psalm he says: Blessed is the man that
fears the Lord, and walks in his ways: when he eats the labors of his
hands he shall be blessed, and it shall be well with him: his Wife shall be as the
flourishinge Vine on the sides of his house: even your Husbands Wife shall be
such a one, if your Husband be such a one: This David promises, and in the
spirit of God prophesies, and confirms it again, saying: Lo, surely thus
shall the man be blessed that walks in the ways of the Lord, and thus shall
the Woman be blessed that marryeth the man that fears the Lord. You will
say, peradventure, I would think my self well bestowed upon such a man: but
the craft is in the catching, the doubt is in the obtayninge. But go you
forward in your race of Virtue, and then you shall not go far before you
meet with a meet match. It is an old saying: The like loves the like. The
Son of Sirache says in the thirteenth Chapter. All flesh will resort to their
like, and every man will keep company with such as he is himself. A virtuous
Woman (says he in the sixteenth Chapter) is a good portion, and a gift to be
given to some just joseph, or some true Tobyas. You know that every good gift
comes from God, as the Father and first founder thereof: and surely in this
case God appears more euidente to strike the stroke, and to work as it were
immediately within, with his own hand: So says Solomon in the nyneteenth
Chapter of his Proverbs: House and riches are the inheritance of the Fathers,
but a prudent Wife is the special guisee of the Lord. Wherefore, although
there be good tokens and marks whereby to make your choice, as by the fruit
to judge the Tree: for so says the Book of Ecclesiasticus in the.xxvij.
Chapter: The word declares the heart, the talk is the trial of men: Yet
because these are rather probable conjectures, then sure demonstracions, for
Fame oftentimes lies: therefore when you have cast the whole and the sum,
yet God is all in all this matter, and the only maker of good Marriages. Be
free then from worldly business, he clear from carnal affections, cast your
hope upon God, depend upon his providence, commit the matter wholly to his
hands, resort and fly to him with often and earnest prayer: for that when all
other ways be tried, is the plainest to seek, the surest to trust, and the
readiest to find, for such as seek good Wives, and good Husbands. You have a
good example in the.xxiiij. Chapter of Genesis, how Abraham proceeded in the
Marriage of his Son Isaac: You have there the prayer that the servant of
Abraham made, to whom the charge thereof was committed, how he entringe his
journey desired God to prosper him, and to show mercy unto his Master Abraham,
and that God according to his faithful prayer, gave him a token, whereby he
chose the virtuous Virgin Rebecca. For her Parents, when they perceived that
God wrought with man, could not deny their good will unto Isaac, but answered:
This thing is proceeded of the Lord, we cannot therefore say vnto^ thee either
evil or good. You have also there the exercise of Isaac, how he was occupied
in the mean time, while Rebecca was taken out of his Ryb: he went out to
pray in the Feelde toward the evening, and Rebecca first found him so
occupied. This is all (my good Cousin) that I have now to be said. Give your
self over wholly unto God to be your guide. Let your eyes be so earnestly
bente upon him, as they were wont to be upon your Mistreste, whom you have
heretofore served: Then shall God no doubt give you as a portion to the
rightuous, he shall so join you, that man may not separate you: Christ shall
be present with you, as at the Marriage of Cana: he shall conduct you with his
holy spirit: he shall turn your Water into Wine: he shall make the sower
sweet, and prosper all your affairs. In the mean time, while God works,
be not you idle, but practice your self in Isaackes exercise, and God shall
send you an Husband of his kind, even a faithful Son of Abraham, a chosen
Child of God. Yea, God shall send his Angel to lead that man unto your
house, even as he brought Tobyas unto Sara, at the house of her Father
Raguell. And as my poor prayer may help, I will become your faithful Orator,
I will beseeke the Lord God to guide you with his holy spirit, to provide you
an Husband for your comfort, and to grant you long to live and love together,
to your desired hearts ease, and unspeakable quiet. And so I leave to trouble
you, and betake you to God, who I am sure will never forget you, if you repose
your whole confidence in him.

Yours to command during life, I. R.
This faithful pledge of true intent, With trusty heart is truly mente.



FINIS.
THE GLASS of godly Love.

Wherein all married couples may learn their duties, each toward others,
according to the holy Scriptures: Very necessary for all married men and women,
that fear the Lord, and love his laws, to have it in their Bedchambers,
daily to look in: whereby they may know, and do their duties each unto others,
and lead a godly, quiet, and loving life togeathers, to the glory of God, and
the good example of their Christian Brethren.

James. 1. See that ye be not only hearers of the word, but also doers, least
that thereby ye deceive your selves. Colossians. 3. Above all things put on
Love, which is the band of perfection. To all Christian men and women that are
married.
FOrasmuch, as the Devil is most ready to make strife where there ought to be
most love: and has with heddy wilfulness, concupiscence, and ignorance,
soblinded the hearts of those which live under the yoke of Matrimony (that as I
may judge by their fruits) there be very few that lead their lives therein,
according to the laws of Christ. Therefore (my dear and well-beloved
Christians, which profess the Gospel) to the intent that you should live
therein, according to your profession and knowledge: I have here breefely and
plaincly set forth what it is, and how you ought to lead your lives therein,
according to the Rules of the holy Scriptures, so that your pure and godly
life may be a good example, and also make such ashamed as would sclaunder the
holy Gospel, and professors of the same: yea, and that their wonted word
(which is, mark these new men by their lyuinge) may sound to Gods glory, to
the honor of his most holy word, and praise of al them in Christ, which do
profess the same. Farewell in the Lord.

YOu shall first understand, that Wedlock is an hie and blessed order
ordained of God in Paradise, which has ever bin had in great honor and
reverence, whern, one man and one woman are coupled and knit together in one
flesh and body, in the fear and love of God, by the free, loving, hearty, and
good consent of them both, to the intent that they two may dwell together, as
one flesh and body, of one will and mind, in all godliness, most lovingly to
help and comfort one another, to bring forth children, and to instruct them in
the laws of God. Also to avoid Fornication and all uncleanness, and so in
all honesty, virtue, and godliness, to spend their lives in the equal
partakinge of all such things as God shall send them, with thanks gyuinge.

And because that the Wife is in subjection to her Husband, I will begin with
her, and shortly declare what duty and obedience she owes unto him, by the
commandments of the Scriptures.

Ephe. 5. The duty of the Wife, to her Husband.
SAynct Pawle says: Ye Wives, submit your selves to your own Husbands, as
to Lord: for the Husband is the Wives head, as Christ is the head of the
Congregation: Therefore as the Congregation is in subjection unto Christ,
likewise let Wives be in subjection to their Husbands in all things. So that
the wife must be obediente unto her husband, as unto Christ himself, whereout
it follows, that the said obedience extends not unto any wickedness, or
evil, but unto that which is good, honest, and cumly. In as much as God
delights only in goodness, and forbids the evil every where: it follows
also, that the disobedience that a wife shows to her Husband, displeases God
no less, then when he is disobeyed himself. For the wife ought to obey her
husband in all points, as the Congregation to Christ, which loves Christ
only: and above all things, she is glad and willinge to suffer for Christ's
sake, she does all for the love of him, Christ only is her romfort, joy, and
all togeathers, upon Christ is her thought day and night, she longs only
after Christ, for Christ's sake (if it may serve to his glory) she is heartily
well contented to die, ye she gives over her self wholly thereto, for
Christ's love, knowing assuredly that her soul, her honor, body, life, and
all that she has is Christ's own. Thus also must every honest Wife submit her
self, to please her Husband with all her power, and give her self freely, and
willingly, to love him and obey him, and never to forsake him till the hour of
death.

And farther (says S. Peter:) Let the Wives be in subiecton to their
Husbands, that even they which believe not the word, may without the word be
won by the conversation of the Wives, while they behold your pure
conversation coupled with fear, whose apparel shall not be outward with
brodred hair, and hanging on of Gold, either in putting on of gorgious
apparel, but let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt, with a meek and
quiet spirit, which spirit is before God much set by, for after this manner in
the old time did the holy Women which trusted in God tire themselves, and were
obedient to their Husbands, even as sara obeyed Abraham: and called him her
Lord, whose Daughters ye are as long as ye do well.

And Paul speaking unto Tytus (says he:) Let the elder Women be in such
apparel as becomes holinesle, not being false accusers, not given to much
Wine, but that they teach honest things, to make the young Women sober
minded, to love their Husbands, to love their Children, to be discrete,
chaste, huswifely, good, obedient unto their Husbands, that the word of God
be not evil spoken of.

What a Wife ought to be.
HEre may you learn, that a Wife ought to be discret, chaste, huswifely,
shamefast, good, meek, pacient, and sober, not light in countenance, nor
garishe in apparel, with dyed or curled hair, painted nor pasted, but with a
cumly gravity and a sad behavior of a constant mind, true tongued, and of
few words, with such obedience in all godliness to her Husband and head, as
it beseemes a Christian to have unto Christ, and to the intent that the
Husband in like case may learn his duty, let him harken what Saint Pawle
says: and take heed that he turn not his authority to tyranny.

The duty of the Husband to his Wife.
HVsbandes love your Wives (says he) as Christ loved the Congregation, and
gave him self to sanctify it. Now must you understand, that the Husband is
the Wives head, as Christ is the head of the congregation: and Christ shows
to the congregation the same thing, that ye head shows to the body: for
like as the head sees and heaveth for the whole body, studieth and deuiseth
for to preserve it in strength and life: even so does Christ defend, teach,
and preserve his congregation. For he is the eye, heart, wisdom, and guide
thereof: so ought Husbands (then) to love their wines, and be their heads in
like manner to show them like kindness, and after the same fashion to guide
them and rule them with discretion, for their preseruacion, and not with force
or wilfulness to entreat them. And S. Pawle says farther: So ought men to
love their wives, as their own bodies: he that loves his wife loves himself.
For no man has at any time hated his own flesh, but does nourish and cherish
it, even as the Lord does the Congregation. Therefore, ought every man most
fernently to love his wife equally with himself in all points: for this is the
measure of mutual love Matrimonial, that either party have nothing so dear
that they can not be contented to bestow one upon another, ye, and if need
should be, they should also not spare their own lives one for another, no more
then christ did for his congregation. And like as when we repent and believe in
the promise of God in Christ (though we were never so poor sinners) are as
rich as Christ, and al merits ours: so is a Woman (though she were never so
poor before she was married) as rich as her husband, for all ye he has is
hirs, ye his own body, and has power over it, as says Saint Pawle.

And if it so chance yt you find not your wife so perfect in all points, as
you would or as your self, yet must you not despise her, nor be bitteer nor
cruel unto her for her faults, but gently and lovingly, seek to amend and
win her. For like as Christ thought no scorn of his church, despised her not,
neither forsook her for her uncleanness and sins: so should no christian man
spurn at his wife nor set light by her, because that sometime she falls,
offends, or goes not right, but even as Christ nourishes and teaches his
church, so ought every honest husband (also) lovingly and gently to inform
and instruct his wife.

For in many things (says S. Peter) God has made the men stronger then the
women, not to rage upon them and to be tirantes unto them, but to help them
and bear their weakness. Be courteous therefore (says he) and win them to
Christ, and overcome them with kindness, that of love they may obey the
ordinance that God made beetweene man and Wife.

Oh how ashamed be those men to look upon this text, which with violence in
their furye will entreat their wives: no beast so beastly, for in the most
cruelst way is not mete, as when the wife is sad and disquieted, then with
spiteful words and wanton fashions, so provoking her to anger. Where it is not
the duty of the husband, but rather ashamed to his own head: likewise it is
worship for a man to have the fear of the Lord before his eyes, that he
provoke not the plague of vengeance.

Let us therefore have humility in our hearts: For as a wise man looks well to
his own goinges, even so pleasant are the words spoken in due season, which
moves the woman in her wrath unto patience, whereof Salamon says: Fair
words are an Honey Comb, a refreshinge of the mind, and a health of the
bones. For it is seldom seen yt any beast is found in the cruelst rage, that
ye Male does ever hurt his Female: and how unnatural a thing is it for a man
to hurt his own flesh and body: Who will violently revenge himself (yea) on
his foot if it chance to stumble? but will not rather, if he have an ill
body, cherish it to make it better.

The strong (says S. Pawle) ought to bear the frailenesse of the weak, let
one suffer with another: bear ye one an others burden, and so shall ye fulfill
the laws of Christ, and above all thing (says S. Peter:) Have fervent love
amongst you, for love covers the multitude of faults. So that love in all
things and at all times ought to be the whole door and only instrument to
work and frame all things between man and wife.

What the Husband ought to be.
BY all this may ye geather and learn that the man is the head, governor,
ruler, and instructor (with gentil words and good example) the prouyder,
defender, and whole comfort of the woman, and owes unto her most fervent love
and affection, all gentle behavior, all faythfulnes and help, all comfort
and kindness, as to him self, his own flesh and body: so that under God
there is no love, no affection, no freendship, no nerenes of kin, to be
compared unto this, nor any one thing under the Sun that pleases God more the^
man and wife that agree well togeathers, which live in the fear of God. And
how can that be more lively expressed, then in that, that Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and the holy christian Church, and the holy body of them both,
are set forth for an example or Mirror of the state of Wedlock, or conjugal
love, a more holy, a more godly and purer example could not be showed.
Undoubtedly, this does plainly show, that love Matrimonial is most highly
accepted before God, and the contrary must needs follow, ye unquietness, hatred,
strife, brawling, chiding, and frowardnes in Marriage, does exceedingly
displease God, and is clearly forbidden by Saint Pawle, where he says: Let
all bitterness, fierceness, and wrath, roaringe, and cursed speaking be put
away from you: be ye courteous and louinge one to another and merciful,
forgeuing one another, even as God for Christ's sake forgave you. Surely it is
an high and pure love, perfect and constant that God requires to be between
married couples, and therefore ought they by all ways, means, and labor to
get, maintain, and increase this exceeding love, and to eschew, forbear, and
cut of all things, that might occasion any part of the contrary.

What maintains love and quietness in Marriage.
ANd undoubtedly, there is nothing that longer maintains concord and
quietness, nor more increases perfect love in Marriage, then sweet and fair
words, gentle and freendly deeds, and with a loving patience to take all
things to the best. Freely to break their minds togeathers, and al things to
be kept secret, does glad and willing to amend that is amiss, and above all
thing not once one to hear ill of another, for S. Pawle warns you that ye
give no place to the backebiters, but take them as ill willers to you both,
though that they be never so nere friends or kin. And God says: A man shall
forsake Father and Mother, and cleave unto his Wife, and they two shall be one
flesh, which in like case is mente to the Woman. Therefore ought no creature
alive, to be in such esteemation, credit, favor, and love, as each of you with
others. Also to be of a sober and temperate diet, does much farther a good
agreement, and where the contrary is, there is much unquietness. For Solomon
askinge where is woe? where is strife? where is brawling? even amongst those
(says he) that be ever at the Wine, therefore it is most cumly for christians
to be temperate in diet, temperate in words, temperate in deeds, and
temperate in all things, so that at all times ye eschew al excess and furfet,
rage and fury, which makes no difference betwixt man and beast, and all other
things which may breed any part of unquietness. For Solomon says: Better is a
dry morsel with quietness, then a full house, and many fat cattle with
strife. Therefore ought ye to exteeme and embrace this concord and quietness,
as the maintainer and only vpholder of the whole felicity in Marriage, which
is engendered of fervent love, faithfulness, and kindness, and maintained by
the same, wherein ye ought continually to walk in all chastenes and pureness of
living, which (assuredly) shines, as a most precious thing in the sight of
God, and in the commendacion of the same says:

The commendacion of Chastity.
Solomon in the Book of Wisdom. O fair is a chaste generation with virtue,
for it is with good men, where it is present men take example thereat, and if it
go away, yet they desire it: it is always crowned and holden in honor, and
wins the reward of the undefiled Battle, but the multitude of ungodly
Children are unprofitable, and the things that are planted in whoredom shall
take no deep root, nor lay any fast foundation, though they be green in the
branches for a time, yet shall they be shaken with the wind, for they stand
not fast, and through the vehemence of the wind they shall be rooted out, for
the unprofitable branches shall be broken, their fruit shall be unprofitable
and sower to eat, ye meet for nothing, and why? all the children of the
wicked must bear record, of the wickedness of their Fathers and Mothers,
when they be asked, but to the rightuous be over taken with death, yet shall
he be in rest.

Here may you see, how vile filthye and abominable Adultery, Fornication, and
Basterdy is, and how high in estemacion a chaste life is amongst all good and
godly folk, and especially in the sight of God, to whom no secreat sin is
hid.

That married folk ought to have chaste manners, and communication.
ANd as a chaste louinge life in Marriage is most commended, so ought ye to be of
chaste manners, to have chaste talk, and to eschew all wanton fashions, uncleanly
communication, filthy handling, and all vnseemelynesse, and to be the speakers
and very doors of all virtue and godliness, for Saint Pawle says: Be ye
folowers of God as dear Children, and walk in love even as Christ loved you,
and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of sweet savor to God,
so that fornication and all uncleanness or covetousness be not once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints neither filthy nor foolish talk, neither
jesting which are not cumly, but rather giuinge of thanks, for this ye know,
that whoremongers, either unclean persons, or covetous persons, which is the
worshippers of Images shall have any entrance in the kingdom of God and of
Christ.

Of temperance in Marriage.
ALso there ought to be a temperance between man and wife, for God has
ordained marriage for a remedy or medecin to assuage the heat of the burninge
flesh, and for procreation, and not beastly for to fulfill the whole lusts of
the devilish mind and wicked flesh, for though ye have a promise that the act
in marriage is no sin, if the man receive his Wife as a guifte given to him of
God, and the Wife her Husband in like case, as ye have a promise that ye
sin not when ye eat and drink measurably with thanks giuinge, yet if ye
take excess or use it beastly, vilely, or inordinately, your mistemperance
make that ill which is good (beeinge rightly used and that which is clean ye
defile through your abusinge of it: God has not called you to uncleanness,
but unto holiness says S. Pawle:) and farther (says he) It is the will of
God even that you should be holy, and that every one of you should know how
to keep his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lusts of
concupiscence as do the Heathen which know not God.

Also Saint Pawle wills you that ye withdraw not your selves nor depart
not one from another, except it be with the good consent of both, for a time
to fast and to pray, which fasting and prayer, I would to God were more used
then it is, not as Hipocrites were wont, but as Christians ought, and are
commanded (almost) in every part of the Scriptures: for they that in eating
and drinkinge fulfill the whole lusts of the flesh, can not work after the
spirit: and as we daily and hourly continually sin, so ought we
continually to pray and call for grace. And in all the whole Bible, you shall
not find a more godly example of marriage (which I would to God all married
folks would read) then that of Tobiach and Sara, the Daughter of Raguell,
which were knit together in fasting and prayer, and often used the same,
lyuinge a godly, pure, and clean life: for the which, they obtained the
blessinge of God, and saw their Chiloerns Children to the fifte generation.

The commendacion of Children.
CHildren (undoubtedly) is the highest gift, and greatest treasure of this
world, and maintenance of the same. For Children is the very sure band and
last knot of love Matrimonial, by the which the parents can never be clearly
separated a sunder: In as much as that which is of them both cannot be divided,
seeing both have part in every one. And children are their Parents chief joy,
comfort, and felicity next unto God, their stay and staff and vphelders of
their age: and in their children do the Parents live (in a manner) after their
death. For they dye not all togethers ye leave collops of their own flesh
alive behind them, and by their children (if they be virtuously and godly
brought up) then is God honored, and the common wealth advanced, so that the
parents and all men fare the better by them. Your children (most assuredly) is
the very blessing of god, for the which ye ought to give him most hearty
thanks, and be contented, and with such as he does send you, be they many
or few, Sons or Daughters. For if they be many, he will provide for them if
they be faithful. If they be few, he may send you more, and give you more joy
of one daughter, the^ of ten sons: Therefore be content with his will, for he
does all things for the best, and knows what is best for you, give him most
hearty thanks for such as you have, and be diligent to see them virtuously and
godly brought up, and in any case suffer them not to be ydell.

How children ought to be brought up.
FOr they that will not work (says S. Pawle) let them not eat, therefore put
them to learn some honest Science, or Craft, whereunto of nature they be most
apt. For in that shall they most profit, in the which they may get their own
lyuinge, and serve the common wealth. And above al thing let them first learn
to know God and his most holy word, which is the right pathe and high way to
all virtue and godliness, the sure Shield and strong Buckler to defend us
from the Devil and all his cruel and crafty assaults, give them daily godly
and louinge exhortacions, suffer no vice to take root in them, but rebuke them
for their ill, and commend them in their well dooinge.

Provide honestly before hand for all necessary things, both for them and all
your household. For says S. Pawle to Timothy: If there be any that provides
not for his own, and namely for them of his householde, the same denies the
faith, and is worse then an Infidel.

The order of your house.
OF the Sparrowes may ye learn the order of your household, for as the Cock
flies too and fro, to bring all thing to the neast, and as the dam keeps
the neast, hatcheth and brings forth her young, so all provision and
whatsoever is to be done without the house, belongs to the man, and the
woman to take charge within, to see all things conveniently saved, or spent as
it ought, to bring forth and nourish her children, and to have all the whole
doing of her Daughters and women.

Also be loving unto your children, and be not fierce nor cruel unto them. For
S. Pawle says: Fathers rate not your children, least they be of a desperate
mind, but with discrete admonitions, and with your pure and good example of
living (which is the cheifest persuasion) lead them to all virtue and
godliness.

If all Parents would virtuously bring up their children in the knowledge and
fear of God, in the practice and exercise of some honest Science or Craft.
Then should we not see so many ydell as be, so many Vacabondes, Thieves, and
Murderers, so many vicious persons of all degrees, nor such ungodliness reign.
But then should we see every man honestly get his living, preferring his
Neighbors proffite as his own, then should we see all men rightly do their
duties, then should love and charity spring, and all godliness reign, then
should the Laws and Magistrates be willingly obeyed, the common wealth
flourish, and God rightly honored, for in this point only through the grace of
God consistes the amendment of all the whole world.

Therefore (my dear and well-beloved Christians) seeing that in this blessed
state of Matrimony, and godly householde of husband, wife, and children
consistes (next under God) the cheifest and highest felicity of this world,
and maintenance of the same, wherein the common wealth is wholly advanced, and
God most highly honored. I exhort you in the name of Jesus Christ, the Son
of the living God, that you walk worthily therein, according to the will of
Christ, which you profess without faining, and that you eschew all works and
deeds of the flesh, which be these, says S. Pawle: Adultery, Fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, Witchcrafte, hatred, varyance, wrath,
strife, sedition, sects, enuyinge, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, and such
like: of the which I tell you before, as I have told you you in times past,
that they which commit such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.
Therefore follow ye the spirit and works of the same, which he (says S.
Pawle:) Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentilnesse, goodness,
faithfulness, meekness, temperance, and such like. And yet once again, I
exhort you with the exhortacion of S. Pawle. If there be amongst you any
consolation in Christ, if there be any comfortable love, if there be any
fellowship of the spirit, if there be any compassion of mercy, fulfill you my
joy, that ye draw one way, having one love, being of one accord, and of one
mind, that nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but that in
meekness of mind, every one esteem other better then them self, and so
shall you lead a joyful quiet, and godly life in this world, and after,
through Jesus Christ, come to the life everlasting, with God the Father, to
whom be all honor and glory. Amen.

Romans 10. If the root be whole, the branches shall be whole also.
FINIS.

