THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S TEARS, AND Christ's Comforts.

DELIVERED AT A FAST the seventh of October. Ano. 1624.

By GILBERT PRIMEROSE Minister of the French Church of London.

HIERON. ad Nepolit. Lachrymae auditoru^ lauds tuae sint. Let the Tears of
thy Auditors be thy praise. LONDON, Printed for I. Bartlet, at the gilt Cup in
the Goldsmiths Row in Cheape-side. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable and Religious Lady, ELIZABETH, Countess of Anandale,
Viscountesse of ANAN, etc.
MADAM:
COnsidering it is the custom of those which set out Books, to stamp them
with the glorious titles of some person of note and authority, that they may
be received as current money; I have given to this little book the silver
wings of your right Honorable name, that flying abroad like a mourning Dove,
it may find a quiet resting place in the favorable allowance of the Reader.

The matter wherewith it is stuffed, is weeping and laughing, mourning and
comforts. The end wherefore it is made, is to exhort all kind of persons to
shead tears of godly sorrow, which God may put in his bottles, and the Lamb of
God turn into the wine of heavenly comforts, when they shall be called unto
his marriage-Supper.

Such tears were never more necessary; I will not say that they were never
less heeded nor cared for, than they are now, because I am a stranger at home:
let every man speak to his own conscience; let every conscience ask of its
own heart, how it is touched with sin, how affected with the affliction of
the Church: let every heart judge it self; and if our heart condemn us, let
us all know, that God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.

One thing I know generally, that men when they are exhorted to weep, are
accustomed to say, that weeping is more womanish than manly: for women are of a
more weak and moist constitution of body, and more sensible of the passions
which provoke weeping, than men are. Men blaspheme the glorious and dreadful
Name of the Lord our God: Men are more frequent in the Tavernes, than in the
Church: Men let fly all they have at Cards, at Dyce, at other unlawful games,
and foolish sports. Where is there deceit, where robbery, where oppression?
where, but among men? Who trouble the state? Men. Who undermine, who betray,
who dismember the Church by schisms, by heresies, by secret plots? Men. Who
persecute the Church? Men. Who forsake it? Men. The most part of the evil that
is done in the world, is done by men: Not because they are more, but because
they are worse than women, and (for the most part, alas!) have neither wit nor
courage, but to do ill. For all this they weep not, because, forsooth, it
becomes not men to weep. But when the hand of God is heavy upon them, will
they not curse? will they not roar like wild beasts? Is roaring more manly? Is
it nothing so womanish as weeping?

I know not what they call womanish? for many women have been, many in this
last age of the world are better than many men. Had not SEMIRAMIS distaffe a
sharper edge than NINVS her husbands sword? Was not TAMYRIS as martial as
CYRUS? did she not find out a more witty stratagem to overthrow him, who was a
most crafty and cunning warrier, and his army of two hundred thousand men
trained up in wars from the cradle, than he did to entangle her Son who was
a beardlesse Captain? did not the AMAZONES fight, when men fled? did they not
subdue their enemies, who had overcome their husbands? Had not ZENOBIA a lions
heart in a woman's breast? How often did she constrain the Roman armies to
show her a fair pair of heels? Neither was she overcome, but wearied with
the innumerable multitude of new armies sent against her by the Emperor
VALERIVS AVRELIANNS; who when he had triumphed of her, was feign to be a suitor
unto her, for her daughter to be his wife. Though she was a Syrian, she spoke
Greek and Latin; she was instructed in all sciences; she writ the Story of
the Orient; she had quick eyes, and a man's voice; her teeth were so white, that
she seemed to have pearls, and not teeth in her mouth: in all the gifts of the
body and of the spirit, she went beyond all the men of her age. Her own
husband ODENATVS was the most valiant man of those days: He subdued all the
Orient, and the Emperor GALLIENVS was fain to pray him to be partaker of the
Empire with him: but she was better than he. PHILE was so wise from her tender
nails, that being yet a young girl, her father ANTIPATER, that old and wise
Counselor of ALEXANDER* THE GREAT, that worthy King of Macedonia asked her
counsel, and followed it: and when she was wife to DEMETRIUS, a man given to
many vices, she could manage and govern his passions with such discretion,
that she made his government tolerable to his subjects, his person respectable
to all men, his power fearful to his enemies. I forbear to speak of
CRATESICLEA, the royal mother of CLEOMENES king of Sparte, and of PORCIA the
wise daughter of CATO, and the courageous wife of BRUTUS, who, when she had
received a great wound, did not so much as shrink.

To enter into the Church; Was not DEBORAH more meet to be General of an
army, than BARAK? did not IAHEL, with a hammer and a nail, teach the great
Captain SISERA, that he had a foolish head? One woman in the City of ABEL was
wiser than all the men therein. There was no man in BETHVLIA to be compared in
wisdom with IVDITH: What courage she and her handmaid had, OLOFERNES proud
and cup-shotten head could best tell. When IVDAS betrayed Christ, when PETER
denied him, when the Priests and Elders of the Jews accused him, women were
faithful unto him: When Pilate condemned him, when men mocked him, and nailed
him on the cross, women wept for him: when his own disciples through fear
fled away from him, women most courageously followed him.

PVLCHERIA fair indeed, but more wise than fair, was more worthy of the
imperial diadem, than her brother THEODOSIUS II. who prospered when he was
guided by her; was unfortunate, and turned the empire topsie turvie when he
neglected her counsel. FERDINAND king of Spain was a wise and valiant Prince:
But his royal wife ISABELLA outreached him in all princely virtues. He was
hard and sparing; She was liberal and honorable. He was fitter to keep and
maintain his own kingdom, than to enlarge it: She, She I sal, increased it with
the kingdom of Navarre, with the Canarie Isles, and with the new world, which
we call AMERICA. She never drank wine. When she was sick, when she was in
travail, not only she cried not, she mourned not, but she did not so much
as change her countenance, as give one sigh. On her daughters wedding day,
news being brought unto her of the death of her only son, she suppresseth
her grief, she keeps a merry countenance, lest she should mar the feast
MARIUS himself could not have shown a greater courage.

I could name women yet living, who went stoutely to the skirmish against the
enemies, no ways dreading the glistering of swords, the brandishing of
spears, the hail of bullets falling thick, and whistling about their ears.
When men made head to men with their heels, they ran to the breach, and
catching the partisans that fleeing men had flung away, laid their enemies
heads where their feet were, and saved the beleaguered town. The only sons
of some of them being killed in that cause, they buried them with dry eyes and
laughing faces; calling themselves happy, that God had made them mothers of
such children. Neither did they at any time weep, but when they saw men do
many things unbeseeming, not only Christians, but men: then, through great
displeasure, they wept, because men did neither blush for shame, nor wax pale
for fear of eternal disgrace, nor weep for forrow, that, like IVDAS, they
had betrayed Jesus Christ; or like REVBEN abode among the sheepfolds, to hear
the bleatings of the flocks.

Moreover, the principal passions which provoke weeping, are love, anger,
sorrow: If those passions be more vehement in women, than in men, as men say;
then, when they are sanctified in women, as they are in all true Christian
women, we must confess, that in women there is greater anger against sin,
greater sorrow for sin, and for the affliction of the Church, greater love of
God, greater zeal of his glory, than men: and therefore that women weep more
than men.

Are they first in weeping? they shall be first in comforts. The more bitter
their weeping is, the greater shall their comfort be. Women, not men, wept
publicly at the death of Christ: therefore they were first comforted with
the delightsome sight of his glorious resurrection, and with the commission
given unto them, to be the Apostles of the Apostles, and to preach that their
Lord and Master was risen again. S. Peter says, that women are the weaker
vessel. That speech may be turned to their praise: for as a little cup of
crystal, though it be frail and brittle, is of more value than a thousand
bowls of varnished tin; so one godly and virtuous woman is more to be
esteemed, when she weepeth to God in time of misery, than ten thousand brutall
men, who can roar, but cannot weep.

I speak of brutall men; for we find in the Scriptures, and I show in this
book, that the most courageous, wise, and godly men, that ever had eyes in
their heads, did make of their heads living fountains of tears, of their eyes
pipes to convey them to their cheeks; and did weep as much, not only as
women, but as little children. And indeed are we not all Gods children? why
then shall we not weep, when we offend him, and he chasteneth us? Are we
not in his Church as newborn babes? why then should we not weep in our
necessities, till he take us in his lap, lay our mouths to his breast, and
still us with the sweet milk of his spiritual comforts? Can man have a true
feeling of his evils, and not weep? Can he know that his help is in the Name
of the Lord, who made heaven and earth, and not run unto him, and cry unto
him, as the woman of Canaan did, LORD HELP ME?

Will such men need rules of weeping, and Masters or Preachers to teach them
how they ought to weep? No, no: their unfeigned love to the Church of God,
their earnest affection to the glory of God, their extreme and godly sorrow
for the bruising and crushing of Joseph, their passionate hatred and grudge
against sin, will be to them a most sufficient and learned Master in that
Art. Godly sorrow will be Aarone rod to their hearts of rock, and make them
an undrainable spring of sighs, of groans, of cries, of tears, of
lamentations, of complaints, of expostulations, of deprecations. Their fervent
love will make them most eloquent in devoute praying. The heart wounded to the
quick, sends up to the eyes rivers of tears, and to the mouth floods of
most pithy and signifying words, and eases it self by weeping and praying.
There all the Saints of God, men and women, have in all times found tears
enough, and words in abundance, to make their moan to God.

Not that God, who sees without eyes, and hears without ears, and before
whom hell it self is naked, and the deep has no covering, has need of our
tears to know our wants: but because we stand in need of him, he will have us
to know and to feel our own miseries, and to acknowledge with sighing,
mourning, and praying, that we have no hope but in his help, but in the
exceeding riches of his grace, but in the infinite treasures of his mercies.
For this cause, does he exhort us to fast, to weep, and to pray: for the same
cause, at a Fast solemnized those days bypast, made I in substance, and so
far as two hours of time would permit, and I thought fit for the time and the
hearers, this exhortation to weeping; which now I present to you,

MADAM, as a public testimony of the due account which I make of those
excellent gifts, both of nature and of grace, wherewith God has, with an open
hand, enriched your noble and honorable person. ISABELLA the Queen of women,
of whom I have already spoken, might have been called the PHOENIX of Queens,
if there had not bin a ZENOBIA before her in the Orient, and after her an
ELIZABETH in England: This Queen was to all women a glistering Mirror of
chastity, a rare example of sobriety, a perfect president of modesty. She
could not abide Iesters, Stage Players, Fiddlers, but banished them all off her
Court: when she was not distracted with matters of State, she was ever in the
midst of her Ladies, sewing with her own hands, and instructing and
exhorting them, by word and by example, to godliness and virtue. Every day
twice she had her ordinary hours of private prayers. Her daughter MARY, Queen
of Portugal, like unto her, was very grave in all her carriage, was as mild
as any might be to all persons, was enemy to idleness, and was wont to exhort
all her Ladies to MODESTY; saying, that MODESTY IS THE PRINCIPAL ORNAMENT OF A
WOMAN. The Chastity and Modesty of a woman; the gracious and courteous gravity
of a Lady; the zeal and piety of a Christian; the wisdom and provide^t care
of a virtuous and noble Matron, are the virtues w ch I have observed in your
Ladyship, and which have moved me to bear witness unto them by this
dedication.

Futhermore, all who know your Ladyship, and know the perpetual attendance of
my Lord, your worthy and right honorable husband, on his Majesty at Court,
will bear you record, that you indeed are the virtuous Woman, of whom Solomon
says, that THE HEART OF HER HUSBAND DOES SAFELY TRUST IN HER; that her
children arise and call her blessed; that her husband praises her, and says,
MANY DAVGHTERS HAVE DONE VERTVOVSLY, BUT THOU EXCELLEST THEM ALL. You are the
last and most sure receiver of my Lords debts: you are the most faithful
keeper of his treasures and Registers: Let it please you then, most virtuous
and Noble LADY, receive this obligatorie bill, whereby I acknowledge my self
indebted to my Lord for his favor and kindness, and do bind me by it, as by
a solemn contract, to power out my soul before the Lord of Lords, day and
night; beseeching his divine Majesty to power down upon your right honorable
persons and hopeful issue, all kind of blessings external, internal, and
eternal, for Christ Jesus his Sons sake; in whom I am, and shall remain for
ever,

MADAM, Your most humble and most affectionate servant, Gilbert Primerose.

Errata pars primae.

Page 13 lin 13. d. the. p. 44. l. 19. when. p. 56. l. 5. yexing. p. 60. l. 10
sadness. p. 130. l. 6. election. p. 213. l. 13. Dorter, or sleeping place. p
252. l. 1. his. p. 241. l. 15. not.

Errata pars secundae.

Page 18. l. 15. d. in. l. 18. the. p. 26. l. 6. his.

THE CHRISTIAN man's Tears: AND Christ's Comforts.
The first part of the Christian man's TEARS.
MATTHEW. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. LUKE
6.21. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.
CHAP. I.
ALl men have a natural knowledge and desire of blessedness.

2. But no man can tell, without special revelation from God, wherein it
consists.

3. Thence is the great diversity of opinions, concerning them who are blessed;

4. As Kings.

5. Courtiers.

6. Rich men.

7. Voluptuous men.

8. There is no blessedness in any worldly thing.

I. AS all men have a natural impression, whereby they acknowledge, that there
is one Sovereign and chief God, who should be worshipped with heart, words,
and deeds; so they have a natural light, whereby they know that there is a
Sovereign and chief good, which should be desired, and sought with much
endeavor, and great might; as the chief end of their lives, and the only
blessedness whereby they are to be perfected, and wherein all their desires
and affections must rest, as in their center. For blessedness is the
perfection of man; and no man can say, that he is blessed, till he say, August.
Confess. lib. 10 cap. 20. Vita beata non est mihi, donec dicam, satest.
It is enough.

Thence it is, that as all men worship God, so they do all desire to be
blessed by the enjoying of the Sovereign good; the only naming whereof
rejoices the heart, and is unto it a restorative, when it is sorrowful and
faint. Ibid. una. voce, fi interrogari possent, utrum beati esse vellent, fine
ulla dubitatione, ve^le responderent.
Ask of all men together, (if it were possible); ask of them a part, whether
they desire to be happy and blessed: and doubt not but they shall all answer
with one voice; that is our desire. whatsoever we attempt, whatsoever we
prosecute, whatsoever we bestow our time in, we do it for that end.
Blessedness is our great business: all our cogitations are of it, all our
cares are for it, all our delight is in it. It Is not so in other things. Take
but two men, and Ibid. ca, 21.
ask of them, if they will go to the wars; it may be, that one of them
answers, he will; the other; that he will not. Ask of them again, if they
desire to be happy: forthwith they shall answer, what else? neither will one
of the two go to the wars, and the other lurk at home, but to be blessed.
So deeply is the sense and desire of blessedness rooted in all men's hearts.

II. But, alas! Ioh. 1.5
The light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. For
what is the natural knowledge which men have of God, and of the sovereign
good wherein their blessedness consists, but as a lightning, which in the
twinkling of an eye is extinguished and drowned in the dim cloudinesse of a
dark night? To speak of blessedness apart, because it is the principal
matter of my text: all men know generally, and in gross, that thereis such a
thing which is called blessedness, and have a confused desire thereof; but
which of them all can tell what it is, wherein it consists, which is the way to
attain unto it? In that knowledge they are as blind as Moles, till they be
enlightened with a more excellent light than that which nature does afford. For
Aug. Confess. lib. 10. ca. 23. Multos expertus sum qui velint fallere, qui
autem falli neminem.
though there be many which like to deceive and cosen others, and not one at
all who can abide to be deceived; whatsoever they love besides that which is
blessedness indeed, they call it their blessedness, and will have others to
think so of it. Et quia falli nolunt, nolu^t convinci quod falss sunt.
And because they shun to be deceived, they cannot suffer to be convinced of
their error.

III. Whereof if ye desire to have a clear trial, ye need not to drive your
thoughts backward, and to search Idem de Civit. dei, lib 19. cap. 1. and ^.
into the reasons which distracted the ancient Philosophers into two hundred,
fourscore and eight opinions, concerning this one and only point of man's
blessedness in this miserable world.

Let us fix them upon those things which our eyes see, and our ears hear,
and ask of so many men, which are much busied, walking abroad, going and
coming through the streets, passing by the high ways, playing, sporting,
eating, drinking, trading by sea, by land, sitting in their shops, plotting,
musing, meditating in their closets; what they think of felicity, and which
is the blessed end wherabout they spend so much time, and take so great pains:
we shall find them to be like unto the builders of Babel, and their language so
confounded, that they understand not one another speech.

IV. Begin at Kings: Ask of the great king Nebuchadnezzar, wherein consists his
beatitude. He shall speak and say, Dan. 4.30.
Is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom, by
the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? But when his kingdom
shall be taken from him, when the heart of a beast shall be given him, when
he shall be driven from men, when his Palace shall be changed into a den,
his fare and dainties into grass, his wine into muddie water, he shall say to
God, as David said in the Psalms to another purpose, When I spoke so, Psalm.
73.22.
I was a beast before thee.

Let Herodot. Clio.
Solon come to Croesus the rich King, and tell him that Tellus, Cleobes, and
Biton, poor men, but honest, are more blessed than he, he shall stand amazed,
and wonder how such a Philosopher can by any apparent reason bereave such
riches, as his, of the glorious title of beatitude, and deck with it three
unknown and needy wretches. But when Cyrus shall dispoil him of his mountains
of gold, when he shall be tied to the post, when the wood shall be put on the
fire; when, in the midst of a smoky flame, he shall be made to his enemies a
most pleasant spectacle of a pitiful Tragedy, then he shall cry, but too too
late, O Solon, Solon, Solon! then he shall know how truly it is said, Job 15 ^1.
Let him not trust in vanity, which deceives him: for vanity shall be his
recompense.

When the Emperor SEVERUS was on his deathbed, what avayled the memory of
all his riches, honors, power, delights, but to make him, upon the trebble
string of his melancholic heart, tune this doleful Song; Spart. in Seneio. Hac
omnia fui, and nihil expedit
I have been all things, and nothing avails?

To return to the Scriptures: Did not Eccles. 2.3.
Solomon acquaint himself with wisdom, and with folly? Did he not give himself
to women and to wine? Did he not make great works, build Houses, plant
Vineyards, Gardens, and Orchards, gather silver and gold? Made he not silver to
be in Jerusalem as common as stones? Says he not, that ver. 10
whatsoever his eyes desired, he kept it not from them? that he withheld not
his heart from any joy? Was not that blessedness? Oh no! The Catastrophe, the
shutting up of all was, ver. 11
Behold, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit. He says as Severus said, There
is no profit under the Sun.

V. Cannot Kings find blessedness in the pleasures, riches, power, glory of a
Kingdom? and shall Courtiers, who wade but in shallow water, who dare not
adventure to swim in the Ocean of royal pleasures, who eat but the crumbs and
leavings of their Master's Table, call their life blessedness? Yea that will
some of them, I warrant you, as being most like unto the Fly; whereof it is
written in the Apologues, that, preferring it self, with much bragging and
ostentation, to the Ant, who has no dewlling place but in the holes of the
earth, it said; I am ever with the King at table, I drink in his cup, I eat of
his best dainties, I sleep in his purple gown, I kiss the Queen's face; and
considerd not, that it was but a troublesome worm, which by and by should be
favored with the cheer which the Emperor Domitian gave to the Flies of his
Bedchamber, as the proverb says; Today glad, tomorrow dead.

Go to Ahasuerus Court; cast your eyes there upon the King's Minion, Haman: ye
see him betimes in the morning waiting Esth. 6.4
at the outward Court of the King's house, to present his suit against
Mordecai: ask of him, wherein he places his blessedness. Esther 5.11.
He shall make you a long Roll of the glory of his riches, of the multitude of
his children, of all the things wherein the King has promoted him above all the
Princes and servants of the Court, of the Queene's most special kindness and
favor unto him: he will assure you, that blessedness it self goes to bed, and
rises with his Grace; that nothing is wanting to make it up thoroughly, but the
King's command to hang Mordecai, which shall presently be dispatched; not
thinking, that the next day all his blessedness shall be hanged with him on the
gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai: as if it had been written of him,
Job 8.14, 15
Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be as a spiders web. He
shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall build it fast,
but it shall not endure.

VI. Go to the rich men of the Land: ask of them, as Croesus did of Solon,
Who is the happiest man of the world? They shall answer, as Croesus thought
Solon should have answered to him, and if need be fetch their answer out of
the Scriptures; Our blessedness is, that Psa. 144.12.
our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters may
be as corner-stones polished after the similitude of a Palace; that our Garners
may be full, affording all manner of store; that our sheep may bring forth
thousands and ten thousands in our streets; that our oxen may be strong to
labor; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no
complaining in our streets: happy is that people that is in such a case: After
this manner did the rich man in the Gospel bless his soul; saying, Luke 12.19.20
Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years: take thine ease: eat,
drink, and be merry. But God said unto him; Thou fool, this night thy soul
shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have
prepared?

Go to the Exchange, go to the shops, go to the ships, go to all kind of
worldlings; ye shall hear them all saying, It is a good and blessed thing to
dwell with goods: They will deaf you with their continual sighing and crying,
Job 31 24.
Who will show us any good? When their riches are increased, ye shall see
them setting up in the Temple of their hearts, Ezech. 8.3.
the Idol of jealousy, Job 31 24
making of gold their hope, and saying to the fine gold, thou art my confidence.

Say thou unto them, that the holy man Job, though richer than they are,
thought it a most heinous crime to trust in riches; that David, a most rich
King, faith to al rich men in the name of God, and with authority from heaven,
Psalm. 62 10
If riches increase, set not your heart upon them: that the Apostle rendereth a
most peremptory reason of this exhortation, taken from 1. Tim. 6.10.
the uncertainetie of riches; that either we must leave them by death, as the
rich man of whom I have spoken, did; or they will Pro. 23.5
make themselves wings, and fly away as an Eagle toward heaven, and leave us,
ere we dye: they will answer, There is no such matter; That Solomon, the wisest
of all men, said most truly, that Eccles. 10.19
money answers all things; that therefore Demost. (...) ete Opus, opus sunt
opes: nam sine his nihil fit quod opus.
they must, they must have money, because without money nothing that must be
done, can be done: money must they have, and in money will they trust.

VII. Go, I pray you, to the Comedians, to the houses of gaming, of tippling,
and of joy: go to the Unthrifts and Ale-knights of the country: demand in what
school they have been brought up. They will answer, In the school of
Epicurus, with two royal fellows, Sardanapalus and Heliogabalus; where they
have learned a short, but most excellent Compendium of Philosophy, 1. Cor.
15.32
Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die: whereof, the words which
Solomon speaks in the behalf of such disciples of riot, are an ample
Commentary; Eccles. 3.12
There is nothing better for a man, than to rejoice, and to do good to himself
in his life; and also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good
of his labor, it is the gift of God.

This was the Philosophy of another rich man in the Gospel, Luke 16 19
who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day;
and, ere he was aware, was buried in the bottomless pit of hell: where one
drop of that sweet water, wherein poor Lazarus does swim, would be more
welcome to him to cool his tongue, than all the deceiving pleasures which he
enjoyed during the flying days of his short life. That is the place ordained
to all his school-fellows: where then, if not till then, they shall condemn
all their former courses, and with Solomon, Eccles. 2.2.
say of laughter, It is mad; and of mirth, what does it?

VIII. Oh that the force of reason could move them, if they will not be moved
with the authority of Scriptures. How can riches be man's blessedness? Aug. de
mor. Eccles. cathol. Hominis optimu^ deterius esse quam ipsae homo, non potest.
Man's blessedness cannot be worse than man himself. Are not the best riches
worse than the worst man? What are they but Hab. 2.6
thick clay, as Habacuc calls the^? which Bern. Qua possessa, onerant; aemata,
inquinant; amissa, cruciant.
if ye possess, they are a heavy load unto you: which if ye love, they defile
you: which if ye lose, they are a cross unto you. Surely, if they could
speak, they would say, Thom. 12a. q. 2. art. 1. in conclus.
Man is not made for us, but we are made for man: as it is written, Psalm. 8.6
Thou have put all things under his feet. Therefore man is our end and
blessedness: but we are not the end, we are not the blessedness of man.

How can honor be man's blessedness? Arist. 1 Aethic. c. 5
Blessedness is in him who is happy: but honor is not in him who is honored,
it is rather in him who does honor. Moreover, Thom. ib. art. 2. in conclus.
honor is given to some excellency: there is no excellency to be compared
with blessedness, whereof all kind of excellency is a part: wherefore honor is
a public testimony rendered to blessedness, and is not so good as blessedness
is. The same may be said of glory and of good fame, which follow man's
blessedness, such as he may have in this world; but are no part of it.

How can Ibid. Art. 4.
Power and Authority be man's blessedness? Is it not particular to some few?
And among all men, are there any so vexed with troubles without, with cares and
grief within, as such men are? In blessedness there is no care, no vexation
of spirit, but full content.

Who will say, that Ibid. 6. Conclus.
man's reasonable and immortal soul cannot come to blessedness, but by
wallowing like a sow in the muddye pleasures of the mortal body? They like
Scorpions have stinging tails, as Solomon, who knew them better than any man,
says, affirming that Pro. 14.13.
the end of mirth is heavines?

I might run through all the faculties and gifts both of body and soul, and
show you, that blessedness is not in any of them apart, nor in the^ all
together: but that which I have said, is sufficient to convince all them which
hold for Principles and Maxims of their faith, that blessed are they that are
rich, that are full, that laugh, etc. and cry, Woe, woe, woe unto them that are
poor, that are hungry, that mourn, etc.

CHAP. II.
1. Jesus Christ curses them which laugh, etc and calls them blessed which
weep.

2. Three necessary properties required in blessedness.

3. They cannot be found, but in God alone.

4. Our blessedness is the vision or fruition of God.

5. What men are not blessed.

6. Who are blessed.

I. SEe now and judge, that God has not said without a pregnant cause, to such
men, Esa. 55.8.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways: for as the
heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and
my thoughts than your thoughts. For our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel of S.
Luke, curses them whom they do bless: and cries, Luke 6.24.
Woe unto you that are rich: woe unto you that are full: woe unto you that laugh
now: On the other part, he blesses them whom they curse, saying, Luke 6.21.
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God: blessed are ye that
hunger now; for ye shall be filled: and in my text, Blessed are ye that weep
now: for ye shall laugh: or as the words are in S. Matthew; Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

These sentences are paradoxes and giddie conceits to the world: but to the
Church, they are Maxims of truth, and propositions more firm than the heaven,
which Job 37.18.
is strong as a molten looking-glass; and more immovable than the earth,
which Psalm. 104 5.
God has founded upon her bases, that it should not be remooved for ever. For
they were conceived in the breast of God the Father, who is wisdom it self:
and were pronounced by the Son of God, who is the substantial word of the
Father, even 1. Ioh. 5.20.
the true God, and eternal life. Let us then be deaf to the hoggish sayings of
men: but let us, I pray you, let us this day, and all the days of our lives,
listen seriously to our Lord Jesus Christ, saying, that those which weep and
mourn, are blessed: and showing, that their weeping shall be turned into joy,
because they shall be comforted. O then give care to the wisdom of God,
teaching you by me this day what persons are blessed: that thereafter he may
cheer up your hearts with the most comfortable doctrine of the comforts
wherein their blessedness consists.

II. Blessedness is to be considered either in the object, or in the fruition
and enjoying of it: The object of it, is all good things that a godly man's
heart can desire: By good things, understand not any of those visible creatures
of God which we now enjoy: for Romans 14.17.
the kingdom of God, the possessing whereof is our blessedness, is not meat
and drink, that is, it consists not in any outward thing: but is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, proceeding from things
more excellent; as it is written, 1. Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. This then is their
first property, that they are not of this world.

Moreover, they must be eternal and exempt from all alteration and corruption:
we must not, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 4.18.
Look at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for
the things which are seen, are temporal: but the things which are not seen,
are eternal: for if we did seek our blessedness in temporal things subject
to corruption; they coming to decay, to wax old, and to rot, our blessedness
should fail with them.

Thirdly, reason it self teaches us, that to make up true and perfect
blessedness, all good things must join together: for though a man be enriched
with them all saving one, so long as that one is lacking to his desire, he is
not thoroughly blessed: for in a blessed man, there is nothing void, no part
empty: all his desires are satisfied, and so full, that he says, It is enough.

III. Now where shall we find all good things? where else but in God, who as
he is the sovereign God, so he is the sovereign good? as he is Deuteronomy. 10.17.
the GOD of gods, and Psalm. 8.10.
God alone; so he is the good of goods, and Mat. 19.17.
there is none good but he: In him are all goods, to satisfy all our desires:
the goods which are in him, are like unto himself. Iam. 1.17
With him there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning: he is Esa.
57.15.
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity; to whom David said with most
humble supplication, Thou will show me the path of life: Psalm. 16.11.
In thy presence is fulness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore. And again, Psalm. 17.11.
When I awake, I will be satisfied with thy likeness.

IV. God, who is all goodness it self, is Boet. 3. de Consolat. Pros. 10.
also blessedness it self: he is blessedness by his own essence. Per
essentiam.
Man's blessedness comes from his by participation, Per participationem.
even so far, as according to our capablenesse, we are filled with his
infinite goodness. He borrows nothing from any creature, yea tho all
creatures were brought to the first nothing, whereout of they were taken, as
he was from ever, so he should be blessed for ever. We borrow all from him:
and our blessedness is nothing but the enjoying of him, which the Scripture
calls, The vision of God: according to the comfortable saying of our Savior,
Mat. 5.8.
Blessed are the poor in heart, for they shall see God.

O blessed blessedness! when shall we see thee? where shall we enjoy thee, that
we may be blessed in thee? B^^t. ibid. Pros. 3. Beatitudo est status omnium
bonorum aggregatione perfectus.
Oh blessed blessedness of them that see thee! In thee they see all goodness:
in thee they enjoy all good things: they are filled with thee; and thou being
with them, they are fully consummated by thee, who art to all thy Elect, Thom.
12a. q. 2. art. 8. Concl. Beatitudo est bonum perfectum quod totaliter quietat
appetitum.
their perfect and universal good, satisfying all their desires. O blessed
blessedness, which dwell in them whom thou blessest, without interruption, and
who art never weary of dwelling in them, dwell in us who are here before thee:
Aug. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 1. Quia fecisti not ad te: Et inquietum est
cornostrum, domae requies^at in to.
for thou have made us to go to thee: and our heart finds no rest, till it
rest in thee. Let us all speak so to our God, that he hearing our prayers,
may fill us with his blessedness, and so we may be blessed in him.

V. Ye have heard what blessedness is: thereby ye may judge who is blessed:
Idem de morib. Eccl. Cath. cap. 3.
He who has not that which he desires, whatsoever it be, is not blessed:
neither is he blessed, who has that which he loves, if it be hurtful: nor
he also who loves not that which he has, how good soever it be: for he who
coveteth that which he cannot obtain, is grieved: Cruciatur.
and he who has obtained that which he should not covet, Fallitur:
is deceived: and he who coveteth not that which should be obtained is sick.
Aegrotat.
None of these can have place in the soul of man without misery: now misery
and blessedness cannot dwell together in one man. Therefore none of those men
are blessed.

VI. Who then are blessed? not they Ciecro. Aiunt esse beatos, quil vivunt ut
ipsi velint, etc. Velle enim quod non deceat, id ipsum miserimum est.
who live at their own will: for to will that which is not decent, is a most
miserable thing. Otherways many wicked me^ should be blessed. For Psalm. 10 3.
the wicked boasts of his hearts desire, and blesses the covetous whom the
Lord abhors.

He only is blessed, Aug. de Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 5. Beatus non est, nisi
qui and habet omnia qua vult, and nihil vuls mal^
who has all that his heart can desire, and desires nothing amiss. Such
shall be they that weep and mourn now, as Jesus Christ says in my text.

CHAP. III.
1. WEeping is often put in the Scripture for fasting, repentance, and prayers.

2. Of the natural causes of weeping.

3. What mourning is.

4. Error of those which condemn weeping, and other natural affections.

5. Diverse examples of courageous and godly men which did weep, namely, of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

6. Too great moderation in the things of God, is a sin; excess in them, is
laudable.

7. Some tears are indifferent.

8. Some are wicked.

9. Some are good.

10. First motive to weeping, by the examples of godly men which wept through
godly sorrow.

I. THerefore ye must learn, and with the assistance of Gods Spirit, I will
teach you what are the natural causes of weeping and mourning: what difference
there is between them, how weeping is not unworthy of men, who think
themselves the most worthiest of all men, and is no unseemlinesse in a
Christian man: finally, which is the weeping and mourning whereunto blessedness
is promised.

This discourse is fit for this day, which is a day of repentance, of fasting,
of weeping, and extraordinary prayers: for where fasting is, there weeping and
mourning should be, as ye may learn of the exhortation which God made to his
people by the Prophet Joel, saying, Joel 2.12.
Turn ye even to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping,
and with mourning.

Yea they are so inseparably conjoined, that weeping is put for fasting: for
the people did ask of the Prophet Zech. Zech. 7 3.
Should I weep in the fifth month, separating my self, as I have done these so
many years? because there is no true fasting without weeping. Ye read
likewise, that when the Disciples of John came to Christ, saying, Mat. 9.14, 15.
Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but thy disciples fast not? he said unto
them, Can the children of the bedchamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is
with them? Being asked of fasting, he answers of mourning, because there is
no fasting, where there is no mourning: for to Christ fasting and mourning are
all one; as he shows by the rest of his answer: But the days will come when
the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. And
therefore S. Mark, and S. Luke do set down Christ's answer after this manner,
Mark 2.19. Luke 5.34.
Can the children of the bride-chamber fast? changing the words, not the
meaning; because he that mourns, cannot choose but fast. Speak to him of
eating and drinking: he shall answer you with David, Psa. 102 9.
Ashes are my bread: weeping is my drink: As also he that has an empty belly,
fasteth in vain, and to no purpose, if he mourn not: which I pray you to
observe, and heed carefully in this day of your fasting.

Moreover, true repentance, and prayers of repentance are seldom without
weeping: and therefore the Scriptures describe the infamous woman's, and Peter's
repentance and prayers, by their tears. Luk 7.37, 38.
That woman came into Simons house where Christ was, and weeping, washed his
feet with her tears: Mat. 26.75.
Peter went our of Caiphas house, where he had denied Christ, and wept
bitterly: Ambr. de poenit. Petri Apostoli, lib. 10. Lucae, cap. 22. Non invenio
quid dixerit, invenio quod fleverit.
ye read that they did weep; ye read not that they spoke: ye see their tears,
ye hear not their words. For sorrow when it is vehement and grievous, squeeseth
tears out of the eyes so fast, that it smothereth the words, and turns them
into vexing, into groaning, into sighing; which speak not, and yet their voice
is heard; which ask not pardon with words distinguished by syllables, and
knotted with letters, and yet obtain it. No prayers are so light, none take
flight to heaven so quickly, none comeback so swiftly from the Throne of grace
with grace and grants, as prayers of tears. The prayers of the mouth are often
but lip-labor, and false witnesses to a double heart: as God says of
Hypocrites, Esa. 29.24. Mat. 15 8.
This people draws nigh unto me with their mouth and honors me with their
lips: but their heart is far from me. But the prayers of tears are true
witnesses of a single heart, and power out the soul before GOD: as it is said
of Hannah, that 1. Sam. 1 10.13, 15.
she was in bitterness of soul, and wept sore, and powered out her soul
before the Lord, unto whom she prayed, and spoke in her heart, for her voice
was not heard, and her petition was granted. Therefore when Christ says, that
blessed are they that weep and mourn; he understands them that are of a
sorrowful spirit, and who in their sorrow, fast, weep, mourn, pray.

IV. Alexand. Aphrodisae problem.
The Naturalists and Physicians say, that originally tears come from the
vapors which are condensed in the brain; and being there dissolved and turned
to water, fall gently upon the eyes, to moysten and refresh them, lest they
should be dried up, and wax hard through want of moisture: for that effect,
God has put in each eye four kernels, two in the upper, and two in the lower
angle, to receive and keep those humors, which drop either by the compression
and straining, or by the dilation and enlarging of the said kernels: that
straining and enlarging, are the internal and nighest causes of tears: there
be other causes which moove them, and are external, to wit, sorrow, choler,
love, joy; sundry other affections and agitations of the spirit: as also
smoke, and the spirits of things that are sour and sharp, as onyons are.
Sorrow and madness make us weep, by cooling and squeesing the conduits and
kernels of the eyes; and by wringing out of them the humors which they
contain. Joy inlargeth them, and makes those humors to fall down, namely,
in such as are tender and delicate, and whose constitution is more humid: for
the kernels of their eyes are soft and slack: whereas they which have them
strait and compact, or who are not so humid, weep not but seldom, and with
much ado. Likewise the other perturbations and passions of the soul, make
such a stirring in the body, and in the humors, that they glide easily, and
flow in such abundance, that they run not only through the eyes, but also
through the nostrils. These tears are called voluntary.

Other tears there be which are not volu^tary, such as are those which
proceed either from some disease in the eye, as is the inflammation of the
uttermost skin thereof, called Opthalmia, and the want of those kernells
whereof I have spoken: or from a great defluxion of humors from the brain upon
the eyes; or from the debilitie of the retaining force of nature, when it is
not strong enough to hold in those waters, but lets them slip and trickle.
He that weepeth thus, would be glad to have dry cheeks: for his tears are not
voluntary.

III. Mourning is the highest degree of weeping; when the smart is so great,
and the wound which the heart has received thereby, so deep and sensible, that
it begets in the whole body wondrous Symptoms. Then the hands, forgetting
their natural office, run to the garments, which are the ornament of the body,
to rent them; to the face, to scratch and deface it; to the head, to pluck off
the hair; to the beard, which is the glory of man, to tear it, and (if it were
possible) to root it out. Then the feet beat and smite the ground, which has
not given any offense. Then the air is troubled, and resoundeth with yelling,
with roaring, with bauling, with loud and confused noises of lamenting voices.
Then ye hear nothing, but Alas! Alas! Then ye see nothing but disfigured
faces, and a doleful spectacle of great astonishment.

When Genesis 50.10, 11.
Joseph and the Egyptians buried Jacob, they mourned with a great and very
sore lame^tation. Which when the Inhabitants of the land saw and heard, they
said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians: wherefore they called the
name of that place Abel-Mizraim, i. The mourning of the Egyptians. 2 Samuel
18.33.
The mourning of David for Absalom is thus described: He wept; and as he went,
thus he said: O my son Absalom! my son! my son. Absalom! would God I had
died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son! When Ezra 9.3
Ezra mourned; he rent his garment and his mantle, and plucked off the hair of
his head, and of his beard, and sat down astonished.

IV. Sen. ep. 116 Cic. 1. Academ. quast.
The Stoickes, ancient Philosophers, held, that a wise man must be moved
neither with joy, nor with grief; therefore that he must neither laugh nor
weep. Hier. advers. Pelag. Omnes affectus tolli posse, omnesque little fibras,
etc.
The Pelagians sowed those tares in the field of the church; teaching, that all
affections, yea, their smallest fillets, may be taken from man. Now, Lact.
Inst. l. 6. c. 15. Laetitiae affectus in spleen est, irae in fells, libidinis
in iecore, timoris in cord.
joy is in the spleen; choler, in the gall; lust, in the liver; fear, in the
heart: wherefore ye cannot pull those affections from man, except ye pluck from
him the milt, the gall, the liver, the heart, and transform him into another
nature, yea, forbid him to be virtuous and honest. for virtue is nothing but an
ordering and tempering of the affections to that which is honest and good: take
them away, way, and virtue is gone. Without anger, there is no fortitude;
without fear, no prudence and advisednesse; without lust, no temperance;
without joy, no love, no sense and feeling of virtue.

Therefore other Philosophers said better, that affections are like unto good
plants growing in a fertile soil: which if ye neglect, they wex wild; but if
they be carefully husbanded, they bring forth most pleasant and excellent
fruit. Which doctrine is true: for we must weed our affections, and snip from
them whatsoever is irregular and vicious. To pluck them out by the root, is as
if, when ye have killed a man, ye should command him to stand on his feet, and
live. Yet Plato de Repub. lib. 3. in principio.
the same philosophers, who gave so excellent precepts for the keeping of the
affections in a due proportion and measure, thought weeping and mourning to be
tolerable in base fellows, and mean women; but uncomely in all men of note,
and in women also which are of the right stamp, and desire to be esteemed
virtuous.

V. Consider now, what difference there is between the wise men of the world,
and God. Philosophers say, that there is much unmanlinesse and
faint-heartednesse, but no generousnesse, in weeping: therefore they condemn it
as childish, rather than man-like; and many men are still of that opinion. GOD
is of a far other mind: for he gives most earnest commandments to his
people to weep, and rebukes them sharply when they weep not. Christ in my
Text blesses them that weep: and the Scripture ministers unto us many examples
of the most courageous men that have been at any time under the vault of
heaven, which did both weep and mourn.

Was not Hos. 12.4.
Jacob so stout and hardy, that he wrestled with God, and prevailed? yet then,
even then he wept: and he mourned so bitterly for Joseph, whom he deemed to
be dead, that Genesis 37.35.
he refused to be comforted: for, said he, I will go down into the grave unto
my son, mourning. Did not 1 Samuel 17.35.
David kill a Lion and a Bear? Slew he not with a sling and a stone the
monstrous Giant Goliath? Was there ever in battle a more valiant man, in an
Army a more courageous Captain, in a Kingdom a more royal King? yet how did
he weep for Absalom! he was not ashamed to tell, that when God's hand was
heavy upon him, Psalm 32.3.
he roared all the day long. If I should produce, for an example of bitter
weeping, Ier. 31 15.
Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted, ye would
peradventure say, that she was a woman, and that women are not so courageous.
But what can ye say to Jacob? to Joseph? to David? ye must needs confess, that
they mourned, not through want of courage, but through abundance of love.

Zechariah, speaking in typical words of the death of Christ, and of
Christians, faith, Zech. 12 11, 12, 13 14
In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the morning of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon: and the land shall mourn, every family
apart; the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart; the
family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of the
house of Levi apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shemei apart, and
their wives apart; ALL the families that remain, every family apart, and
their wives apart. See the mean in mourning: it shall be without mean; such as
was the mourning at Megiddo, where the good King Josiah was slain: for, 2 Chro.
35.24.
all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for him. See the persons that shall mourn; Men
and women of all qualities and conditions: First, Kings and their wives;
secondly, Princes and their wives; thirdly, all ecclesiastical persons and
their wives; finally, all the rest of true Christians and their wives. Where is
courage, rage, where generosity, where constancy, if it be not in Christians,
who wrestle against the devil, and overcome him?

Was there ever in the world any man, or in heaven any Angel to be compared
with Jesus Christ? did he not John 11 33.35
groan in the spirit? did he not trouble himself? did he not weep for Lazarus?
If ye seek a President of weeping, who may be to you a true President, here ye
have one who is better and Psalm 45.2
fairer than all the children of men. Shall we refuse to follow such a
Ringleader? and seeing the Son of God did weep, because Heb. 2 17
in all things it behooved him to be like unto his brethren; shall we think
it a disgrace unto us to weep, and to be like unto him?

VI. Surely his holy Spirit sanctifies in us our natural affections, but
abolishes them not. And whereas many Philosophers take them for vices when they
exceed mediocrity; God gives them full liberty, when they come from a good
cause, and aspire unto a good end: Lact. Inst. l. 6. c. 16. Potest et qui
graditur, errare; and qui currit. rectam viam tenere.
For as he that walks softly, may stray; and he that runs, keep the high
way: so a man may be moderate in his affections, and sin; and let them grow to
the highest measure, and not sin: yea, if he should restrain them, he should
sin. No mediocrity is to be praised in ill-doing. If thou be but tickled
with joy for the death of thine enemy, thou sinnest: but 2 Samuel 6 14, 20, 23
David, leaping for joy, and dancing before the Lord with all his might when
he brought the Ark into Sion, sinned not. Contrariwise, Michol his wife,
reproving him for the excess of his joy, sinned, and was punished.

In things which are truly good, no excess is vicious: for God likes a man
who does good things with all his mind, all his soul, all his heart, and all
the strength of his affections. Who will say, that to leap for joy for the
deliverance of the Church, is a sin? Lact. ibid. Nemo dubitat, quin and in illo
exiguu^ laetari, and in hoc parum laetari, sit maximum crimen.
The Church says, that not to leap for joy in such a case, is unthankfulness,
and therefore a most detestable sin. The true moderation of the affections, is
to withdraw them from sin, and to apply them unto righteousness: when they
are once in the way, lay the bridle on their neck, put the spurs to their
sides, and make them to gallop till they run with thee to the Kingdom of
heaven. In our discipline, says Saint Austin, Aug. de eiv. Dei. l. 9 c. 5. In
disciplina nostra non tam quaeritur, utrum pius animus itascatur, sod quare
irascatur, etc.
we ask not if a godly soul be angry, but for what cause he is angry;
neither whether he be sorrowful, but for what cause he is sorrowful; nor if
he fear, but what is the cause of his fear: for, to be angry against a sinner,
that he may be corrected; to be sorrowful for him who is afflicted, that he
may be delivered; to fear for him who is in danger, lest he perish; who, that
is in his right wits, can blame it?

VII. Let us apply this to weeping and mourning. We must judge of all our
affections, not by their mediocrity or excess, but by the causes which set
them on work, and the end whereunto they incline, as I have said: this must be
the rule of our judgment concerning other men's weeping, and our own.

For such as are the causes of our Tears, such are they: some causes are
indifferent, some ill, some good. All tears naturally come from joy or sorrow.
These causes are indifferent in themselves. When Genesis 29 11
Jacob saw his cousin Rachel, he lifted up his voice, and wept: when Genesis 33.4
Jacob and Esau met together, they wept: when Genesis 43.30
Joseph saw his brother Benjamin, his bowels did yerne upon him, and he wept:
When he made himself known to his brethren, Gen 45 1, 2
he wept aloud: when he went to meet Israel his father; Genesis 46.29
he fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good-while. Natural love in
them begat joy, and joy opening all the pores of the eyes, they could not chufe
but weep. Such joy, such love, such tears are not commanded of God; for he is
not served by them. Neither has God forbidden them: for they are no offense
unto him, so that they go not beyond their due proportion and measure.

I say the like of tears which come from sorrow. Agar neither served nor
offended God, when Genesis 21.16.
she lift up her voice, and wept, being in distress, because she had no
water to give to her son to drink. It was natural to Ier. 31.25
Rachel to weep for her children; and in that, she sinned not: but when she
refused to be comforted, she sinned. The Act. 20.37.
brethren of Ephesus and Miletus, when Paul was going away, wept sore, and fell
on his neck, and kissed him. So we are accustomed to weep, when we lack
things which are necessary to our subsistence; as also when those whom we love,
die, or go from us to some foreign place. Where we love, if we see any
misery, sorrow seiseth the heart, the distressed heart sends a cold air to
the eyes: the eyes pressed with cold, become like a foggie winter day, and
distill tears abundantly. In such tears there is neither offense, nor service
don to God. Therefore they are indifferent.

IIX. But when Genesis 37.38, 41.
Esau lift up his voice, and wept, because his brother had taken away his
blessing, he sinned; for he wept through despite, proceeding from the pride
of his uncircumcised heart, and from hatred against his brother Jacob, whom he
vowed to slay. Number. 14.39.
The people of Israel being deprived of entering into the land of Canaan,
mourned greatly, not through repentance for their murmuring against God, but
through self-love, which is no small sin. What were the tears of Cain,
Saul, Achitophel, Judas, but stinking waters, flowing from the muddy puddle of
discontent and despair.

In anger a man will weep, not only through displeasure for the offense
received, but also through joy for hope of revenge: as the Crocodile weepeth
when he has found his prey. So Spartioni Antonia. Caracalla.
Bassianus wept for joy as often as he saw the Images of his brother Geta,
whom he had murdered. Many Robbers and Pirates weep so; woe, woe to such
weepers.

IX. The weeping where of we speak, and whereunto we exhort you this day, is
good, because it comes from a good spring: I may call it godly, because it
flows from godliness. I know that all reares in themselves are indifferent,
and no part of Gods service; but they take their denominatio^ from the root
whereout they grow and blossom. If the root be badde, they are bad; if good,
they are good: all good and godly tears come from joy or from sorrow.

As natural joy made Jacob to weep when he saw Rachel: so a supernatural joy
Neh. 8.9.
made the Jews to weep, when they heard the words of the Law. The love of God
made them to rejoice in his Law, and that joy turned their eyes into fountains
of tears; which they shed in such abundance, that Nehemiah, and Ezra, and the
Levites, were feign to exhort them, not to be grieved, but to abstain from
mourning and weeping. The Church needs not such exhorters, because it has
but few such weepers. Would to God that such a cause might be unto us this
day, a cause of crying unto you, as Ezra did then; Mourn not, nor weep.

But what godly Joy does never or seldom amongst us, will not 2 Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow do it? Many, many cannot persuade their eyes to weep for joy,
whose eyes sorrow will plunge into a river of tears. Let us then, I pray you,
let us NOW, let us in this day of godly sorrow weep after a godly manner: let
that sorrow which springs from the love of God, NOW in this day of tears,
furnish unto us tears of repentance to God, and tears of charity both to our
selves, and to others, who should be to us, for Gods sake, as our selves.

X. If there be no sin among us, let joy enlarge our hearts, let laughing
clear our faces, let us say to sorrow, Get thee hence: but if that which is
written in the Book of Job of the natural and sensual man, that Job 15 16
he is abominable and filthy, and drinks iniquity like water, be true of us;
if we sin NOW, then let sorrow press our hearts, and make of them a spring of
tears NOW: let heaviness cover our faces, as a cloud: let our eyes become
rivers; and for so much water of iniquity, or rather for so much wine of sin,
wine which is Deuteronomy. 32.33.
the poison of dragons; and the cruel venom of aspes, wherewith we are every
day drunken; let us this day, let us NOW cry Avaunt to joy, let us NOW welcome
weeping, let us NOW run to our eyes, and draw water; let us make of this
Fasting, a Feast of mourning: let every man NOW drink to his brother, every
woman to her sister, full cups of tears.

When the people of Israel were rebuked of Samuel for their sins, 1 Samuel 7.6
they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured it out before the
Lord, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against the Lord.
Lo how busy, lo how forward they were to draw water for the clensing of their
sacrifices, and for the purifying and washing of their bodies; or, as some
Doctors allegorize the words, lo how contrite they were, making of their hearts
wels of godly sorrow, and going thither with the bucket of faith, to draw up to
the eyes tears of repentance for bewailing of their sins. And what had they
done? They had worshipped strange gods, and set up among them ASTAROTH, R.
David Kimchi in lib. radicum.
which was the god of their sheep their fathers had done the like. And when the
Angel of the Lord rebuked them of that sin, Judge. 2 4, 5
they lift up their voice, and wept, and called the name of that place Bokim,
i. weepers, and they sacrificed there unto the Lord.

O how many strange gods do we worship! What are our self-love, our ambition,
our filthy lusts, our envy, our hatred, our pride, but strange gods, to who^
we offer most abominable sacrifices all the hours of the day? Our covetousnes,
our insatiable desire of cattle, of sheep, of the Mammon of unrighteousnes, is
our Astaroth, yea, an Idol so much worse than Astaroth, in that we worship it
not openly, but privately; not in the face of the world, but in the face of
God; not in temples of stone, but in the temples of our hearts, which God has
dedicated to his own service. How many Samuels, how many Angels has GOD sent
unto us, to reprove us of so many sins! and we are here assembled, as Israel
in Mizpeh, to acknowledge and confess our sins. O then, dear brethren and
sisters, let us first look up to the infinite Majesty of God whom we have
offended, and let us afterward look downwards to our selves who are the
offenders. Job 4 19
We dwell in houses of clay: our foundation is in the dust: we are crushed
before the moth. Houses of clay, earth and dust, worms, which are the meat of
of worms, sin against God; and shall we not mourn? shall we not draw tears
from our hearts? shall we not command our eyes to pour them out NOW before
the Lord? shall we not NOW wash with them our reasonable sacrifices, the
calves of our lips, which we are come hither to offer up unto God? shall not
this House of God be this day Bokim unto us? shall we not NOW cry to heaven
with weeping and mourning, We have sinned against the Lord?

David sinned but one night, and Psalm 6.6.
he was weary with his groaning: every night he made his bed to swim: he
watered his couch with his tears. If I say of many of us, that we sin every
night and every day, I think that I shall not lie: Oh then shall we not weep
this one day? David, when he wept, cried to heaven, Psalm 51.1, 2, 3
Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to
thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions: wash me thoroughly from mine
iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. What moved him to cry so loud, and in
crying, to pray for mercy? For, says he, I acknowledge my transgression, and
my sin is ever before me. Because he acknowledged his sin, therefore he wept.
If we knew how hateful our sins are to God, we would weep: we know them
not, we feel them not, we cast them still behind our backs, we never bring
them before our eyes: therefore we weep not. Oh how horrible shall be that
day, wherein shall be fulfilled that which GOD says, Psalm 50.21
I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thy eyes! The Lord in his
mercy preserve us from the terror and horror of that day.

He will do it, if by the weeping of this day we prevent the weeping of that
day; if, as Daniel did, Dan. 9 3, etc.
we set our face unto the Lord God, to seek him by prayer and supplications,
with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes; if, as he did, we confess that we
have sinned, and committed iniquity, and done wickedly, our Kings, our Princes,
our fathers, and all the people of the Land; if we acknowledge, as he did,
that if GOD should deal with us, as he dealt with his people of those days,
righteousness should belong unto him, and unto us confusion of face; if, as
he did, we join deprecation to the accusation of our own sins, and
confession of our own deserts, crying, Ver. 19
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do.

Where are the women of joy, which through grief for their sin, wash Christ's
feet with their tears, as Luke 7 37
one woman of that kind did once? How many (alas!) how many Publicanes, yea,
worse than Publicanes, do swarm in the Church! Shall ye find one among a
thousand, who dare Luke 18.13
not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven, for shame; who smites upon his
breast, which conceived sin in him; who with words interrupted with sighs, and
carried into heaven with a swift flowing stream of tears, cries to God, God
be merciful to me a sinner, as the Publicane in the Gospel did? We are all
prodigal sons: what do we all but feed swine; but feed upon swines
provender, but cherish in our selves our filthy lusts, but delight in sin?
Nevertheless, which of us all comes to himself, returns to his Father, and
says, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son, Luke 15 15
as once a prodigal son did?

Mat. 26 75.
Peter denied Christ but once, and against his heart, and yet he excused not
his fault, but wept for it bitterly. Are we not of the crew of those, of whom
the Apostle writes, that Tit. 1.16.
they profess they know God, but by their works they deny him; being
abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate? Would to God we
were not. But we are, and yet our heart is glad, our faces shine, our cheeks are
dry, our eyes are hardened like Pumice-stones, and we weep not.

Think ye, that Saint Paul could write to the Romans without vehement
sighing, how Romans 7 19
the good that he would, he did not; but the evil which he would not, that he
did? We are of a disposition much disagreeing unto his: The evil that we
would, we do not; but the good which we would not, that we do. Through fear
of punishment, we abstain often from the evil which we like to do: and
through love of praise; or of some reward, we do sometimes the good which we
love not: we serve God in covered dishes, yet we sigh not. O how sensible was
sin to this holy Apostle, when he cried, Romans 7 24
O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? O how
many tears, dropping from his eyes, washed his hands, and blurred his paper
when he writ these words! He with many sobbing tears desired to die, that
sin might die in him: Romans 6 7
for he that is dead, is freed from sin. We would not live, if we could not
sin: for life without sin, is death unto us. We walk as the Gentiles of
whom the Apostle writes, that Ephesians. 4 19
being past feeling, they have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to
work all uncleanness with greediness. Therefore being without sorrow in our
hearts, we have no tears in our eyes, and we weep not. What token is this?
Surely, that there is no love, no respect to God in us: for if we loved his
goodness, if we respected his Majesty, our hearts would cleave asunder for
sorrow, our eyes would break out into tears when we offend him.

CHAP. IV.
1 SEcond motive to weeping, from the Justice of God.

2 Sins are debts, whereby we treasure up wrath to our selves.

3 The sinner fights against God.

I. AS we love not his Goodness, as we honor not his Majesty; so we fear not
his Justice: and though we be selfe-lovers, though apparently we love our
selves too much, yet I may say, that we love not our selves enough, because
we hate our own souls. 2. Sam. 1.17
David wept and lamented^ when Saul killed himself, and when his best friend
Jonathan was slain by the Philistines. The Chap. 1 verse 11
author of the book of Wisdom says, that the mouth that belyeth, slaieth the
soul. Say not that the book is not Canonical: God himself says, that
Ezech. 18.7^
the soul that sins, it shall dye. Neither is there any of you ignorant of
the scripture, where S. Paul writes, that Romans 6 23
the wages of sin is death. Wherefore take heed to your sins; for so many
sins as ye commit against the eternal God, so many mortal blows give ye
to your immortal souls.

II. Macrob. l. 2 Satur. c. 4 Habenda est, inquit, ad somnum mihi conciliandum
illa culci^ra; in qua ille, tanto aere alieno obstrictu^, somnum capere potuit.
Augustus Caesar wondered, how a certain Knight of Rome, who owed great sums
of money, far beyond all his worth, slept so securely, that he was no way
disquieted with fear of the rigor of Justice, no way grieved with the
overthrow of his family; and would needs have the Quilt whereon that careless
man could be at quiet; thinking it should have more force to make him sleep,
than all the Laudanum of the Apothe-caries shops. We are that man: our debts
are our sins, which we pile up so mightily, that, as David said of his
iniquities, Psalm 40.12
they are mo than the hayres of our head: nevertheless we say with David, but
not in so good a cause, Psalm 4.8
I will lay me down in peace, and sleep; neither call we to mind when we
are thus hoording and heaping sins upon sins, as the Fables tell that the
Giants laid hills upon hills, when they were to fight against God; that Romans
2.5
through our hardness and impenitent heart, we treasure up unto our selves
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God. This is no tale forged by a Poet, but a most true saying come from Heaven:
for To. 1.31
this is the judgment of God, that they which commit such things, are worthy of
death.

III. What is it to sin? God says, it is to walk at all adventures with
him; or, as the translation of the text has, contrary unto him: that is, as if
ye should run your head against a wall of marble stone. Hear then what news
he sends to such adventurers, Lev. 26.27, 28.
If ye walk at al adventures with me, I will also walk at all adve^tures with
you in fury: and I, even I, will chastise you seven times for your sins: when
we fight and bicker, and tilt thus with God, who shall have the upper hand, and
which of us shall triumph? It were a safer course for us to Genesis 32.24.
wrestle with him, as Jacob did: Hosea 12.4.
He wept, and made supplication unto him. He wrestled by weeping, he
prevailed by praying: it is sorrowing; it is weeping for sin, it is praying
for forgiveness of sins, which gives us power over God. Therefore if we
desire to prevayle NOW, let us weep and pray NOW.

CHAP. V.
1. THird motive to weeping, from the passion and death of Jesus Christ,
considered first in the Garden;

2. Next, in the High Priests house;

3. Thirdly, in the Iudgement-Hall;

4. Fourthly, upon the Cross.

5. Diverse examples to moove us to weep for his death.

6. We have crucified him, therefore we should weep because of him;

7. As the Jews did.

8. They that weep not in this world, shall weep in hell.

I. BUt, to leave this, let us cast our eyes upon the passion and death of our
Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Cor. 5.21.
who knew no sin, and nevertheless was of God made sin for us; Let us
look upon him in the garden: there he said, that Mat. 26 38.
his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death: He was thus sorrowful for
our sins: and shall not we be sorrowful for them? There Mark 14.33.
he was sore amazed, and very heavy: And shall not we be amazed for his
amazedness, and very heavy for his heavines, who was thus amazed, thus heavy
for us? There ye see him wallowing on the ground before the throne of the
justice of God, there Luke 22.44.
he is in an agony, there in a cold air: the heat of the agony opens all
the pores of his sacred body, it melts his flesh like wax, it changes all
his humors into a river of a bloody sweat; which piercing and running through
his garment, imbued and dyed the ground with a crimson color: There ye hear
him Heb. 5.7
offering up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him
that was able to save him from death; death which he was to suffer, not for
himself, but for us. O hearts of steel! when will the agony of the Son of
God for you, cast you in an agony for your selves? O eyes drier than the dryest
brick! when will the bloody sweat of your sweet Savior, which mollified the
hard ground, soften you? when will the streams of tears, running from the
glorious and bright-shining eyes of the King of kings, change you into
fountains of water? when will weeping dig hollow furrows and gutters in your
faces? O when will ye begin to shed one tear for your own sins? Is it not
time to begin NOW, if ye have not begun till NOW?

II. Behold Luke 22.48.
Judas betraying him with a kiss: behold Ioh. 18 12.
the Officers binding him, as if he had been a male factor: behold them in
the high Priests house, Luke 22 63, 64, 65.
mocking him, smiting him, blindfolding him, and afterward striking him on
the face, and asking him, Who is it that smote thee? behold them speaking many
other things blasphemously against him: Mat. 26.59.65, 66.
behold the chief Priests, and Elders, and all the Council, seeking false
vvitnesses against him: behold them all, with the high Priest, pronou^cing
against him their award and last sentence, He is guilty of death. Now hearts
burst, Now eyes weep; NOW Christians, if there be any love of Christ, if
there be any bowels of compassion in you, mourn and lament. The Son of God
was bound for you who were slaves, that ye might be set at liberty. The Lord
of glory was mocked for you, who were the devils mocking stock, that ye might
be honored of God, who is your glory. The light of the world was blind-folded
for you who were darkness, that ye might be enlightened. The righteous was
outrageously beaten for you, who were unrighteous, that ye might be spared. The
Innocent was condemned for you, who were guilty, that ye might be absolved.
Christ suffered all this for you, and yet ye weep not.

III. Follow him into the Iudgement-Hall: Can thou, with an unbroken heart,
and dry eyes, see him Ioh. 19.1, 2.
scourged there, and his flesh mangled, and torn in pieces for thy sake?
Behold his naked head begirt with a crown of sharp thorns: O let us, us I
say, who profess to be members of his body, Pudeat membrum deliciarisub
capite spinis coronato.
O let us be ashamed to sport, and to make merry under a head crowned with
thorns.

IV. Go to the Cross: heed the soldiers nayling to the unfruitful tree his
hands and his feet; behold them giving him vinegar mingled with gall to
drink, in stead of wine: consider how they stripped him, ere he die, that he
may dye with more shame: listen to all those that pass by, and look on him;
ye shall see them wagging their heads, ye shall hear them reviling him, and
railing on him most outrageously. There he yielded up the ghost: there his side
was pierst: there he was made a woeful spectacle, and the principal actor of
a bloody and pitiful Tragedy.

Mat. 27 45, 51.
The Sun could not look on it; it covered it self with a black mourning
weed, and was darkened: but our faces shine, as if we had no cause of
mourning. The earth did quake; but we tremble not. The rocks rent: our hearts
are harder than flint stones, yea than the most hard Diamonds, and cannot be
broken. The graves were opened: our throats, alas! are open Sepulchers,
breathing out all filthiness, and rotten words; but our souls are graves
sealed and shut to all good. The dead rose again: we lie dead in trespasses
and sins without any spiritual motion, any feeling of the wrath of God,
which Christ in the passion of his death suffered for us. For 1. Pet. 2.24.
his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. There Esa 53.5
he was wounded for our transgressions: there he was bruised for our
iniquities: there, there, the chastisement of our peace was upon him: with his
stripes which he received there, we are healed. He, whom the ignominious
passion of Christ, whom the shedding of his blood, whom his cursed death will
not wound with a pricking remorse, and sting of sin; he out of whose eyes the
bruising and crushing of his body, the sorrow and agony of his soul, will not
thrust a flood of tears, shall never be moved by any other argument, to
mourn and to weep.

Plin. hist. not. l. 37. c. 4 I lla invicta vis, duarum violentissimae naturae
reru^, ferri ignisque contemptrix, hircino rumpitur sanguine.
The blood of a Heegoat will beat in pieces the diamond, which no heat of fire
can melt, no hammer of steel can break. What fire will melt, what hammer will
break our hearts of diamond, if the blood of the Lamb of God will not do it?

V. Judas a Reprobate, Mat. 27 3
Iud is which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented,
and wept: and we, who brag of our elation, weep not.

The Centurion, an ignorant Pagan, when he saw what was done, when he
considered all the circumstances of his death, glorified God, saying, Luke 23 47
Certainly this was a righteous man: we that are called Christians, we that
boast of the knowledge of God in Christ, acknowledge not his righteousness as
we should, seeing we weep not because he 1. Pet. 3 18
suffered for our unrighteousness.

Luke 23 48
All the people that came together to that sight, beholding the things which
were done, smote their breasts. We know all the things that were done: every
day Gal. 3.1
Christ is evidently set forth, and crucified among us, by the preaching of the
Gospel: and yet none of us smites his breast.

Ezech. 8.14
The idolatrous women of Jerusalem sat weeping for TAMMVS, Plut. de Iside and
Osiride.
called by the Greeks OSIRIS, the false god of the Egyptians, whom Typhon
slew: and we weep not for Jesus Christ, who 1 John 5.20.
is the true GOD, and eternal life, whom the Jews slew.

Plut de cessatione Oraculorum.
The Devils themselves, which were in the Isles of Paxes, did mourn at his
death, when Thamos the Pilot of the ship, which was sailing by, cried, The
great Pan is dead. Who is the great Pan, but he who is all in all, our Lord
Jesus Christ? The Devils mourned, because Heb. 2 14
through death he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil their master, and them also: we mourn not, we, I say, who were the
causes of his death.

VI. It is written in the Revelat. that Rev. 1.7
every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of
the earth shall wayle because of him. Why shall they wayle because of him?
because they pierced him. O God! have we pierced him? are we guilty of his
death? was it not Judas which betrayed him? was it not the Council of the
State and of the Church, which sent to take him? was it not the high priest which
accused him? was it not Pilate which condemned him? were they not Pilat's
soldiers which scourged, crowned, nailed, stripped, and pierced him? What ye
ask, is true. But why did he suffer mortal men to exercise such cruelties on
his innocent person? He stood there in our room; and what we deserved, that
he suffered: Our covetousness betrayed him; Our anger laid hold on him, and
tied him; Our lust mocked him; Our envy accused him; Our pride delivered him;
Our worldly fear condemned him; Ou^ ^nhumanitie scourged him; Our ambition
crowned him with thorns; Our profaneness and atheism spet upon him, smote
him, and abused him; Our causeless oaths nailed him; Our intemperancie in
drinking gave him vinegar and gall to drink; Our blasphemies, our horrible
execrations, our cursings, pierced him to the heart: and yet we weep not. God
was made a worm for us; and we weep not. Blessing it self was made a curse
for us; and we ^eep not. Life it self is dead for us; and we weep not.

VII. When the Jews heard, that he whom they denied, whom they delivered,
whom they crucified and killed by wicked hands, was Acts 3 14.15
the Holy One, the Just, the Prince of life; Acts 2 37.
they were pricked in their hearts, although that Act. 3.17
through ignorance they did it. O how bitterly did Saint Paul weep, when he
recorded how he had bin 1 Timothy 1.3.
a blasphemer, a persecuter, and an oppressor of Christ's Church, although he did
it ignorantly in unbeleef! we Heb. 6.6
crucify him, we put him to an open shame every day; if not wickedly, at
least vvittingly and willingly: nevertheless, we are not pricked in our
hearts; and therefore we have no tears in our eyes to vveep and vvail, because
of him whom we have pierced.

VIII. Will we defer the accomplishment of St. John's Prophecy till
Doomsday; when Rev. 6.15, 16
the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and all the
rabble of wicked men, shall cry to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and
hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of
the Lamb; when their crying shall avail them nothing; when the irrevocable
Doom shall be pronounced, and they shall be cast into utter darkness, where
Mat. 22 13
there shall weeping, and gnashing of teeth; because then shall be fulfilled
the threatening of Christ; Luke 6.25
Woe be to you that laugh now, for ye shall wail and weep? That weeping will
be unfruitful, because it shall be a weeping of despair; such as Judas
weeping was when he hanged himself.

Let us then, my beloved and dear brethren, begin to weep NOW, and to shead
fruitful tears; Aug de Temp ser. 66. Duplicem habere debet fletum in
poenitentia omnis peccator, five per negligentiam bonum non fecit, seu per
audaciam malum perpetravit. Quod enim oportuit, non gessit; and quod non
oportuit, egit.
tears for our sins of omission, tears for our sins of commission: for,
through negligence, we have not done the good we should have done; through
rashness, we have done the evil which we should not have done. Let us join
to that weeping, a resolution to sin no more: let us after that manner,
according to the exhortation of S. John, Mat 3.8
bring forth fruits answerable to amendme^t of life. Aug. ibid. Fructus dignus
est poenitentiae, transacta flere peccata, and eadem iterum non agere.
To bring forth such fruits, is, to weep for our sins past, and not to commit
any sin, for which we shall have need to weep again.

CHAP. VI.
1. Tears of repentance are fruitful, but they are not honorable.

2. Tears of charity, which we power out for the sins of our brethren, are
both fruitful and honorable.

3. In this charity, there is a duty to God,

4. And to man.

5. Examples of godly men which wept for other men's sinnnes, are accusations of
the hardness of our hearts;

6. Namely, the examples of Jesus Christ.

I. SUch fruits are fruitful, such tears are profitable, but they are not
honorable. It Is shame to a man to sin: and therefore it is not honorable
unto him to have need of pardon, to beg it, to weep for it. Quem liberat,
notat.
A remission is a disgraceful brand to him that opposes it to the hands of
justice: and amongst the Nobles of the land, those are most esteemed, in whose
family there is no pardon, no letters of remission: But u it is the glory of a
man, Pro. 19.15.
and namely of a King, to pass over a transgression, and to forgive it. It is
even so between God and us. Pro. 25.2.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, and to give pardons to great
sinners: But they which receive such pardons, must confess as Daniel did, that
Dan. 9.8.
to them belongs confusion of face, and say with Jeremiah, Lam. 3.2.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not.

II. As we must have fruitful tears of repentance, to weep for our own
sins NOW: so must we have honorable tears of charity, to weep NOW for the
sins of our brethren, whereof we are not guilty. As it is honorable to Luke
15.10.
the Angels to rejoice over the sinners that repent, because they themselves
are without sin: so it is a glory to us to mourn for those sins wherewith
we are not blemished.

III. In this glory there is a duty: if we honor God, if we fear his
glorious Majesty, if we be zealous of his glory, can we hear his great and
fearful name blasphemed, can we see his word despised, his law transgressed,
his glory turned into shame, and not be commooved? If our dearest friends
uttered in our ears but one word of discommendation and reproach against our
fathers and mothers that begat us, what noise would we not make? up would all
friendship go, no exhortation, no submission, no satisfaction would be able to
bridle our impatience, and to restrain our passionatenesse and fury from
vengeance.

If great men who are above our reach, if our Magistrates, if our Princes, if
our Kings speak disdainfully of them, at the least we would weep, at the
least we would show, by all kind of tokens of sorrow, that such disgracing
checks are grievous unto us. The living God, the Father of spirits is every
where vilipended, dishonored, reviled by great and small, by our inferiors, by
our superiors, by our equals, by our friends, by our foes. And shall not we,
which profess to be Gods children, be sensible of such contumelies?

IV. A great many, yea many millions, yea, the greatest part of men give
themselves over unto lasciviousness, and run headlong into the dark gulf of
death and eternal damnation. Are they not created to the image of God, as well
as we are? Are they not our own flesh? are they not our brethren? where then
is our charity, where our bowels, where our mercy, if we seek not to rescue
them, if we endeavor not to pull them out of the fire; if all helps being
impossible to us, we weep not for them?

V. 2. Pet. 2.7, 8.
Lot a poor stranger, in the midst of a town swarming with wicked men, when
he could do no better, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their
filthy conversation and unlawful deeds. Is not Christendom as filthy as
Sodom? and shall we find amongst us all one Lot, whether outlander or
homebred, that is vexed therewith? When David lived a private life, and had not
the power in his hand to repress wicked men; what he might, that he did.
Psalm. 119 53, 136.
Horror took hold upon him, because of the wicked that had forsaken Gods law:
rivers of waters ran down his eyes, because they kept it not. The forsaking of
Gods Law is an indifferent thing unto us: we discourse, we eat, we drink,
we take pleasure in wicked men that transgress it. O how was that holy man
moved with blaspheming and cursing, when he said to his God, The zeal of
thine house has eaten me up: Psalm. 69 9, 11.
the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me. Therefore I
wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, and that was to my reproach! The
air is infected with blaspheming and cursing: who is eaten up with the zeal
of the house of God, and of his glory, to refrain it? At the least, who
fasteth, who weepeth when he cannot refrain it?

If God should send his Angel through the midst of this City, as he did
Ezech. 9.4.
the man clothed with linen, through the midst of Jerusalem, to set a mark
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations
that be done in the midst thereof; I doubt not but he should find some
sighing, and shedding tears abunda^tly. For whersoever the visible Church is,
God has there one or another that belongs to his election: but I fear that
the number would be very scant and few.

Where justice has erected her sea, where Lawyers plead at the bar, there
is prevarication and briberie: where there is a crowd and many halls of
trafficking men, and of diverse societies of tradesmen; there must needs be
Monopolies, engrossing, cousenage, forswearing and robbery. Where there are so
many Tavernes, so many Alehouses, there is idleness, unnecessary wasting, and
lechery: where every where ye see nothing but pomp, but sumptuousness, but
riot, but gorgeousness and braverie, ye shall not lie, if ye say that there
is too much pride and vanity. As a big and wel-fed body is full of ill
humors: so in a great City, such as this is, there are many irregular and
careless Citizens. And as standing waters turn into mud, and breed frogs
and toads; so a long peace begets a crew of uglie and noisome vices, and a
pack of base and lewd fellows.

If we could Ezec. 8.8, 9, 10.
dig in the wall, as Ezechiel did, how many creeping things, how many
abominable beasts should we see, not purtrayed, but living and mooving in the
Temples of many men's hearts, who have a fare show in the flesh, and seem to
our charitable judgment the honestest men that ever are bread. Oh! if we
could know them, we would, or at least we should mourn NOW, as Ezra 9.3. Neh.
13.23.
Ezra did once for the unlawful marriages which they had contracted with the
women of Ashdod, even with strange and beastly affections: We would NOW weep
in secret places for their pride, as Jeremiah did: and that which was commanded
to Ezechiel, Ezech. 6.11.
to smite with his hand, to stamp with his foot, and to say, Alas! for all
the abominations of the house of Israel; that would we, or should we do NOW
for all the enormous and most wicked sins of the reformed Churches.

The holy Apostle 2. Cor. 12.21.
Paul was humbled among the Corinthians, and bewailed many which had sinned,
and had not repented of the uncleanness, and fornication, and lasciviousness,
which they had committed. If this Church were but one Parish, if we might know
every man's and woman's carriage in it, I think that we should rather want
tears in our eyes, than matter to provoke them to weep for such sins.

The same Apostle rebuked sharply 1. Cor. 5.2.
the Corinthians, because they mourned not, that the incestuous man might be
taken away from among them. Alas! alas! what is riot, what is pride, what is
taverning, what is lasciviousness, but committing of spiritual incest with
the devil? There was but one incestuous of that kind in Corinth; there are
NOW too many of this kind amongst us, and we weep not Now.

2 Cor. 2.7.
That incestuous man sorrowed, repented, and wept; yea he was almost swallowed
up with overmuch sorrow: these incestuous persons will seem honest men, and
weep not: for Hosea, 4.11.
whoredom and wine, yea, the excellent wine, take away the heart.

Ier. 6.23, 24.
Iehoiakims Courtiers are threatened with great plagues, because when the King
had cut the roll wherein the word of God was written, and cast it into the
fire, they were not afraid, rent not their clothes, and wept not: My heart
quakes, my soul shakes, my flesh faints, my hair stares, my tongue cleaves
to my jaws, and words are dried up in my mouth, when I begin to complain that
not the word of God, but his glorious body is most cruelly and ignominiously
disme^bred, that no word is spoken by many without an oath, and no oath without
wounds, passion, body, pockes, etc. that at each of those blasphemies, God is
most vilely named; and none, yea not one of those that stand by, open their
mouths to reprove it, yea, yea, do not so much as sigh, as frown, as shiver,
as thrust one, one drop of tears from their hornie eyes to condemn it.

VI. O sweet Jesus! thou seeing the malice of the Jews, Mark. 3.5.
lookedst round about on them with anger, being grieved for the hardness of
their hearts: O most glorious Son of God! Thou, who art Romans 9.5.
over al, God blessed for ever, did Luke 19.41.44.
weep over Jerusalem, because she knew not the time of her visitation. O
zealous and blessed Apostle! when thou wast at Athens, Acts 17.16
thy spirit was stirred in thee, seeing the City wholly given to Idolatry. If
ye were beyond sea, yea if ye could enter into a Recusants closet, ye should
see so many Idols, that ye would wonder, that men, men calling themselves
Christians, should be they of whom it is written, that Rev. 9.20, 21.
they repented not of the works of their hands; that they should not worship
Devils, and Idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood,
which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk. More would ye wonder, if ye did
see them worshipping, in stead of Jesus Christ, a piece of dough roasted upon a
pair of tongs. But alas! whose spirit would wex eager at it? That which is
written of the Priests, People, and Princes of Israel, is true of them: Hos. 5.4
Their doings will not suffer them to turn unto their God; for the spirit of
whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the Lord. But who,
with Jesus Christ, whose actions are our instructions, is grieved for the
hardness of their hearts? Shall the sins of idolaters wring one tear out of
our stony heads; when our own sins are increased above the hairs of our
head, and are heavier than the sand of the sea, and yet we look on them with
dry eyes, as if all their muscles were withered, and without sap? Let us, I
pray you, let us begin NOW to weep, because until NOW we have not wept: let
us tune upon the strings of our hearts a doleful song of heavy mourning,
because we have not known, in this peaceable Kingdom, the things belonging
to our peace.

CHAP. VII.
1 THey that weep not for sin, are constrained to weep for the punishment of
sin.

2 He that weepeth not in affliction, is a desperate sinner.

3 Godly men weep in affliction.

4 In our afflictions we must weep to God.

I. FOr, 1. Cor. 11.31.
if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged. If we could once
sorrow: if sorrow wrought indignation in us; indignation, fear; fear, desire;
desire, zeal; zeal, revenge, by weeping for our sins, and abstaining from
sin, then we should never weep for the punishment of sin: but if we weep
not when we should weep, Genesis 4.7
sin lies at the door; and the punishment thereof shall make us to weep
when we would not weep. Ephesians. 5.4
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for, because of these things, because
of fornication, of uncleanness, of covetousness, of filthy and foolish
talking, and other vices, which are but too too common in our Churches, comes
the wrath of GOD upon the childen of disobedience. I am not a Prophet, nor the
son of a Prophet, to say to you, as Ezechiel writ to the Jews, Ezech. 7.5, 6,
7.
An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. An end is come: the end is come: it
awaketh against thee: behold, it is come. The morning is come unto thee, O thou
that dwell in the land: the time is come, the day of trouble is near. Ye
see it come upon your brethren, for whom ye fast, and should weep NOW. Are
they not as honest, as godly, as religious as ye are? Therefore say not with
the profane Jews, Esa. 28.15.
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell are we at agreement. When
the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: for we
have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we hid our selves. Apply
rather to your selves that which Christ, who cannot lie, said to the Jews of
Luke 13.2
the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices; and of
those eighteen, upon whom the Tower in Siloe fell, that they were not sinners
above all the rest of the people: And therefore, except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish.

II. When affliction is comne, I need not exhort you to weep for it: To that,
nature will be to you a most persuasive preacher. The heart must be harder
than a Stithie, if it sorrow not; the eyes must be dryer than a potsheard, if
they weep not in affliction. The Jews were come to the height of sin, when
the Lord checked them for hardness of heart in their oppression; saying, Esaias
22 12, 13, 14
In that day did the Lord GOD of Hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and
to baldnes, and to girding with sackcloth: and behold joy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; and ye say, Let us
eat and drink: for tomorrow we shall die. Such a sinner in that was their King
Achaz, who in the time of his distress did trespass yet more against the
Lord. He was ever king Achaz, ever like himself; never better, but rather
worse. This hardness of heart is a near cousin to the irremissible sin: for
God said to these stony-hearted sinners, Surely, this iniquity shall not be
purged from you, till ye die.

III. I hope there is none so wickedly disposed amongst you all: for, I deem,
there is none amongst you, but he will sorrow, weep and mourn, when the hand
of God is heavy upon him; we are all of one metal. Job says, that in his
afflictions, Job 3 24
his roarings were poured out like the waters: he Job 30.28, 31.
cried: his harp was turned into mourning; and his organe, into the voice of
them that weep. The like we have heard of many others, with the refutation of
the indolence and unsensiblenes of the Stoics.

IV. But if ye do nothing but roar, but cry, but weep and mourn when ye are
chastised, what do ye that your dogs will not do? will they not cry and
howl when they are beaten? Tears, if they be alone, are no more regarded of
God, than the howling and yelling of beasts, which will roar when they are
hardly used.

Weep then as the Saints have always wept. When your eyes run down with
tears, and your eyelids gush our with waters, let your prayers run up to
heaven with them, to power them out into the bosom of God. Weep as 1. Sam.
1.10.
Hannah wept, who being in bitterness of soul, prayed unto the Lord, and
wept sore. Weep as the children of Israel wept: for when the children of
Benjamin had destroyed of them forty thousand men, Judge. 20 23, 26.
they wept before the Lord. Weep as Job wept, when Job 16.20.
his eyes powered out tears unto God. Weep as David wept, who when he was
swimming in his tears, said, Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and morning, and at noone will I pray, and cry aloud, and he shall
hear my voice. Weep as Hezekiah wept; 2. Kin. 20.2, 3.
He prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore. Esa. 38.84.
He chattered like a crane, or a swallow: he mourned as a dove: his eyes
failed with looking upward: his prayer was, O Lord I am oppressed, undertake
for me.

CHAP. IIX.
1. WE must weep also for the desolation of the Church,

2. As David and Jeremiah did.

3. Great desolation of the Churches by the last troubles.

4. Their present state most pitiful and lamentable.

5. Examples to moove us to weep for them.

I WHen ye have thus wept for your selves, remember that ye are not for your
selves only: consider that ye belong to the mystical body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the members whereof are dispersed through the whole world: and print in
your minds the most reasonable commandment of the holy Apostle, Romans 12.15.
Weep with them that weep. Weep for the Church, as the holy men of God have
wept for it. They mourned for the evils past, for the evils that were
present, and for the evils that were to come.

II. When David heard the tidings of the overthrow of Gods people by the
Philistines, 2. Sam. 1.11, 12.
He and all the men that were with him, mourned, and wept, and fasted until
even. Made not Jeremiah lamentations for the desolation of Jerusalem? and when
his eyes were dried up, when his eyelids were so withered, that heaviness and
sorrow could find no water to squeese out of them, did he not then wish, did
he not the^ cry, Ier. 9.1.
O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.

III. Dear brethren, there is no man beyond seas, in those places where the
war was, but he may say as truly as Jeremiah said in his Lamentations, Lam.
3.1
I am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of the Lords wrath: who as
Ier. 15.3.
he had appointed over his Churches their four kinds, the sword to slay, the
dogs to tear, the fowls of the heaven to devour, and the beasts of the
earth to destroy; so has he brought those fierce and pitilesse executioners
of his justice upon his people. Lam. 2.21.
He has slain in the day of his anger, he has killed, he has not pitied.
Chaste women and honest matrons were defiled and murdered; shamefac't and pure
virgins were most vilely deflowred; the young men were put to death by the
sword; sucklings were pulled away from their mothers breasts, and cast into the
rivers, or dashed against the stones; the principal men of towns were hanged;
the faces of Elders were not honored; their bodies, which had been Temples of
the Holy Ghost, were given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and unto
the beasts of the earth, as if they had been dead dogs. Populous towns are
now heaps of stones: where defenced and strong cities were, nothing is to be
seen but ruins. That which was thought impossible to be achieved in fifty
years by all the slight and might of the enemies, was begun and finished in
fifty days.

Esa. 4.26.
The Lord hissed unto them, and they came upon the Churches with speed swiftly.
None was weary, none stumbled amongst them: their horses hoofes were like
flint, the wheels of their charriots were like a whirlwind. Their roaring
was like a Lion; they laid hold of the prey, and carried it away safe, and
there was none to deliver: So on them was accomplished that which Isaiah
prophesied once against the Jews, and which was fulfilled. The head of those
armies might have written about the Emblem of his unlooked-for victories, the
posie which Julius Caesar carried graven in the table of his triumph of the
Parthians, VENI, VIDI, VICI: I came to them, I saw them, I overcame them. Is
there any head so frozen and hardened with unsensiblenesse, but it will NOW melt
and flow over with tears, at the naming only of the great breach which has
been made in the Church of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

IV. There was never wound so weil healed, but the cicature remained: O how
great is the scarre of this wound! Alas! alas! when shall it be closed up?
Behold and consider the present state of the Churches of the Palatinate, of
Bohemia, and of many more: Is it not NOW most miserable, and a sorrowful
subject of a tragical lamentation? and shall we not weep NOW?

V. Job 30.25.
Did I not weep, says Job, for him that had evil days? was not my soul
grieved for the poor? O how evil are Now the days of our distressed
brethren! and shall not we weep for them NOW? O how many rich men have been
turned into their shirts! how many are now poor, that were wont to relieve the
poor! and shall not our souls be grieved for them NOW?

1. Sam. 4.20, 21, 22.
Phineas wife was not so gladded, because she had borne a son, as she was
deadly wounded with displeasure, because, the Ark of God was taken: At that
tidings, she called her son Ichabod, that is to say, Where is the glory? and
nothing at all regarding him, she said in her mourning and lamentation, The
glory is departed from Israel: for the Ark of God is taken. So weeping, so
mourning, so bemoning, not so much the death of her beloved husband, as the
taking of the Arc, she gave up the ghost. The true Ark of God is the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ; Gospel which Romans 1.16.
is the power to every one that believes. The Philistines have taken the Arc:
Antichrist has again smothered the Gospel: the glory is departed from the
Churches: the abomination of desolation is alas! alas! set up again in the
houses of the Lord: swarms of drones humming and buzzing make an unknown and
most unpleasant noise; where the word of the Lord was wont to be preached, his
Name to be ta^^ed upon, his praises to be sung. If men, hearing NOW these
woeful tidings, will not weep NOW; shall not women, who are more sensible of
injuries, and sooner pricked with sorrow, mourn and weep NOW, even NOW?

Nehemiah was more sorrowful for the desolation of the City of Jerusalem, than
he was joyful for all his credit and favor with the great King. When he
heard, that the people of God, which was returned from the ^^ptivity of
Babylon, Neh. 1 3, 4.
was in great affliction and reproach, that the wall of Jerusalem was broken
down, and the gates thereof burnt with fire; he sat down, and wept, and
mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God of heaven. The
king wondered to see his countenance; thinking his royal favor more than
sufficient to cheer him up, and to make his heart glad. But he answered, Neh.
2.3.
Why should not my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my fathers
sepulchers, lies waste, and the gates thereof are consumed with fire? This is
the present state of many brethren: where they are suffered to live, they live
in so great affliction and reproach, that death would be welcomer unto them
than life. Their towns are dismantled: their houses are turned into cotages:
they that had something, are, by the oppression of garrisons, brought to little
or nothing. If there be not at Artaxerxes Court a Nehemiah to weep a few
days; let us, who are no Courtiers, weep this one day for them: let us weep
NOW.

David said of his enemies, that Psalm. 35 12, 13, 14.
they rewarded him evil for good, seeking to deprive him of his soul. But as
for me, says he, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled
my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom: I behaved
my self as though he had been my friend and brother: I bowed down heavily,
as one that mourns for his mother. Was that holy man's charity so fervent,
that he wept for his foes? and shall ours be so cold, that we cannot find
one tear to shead NOW for our friends?

John 11 35, 36
Jesus wept for his friend Lazarus, who was dead and stinking. Then said the
Jews, Behold how he loved him. Our dear friends are like unto Lazarus: they
are in a worse plight, than if they were dead: when they walk abroad they look
like a ghost. Their goods are become a booty: their houses are desolation: their
enemies are roaring Lions and ravening wolves, who have left nothing on them
but skin and bone. If we had charity in our hearts to love them, would we
not have tears in our eyes, to weep for them NOW; words in our mouths, to
pray for them Now; our hands in our purses, to succor them Now? would we not
remember the exhortation of the Apostle, and practice it? Heb. 13 3.
Remember, says he, them that are in bo^ds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body.

CHAP. IX.
1. We must weep, to divert greater calamities, wherewith we are threatened.

2 Most excellent presidents of such weeping.

3 Of them which weep when they should not weep.

4 It is lawful to weep for the dead,

5 With moderation, and without ostentation:

6 As it is comely to Christians.

7 Custom of the ancient Church in Funerals.

8 They which weep for sin, and leave not off to sin, weep not as they
should weep.

1. AS the last of GODS visible works were the best: so the last of the works
of the Man of sin, who intituleth himself, Summum Numen in terris, the
Sovereign God on earth, are the worst. The ill which he has done, is like
unto 1. Kings 12.11
Salomons whips: but the ill which he is minded to do, is like unto
Rehoboanis scorpions. He plays now with sundry of our brethren, as the Cat
does with the Mouse: but if he may take all with his great Armies, he has
laid his plotte to destroy, to cut off the churches, to tread them down like
the mire of the streets. He has already ingulfed the Palatinate: he has
swallowed up the Kingdom of Bohemia: he has set his foot on the neck of France
are under his hand: of all the reformed Churches which God has erected in the
Continent and main land of Europe, none have escaped his clavves, but those of
the Lowe-Countries. Now when he is assured of all the rest, he seeks to
grasp them; making his account, that to us from them there is but a short
passage. Therefore this day we fast, we vveep, we mourn, we pray for them.

II. The man of God, Elisha, settling his countenance steadfastly on Hazael,
wept; because, said he unto him, 2 Kings 8.12
I know the evil that thou will do unto the children of Israel: Their strong
holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay with the sword,
and wilt dash their children, and rip up their women with child. Our Lord
Jesus Christ Luke 19 41, 42, 43
wept over Jerusalem, because the days were coming, that she should be laid
even with the ground, and one stone should not be left in her upon another.
This is the humanity that our neighbors and we must look for, if our
neighbors be oppressed, and Antichrist prevail. Therefore let us NOW, NOW, I
say, cry to heaven with weeping and mourning, that they may fall from their
counsels, and their mischief return upon their own heads.

1. Sam. 15.35
Samuel wept for Saul, whom God had rejected. Shall we not weep for our
brethren, whom God has elected? Isaiah says, that Esaias 15.5
that his heart cried out for Moab, that Esaias 21 3, 4
his loins were filled with pain; that pangs had taken hold upon him, as the
pangs of a woman that travelleth, that his heart panted, that fearfulness
affrighted him, that God had turned the night of his pleasure into fear,
because of the fall of Babylon, which was near. Are the Saints so
tenderhearted, that they weep for the ruin which is to come upon Gods
enemies? Are we so hard-hearted, that we cannot weep NOW for the evil
wherewith GOD's servants are threatened? was Joel 2 12
fasting, weeping and mourning, indicted to God's people, for Armies of Locusts
and Caterpillars, which could do no more but eat up the fruits of the earth,
and destroy the glory of the trees? Now when great Armies of unmercifull men,
whose mind is to destroy both the land and the inhabitants, rise up against
our brethren, and seek to overwhelm them; shall we not NOW, even NOW, with
fasting and weeping cry unto God, as Iehoshaphat did, 2. Chro. 20.12
O our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this
company that comes against us, neither know we what to do: but our eyes are
upon thee.

III. O how great is our crossenesse! O how untractable is the hardness of our
hearts! We weep when we should not weep: we weep not as we should weep: we
weep not when we should weep.

As little children are angry when ye throw out of their hands the knife
wherewith they would have killed, themselves; or take from them their puppets,
that they may go to schools, and weep when they should not weep: so when God
pulls from one his riches, from another his health, from some their honors,
from others the pleasure of their bellies, which are but painted trifles, and
to the most part of men's souls are more dangedangerous, than sharp knives in
their throats; they weep beyond all measure, and ye cannot still them. Whereas
if they knew why God strippes them of their childish delights, they would say
as the French men did, after that Julius Caesar had brought them under the yoke
of obedience, Perieramus, nisiperij ssemus.
We had perished, if we had not perished. Gods children, after they have been
schooled and nurtered with such losses, think and speak so, and say with
David, Psalm. 119.67.71.
Before I was afflicted, I went astray: but now have I kept thy word: It is
good for me, that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

As worms, which breed in childrens stomachs, and gnaw their guts, cannot
be killed but by worme-wood, or some other bitter potion, which ye cannot
persuade them to drink without weeping: so the vanity, the pride, the
covetousness of riches, the contempt of the Gospel, the horrible security of
many men, can not be cured but by the wormwood of tribulation; whereof the
great Physician of the soul fills to them great bowls, and compells them to
drink thereof, till their heads be dizzy, that they may be healed; and they
are so childish, that they weep: whereas as Iam 1.2.
S. Iam. teaches them to count it all joy, when they fall into diverse
tentations. I say then, that such men weep when they should not weep.

IV. Others weep when they should weep, but they weep not as they should.
Christian Religion transformeth not men into stocks and stones: and grace
abolisheth not natural affections, but sanctifies them. When the Apostle,
speaking of them which are asleep, says, that 1. These. 4.13.
ye should not sorrow, even as others which have no hope, he forbids you
not to be wail your dead: for it is impossible to fight against the motions of
nature. Did not Genesis 23.2.
Abraham, the father of the faithful, mourn and weep for Sa^ra? Did not Genesis
50 1.10.
Joseph weep upon his dead father, and kiss him? did not all his sons bury
him with a very great and sore lamentation? Did not Number. 20.29.
all the congregation of Israel mourn for Aaron thirty days? Did Deuteronomy. 34.8.
they not weep for Moses as many days? Did not David weep for v 2. Sam. 1.17.
Saul, for 2. Sam. 3.32.
Abner, and for his son 2. Sam. 18.33.
Absalom? and did not our Lord Jesus Christ Ioh. 11.35.
weep for Lazarus? Did not Act. 8.32.
the devout men of Jerusalem make great lamentations over Steven? Did not Act.
9.39.
the Christian widows of Lydda weep for Dorcas when she was dead?

V. The thing which the Apostle forbids, is weeping; such as is the weeping
of the Gentiles, which is immoderate, because they have no hope. One of them,
seeing he must needs pay the last tribute to nature, and go the way of all
the earth, as he was dying, made an heavy moan for his soul, saying Spartiani
Adrianus. Animula, vagula, blandula, Hospes comesque corporis; Quae nune abibis
in loca Pallidula, rigida, nudula? Nec, ut soles, dabis iocos.
O my restless, my gentle, my sweet soul, soul, which have been a friendly
guest and companion of my body? O how wanne, how cold, how bare and empty is
the place whither thou must now go! neither shall thou hereafter make me
merry. The rest had no better hope; if they spoke not so, they thought no
less. But we know, that Ioh. 5.24.
he that believes in Christ, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death unto life: therefore we must not weep
for our dead immoderately, as Gentiles do; but moderately, as Christians do.

In Ier 9.17, 18.
Jeremiah his time, there was an heathnish custom among the Jews, Praficae
mulieres.
to hire mourning women, who were accustomed to take up a wailing for their
dead: and that Chrysostom. ad Popul. Antiochen. homil. 69. and 70.
profane custom was in the Church in S. Chrysostomes days. It is now banished
out of the Church: But that weh we do, is not much unlike unto it: we tear
our faces with our nails, we pull the hair out of our heads, we rend our
clothes, we yell, we roar, we howl like beasts, and show indeed, that we
are without hope, and so great hypocrites; or that we consisider not what we
are doing. Chrysostom said, that Ex ostentatione potius, and ambitione, and
inani gloria sunt, etc.
there is more ostentation, ambition, and vain glory, than true sorrow in such
weeping: for a man may weep bitterly in his closet, and not make such a show.
Yea, in such weeping there is great shame and great offense offered to our most
holy religion. For how shall we speak of the immortality of the soul to them
which believe no such thing? how shall we persuade them to believe Tertull. de
Resurrect. Carnis. Fiducia Christianorum, resurrectio mortuorum.
the rising again faith of Christians, when by such yelling, we make them to
believe that death is as horrible unto us, as unto them? for they heed not what
we believe, but what we do. And how shall we our selves contemn death, if we
show so great impatience when our friends die?

IV. Hearken then, and learn how to weep for the dead: do ye consider death
as it is Rom 6.23.
the wages of sin? Weep. Consider it also as it is through Christ, Ioh. 5.24.
a passage to life, and weep not.

Do ye consider how your dear friend, whom ye loved so tenderly, is by death
become so ugly and loathsome, that ye are constrained with Genesis 23.4.
Abraham to bury him out of your sight, lest he become suddenly a stinking
carrion? Weep. Consider also, that through Christ his grave is made a Doctor
unto him, and weep not.

Does experience make you to say, that by and by he shall be dust and ashes?
Weep. But send for faith, and it will tell you, that though he sleep now in
the dust of the earth, Dan. 12.2
he shall awake to everlasting life: according to the comfortable saying of
Christ to Martha, John 11 25, 26
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never
dye. For in that blessed day of the resurrection of the righteous, Christ Phil.
3.21
shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body. Here is the comfort of your faith. The Pagans, speaking of a dead man,
were wont to say, Scal. Castigat. in Festum verbo. Abitione^.
FUIT, He was, because they were without hope for the time to come. But your
Romans 5 5.
hope, which makes not ashamed, teaches you to say, ERIT, He shall be. They
said also, Tert. de testimonio animae. adver. Gent. c. 4. Abijt iam, sed
reverti debet.
He is gone, but he will come again: not showing, that they had any hope of
the resurrection, as Tertullian deemed, but seeking Euphemisms and fair words,
having a sense repugnant to their mind; to show, that they esteemed all dead
men to be lost. In that same sense they said, VIXIT, He did live: and therefore
they called him Ibid. Cum alicuius defuncti recordaris, misellu^ vocas cum.
miserable. If ye consider your dead brother as departed out of this life
because of sin, say, He did live; and weep: but know ye not, that 1. Sam.
25.29.
his soul is bound in the bundle of life with the Lord his God? Therefore say,
VIVIT, He lives: say, He is blessed; and weep not. Rev. 14 13
For, blessed are the dead that die in the Lord. Believe ye not, that they are
past from death to life? Wherefore then weep ye? Will ye be injurious to our
Lord Jesus Christ? Will ye deny the virtue of his death? Will ye forsake the
merit thereof? Know ye not, that his death is to us which believe, the death
of our death, and the life of our life? Then weep not.

O but he was my loving husband: she was my virtuous wife: thou have had some
loss; weep: but thy loss is their gain. They are gone to the marriage-supper
of the Son of God: and it is written, Blessed are they which are called unto
the marriage-supper of the Lamb. These are the true sayings of God. Therefore
weep not.

Alas! he was mine only son, the heir of all my goods: and now (alas!) to
whom shall I leave them? Thy loss is great; weep: his advantage is greater. He
is gone to his heavenly Father: he is now his heir. Thou could give him but
earthly goods: those which he enjoys, are celestial. Thine are perishable,
and death would have constrained him to leave them to another: those which he
now possesses, are everlasting, and are not subject unto loss. If thy son
were in credit with the King, I think thou should laugh, and not weep: he
is in credit with the King of kings, and in great felicity in his presence; and
if he could send thee tidings from heaven, he would admonish thee to leave thy
goods to thy poor kinsmen; and, according to the commandment of the Apostle,
1. Tim. 5.3
first to show piety at home; and next, to strangers that are needy. Therefore
weep not.

He was a godly man, and (well-away!) I am bereft of his godly and fruitful
conversation. That affliction is great to thee; weep: but thy cross is his
crown. And therefore, if thou lovedst him as much as thou love thy self, thou
would rather rejoice for him, than weep for thy self. Weep for wicked men:
for they are with the devil; yea, says Ad pop. Antioch. hom. 69. Na^ si
lugendum est, diabolum oporteret lugero, etc.
Chrysostom, If ye would weep, ye should weep for the devil himself. Rather
let the devil weep for himself, because he is damned: let wicked men weep
for themselves, because they are tormented. But let us rejoice for good and
godly men, because they are with God, and are saved.

VII. This has ever been the doctrine of the Christian Church; which, to
withdraw those of the Gentiles that believed, from mourning and crying at
funerals, was accustomed to celebrate the funerals of Christians with singing
of psalms: Chrysostom. ibid. hom. 70.
and the words which they sung, were, Psalm 23.4
I will fear no evil: for thou art with me: Item, Psalm 32.7
Thou art my hiding place; thou shall preserve me from trouble: as also, Psalm
116.7
Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the LORD has dealt bountifully with
thee. Consider now, and behold: God calls death a benefit; why then do thou
weep? Thou will weep for the welfare of thine enemy, because thou hat'st him;
will thou make thy friend his companion, and weep also for his weal?

The Apostle, forbidding us to weep as the Gentiles do, bids us 1. These.
4.18.
comfort one another with these words of the resurrection: If, notwithstanding,
we weep as the Gentiles do; I say, that, weeping when we should, we weep not
as we should.

VIII. I say the same of all those, which when they are rebuked of sin, will
weep; and yet leave not off to sin. The Scripture says, that 1. King.
21.25, 26, 27.
there was none like unto Achab, which did sell himself to work wickedness
in the sight of the Lord. Yet when he heard the judgments of God denounced
against him, he rent his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted,
and lay in sackecloth, and went softly. O how bitterly he wept! O how
dolefully he mourned! To look on him, ye would have said, This is a penitent
man. But immediately after, 1. Kin. 22.6.27.
he gives heed to false Prophets, he casts Micaiah the Prophet of the Lord
in prison, and surceaseth not from sinning, till God kill him. Doubtless, Cain
wept and mourned, when he said to God, Gen 4.13.
My iniquity is greater than I can bear: Nevertheless he did not forbear to
sin, but waxed worse and worse.

Such men, says Greg. Pastoralis Curae 1. part. Flendo inanit^r se mu^dant,
qui vivendo se nequiter inquinant.
Gregory, Wash themselves in vain with tears, because they beray themselves
by their naughty lives, and practice that which is said in a Proverb, 2. Pet.
2.22.
The dog is turned to his own vomit again: and the sow which was washed, to
her wallowing in the mire: what is such weeping, but increasing of sin? Thou
weepest for sin, because thou know that it is an evil thing. And yet thou
go back unto it again, as if thou soughtest to shed tears to steep in
them the dirt of thy sins, that as a sow thou may wallow with full content
in myrie water: As when Balaam wished with sighing, Numb. 23.10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his: yet
after that, he sought to curse the righteous, and gave a pernicious counsel
to the King of Moab against them, what did he but heap sin upon sin, and
aggravate his own condemnation?

CHAP. X.
1. OF them that weep not when they should weep for their own sins,

2. Nor for the sins of other men,

3. Nor for the afflictions of the Church.

I. BUt how, alas! how are they increased that weep not! How many see we
before our eyes every day benumbed with a spirit of slumber, who Cypr. de Laps.
Quando debuerant stare, iacuerunt: quando iacere and prosternere se Deo debent,
stare se opinantur.
when they should stand, fall; and when they should fall, stand! who when they
should resist sin, and stand fast for their souls against the wiles of the
devil, fall into sin: and when they should fall on their faces, with sad
hearts and moist eyes, before the throne of the mercy of God, stand straight
like Idols in Popish Churches, and are no more moved, than if they had done
nothing amiss; Ibid. Ante admissum facinus improvidi, post facinus obstinati,
nec prius stablles, nec postmodum supplices.
neither careful to stand before they sin, nor to pray and weep after they
have sinned.

Jeremiah powered out his heart like water before the face of the Lord, his
tears did run down like a river, day and night, he gave himself no rest, the
apples of his eyes ceased not to weep for the ruin and destruction of the
Temple builded with stones, Heb. 9.4
wherein was the Arc of the Covenant, the golden Censor, the golden pot that
had Manna, Aarons rod that budded, and the Tables of the covenant: Chrysostom. ad
Popul. Antiochen. homil. 22. Si morientibus compa^imu^, quis tam sine
misericordia est, qui animam suam morientem non deploret?
And they weep not for their souls which are more holy, and have dwelling in
them the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, even the holy Trinity. They
will weep for a dead man, though a fremme body, if they know him. And they are
so desperate, that they cannot weep for the death of their best friend, of the
guest and companion of their body, of their immortal soul which is dead in
sin. Romans 8.22.
Every creature groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until now for the
vanity of man: and man, even he that calls himself a Christian man, is a
dullard, and unsensible of his own iniquity.

II. They weep not for their own sins: look not that they should weep for
the sins of other men. What S. Cyprian said of the sins of the Churches of
this time, I may say truly of those of this time. Cypr. de Lapsis Studebant
augendo patrimonio singuli: non in sacerdotibus religio devota, non in
ministris fides integra, non in operibus misericordia, non in mori bus
disciplina, etc.
Every man is give^ to augme^t his patrimony. There is no devotion in Priests,
no fidelity in Ministers, no mercy in our works, no discipline in our manners.
Men have disguised beards, women have painted faces: the eyes, disdaining to
be as God made the^, are counterfeited: the hair is dyed with a lying color:
To deceive the hearts of simple ones, what see ye but crafty dealing? To entrap
and oppress the brethren, but deceitful desires? For all that, there is no
weeping.

III. For such sins, many plagues are come upon foreign Churches. Ye see
nothing there but remarkable spectacles of calamity, of misery, of the
folly, or rather fury of men, of the vanity of the world. That touches not
the hearts of a great many of us. It Is a great pity that they should be
without pity: I have compassion on them, that they should be without
compassion. Nothing can penetrate their hardness: no commiseration, no
Christian charity can sink into their hearts. Apply to them the words of the
Prophet, Amos, 6.3, 4, 5, 6.
They put far away the evil day, they cause the seat of violence to come
near: they lie upon beds of Ivory, they stretch themselves upon their couches,
they eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the
stall: they chaunt to the sound of the violl, and invent to themselves
instruments of music, like David: they drink wine in bowls, and anoint
themselves with the chief ointments: but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph. I will not apply to them the words following, because I
hope God shall give them repentance.

CHAP. XI.
1. EXcuses of those which weep not.

2. Men laden with sorrow, will not weep.

3. Difference between the weeping of Hypocrites, and of sincere Christians.

4. Exhortation to those which cannot weep, to imitate the example of Zacheus.

5. If we can weep for our worldly losses, and not for our sins, we are
Hypocrites.

6. Exhortation to join weeping with fasting.

7. Christian weeping is a a gift of God.

8. Prayer for the gift of weeping.

I. I Hear their excuses: they say, that many honest and godly men cannot
weep: That many Hypocrites will weep: that Zacheus dry repentance was as
acceptable to Christ, as the whores and Peter's weeping repe^ta^ce.

II. I know that the heart is sometimes so laden and overwhelmed with sorrow,
that it cannot ease it self by weeping. A man will shed many tears for the
death of his dear friend, and shall not find one tear in his eyes to weep for
the death of his only son. Lam. 3.28, 29.
He sits alone, and keeps silence, he puts his mouth in the dust, he
is filled with sorrow. Mediocres dolores lugent, ingentes stupent.
Mean griefs will make a man weep and mourn: but those which are exceeding
great, will drive him into a dump, and make him senseless: As the Fables tell
of Niobe, the rich and fair mother of 6 sons and 6 daughters, that after she
had lost them all in one day, she was hardened into a stone, because Cicero. 3.
Tuscul. Niobe fingitur in lapides, propter aeternum credo in luctu silentium.
she was so dismayed with that sudden and heavy affliction, that she could
neither speak, weep, nor lament. Those of whom I speak, are not of this kind.
As there are no tears in their eyes, so there is no sorrow in their hearts:
for there is no token of amazedness in their countenance: they have a laughing
face: the beautiful red of their cheeks is a clear token of the joy of their
hearts: they are lusty: they are merry: their delight is to make good cheer:
although they are ashamed not to fast when the Church fasteth, yet they like
feasting better than fasting.

III. I know also, that an hypocrite will easily weep, namely, at the
preaching, when he hears a patheticall and persuasive Preacher, who can bow
and turn the minds of ^^e hearers to any affection: yea, he will rather rub
his eyes with an onion, than he should not weep when godly men weep; and make
art to do that which nature will not do. Such were the hypocrites of whom
Christ said, that Mat. 6 16
they dis-figured their faces, that they might appear unto men to fast. When
they fasted at home, they sought to make it known abroad. Hypocrites weep before
men: but in their Closets, in their Couches, their eyes are drier than dry
sticks: they cannot say with David, Psalm. 6.6
All the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my tears: nor with
Jeremiah, that Ier. 13 17
they weep in secret places for the sins and affliction of the Church. This
is a sure mark of an hypocrite: If thou can weep abroad, not at home; in the
Church, not in thy Couch, for another man's misery, or for thine own iniquity,
thou art an hypocrite.

Image-makers, Statuaries, and Painters, will draw, with most lively and
resembling colors, the feature of the face, the hands, the feet, and of other
outward parts; but they care not for the inward parts, neither can their art
and skill attain to the resembling of them: they will set out in quick colors
a fair flower; but they cannot so much as delineate the virtue thereof. The
hypocrite is such a cunning Painter: (...) counterfeit true devotion, by
sighing, by sobbing, by weeping, by such outward shows of sorrow, and set a
mourning face on a glad heart; the reformation whereof he heeds not.

But nature begins with the heart, and first forms the inward parts; which
afterward it begirdeth with bones, tyeth together with sinews, clotheth with
flesh, covers with a fair skin, and fashioneth by little and little the
outward parts: So the blessed man, Psalm 32.2
in whose spirit there is no guile, offers first to his God Psalm 51.17.
the sacrifice of a contrite and broken heart; which by and by, and unawares,
bursts forth into sighing, sobbing, weeping, mourning, and all external
shows of sorrow, because the body cannot choose but sympathize and jump in all
kind of affections and passions with the soul, by reason of the strait union
that is between them.

IV. Now, if there be any of you whose eyes are of horn, and cannot weep; is
his heart of stone, that it cannot sorrow, nor show by outward tokens, that it
sorroweth indeed? Ye say, that Luke 19.2
Zacheus wept not, because ye read not that he wept. Then rejoice as he
rejoiced: He was little of stature, but he was great in faith. By faith, he
ran: by faith, he climbed up into a tree to see Jesus: by faith, he made
haste: by humility, he came down: by charity, he received Christ into his
house joyfully. Rejoice after that manner, and receive Christ into thy house:
that rejoicing will be as acceptable to Christ, as weeping. By true charity, he
gave half his goods to the poor; yea, if he wept not, he sorrowed to
repentance after a godly manner: he gave fourefold to them whom he had cousened.
If thou will not do as much as he did, do as he did: restore unto thy
neighbor that wherein thou have deceived him: in this day of thy devotion,
give a charitable devotion to the poor: make that their feasting, which thou
have spared by fasting: and seeing thou can not weep for thy self, make
them which weep for themselves, laugh; that they, rejoicing for themselves, may
weep and pray for thee. Alms excels weeping.

V. But I fear this is a shift. If we can shead tears enough for the loss of
our goods, let us not excuse the constitution of our bodies: rather let us
accuse the corruption of our souls if we cannot also weep for offending God.
For he that forroweth indeed to repentance, will be more deeply and feelingly
troubled with the loss of the favor of his good God, than of all the world
besides.

VI. Now, what grief and vexation a worldly loss is unto us, we know all. Let
us lay aside all frivolous excuses; and let us now, in the face of the blessed
Angels, and of this holy Assembly, pray and sigh to GOD with tears and
lamentations of true repentance: let us not seek to assuage our mourning: let
us seek to increase it, that this day our hearts may groan, and our eyes weep
sore, and run down with tears for the distressed members of the Church of
Christ Jesus. Let us join our hearts with their hearts, our eyes with their
eyes, our tongues with their tongues; that all together, with one heart, and
one mouth, we may sigh, weep, mourn, pray for their deliverance, and for the
continuation of this happy and long peace amongst us.

VII. Such weeping is a gift of God. As waters came not out of the hard rock,
Numb. 20.10
til Moses with his rod smote it twice; so the rivers of tears will never flow
and from our hearts of stone, till the Lord Jesus smite them often with the rod
of his mouth, and soften them with the mighty and powerful blows of his holy
Spirit. It Is the spirit that bruiseth our rocky hearts: it is the heat of the
spirit that melts the ice of our frozen eyes, and makes the waters flow:
It Is the Spirit of Christ Jesus, Romans 8 15
whereby we cry Abba, Father: Romans 8.26.
It Is the Spirit it self which makes intercession for us, with gronings which
cannot be uttered. Ambros. in Lucam, c. 22. v. 61, 62. Quos Jesus respicit,
plorant, etc.
He, he only upon who^ Christ looks, weepeth. Peter denied him once, and
wept not, because the Lord looked not. He denied him the second time, and he
wept not, because the Lord looked not. He denied him the third time: the Lord
looked upon him, and he wept bitterly.

VIII. O Lord Jesus! O sweet Jesus! we have once, twice, thrice denied thee:
Look now upon us: O Savior of mankind, now the cock croweth; now look upon us.
Veni, Creator, Spiritus, and insunde coelitus lucis tuae radium.
O holy Spirit, Creator and reformer of mankind, come and create in us a new
heart: send from heaven into our congealed hearts an hot beam of thy
comfortable light, to break and melt them; that now, at least now, we may know
our sins, and the afflictions of our brethren* that knovving them, we may feel
them; that feeling them, we may weep to thee for them* that weeping to thee*
we may be comforted by thee, according to thy promise vvch thou have made to
us by thy dear Son Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
The second part OF THE CHRISTIAN MAN'S TEARS. Containing CHRIST'S Comforts.
CHAPTER I. The Argument of the first Chapter.
I. AS there is a time of weeping and of mourning, so there is a time of
comfort and of joy.

II. Our comfort is spiritual. N

III. Gods own self is our comforter.

IV. Thence is the certainty of our salvation.

V. The cause of our comforts are not in the merits of our tears.

VI. There is no merit nor satisfaction but in our Lord Jesus Christ.

VII. Blessedness is given to godly men: but not for their godliness.

VIII. How we must understand some sp^^ches of the Doctors concerning Tears.

MATH. 5. 5. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. LVK.
6.21. Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh.
I. EXperience teaches us, and the scripture joining hands with experience
says, that Eccles. 3.1.4.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the
heavens: Amongst orther things, that there is a time to weep, and a time to
laugh: a time to maurne, and a time to dance: A time to weep, as Christ has
said, Blessed are ye that weep now: A time to laugh: For, says he, ye shall
laugh: A time to mourn: because Christ says, Blessed are they that mourn: A
time to dance, because he says also that they shall be comforted.

I know not where Cicero. 4. Tuscul.
HERACLITVS could find such abundance of tears; and what could move him to
weep always: was there no blessing of God in the world to make him laugh? Was
not DEMOCRITVS a vain man to laugh perpetually at the vanity of the world,
and never to weep for it? CATONS heart was made of steel and could neither be
moved to laugh for joy, when God blessed the State; nor to weep for sorrow,
when it was afflicted.

But DAVID who was better then any of them, 2 Samuel 6.14.
danced for joy, when the Ark of the Lord entered into his house; and wept for
sorrow when he sinned against the Lord. JESUS who was the best of all, Luke
10.21.
rejoiced in spirit when he considered the wise dispensations of the blessings
of God: He was also sorry and wept when he saw men's incredulity and obstinacy
in their sins. And he says to all Christians, that they shall weep, for the
causes whereof we have spoken: as also that they shall laugh, for the causes
whereof we are to speak.

II. Laughing is an effect of joy. Such as the joy is, such is the laughing.
Our joy is such as we are, or should be; Inward, celestial, spiritual: for it
comes from the faith and hope of heavenly things, as Christ said to them which
are persecuted; Mat 5.12.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For our laughing is
spiritual, heavenly, and inward, flowing from an inward and spiritual joy:
The Spring of our joy, is comfort; whereof Christ says, that they which mourn
shall be comforted.

III. Our comfort is our blessedness: and all blessedness is of God, to whose
praise we cry aloud with the holy Apostle; Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places, in Christ. So all our
comforts are of God, who Isa. 51.3.
shall comfort Sion. For he is 2 Cor. 1.4
the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation.

He comfort us by his dear Son Jesus Christ, who says that the Lord has
sent him Isa. 61.2.
to comfort all that mourn, and as he came into the world for that end, so he
does that wherefore he came, as he said to his Disciples. Ioh. 14.18.
I will not leave you Orphans, that is, comfortless: I will come to you.

He comes to us by his Spirit, who is the true Comforter. For he ascended into
heaven, and thence he Tertull. de praescript. cap. 11. Misit vicariam vim
spiritus sancti qui credentes agat.
has sent in stead of himself the power of the holy Spirit, by whom the
believers are led, according to his promise, Ioh. 14.16.
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever.

IV. Here is the certainty of our comforts God has promised that we shall be
comforted: Heb. 10.23.
He is faithful that promised, and 1 These 5.24.
also will do it. He gives not that charge to another: His own self does it.
Isa 46.10.11.
My counsel, says he, shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: I have
spoken it, I will also bring it to pass I have purposed it, I will also do
it. He does it by his owno Spirit: As Ioh. 3.8.
the wind, so the Spirit blows where it lists. If he will comfort us, who
can grieve us? Men will do what they can to make us weep. But says Christ,
Ioh. 16.25
Your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you: If we hold our
eyes upon our selves, we see our own weakness, and we know we may loose our
joy. But Christ has prayed, that Ioh. 17.13.
we may have his joy full filled in our selves: And the Comforter himself
abides in us: who then shall take the fruits of our tears from us?

O most precious pearls of your eyes! O tears most acceptable to God! The
French Virgin is not so curious to keep the tears of the vine, wherewith Plin.
l. 23. cap. 1. Cutem in facie mulierum purgant. Ibid. Vitia cutis in facie,
varosque and lentignes emendant.
she takes away the speckes, and pimples, and other spots of her face and
hands, and keeps their skin soft and fair; As God is careful to keep the
tears which trill from the spiritual branches ingraffed into Jesus Christ, who
Ioh. 15.1.
is the true Vine: Psalm. 56.8.
He puts them into his bottle. Are they not in his Book?

Ctesias in Indicis.
When the tears distilling from the Indian tree, called Siptachora, fall into
the river Hyparchus, they are congealed there, and turned into most excellent
Amber, So when our tears fall into the river of the mercies of God, they
become there a most precious jewel: And as the Sun drawing salt vapors out
of the Sea up into the air, turns them into pleasant showers of rain, Isa.
55.10.
which waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give
seed to the sower, and bread to the eater; So Mala. 4.2.
the Sun of righteousness our Lord Jesus Christ draws up to heaven our
sighs, our groans, the salt vapors of our devotion, the bitter tears of our
godly sorrow, which we pour out before him, and keeps them in his bottles
till being all gathered together, he power them down upon us again in a mos
sweet and well-come shower of all kind of heavenly comforts, which are our
blessedness both in this world, and in the world to come.

V. Be not deceived with the error of Papists. Imagine not that there is any
merit in tears, as that word is taken by Papists, that in them there is any
satisfaction, as Papists speak of satisfaction, that they wash out the blots
of the soul, which are our sins, as water cleanses and takes away the
spots of the body, as Papists dare too boldly and ignorantly affirm: they have
not in themselves any such efficacy: neither has God made unto the^ any such
promise. Nothing can satisfy the wrath of God, but the death of the son God:
Nothing is of worth and value before his eyes to be rewarded with glory, but
the obedience of the Lord of glory. No water can purge and take away sins,
Ioh. 1.29.
It is the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

VI. If ye ask who has satisfied the wrath of God? I answer with Isaiah:
Christ Isa. 53.5.
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
iquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed. If ye ask again, by what means, by what deserts ye obtain
eternal life? Christ himself answers. Ioh. 14.6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. i.e. The true way to eternal life. And
the Apostle faith, that 1 Cor. 1.30.31.
of God ye are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: That according as it is
written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord. Finally if ye ask, which
is the river, which is the poole wherein we are cleansed of all our sins, so
perfectly that there remains no spot, no blemish in us? The Disciple which
lay in Christ's bosom, and was privy to all his secrets, faith, that 1. Ioh.
1.7.
the blood of Jesus. Christ the Son of God cleanses us from all sin. He
only is the river of Jordan wherein the leprosy of sin is cured: 2 Kings 5.14.
The river Jordan in the land of Canaan did never cleanse any man of the
leprosy of the body, but Naama^s the Syrian: This Jordan of the heavenly
Canaan cleanses perfectly all leprous sinners which wash and dippe themselves
in it. At Ioh. 5.4.
the poole of Bethesda he only was made whole of his disease who first after
the troubling of the water stepped in. But when soever a sinner shall repent of
his sins that he has committed, and cast himself into this vndraynable
poole of the blood of the son of God his sickness shall be cured, and his
soul shall be healed. Ye read in the Legendes that Constantine the great being
leprous, was councelled to wash in a bath made of the blood of little children,
that he might be made clean. That bath was nothing else but the blood of the
Son of God, wherein he washed by faith, and was made clean of the incurable
leprosy of sin.

So then if ye ask by whose satisfaction and merits ye obtain eternal life,
the Scripture answers absolutely, that it is by the only satisfaction and
merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other: for there is none other Name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

VII. But if we ask to whom this salvation is given? That is another question,
where unto the Scripture makes another answer, and faith, as Elizabeth said
to the Virgin Marie, Luke 1.45.
Blessed is she that believed. 2 Cor. 1.20.
All the promises of God in Christ, are Yea, and in Christ, are Amen, unto the
glory of God. And Gal. 3.14.
we receive the promise of the Spirit through faith: Neither have we any other
hand to receive Christ who is promised unto us, but faith. Therefore it is
written that Ephesians. 2.8.
by grace ye are saved by faith: And because our last and principal
blessedness is our salvation, it is also written that they which be of faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham.

Act. 15.9.
The hearts are purified by faith. Therefre it is written, Math. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart: The heart by faith is broken and bruised with
the sense of sin, and with 2 Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow for sin Therefore it is written. Math. 5.3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit: Faith looks up to heaven with a weeping
eye: Faith calls upon God, with prayers steeped in tears: Faith stretches
soorth to the throne of grace hands dipped in the bitter and salt waters of
repentance: And therefore it is written, Blessed are they that mourn.

If faith did not repent, sigh, weep, pray: repente^ce, weeping, sighing,
prayer should be sins; For Romans 14.23.
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. So the tears of Esau were sins. So
when David prays against the wicked man; Psalm. 109.7.
Let his prayer become sin, he teaches us, that prayers of wicked and
unbelieving men are sins: for to such men, Tit.1.15.
nothing is pure: but even their mind and conscience is defiled: And what can
come from such a puddle, but filth and stinking putrefaction? Gal. 5.6.
Faith works by love, and is rich in good works. Therefore it is written,
Psalm. 1.2.
blessed is the man whose delight is the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 119.1.
Blessed are the undefiled in the way, Psalm. 128.1.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, etc.

Ye see what persons are blessed: And what qualities are required in you, if
you desire to be partakers of blessedness: The first must be faith: For Heb.
11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God: From faith springs forrow for
sin, repentance, weeping, prayers, good works, Ephesians. 2.10.
which God has prepared, that we should walk in them. All those which are
adorned and enriched with those good qualities, are blessed: but the cause
wherefore they are blessed, is the merit of Christ Jesus, in whom they believe,
by whom they pray, for whom they weep, and by whose spirit they are lead in
the way of the Lord, and do good works.

For to them Zech 12.10.
that mourn in Jerusalem, Zechariah says, that Zech. 13.1.
there shall be a fountain opened for sin, and for uncleanness: what? are
not their eyes a fountain? To weep for sin, they may be. To blot out, and
abolish the slain of sin, they cannot be. The only side of Christ which was
pierced in his death, was made a fountain of blood, to wash in it the sins of
all them, which, to weep for their sins make of their heads a fountain of
tears.

VIII. Therefore when ye read in the Homilies of the Doctors of the Church,
either ancient, or modern, that tears are a satisfaction for sin, that
they wash it away, and blot it out, and many such hyperbolicall speeches, ye
must understand them Cum graeno salis.
with a grain of salt, as the Iurisconsults speak of some sayings of their
Doctors, and know that either they speak of satisfaction given to the Church,
or attribute to the effect that which is proper to the cause, which is frequent
amongst orators, and in speeches gilt and beautified with Rhetoric.

Consider that in my text blessedness is attributed to them which weep, not
to weeping; to the tree, not to the fruit; to the worker, not to the work: And
when ye seek the causes of your blessedness, look not downward to your
selves, but upward to the mercy of God, and with a sincere heart and true
mouth follow the holy Apostle, and say, Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Romans 11.36.
For of him, and through him, and to him are all things: To whom be glory for
ever. Amen.

If ye remember this distinction between the qualification of the persons
which are to be saved, and the causes wherefore they are saved, as also the
cha^ging of attributions, when the effects are honored with the glorious
titles which belong to their causes, ye will not easily be seduced with
Papistry, nor troubled with some speeches which the Doctors uttered
hyperbolically, which the Papists wrest unlearnedly, which ye must understand
Romans 12.6.
according to the proportion of faith soundly.

CHAPTER II.
I. ALl our comforts are called Life, and wherefore.

II. Item, wherefore that life which is our only comfort, is called
everlasting.

III. What eternal life is.

IV. It Is imperfect in this world, and perfect in the world to come.

V. He that has not the beginnings of eternal life in this world, shall never
come to the perfection thereof in the world to come.

I. BUT to leave of disputing against Papists, which is not fit for this day,
wherein we are assembled to dispute against our own sins, and to let alone
the hyperbolicall speeches of Doctors, let us come to Christ's comforts wherein
our blessedness consists.

Our Blessedness in holy Scripture is called Life Everlasting. It Is called
Life, not because we shall act, live, and move by it, as we do now during our
abode in the earthly tabernacles of our mortal bodies; but because it is a
most glorious, happy, and blessed estate, our sovereign good and felicity,
the full perforformance of all our desires, the longed-for wish of our
insatiable hearts, the center and last resting place of all the agitations of
our stirring and unquiet souls.

There is nothing that man loves better then life. For how can he love, what
can he love, if he live not? Life is the spring of love: life is the enioyer,
life is the vser of all the things which we love. As we cannot love without
life: So life is loathsome unto us without the fruition of those things which
we love. The Devils and the damned live in hell. But that life is called Death,
because all the evils which they would gladly shake off, fall thick, and lie
close together upon them, and all the goods which they desire most earnestly
with groans and sighs, flee away from them.

It Is a living death, and a dying life. Therefore David asks, Psalm. 34.12.
what man is he that desires life? And loves many days that he may see good?
Take good from life: And men will choose death to be freed of life.

In the state whereof we speak, we see good, because in it we see God, Psalm.
36.9.
with whom is the fountain of life, and in whose light we see light. August.
de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 6. Omnino non mesatiaret Deus, nisi promitteret mihi
seipsum. Deum. etc.
Certainly God could never satisfy me, if he promised not to give himself
unto me. For whatso ever God promises unto thee, it is of no value without
himself: what is the whole earth? What is the whole Sea? What is heaven? What
are all the stars? What is the Sun? what is the Moon? what the Hosts of
Angels without him? I know him to be the creator of all those things. Ipsum
sitio, Ipsum esurio, Ipsi dico, quoniam apud te est sons vitae.
I thirst after him, I hunger after him. To him I say, with thee is the
fountain of life. Bernard deproemio patr. coelest. Esse cum deo, esse in deo:
Viuere cum Deo, viuero de Deo. etc.
To be with God, to be in God: to live with God, to live by God, to have God
who is the sovereign Good, is sovereign blessedness, is life it self.

II. This Life is called Everlasting, because as it comes of God and is
nothing but the enjoying of him, so it is like unto him Iam 1.17.
with him there is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. It Is so with
their life. It may grow better, and shall be better in the resurrection: It
knows no interchangeable course of seasons. It Is al at once the spring time of
most pleasant sights, the Summer all kind of pleasures, the harvest of al
blessings, which fear no withering by the biting frost of a cold and mistie
winter. God is eternal by nature: This life is eternal through his grace: God
is eternal without beginning, and without ending: Reu. 1.8.
which is, and which was, and which is to come. This life has a beginning, but
shall never have an end. It Is rather everlasting then eternal.

So is the death of the wicked, to whom the great Judge shall say at the last
day, Math. 25.41.
depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil, and
his Angels. O happy would they think themselves, if death could cut the thread
of their life! Woe, woe, be unto them. Reu. 9 6.
In those days men shall seek death, and shall not find it: And shall desire
to die, and death shall flee from them. This shall be the fullness of their
misery, that they shall disire to die, and know that they shall never die. But
in this shall be the fullness of our felicity, that living in God, we shall
know that we shall live with him for ever and ever Barnard. de modo been
viuendi. Sermon. 69. Atterna vitaest vitalis, ista est mortalis. Idem. in Psalm
Qui habitat. Sermon. 17. Est finis sine sine.
This life whereby we live in in those houses of clay is mortal: But eternal
life is vital and lively: It Is an end without end.

III. For eternal life, is a full and everlasting possession and fruition of
al things which God has promised unto us in Jesus Christ his Son: ye may
reduce them all to this one, Reu. 21.3.
Behold, the Taber nacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their
God. Or as S. Paul says in fewer words, 1 Cor. 15.28.
God shall be all in all.

August. de Verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 16. Quicquid hic quaerebas, quicquid hic
promagno habebas, ipse tibi erit etc
What is that all in all? Whatsoever thou did seek here, whatsoever thou
did make great account of here, his own self shall it unto thee. Idem concio
1. in Psalm 36.
That which is gold, cannot be silver unto thee: That which is wine, cannot be
bread unto thee: that which is light, cannot be drink unto thee. Thy God shall
be all unto thee. Thou shall eat him that thou hunger not, thou shall drink
him, that thou thirst not: thou shall be enlightened by him, that thou be not
blind, thousha't be holden up by him, that thou faint not Posssidebit te totum
integrum, totus integer; He entire and whole shall possess thee entire and
whole: he shall be al in thee all: thou shall be all in him all. Totum habebis:
Totum and ille habebit; quia tu and ille vnuus eritis. Thou shall have him all:
he shall have thee all: because thou and he shall be one.

IV. This eternal life, which is the possession of all good in God through
Jesus Christ, and the only comfort of them which weep and mourn, though it
be always one and the same, and not of sundry sorts, yet it has some degrees:
we are now in this land of the dying, Viatores, Travelers and wayfaring men,
and in it we have the beginnings of eternal life. In heaven, which is the
land of the living, we shall be Comprehensores, Owners and peaceable
possessors of the entire and whole felicity, which GOD has prepared for his
dear ones.

The Lord Jesus has he not said in his prayer to his Father, Ioh. 17.3.
This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent? If eternal life be in the knowledge of God, as
Christ says: And if 1 Cor. 13.9.10.
we know in part, as the Apostle says, we have already eternal life, but in
part only, till that which is perfect come, and that which is in part, may be
done away, or rather swallowed up in that profound Ocean of perfect
blessedness. Now we Romans 8.23.
have the first fruits of the Spirit: Then we shall have a most plentiful
harvest. Now we have 2 Cor. 1.2.
the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, as a part, and therefore a most
assured pawn, of the total sum which shall be given us then. Now we say one
to another, Psalm. 34.6.
O taste and see, that the Lord is good. Then Cyprian. de Laud Martyrij, Ibi
non gustabunt qua^suanis sit Deus, sed implebuntur et satiabuntur dalcedine
mirifica. Nihil deerit, nihil oberit. Omne desiderium eorum Christus praesens
implebit.
we shall not only taste how sweet God is, but we shall be filled and
satisfied with a wonderful sweetness: then nothing shall be wanting unto us:
nothing shall hurt us, because Christ by his presence shall fill all our
desires.

V. Be not therefore deceived: for if ye have not the beginnings of eternal
life in this barren wilderness of your pilgrimage, ye shall never come to the
compleatness thereof in the pleasant and fruitful land of your rest, whereof it
is written, Ps. 25.13.
His soul shall lodge in goodness, and his seed shall inherit the earth.

Object not the words which we read in the first Epistle of S. John, Ioh. 3.2.
It does not yet appear what we shall be: for he speaks of the full
manifestation and fruition of our blessedness, of the beginnings whereof he
writes in that same Chapter, Verse. 14.
We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
brethren. Even as Christ affirmed, Ioh: 5.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you: He that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
is passed from death unto life. Consider and see, how by faith in Christ, by
love to our brethren for Christ, we have already eternal life, and bless God
who has given you faith and love.

CHAP. III.
I. Our first comfort and blessedness in this world, is the forgiveness of
our sins.

II. Which is declared by the example of David.

III. Who affirms that man's blessedness is the forgiveness of his sins.

IV. The same is verified by the example of a woman which was a Sinner.

V. To obtain this first degree of blessedness, we must be reconciled with our
brethren.

VI. Laudable custom of the Primitive Church to end their public prayers
with a kiss.

VII. We must weep and pray to God, one for another and for our ownselues.

VIII. Exhortation.

I. Our first comfort, and therefore the first degree of eternal life, or of
our blessedness in this world, is forgiveness of sin: Because our first
misery is sin. Ye have heard that eternal life is in God; and ye hear
Isaiah saying, Isa. 59.2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God: And your sins have
hid his face from you, that he will not hear. If then a man be separated from
God, as he is by sin, his life is gone, his blessedness is lost, misery is
become his portion, and death his inheritance: wherefore he cannot be restored
to his blessedness, but by forgiveness of sin, whereby he is reconciled with
God, received again into his favor, enlightened with the brightness of his
countenance, quickened with his life, blessed with his grace, graced with all
his blessings. This is the first gate of heaven: This is the first entrance
into the kingdom of glory.

Blessed should we be, if we could be without sin. Seeing that cannot be,
because Iam. 3.2.
in many things we offend all, blessed are we, if our sins be forgiven us.
This is known of them only that know what sin is, and whose eyes godly
sorrow changes into fountains of tears making their hearts to sigh, their
eyes to weep, their tongues to cry incessantly for forgiveness of sin, which
was never refused to any that did ask it with a contrite and broken heart Can
ye name me one among so many millions of sinners, who did weep before God,
and lost his tears? Who did offer his supplication to the Father of mercies
with a sound and single spirit, and was rejected? Says he not, that Isa. 66.2.
He will look to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit? He has said it;
and who will say that he must not, or will not do it?

II. Which of you is ignorant of David's sin? Was it not most heinous in it
self? Was it not exceeding sinful, and horrible above measure in such a man,
who was so many ways beholden unto his God?

Who can tell us better then himself, how hateful it was? He confesses in
the fifty and one Psalm, that by it he had lost the favor of his Savior,
and fallen from the heaven of all felicity, into the hell of all misery: and
therefore feeling the damnation wherein he was ingulsed, and desiring to
recover the salvation which he had lost, he makes with moaning and mourning
this true confession to Nathan, whom the Lord had sent to rebuke him, 2 Samuel
12.13.
I have sinned against the Lord. And knowing that a confession made to a
mortal man, was not sufficient to repair one offense committed against the
immortal God, he runs straight to the throne of grace, he covers his
body with sackcloth, he sprinckleth dust and ashes upon his head, he takes
the apparel, the countenance, the words of a prisoner at the Bar, of a
malefactor condemned to die; He cries with many tears to his Judge, Psalm.
51.1.
Have mercy upon me, O God.

Scarcely is the word out of his mouth, when God, who knew the desire of his
heart, blessed him with this comfortable answer, uttered by a man, but
proceeding from the bowels of mercy, from mercies own self; The Lord also
has put away thy sin: Thou shall not die. Then his heart was filled with joy,
then his bruised bones were healed, and moistened with the marrow of gladness:
then his face shined, then his eyes were two glistering diamonds between his
brows: Then he leapt, then he triumphed, then he sang, When I sinned, I was
miserable: Now my sins are forgiven me, and I am blessed.

III. Then Rom: 4.6.7.8.
he described the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness
without works, saying, Psalm. 32.1.2.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered:
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

August. in Psalm. 31. Conc. 2.
He says not blessed are they in whom no sins are found, but whose sins are
covered. Sins are they covered? They are abolished. If God has covered our
sins, noluit aduertere, he would not behold them: Si noluit aduertere, noluit
animaduertere, If he would not be hold them, he would not take notice of them:
Si noluit animaduertere, noluit punire: if he would not take notice of them, he
would not punish them: Noluit agnoscere, maluit ignoscere, He would not know
them, he choosed rather to forgive them.

Oh consider, I pray you, this example, and this saying of David. He had great
store of riches, he was mighty in force, he ouerpeered all men in wisdom,
God had put on his head a crown of fine gold: he was peaceable at home,
victorious and triumphant abroad; he had wise Captains, valiant Soldiers,
faith full Sergeants, obedient Subjects: His children were like Olive plants
round about his Table; no worldly Commodities were wanting to his desires, and
lo they are dung unto him; Lo he assigns not blessedness unto them, but unto
the forgiveness of sins. Therefore let us cry after him with sweet Bernard,
Bernard. in Cantica. Ser. 23. O solus vere beatus, cui non imputauit Dominus
peccatum.
O the only, O the true blessed man, to whom the Lord imputes not sin: For
who is without sin? None, no not one. ALL have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God. Nevertheless who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
elect: It Is sufficient to me, in stead of all righteousness, to have God alone
propitious unto me, because to him alone I have sinned. What Is;oeuer he has
decreed not to impute unto men, is as if it had never been: non peccare, Dei
iustitia est: Hominis iustitia, indulgentia Dei.
Not to sin, is the righteousness of God: The righteousness of man, is Gods
indulgence Gods merciful favor, whereby he forgiueth sin, is my
blessedness. IV. This was the judgment of a man who had been an adulterer and
a murderer: Such also was the judgment of a woman, whom the Scripture
calls, Luke 7.37.
A Sinner. She came to the Pharisees house, where Christ was. The Pharisees of
all men were most affectionate to the Law, Gal. 3.24.
The Law is a pedagogue to Christ, Romans 10.4.
who is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes. See
the wisdom of the woman: when she is in the Pharisees house, she goes not
to him, who taught, who believed that man is saved by the righteousness of the
Law; She said in her heart with David, Psalm. 51.3.
I acknowledge my transgression, my sin is ever before me: I have
transgressed the Law, I find no good works in my life, which has bin so lewd,
that I dare not trust in it. Therefore, O Pharisee, I am come to thy house, but
not to thee: Thou speak of perfection of righteousness, thou preachest of
rewards, thou bragst of merits: I cry to my God; Psalm. 130.3.4.
If thou Lord should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand. But there is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may he feared. My misery is my sin, my
blessedness is his mercy: I have need of forgiveness, I come to crave mercy, I
have hoised the sails of my faith toward the only haven which God has
ordained for sinners, I fly to the port of Salvation, where the stormy winds
of the law tearing asunder the mountains, and breaking in pieces the rocks
before the Lord, blow not; where the still and small voice of the Gospel
refreshes the conscience, which thirsts after thee, O my God, like a dry
land: I am come, o Pharisee, to him who 1 Timothy 1.15.
is come into the world, to save sinners, of whom I am chief: He is in thy
house: He is not of thy house.

So she thought, so h^^ heart spoke. Out of hand she runs to her Savior:
And, to apply to her with the alteration of two words, that which S.
Chrysostom has written of the woman of Canaan; Chrysostom. tom. 2. Ex varijs in
Matthaum locis homil. 16.
See the wisdom of the woman: She entreats not James, she prays not to
John, she goes not to Peter, she looks not to the company of the Apostles,
she sought not a Mediator: In stead of them all she took repentance with her
for companion, which was to her in stead of an advocate, and so she goes
straight to the Sovereign Spring: for this, says she, is he come down from
heaven: for this has he taken our flesh, for this was he made man, that I may
be bold to go unto him. In the heavens above the Cherubims tremble before him,
the Seraphims fear him, and here below a Whore goes unto him. She speaks
not, she cries not with her mouth, as the Woman of Canaan did, Mat. 15 22.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David. Her humility spoke for her.
She stood at his feet behind him: Her godly sorrow for sin cried aloud unto
him, She washed his feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her
head: Her love was a most ardent prayer. She kissed them, she anointed them
with ointment: each of those actions was a sensible prayer, O Lord, O sweet
Jesus, have mercy on me. Thou art come into the world to have mercy on
sinners, O son of God have mercy on me: Thou have taken our flesh, thou art
become that which I am, to have mercy on sinners: O son of David have mercy
upon me. Thou art still that which thou wast, thou art become that which thou
wast not; Now thou art both in one person, O Immanuel, O God and man have mercy
on me.

Woman what ails thee? What cause have thou to weep? Judge by Christ's answer
to her weeping prayers, what was the cause of her praying tears? Luke 7.48.50.
Thy sins, says he, are forgiven. For her sin she wept, because her sin
was her misery: Her sin was forgiven her, because forgiveness of sin was her
felicity. Simon the Pharisee made unto him a feast of flesh, and filled unto
him cups of wine: The Lord had no stomach for Simons meat; no thirst for his
drink: This woman, like unto Genesis 27.9.
Rebecca, who could make sauourie meat to Isaac, such as he loved, knowing that
Ioh 4.34.
his meat and drink was to comfort and to save repenting sinners, fills unto
him a bowl of tears mingled with faith, and he pledgeth her in Psalm. 116.13.
the cup of salvation, saying unto her, Thy faith has saved thee: Go in peace.

Dear brethren, if this day we weep as this sinner did, our fasting will be
feasting to Christ, our tears will be his drink: If we cry to God as David
did, Psalm. 6.1.4.8.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger: Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: oh
save me for thy mercies sake. The Lord will come and speak to our souls, and
we shall return home, saying with David, Depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity: for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping.

V. I say, if ye pray so, the Lord will hear you: If ye weep so, the Lord
will comfort you: If ye trust not in the prayers one of another: If ye rely
not upon the prayers of the Church; but if every one pray for himself. Heed
what I say, I do not forbid you to pray, and to weep one for another; for I
have taught you, that the Saints did weep and pray when their brethren sinned:
did not God say to Jobs friends, Job. 42.8.
Go to my servant Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt offering, and my
servant Job shall pray for you: for him will I accept? He commanded them to go
to Job whom they had offended, and to require his prayers: He commanded them
also to offer up for themselves a burnt offering; to teach us three most
profitable lessons.

The first, that our prayers are not accepted of God, till we be reconciled to
our brethren: This is Christ's lesson, saying, Mat. 5.23 24.
If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother
has ought against thee: Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy
way: first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

The second, that we must forgive them which trespass against us; This Lesson
also has Christ our good Doctor taught us, not only Mat. 18.32.
by the Parable of the wicked servant, who was punished, because he showed no
mercy to his fellow; but also in proper words, when he gives us this warning;
Luke 17.3.4.
Take heed to your selves: If thy brother trespass against thee, rebuke him,
and if he repent, forgive him: And if he trespass against thee seven times in
a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent; Thou
shall forgive him. Protest we not that we do this, when according to our
Masters direction, we cry to God in our daily prayers; Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us? If we forgive them
from our heart, we will pray to God for them, as God said that Job would pray
for his friends: Therefore St James says both to them who give offense, and to
them which suffer it, Iam. 5.16.
Confess your faults one to another: And pray one for another, that ye may be
healed: for the effectual fervent prayer of arighteous man avayleth much.

VI. In all the congregations of the Primitive Church, Justin. Apol. 2. (...).
Precibus fini^is mutuis nos inuicem osculis salutamus. Tertull de Oratione.
cap. vlt.
the brethren had a most useful and laudable custom, to seal and close up
their prayers, with mutual imbracings and kisses, which they called, Orationis
signaculum, the seal of Prayer: And so they went to the Table of the Lord.
They kept this Custom principally in their fasting days, as a public
testimony, that they did forgive one another, and were assured that God would
hear their prayers, which they had offered up unto him with single and meek
heart purified of all inward grudge and rankor, and endued with brotherly
charity according to his holy and righteous commandment: If any man withdrew
this kiss from his brother, he was rebuked and hissed of the whole
congregation, which being an assembly of holy and true lovers, could not abide
a brother, who bewraied the ill will and hatred of his heart, when he refused
the kiss of his mouth.

This custom was grounded upon the custom of the Jews, who at their meetings
did kiss one another, and upon the express commandment of the Apostles. For
S. Paul exhorts the Romans, Romans 16.16. 1 Cor. 16.20. 2 Cor. 13.12. 1 These.
5.26. 1 Pet. 5.14.
the Corinthians, the Thessalonians, to greet one another with an^h^^ kiss:
And S. Peter exhorts the brethren, to greet one another with a kiss of
charity. Not with the kiss of religious homage, which is due to God alone and
him whom he has sent, our Lord Jesus Christ, Psalm. 2.12.
as it is written, Kiss the Son not with the kiss of superstitious homage
to idols, as the Israelites kissed Baal, 1 Kings 19 18. Hosea. 13.2.
and the calves: Not with the kiss of natural affection only, such as is
usual among those who are of kindred, and nigh friends, as when Isaac kissed his
Son Jacob, Genesis 27.27.
and Jacob kissed his kinswoman Rachel. Genesis 29.11.
Not with the kiss of humanity and civility, such as were frequent among the
Jews, when they did meet one another, or when they invited a friend to their
houses, whereof Christ spoke, when he said to Simon the Pharisee who had
invited him, Luke 7.45.
Thou gave me no kiss: Plin. lib. 14. c. 13. Ideo propinquos foeminis
osculum dare, vt scirent an ^emetumolerent.
Not with the kiss of trial, such as was much used among the Romans who
kissed their wives and kinswomen to try if they had drunk wine, nonnius ex
Cicer. 3. de Repub. Carent remet^ omnes mulieres. Gellius. lib. 10. cap. 23.
and if they did sent of it, killed them; for amongst the^ it was a crime in a
woman to drink wine: Far less with the kiss of treachery and treason
shadowed with the cloak of friendship and love, as when Ioab kissing Amasa
killed him, 2 Samuel 20.9.10. Luke 22.48
and Judas betrayed our Lord Jesus Christ with a kiss. Pro. 27.6.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend: but the kisses of an enemy are
deceitful. In no case with the unclean and unchaste kiss of wan tonnesse,
whereof it is written that the Harlot met a young man, Pro. 7.13.
caught him, Origin. ad Roman. cap. 16.16. Osculum fidele primum castum sit,
d^inde pacem simplicitatemque habeat in chari ta^^ non ficta.
and kissed him: but with an holy kiss, wherein there is no uncleanness; and
with a kiss of charity, wherein their is no dissembling, but a clear
demonstration of a peaceable and loving heart.

Where such holy kisses were usual, were there, think ye, any iarres, any
alterations, any cousenage, any contentions at law? Or if any, were they not
presently smothered and extinguished in the very eyes of the congregation? I
know the precept of the Apostle is not universal, and that we are not tied by
it to the custom of kissing: But this ye must all know, that he thing
signified thereby, to wit, concord, peace, charity, is a law both universal
and perpetual. And therefore as our fasting gives wings to our prayers, that
they may mount up to the throne of grace swiftly, so let us this day by an
unfeigned reconciliation, if there be any iarres amongst us, and with christian
charity, grace and imbellish them, that coming there, they may be welcome and
accepted.

VII. The third is, that every one weep, and pray for himself as Jobs friends
were commanded to offer up for themselves a burnt offering. This lesson is
employed in my text. For to whom does Christ promise that they shall be
comforted? To them which mourn. Solomon bids us? Pro. 31.6.7.
give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto those that
be of heavy hearts: Let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember his
misery no more. This Christ does: He makes glad with the wine of his comforts
the hearts which are heavy for sin: for who that is not witless will give
wine to him who is already too merry? Let not any man be deceived. Though this
whole Church, though all the Churches of God, Though all the Saints, all the
Angels of heaven should pray for one of you, if that one weep not, if he pray
not for himself, God will not hear them to forgive him his sins? Iam. 5.17 18.
Eliah may fast and pray for rain, when wicked Achab feasts, and God will
hear him. Moses prayed often for the people, and God removed from them
temporal plagues; But he did never forgive sin to any man, who prayed not
for himself.

Yea Moses prayed for his sister Miria^, who for her sin was struck with
leprosy, Number. 12.13.
He cried unto the Lord saying, Heal her now, O God, I beseech thee, and he
was heard. Did not Samuel mourn for Saul unprofitably? For God said unto him.
1 Samuel 16.1.
How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him? Did not
Jeremiah pray and mourn incessantly for the people of Judah, and was not heard?
Ierem. 11.14.
Pray not thou for this people, says God unto him, neither lift up a cry or
prayer for them. For Ierem 15.1.
though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this
people: Cast them out of my sight, and ^et them go forth. Doubtless Ezechiel
prayed for Jerusalem, when the Lord said unto him Ezech. 14.20.
Though Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, as I live, they shall deliver neither
Son nor Daughter Think thou tha^ God will hear another weeping for thy
sins, so long as he hears thee blaspheming his holy Name, and sees thee
wallowing with delight and content in the mire of filthy pleasure?

But if thou weepest and prayest for thy self he will hear thee, although
all other men's and Angels mouths were dumble. Though all hearts were merry,
though al cheeks were dry, and no vapors ascended from the eyes, no tongue
darted prayers up to heaven, but thine. For Chrysostom. in Math. homil. 5. tom.
2. Namet Deus gratiam, non tam alijs rogantibus pro nobis vult donare, quam
nobis,
God delights to give grace, not so much to others which pray for us, as to
our selves: Take for example David, Manasseh, the forlorn Son, the woman of
whom I have spoken, the Thief on the Cross, and Peter who wept and prayed for
themselves, when no body that we read of prayed for them yea, says Idem,
homil deprofecta, Euangelij, tom. 3.
Chrysostom, will thou learn, that when we pray for our selves we come better
speed with God, then when others pray for us. The woman of Canaan cried. Matthew
15.23.
and the Disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away, for she
cries after us: But he answered to them, and said, I am not sent, but unto the
lost sheep of the house of Israel: But when she comes her self, and holds
on her crying, and says, Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eat of the crummes which
fall from their masters table, then he gave her a benefit; and said, Be it unto
thee even as thou will. Ye see how he reiects her, when others pray for her,
and grants her requests when she prays her self.

VII. Beloved auditors, retain and keep in your sanctified memories these
three lessons, and now, even now put them in practice: I beseech you, I pray
you for Christ's sake, Col. 3.12.13.
put on, as the elect of God, holy, and beloved, the bowels of mercies kindness,
humblenes of mind, meeknes, long suffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: Even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye. Ephesians. 6.18.
Pray always with all prayer, and supplication in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all perseverance, and supplication for all Saints. Namely take
heed that every one of you pray and weep, this day and every day for your
ownselues.

Which if ye do with with an unfeigned repentance, doubt not of the
forgiveness of your sins: for God has says, that Esa. 1.18.
though your, sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. And I am sent to you of God this
day, as Paul was to the Jews of Antioche, Act. 13.38.39.
To preach unto you through Christ the forgiveness of sins: And that by him
all that believe, are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses.

CHAPTER IV.
I THe second comfort and blessedness promised to them which weep, is
deliverance from the punishment of sin.

II. If they suffer for righteousness sake, the cause of their sufferings is a
comfort unto them.

III. God delivers them in a convenient time.

IV. Till that time come, he strengthens us with his holy Spirit.

IV. Apostates which fall away are no true members of Christ's Church.

I B^essed are we, if God has blessed us with this first and most necessary
blessing forgiveness of sins: for to whom he forgiueth sins, he gives
all other necessary comforts. And therefore our second comfort is, that putting
away from before his eyes the iniquity of our sins, he will also take away
from our backs the punishment of them: For when the cause is gone, the effect
must cease.

If ye desire a proof of this truth, hearken to David, saying in the 32.
Psalm, Psalm. 32.5.
I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said I
will confess my transgressions unto the Lord: And thou have taken away the
punishment of my sin. Did not the Lord say to Hezekiah who had wept and
prayed unto him, 2 Kings 20.3.5.
I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: Behold I will heal thee?
This healing of the body was an effect of the healing of the soul, as the good
King confessed in his song of thanksgiving, when he said to his God, Esa 38.17.
Thou have in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for
thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

So ye read in the Gospel of Matthew, that Christ when he was to cure one
sick of the Palsy, said first unto him, Matthew. 9.2.6.
Son, be of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee: And consequently, Arise,
take up thy bed, and go unto thine own house.

This is the order of Gods blessings: the first is the forgiveness of sin:
The second is the removing of the punishment of sin. But we put the Plough
before the Oxen, we weep and cry desiring to be delivered of the punishment of
sin, and are not heard, because we have not sought with tears the
forgiveness of sin.

II. If we be persecuted for Righteousness sake as many of our dear breathren
are now, we have subject of comfort in the midst of our sufferings, because
we know that the cause of our sufferings is not only good and honest, but also
most honorable. So says Christ, bidding us Matthew. 5.21.
rejoice and be exceeding glad, when we are persecuted for righteousness sake,
and reviled for his sake. So thought his Apostles, when Act. 5.41.
they departed from the presence of the Council, rejoicing that they were
counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. Such brands are rather glorious
then disgraceful: wherefore then should we not rejoice in them?

III. If we had no other share lotted unto us, but afflictions, how could we
subsist, and what should become of our hope? Therefore Jesus Christ said to his
Disciples; John 16.20.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the world
shall rejoice: ye shall be sorrow full: but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy. Consider how turned into joy.

First the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10 13
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are
able: but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it. And how often has God made such a way to his afflicted
Church? How often has been fulfilled that which David says, Psalm. 34.6.
This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his
troubles? How many examples might I produce of Gods most wonderful deliver
a^ces, whereby the sorrow of his children was turned into joy, and the day of
their mourning and fasting, into a good day of feasting, and of gladness; as
in Ester 9.19 22.
the time of Queen Esther?

Leaving other examples, whereof I have spoken else where, let us consider one
which cannot be yet worn out of our memories. I speak of the Churches of
France. The wind with most horrible noice blowed upon us whole storms of
bullets and fiery rain: The sea wrought, and of a plain became high
mountains which we could not ouerswim: Her floods swelled, her billows
roared, her proud and outrageous waves gauesuch blows against the small skiffe
wherein Jesus was asleep, and redoubled them with such swiftness and violence,
that neither could the shipper direct, nor the steeresman stand at the rudder,
nor the mariners resist. The^ our ears and our eyes having nothing before
them, but monstrous cries of roaring voices, but ugly darkness, but terrible
images of desolation and death; Then seeing our little boat ready to be driven
upon the Rock of destruction; Then nothing being left us but fear, but
dismaidnes, but despair of safety, but expectation of a loath some end, we
ran to the Lord who was a sleep; and awoke him, crying as the Aposties did,
when upon the tempestuous Sea they were a type of the Church. Matthew. 8.25.26.
Lord save us, we perish. Then Fsal. 121.4.
the keeper of Israel, who neither slumbers nor sleeps, arose: Then he spoke to
the winds, and they spoke no more: he rebuked the waves of the Sea, and they
leuelled their mountains, they sleeked the furrows of their angry brows,
they changed their wrinkles into smoothnes, their crookedness into evenness
their roughness into a fair plain? He made the storm a calm, and when we
could not be in a harder plight, as being without hope to escape, he directed
our course to a more safe and pleasant haven, then that which is nigh unto the
City of Lasea, called Act. 27 8.
the Fair havens. So we arrived to the harbor of grace, to the port of peace,
to the unlooked for, but much desired haven of tranquillity and quietness.
This was the fruit, this was the effect of our humiliation, of our fasting, of
our mourning and prayers in France.

Undoubtedly the same cause shall bring forth the same effect in the
Palatinate, and other parts of Germany. They have a longer winterthen we had.
It Is now their sowing time, and now they sow in tears: Their harvest shall
come, then shall be accomplished that which is written, Psalm. 126 5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Psalm. 147.9.
God hears the voice of the young Ravens which cry, and will he not hear the
voice Luke 18.7.8.
of his own elect, which cry day and night unto him? I tell you, says Christ,
that he will avenge them speedily. Psalm. 14.7.
O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion: when the. Lord brings
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad.

IV. Secondly, God has a time ordained for his deliverances, which the
scripture calls Ps. 69.13. Isa. 49.3.
an acceptable time. Till that time come, the Lord sweetneth the bitter gall of
bodily tribulations, with the honey of his spiritual comforts: As Christ said
to his Disciples, Ioh. 16.22.
Now ye have sorrow, but your joy no man takes from you. For even then the
comforter, Romans 8.16.
the Spirit of adoption bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God: And that comfort is so great, that when we weep, we weep
for joy, and say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.5.
As the sufferings of Christ abound in un, so our consolation also abounds by
Christ.

It Is a wonder to behold the true Christian in the time of his trouble and
distress: Men seek to bring him down to the ground, but hope lifts him up
above the sky: As when David said, Psalm. 94.18.19.
My foot slippeth, the experience of Gods wonderful assistance made him to say
forth with, Thy mercy, O Lord, held me up: In the multitude of my thoughts
within me, thy comforts delight my soul. When men have done what they can to
overcome him with bitter jests, with sharp stripes, and cruel tortures, he
overcomes them with patience; And in him is verified that which the Apostle
said, 2 Cor. 4.8.9.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, but not
in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.

As Plin. histor. natural. l. 12. cap. 25.
the Balm, which of all liquors has the sweetest and most pleasant smell,
distills not from the Balsame tree till it be pricked: So the most precious
graces of the Spirit of GOD, wherewith the fowls of truly religious Christians
are beautified, their faith, their zeal, their patience, their constancy,
their contempt of the world, their earnest desire of heavenly things flow never
so abundantly, as when the sword of perse cution makes in them a deep
incision. Therefore the Lord has trodden the Virgin, the daughter of Judah as
in a Winepresse, and he has pressed and wrung out of her the most excellent
liquor of her faith, hope and charity, which before was hid in the grapes, and
under the fair skin of a peaccable profession.

V. On the other part, it is a monstrous spectacle to behold then the fickleness
and inconstancy of counterfeit professors, who fearing the weight of GODS
Wine Press, conueigh themselves away from under it, and do even as if one who
desires to be esteemed an honest man, when he sees robbers and way-layers
coming to the company where he is, did troop and join hands with them, to
take his friends purse, or life from him, to save his own; 2 Pet. 2.21.
It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteonsnesse,
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered
unto them. I will not compare the true Christian to a tree in the kingdom of
Congo, called by the Portugalians, Arbor tristis.
The sorrowful tree, because it neither buds, nor blossoms, nor brings forth
fruit, but in the night, and in the day is without fruit, flowers, or leaves,
as if it were dead: for the Christian is like unto the Palm Tree, which is
green both day and night; though his godliness shines more brightly, like a
Diamond, in the night of his adversity, then in the day of his prosperity.
But well may I compare those painted Christians to the herb called
Heliotropium or Turnesol, be cause it turns with the Sun both arising and
going down; For so long as prosperous days shine upon them, they follow
Christ, who is Mal. 4.2.
the Sun of righteousness: But if to put his children to a trial of their
faith, he hide himself for a little while in a dark night of persecution,
forthwith they turn their backs unto him, and forsake him.

Great and wailefull is their loss: Nevertheless, the Church finds in it a
great gain, and in weeping for them matter of joy for her self. For what are
they but super fluous and unprofitable Ezech. 5.1.2.
hair of the mystical body of Christ, which he burns with fire or scatters
in the wind, when he takes a rasour to trim the head and the beard of his
Church? but Ezech. 22.18.
brass, tin, iron, lead, drosses which are euaporated and vanish away in
stinking and pestilent smoke, when Mal. 3.3.
the refiner and purifier of the sons of Levi, takes his gold and his silver
to melt and purge them in the furnace of trial? but the scum which the
Cauldron of the Church casts out, when it seeths and bubbles at the fire of
persecution? but Psalm. 1.4.
chafe which the wind drives away, when the Lord takes Mat. 3.12.
his fann^ in his hand, and a broom to sweep and purge thoroughly his floare?
but Ioh. 15.1.
the fruitless branches of the true vine, which the heavenly Vine-dresser
takes away, and casts into the fire of his indignation? but August in Epist.
Johan. tract. 3. Non de carne mea praecisi sunt, sed pectus mihi premebant, cum
inessent, etc.
ill humors which lay heavy upon the stomach of the Church? but noisome and
rotten deiections which she avoyds into the iakes of the world, when the
Physician of the soul has given her to drink a bitter potion in the cup of
tribulation? When such filthy excrements are euacuated she is not so gross, so
swollen and puffed up as she was, but she is more healthful. Finally, what are
they but like unto wooden legs, or to a Creple-mans staff, which, when he is
cured of his disease, he casts away, and not only loses nothing of his
own, but also receives a benefit, and thanks God, that they are not more
behoouefull unto him?

CHAP. V.
1 Our first comfort in heaven, is, that we shall be without sin;

2 The second, that we shall be free from all misery;

3 The third, that our faith and hope shall be changed into the real
possession of the thing believed and hoped for.

4 What shall be then the blessedness of our souls,

5 And of our bodies.

6 Eternal life more fully described by seven circumstances.

7 Then the wicked shall see the glory of Gods children; who also shall see the
torments of the wicked, and praise God incessantly.

8 Exhortation and prayer.

I. AS at the marriage Ioh. 2.10
in Cana of Galilee, all the wine was good; but that which was given last, was
the best: so all those comforts whereof I have spoken, are most excellent; but
the last, which God gives to his children at the last day of their lives, and
which he shall fill to them in the unmeasurable bowls of his infinite mercies
at the last day of the world, surpasses them all.

Our comfort and our blessedness is now, that our sins are forgiven us: our
comfort, our blessedness shall be then, that we shall be without sin. Rev.
14.13
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: they rest from their labors.
Their first, their last, their most continual and toilsome labor, is their
sin: from it they rest. And therefore the holy Apostle Romans 7 24
desired to die, that his blessedness, which consisted only in forgiveness of
sin, by death might be changed into the blessedness of abolishment of
sin: for then there shall be no sin, because there shall be no
inticement, no allurement to sin. Rev. 21 27
There shall in no wise enter into the holy City, any thing that defiles.
Nothing is able to defile us, but sin: and therefore to it we shall say in
that day, Get thee hence, stand without. Rev. 22 15
For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie. What is sin, but a lie?
What is a sinner, but a lover, but a maker of lies? But within are they of whom
it is written, Esaias 60.21
Thy people shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever; the
branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. O Lord,
Psalm 118.9, 20
open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I will praise
the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall enter. I
will praise thee: for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation.

II. Our comfort and our blessedness is now, that when Rev. 17 4
the Whore of Babylon drinks unto us, in the cup of her abominations and
fornications, not the health, but the death of our souls, God strengthens us
with Esa. 11.2
the spirit of might, which makes us to say to him, Psalm 73.27, 28
Lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish. Thou have destroyed all them
that go awhoring from thee: but it is good for me to draw near to God. I have
put my trust in the Lord God, that I may declare al thy works.

Our comfort and our blessedness is now, that when our enemies make us to drink
great bowls of salt tears in stead of wine, we drink stoutly, and are not
drunk, and stagger not any way from our profession: when they bait us, they
cannot abate us: when they press us, they cannot oppress us: when they cut
the thread of our mortal life, we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of
glory, because we know that God will knit and fasten our souls to the thread
of immortality, which his own hands have spun.

Our comfort, our blessedness will be then, that Rev. 21 4.
God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes: and there shall be no more death,
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain. Rem. Felices
lachrymae, quas benignae manus Conditoris abstergunt!
O blessed tears, which the merciful hands of the Creator wipe away! Then Rev.
20 14
death and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire. Then we shall with
triumphing voices desie death, and say, 1. Cor. 15.55
O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?

III. Our comfort and our blessedness now, is our faith. It Is our
blessedness, that Christ dwells in us: and Ephesians. 3.17
he dwells in our hearts by faith. Now, by faith; u Now, Aug. de verb.
Apost. ser. 16.
as long as we are in the way; now, as long as we are in our pilgrimage; now,
2. Cor. 5.6, 7
whiles we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord: for we
walk by faith, not by sight. Now we are in the world, besieged on all sides
with Armies of enemies: and 1. John 5.4
this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.

Then we shall dwell Cant. 8.14
in the mountain of spices, in the Country of Eden, in the Paradise of
felicity, of glory, and of joy. Greg. in 7. Psalm poenit.
Vbi est lux sine defectu, gaudium sine gemitu, desiderium sine poena, amor
sine tristitia, satietas sine fastidio, sospitas sine vitio, vita sine morte,
salus sine languore: Where there is light without any defect, gladness without
mourning, desire without pain, love without sorrow, fullness without
loathsomenesse, safenesse without imperfection, life without death, salvation
without any languishing feebleness: where we shall enjoy all felicity with
Heb. 12 22, 23
the innumerable company of the Angels, with the general Assembly and Church
of the firstborn, with the spirits of just men made perfect. For then we shall
be citizens of heaven, fellows to all the Saints, like unto the blessed Angels,
heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ.

Now our comfort and our blessedness is our hope. Hope is necessary unto a
wayfaring man: hope comfort him in the way. A man who is on his journey,
endures all kind of travel, so long as he hops to come to his journeyes
end: Aug. de verb. Apost. ser. 16. T^ll^ illi spem perveniendi, continuo
franguntur vires ambulandi.
Take from him that hope, by and by ye shall see him discouraged, his strength
weakened, his journey broken off. We are all travelers, all on our journey to
heaven. The staff which upholdeth us, the spur which sets us forward in
the way, is our hope: Rom 8.24, 25.
for we are saved by hope. But hope that is seen, is no hope: for, what a man
sees, why does he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do
we with patience wait for it. Aug. ibid.
In this patience the Martyrs were crowned: Desidorabant quod non videba^t,
contem^ebant quae forebant.
they desired the things which they suffered: in this hope they said, Rom 8.35.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? O the
strength! O the power of hope!

1. Ioh. 3.2.
Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, now we are predestined, called,
justified, adopted: and it does not yet appear, what we shall be: therefore we
hope: for we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we
shall see him as he is, i. e. we shall enjoy him, Bern in fes^o omnium Sanctor.
sermon. 4.
1. in all his creatures: 2. in our selves: 3. in his own self: for then we
shall know the blessed Trinity in its own self: then, with the pure eye of our
heart, we shall behold that incomprehensible, that unspeakeable glory, not 1.
Cor 13.12.
through a glass in a riddle, as now in his works, in his Word, in his
Sacraments; but face to face. Then we shall no more walk by faith, but by
sight. And Aug. eod. Spes tam non erit, quia erit res.
hope shall be no more, because we shall enjoy the thing hoped for. Now Col.
3.3, 4.
our life is hid with Christ in God: when Christ, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall ye appear with him also in glory. O how glorious is that
glory! who shall give me words to utter it aptly? Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has entered into the heart of man, what brightness, what
sweetness, what pleasantnes, what glory God has prepared for them that l^ve
him: This is that Phil. 4.7
peace of God which passes all understanding: Bern. ibid. Quod ergo nulli
datum est expertri, nullus conetus affari.
wherefore that which no man is able to understand, let no man go about to
utter.

IV. Yet, if ye will suffer me to fumble, and to speak of such things as I
can; since I cannot speak of them as I would, 'Ile make to you a short
description, and draw rudely, as it were with a coal or black ink, the first
lineaments of the bright-shining light of that glory.

Man, as ye know, is framed of two parts: of a soul, and of a body. The wise
men of the world say, that in the soul there are three faculties or natures,
which they call reasonable, sensual, and choleric. By the first we reason and
discourse: by the second, we covet meats, drinks, all sorts of delights: by
the third, we are angry. In the first, so long as we are in this world, there
is knowledge and ignorance; for 1. Cor. 13.9.
we know in part: In the second, there is desire and disdain: In the third,
there is joy and anger. But in that day, Bern. ibid.
implebit Deus rationale nostrum luce sapientiae: implebit concupiscibile
nostru^ fo^te iustitiae, etc. God will fill our reasonable part with the light
of wisdom: our sensual part with a fountain of righteousness: our
choleric part with perfect tranquillity. Then we shall know God with all
our mind, as we are known of him: then, being filled with his
righteousness, we shall ever love him with all our hearts, and still desire
him; ever be satisfied with his likeness, and still hunger after him; ever
rejoice in his goodness, and never be weary of rejoicing in him. Nihil quippe
aut deest semper videntibus, aut superest semper volentibus: For there nothing
is wanting to them who see God always; nothing is overmuch to them who desire
always. This is the blessed comfort wherewith Lazarus is comforted in Abraham's
bosom; as Abraham said, Luke 16.25.
Now he is comforted.

V. Man's body is made of the four Elements; of earth, water, air, and fire.
Ex Bern. ibid.
Habebit Terra nostra immortalitatem, Aqua impassibilitatem, Aer agilitatem,
Ignis perfectissimam pulchritudine^: Our earth shall receive immortality, and
shall not return unto earth again. Our water shall be glorified with
impassibilitie, and shall not be subject to any passion or sufferings, which
may hurt and grieve us. Our air shall have such agilitie and promptness, Aug,
de Civit. dei, lib 22. cap. 30. Certe ubi volet Spiritus, ibi protinus orit and
corpus.
that it shall quickly carry the body wheresoever the soul will have it to go.
Our fire shall be beautified with the most wonderful light of all fairness.

If the Exodus 34.29, 30.
skin of Moses face, after he had been forty days with God in Mount Sinai,
shone so brightly, that the people was afraid to come nigh him: how brightly, I
pray you, shall shine the bodies of the Saints, when they shall be transported by
the holy Angels unto Mount Sion, and enlightened with the glorious light of the
face of God shining upon them night and day, world without end!

The Lord Jesus himself says, that Mat. 13.43.
the righteous shall shine forth as the Sun, in the kingdom of their
father. And the holy Apostle says, that Phil. 3.20, 21.
we look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body. In his
transfiguration, which was but a praeludium of his glorification, Mat. 17 2.
his face did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

If such was the glory not only of his body, but of his raiment also, when he
was upon earth; how wonderful and glorious is his body now in heaven! And if
our bodies are to be like unto his in glory, what heart can conceive, what
speech can express the greatness of that glory! How radia^t and glittring shall
then be the beams of the glorious bodies of all the Saints together, when each
of us shall be so glorious! So then says S. Bernard, allegorizing the words
of the psalm, Psalm 72.19
The whole earth shall be filled with his glory: Bern. ibid.
So will GOD fill our souls, when in them shall be perfect science, perfect
righteousness, perfect joy: So the whole earth shall be filled with his glory,
when the body shall be incorruptible, impassible, nimble, and fashioned like
unto his glorious body.

VI. But what is all this that I have said, or can say of eternal life? It is
as if I should paint the fair light of the Sun with the blackest coal. O the
last comfort of the Christian man, how blessed art thou! o blessed life of them
that hunger and thirst after thee, how comfortable art thou for the thing which
we shall enjoy in thee, for the means, for the measure, for the time, for the
certainty, for the place, for the companions of that comfortable blessedness, of
that blessed comfort!

The thing shall be God himself; Ber. Deus omne bonum, and summum bonum.
God, who is all goodness; God, who is the sovereign good. Now we make our
moan with David, and say, Psalm 42.2, 23.
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear
before GOD? But as Lyranus says upon the sixth chapter of S. John, Is status
est vita aeterna, ut faciat tu^c Deus, ut videamus quod credidimus, manducemus
quod esurivimus, habeamus quod amavimus and desideravimus: Eternal life is a
state wherein God will make us to see that which we believed, to eat that for
which we were hungry, to have that which we loved and desired.

The means shall be no means: we shall enjoy him by himself immediately: As
Saint John says, that Rev. 22 22, 23
he saw no Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem: for the Lord God Almighty and
the Lamb are the Temple of it; and the City, says he also, had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the Lamb is the light thereof.

The measure shall be Luke 6 38.
good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, given into
our bosom. For Bernard.
Deus futurus est intellectui plenitudo lucis, voluntati multitudo pacis,
memoriae continuatio aeternitatis: nam quicquid olim inchoavit and praeparavit
gratia, tunc absolvet and perficiet gloria: God shall be to our mind fullness
of light; to our will, multitude of peace; to our memory, continuatio^ of
eternity: then whatsoever grace has begun in us, glory will make it perfect.

The time shall not be Aug. in Mat. sor. 17 Vbi sunt dies bow, nec multi, sed
u^^s. Dies ille nescit ortum, nescit occasum: illi di^^ non succedit crastinus,
quia non pracedit tum besternus.
many days, but one; A most wonderful day: A day which has no rising, no
setting; A day which is not followed by another, because another day is not
gone before it. Psalm 30.5.
Weeping soiourneth in the evening, but singing comes in the morning. We are
now in the evening of our misery, and therefore weeping sojournes journes with
us: we shall be then in the morning of our felicity. Then Mal. 4.2
the Sun of righteousness shall arise unto us; Sun whereof the Prophet
says, Esaias 60 20.
Thy Sun shall no more go down; neither shall the Moon withdraw it self: for
the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall
be ended.

The place shall be new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
If this heaven, which we see enamelled with so many bright and glistering
stars, be so glorious; if this earth, which is diapred with such a pleasant
and profitable diversity of so many creatures, and is inhabited by sinners, be
so fair: how glorious will the new heavens be, how fair will the new earth
be, which are prepared to be the blessed habitation of righteous men!

The certainty shall be most certain: Aug. do civ. Doi, l. 12 c. 13. Quomodo
enim vera beatitudo est, de cuius nunquam aeternitate confiditur?
for that cannot be true blessedness, of the eternity whereof we are not assured.

The companions shall be all the blessed Angels, and all the Elect; who then
shall know one another, even as in the transfiguration Mat. 17 4
Peter knew Moses and Elias, whom before he had never seen: and the Luke 16 23
rich man being in hell, knew Lazarus in Abraham's bosom.

VII. O wonderful dispensation of the justice and mercies of the Lord our God!
Chrysostom in ep is it. 3. ad Cyriac. Episc.
The tyrants and persecuters shall see and know God's dear children whom they
martyrized, and Sap. 5.4, 5.
whose life they accounted madness; and their end, disgrace and infamy? Seeing
and knowing them, they shall groan with anguish of spirit, and say with the
sobs of too too late repentance, Psalm. 144.15.
happy is that people that is in such a case: happy is that people, whose God
is the Lord; But woe and alas is to us now and for evermore.

The Church also shall see and know al her persecuters, and having all tears
wipt from her eyes, shall sing Rev. 5.9.
a new song, which shall never wax old, even Rev. 15.3. Exodus 15.
the song of Moses, the servant of God, which shall be continually in their
mouths, to praise God and the Lamb, who has guided them by his strength
through the red sea of bloody persecution, and planted them in the mountain of
his inheritance, in the Sanctuary which his hand has established.

IIX. Dear brethren, what shall we render unto the Lord our God, for so many
comforts which he has already bestowed upon us, and for this last comfort which
he has prepared for us? Aug. de verbis Apost. s^^th. 16.
Praedestinavit antequa^ essemus, vocavit cum aversi essemus, iustificavit cum
peccatores essemus, glorificavit cum mortales essemus: He did predestinate us,
before we were: he called us when our backs were turned unto him: he
justified us when we were sinners: he glorified us when we were subject to
death. This last benefit is but begun in us in this world, we look for the
accomplishment thereof in the world to come, where God shall be unto us Bern.
in Vigil. nativit. Domini, s^^m. 5.
omne iucundum; omne utile, omne honestum; whatsoever is delectable,
profitable, and honest, and therefore whatsoever our hearts can desire. Aug.
ibid.
In his quae iam habemus, laudemus Deum largitore: In his quae nondum habemus,
tenemus debitorem: Let us then, I pray you, praise God for that which we have
received, and trust in him as in a most sufficient debtour of the rest which is
to be received. Debtor enim factus est; non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed
quod ei placuit promittendo: for he is become our debtor, not by receiving any
thing from us, but by promising that which of his own good pleasure he is
willing to give us.

And because Idem de Symbolo, ad catech lib. 3. cap. 11. Si in cor hominis non
ascendit, cor hominis illuc ascendat.
the things which he has prepared for us, cannot ascend into our hearts, let
our hearts ascend unto him with whom they are. For that effect, let us now,
even now purify our hearts: for every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure, 1. Ioh. 3.3. Yea, let us lay down
willingly this present transitory life, that we may attain to the other
which is eternal: for by the small loss of this life, we enter into the
glorious and joyful possession of the other.

O God, Idem Confess. lib. 10. cap. 22.
Ipsa est beata vita, gaudere ad te, de te, propter te: ipsa est, and non est
altera. The only blessed and eternal life, is to rejoice to thee, in thee, of
thee, for thee: there is no other life. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor
that thou bear unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation, that I may
see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation,
that I may glory with thine inheritance. O eternal God, Psalm. 106.4, 5.
O Father of mercies, hear our prayers which we power out before thee, that
we may from henceforth, and for evermore sing unto thee David's song; Thou have
turned from me my mourning into dancing: thou have put off my sackecloth, and
girded me with gladness. Psalm. 30.11.
O Father of Christ hear us for Christ thy Sons sake; to whom, with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all glory, honor, and praise, both now and for evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.

