HEALTHES: SICKNESS. OR A COMPENDIOUS AND brief Discourse; proving, the
drinking and pledging of Healthes, to be Sinful, and utterly Unlawful unto
Christians; by Arguments, Scriptures, Fathers, Modern Divines, Christian
Authors, Historians, Councels; Imperial Laws and Constitutions; and by the
voice and verdict of profane and Heathen Writers: Wherein all those ordinary
Objections, Excuses, or Pretenses which are made to justify, extenuate, or
excuse the drinking or pledging of Healthes, are likewise cleared and answered.

By WILLIAM PRYNNE Gent. Hospitii Lincolniensis.

Isay 5. 11. 22, Haback. 2. 15. 16.

Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong
drink: that continue until night till wine inflame them. Woe unto them that
are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink. Woe unto
him that gives his neighbor drink: that put thy bottle to him, and
make him drunken also, that thou may look on their nakedness: the cup of
the Lords right hand shall be turned toward thee, and shameful spuing shall
be on thy glory.

Ambrose. Eplst. lib. 3. Epist. Vercellenst Ecclesiae.

Non propter volupt atem bibendum est, sed propter infirmitatem: pro remedio
igitur parcius, non pro deliciis redundantius.

Owen. Epigram. Pars. 1. lib. 2. Epigr. 42.

Quo tibi potarum plus est in ventre Salutum,
Hoc minus epotis, hisce Salutis habes.
Vna salus sanis, nullam potare Salutem
Non est in pota vera Salute Salus.
Printed at London. 1628.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES BY THE Grace of God, King of
great Britain, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, etc.
MOst Gracious and dread Sovereign; in Vt parts hominis in cord vivunt, it a
parts Reipublicae in Rege. Case Poli^. li 3. ca 7.
whose spiritual and corporal health and welfare, the safety, health and
happiness both of our Church and State subsist: I the most unworthiest and
meanest of your true and faithful Subjects, presuming on your Grace and
Clemency, have made bold to consecrate this mean and worthless Treatise,
against Healthes, or Health-drinking, unto your sacred Majesty: and to commit
my self and it, unto your royal Patronage. The reasons which swayed and
emboldened me, to dedicate so small a Pamphlet, unto so great a Patron as your
Majesty, were chiefly these.

Healths, which are daily carouzed in your royal Name, throughout your
Kingdom, and else where: are more interessed in the theme and subject of this
compendious Discourse, then any other that I know.

Majesty of all other persons within your own Dominions, are most
dishonored, praeiudiced and abused by these Healths; and that in these
respects.

Health, your Name, your Crown and Dignity, by means of Healths, are made the
daily table. complement, grace, and first salute of every iouiall ^erpetuat
brietas auli^a vita mode est. Obsopaeus de A^tc Bib^ndi. lib: 2.
Courtier; the grandserjeanty and chief allegiance of every great or petty, of
every Corporation, Court or Country Officer: the principal welcome and
enterteinment, of every rusticke Gentleman: the piety, and meal devotion, of
many a Trencher-Chaplin: the logic, theme and rhetoric, of every
potlearned Scholar: the phrase and His omnis in b^bendo est fortitud^. De Elia
et Ieiun: cap: 12. Ta^ inter ^pulas fortis vir esse potest, quam in bel^o.
Eurip: Panyasides Stobaeus de Incontineatia sermo 18.
valor, of every deboist and roaring Soldier: the liuerie, and
table-buttrie-sellar-talke of every good fellow Serving-man: the ceremony,
byword, and ale. discourse, of every base Mechanicke, of every rusticke Clown
and Peasant: the first ingredient, of every Drunkards Cup: the first
Pot-seruice at every great or mean man's Table: the song, the antheme, foot or
music of every festival and merry meeting: the prologue or praeludium to
every drunken match and skirmage: the ornament, grace or garland, of every
ebrious Round: the only Ram or Pol-axe to assault, to force, and batter
down; the most flexanimous Eloquence, to solicit; and the most energeticall
and uncontrollable Argument, to overcome, the sobriety and temperance of all
true-hearted, real Bedlus, qui diuinas Scriptur as legens, verb a ver^it in
opera. Bernard. De ordine vitae: Col. 1116 h.
practical and blessed Christians, (who make a conscience of excess, because
the Scripture does condemn it:) the chief Alectiue, bait or stratagem, to
draw men on to drunkenness; and the only Patronage and protection, to
justify, countenance, and bear out, the intemperance and riot of all such,
who deem excess and drunkenness a Ducitur ebrietas nunc virtus maxima. Nec
vitium ebries as quaelibet esse potest. Obsopaeus de Art Bibendi. lib. I. and
2.
virtue, and no sin at all; (at least but ventall) if your Majesty's Healths
occasion it. And is not this a great affront, indignity and dishonor to your
Majesty, that your sacred Health, your Name, and royal Crown, should be thus
profaned, and banded up and down in every Drunkards mouth? in every Cup and
Can? in every Tavern, Tap-house, Hall, or Seller? (unhallowed, base and sordid
places, unworthy of so holy and great a Name and Presence:) that every
degenerous, infamous and stigmaticall Belialist: every deboist and brutish
Pot-companion, (whose I Cor. 5. 11. Ephesians 5. 11. Turpe est virum ebrium apud
sobrios esse: Turpe item est, si sobrius cum ebriis fuerit. Theogmede (...)
stobaenm: de^ncontineusia, Sermo 18.
very company and acquaintance all Christians should abhor:) that the very of
scouring, dreggs, and scum of men, should so far debase and undervalue them:
as to prostitute them to their swinish sins and lusts; as to command and use
them at their pleasures, to enforce and toll on others to drunkenness and
excess: and so to make the great Defendor of the Faith, the ground, the
Patron, and grand Protector of all intemperance; as if Drunkenness were the
sole and only Faith that Kings defend? It was no little grief, nor trouble to
great and good King David, that Psalm: 69: 12.
he was the drunkards song: and shall it not then be your Majesty's greatest
grief, and chief dishonor; that your royal Crown and sacred Health, should
not only be made the song, the phrase, the complement, the ceremony, byword,
and pot-discourse; but even the Gloss, the Text, the Religion, the Engine, the
Patronage, the Plea and Justification, the stallion, and vizard of every
drunken Tos-pot, of every sordid Pessimum inimiconim genus laudantes. Ta^ius:
Agritola Sec. 13 Genus hominum adulatoribus pestilentius nullum est: Plu^arch:
de lib. E^^candis.
hostile, and pernicious Parasite: as if you were no better then the Devil
Bacchus, the Idol-god of wine, of Healths, and drunkenness? Doubtless though
it were the honor of heathen Kings, and Diuell-gods in former ages, to have
their Healths carouzed and quaffed off at every solemn and festival meeting;
yet it is the greatest contumclie, indignity and dishonor to any good or
Christian King, who should be a very Psalm: 82: 1: 6. Rex si officio suo suerit
cum laud perfunctus, quasi quidam Deus in terris est: singulari cu^tu^ ac
veneratione dignissim^is: Osorius de Regum Inslit lib: 4.
God on earth, (not only in respect of Sovereignty and command: but likewise
in the Reges (...) meliores privatis hominibus esse debent, quanto cis
honoratiores ex istunt ^^^rates Panig^r Oser: lib: 4: de Regum Inssit.
transcendency of grace, of holiness, and the Facere recte cines suos Princeps
optimus saciendo^ ^oc^t ctiam hic em^ imperio maximns sit. (...) plo mayor est:
(...) Rom l 2: p: 134. I Tim 2. 1: 2, 3
exemplarinesle of his practical, pious, regulating and reforming life:) to
have his Name, his Health, his Crown and dignity thus vilified and abused: by
sordid, beastly, wicked and ungodly men, to such sinester, sinful, graceless,
heathenish and infernal ends as these; to patronize their gross intemperance,
and so to drown their own and others souls, in drunkenness, riot, and
excess of wine.

Secondly, as Healthes do thus dishonor, so likewise they do praeiudice and
wrong your sacred Majesty in two respects.

First, in merging, quenching and drowning the multitude, heat and feruency of
those public and private Prayers, which every loyal subject owes unto your
Grace. It is ( m) Gods own iniunction, and it was the Christians practice even
under pagan Nos pro saluse imperatorum Deumi^coeamus aete^num, Deum viuum, et
Deum vuitum, quem et if si Imperatores propicium sib^ in^ ter caeuros malune:
pratantes ^umus omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum,
domum tutam, exercitus fortes, senatum fidelem, populam probum, orhem quietum,
quaecunque ^ominis et Caesaris vota sunt. Tertul. Apol. adv. Gentes cap. 30. 39.
Emperors, in former ages,) that Subjects should make prayers, and
supplications, and intercessions for Kings, and all that are in authority: not
drink, carouze, or revel for them: But by reason of the Devils malice, and
men's prodigious wickedness: these holy and fervent Prayers are turned into
profane, hellish, excessive, and unchristian Healthes: (the Isay 5 11, 12, 13,
22, 24, 25. Prove. 23 29. 30. Joel. 1. 5, 6. Nahum: 1: 10. Amos 6: 6: 7: Isai:
27: 1, 2, 3: Hos: 4: 3: 11: cap: 7: 5: Deutr: 28: 59, 60, 61: Matthew: 24: 49,
50: Luke 21: 34: compared together.
only means to draw down curses and diseases, yea woes and fatal indgements
on a King and Kingdom:) Hence it is now accounted a part of Puritanisme, to
make a conscience of praying constantly and privately; but a part of
Protestanisme, piety, and true devotion, to make no conscience of drinking
openly and howerly, even beyond excess it self, for your Majesty's health and
welfare: Hence is it, that most men prefer their Healths before their Prayers;
and therefore would rather drink your Majesty's Health Dies admodum parna,
breuis etiam nox vel kiberna potando videtur. Basil de Ebrietate et Luxu Sermo.
a whole night or day, or week, or month: nay an whole year together, then
pray in priuacy and feruency one hour for it: Hence is it that many men place
their Religion Allegiance and Devotion in these Healths; thinking themselves
most pious, loyal, and Non prophanus molius esses qua^sic vel^gi^su? Minuc.
Felix: Octav: page: 77. Sic tum so maxim^ pios putans, tum maxim fiune impij.
Lactant: de Iustit. lib: 5: cap: 10.
religious to their Sovereign, when they are most profane, and impious, most
riotous and luxurious; in drinking down his Health: whence they deem it a
greater breach of allegiance, piety, and devotion, not to pledge your Majesty's
Health, then not to pray for it. So far have Healths incroached, and of late
usurped upon your blessed and best inheritance of your Subjects prayers: that
they have even quite extinguished the heat and feruency, and much abated the
multitude and frequency of them throughout your Kingdom, to your incomparable
and peerlesse loss.

Secondly, they praeiudice your Majesty exceedingly Name being made a party to
it, and your Health an occasion, apology, praetence or justification of it.
Alas, how many thousand persons, both are, and have been drawn on (especially
at festival and solemn times of joy and thankfulness) to drunkenness and
excess: drinking their wit out of their heads, their health out of their
bodies, and God out of their souls; whiles they have been too busy and
officious in carouzing Healthes unto your sacred Majesty? Manifold are the
mischiefs, sins and inconveniences, which your Majesty's Healths occasion in
every corner of this Island, (which flotes in Seas of sin and drunkenness,) and
more are they like to grow, if you prevent them not in time: Now this is
certain, (if I may be so bold as to Ma^uerim veris offendere quam placere^
adulando. Senede Clementia. cap. 2.
speak the truth unto your Grace, in this our flattering age;) if that your
Majesty Seruorum filiorumque peccata non coercere peccatum est: Lactantius de
Ira Dei^cap. 18: Ioannes: Frid: de Ritu, Rib: ad San: lib: 2 cap. 2. see Deuteronomy:
13: 8. Psa: 50: 18, 21. Prover 1. 10. 1 Samuel: 15: 9. to 24. ludg: 5. 23. 2 Chro
19 2. Hal^: 2: 15, 16. Acts 8. 1. Rom: 1. 32. 1 Timothy: 5: 22: Ioh: 10: 11:
compared together.
give any tacit, allowance, consent or approbation to these luxurious and
excessive Healths, not laboring with care and conscience to suppress them; you
are then undoubtedly made a party both to the guilt and punishment of all the
sin, the drunkenness, and intemperance, that is occasioned or produced by
them, in any of your Subjects or Allies, (especially within the Verge and
compass of your Court and Palace:) which the 1 Timothy: 6. 15: Rev,: 17: 14: cap:
19: 16.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords will certainly require, at your hands, when
as (...) 25: 31. to 46. Rom: 14: 10, 12. 2 Cor: 5: 10. Rev: 20: 12, 13.
all mankind shall be arraigned before the bar of his Tribunal, there to
receive an everlasting doom and final censure, according to their works,
without respect of persons. Since therefore these Healths do not only
dishonor, but likewise damnifie and praeiudice your sacred Name, your Health,
your Crown and Person, in all these respects: (which should cause your
Majesty, as you tender the honor of your Name, and the eternal welfare of your
Souls, with care and speed for ever to Principis b^ni est, non tantum id agere
vt ipse bonus sit, sed et hoc essicere, vt alii mali esse desistant. Salu. de
Guber. Dci: lib 7.
suppress them:) I thought my self in some sort engaged by Duty and
Allegiance, to appropriate this Treatise to your Grace above all other Patrons
even in this respect, to prevent all further mischiefs that Healths might bring
upon your sacred Person, Crown or State.

Thirdly, I dedicated this Pamphlet to your Majesty above all other persons;
because as none are so much interessed in this Theme and Subject, so none are
so able in respect of place and power; none more obliged in regard of Duty, (
you being, the supremest Magistrate, and Rex medicu^ est; et medico comparamr,
vt saret. Plato de Regn; Case. Polit. lib 3 cap: 4.
State-physition under God himself,) to purge these hydropicall, noxious, and
superfluous humors, and unhealthy Healthes, out of the body of our State and
Kingdom, which are now so much distempered, molested and ouercharged by them,
as your sacred Majesty: Whose Judge. 9. 15 Ps. 78: 71, 72. Deu: 17: 16. 18, 19,
20 2 Samuel: 24: 17 Nehem 2: 10 2 Chro: 1: 10, 11. cap: 7. 10 Neh: 5: 1: to 19. ^
K^^^ 21: 18, 19 2. King: 8: 3: to ^. Nullum ornamentum Principis fastigio
dignius pu^chriusque est quam illa cor^ na ob ciues seruatos sen: de Clement:
cap: 26. Principi et imperatori hoc consulendum est, vt cives set vent, (...)
heg. Populi satus, est gloria Principum: Cassi. (...): lib: 2: (...): 41.
Duty, Honor, and (...)
solemn Oath it is: not only to protect your Subjects, from all external
violence, wrongs, and dangers; to preserve their lives, their states, their
peace, and liberties; and to seek their temporal welfare, good, and
happiness, to the very utmost of your power: but likewise 1 Samuel: 23: 3.
to rule them in the fear of God, by unsheathing, and drawing out the sword of
Sovereign Justice against all sin and wickedness: by executing wrath and
vengeance upon all them that do evil without respect of persons, as the
minister and avenger of God, designed for this purpose. and Rom: 13: 3, 4. Prove
20 26: ca. 25: 5. Rex regendo dictus est; non autem regit qui non corrigit.
August: Enarun Isa: 44.
by cutting off all the wicked of the Land: Psalm: 101. 5, 6, 7, 8.
(especially all graceless, swinish, and unthrifty Drunkards, the very Drones
and Caterpillars of a Commonwealth; and the most unuseful, unnecessary, and
Quid est homo ebrius nisi su perflua, creatura? cuius vita somnium est: cuius
somnus mors est: Ambr: de Elia cs Iei^v. cap. 16.
superfluous creatures of all others) that so you may cut off all wicked doers
from the City of the Lord, and from your Court and Kingdom. on which they
will pull down wrath and indgements, unless the arm and sword of justice lop
them off.

Fourthly, I did it to interest and engage your Majesty, (if it may stand with
your Princely will and pleasure,) in the defense and Patronage of this
distressed Treatise: which by reason of the prauitie, coldness, luxury, and
misery of the times, can find no license for the Press, though it has sought
it fa^ and near: and therefore does here humbly crave your Majesty's most
royal Protection, and Allowance: that so it may pass for current Coyno: and
divulge and spread it self in despite of Bacchus, and his ebrious Crew, to the
affronting and suppressing of Healths and drunkenness, (the Epidemical
Diseases of our Nation, and the Nulla in part mundi cessat ebrietas. Plin: Mat
Hist li. 14. cap 22. Ebrietas toto breviter non cessat in orb. Sunt passim
bibulis om ^ia plena yiris. Obsopaus de Art Bibendi: lib: 3.
world it self:) else it is like to prove abortiue, for want of Midwife
Authority to bring it forth: as many other works and writings have done of
late, if the complaint of Stationers or Printers may be credited. These are the
reasons, ( Gracious Sovereign) that animated and induced me, to commend this
worthless and forlorn Babe of mine, unto your royal Patronage: Not doubting
but your Grace, upon these praeuious considerations, seconded by the noualty
and rareness of the subject, which few have largely handled: will most
graciously own it, and prove a safe and sure Sanctuary, both to me, and it,
against the malice, spleen, and power, of all who shall oppose it. So shall
this petty work of mine, (which here I once more humbly offer unto your sacred
Majesty,) prove useful and profitable unto men, whose good: but fatal and
pernicious unto Healths and Drunkenness; whose final ruin and subversion I
cordially affect: (as being the Ebrietas fortitudinis pernicies: Basil de
Ebrietate et luxu Sermo.
very bane of fortitude and prowess, the things which now we need; and the
Gubernator ebriosus, et qui vis cuiuseunque rei praefectus, omnia subvertit,
si^e nauigium, sieve currum, sieve exercitum, sieve quamcunque rem fidei su^e
commissam Pl^ to. li 2. de Repub. St^b ^u^ Ser. 1^.
overthrow of all martial attempts, and civil enterprises:) and I your
humble, loyal, and obedient Subject, shall still continue, (though not to
drink, carouze, and swill, as others do;) yet heartily to pray, for your
Majesty's Health, and happy Reign: which God continue and prolong among us, to
our temporal, and your own both temporal, and eternal joy, and bliss.

Your Majesty's humble and loyal Subject: WILLIAM PRYNNE.
To the Christian Reader,
CHristian Reader, among all the gross and crying sins which have of late
defiled and ouerspread our Nation and the world it self, there are few more
common, few more dangerous, hurtful, and pernicious, then the unnatural,
unthrifty, odious, and swinish sin of Drunkenness. A sin, which if we will
believe the Aug. Sermon. 32 a^ Fratres in Fremo. De Temp se^. 231. 23^ Basil de
letun. and ae Eb^tate, et Luxu serme Clem Alex. Paedag. l. 2, c. 2, 3, 4. Ambr.
ae Elia. and leiun. c. 10, to 19 Chrysoft. Ho^. 54, 57, 71. and ad Pop.
Antioch. Hom. 27, in 1 Cor. Hier. Com l. 15. in Eze. 42. Chrysolog sermon. 26.
Bern. de Mode Viue^di, Ser. 26 See Puteani Comus. Opsopaeus de Art Bib. l. 2.
Friseclinus in Ebriet. Mr. Harris his Diunkards Cup. Master Wards Woo to
Diunkards. The Homily against Drunkenness. And Mr. John Downhams Disswation
from Drunkenness.
Fathers, (nay Plat^ Symposium. Legum Dial. 1. Pliny Not. Hist. l. 14, c. 22.
Zenophon de Instit. Cyri. l. 8. Memorabilium lib. 7. Seneca Epist. 24^ 83.
Plutarch. de Sanitate tuenda. De Adulat: and Amicit^a. Horace Ipist. lib. 1.
Epist. 5. Tacitus de Moribus German. cap. 7. S^obaeus sermo 18. Ovid. de Art
Amandi, lib. 1
Infidels and Pagans whom Christians should excel) Is but a flattering devil;
a sweet poison; a voluntary madness; an invited enemy; a deprauer of
honesty; a wronger of modesty; the mother of all sin and mischief; the
sister of all riot; the father of all pride; the author of murders, quarrels
and debates: the nurse of fury: the mistress of petulancy: the inflammation
of the stomach: the blindness of the eyes, the corruption of the breath, the
debility of all the members; the accelleration of death: and poison of the
soul. A sin which crackes men's credites, exhausts their purses, consumes
their estates, infatuates their senses, besots their understandings, impaires
their healthes, distempers their constitutions, subuerts their bodies, eats
out their lives, ruins their families, grieves their friends, brings wrath and
judgments on their Countries, decays their parts and morrall virtues,
disables them for all employments, indisposeth them to grace and godliness,
and all the means and works of grace, and without Gods infinite mercy, and
their sound repentance, Prou. 23, 32 Nahum. 1, 10. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5, 21.
Mat 24. 49, 50, 51.
damnes their souls. Strange it is, that this most unnatural, unprofitable,
unpleasant, unseemly, unreasonable, brutish, base, and shameful sin of all
others, which makes men odious and ridiculous unto themselves, and all that see
them: which transformes men into beasts and swine, or carkases of men: which
fights against the Luke 21, 34 Ephesians. 5, 18. 1 Pet. 4, 3.
Laws of God, of grace, of nature, sense and reason; which Pro. 23, 29, 30.
Isay 5, 11, 22. Hab. 2. 15, 16. 1 Pet. 2, 11. Isay 28, 1, 3.
wars against the peace and safety of men's souls; which 1 Cor. 6, 10. Gal. 5.
21.
excludes and shuts out men from heaven, and from 1 Cor. 5, 11. Pro. 23, 20, 21
the society and company of Gods Saints, and See Master Stubs Anatomy of
Abuses, p. 77, 78. Mr. Wards Woe to Drunkards. Mr. Thomas Beard his Theater of
Gods Judgments. l. 2. c. 3.
oft-times draws down many heavy, fatal, sad and dreadful indgements on
men's heads, (sufficient to amaze, to split, and daunt the hardest and the
strongest hearts, and to awake the drowsiest, and most stupefied, and
cauterized conscienses of all such, who are infatuated, and benumbed with this
hellish dropsy:) should so far insinuate it self into the affections,
practice, and lives of men (especially in these radiant, blessed, and
resplendent days of grace, Tit. 2, 12, 13. Romans 13, 12, 13
which teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live, soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the glorious and
blessed appearance and coming of the great God, and our blessed Savior Jesus
Christ) as to inthrall and captiuate whole Nations to its base and slavish
bondage, who profess themselves not only to be men and reasonable creatures;
but likewise temperate, sober, grave, devout, religigious, and holy Christians.
I confess it seems a mystery and wonder unto me, that natural and reasonable
men (much more that such as bear the name and face of Christians) should so
far degenerate from the very principles of nature, and the rules of common
reason, as to be intoxicated, inamored, bewitched, and ensnared with such an
Ebriet atem qui habet, se non habet: ha^c qui habet, home non est: hane qui
habet, non p^ecatum facit, sed ipse est peccatum. Chry sologus Sermon 26
inhumane, absurd, and Swinish sin as this, which has no good, no honor,
profit, pleasure, beauty, nor advantage in it, to win, allure, or engage men
to it: yea, so sarre to be affected and delighted with it; as to rejoice and
glory in it; to magnify, honor, and applaud, all those who are devoted and
inthralled to it; and Est in conte^ptu frugalis vita: libid^ potands eunctos
prodigiosa tenet. Nemo bonus nunc est, nec strenu^s esse videtur Plurima ni
poterit perdere vina bibax. Nullus eris si sint ignauae ad pocula vires,
Plurima ni sieces pocula, nullus eris. Obsopaeus De Art Bibendi, l. 2.
to vilify, contemn, reproach, and undervalue such, who hate and loath it in
their Judgments, or abandon and renounce it in their practice. Certainly, if
I did not know the truth and probate of it, by ocular and experimental
demonstrations from day to day; I could hardly bring my understanding to
believe; that men, that Christians should so far affect, admire, or odore, so
foul, so filthy, so base, so vnamiable, so unfruitful, unprofitable and
unpleasant a sin; so unnatural and brutish a vice, as this Drunkenness in
most men's judgment and experience is. The reasons (as I conceive) why men are
now so much infatuated with this so odious, execrable, and unpleasant sin,
are briefly these.

The first, is that very inbred corruption, and prauitie of humane nature:
which Romans 8, 7, 8.
being a lawless and unruly evil, that nether is, nor can be subject to the
law of God, till it be mortified and subdued by the power of grace; does bear
down all the bounds and rules of nature, reason, religion, temperance, and
fobriety, and Isay. 15. 11, 12, 22, 1 Pet. 4, 3, 4. Ad deteriora faciles sumus:
no^ pronum tantum iterest ad vitia, sed etiam praecep^: Seneca. Epist. 97.
carry men headlong unto Drunkenness, riot, excess of wine, and all
unreasonable, unnatural and beastly finnes and lusts, even with a full carere.

The second, is the Ephesians. 2. 2, 3
power of the Prince of the air, the spirit who now works in the children of
disobedience, intending the lusts, and desires of their flesh and mind; and
carrying them captive unto finne. Who has lately gotten such high
praedominancie in the souls of vicious and carnal men, and added such
impudency and vnbridelednesse unto their sins and lusts: that they do not
only Phil. 3. 19.
glory in their drunkenness and gross intemperance, Esaias 3. 9.
proclayming it often times unto the world with Cornets, Drums, and Trumpets
(the common ornaments, melody, solace, or incrediaries of their licentious,
Hoe non est gaudere, sed insanire bibones, Obsepaeus, de Art Bib. l. 2
mad, deboist, bacchanalian, profane and heathenish Healthes, and ebrious
pot-battels) but even purposely bend and set themselves against the God of
heaven: trampling his word, his laws, and all his precepts under foot:
violating the very laws of nature, and rules of reason: breaking all the cords
and ligaments of nature, modesty, temperance, and sobriety, as if they had no
Lord, no God, nor Ruler over them: felling themselves wholly unto all excess,
and wallowing like so many base and filthy swine, in the mire and puddle of
drunkenness, and vomit; as if they were borne for no other purpose, but with
that infamous, and drink-deuouring Bonosus non vt viuat natus est, sed vt
bibat. Lypsius Centur. Miscell. Epist. 51. Theatrum vitae humanae.
Bonosus for to swill and drink.

The third reason of the increase and growth of drunkenness, are those many
specious, beautiful, popular, amiable, and bewitching names and titles where
with this ugly, odious and filthy sin, together with the Practisers, Patrons
and Abettors of it, are beautified, gilded, and adorned; and those common
terms and mottoes of ignominy, scorn, and reproach, which Satan and his
ebrious crew, have cast upon the graces of temperance and sobriety, and on the
persons of all such temperate, holy, and abstemious Christians, who do in
truth pursue them in their lives and practice. As all Quicquid vitium erat,
virtutis nomen induit. Puteani Comus. Probitatis inertia nomen, Iustitiae
formido subit. Claud. in Eutrop. l. 2. Nequitiae classes candida velae ferunt.
Petronius page 154. Vitia pro virtutibus hodie habentur. Dio^. Cass. Roman.
Hist. l. 58. Non solum vitiosa, sed and vitia laudantur. Seneca Epist. 114.
other sins and vices: so Drunkenness is now shrouded Ducitur ebrietas nunc
virtus maxima: nemo. Carpente^ bane sicco rebitur ore loqus: Quaeritur hac
celebris nunc cunctis gloria: cunctis, Quaeritur hac nomen, gratia, fama,
favor, Obsopaeus de Art bibendi. lib. 2.
(nay countenanced, defended, justified and applauded,) under the popular and
lovely titles of hospitality, good-fellowship, courtesy, entertainment,
iouiality, mirth, generosity, liberality, open house keeping, the liberal use
of Gods good creatures, friendship, love, kindness, good neighbor hood,
company-keeping, and the like: and Drunkards are likewise magnified, and
extolled, under the amiable, reverenced, and applauded terms of good-fellowes,
wits; Poets; courteous^ sociable Haec tamen illi omniae cum faciant hilares
nitidique vocantur. Iuuenal. Satyr. 11.
merry, ^ouiall, and boone-companions: generous, liberal, free-hearted,
valiant, and heroic Sparks and Spirits: sociable, pleasant, and good-natured
Gentlemen: open, liberal and free housekeepers; merry Hence came the phrase
pergracari; or Graco modo bibere: Caelius Rhod. Antiq. Lect. l. 28. c. 6. Alex.
ab. Alex. l. 5. c. 21 Francis Irenicus: Germaniae Exegeseos Tom. 1. l. 2. c. 1
^.
Greeks, and such like styles and titles: which set such a laudible, specious,
beautiful, amiable, and comely gloss and varnish on Drunkenness and
Drunkards, which are full od^ous, loathsome, and deformed in themselves: that
they do even ^allit enim vitium specis virtutis and vmbra. Iu^en. Satyr. 1.
vitta non decipiunt, nisi sub spec^e vmbraque virtutum. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 7.
c. 4.
secretly and Quoedam vitia species virtutum praeferunt, ideoque pernitiosius
su^s sectatores decipiunt, quia se sub velamine virtutum tegunt. Isidor.
Hispal. de Sum. Bono. l. 2, c. 35. Nullum vitium est tetrius aut pestilentius,
eo quod in virtutis specie latet. Osorius de Gloria. l. 1. Sect. 7.
dangerously insinuate, incorporate, and instill this beastly and pernicious
vice, into the affections lives and practice, of carnal, graceless, and
ungodly men, whiles they present it to them, as an honest, laudable, and
necessary virtue, without which there can be no love, no fellowship, no true
society, nor hospitality, mirth, nor entertainment in the world: whereas they
could not but abhor it, together with all those whose lives are tainted and
defiled with it, did they but suruay or view it in its proper colors. Now as
Drunkenness, excess, and Drunkards, are thus magnified, countenanced, and
applauded under these popular, goodly, flattering, and insinuating titles; so
Temperance and Sobriety are deformed, vilified, derided, sentenced, condemned,
and scoffed at, under the approbrious and disdainful names, of puritanisme,
preciseness, stoicisme, singularity, vnsociablenesse, clownishnesse,
rudeness, baseness, melancholy, discourtesie, pride, surlinesse, disdain,
coyness, and what not; Dat veniam cornis, vexat censora columbas. Iuuenal.
Sat. 2.
and temperate, sober, gracious, abstemious, and religious Christians, who make
a conscience of excess under the ignominious and reproachful styles, of
Insani sapi ent, nomen fert equus iniqui, Vltrae quam satis est virtutem si
petat ipsam Horrace Epist. l. 1. Epist. 6.
Puritanes, Praecisians, Stoics; unsociable, clownish, rustic, perverse,
peevish, humorous, singular, discourteous niggardly, pragmaticall, proud,
unmannerly, degenerous, base, scrupulous, melancholy, sad or discontented
persons. He that is now Annon hoc ita fit in omni populo? nonne omnem
exuperantiam virtutis oderunt? quid? Aristides nonne ob eam ipsam causam pulsus
est paetria, quod praeter modum iustus effet? Cicero Tusc. quaest. lib. 5.
more holy, temperate, gracious, and sober in his life and carriage then the
ordinary sort of men. he that is reclaimed from his ebrious and drunken
company and courses, and will not drink, rore, carowse, health, play the
good fellow, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4.
or run into the same excess of Drunkenness and intemperance that others
do, and as himself did heretofore, out of conscience, love, obedience, and
true devotion toward God: is forthwith hated, taxed, and branded for a
Puritan, an Hypocrite, a Praecisian, and I know not what besides: even by such
who deemed him an honest man, a sociable, boon, and good companion heretofore,
when as he would swill and drink, and health, as well as others: (as if his
temperance and sobriety did deprave, disparage, vilify and disgrace him:) an
infallible argument, that Puritans and Praecisians (as the world now takes
them) are the most religious, holy, temperate, sober, and obstemious men of all
others; because they are generally hated, styled, and reputed Puritans and
Praeisians for this very cause; that they are quite reclaimed and estranged
from Drunkenness, healthing, good-fellowship, and excess of wine: and become
more temperate, sober, holy, and religious in their lives then other men, whose
ebrious, riotous and luxurious courses they utterly abandon and dislike, Sunt
aliqui intempestiue boni. qui corruptis moribus publicis conuicium been viuendo
faciunt. Erg^ tanquam scelerum and malitiae suae testes extirpaere funditus
nituntur, and ^ollere: grauesque sibi putant sanquam vita eorum coarguatur.
Idcirco auferantur, quibus coram viuere pudet, qui peccaxtium frontem et si non
verbis, quia tacent, tanien ips^ vita genere dissimili feriunt and verberant:
Castigare enim videtur. quicunque dissentit. Lactantius de Iustitia, lib. 5. c.
9.
yea censure and condemn, by their practical and holy lives. This magnifying,
then of Drunkenness and Drunkards under these popular, glorious, lovely, and
applauded titles, which sound full sweet and pleasant in the ears of most:
and this depressing and vilifying of Temperance, sobriety, and abstemious
Christians, under such ignominious, scornful, odious, base, and undervaluing
terms, (which make an harsh, an uncouth, preiudicate, and unpleasant noise,
among the carnal, vulgar, and looser sort of men;) is one of the maine and
chiefest causes why Drunkenness does now so much diffuse and spread it self.

The fourth cause of the increase and growth of Drunkenness, is the negligence
and coldenesse of Justices, Magistrates, and inferior Officers, in the due and
faithful execution of those laudable and pious Laws and 1 Jacob. c. 9. 4
Jacob. c. 5. 7 Jacob. c. 10. 21 Jacob. c. 7.
Statutes, enacted by our King, and State against this odious, swinish,
unthrifty, and State-desturbing sin: which if they were as duly executed, as
they are generally neglected, (and so Lex noua vsu non recepta viribus caret,
and desuitudine tollitur. Gaillius Pract. Obser. lib. 2. Obser. 110.
abrogated, frustrated, and euacuated for want of execution) this noxious
dropsy and disease of Drunkenness would soon be cured, and dried up. If
Justices and Magistrates, were as diligent to suppress and pull down
Drunkenness and Alehouses, as they are industrious and forwards to Patronize
and set them up, See 4 Jacob. c. 5. 1 Jacob. c. 9.
to the great disturbance, hurt and prejudice of our Christian Commonwealth;
the wings of Drunkenness would soon be clipped, whereas now they Leges
optitima si negliguntur, diss^lutionem pariunt. Cafe. Pol. l. 5. c. 7.
spread and grow from day to day, because the sword of execution clipse them
not.

The fifth cause, why this gangrene or leprosy of Drunkenness does so dilate,
enlarge, and propalate it self, is either the ill example of some great men,
Gentlemen, Clergy men, and others, who instead of being patterns of
temperance and sobriety unto inferior and meaner persons, are often times made
their presidents and plot-formes of Drunkenness and excess; Quantum pracellunt
c^teris magnitud^ne, tantis praestant impuritate. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p.
277.
transcending them in ebrious, riotous, deboist, intemperate, and licentious
courses, as far as they exceed them in their place and dignity. When
Gentlemen, Velocius and citius was corrumpunt vitiorum domestica exempla, (...)
subea^t animos magnis a^teribus. Iuuen. Satyr. 14.
great men, Magistrates and Ministers, who should be guides and curbes to
others, shall take delight and pleasure in Drunkenness and excess: either
approving them by their own personal practice; or else by tollerating, and
allowing them in their own irregular and misgouerned Families, (which are often
times made the very Theaters of Bacchus, and the very seminaries, sinkes, and
puddles of Drunkenness, vomit, riot, and intemperance; under pretense of
hospitality and free housekeeping:) Non amplius mirabor c^^^ peceant qui
genere ignobiles sunt, quand^ by qui summ^ l^lo nati sunt, peccant. So phocles
Ajax Flag. NG. 1165.
no marvel if Inferiors (who commonly adore Superiors chief and greatest
Cum surpia placent iis qui habentur boni, ceric valde honesta videntur esse
malis. Euripid. Hyppolitus Cor. Sect. 410.
vices, as so many glorious and resplendant virtues:) do even plunge
themselves, into the very dregs and boggs of surfeiting, Drunkenness, and
gross intemperance, with greediness and delight, being animated, and fleshed
by those great examples, As Nemo sibi tantum errat, sed aliis ^rroris causa and
auctor est. Nem^ ita cadit vt ne^ alium in so attrahat. Seneca de Vita Beata
cap. 1.
all men, so Magistrates, Ministers, Gentlemen, and great men, especially, do
seldom err alone; If these would but reform themselves, and rectify their
unruly and disordered Families, (which is Demum s^ am coercer^ plerisque hand
minus (...) est, quam preuinciam ^^^^re. Tac^^us Agricolus vita. cap. 7.
as difficult a task to many, as to rule a Province.) This sin of
Drunkenness would soon grow dry and out of use; where as now their ill
examples feed and nourish it.

The last, though not the least occasion, why Drunkenness does so much
increase and superabound among us; are those common Ceremonies, wiles, and
Stratagems, which the devil and his drunken rowt have plotted and invented, of
purpose to allure, force, and draw men on to Drunkenness, riot, and excess of
wine. Not to diue into the depthes and mysteries of the black, the heat henish,
execrable, and Infernal See Obsepaeus, de Art Bibend.
Art of drinking, in which I Melius est aliquid neseire secure, quam cum
periculo discere. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 22. c. 13.
was nouer learned nor experienced: nor yet to mention See Master John Downam
his Disswasio^ from drunkenness: and Mr. Harris his. Drunkenis Cup the Table
of Drunkenness, and ^us potandi.
the drinking by the Die, by the dozen, by the yard, or such like hellish and
unchristian policies and aloctiues, which Drunkards use, to force, to draw, or
lead men on to Drunkenness and excess; in which every Alewife and Malt sucker
are far more learned and skillful then my self: I dare avouch it for an
approved truth: that there is no such common bayte or stratagem, to win, to
force, entice, and lead men on to Drunkenness and intemperance, as this idle,
foolish, heathenish, profane, and hellish Ceremony, of beginning, seconding,
and pledging Healthes; which is nothing else in truth and verity but a Bawd
and Pander unto Drunkenness, and a praeludium, inlet, way, and passage unto all
excess. If Health drinking (which is the very mother and nurse of Drunkenness)
were but once suppressed and banished the world, as an abominable, heathenish,
unchristian, and unlawful Rite, See Argument 14.
which had its birth and pedigree from hell it self: the sin of temulencie
and Drunkenness would quickly vanish and grow out of use: And this has
caused me to propalate this short and rude discourse against these Healthes,
unto the public view, that so I might at least assuage, if not expel the
dangerous dropsy and disease of Drunkenness, Hosea 4. 3.
which makes our Land, if not the world it self, to mourn and languish; in
drying up these noxious humors and unhealthy Healthes, which feed and nourish
it. A Treatise (I suppose) which though it may seem harsh and uncouth at the
first, to many habituated, infatuated, incorrigible, or cauterized Drunkards,
resolved for to live and die in this their sin, though they fri^ in hell for
ever after; or to praeiudicate, I shall say to these. L^gant prius. and postea
despiciant: ne videantur, ne^ ^u iudicic, sed au odi^ prasumptione ignorata
da^nare. Hier. aduer. Ruffin^ l. 2. c. 9. Tom. 2. page 251.
forest alled, and prepossessed affections, (who would rather maliciously fore
judge, and rashly censure this Discourse and me before they read it, then take
the pains for to peruse it; because they presume, that none but factious,
nouellizing, precise, or ouerzealous Puritans condemn these Healthes, and that
not out of judgment, but of pe^uish frowardnes.) Yet questionless it will be
acceptable and pleasing unto many: not only for the Natural ^st potius non^
quam magna mirari. It ^ enim comp^siti sumus, vt nes quotidiana si admiratione
digna sunt, tr^ seant; contra minimarum queque rerum s^ ins^lita prodi^runt,
spectaculum dulce fiat. Sen. Not. Quaest. l. 7. c. 1. Aertor est cupiditas
ignota cognoscendi, quam nota repetendie ad neua omnes concurrant, ad neua
te^uentunt. Sen. co^trouers. l. 4. Proaem. Nouitas auditoribus lenocinatur.
Plin. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 19. Noua, and non in promptu posita, admirationem
suiexcitant auditeremque allicinnt. Plutarch de Homero. Est qu^que cunctarum
nouitas gratissimarerum. Ouid^de Ponto, lib. 3. Elig 4.
no^alty and strangeness of it, which adds delight and acceptance to it: as
treating of a Theme or Subject, wherein few have lately, purposely, or largely
traveled, especially in our English tongue: but likewise in regard of the
benefit and usefulness of it: as being very seasonable, suitable, and needful
for these intemperate, dissolute, and bacchanalian times of ours: where in
Healthes and Drunkenness do so much abound (especially in those festival and
blessed times of joy and thankfulness, wherein our temperance, sobriety and
holiness should most excel:) that we may justly fear, they will drown us
in some great and general deluge of Gods judgments ere it be long, and cause
the Lord to curse and cross us in all our enterprises and designs (as he has
done for sundry years, though Isay 42. 24. 25. Prou. 23. 34. 35.
we consider and lay it not to heart, in that penitent and soule-affecting
manner as we ought) unless we speedily repent us of them: For alas, how can
we possibly expect or hope, that God should auocate or withdraw his judgments
from us: that he should bless and prosper us in any kind; that he should
plead our cause, or fight our battles for us: that he should guide, direct, or
bless our King, our Queen, our Counselors, our Nobles, or our Rulers, Reges
quand^ boni sunt muneris est Dei quando vero mali, seeleris est populi:
Secundum meritum plebeiu^, disponitur vit^ rect^rurn. Irascent^ enim Deo, talem
rectorem populi suseipiunt. qualem pro peecat^ mere^tur. Nannunquam etiam pro
malitia populi reges mutantur^ and qui ante videbantur esse beni, accepto regno
fiunt iniqui. Isiodor. Hispal. de Sum. Bono l. 3. c. 48. Council. Parisiense sub
Ludouico and Lothorio: 829. lib. 2. cap. 1.
(whom God does often times curse and alter for the peoples sins:) that he
should speed our Generals, our Captains, our Nauies, or our Armies, Non
ignauissiumorem hostium fortitudine obruimur, sed s^lum vitiorum nostrorum
impuritate superamur. Nemo sibi aliud persuadeat, nem^ aliud arbitretur: solum
nos m^rum nostrorum vitiae vicerunt. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p. 238. 278.
which the Troops and Armies of our sins, and not the force and prowess of
our enemies, have vanquished and put to flight:) when as our Healthes are far
more dense and frequent, then our Prayers for them? when as we ouerwhelme and
drown our souls and spirits, and quite Habet h^^ temulentia, vt and molliat
and resoluat corda temulent^rum Ambr. de Elia and Ieiun c. 12. Basil. de
Ebrictate and Luxu. Sermon. Obsopoeus De Art Bibendi, l. 2.
ener^ate, weaken, and dissolve our bodies (which are, or should be 1 Cor. 3.
16. and 6. 15. 19.
Temples for the holy Ghost to dwell in) with Drunkenness, riot, and excess
of Wine; and cause the Lord of Hoasts himself to be our enemy, Isay 8. 7. to
15.
(whose force and power no creatures can resist) by our intemperate, ebrious,
and luxurious sins? When as we put away far from us the evil day, and
cause the seat of violence to come near: stretching our selves upon our
couches and beds of Iuorie: eating the Lambs out of the stocks, and the
Calves out of the stall: chaunting to the sound of the Viole, and inuenting to
our selves instruments of music (in these dangerous, Amos 6. 1. to 7. Isay 5.
11. 12.
sad, and doleful times, when as tears should be our mirth and chiefest
solace,) which do so far infatuate and stupifie our hearts and judgments;
that we regard not the works nor judgments of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands; (which we may justly fear are working of our ruin:)
drinking Wine in bowls; rising up early in the morning, that we may follow
strong drink, and continuing at it until night, till wine inflame us; as if
we were free from fear of evil, or as if there were no God in heaven for to
punish us: and yet not grieuing for the afflictions of Joseph, nor for our
manifold and great rebellions against our good and gracious God: whose Romans a.
4.
patient goodness, and long-continued mercies, do now call; and dreadful
judgments, force and summon us to repentance? Certainly, though I dare not
antedate the sorrows of our Syon, or raise a fear or jealousy without a
ground; yet when I do but seriously and cordially suruay, that intolerable
Ezech. 16. 49
pride; that abundance of idleness; that fullness of bread; that lusting
after strange flesh (the sins that drew down fire and brimstone upon Sodom
long ago;) those monstrous habites, fashions and attires: that excessive
vanity, Atheism and profaneness: that execrable and Plures inuenia^ qui
saepius peiurent, quam qui omnine non turent. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 3. p. 79.
frequent banning, swearing, cursing and blaspheming: that greedy
covetousness, extortion and oppression; that fearful murder and bloodshed;
that scurrility, effaeminacie, wantonness, fornication, whoredom, adultery
and uncleanness: that general neglect, contempt and hatred of God, of grace,
of goodness, and the Gospel: that Nihil amentius est, quam in malis esse, and
malorum intelligentiam non habere. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 216. 217.
stupefied and senseless security, and hardness of heart, in the midst of
fears and dangers: that degenerating and growing worse and worse, not
withstanding all Gods judgments, Non mirum est si quotidie deteriora patimur,
qui quoeidie deteriores sumus. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 4. p. 111.
which still increase upon us, because our sins increase: that
dissoluteness, that drunkenness, deboistnesse, and excess of Healthes;
together with those other troops of sundry sins, which walk so bold and
thick among us, in despite of all those means which GOD has used to reclaim
us from them: I cannot but conclude as others do: that these abominations and
sins of ours (especially in these times of fear and danger, Isay 22. 12.
Ier. 4. 8. and 6. 26.
which cry and call for true repentance) prognosticate no victory, no good, no
blessing, nor success: but undoubted ruin and destruction to us, unless we
speedily repent us of them. Wherefore (Christian Readers) if you have any
compassion of your own poor souls (which Healthes and Nahum. 1. 10 1 Cor. 6.
10. Gal. 5. 21.
Drunkenness will damn to hell without recovery, if you proceed on in
them:) If you have any love to God and Christ; or any filial fear of God, or
of his wrath and judgments left within you: If you have any humanity or
bowels of compassions in you, toward the public good and safety of this
your dear and mother Church, and Country; which have so long supported you in
peace and plenty, even beyond your hopes: If you have any commiseration of the
poor distressed Saints and Church of God in foreign parts, who are almost
swallowed up of bloody persecutors, whiles we are wallowing in carnal
pleasures, and delights of sin; in luxutie, riot, Drunkenness, and all excess,
without any cordial pity or simpathizing compassion of, or any sound
humiliation for, their low estates: If you expect or long for any prosperity,
peace, or plenty: any abatement, diuertion or extinguishment of Gods judgments
at home; or any success or victory abroad: let me now entreat, and thoroughly
persuade you all Romans 12. 1
by the very mercies of God and Christ (the most flexanimous, perswasiue, and
prevailing motive of all others:) by the love you bear unto the Church of God
in general; to this your mother Church and Country; and to your own
salvation: by that most sacred oath and solemn rouenant which you have made to
God in Baptism, and often renewed in the blood of Christ, in the sight of many
witnesses; and by that strict, that terrible, and inevitable account, which you
must shortly Dan. 7. 10. Math. 25. 32. 33 2 Cor. 5. 10.
make before the bar of Christ's tribunal, in the open view of all the world:
that you would Psalm 95. 7. 8. 2 Cor. 6 2.
now, even now I say, whiles the acceptable days and times of grace and mercy
last; whiles the bowels and arms of Christ lie open to receive you, if you
will come in: and Deuteronomy 22. 41 42. Psalm. 7. 11 12. 13. Qui volunt atem Dei
spreuerunt inustantem, voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem. Prosper. Aquit.
Respons. ad Object. 16. Vincent.
the arm and sword of God are brandished and stretched out against you, to
your just confusion, if you still stand out: abandon, abjure, renounce, and
quite cast off for ever, those cursed and pernicious sins, in which you are
all inuolued, without any more pretenses or delays. Above all, resist, oppose,
shake off, and quite root out, the unnatural, unreasonable, unpleasant, Vno
die bibunt multerum dierum labores. Ambr. de Elia and Ieiun. c. 12.
unthrifty, prodigal, wastfull, beastly, and shameful sin of Drunkenness,
Ebrietas multorum malorum metropolis. Athen. Dipnos. l. 10. c. 1^.
( the metropolis of many mischiefs) which does Qui luxuriatur, viuens mortuns
est: Ergo qui inebriatur, and mortuus and sepultus est. Hierom. Tom. 2. Epist.
63. c. 4
not only slay, but quite interre the souls of living men, and indispose them
unto all employments; and so make them a burden, a trouble, and encumbrance
both to Church and State: together with all heathenish, hellish, idolatrous,
profane, luxurious, and excessive Healthes, which are but Panders, Bawdes,
Attendants, and Vshers to intemperance: for fear you bring your selves, your
souls, your bodies, yea and your dearest dear, your Country unto ruin; Let
Great men, Gentlemen, Justices, Magistrates, and those of better and superior
rank, as they tender Gods glory or their Countries good, exile them from their
houses, and banish them for ever from their Tables; Halls and Butteries: as at
all times and seasons, so especially in the Festival time of Christ's
Nativity: wherein Sub Christino nomine Gentilem vitam agunt, and aliud
professione, aliud conuersatione testantur. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 14. c. 2.
Christians often times act the parts of Pagans, and turn incarnate devils for
the present, laying aside all reason, temperance, grace, and goodness, as
unseasonable and unseemly ornaments for so good a season; giving themselves
wholly over to gluttony, riot, luxury, Drunkenness, Epicurisme,
Health-drinking, idleness, chambering, wantonness, unlawful pleasures,
games, and carnal mer, riments, and all excess of sin and wickedness,
which may praecipitate and post them on to hell; as if they were celebrating
the ancient Bacchanalia, or the devils birthday, and not the birth of Christ:
who came to redeem and free us from these infernal, heathenish, prodigious,
graceless, profane, and godless practices, which Turks and Pagans would
abhor: and not to set hell loose; or to give men liberty and exemption to
sin without control or mealure, under pretense of giving honor to his
birthday: Certainly Christ will not be fed nor honored with the Devils broth;
with the Devils sacrifices and Drinke-offerings: with such odious, shameful,
vile, and loathsome things, as Drunkenness, vomit, Healthes, and riot are:
Let Christians therefore quite renounce them, and leave them unto Bacchus, and
his heathenish, Pagan, and infernal Crew: Let Magistrates suppress and curb
them, by executing all those laws that are in force against them, even with
care and conscience: Let Ministers who are Apost. Canones Can. 53. Deerete
(...) P^p^. Can. 10. C^ne. ^^^dicenum. Can. 24. Carthaginense 3. Can. 27.
Aphricanum. Can. 7. Consta^tinop 6. Can. 9 Turonense. 3. Can. 21. Cabilon: 2.
Ca^. 44 Rhemense. 823 Can. 26. Aquisgranense An. 816. Can. 60. 90. Reformatio
Cleri German^ae R^tisponae. 1524 Can. 3. 8. Conc. Colon: 1636. part. 2. cap.
25. part 5. c. 6. Augustense, 1541. cap. 10. 19. Moguntin. 1549. Can. 74. See
Gratian, Distinct. 44. Bochellius Decret. Eccl. Gallica. lib. 6. Tit. 19.
enjoined by sundry Councels not so much as to enter into any ^nne or
victualing house (much less into a sauerne, Alehouse, or Tobacco-shop, where
too too many of them place their chiefest residencie) unless it were in case
of necessity when they travel;) Isay 58. 1.
Lift up their voice and cry aloud against them; not only by their doctrine but
by their practice too: Judge. 5. 23.
Let all who bear a loving heart to God, to Christ, to Church, to Country, or
themselves, come forth to help the Lord, and this our Zion, against these
mighty, general, praeualent, and pernicious enemies, which threaten a
Catastrophe and deluge of Gods judgments to us: for fear they in^ur that
bitier curse of Meroz, which no heart can bear. I for my own part can but
blow the Trumpet, and give the onset; it is others that must give the foil,
and overthrow to these hostile powers: If these my weak and mean endeavors
shall so far prevail with any, as to cause them to take up Arms against
these sins, that so they may suppress or bridle them; or to divert,
reclaim, and win such from them, who have been formerly enamored with them,
or held captive by them; I shall think my labor highly recompensed, and
happily rewarded: But if they prove unfruitful or ineffectuall unto all, or
bring me nothing but reproach and scorn, among the looser and deboister sort;
whose black and filthy mouths, or burdened and distempered stomachs, may
chance to vomit up some crapulous, noisome, and superfluous crudities of
Nunquid aeger laudauit medicum secantem? Senec. Epist. 53.
scandalls scorns, hatred, and reproach against me, because I offer violence
to their best beloved Dalilaes and bosom lusts, Nulls gratae repr^hensio est^
imo quod niulto peius est, quamlibet malus, quamlibet perditus mauult
mendaciter praedicari, quam iure reprehendi: and falsarum laudum irrisionibus
decipi, qua^ saluberrima admonitione seruari, Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 8. p. 279.
whose just reproof they cannot brook: yet this shall be my joy and comfort:
that as Drunkards scornful, rash, and undeserved censures (which Magna dementia
est, verert ne infameris ab infamibus. Seneca Epist. 91.
I deem but folly for to fear) Regium est male audire cum been feceris.
Plutarch Apotheg. Graec.
are crowns and honors, not blemishes and debasements; especially to such as
seek men's spiritual good and welfare, Qui laudem non appetit, nec centumeliam
sentit. Bern. de Inter. Demo. c. 42.
not their praise: So God himself, how ever men requite me, will yet reward
and Men's boni studii ae pii voti, etiamsi effectum non inuenerit capts operis,
habet tamen pramium voluntatis. Salu. Praesat. in l. 1. de Gub. Dei.
recompense me for this my poor endeavor (being all that I could do or
promise) though he deny success unto it: which is not mine, but his to give.
Thus leaving this poor Treatise to thy charitable and pious censure (Christian
Reader; from whom I shall request this favor only; to read and know before
thou judge:) I commend both it and thee to Gods own blessing. Farewell.

The unfeigned well-wisher of thy spiritual and corporal, though the oppugner
of thy pocular and Pot-emptying Health. WILLIAM PRYNNE.
HEALTHES; SICKNESS.
OF all the Wiles, the Proiects, Plots and Policies, which that subrile Serpent
Satan has brought forth and practiced in these last and sin producing
times, Peccatis prateritis noua addimus: nec solum noua, sed e^^am quaedam
paganica ae prod^giosa, and in Ecclesiis Ded non vi^a. Surgun^ recentia
crimina, ne^ repudiantur antiqu^^ noua qu^tidi^ mala facima^^, and vetera no^
relinquimus. Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 4. p. 111. 122.
( which swarm with old and newfound evils) of purpose to entrap the Souls
of men in the Labyrinthes and Snares of sin: there are few more Dangerous,
Hurtful, and generally Pernicious, then this one of Drinking, and of pledging
Healthes: which now of latter times, has purchased such general and common
approbation, in City, Court, and Country, that it is become a usual,
ordinary, and daily guess at most men's (but especially at great men's) Tables:
and a familiar, custommary and Assiduous complement, at every Banquet, Feast,
nay common meeting, though it be but in a Tap-house, or Tavern: Yea, it has
now through use and custom, procured such Credit and Reputation in the World,
that it has found and gained, not only Great and Potent Patrons to support
and shield it; but likewise Noble and Heroicke Habent in exercitu su^ plures
succenturiatos: habent scurras e^ velite: in prasidiis, crassos, comptos,
nitidos, inf^ios clamatores qui illas pugnis calcibusque defendant^ Heirom.
Adu. Iouin. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Champions, to Vindicate its Rite and Title in the Field; and Procters, nay
Chaplains to abbet and plead its Cause; if not in open Court and Pulpet, yet
at least in private Practice and Discourse, at their own, their Lords, their
Patrons, and their Masters Tables; and that with such Maiori procacitate
defendunt ebrietate^ quam exercent. Heirom. ib.
Zeal and earnestness of Spirit, as if it were a Maine, a Chief and
Principal Article of their Faith. That Healthes are Lawful, Good, and
Commendable: whence they Accuse and Brand all such for Puritans, and Precisians
(as being unworthy of the name of Christians or Protestants,) who out of
Conscience refuse to bear them company in Carrouzing Healthes. What Patrons,
what Champions, what Credit and applause this illa faeda et inf^li^ co^suetudo
per quam grandi mensura sine mensura tres ^^mines aut volentes aut inuitisolent
biber^, de Paganorum obseruatione rema^. sit: ideo tanquam venenu^ Diaboli de
vestris Conuiuiis respuatis. August. de Tempore. Sermo. 231.
Heathenish ceremony), and Hellish invention, has generally procured: what
Sinful, Bitter, Doleful, Sad, and dangerous fruits of Drunkenness, Riot,
Duells, Quarrels, Combats, Murders, Murmurings, Heart-burnings, Grudges,
Debates, Oaths, Profane, Idle, Scurrilous and Cursed speeches,
Distemperatures, Diseases, Alii prto^em diem tan ^um perdunt; ^briosi ve^^
priorem diem quovidie, ^ venientem perdunt. Plin. Not. hist. lib. 14. cap. 22.
Vita his somni um est; somnus his mors est. Ambr. de Elia and leiun. lib. cap.
16.
loss of Time, of Parts, and Credit, superfluous and vain Expense, and things
of such like Nature, it has produced and brought forth in every City,
Village, Town, and place within our own, and other Kingdoms, is not unknown
unto any, who have had the least experience in the World. Wherefore, it will
be neither Untimely, nor Unnecessary, to encounter and withstand the Streme of
this Pernicious and common Evil, with these ensuing arguments, which evidence
and prove; That the Drinking and Pledging of Healthes, are Sinful and utterly
Unlawful unto Christians.

My First Argument against these Healthes, is briefly this.

That which in its very best acception, is but a Vain, a Carnal, Worldly,
Heathenish, Profane, Superfluous, Vnseem^ly, Foolish, and unnecessary
Ceremony, Ordinance, Custom, Tradition, Right, or Rudiment: invented and
prosecuted by Riotous, Intemperate, Licentious, and Drunken persons, of purpose
to draw men on to Drunkenness and Excess: must needs be Sinful and utterly
Unlawful: as is evident by Ephesians. 2. 2, ^. chap. 4 17, 18 Col. 2. 20, 21, 22.
1. Pet. 1. 14, 15, 18. chap 4 3, 4. Romans 12. 2. compared with Matthew. 6. 7, 8.
Prou. 23, 31. Isay 5. 22. Hab. 2. 15, 16. Ephesians. 5. 18. which do expressly and
fully warrant it.

But this Drinking and Pledging of Healthes is but a vain, a carnal, worldly,
heathenish, profane, superfluous, unseemly, Stulium est. quicquid homines
sine Deo sapiunt. Amb. de Elia and Ieiunio. lib. cap. 16.
Foolish, and unnecessary cerimonie, ordinance, custom, tradition, rite, or
rudiment, invented and prosecuted, by riotous, intemperate, licentious, and
drunken persons, of purpose to draw men on to drunkenness and excess; this
every man's Conscience and experience, this Histories and Authers testify, as I
shall prove anon:

Therefore they must needs be Sinful and utterly Unlawful.

Secondly.

That which is a usual, ordinary and common cause, occasion and enticement to
Nullune i^tra se man^^ vitium Senec^ Epist. 95.
draw men on to Drunkenness and excess, must of necessity be Sinful and
Unlawful: witness Hab. 2. 15, 61. Prou. 23. 21. Job 31. 1. Matthew. 6. 13. 1.
These. 5. 22. Jude 23. and the common maxim Aristot. li. 1. poster. cap. 2.
sect. 14. lib. 3. topic. cap. 5. pa^tic. 4. Keck. Syst. Log. lib. 1. cap. 1^.
Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale.

But this Drinking of Healthes (as experience, and Basil. de Ebrietate Ser.
Ambr. de Eli^ and Ieiun. li. ca. 11. to 18. Aug. de temp. Ser. 231, 232.
Guagninus Rerum. polon. Tom. 2. page 67, 68. Joan. Fridricus de Ritu Bib. ad
San. lib. 1. cap. 12. lib. 2. cap. 4. 2, ^, 4. Sigis. Baro. de Reb. Moscouitis.
Mr. Harris his Drunkards cup page 20. 28, 29.
Authors testify) is a usual, ordinary and common cause, occasion, and
intic^ment to draw men on to Drunkenness and excess: yea it is a kind of
shooe-horne to draw on Drink in great abundance:

Therefore it must of necessity be Sinful and Unlawful.

Thirdly.

That which does pervert and cross, the true end, and right and proper use of
Drinking, must needs be Sinful and Unlawful: because it is an abuse of Gods
good Creatures.

But this Drinking and Pledging of Healthes, does pervert and cross the true
end, and right and proper use of Drinking: for it makes our Drinking, whose
proper, right, and utmost end and use, should be the 1. Cor. 10. 31. Deuteronomy. 8.
10. 1. Tim 4. 3, 4, 5 Colos. 3. 17. 1. Pet. 4. 11.
praise and glory of God, and the Genesis 1. 29. and 9, 3. Ps. 116, 23 Psalm. 146,
7. Prou. 31. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 5. 23. Non propter voluptatem bibendum est, sed
propter infirmitatem. Pro remedio igitur parcius, non pro delitiis re
dundantius. Ambr. Epilst. l. 3. Epist. Verc. Ecclesiae. Hier. Regula
Mona^horum. De abstinent. cap. See Mr. Harris his Drunkards Cup, p. 15, 16.
refection, nou-rishment, and comfort of our own bodies, for our furtherance
in Gods service; to serve to no other end nor purpose, but to commemorate and
drink the health of such and such particular persons (perchance of some Whore
or Mistress, some Pot-companion, some Deuill-Saint or other, or such to whom
we have no engagements:) or to draw men on to drunkenness and excess, in
drinking more then else they would or should do: It aims not at all at GODS
glory, nor at the health, the nourishment, comfort, or refection of those
persons who do either begin or pledge it:

Therefore it must needs be Sinful and Unlawful.

Fourthly.

That which is against the rules of Charity and Justice, must needs be
Sinful and utterly Unlawful: because it is a violation of the Law of God, of
man, and Nature.

But this Drinking (especially the forcing) of Healthes, is against the rules
of Charity: because it tends for the most part both to the Temporal and
Eternal, the Corporal and Spiritual hurt and prejudice of those who pledge
it, their bodies being sometimes, but their Souls for the most part,
distempered, diseased and endangered by it: and it likewise violates the
Lessius de Iustitia. et Iurc. Wesenbecius in pandect. Iuris Ciuilis. Lib. 1.
tit. 1. numb. 12. at the end. Mr. Bolton in his General directions for our
Comfortable walking with God. page 204, 205, accordingly.
rules of Justice in pressing or alluring others to an unlawful act; to drink
either against their Natures, or their Consciences: to drink more then else
they would or should do; and in measuring other men's bellies by their own,
which should be measured by themselves alone:

Therefore it must needs be Sinful and utterly Unlawful.

Fifthly.

That which is scandalous, infamous, and of ill report among the best and
holiest Saints of God, and the better and ciuiler sort of morrall, natural and
carnal men, must needs be Sinful and Unlawful: witness Romans 12. 17. chap.
14. 3. 13. 15. 20, 21. 1. Cor. 8. 1. to 13. chap. 10. 31, 32, 33. 2. Cor. 8.
21. Phil. 4. 8. which are express and punctual in it.

But this Drinking of Healthes is scandalous, offensive, Synodus augustensis
1548 cap. 28. S^rius Tom. 4. Council. page 813. styles them Infames
compotationes.
infamous and of ill report among the best and holiest Saints of God, and the
better and ciuiler sort of morrall, natural, and carnal men, who
Comm^ssationes, eb utates, et reliqua omnis insania, et turpitu^o, a caetu
nostro exacta explosaque est, Chryso^^. Tom. 5. contr. Gentiles lib. p. 877.
all condemn and utterly dislike it in their Hearts and Consciences: and
openly protest against it, as an invention, practice, badge and character of
intemperate, luxurious, and licentious persons; as an allurement, way and inlet
to Drunkenuesse and excess; and as an Idols portio est mebriare vino mentem,
ventrem cibo distendere, and it a prauis actionibus occup^ri, vt cogaris
ignorare, quod Deus est: Ergo si nos sumus Templum Dei, car in temp. ^ Des
co^itur festiuitas Idolorum? Cur vbi Christ^s h^bitat qui est temperantia.
castitas, inducitur co^messati^ ebriet as atque lasciuia? Ambr. Ser. 11.
Heathenish, dissolute, ridiculous, profane and sinful custom: witness our
own experience, and those Fathers, Christian and Heathen Authors which I shall
cite hereafter.

Therefore they must needs be Sinful and Unlawful.

Sixthly.

That which does often times cause men to judge, despise, condemn, abuse,
reproach, or hate their brethren without a cause, must of necessity be Evil,
Sinful and Unlawful: as Godhimselfe has expressly informed us in this case
of Eating and Drinking: Romans 14. 3, 4. 13. to 22. Col. 2. 16. 20. 21, 22.

But this drinking of Healthes, does often times cause men, to judge, despise,
condemn, abuse, reproach, or hate their brethren without a cause: For if any
man out of Conscience refuse to pledge an Health, (especially if it be the
Propterea igitur publici hosts Christiani, quia Imperatoribus neque vanos,
neque mentientes, neque temerarios henores dicant: quia verae religionis
homines etiam so^emnia eorum conscientia pot^us quam lasciuia celebrant. Teitul
adu. Gentes: Apolog. c. 30. 31.
Kings, or Queens, or any great man's Health) he is presently branded,
sentenced, and taxed for a Puritan: for a humerous, obstinate, factious,
unmannerly, singular, unsociable, and censorious person: he that begins, and
others who pledge and second the Health, do murmr and repine against him,
they hate him, scorn, and contemn him in their hearts: they except against
him, and quarrel with him for it: and often times they break out into open
violence against him, and reproach, revile, deride and slander him to his face:
This daily experience, together with the 1 Pet 4. 2, 3. 4 Wisd. 2. 6, to 21.
Scriptures, and Ambr. de Elia and Ieiunio, c. 11, 12, 13, 17 Hierom. Com. lib.
1. in tit. 1. Aug de temp. Sermon. 23 1. 232
Fathers testify:

Therefore this drinking of Healthes must needs be Sinful and Unlawful.

Seventhly.

That which takes away Christian liberty and freedom, and puts a kind of Law
and necessity upon men in the use of Gods good creatures, must needs be
Sinful and Unlawful: witness Romans 14 1. to 22. 1. Cor. 8. 7. to the end,
Hab. 2. 1^, 16. Esther 1. 8. 1. Pet. 4. 3, 4. 1. Tim. 4. 3. Colos. 2. 16. 20,
21, 22. Basil. de Ebrietate Sermo. Ambrose. de Elia and leiunio. (...). 12. 17.
August. de Temp. Serm^. 231. 232. and de Rectitud. Cathol. Conuersationis.
Lessius de Iusticia and Iure. and Ioannes Fredericus, de Ritu Bibendi ad San.
lib. 1. cap. 10. 11. 12. Who all concure and iumpe in this.

But our ordinary drinking of Healthes, does take away Christian liberty and
freedom, and puts a Illum abus^^ decernimus peuitus tollendu^, quo in
quibusdam partibus ad potus aquales, suo modo se obligant potatores: and ille
iudicio talium pius laudatur, qui plures inebriat, et calices foecundiores
exhaurit. Council. Lateran. sub Innocent. 3. c. 15. Surius Tom 3. Council. page
742.
kind of Law and necessity upon men, in the use of Gods good creatures: For
it confines and restraines both the matter, the measure, the time, the end, and
manner of men's drinking, to the will and pleasure of such as begin the Health:
and puts a kind of Law and necessity upon all the company that are present,
both in the matter, manner, measure, time and end of drinking. For they must
drink for matter, the same Wine, Bear or liquor: for manner, in the same
posture, gesture, for me and ceremony: for measure, the same quantity and
proportion: for time, as soon as ever it comes to their course, be they
thirsty or not thirsty, willing or unwilling, able or unable: and for end, to
whom, or for whom, or to what end soever the parties will that begin the
Health, and not for those ends which God has ordained, and for which nature
does require drink. So that it takes away Christian liberty and freedom,
both in the matter, manner, measure, time, and end of drinking; as experience,
and the forequoted Authers in the Mayor testify:

Therefore this drinking of Healthes must needs be Sinful and Unlawful.

Eighthly.

That which neither wicked, nor godly men can safely use without offense, must
needs be Evil, Sinful and Unlawful: because it cannot be used lawfully:

But neither wicked, nor godly men can safely use this drinking of Healthes
without offense: For wicked men cannot use it, but they will either abuse it to
drunkenness and excess, or to some other unlawful end: and godly men cannot
practice it: For it beseemes nor becomes not their profession, who should be
Tit. 2, 14. 1 Pet. 3. 14, 15. 2 Pet 3. 11, 14 Luke 1. 75. Math. 5. 16. Romans 13.
13, 14.
holy, exemplary, and temperate, in all their conversation, to begin or pledge
an Health: it would bring a scandal and an ill report upon them, not only
among the godly, but among the wicked too; who would be always casting this
into their dish (yea and into the teeth of Ita est Dei Ecclesia quasi oculus:
Nam vt in oculum etiam si parua sordes incidat, totum lumen obcaecat: sic in
ecclesias^ico corpore etiam sipauci sordid^^ faciant, prope totum ecclesiastici
splendoris lumen obscurant. Salu. de guber. Dei, l 7. p. 264.
all Professors) upon every occasion; that for all their counterfeit shows of
Piety and Holiness, they can Health and drink as well as others, when
occasion serves: and therefore they should forbear to tax, reprove or
censure others for their Drunkenness and excess, till they had first reformed
themselves: It would likewise give offense and scandal to other godly
Christians who disapprooue of Healthes, and make them either openly to condemn
them, or at least to think of them far worse then else they would: And besides
all this, their very example would Peccator cu^ videt aliquem similia suorum
operum facie^tem, confirmatur vt eadem faciat: Clemens Constit. Apost lib. 2.
c. 20.
confirm, and encourage other wicked men in the abuse and use of Healthes, who
are apt to plead that Healthes are lawful, good, and commendable, because,
such good men use them: so that neither good nor bad men, can safely use them
without offense.

Therefore this drinking of Healthes must needs be Evil, Sinful and
Unlawful.

Ninthly.

That which is an ordinary usual and common cause of many Ephesians (...), 32. Iam.
3. 14. etc. 1 John 3, 14, 15.
Duells, Quarrels, Murders, Debates, Heart-burnings, Hatreds, and
Discontents, of many Mat. 12. 36, 17. Ephesians. 4, 29, 31. and 5. 3, 4.
idle, vain, lascivious and scurril^us speeches, songs and tests: of many
Exodus 20. 7. Mat. 5, 33. to 38. Iam. 5. 12.
profane and biasphemous oaths and cursings: and of much Ephesians. 5, 16. Col.
4, 5.
mispence, and loss of time: must needs be evil, and unlawful.

But this drinking and carouzing of Healthes, as Rer. Polon. Tom. 2, p. 68.
Guagninus and See Pro. 23. 29, 33. Virgil. Georg. lib. 2. Ambr. de Elia. and
leiun. c. 11, to 19. Chrysolog. Sermon. 26. Mart. Epig. l. 8 Ep. 6. Crebrae inter
vinoientes rix^^ ^ raro conuitits, saepius coede and vulneribus transiguntur.
Tac. de Mor. Germ. Sect. 7. Vini cadus fit ensis, et euspis calix, crateres
hosts, etc. Athen. Dipnos. l. 10. c. 4.
others testify, and as our own experience can witness: is the ordinary,
usual, and common cause of many Duells, Quarrels, Murders, Debates,
Heart-burnings, Hatreds and Discontents: For how many Quarrels, Murders,
Brawles, Debates, Duells, Stabbes, Wounds, and Discontents do we hear of
every year, nay sometimes every week, about the beginning, pledging, or
refusing Healthes, ( f) of which we cannot but take notice? and besides they
are an occasion of many idle, vain lasciutous speeches, songs and jests: of
many profane and blasphemous oaths, and of much mispence and loss of time:
as Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, Pliny, Ioannes Fridericus and others witness,
in the forequoted places.

Therefore this drinking and carrouzing of Healthes must needs be Evil, and
Unlawful.

Tenthly.

That which was never practiced among godly Christians in former ages: that
which serves to 1 Samuel 12. 21 Psalm. 24. 3. Pro. 23, 5. Esaias 52, 2. Ps. 4. 2.
no good, nor commendable, nor necessary use at all: that which does Math. 6.
13. 1 These. 5, 22.
much hurt and mischief, but 1 Cor. 10. 31, 32, 33.
brings in no glory at all to God, nor good to men; must needs be Evil,
Sinful, and Unlawful: especially when as it is not enjoined, nor commanded by
any public authority.

But this drinking of Healthes, was In conuiuiis nostris editur quantum
esurietes capiunt, bibitur quantum pudicis est vtile. Tertul. Apol. adu.
Gentes. c. 39. Theod. de Euang. verit. cognit. lib. 8. Co^messationes,
ebrietates, and reliqua omnis insania et turpitudo a cat^^ nostre exacta
explosaque est ^ Chrysoft. com. Gent. Tom. 5. p. 877. Conuiuia non tantu^
pudica colimus sed and sobria: nec enim indulgemus epulis, aut conuiuium mero
discimus, sed grauitate hilaritatem temperamus, casto sermon, corpore
castior^. Minut. Faelix. Octa p. 102.
never practiced among godly Christians in former ages: (yea, it was so far
from being practiced, that it was condemned by them, as I shall prove anon:)
Nay, it was never used nor practiced in our own Nation, for ought that we can
hear or read of, till of latter times: it serves to no good, no commendable,
nor necessary use at all, that I can think of: it is an apparent occasion of
much hurt, of much excess and drunkenness, but it does no good at all to any
who do practice it: It brings no glory at all to God, nor good to men in any
kind: nay, it does dishonor God, and praeiudice both the bodies and souls of
many men, as experience testifies; and it is not enjoined, nor countenanced by
any public Authority.

Therefore this drinking of Healthes, must needs be evil, sinful and
unlawful.

Eleuenthly.

That which does ordinarily and usually tend to the honor, praise, applause,
and commemoration of vain, of evil, wicked, and sinful men, whose very
Pro^. 10. 7. lob. 18. 7. and 20, 7, 8. Psalm. 10^, 13.
memories and names should rott and perish, and Ester 3. 2, to 7. Psalm, 15. 4.
Ps. 101, 3, 4, 7, 8. Ps 139, 20, 21.
whose persons should be vilisied and despised as far as they are wicked,
must needs be sinful and unlawful: because it does P^ou. 17, 15. Isay, 5.
10, 21, 23.
justify and honor those whom God himself condemns and hates.

But the drinking of Healthes (if there be any honor at al in them, as in At
non infami subsurgit gloria fama, Turpibus a relus gloria nulla vonit, Obsop.
de Art Bibendi, lib. 2.
truth there is not) does ordinarily and usually tend to the honor, praise,
applause, and commemoration, of Johannes Fridericus, de Ritu Bib. ad S^^. ^ 1
cap 7. 8. accordingly.
vain, of evil, wicked, and sinful men, especially, among the baser and the
looser sort: the objects and subjects of whose healthes, are commonly some
Whore, or Mistress; some Pot-companion or Gull-gallant; some Pand^r, or
Whooremaster; some Deuill-sainct or other, and sometimes the very Devil
himself, for want of a better Friend to drink unto) whose very memories and
names should rott and perish, and whose very persons should be vilified, and
despised as far as they are wicked: Few there are whose Healthes are commonly
drunken (except it be the Healthes of great ones, and men of place and
dignity, and those not always the best, nor most religious) but such as are
of the Malus est et quem malus laudat, vel que^ bonus vitup^rat: Plutarch. de
vitioso pudore lib.
looser, prophaner, and the more intemperate, dissolute, and d^boister sort: As
for all good, and holy men, they Nullus tam grauem iniuriam, sanctis Angelis,
vel sanctis hominibus ag^oscitur irrogare, quam qui in eorum nominibus bibend^,
per ebrietatem animas suas, prebantur occidere. August. de Temp. ser. 23. 2.
desire not to have others drink or pledge their Healthes; (which is no more
in substance, then to make them the occasions, the causes, and Patrons of their
drunkenness and excess,) and they are commonly so ill beloved in the world,
that most of our drunken Healthers (unless it be those who have their whole
dependancy upon them) would rather drink their See Wisd. 2, 10. to 21. Ier.
18, 18, 20, 23.
confusion then their Healthes.

Therefore this drinking of Healthes, must needs be sinful and unlawful.

Twelfely.

That which does Quicquid est praeter rectam rationem, id est, peccatum. Clem.
Alex. Paedag. lib. 1. c. 13.
pervert, and abuse those serious, solemn, reverend, and religious gestures,
wherewith we are to worship God, and honor men, must needs be evil and
unlawful: because we are not to use any serious, solemn, or religious
gestures, but in serious, solemn, weighty, and religious things: and because
we must give an account to God of all our gestures, as Mat 12. 36. Eccles. 12,
14. Ro^ 16, c. 14, 10. 2 Cor. 5, 10.
well as of all our words and thoughts: so that we may not abuse not take the
one in vain (especially of set purpose, as we do in Healthes) no more then
the other.

But the drinking of Healthes does abuse those serious, solemn, reverend and
Quanto res sacratior, tanto abusus eius damnabilior. Council. Coloniens. Anno
1536. pars 9. cap. 16.
religious gestures wherewith we are to worship God, and honor men. Witness
the common practice of many, who are more frequent, serious, solemn, and
de^o^t upon their knees in the bottom of a Seller at their Healthes, then ever
they are at their prayers in their Clossets, or Families: who stand up
uncovered, with greater reverence, gravity, exactness, attention, and
praecisenesse, whiles an Health is drinking at the Table, then whiles the
Creed is repeating in the Church: Who are more scrupulous, praecise, exact,
and punctual in the Circumstances, and Ceremonies of their Healthes; then in
the manner and substance of all those holy duties which they owe to God: Who
make a greater scruple and conscience, and deem it a matter of greater
consequence to sit covered at an Health, then at a Psalm, a Chapter, a Prayer,
or a Sermon in the Church: Who repute it a greater insolency and offense, to
omit the pledging of an Health, then to omit any Holy duty, or to swear an
Oath, or to Drink till one vomit up his shame again, like a filthy Dog: or
lie wallowing in his Drunkenness like a brutish Swine. Now to be thus
scrupilous, solemn, grave, exact, and serious, in drinking Healthes with
bended Knees, and uncovered H^ades, what is it, but magno conatu nugas agere,
to act toys and vanities in good earnest; to pervert and abuse those solemn,
reverend, and religious gestures: which we should appropriate, and principally
reserve to God: and to worship, reverence and adore those persons with them
whose Healthes are drunken, See Dau. 5. 3, 4. Apud Septentri^nales religiosum
est pro reuerentiae numinum bibere. Olaus. Mag^ lib. 13. ^, 14. Graect in
conuiuiis Deo^ interpocula salutant, nominatimque app^llant euacuaeto poculo,
and sic praecatis Diis pocula affatim ha^uriebant. Al. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l.
5. c. 23. See Athen, Dipnos. l. 2. c. 1.
as the Gentiles and Heathen sometimes did adore their Deuil-gods, in quaffing
of Healthes unto them.

Therefore this drinking of Healthes must needs be Evil, and Unlawful.

Thirteenthly.

That which does cause men to drink more, and to Pray, and Praise God less
then else they would do: that which does put out Prayer and Holy duties, and
attribute that to healthing which should be ascribed unto prayer: Ostultitiam
hominum qui ebrietatem sacrificium putant. Ambr. de Elia. et ^eiun. c. 17. See
loba^. Frid. de Ritu. bib. ad San. l. 1. c. 8 p. 52, 67, 68, 104.
must needs be Sinful and utterly Unlawful: because it does abuse Gods good
creatures, and not only derogate from, but likewise pervert his Holy
ordinances.

But this beginning and pledging of Healthes, does cause men to drink far
more then else they would: to drink against their wills, their natures, and
their appetites, when as they are not thirsty, or when as they have drunk
enough, or to much before: yea it serves to no other purpose, but to draw men
on to drink more liberal, then else they would: and besides, it causes them
to pray and praise God less then else they would do: yea it puts out holy
duties, and Alex. ab Al. Genesis Dier. l. 5. c. 21. Olaus Mag. l. 13. c. 14 Ambr.
de Elia. and Ieiun. c. 17. Hier. Com. l. 1. in Tit. 1. Arrianus. l. 6. de
Gestis Alexandri^ Dio^. Cass. l. 51. Romans hist. p. 602. Record that it was the
custom of the Heathen Gretians, Macedonians, Romans, and Northerlings to
drink the health of their Kings and Friends, at their Feasts, and meetings.
attributes that to Healthing, and Drinking, which should be ascribed unto
prayer. Hence it is, that many like the Sic cu^ se max i am pios puta^t tum
maxim fiunt impii. Lact. de Justice. lib. 5. cap. 16.
Pagans in former ages, are drinking their Kings, their Queens, their Lords,
their Ladies, their Masters, their Mistresses, their Magistrates, their
Captains, their Kinreds, their Parents, their Friends, their Childrens, and
companions Healthes, when as they should be praying for them: hence it is, that
they make the drinking of their Healthes, a principal part of their Piety and
devotion toward them, and to go in lieu of their prayers for them; thinking
that they have more really, and truly, manifested, and expressed their love,
their Piety, their service, and their duty to them, and done them more true
and real good, honor and service in quaffing off their Healthes, then if they
had heartily prayed for them. Hence is it, that men do attribute a kind of
Divine virtue and efficacy to their Healthes (which the very phrase of drinking
such a man's Health does seem to import) as if the drinking of men's Healthes
were as effectual, nay more energeticall, to preserve, to purchase and procure
their health and happiness, then their prayers for them. Hence is it, that men
drink the Healthes of others, whiles they are in health of purpose to
continue, lengthen and increase their health: hence is it, that they carrouze
their Healthes in sickness, of purpose to recover and restore them to their
health, as if Healthes were the only Cordial, or Physic to preserve,
procure, or restore men's healths: Hence is it, that many deem it agreter
Videtur non amare Imperatorem qui pro sua salute non biberit: qui pro salute
eius non biberit fit reus indeuotionis. Ambr. de Elia. and Ieiun. c. 17.
Accusasionis occasio est adiuratum per regem freque^tius non bibisse. Hier.
Com. l. 1. in Tit. 1.
breach of Allegiance to refuse to drink or pledge the Kings Majesty's Health,
then not to pray for it: reputing those for no good Subjects, who out of
Conscience dare refuse it: Hence most men estimate it the greatest injury,
indignity, discourtesie and wrong that can be offered to men, to refuse their
Healthes: because they presume that there is some virtue in them for to do
them good: Hence many drink over their Kings, their Queens, their Lords their
Ladies, their Masters, Captains, Friends, or Mistresses Healthes, some twice
or thrice a day: where as they scarce pray privately (at least purposely, or
heartily) for their health and spiritual happiness, once a year; as if they
had more need of Healthes then Prayers: Hence is it, that on most of our
Festival and solemn days: on the Siccine exprimitur publicum gaudiu^ per
publicum dedecus? Haeccine solennes dies principi^m decent? quae alios dies non
decent? Tertul. Apolog. Aduer. Gentes.
Coronation or birth-daies of our Kings, or on the birth-dayes, or
marriage-dayes of our friends: upon our solemnities, for great, deliverances
and mercies to our Kings, our States, or friends; in steed of praying for them,
and of praising God for his great mercies, blessings, and favors toward them,
we are always quaffing and taking off their Healthes, as if Healthes were the
best prayers that we could put up for them, or the best Sacrifices, and
praises that we could offer up to God in their behalfes, when as in truth,
they stink in the very nostrells of God, and all good men. Since therefore God
has commanded us, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
to make Supplications, Prayers, and Intercessions for Kings, for Magistrates,
and all that are in authority, and for all men else, and not to drink
Healthes for them, (which Swine and Oxen may do as well as men, and that to as
good, or better purpose:) since he has enjoined us Psalm. 50. 14. Ps. 69, 31,
32. Ps. 107. 22. Psalm. 147 1.
to offer up the Sacrifice of praise, of prayer and thanksgiving to him, and
not of Healthes, for all his mercies and favors to our selves or others: it
cannot but be Sinful and utterly Unlawful, to out, to lessen, or abate our
Prayers and thankesgiuings with our Healthes, and to attribute that efficacy
and power to those Healthes, which is proper and peculiar to our Prayers; as
all our Healthers do in their hearts and judgments, though not in open
speeches: though some of them are not ashamed to profess in words; that the
drinking of men's Healths, is as beneficial to them as men's prayers for them; a
most Atheistical and blasphemous speech.

Therefore this drinking of Healthes must needs be Sinful and utterly
Unlawful.

Foureteenthly.

That which was a common practice, custom, and ceremony of Gentiles, and
Heathens who knew not God, in their ordinary Feasts and meetings, and in the
Solemnities, and Festiualls of their Deuill-gods, must See Tertul. de Corona
Militis, lib. Ambr. Sermon. 11. Council. Laodicense, Can. 39. Conc. Aphricanum:
Can. 27. Conc. Constantinop: 6. Can. 94. Council. Bracarense Can. 29. Synod.
^uronica 2. Can. 23. Capitula Graecaru^. Synod^ru^. Can. 71, 72, 73. Clemens:
constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 66. For proof of this Proposition.
needs be Sinful and utterly Unlawful unto Christians.

But this drinking of Healthes one to another in a certain method, order,
course, measure and number, was a common practice, custom, and ceremony of
Gentiles, and Pagans who knew not God, in their ordinary Feasts and meetings,
and in the Solemnities and Festiualls of their Deuill-gods: yea it is an
invention and practice of the Devil and his followers.

Therefore this drinking of Healthes must needs be Sinful and utterly
Unlawful unto Christians.

The mayor is warranted, not only by Fathers and Counsels, but likewise by
many express Leu. 18. 30. Deuteronomy. 12, 29, 30. Ps. 106. 35. Ier. 10. 2. Mat. 6,
7, 8, 31, 32. Ephesians. 2, 1, 2. and 4, 17, to 22. Col. 2. 20, 21, 22. Romans 12. 2. 1
These. 4, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 1, 14, 15, 18. and 4, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15, 16. 2 Kings 17, 15
Scriptures, which do positiuely enjoin us: Not to imitate the customs,
fashions, ordinances, rudiments, traditions, or ceremonies of the World, or of
the Heathen, Gentiles, or Worldly men: not to learn their ways nor customes^
not to be like to them, nor yet to conform nor fashion our selves unto them,
especially in their profane, heathen^sh, idolatrous and superstious rites and
ceremonies.

The Minor, I shall back and prove by diverse Authenticke Testimonies,
evidences, and records both of profane and Christian Authors. It is recorded
by Symposium: about the end.
Plato, that certain drunkards came in to Agatho, Aristophanes and Socrates
where they were discoursing, compelling them to drink: and when these three
Philosophers had drunk them all asleep, they fell to drink in Ex magna
Phyala ex orne ad dextram biberunt.
course one to another to the right hand, out of a great bowl, in the nature
of our Healths: Plutarch relates, Conuiuium, 7. Sapientum, See de Sanitat,
tuenda lib.
that it was the custom and manner of the ancient Grecians to drink one to
another in course by a certain measure: and that Jupiter in the feast that he
made to the Gods, did power out wine into a cup, and inioyne them to drink it
off one after another in course: so that it seems, the great Deuill-god
Jupiter was the first inuenter, founder, and i^stituter of our Hellish, and
Heathenish Healthes. Alexander ab Alexandro, and Polydor Virgill record: Genesis
Dier. l. 5. c. 21. and 3. and ^. Polidor. Virg. de Inuentor. rerum. lib. 3 c. 5.
that the Grecians (yea and the Sole tamen, vinoque calent: annosque
praecantur. Qu^t sumunt cyathos, ad numerumque; b^^u^t. Ovid. Fasto^u^. lib. 3.
p. 51. Hinc ad Vina redit laetus, and alteris Te me^sis adhibet deum: te multa
praece, te prosequitur mero de ^uso pateris, and laribus tuum. Miscet munen,
Hor. Carm. l. 4. O ^. 5. Naeuia sex cyat his septem lustin^a bib^tur. Quinque
Lydas Lydo quatuor, Ida tribus. Omnis ab infuso numeratur amica Falerno.
Ma^tial. Epig. lib. 1.
Romans too) did salute their Gods, and friends among their cupes, and call
upon them by name, carousing off the whole cup to them: and that when as they
drunk to any one, they did always nominate him to whom the cup should be
filled and given for to pledge them: and so they did drink the Health of their
Gods first, and then the Health of their friends afterward: and having called
on their Gods, they did liberally drink of the whole cup unto them. Yea, no
Ambassador could enter within their territories, nor yet discharge his
Embassage, unless he had first washed his hands and drunk a Health to Jove
their Idol god. Saint Basil the Great, informs us: De ^brietate Sermon. and
Com. in cap. 5. Esaiae. See Plutarch, Symp. l. 1. Quast. 1. accordingly.
that the Heathen Greeks in his times had overseers, and stewards of their
drinking in their feasts, to see that every man should take off his liquor,
and drink in course and order: and that the Master of the feast having a
ferkin of coolewine brought unto him, did measure out to every guess an equal
quantity and proportion of wine, which they must drink off in order: that so
the cupps being equal, there might be no exceptions taken, and one might not
circumuent nor defraud another in drinking: of which law ( he informs us) that
the very Devil himself was the author: which order and course is now observed
in our Healthes: Dipnos^ lib. 27. c. 5.
Athenaeus relates, that among the Tyrrhenians it was lawful for any man to
provoke whom ever he would to pledge an Health: De Plantatione Noe, lib.
Philo Iudaeus, produces the Heathen Philosophers disputing this question:
whether a wise man might enter into a combat of drinking for some great
advantage, yea or no? as to drink for the health of his Country, the honor
of his Parents, the safety of his Children or nearest friends, or for some
other such like private or public occasion: by which it is evident that
Healthes were commonly used among the Gentiles, and Pagans in his times: It is
recorded of Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 2. c. 1.
Amphyction King of Athens, who was the first that mixed wine; that he enacted:
that men should drink but a little pure wine after meals, but as much mixed
wine as they would: and that they should always invoke the name of Jove, or
drink Jove's Health, in their drinking matches, that so they might obtain
Health by it: Whence Seleucus witnesses, that the Ancients did not use to
drink much wine, but in favor and honor of the Gods: whence they styled
their feasts and meetings, Thaenas, Thalias, and Methas: because they
imagined, that they might be safely drunk in these feasts of theirs, for the
honor and sake of their Gods, since the principal end of these their meetings
was to drink their Healthes: So that Healthes (it seems) were a part of the
Devils homage, service and sacrifice at the first: and hence I suppose it is,
that many are turned such incarnate Devils in these our days, that they fear
not to begin or pledge the Devils health, which is so rife with many. It is
Storied of Alexander the great Aria^us l. 6. de Gestis Alexand: See Lypsius
Epist. Centur Miscel. Epist. 51.
That after he had composed the differences between the Persians and
Macedonians, he made a great Feast unto them, and to others of other Nations
whom he had conquered, to the number of 9000. men: who did all drink to his
health, and the health of his Army, and to the perpetual concord of the
Persians and Macedonians out of the same Bowl. It is recorded by Dion Cassius,
Romans Hist. l. 51. p. 6^2.
That the Roman Senate inacted for the honor of Augustus: That the Romans
should make wishes for him, Vt in conui^i^s non modo publicis, sed priuatis
quoque, pro eo libaretur.
and drink his health in all their public and private Feasts. Dipnos. lib.
10 cap. 7.
Clea^chus is cited by Athaeneus, bringing in V^pian drinking of an whole
carouse for the Health of his Kindred, as a pledge of his love unto them.
Nature. Hist. lib. 14. c. 22. Doctor Hackwells Apology l. 4. c. 6, sect. 2, 3,
4, 5.
Pliny records, Some Laws and Ceremonies of the Romans observed in their
drinking: Which do much resemble our Healthing: to wit, That they must drink
up all at a draught, and not take breath to do it: that they must spet out
none, nor cast away none, nor leave no snuff behind them in the cup: Which
rules our artificial Healthers and Drunkards, do now exactly keep and
observe. Cornel. Tac. de Mor. Ger. sect. 7. Boemus de Mor. Gent. l. 3. c. 12.
Munster. Cosmogr. l. 3. Cap. 27.
It is registered of the ancient Germans: that they sit drinking: and of the
modern Germans, that they sit Healthing night and day, till they have laid one
another dead drunk under the Table. De Elia and leiun. cap. 11. 12, 17.
Saint Ambrose, Com. lib. 1. in Titus 1.
Saint Hierome, and De Tempore Ser. 231. 232.
Saint Augustine make mention, how the Gentiles, and Drunkard (...) their
times, did use to drink the Healthes of their Emperors, Kings, Armies,
Friends and Children. It is recorded of Nec prius ante epulas. aut numera grata
Lyaei^ ^as cusquam ^e^^gisse fuit, quam multa prae^atus, In mensam Fabio sacrum
libauit hon^rem: Sil. Ita^. l. b. 7. at the end.
Fabius Maximus, that he was so much honored among the Romans, for his
service against Hamball, that no man might eat nor drink, before he had
prayed for him, and drunk his Health. Lib. 13. cap. 37.
Olaus Magnus records it of the Northerlings: That they account it a kind of
Religious thing, to drink the Healthes of their Gods and Kings: and Rerum
P^^^^ Tom. 2. p. 68.
Alexander Guagninus witnesses: that among the Sar^^atians (who are for the
most part Pagans and Infidels) he is reputed the best servant who can drink
his Masters Health best: I might here produce Antiq. Le^^ionum lib. 3.
Lypsius, In Mostellaria and Persa,
Plautus, De Ritu^ Bib. ad san, lib. 1, c. 6, 7.
Ioannis Fredericus, Dipnos. l. 2. c. 1. l. 10. c. 7.
Athenaeus, Epigr. lib. 9. ^p. 74. l. 11. Ep. 21.
Martial and others, to prove unto you: That it was common and usual among
the Gentiles, to drink the Healthes of their Deuill-gods their Friends, their
Kings, their Mistresses, their Whores, their Armies, and the like: I might
likewise expatiate and lash out in proouing unto you, how they did drink
sometimes Ath. Dipnos. l. 10. c. 8, 9. Hor^ Carm. l. 3. Ode. 19. Coel. Rhod.
Antiq. Lect. l. 7. c. 26. l. 28. c. 16. Tibul. El. ^. lib. 2. Ovid. l. 3.
Fastor. Martial. Epig. l. 9, Ep. 9. 4. l. 11 Ep. 21. Putean. Dia^r, 1 p^ 40
Joan. Frid. de ^it. ^ib. ad Sam. l. 1. c. 7.
one cup, sometimes two cups: sometimes three, sometimes five cups, sometimes
seven cups, sometimes more, sometimes as many cups as there were letters in the
names of the Gods, or persons whose Healthes they drank, and the like: and how
they did drink Plat^: Sympos. At^. Dipnos. l. 10. 10. l. 11. c. 2. 17. 28.
Pla^t. in M^stellaria, lu^ ^enal. Satyr. 6. Joan. Frid. de Ri^^. Bib. ad ^an.
l. 1, c. 12. Dr. Hackwells Apology l. 4. c. 6. sect. 2. 5
sometimes unto the right hand, sometimes to the left hand, sometimes in a
circle: but then I should exceed the bounds of my intended brevity. Wherefore
I will conclude, and shut up this with the authority of Saint Augustine, who
expressly informs us. De Tempore Sermon, 231.
That this filthy, and unhappy custom of drinking Healthes by measure, and
method, is but a ceremony, and relic of Pagans: and therefore we should
banish it from our Feasts and meetings, as the poison of the Devil: and know,
that if we practice it either at our own, or other men's Tables, that in doing
so, we have without all question sacrificed to the Devil himself. And with
that of Disquisitio Mag. Tom. 3. Ap^nd. 1. ad lib. ^. Tom. 1 q. 2. l. 2. Tom.
3. lib. 5. sect. 7.
Martin Delrio, and De Ritu. lib. ad ^an. lib. 1. cap. ^
John Frederick, who plainly certify us upon the testimony of John de Vaux
a great Magician: That these Healthes were invented by the Devil himself: and
that Magicians, Witches, and inferior Devils do often times use them,
carrouzing the Health of Beelzebub the Prince and King of Devils in their
Feasts and secret meetings, as others usually do their Kings and Princes
Healthes. And should we then ( says Frederick) endeavor to make these
customs ours, with which the infernal Spirits, Witches, and Magicians use to
flatter and gratify their Beelzebub, and by which they seek the unhappy
friendship of their familiar Spirit? O wickedness: you Gods, you Heavenly
hosts who defend, and keep^ men back from evil, come near and put to your
helping hands: lest any Christian heart should be infatuated with so execrable
a madness. If therefore it be come to pass, that Devils, and deuillisle
persons have drawn^ these Healthes into their roundes, and Feasts: what
Christian should not quake and tremble in every ioy^t and member of his body,
when as he is forced, or allured to their Healthes, perhaps as far as
drunkenness it self: thus far John Frederick.

By all these Testimonies and Records, which cannot be controuled, it is now
most clear and evident: That this drinking and quaffing off of Healthes, had
its original and birth from Pagans, Heathens and Infidels, yea from Hui^^
Aut^rem l^gic diabolum habent Basil. de Ebriet. and Lu^u: Sermo. Augu^^ de
Temp. ^er. 23 1.
the very Devil himself: that it is but a worldly, carnal, profane, nay,
Heathenish, and Deuilish custom, which savors of nothing else but Paganism,
and Gentilisme: That it was but the Devils drinke-offering, or a part of that
honor, reverence, worship, service, sacrifice, homage, and odoration, which
the Gentiles, Witches, Sorcerers and Infernal Spiri^s gave to Beelzebub, the
prince of Devils, and every other Deuill-gods; to whose honor, name and memory,
they were first invented and consecrated. And shall we then, who profess our
selves to be Qui Christiani n^mini^ op^^ non a^it Christianu^ (...) esse
videatur: Nomen enim sine a^tu atq^^ officio suo ^ihil est: Nec est aliud
sanctur^ vocabulum sine merito nis^ ornamentum in l^t^. Sal^. de Gub. Dei. l.
4. p. 94.
Christians in name, turn Infidels and Pagans in our lives: Shall we who have
given up our names to God and Christ: we who have utterly renounced in our
Baptism, all worldly, heathenish, carnal, and hellish Rites and Ceremonies:
and vowed solemnly unto GOD himself Tertul. de Baptism lib. Salu. l 6. de
Gubern. Dei. Tertul. de C^rona Mil. And the form of Baptism in our Common
Prayer Book.
to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the P^mpes, and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the Flesh: betake our selves to
these rudiments and ceremonies of the World? to these works of Darkness,
Sin, and Satan? to these Riotous, Idolatrous, Profane, and Graceless
Healthes, and Ordinances of Infidels, and Paga^s, who were solely imbondaged
unto Satan's discipline, and never heard of Christ? Shall we think to gratify
and honor God, or Christian Princes, Parents, Nobles, Captains, Friends, or
Magistrates, in the very self same kind and manner as the Gentiles did adore
their Deuill-gods, in quaffing off their Healthes? Shall we now think to
celebrate, the Nativity, Circumcision, Resurrection, or Ascension of our
blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: or our Christian Feastiualls and
Solemnities (as the custom of too to many Healthen-Christians is, In nobis
Christus patitur opprotriu^, in nobis patitur Lex Christiana maledictum. De
nobis enim dicunt Pagani: Ecce quales sunt Christiani qui Christum colunt: ^bi
est lex Catholica quam credunt? Vbi sunt pietatis ac castitatis praecepta, quae
discunt? Euangelia legunt and impudi^^ sunt: Apostolos audiunt, and
inebriantur: Christum sequ^^tur and rapiunt, vitam improbam agunt, and probam
legem habere se decunt, salsum plan^ illud est quod aiunt se bona discere: quod
iactant se sanctae legis praecepta retinere: si enim bona discerent, boni
essent, Salu de Gub. Dei lib. 4. page 137. 138.
who scandalize Religion, and make it odious unto Turks and Infidels by their
deboist, their wicked and licentious lives) in the self same manner as the
Pagans did their Of which see Liuie Romans Hist. l. ^9. Aug, de C^u. Dei. l. 18.
c. 13. Coelius Rhod. Antiq. lect. l. 4. c. 6. Pol^d Virgil. de Invent. Rerum.
l. 3. c. 17.
Bacchanalia, or their Deuill-feastes, in drinking and carrouzing Healthes? as
if 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16.
Light and Darkness: Righteousness and Unrighteousness: Christ and Belial:
the Cup and Table of the Lord, and the Cup and Table of Devils; the Temple of
God, and the Temple of Idols (which can have no Communion, no Concord, nor
Agreement) were fully reconciled and recorded! O let it be never said of any
who dare to bear the face, or to assume the name of Christians to themselves;
that they should ever glory, or take a pride (as many do) or get an habit, or
bear a share in drinking Healthes; especially on those blessed times, and
happy days, which summon and engage them in a more near and special manner,
to express their love, their thankfulness, and their best obedience and
respect to God, for all his kindness, mercy, love, and goodness to them, or
when as he comes unto them Praeclare dona Dei vel agnoscimus, vel honoramus:
qui quantum ab eo bene^icii accipimus, tantum ei iniuri^s repensamus. Salu. de
Gub. Dei. lib. c. page 222.
in his best and richest mercies, which call them unto Temperance, and
Sob^ietie, and not to Drunkenness, Riot, and Excess: but let them worship him
with a Reverend, Pure, and holy Worship: with a Gracio^s, Temperate, and holy
Heart; and with a Thank^ull, Mederate, Sober, and Awful use of all his
Creatures, as himself D^ut. 8. 10. 1 Cor. 10. 31. Romans 13. 12. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4.
Tit. 2. 11, 12 1 Pet. 5 8. Luke 21. 34.
Enioynes them; or else let them utterly renounce and disclaim the name of
Christians, and turn professed Pagans, both in name and nature, as they are in
practice. O let us Christians who think sco^ne to be styled In^idels, or
Heathens; or Carnail, Worldly, profane, or graceless persons; be ashamed to
allow, or practice that, which makes us either such, or worse then such: Let us
be such in truth and practice as we would be in name: or else let us be
contented to be deemed and reputed such (even Infidels and Pagans) Non
imita^tands nobis illi sunt, qui sub Christiano nomine, Gentile^ vitam agunt,
and aliud pro^essione, aliud conuersatione testant^r. Inter Christianu^ and
Gentien^ non sides tantu^ debet, sed and vit. a disl^nguere, and diuersam
religione^, per diuersa opera monstrari. Hiero^. Epist. Tom. 1. Epist. 14 c. 2.
Joan. Frid. de Ritu. B^b. ad San l. 1, c. 8.
as our lives our Healthes and actions, describe us for to be. Let us not
honor court, nor entertain, our God, our Savior; our Kings, our Christian
Princes, Nobles, Magistrates, Friends, or Consorts, with Healthes and roundes
(as the manner is) as we would entertain, or court the very Devil himself:
(for what other better complement or well^come could the Devil Beelzebub
himself desire, if he were a bidden guess unto our Tables; or what ^itter
fare or entertainment could we give him, then to plye him hard with Healthes
Marti^^s Delrio. Disquisit. Magica Tom. 3 Appendix. 1. ad lib. 5 Tom. 1.
Quaest. 2. l. 2. Tom. 3. l. 5. sect. 7.
As the Magicians, Witches, and inferior Devils use to do) until we had
got the staggars) but let us imitate the feasts and meetings of holy
Christians in former ages: Tertul. Apol. adu. Gent. c. 39. Theod. de Euang.
veritat. Cognit. l. 8. Gregor. Nys^de vita Beati. Greg. Oration. See Leuit. 23.
1 Chronicles. 20. 21, 22. 2 Chronicles. 7. 6, 8, 9, 10. and 30. 21, to the end. Acts. 2.
46, 47, Clemens Alex. Paedag. lib. 2, c. 4.
Who did begin their Feasts with Prayers, continue them with Temperance, and
Sobriet^e, eating no more then would suffice their hunger; drinking no more
then would quench and satisfy their thirst: eating and drinking as in Gods
sight; discoursing and talking as in his hearing: concluding their meetings
with a Psalm and Prayer, and then departing, not to a Tavern, or a
Whore-house, but to their own houses with Temperance and Sobriety, having
their Souls as well replenished with Grace and Discipline, as their bodies
with gross and corporal food: If we would now at last, observe this
Ancient, Godly, and Religious practice in the entertainment of our friends:
and in our Feasts and meetings, which are commonly made the ^iusmodi conuiuium
often obrietatis theatrum. Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 4
Theaters of Healthes, of Drunkenness and Riot, (especially in the time of
Christ's Nativity. Wherein men commonly sell themselves to Drunkenness,
Healthing, Dancing, Carding, Dicing, Idleness, Epicurisme, Wantonness, and
excess of Sin, as if it were a time of looseness and profaneness, not of
Grace and Holiness; doing more true service to the Devil, during this Holy
time, then all the year besides) what Joy, what Peace, and Comfort: what
increase and strength of Grace would it bring unto our Souls, and to the
Souls of all our friends and guess; which are now so much endangered, and
without Repentance damned, by these sinful Healthes which we begin unto them?
O therefore let us now at last abandon these Heathenish, Idolatrous, and
Hellish customs as unbeseeming Christians; as the Inventions, Ceremonies, and
Customs of Infidels and Pagans, whose ways and works we must not practice.
O let it never be recorded of us Englishmen (who have taken up this Heathenish
custom but of punie times) as it is storied of the Polonians: Guag^inus Rer.
Polon, To^. 2. p 67, 68, 69. Martin. Chromeru^ de Polon. lib. 1. et. Solomon
Neugebauerus hist. Polon. lib. 1.
That they usually, as their manner is, do ^arrouze and quaffe off great
Bowls, to the Health of one another, often times against their natures, so that
their mutual love one to another, (which they do principally express in
their Feasts and meetings) does often times deprive them of their health, and
make them subject to many diseases, through to much Healthing: That they will
often times force one another to drink, saying: either pledge me, or fight with
me: (which is the cause of many Duels:) and that they account him the best
servant, who can drink his Masters Health best: Let not the Moscouites
description ever suite with us: of whom it is registered, Sigismund Baro. de
rebus Moseouitis Matthias a Micou. de Sar^atia Eur^p^^ l. 2. c. 3.
That they know full well how to allure men to drink; and that when as they
have no other occasion of drinking, they begin to drink their Dukes Health:
then the Prince his Brothers Health: and next the Healthes of other men of
place and dignity: whose Healthes they think, that no man either will or dare
deny: Let it not be storied of us, as it is of the Ancient and modern
Germans. Munster Cosmogr. l. 3, e. 27 Boem^^^. de Mor. Gent l. 3. c. 12.
Euphormio. lcon. Animorum. cap. 5. loan. Frid. de Ritu. Bib. ad San l. 1. c. 5.
6, 7. Franciscus Irenicus, Germania Exeges. Tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 8.
That they Carrouze, and Health, and Drink so long, till they have laid one
another dead drunk under the Table, or caused one another to vomit up their
shame, and surfeit: (a sin to common in our swinish age) and a custom among
Drunkards in Amb: de Elia and leiun: l c. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Saint Ambrose his days, Let it not be reported of us, as it is of the Ancient
Persians, Zenophon. de instit. Cyri. Hist. lib. ^.
That they drunk so liberally at their Feasts, that though they were able to
carry themselves into their Banqueting-roomes, yet they were always carried
out of them, because their own legs could not bear them: (the case of too
to many now among us.) Let it be never enrolled of us, as it is of the
Brasilians, Leri^^ Hist. Nauig in. Brasil. cap. 9.
That whole Villages of them meet together to drink and quaffe (as they use to
do at our Country Wakes, or Reuells) carrouzing, and drinking off whole
Bowls one to another, some times three days together, till they are not able
to stand, and till they have drunk up all the Caouin, or liquor in the place:
Let us not be of the same mind and judgment, as the inhabitants of Purchase
Pilgrimage, l. 9. cap. 2. 3.
Cumana, and G^iana are, Who account him the greatest, and brauest man, and the
most complete and accomplished Gallant, who is able to carrouze and swill
down most: which is the opinion of many Gul-gallants in our Bacchanalian age:
But since we are Christians and Saints in name and reputation: and since Tit.
2. 11. 12, 13, 14. 1 Pet 1, 13. 14, 18. John 15. 19. ler. 10. 2. Ro^: 12 to 2.
1 Cor. 7 23. Ephesians. 4. 17. Col. 2 20. 21. 22. 1 Pet. 4. 2. 3. Reu. 14, 3^
the Grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared to us: touching us,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world: looking for that Blessed hope and
Glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ: who gave
himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all iniquity, and from our
vain conversation received by tradition from our Fathers: that he might
Redeem us from the World, and all worldly, profane, and heat henish customs,
ceremonies, ordinances, rudiments, and traditions of Gentiles, Pagans, and
Infidels: and purify us unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works: Let us be no longer Pagans, Heathens, and Infidels in our practice, in
taking up, in using, practicing, or approouing these Heathenish, Hel^^sh,
Profane, Idolatrous, and Unchristian Healthes: but let us utterly abjure, and
disclaim them, as a part of the Devils worship, service, homage, and
sacrifice heretofore: and an invention, custom, ordinance, tradition, rite and
ceremony of Devils, Infidels, and the deboistest Heathens, whose waves and
customs Ipsa est saeuissima supplantatio, quando fideles and religiosi relicto
proposite bono in imitatsonem transeunt aliorum. Prosper. Aquit. Exposit, in
Psalm. 139.
no Christians are to imitate, unless they will fall from God, to gross
Idolatry.

Fifteenthly, and lastly.

That which the Scriptures, Fathers, and many Modern Christians, both Divines
and others: together with two Councels, Christian Emperouurs, and States: and
many Pagans, Infidels, and profane Authors, have utterly condemned and
disapprooued, must needs be Sinful, and Unlawful.

But the Scriptures, Fathers, and many Modern Christians, both Divines and
other, together with two Councels, Christians Emperors, and States, and many
Pagans, Infidels, and profane Authors, have utterly condemned and
disapprooued this drinking and forcing of Healthes.

Therefore it must needs be Sinful and utterly Unlawful.

The Mayor I take for granted: the Minor I shall endeavor to back and prove
in every branch and member.

First I say, that the Scriptures themselves do utterly condemn and
disapprooue this drinking, or forcing of Healthes, though not expressly and by
name (because it was not precisely nor particularly known to the Penmen of the
Scriptures) yet in gross and general terms: and that so plainly, fully,
and punctually, that no man can deny it. For first of all, they do expressly
prohibit, 1 These. 5. 23 Math. 6. 13. Job 31: 1. Jude 23
all appearance of evil, and all occasions of sin: Secondly, they do
positiuely condemn, Leuit. 18. 30 Ier. 10. 2. Romans 12, 1, 2. Math, 6; 7, 8,
31, 22. Ephesians. 2, 2, 7, and 4, 17. 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21. Col. 2, 20, 21, 22. 1 Pet.
1, 14, 15, 18. and 4, 2, 3, 4. Iam. 1, 11, 27.
all Worldly, Carnal, Heathenish, Vain, and idle Customs, Ceremonies,
Ordinances, Rudiments, and Traditions, and all such things, and Rites as savor
of Gentilisme, Paganism, or Heathenish Idolatry and Superstition: Thirdly,
they do absolutely condemn Romans 13, 13, 14. Ephesians. 4, 22. 23. Col. 3, 8. Gal 5.
24. 1 Pet. 1. 15. and 2, 11. Tit. 2. 12. and 3, 3. 2, Pet. 2, 18. 21.
all Rioting, and Drunkenness, all fleshly and carnal lusts, and all such
things, as do either savor of the old Man, or make provision for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof: Fourthly, they do manifestly forbid, Romans 14. 13
15. Ph^l. 1. 27 1 Cor. 10, 32, 33. 2 Cor. 8, 21.
all Scandalous and offensive things, which beseem not the Gospel of Christ;
which may give offense to the Saints, and Church of God and are not honest and
laudable in the sight of all men: Fifthly, they utterly disallow, a d^sentence,
all manner of carro^zing, and Amos 6. 6. Esaias 5. 11. 22. 1 Kings 20. 16 Dan. 5.
3. 4.
drinking Wine in bowls; all Reuellings, Banquetings, and excess of Wine, and
Riot, according to the will and lusts of men, and the practice and custom of
the Gentiles: Sixthly, they denounce an Woe, not only against all 1 Pet. 4, 2, 3
4. Ga. 5. 21. ^om. 13. 13.
Drunkards, and such as are strong to power in strong drink: but likewise
against Isa. 5. 11. 22. and 28. 1. Prou. 23, 29. Joel. 1. 5.
him that gives his neighbor drink, that puts his bottle to him, and
makes him drunk also, that he may see his nakedness: that is who does any
way force, or allure his friend or neighbor by any entreaty, d Hab. 2. 15.
Hosca 7. 6. 8.
art, or wile, to drink more then either he would, or should do: (a place
for such to meditate, and ruminate upon, who delight to make others drunk,
though they are not drunk themselves.) Now this drinking of Healthes, is
expressly, and punctually, within the verge and compass of all these
inhibitions, precepts, and injunctions. For it is an appearance and spice of
evil, and an occasion of much evil, drunkenness, and excess. It is a
Worldly, Carnal, Idle, Vain, Profane, and Heath^nish Ceremony, Ordinance,
Rudiment, and Tradition, and a thing, and rite that savors much (nay wholely)
of Gentilisme, Paganism, and Heathenish Idolatry, and Superstition: it is a
concomitant, cause, and adiunct of Riot, and Drunkenness; a fleshly and
carnal lust, and a part and relic of the old Man, which makes provision
only for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. It is a scandalous, and
offensive thing, which beseemes not the Gospel of Christ, which gives offense
to the Saints, and Church of God, and is not honest and laudable in the sight
of all men: It is within the compass of carrouzing, and drinking Wine in
Bowls: within the verge, of Reuelling, Banqueting, and excess of Wine, and
Riot, according to the will and lusts of men, and the custom and practice of
the Gentiles: and those who use and practice it, are such who give their
neighbors drink, and put their bottle to their mouths, that they may make
them drunk, and see their nakedness: they are such as draw on others to
drink more largely then they would, or should do, for which there is an heavy
and bitter Woe attending on them: Therefore this drinking of Healthes is in
substance, punctually, fully, and particularly (though not expressly, and by
name) condemned and disapproued by the Scriptures; So that it must needs be
Sinful and utterly Unlawful, as well as Sacrilege, Astrology, Symonie,
Nonresidency, Poisoning, Treason, Magique, and the like: which are only in
substance, but not by name condemned in the Word: and this should move us De
quibus apertissime diuina Scriptura sanxit, non differenda sententia est, sed
potius exeque^da. Aquisgsanense Con^il. sub Lud: Pio: Can. 61.
forthwith for to reject them.

Secondly, as the Scriptures, even so the ancient Fathers of the Church, do
utterly condemn and disapprooue of drinking Healthes. Not to trouble my self
nor others in recording all those Works and Treatises, wherein the Fathers
have learnedly and zealously displayed themselves against Drunkenness and
Drunkards: whose See Clem. Alex. Paed: l. 2. c. 2. Basil. de Ebrietate, and
Luxu, Sermon. et Com. in cap. 5. Esaiae Amb. de Elia and leiun. cap. 10. to 20.
Origin. Hom. 6 in Genesis and Ho^. 7. in Leuit. Chysost and Pop. Antioch. Hom. 54,
57, 71. Enar. in Esaias 5. and Hom. 27. in 1 Cor 11. Aug. de Ebrietat. et Virgin.
Sermon. and de Tempore Sermon. 231 232 Bern. de Modo been viuendi, Ser. 25.
Chrysolog. Ser. 26: Hier. Com. l. 2. in Gal. 5. and Com. lib. 1, in Tit. 1:
Against this sin of Drunkenness.
Works and Writings in this kind, I would the learned Drunkards of our
ebrious age would well consider: I will only mention and produce such Fathers,
as come home and punctual to our present purpose; such as do either in realty
and substance: or else in express and punctual terms, condemn all forcing,
beginning, pledging, and drinking of Healthes. Clemens Alexandrinus, does
blame and tax the Drunkards of his age, Paedagogi lib. 2. c. 2. and 4.
for drinking and rounding one to another, under the name of benevolence, or
good-fellowship: under which name our Drunken roundes and Healthes (which are
the same with those which he condemns) are this day palliated. Saint Basil,
writing against Drunkenness, which was very ri^e among the Grecians in his
age: Informs us; De Ebrieate et Luxu. Sermon and com. in cap. 5 Esaiae.
That they had Masters, Stewards, and Overseers of drinking in their Feasts
and meetings, to see that men should take up their liquor: and that there was a
certain order and method observed in their disorderly course of drinking. (And
is not this the course, and practice of our Drunkards now?) When as a man
(says he) would think that they had well drunken, then they begin to drink:
and they drink like beasts, giving equal cups unto the guess as out of an
inexhaust fountain: The drinking thus proceeding, a young man comes forth
with a Flagon of cool Wine on his shoulders: he coming in the Butlers place,
and standing in the midst, does distribute an equal portion of drunkenness
to all the guess through crooked pipes: This is a new kind of measure, where
there is no manner of measure, that so by the equallity of the cups there may
be no murmuring, nor exceptions taken, and that one may not circumuent, nor
defraud another in drinking: Every one now takes the cup that is set before
him, that so like an Ox out of a Cisterne, he may strive to drink at one
draught without any respitation, as much as that great Flagon will supply
through the Silver pipe: Consider the greatness, the belly and measure of the
Flagon how much it holds: this Flagon of Wine thou do not put into a
Wine-caske, but into thy belly which was filled long before: Wherefore the
Prophet does well cry out, Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning,
the they may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till, Wine
inflame them: but they regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his hands: and so he^ proceeds in condemning of these Healthes,
which are the same with ours now, or at least but little different from them.
Saint Ambrose in express terms condemns this drinking of Healthes: De Elia
and Ietun. cap. 17. 11, 12, 13, 14.
What (says he) shall I speak of the obtestations of Drunkardes? and what
shall I commemorate their sacraments, or ceremonies, which they esteem a kind
of impiety for to violate? Let us drink, say they, the Emperors Health: and
he that will not pledge it, is made guilty of indeuotion and disrespect: for
he seems not to love the Emperor, who will not drink his Health: and is
not this the speech and custom of our times? O the obedience (says he) of
this Pious devotion. Let us drink say they, for the safety of our Armies, for
the Prowess of our consorts, for the Health of our Children: They think that
these their well-wishing Healthes do ascend up even to God himself. O the
folly of men, who deem drunkenness to be a kind of sacrifice: who think
that those Martyrs will be appeased by drinking of their Healthes, who have
learned to endure affliction through fasting, etc. In their Feasts (says he
in another Chapter) thou shall see their Gold and Silver cups to be
marshalled, and ranked like an Army, to provoke men for to drink, (Lo here
the very method and pattern of our drunken age:) First, they begin to drink
and Skirmish with the lesser cups, then with the greater: Next the cups begin
to strive with the Firkins, they being often times doubled between delays.
Afterward proceeding on to drink, they begin to strive who shall drink most.
If any man desire to be excused from drinking, he is hardly taxed for it.
When the Feast is ended, they begin to drink a fresh: and when as a man would
think they had ended, then they begin their drinking; and then the greatest
Bowls, like so many warlike instruments, begin to walk; here they begin the
combat: the Butlers and Servants begin to grow weary of filling, and yet they
are not weary of drinking: Only these combats are without excuse. In War,
if any man find himself to weak, he may lay down his Arms, and receive a
pardon: here if any man sets down the cup, he is urged to drink. In
wrestling, if any man foil thee, thou losest the victory, but yet thou art
free from wrong: in Feasts, if any man refuse to take the cup into his hand,
it is forthwith powered into his mouth by force. Thus they continue till all of
them are drunken, as well the Conquerers, as the Conquered. What a sorrowful
and miserable spectacle is this to Christians? Neither are they excused, who
thus inuit men as Friends, and send them away as Enemies, Vocas ad c^nam vt
amicum: postea eiicis vt cadauer, anima eius extincta. Basil, de Ebrictate Sermon.
or cast them out as carcases: why do expenses and costs delight thee without
thanks? thou inuitest men to mirth, and yet thou forcest them to death: thou
call them to Dinner, and then thou will carry them out as to the Grave: Thou
promisest Meat; but thou inflictest Torments, thou offerest Wine, but thou
powrest in Poison, etc. This Father proceeds, but I will stop and refer you
to him: since I have recorded sufficient out of him, not only truly to
discypher, but likewise positiuely to condemn, the Drunkenesse, Custom,
Practice, and Healthing of our age. Saint Heirom, speaking of the effects of
Drunkenness in his days, has this passage. Lib. 1. Comment: in Tit. 1 Tom.
6. page 200. A.
Thou may (says he) behold some turning cups into darts, and dashing them in
the faces of their companions: others with torn Garments, Assaulting, and
Wounding those they meet: others Crying, others Sleeping: He who drinks off
most, is deemed the valiantest man: and Accusasionis occasio est, adiuratum per
per Regem frequentius non bibisse.
it is an occasion of a just accusation, to refuse to pledge the Kings Health
often: which course and practice he utterly disauowes, as sinful and
abominable. Saint Augustine, is very large and copious in this Theam^ De
Tempore Sermon. 231 232 De Sobrietate, and Virginis Sermo. and De Rectitud.
Cathol. Conuer^^^^^ lib.
Dear brethren (says he) albeit I believe that you fear drunkenness as
much as Hell it self, yet I exhort you neither to drink more your selves,
neither to compel others to drink more then they ought. For many often times
do drink by measure, without measure: they provide great cups, and drink by
a certain Law and Rule: he that ouercomes deserves the praise by this sin
of his. Now those who are such, endeavor to excuse themselves, saying, (as our
common Drunkards usually do:) We should use our Friends discourteously, if
we should not give them as much as they will drink, when as we inuit them to
our Feasts. But how are they your friends, who would make God your Enemy,
who is a friend to both? Wherefore it is better to part with such friends,
then to part with God: and if they will needs drink, let them drink, and
perish alone: better it is that one should perish, then many. But O the
unhappiness of man kind: how many are there, who will force Drunkards to
drink more then they ought, when as they will hardly part with a cup of
drink, to a poor needy Christian who begges it at their doors;
notwithstanding, that in this case it be given to Christ himself! And that
which is far worse: diverse of the Quod in Laicis reprehenditur, id multo
magis in Clericis opertet praedamnari. Aquisgranense Council. sub Ludi pio. Can.
61.
Clergy, who ought to hinder others from drinking thus, do themselves Nullam
habet spem salutis aeger quem ad intempera^tiam medicus hortatur. Seneca Epist.
129
compel, and allure others to drink more then they ought. But now I entreat
this one thing of you, above all the rest, and I adjure you by the dreadful
day of Judgment, that as often as you Feast one another, you would utterly
banish from your Feasts, that filthy and unhappy custom of drinking Healthes,
three by three in a large measure, without measure, either willingly, or
against your wills: as being the poison of the Devil, and an unhappy relic,
and custom of the Pagans. And whosoever shall consent, that this form of
Healthing shall be used, either in his own, or other men's Feasts: let him
not doubt, but that he has Sacrificed to the very Devil, himself: by which
form of drinking, his Soul is not only slain, but his body likewise is
infeebled. But now what a thing is this, that these unhappy Drunkards when as
they drink till they glut themselves with over much Wine, should deride and
scoff at those, who will drink no more then will suffice them? saying unto
them, be ashamed, and blush: why cannot you drink so much as we? (Which is the
ordinary speech, and phrase of Drunkards now): They tell them that they are no
men, because they will not drink: They style themselves the men, when as they
lie prostrate in the Iakes of drunkenness: and they say that others who can
stand up Honestly, and Soberly, are no men: They lie prostrate, and yet are
men: others stand upright, and yet they are no men: The Conqueror of
Drunkenness is dispraised, and he that is Conquered of Drunkenness is
applauded: The Sober man, who can govern himself and others, is derided: and
the Drunkard, who can neither know himself, nor others: is not derided, yea
not bewailed. Mark this Objection, and the reply unto it.
But now Drunkards do allege this excuse for themselves. That a great Man did
compel them to drink more then they would, and in the Feast of the King I
could not do otherwise. This is nothing else but a mere pretense to excuse
our sins: and that which we will not, we say we cannot fulfill: our will is
the fault, though our inabililie be pretended: But admit that thou were so put
unto it, that there it should be said unto thee; either drink or dye: It is
better that they Sober flesh should be slain, then that thy Soul should dye
for Drunkenness. Howeuer the objection is false: for Godly, Sober, and
Religious Kings and Potentates, though they may chance to be angry with thee
for an hour, or two, because thou refr^sest to drink out of a love to God:
yet they will afterward admire thee, and respect thee so much the more for
this thy refusing, by how much the more earnestly they did desire, persuade,
and press thee for to pledge them. And now, what a things is this, that after
the Feast concluded, when as men have quenched their thirst: when as they
cannot, neither ought they to drink more, that then they should begin to
drink afresh (as if they were but newly come) under diverse names, not only of
living Men, but likewise of Angels, and other ancient Saint: thinking that they
do them the greatest honor, if they do even bury themselves with too much
Drunkenness, in the commemoration of their names, and healthes: not knowing,
that none are so injurious to holy Angels, or holy Men, as those who slay their
Souls through too much Drunkenness, in drinking off their Healthes. Remember
therefore, that he who drinks too much to his friend, is made an Enemy to
his Soul: that he does debilitate his body, and murder his Soul. And thus
he proceeds against Drunkenness, and drinking Healthes, as you may more
largely read in the Works themselves. You see now by these several
Testimonies, and Records: that the Ancient Fathers, not only in their
Practice, but likewise in their Judgments, have utterly condemned this
Heathenish Art and Ceremony of drinking Healthes. Let those then who are, (or
at leastwise should be) Fathers in the Church, (as I fear there are some in
ours, as well as in Multi sunt etiam maioris ^rdinis Cleric^, qui cum aliis
sobrietatis bonum deberent iugiter praedicare, non solu^ hoc non faciunt, sed
etiam epsi cogu^t bibere aliquos plus quam expe lit, and se aliosque inebri^re
non erubescunt nec metuunt. August. de Tempore Sermon. 231. 232 See Synod.
Treuere^sis de Clericorum Temulentia, cap.
S. Austines days, who are too much addicted to this sin, and crime) be
ashamed to use, to Practice, or approve of Healthes, especially at their
proper Tables, or at any public meetings (as the custom of too many is;)
since so many Ancient Fathers have condemned them. It is a shame, nay a
Ebrietas in alio crime^ est, in Sacerdote sacrilegium: quia alter animam suam
necat vino, Sacerdos spiritum sanctitatis extingust. Chrysologus Sermo 26.
Sacrilege, for a Father, a Bishop, or Pastor, of the Church (whose life
should be a Light, a Pattern, and Grex qui Pastoris vocem moresque sequitur,
per exempla melius quam per verba graditur Greg. Magn. Pastoralium pars 2 cap.
3.
Example unto Others) to be a Childish nay, a Swinish Drunkard, or
Health-Drinker: especially since God himself has so punctually and frequently
1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 7, 8, and 5, 23. Tit. 1, 7. Leuit. 10, 9. Numb. 6, 2, 3. Pro.
31, 4. 5 See Hier. Com. l. 1, in Tit. 1. Theodoret. Primasius: theophyl. and
Haymo in 1 Timothy 3. Clemens Romans Constist. c. 50. Council. Aquisgr. sub Ludou.
Pio cap. 94. Council Turonicum 1. c 1 2. Synod Treuerensis. Anno 1541. Sur. Tom.
4. p. 828. Gra^ian. Distinctio. 35, and 44. See loan. Frid. de Ritu. Bib. ad
San. lib. 2. cap. 1.
enjoined, all Bishops, Pastors, Deacons, Fathers, and Elders of the Church: to
be Grave, and Sober; not given to much Wine: that so they may have a good
report of those that are without; lest they fall into Reproach, and the Snare
of the Devil: And therefore, though Courtiers, Soldiers, Russians, Rorers,
and others, do practice, and approve of Healthes: yet let Bishops, Ministers,
Scholars, Maiestrates, and all such persons, who are the Pastors of men's
Souls, or Patterns of their Lives, be sure to renounce them, as a Profane,
Luxurious, Heathenish, Idolatrous, and Hellish Custom Complement, and
Ceremony; for fear they degenerate from these fore-quoted Fathers, whose
Sons, and followers they profess themselves to be; and plunge themselves
into such Eternal flames, as all the Ocean cannot quench, though they should
Health it down. But especially, let all Protestant Bishops, Pastors, Fathers,
and Divines, abjure and renounce these Heathenish, Idolatrous, and Pernicious
Healthes, and utterly abandon, and disclaim them, both in their Judgments,
and their Practice, as Sinful, and Abominable; that so they may stop, and put
to silence, the slanderous mouths of brazen-faced, and false-tongued Papists;
who have published it upon Record. Joan. Fri^^^ ricus de Ritu. Bib. ad Sa^.
lib. 1. c. 9. Where this ensuing History of Luther is likewise recorded.
That the Arch-heriticke Luther, was the Author and founder of those new kinds
of Healthes, which are now so rife among his followers: of whom they Register
this Vtopian and forged Story. That Luther, on a certain time made a great
Feast at his House, to which he invited the chiefest Professors of the
University, and among the rest one Islebius, for whose sake this Feast was
principally provided. Dinner being ended, and all of them being somewhat merry:
Luther after the German custom, commanded a great Glass, divided with three
kind of circles to be brought unto him: and out of it he drunk an Health in
order to all his guess: When all of them had drunk, the Health came at last
to Islebius: Luther then in the presence and view of all the rest, takes this
Glass being filled up into his hand, and showing it to Islebius: says,
Islebius I drink this Glass full of Wine unto thee, which contains the run
Commandments to the first circle: the Apostles Creed to the second, the Lords
Prayer to the third, and the Cattechisme to the hottome: When he had thus
spoken, he drinks of the whole Glass at a draught: which being replenished
with wine, he delivers it to Islebius, that he might pledge him all at a
breath: who takes the Glass, and drunk it off only to the first circle,
which did contain the Decalogue, it being impossible, for him to drink any
deeper, and then sets down the Glass on the Table, which he could not behold
again without horror: then said Luther, I knew full well before, that
Islebius could drink the Decalogue, but not the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and
the Cattechisme: which speech of his was received, and approved of all as an
Oracle, From this forged Story, the Papists take occasion, not only to
slander and vilify Joan. Frid. de Ritu Bib. ad San. l. 1. c. 9. and 7. p. 52.
Luther and his followers, but likewise to vpbraid the very Doctrine and
Religion of the Protestants; as being Ratefied, Established and Confirmed by
this Praphane, if not l^sphomous Health of Luther, and by the Healthes of
Ecmondamus, and Aurasius. Wherefore, let all Protestants abjure, and renounce
these Healthes for ever; not only because these several Fathers, (whose steps
we ought to follow, as well in Life and Manners, as in Faith and Doctrine)
have with one consent condemned them: but likewise that they may wipe off this
false, and scandalous reproach, which the Papists have raised upon Luther, and
his followers, as the inuenters, and establishers of Healthes: When as in
truth themselves are most of all addicted, and devoted to them, and may be
truly styled the Authers and the Fathers of them, what ever they pretend.
Witness Pope John the thirteenth, that monster of Men, as Platina styles him:
Luitprandius lib. 6. c. 6. 7. Baranius An. 963. Numb. 17, 23. Mr. John Whites
Way to the true Church. Digres. 57. sect. 9.
Who did drink an Health, to the very Devil himself; Whose Vicar
questionless he was. Witness the Suriu^ Council. Tom. 3. page 742. and Tom. 4.
761, 771.
Council of Lateran under Innocent the 3. Can. 15. and the Council of Colen,
Anno, 1536. Part. 2. Cap. 24. and Part. 5. Cap. 6. Which restrain not only
the Popish Laity, but likewise their Parish Priests, and Clergy, from
drinking of Healthes, which did then abound in diners parts, (and that before
Luthers days) as these their Counsels testify: (though they would falsely
stitch them upon Luthers sleeue, by this their false, and sleeuelesse story:)
Yea witness John Frederick himself, the Register of this forged Fable: Who
testifies, De m^do Bib. ad San. l. (...) 7.
That not only the Lay Papists, but even their unholy holy Fries, Monks, and
Clergy men, (such temperate and abstemious Creatures are they) do often times
drink and quaffe off Healthes unto the Honor, and Reputation of their God
defied Saints, and Angels: which practice he does seem for to approve:
contrary ( I am sure) to Saints Augustines verdict. Who informs us; De Temp.
Ser. 231.
That it is the greatest indignity, and injury that can be offered to holy
Angels, or Saints, to drink their Healthes: Yea contrary to the Practice, and
Judgment of the Fathers: (in which they so much vaunt, and triumph) who have
condemned, sentenced, and rejected Healthes, as their fore-quoted Works and
Writings testify.

Thirdly, as the Scriptures and Fathers, even so many Modern Divines, and
Christian Authers of all sorts, have utterly condemned, and disapprooued this
drinking, and pledging of Healthes. Not to make mention of De Polonia lib. 1.
p. 15.
Cromerus, Rerum Polon. Tom. 2. p. 67, 68.
Guagninus, De Rebus Muscouitis.
Baro, Cosmogr. lib. 3. Cap 27.
Munster, Gen Dierum l. 5, c 3, and 21.
Alexander ab Alexandro, and Boemus de Mor. Gent. l 3. c. 22. Lipsius Epist.
Miscel. Cenr. Ep. 51.
other Historians who tax the Sarmatians, Polonians, Germans, Graeciaus, and
others for their Health-drinking: nor yet to remember Comme^t. in Ester 1. 8.
Brentius, Sermo: 2. in Ester. 1, 8.
Merlin, De Inuenter rerum. l. 3, c, 5.
Polidor Virgil, Epist. Decad 6. Epist. 6.
Bishop Hall, or Epigr, l. 2, Epigr. 46.
Owen, who have glanced at them, and condemned them in the by: as evil,
hurtful, and unlawful things, and Ceremonies, that draw on Drunkenness and
Excess; and often times prove the sickness both of Soul and Body too: Nor
yet to trouble you with the The life, confession, and heuty repentance of
Francis Cartwright
Confession of one Master Francis Cartwright, who being troubled in his
Conscience, and lying on his sicke-bed, cried out; It wounds me to the heart,
to think on my Excess, my drinking of Healthes, etc. which will be the case,
and cry of every Health-drinker, when as the panges of Sin, and Death shall
seize upon his Soul at last. I shall only refer you to In Pandect. luris
Ciuilis lib. 1. Tit. 1. Numb. 12. at the end.
Wesenbecius, a Ciuilian: Who censures Healthes, as being contrary to
distributiue^ Justice: to De lustitia and ^re lib.
Lissius, a Pesuite; who handles this very question: Whether it be law full to
begin an Health? and whether it be law full to pledge it? and concludes that it
is not: For neither reason, nor necessity of nature, nor good health, nor the
vigor of the mind, nor the alacrity of the senses, but another man's belly,
nay, the whole capacity of his belly, bowels and reins, are made the rule of
drinking, etc. To one De Ritu, Bib. ad San. tib. duo.
John Frederick a Papist, Professor of History in Colin: Who has written
two learned Books against Health drinking: to Olaus Magnus Hist. l. 13. c 37.
39. 40. to Vincentius Obsopaeus de Art Bibendi. lib. 2. 3. to Master John
Downame in his Disswasion from Drunkenness: to Master Robert Harris his
Drunk^rds Cup. page 20. 28, 29. to Master Samuel Ward his Woe to the Drunkard:
and to the Reverend, and Learned Divine, Master Robert Bolton, in his General
Directions for our comfortable Walking with God: page 200. to 206. Who have
fully and largely, rejected, condemned, and censured the drinking of Healthes,
as an abominable, Odious, Sinful, Heathenish, and Unlawful practice, which
dishonours God, and man, and produces many mischiefs; as these works of
theirs do at large declare: And shall we Christians and Protestants still
practice and applaud them, when as so many Modern Christian writers, both
Protestants, and Papists, have passed a Verdict, Doom, and Sentence of
Condemnation on them? O let us never dare to do it, for fear, the fore-quoted
Scriptures, Fathers, and the now recited authors, should rise up in Judgment
against us to condemn us for it.

Fourthly, but if these Authorities will not sway us, nor cause us to abandon
and renounce these Healthes, then hear in the fourth place, what Councels,
what Christian States, and Emperors have concluded and decreed against them.
In the Popish Surius Con^. Tom. 3. p. 742.
Council of Lateran under Innocent the third, in the year 1215. Can. 15.
there was this Constitution made. Let all Clergy men diligently abstain from
Surfeiting and Drunkenness; for which let them moderate Wine from themselves,
and themselves from Wine: neither let any one be urged to drink, since
Drunkenness does banish wit, and provoke lust. For which purpose we decree,
that, that abuse shall be utterly abolished, whereby in diverse quarters,
drinkers do use after their manner, to bind one another to drink Illum
abusu^ decernimus penitus tollendum quo in quibusda^ partibus ad potus aequales
suo modo se obligant potatores.
Healthes, or equal Cups, and he is most applauded by them, who makes most
drunk, and qu^ffes off most carrouses. If any shall off end henceforth in
this, let him be suspended from his Benefice, and Office, unless he give some
other competent satisfaction. Lo here you have an express Council against
Healthes, especially in Clergy men, together with a penalty on such as drink
them. So again in the Surius. Conc. Tom. 4. p. 761. 771. See Gratian:
Distinct. 44. Bochellius Decretalium Eccl. Gallicanael. 6. Tit. 19 cap. 11.
Provincial Council of Colin, in the year 1536. part. 2. c. 24. and part 5.
c. 6. All Parish Priests, or Ministers are chiefly prohibited, not only
Surfeiting, Riot, Drunkenness, and Luxurious. Feasts, but likewise the
Execratur competationes illas ad aequales haustus obligatoias.
Drinking of Healthes, which they are commanded to banish from their Houses by
a general Council. Thus have you two several Councels against Healths. Let
us now see what Christian States, and Emperors have decreed against them. It
is Tolossanus: l. 11. de Repub. c. 9. loan Frid. R^^u. Bib. ad San. l. 1, c. 10
p. 91, et, 12. p. 109 Rhenanus Rerum German. lib. 2, page 91.
Recorded of Charles the Great, Maximilian the Emperor, and Melchior
Hayminsfeild: statuta Caro^s 5: Imperialia: An. Do^^ 1548. Reformat. Pol^tae
^mperialis. c 8. p 143
Charles the fifth, that they inacted Laws against Health-drinking: to wit, That
no Soldier, nor any other person should allure, or compel any one to drink,
or pledge an Health: and that all Healthes should be abolished and antiquated,
because they were the causes of great and filthy vices: And withal they
commanded all the Electors, Princes, Dukes, and Ecclesiastical, and Temporal
Lords, to banish them out of their Courts: and all Courtires, Citizens, and all
other their Subjects whatsoever, not to use, not force any Healthes: enioyning
all Ministers to Preach against them: Right Christian Laws, and Injunctions,
worthy to be imitated, and seconded by all Christian Princes, especially in
this ebrious and drunken age. To these I may add those notable ru^^s against
Health-drinking, composed long since by a German Senate, and now lately reu^ued
in so^e parts of Germany: which Orders and Laws De Ritu: Bib. ad San. l. 1,
p. 116, 117, 118.
John Frederick has transcribed out of a Marble piece, in which they were
engraven, in form as follows: Let no Prince, nor Lord whatsoever, suffer his
Health to be drunken in great cups: he that prouokes another to drink an
Health, let him fear the wrath of the Prince of great Name. If one provoke
thee impiously to drink an Health, do thou piously avoid it: he that
drinks his Princes, or Patrons Health, let him not lose his own. If thou
drink an Health, we do not so well approve of it: if thou do it, be
thou still a man. Let Reason be thy Gnomon, and Virtue thy Queen to govern
thee. Remember that Christians must fight against the Turk with the Sword, not
with the Cup: there it is an honor, here a disgrace to overcome. Let not one
friend draw nor force another to drink: if he does so, withstand him: and if
he will not be contented, then throw the Wine upon the ground: and if he will
not leave thee so, then take him for an Enemy: If thou would rather
displease the Lord then man: and rather damn thy Soul, then save it, let it
be capital to thee. Not to trouble you with our own 1 lacobic. 9, 4. lac. c.
5, 7. lac. c. 10, 21. lac. cap. 7.
Satutes against Tippling and Drunkenness, (in which the drinking and pledging
of Healthes in Innes and Tauernes, may be well included,) I shall conclude on
these recited authorities; that Councels, and Christian States and Emperors
have utterly condemned, and rejected Healthes as abominable, hurtful, and
pernicious evils. And shall we not then disclaim, and quite renounce them?
shall we not pass a sentence of condemnation on them, and exile them from our
Houses, Tables, and our Kingdoms too (where they have been practiced, and
fostred but of latter times) as these have done? O let us be sure to do it,
lest Papists, and Germans should excel us in temperance, and sobriety, to our
just reproach: and to the scandal of that Holy, Pure, Orthodoxe, Ancient, and
sincere Religion which we now profess.

Fifthly, as the Scriptures, Fathers, and these Modern Christian Writers,
Emperors, States, and Counsels: even so Pagans, and Infidels have utterly
condemned, and disapprooued this forcing and drinking of Healthes. losephus
Antiquit. lud^eorum. l. 11. c. 6. Ester 1. 3. to 9.
Ahashuerus, that great P^sian King, when as he made his great and royal
Feast to all his Nobles, Princes, and People, of purpose for to manifest and
show the riches of his glorious Kingdom, and the honor of his excellent
Majesty, was so far from approving either of forcing, or drinking Healthes,
after the Persian manner: as he inacted a Law. That none should be compelled
to drink: appointing all the Officers of his Palace, that they should do
according to every man's pleasure. A pattern worthy to be imitated of all
Christian Princes in their greatest Feasts, and Solemnities. Athen. Dipnos. I.
10. c. 11.
The Lacedaemonians, did utterly condemn this dinking of Healthes one to
another, because it would weaken their bodies, and provoke them to scurrilitie:
wherefore they did drink but moderately in their Feasts, not inuiting any one
to drink, but when he would himself. It is Diogen. Lactan. I. 8. Emp.
stor^ed of Empedocles, that being invited by one of the Princes to a Feast,
the Servant that invited him, conspiring with the Ouerseer of the Feast,
commanded him to drink, or else he would power the drink upon his head.
Empedocles held his peace for the present: but the next day calling them in
question for it, he put them both to death for example sake: so much did he
abhor this forcing of Healthes Horrace the Poet, Prout euique libido est,
Siccat inaequales calices conuiua solutus Legibus insanis, seu quis capit acria
fortis Pocula: leu modicis virescit latius. Ser. 1. 2. Gatyr. 6.
does utterly disapproue this drinking of Healthes as a mad kind of law:
informing us: that every man ought to drink what he please. Athen. Dipnos l.
10, c. 9. Lypsius de Antiqu. Lect. l. 3.
It is an evil thing ( says Sophocles) to drink by force; ( as men for the
most part do in pledging of Healthes) it is all one as to force a man to be
thirsty: Not Hist. lib. 14. cap. 22.
Plini^ condemns them much, who draw on others to drink: and utterly dislikes
those Laws of drinking which the Romans observed, to drink up all at a
draught, to spit out none, and to leave no snuff behind them: Which rules are
observed in our Healthes. Dipnos l. 10. cap. 4.
It is a ridiculous thing (says Athenaeus) for a man to pray for his Wifes, or
Childrens Health, and Honor, and then to drink Healthes, till he fall to
Beating, and Cuffing of the Servants that attend him: for this is enough to
cause God to forsake, not only his own House, but the whole City too: A
strange speech of an Heathen man, which I would we Christians would consider,
for fear we drive away God from our Houses, and our Country too, by
carrouzing Healthes: Sympos^^. l. 1, Quaest. 1, l. 7 Quaest. 10, et de San.
tue^da lib.
Plutarch does utterly dislike, the making of Masters of drinking in Feasts,
because they were too importunate, and immoderate, in pressing men to drink,
and utterly condemns the pressing and drinking of Healthes, aduising men to
refuse them. Philo a Learned and famous Jew, recording the excessive
Drunkenness of his times: De Planta. Noe lib: and de Temule^tia lib. See
Gellius Noct. Attic. l. 15, c. 2 Plato de Legibus, l. 1, 2. Macrob. Saturn. l.
2, c. 8.
How they had certain matches, and combats of Drinking in their Feasts,
beginning to drink one to another in lesser cups, then in greater; and at last
carrousing whole bowels at a draught: brings in the Heathen^ Philosophers
disputing this question. Whether it were lawful for a wise man to enter into a
combat, or match of drinking? Where he produces some of them, affirming that
he might, so as he did it not voluntarily of his own accord, but for some
great advantage: as for the Health of his Country; the Honor of his Parents:
the Saftie of his Children, or nearest Friends: or for some such like Private,
or Public occasion: ( which must needs be intended of drinking Healthes:)
But then he brings forth others, and his own opinion against the former:
affirming that this drinking of Healthes, is such a Poison, as if it begets not
death, it certainly produces madness for the present, (which is the death of
the Mind, and Soul,) a far worse and greater death then the death of the
Body: Which reason is backed in his whole Book de Temulentia: where he and
they conclude: That a wise man will not drink an Health, nor yet enter into a
combat of drinking: So that by these authorities, it is sufficiently
manifested: That even Pagans, and Infidels themselves, have utterly condemned,
and disapprooued^ this drinking, and forcing of Healthes. And shall we
Christians then, be so shamelessely, and desperately wicked, as to approve,
maintain, and practice that, which Infidels, and Pagans have condemned? shall
we be Ex hoc ipso vtique deteriores barbaris sumus, si meliores non sumus, qui
meliores esse debemus: Criminosier enim culpa est, vbi honestior status: si
honorosior est persona peccantis, peceaeti quoque mayor inuidia: Itaque nos qui
Christians Catholici esse dicimur, si simile aliquid barbarorum impuritatibus
facimus, grauius arramus. Atrocius enim sub sancti neminis profesione peccamus,
Vbi sublimior est praerogatiu^. mayor est culpa. Faedius inebriatur,
sobrietatem, fr^n^e pratendens. Non tam reprehensibilis ebrietas Alamanni, quam
ebrietas christiani. Salu. de Guber, Dei, l. 4, p. 115, 17. 6, 130.
worse then Infidels, and Heathens in these times, and days of light and
Grace, Tit. 2. ^1, 12 13, 14. Romans 13, 13, 14. 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3, 4.
which summon and engage us to Temperance, and Sobriety, and to a moderate,
and holy use of all Gods creatures? O let it be never recorded of us, as it is
of the Israilites: 2 Chronicles. 33 9. Ideo plus sub religionis titul^ Deum luaimus,
quiae positti^ religione peccamus. ^^lu. de Gub. Dei. l^b. ^ page 93.
That they did worse then the Heathen, that were round about them: Let it be
never published among Turks, and Infidels: that Idolatry, Morality, and
common Nature, should do more in Pagans, then Grace it self, can do in
Christians: Plus debet Christ's discipulus praestare, quam mundi Philosophus.
Hierom. Tom. 1. Epist. 26. c. 4.
who owe far more to Christ and God, then Pagans do. But since these
Infidels, and fore-quoted Fathers have utterly condemned, this Drinking and
forcing of Healthes: let us Christians be afraid, to practice or approve
them: else these very Pagans, shall one day rise up in Judgment against us,
and utterly c^ndemne us to our eternal shame: for fost^ri^g, using,
justifying, and approouing, those Heathenish, Hellish, Idolatrous, Profane,
and Sinful Healthes, which they have sentenced and rejected.

Having thus (as I suppose) sufficiently euidenced and euinced the sinfulness,
and unlawfulness of Drinking Healthes, by these forecited arguments, and
Authors: I will here in the next place, answer all those ordinary and common
objections, excuses, and pretenses, which men make, either in the defense and
justification, or in excuse, or extenuation of Drinking, or pledging Healthes.
Indeed, a mere Natural, or Heathen man, might justly wonder, (but a
Christian, much more then they:) that there should be any men (but especially
such as profess themselves Christians, Scholars, or Divines) of such
commasculated, impudent, and brazen foreheads, as to defend, and justify this
Heathenish, Disolute, Profane, Luxurious, and Eb^ious practice of Drinking
Healthes: since so many Fathers, Christians, and Profane Authors, together
with the common course and Law of Nature, (which does secretly abhor it)
have so often cried it down. But if we consider: that Nulla in part mundi
cessa^ ebriet^^. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 14, c. 22.
Drunkenness it self, together with Nullum vitium est sine patrocinto. Vitia
nostra quia amamus, defendimus: and malumus excusare ea, quam excutere Sen.
Epist. 116.
every other sin, out of men's natural pronenesse, and love to Evil, have
found some Patrons to protect, and Proctors for to justify it, in every part
and corner of the World: We need not wonder, if Healthes (which are the
Vshers, Passages, Ways, and Inlets to Drunkenness, and most sins else) find
Champions, Proctors, and Abbettor, to vindicate, and make good their right, at
least to extenuate, and abridge their guilt, by these ensuing Arguments, Pleas,
Pretenses, and Excuses, which I am now to answer.

1. Object. Some there are which are grown to such an height of Impudency, and
Blasphemous audacitie, that they fear not to produce, or rather to traduce,
that place of Psalm. 116. 13. (I will take the Cup of Salvation, or the Cup of
Health, and call upon the Name of the Lord.) As an express and punctual Text,
to justify, and warrant Healthes.

1. Answ. But I wonder much, from whence these Learned men did borrow this
shallow and strange Divinity. Sure I am, there is never a Father, (and I
think, no other Modern Commentator) that ever made such an Exposition of this
Text. Scholia. in Psalm. 115, and Hom. in Psalm. 115.
Basil, and Saint Chrysostom, would have this Cup of Salvation, to be nothing
else, but the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving: Heirome, Augustine,
Theodoret, and Prosper Aquitanicus, in their Commentaries, and Enarrations on
this Psalm, do take this Cup of Salvation, for Death, or So does Saluian. l.
2, de Guber. Dei, p. 120.
Martyrdom: or for the Blood of Jesus Christ, coupling it with the 15. verse,
Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints: and expounding
it by that of Matthew. 20. 22, 23. chap. 26. 39. 42. Ioh 18. 12. Are ye^ able to
Drink of the Cup that I shall Drink of? ye shall indeed Drink of my Cup:
The Cup which the Father has given me shall not Drink? Father if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: with which Exposition, Saint Lib. 5, in
Euang. Lucae, c. 6, v. 22, 23. De Fide lib. 5, c. 5. and Sermon. 18.
Ambrose, and De Gratia and Lib. Arbit. Tract. about the end.
Saint Bernard, do concur. Others take this Cup of Salvation, for the
Chrysostom Hom. in. Psalm. 115.
Cup in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, which is all one with the former:
but I never heard of any Divine, or Commentator hitherto, that did ever take
this Cup of Salvation, for a Profane, and Heathenish Health. If this then be
the Genuine, and true Exposition of this Scripture, which these Fathers have
given; let us see what argument or conclusion, may be drawn from it, to
prove the lawfulness of this Drinking Healthes: Surely all the argument will
be but this. A man may offer up the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to
the Lord: a man may take the Death and Passion of Jesus Christ, and so call
upon the Name of the Lord: a man may suffer Martydome for Christ, as Christ
has done for him: he may take the Cup of Salvation, even the Blood of Christ,
and call upon the Name of the Lord: therefore he may Drink an Health: a very
Hoe e^eni^ ignorantibus veritatem, Vt quiduis potius excogite^t, quam id
sentient quod ratio dep^scit. Lact. de Ira Dei. cap. 10.
Incongruous, and ridiculous, if not an Athesticall, and Blasphemous argument.
Indeed if Infidels and Pagans, who did usually drink the Healthes of their
Deuill-gods, in token of praise and thanksgiving to them, should produce this
Scripture to justify these their Healthes, it might yield them some color for
them, if their Gods were true: But for Christians to pervert and abuse this
sacred Text, of taking the Cup of Salvation, and calling upon the Name of the
Lord, to the invocation, or commemoration of any man's (but especially of a
Vicious, or Wicked persons) name in quaffing of his Health: I see not how they
can be well excused from Blasphemy, and gross Idolatry.

2. Object. Others there are of a more moderate temper, who object in defense
of Healthes. That they serve to honor Kings, Princes, Nobles^ Friends, and
such whose Healthes they Drink: therefore they are, and may be lawful.

2. Answer. To this I answer first: that we are to honor none but in that
way, and course which God himself has limmited and prescribed to us: but God
himself did never teach us, (no nor any of his Saints, or Children) to honor
men in Drinking of their Healthes: therefore we are no^ for to honor them in
this kind, or nature. If this reason which is objected could pass as current;
the Egyptians and Joseph, might justify Genesis 42. 15, 16.
their swearing by the life of Pharaoh: because they did it for his honor:
Yea, the Parasites, and flatterers of Alexander the Great, might by this means
justify and defend their Plutarch. Alexan. and de Adulat. and Amicitia Lib.
Quint. Curtius Lib. 8. Sect. 5.
adoration of him for a God: because it made for his greater honor, in their
esteem. Wherefore if we will honor Kings, and others, we must not do it in
Drinking and Quaffing off their Healthes, but in that course and way which God
himself prescribes unto us; even in giving them that outward reverence,
obedience, service, and respect, and that due, and just applause, which their
places, their worth, their virtues, and their graces do deserve.

Secondly, I answer: that God never appointed Drinking, for any other end, but
to ^ourish, and cherish men's bodies, and to refresh their spirits, by a
moderate, and sober use of the Creatures, and Liquors that we drink: to the
end, that we might be more cheerful, quick, and forwards in his service.
If therefore the Healthes we drink tend to no other end, but to honor Kings,
and Princes, and those whose Healthes we drink, as this objection does
pretend: they do but Hoc quide^ est Vinum perdere, non ^iber^. Obsopaeus de
Art Bibendi. lib. 2.
Pervert, and abuse the use and end of drinking: and so by consequence, abuse
Gods creatures, which is a great and capital sin. As therefore, Romans 3. 8.
we must not do Evil in any kind, that so good may come of it: so we must
not abuse our drinking, nor Gods good creatures in our Healthes: that so some
vain, and triuiall honor, may redound to others by it.

Thirdly, I answer: that the drinking, or pledging of men's Healthes, is so
far from being an honor, benefit, or advantage to them, as vain, and
ebrious persons do surmise; that it is the Sea Master Harris his Drunkards
Cup. p. 20, 28, 29. Mr. Boltens Directio^s For our comfortable walking with
God, p. 201. accordingly.
greatest indignity, and dishonor, the greatest hurt, and prejudice, that can
befall them; because it makes them the Patrons, occasions, and pretenses, of
other men's Drunkenness and excess: and so often times inuolues them not only
in the guilt, but likewise in the Temporal, and Eternal punishment of their
Sins. To expostulate, and argue this a little farther. Can it so much as ever
enter into any Christians thought, that the Drinking, or pledging of any man's
Health, should be a grace, or honor to him? Can it be any honor to a
Christian King, or Prince or Potentate, or any other person whatsoever, to be
honored with Gods, dishonor? To be honored with excessive roundes, and
drunken Healthes, wherein Gods creatures are abused, his Commandments
violated, his Name disgraced, his Image defaced, and the Souls of men (his
best and chiefest Creatures) even often times drowned and infatuated, and without
his infinite Grace, and Mercy, See loannes Frid. de Ritu. Bib. ad San. l. 2. c.
2, 3, 4.
for ever Damned, through excess? It is for the praise and honor of any
Christians, (especially of such as represent the person, and place of God on
earth) to be honored with the very See Argument 14.
Sacrifice and Drinke-offering of the Devil himself, the Author, and Owner of
these Hell^sh Healthes? to see whole troops of men Vino madidi acs^mno^enti
nescu^nt mente quid lingua proserat. Vnusquisque slertit and potat: dormit and
demicas. Et si quand^ resurrecturum fuerit, viri praeliatores slare vix
possunt, gressu vacilla^t, Rident seruuli dominorum ^pprobrium, manibus suis
pertant m^^^em bellatorem, imponunt equo. lt^aque ^u^ atque illu^ tanquam
nauigia sine gubernato refluctuant, and tanquam vulnere icti interram desluunt,
etc. Ambr. de Elia. and Ieiun. c. 13. See. Basil. de Ebriat. and Luxu. Ser. and
Puteani Comus.
lie groueling in the ground, and reeling up and down in every corner, to
vomit up their shame, or falling dead Drunk vndertheir Tables, like so many
Swine, not able for to speak, nor any ways to help themselves: whiles they
strive to gratify, please, and honor them, in carrouzing off their Healthes,
by Hac non sobrietatis est species, sed bibendi disciplina Ambr. Ib.
rule and measure, even beyond rule and measure, to Gods, dishonor, and their
own Eternal ruin? Can this be any credit, grace, or honor, to be honored
with the Drunkenness, the Excess, the Sin, and shame, of others? to be
honored, and delighted with Gods great dishonor, and with the ^ieri non
potest, quin tu dum super sanitate aliorum temulenttor bibis, super vita
saluteque tua pericliteris: and dum adulatoriam salutem venaris, mortem
intercipias: Joan. Fridiricus De Ritu Bibendi, ad San^ l. 1. c. 8.
Damnation, and ruin both of the Souls, and Bodies, of our dearest Friends,
and Kindred? of our Children, Servants, Associates, Inferi^urs, Subjects,
Equals, or Superiors, who honor and respect us most? which are often times
ruined, and always hazzarded, by these Excessive, Ebrious, Heathenish, and
superfluous Healthes? Doubtless, if there be any dishonor in the World that
can befall men, without all question this is it, to be thus honored with Gods
dishonor, and the loss and ruin of other men's Souls, which Healthes, often
times distroy. But admit, that this were no dishonor unto men (from the very
thoughts of which, God keep all Christians.) Yet questionless, there See
Chrysostom. Hom. 13. in 1. Cor. accordingly. Malus est, vel quem malus laudat,
vel quem bonus vituperat. Plutarch. de Vitioso pudore lib. Antisthenes cum a
malis laudaretur, Misere, inquit, metuo ne forte quippiam mali fecerim. Diog.
Laert. lib, 6. Antisthenes.
cannot be a greater Staeine, Blemish, nor Eclipse, unto the Honor, Dignity,
Worth, and Credit, of any Christian Prince, or Potentate: of any Christian
Maiestrate, Nobleman, Lord, General, Captain, Prelate, Master, Superior,
or the like: then for every Infamous, Beastly, Drunken, Swinish Sot; every
Deboist, Riotous, Profane, and dissolute Rorer, Ruffin, Gul-gallant, or
Pot-companion; every base and rascal Tapster, Peddler, Tinker, Cobbler, Hostler,
Seruing-man, Mechanicke, Clown, or Footboy, to thrust their Names, their
Healthes, and Dignities, into their Pots, and Cans, and to toss them off in
every cup; as ordinary, profane, and sordid things? What Christians, or
Wisemen are there in the World, that stand upon his honor, but would think
themselves much dishonored, and defamed, to be honored of Quid nobis prodest
si illi nos laudent, quibus placere peccatum est? quinon alios quam sibi
similes laudant? Quidue obest si vituperent hi, quorum non plus vituperatio
prodest, quam obest laudatio? Hierom. ad Oceanum. Epist. Tom. 9. p. 253.
such impudent, such base, such beastly, Swinish, and Drunken Sots as these? to
have their Dignities, Healthes, and Names thus banded, and tossed up and down
in every Cup, and Can, at every Ale-bench, at every Riotous meeting, or
Conuenticle of good-fellowship? What man of place, or credit, would not scorn
and disdain, to be made the Complement, the Ceremony, the Byword, the Song,
the Cup-seruice, or Pot-discourse of every Infamous, and beastly Drunkard: or
the Ornament, Crown, or Garland, of every cup, and Quasi aperto gu^gite vtnum
tam non ^ibitur, sed infunditur: poculum non libatur, sed exinanitur, Ambr. de
Elia and Ieiun. lib. c. 8. Mihi non p^culised profluii esse genus videtur, quod
in ora heminum tanquam per ^istulas ac canales ^tni funduntur Ib. c. 17.
large carrouse? What Christians would not disdain and scorn this, as the
very foulest blemish, and dishonor, that might, or could be befall them, to
have their Healthes, their Names, their place, and persons made, a common
prologue, or preludium, an ordinary Baud, or Pander, a usual inlet, way, or
passage unto Drunkenness and Excess? a common shooe-horne, bait, or engine
to force, or draw men on to drink beyond all measure? and a daily patronage,
plea, or Sanctuary, to justify, and bear out: or else, a frequent and iniust
Apology, or Excuse, to extenuate, salve, or mitigate, the Intemperance,
Drunkenness, Excess, and sin, of Infamous, base, and Swinish men: who
think they may lawfully and saffely drink till their Brains, their Wits,
their Tongues, their Eyes, their Feet, their Senses, and all their members
fail them, so long as they do but drink their Kings, their Queens, their
Lords, their Ladies, their Masters, their Mistress, their Friends, their
Maiestrates, their Captains, or Commanders Healthes: as if their very persons,
names, and place, were a sufficient dispensation, protection, plea, or
patronage, to justify and bear out (at least to mitigate and excuse) their
Drunkenness, and Excess, both against God and man? Can there be any honor,
or credit unto any, to be thus honored of every base, infamous, and beastly
Drunkard, of every Pot-companion, Hos homines an vtros vertus existimauerim?
Ambr. de Elia and Ieiun. c. 17.
Tun, or Hogs head? to be the daily phrase, complement, theme, or rhetoric
of every ebrious, and luxurious sot? the usual ceremony, crown or motto of
every bowl and cup,? the subject, foot, or prologue of every drunken round?
or the occasion, cause, and patronage of Drunkenness, and excess? This is the
sole, and only honor and credit that men gain unto themselves, or receive
from others in having their Healths, carro^zed and drunk off: and should not
this honor be, nay, is it not, their greatest infamy, disgrace, and shame?
undoubtedly it is. As the honor is exceeding small, nay, none at all; but the
dishonor very great, that comes to such, whose Healthes are frequent in the
mouths and cups of others; so likewise is the profit and advantage small, and
the loss and danger great, that redoundes unto them by these Healthes. Not to
mention the excessive Quid ^e delectant damna sine gratia? Ambr. de Elia and
Ieiun. c. 14.
thankelesse, and prodigal expense of men often times, in providing Wine and
Liquor for others, of purpose for to drink their Healthes: which though it be
but a Temporal disadvantage, in respect of charge: yet it will light heavy on
men's Souls at last, in regard of that prodigality, and excess which did
attend it, how ever men slight and disrespect it now. I will only touch upon
that great and fearful danger, which lights upon the Souls of all such men,
whose Healthes are rife and frequent, either in their own, or other men's cups,
and houses^ There is no man whose Health is drunk by others with his consent,
his priuitie, his approbation, or command (which is the case of many^) but is
S^ hoc commune omnibus non faciebant actus, commune omnibus faciebat assensus
Sal^. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p. 263
undoubtedly made a sharer and partaker of the Excess, the Sin, and
Drunkenness, and of all the dishonor that redoundes to God, by means of this
drinking, or pledging of his Health: all the evil that is occasioned, and
wrought in others by it, will be laid upon his Soul, and score at last: For
if 2 Ioh. 10. 11
he who bids but an Heretic God speed, be made a partaker of his evil
deeds: or if 1 Samuel 15. 9, 11, 19, 21, to 24.
Saul, by permitting the people to save Agag, and the best things, was deeply
engaged in that crime of theirs: or if Hab. 2, 15, 16.
he that puteth his Bottle to his neighbors mouth, or gives him drink to
make him Drunk, be made a partaker and sharer, both of the guilt, and
punishment of this his sin: then certainly, Iubet agi qui non prohibet
admitti. Salu. de Gub. Dei. lib 7. page 266 Facientis culpam proculdubio habet,
qui quod potest corrigere, negligit eme^dare Quialatum pandit delinquentibus
additum qui iungit cum prauitate consensum. Gratian Distinctio 86. Qui cum
possit malum non impedit, mali est actor potius quam qui id facit. Thucid. Hist
lib. 1. page 5. Qui semen praeb^it, is enatae segitis malorum est auctor.
Demosthenes Oration de Corona. Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, iubet. Seneca
Troas Act. 2.
must he become a sharer and partaker both of the guilt, and punishment of all
the Drunkenness and excess, that is occasioned in others, by drinking his
Health: who either wilfully makes, or willingly admits his Name, his Person, or
his Health, to be an occasion, cause, or patronage of Drunkenness and excess
in others, who drink, or pledge his Health. Alas, how many are there, who
daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly, drink themselves drunk, in drinking and
carrouzing down the Healthes of Kings and great ones, Esaias 3. 9. Genesis 18. 21.
Ier. 6. 15.
Proclaiming, and sounding out this sin of theirs in a more peremtorie, and
audacious manner, then ever Sodom did, even with Shoutings, Trumpets, Drumes,
or Hac instrumenta a sobri^ conuiuio sunt amandanda, quae magis bestiis quam
h^minibus conueniunt, and iis hominibus qui a ratton^ sunt alieniores. Clem.
Alex. Paedag. lib. 2. c. 4.
Cornets, that so all the World might take notice of it, and that it might cry
more loud, and strongly in the ears of God, for wrath and vengeance? O the
audacious, impudent, horrible, and fearful Drunkenness, that is continually
caused by these Healths, in every place and corner, (especially, in the
solemn, and sacred time of Christ's Nativity: who came of purpose to reclaim,
and call us from these excessive Healthes, to temperance and sobriety:) What
great one is there, who is able to stand under the weight and burden of that
excess, that sin and Drunkenness, which is procured, and caused by this
carrouzing^ and drinking of his Health, from time to time? Doubtless, if he
consent unto these Healthes, or give any conniuance, or tolleration to them, he
is inuolued in all the sin, that is occasioned, or wrought in any by them:
and so his case is miserable, and his danger great: Wherefore let Kings, and
Queens, and great ones, and all such persons, whose Healthes are now so dense
and rife among us: consider, what a base and infamous thing it is, and what a
disparagement, and blemish to their honor: to have their Names, their
Healthes, and Persons, made the very Devils Sacrifice, and Drinke-offering,
the phrase and language, the complement, and salute of every Swinish Drunkard:
the chief ingredient of every Can and Cup: the subject and discourse, the
ornament, and theme of every Drunken meeting: the occasion and means of
Drunkenness and excess: the patronage and protection of all intemperance, and
deboistnesse: and the ruin, and Damnation, of many a Christian Soul: And
withal, let them meditate and ponder in their hearts, what great dishonor,
these Healthes of theirs do bring in to God: how they abuse his creatures,
deface his Image, and violate his Laws: and what infinite and apparent danger
they bring, and pull down one their own poor Souls, if they give any
voluntary approbation, countenance, or conniuance to them, in intressing, and
ingageing them, both in the ghilt, and punishment of all the sins that are
occasioned, or produced by them, in all such persons who have a hand, a part,
or share in drinking them. And let this cause them in the Name, and fear of
God, even as they tender their own honor, and reputation with God and man,
and the Salvation, and welfare of their own Souls, (which are endangered by
these Healthes) to abandon all these Healthes for ever from their own lips, and
cups: and to exile, and banish them from their own Butteries, Sellars, Houses,
Courts, and Tables, (which are often times made the very Nurseries, Sanctuaries,
Shops, and Sinkes, of Healthes and Drunkenness, of vomit and excess,
especially, in the Christmas season; wherein some men think it a
disparagement, and dishonor to them, their guess should return temperate,
and Sober from their Houses: accounting it their Mensasua gloriam putant si ex
ea omnes vulnerati, acsancii tanquam de arena exeunt. Ambr. de Elia and Ieiun
c. 13.
glory to send them away Wounded, and Dead-drunke from their Tables, like so
many Vocatis vt amicos, and emittis vt inimicos: Rogas ad iucunditatem, cogis
ad mortein; inuitas ad prandium efferre vis ad sepulchrum Ambr. Ib. c. 14.
Swine, or Carcases of men, that were ready for the Grave: (a Barbarous,
Graceless, and Unchristian practice,) as if they took delight in mooning, and
dishonouring God, and in damming their own, and others Souls,) and carefully
to abolish, and suppress them in every part, and corner of the World, to the
utmost of their power, for fear they inuolue them in the sins of others, and
so prove the ruin of their Souls at last. And let this likewise inform, and
teach all such, who think they honor and do good to Kings, and others, by
drinking, and taking of their Healthes, (imagening, that it is a breach of
Alleagance, Homage, Fealty, Service, Duty, and Respect unto them, for any to
refuse their Healthes:) to reform their judgments, and practice for the
future, and to abandon, and renounce their Healthes: because they cannot more
defame, dishonor, nor deface them in their Names and Credits, nor Nullus tam
grauem iniuriam sanctis hominibus agnoscitur irrogare, quam qu^ in eorum
nominibus bibendo, per ebrietatem animas suas probantur occidere. August de
Temp. Ser. 232
more prejudice, hurt, or worng them in their Souls, then by carrouzing, and
quaffing off Healthes unto them; in as much as they make their names, their
dignities, and persons, a very Bacchus, or Deuillgod; or an occasion, stallion,
ground, or patronage of all licentiousness and Drunkenness, prostituting them
as so many Baudes, and Pandars, to their own Swinish, and excessive lusts: and
using them as so many Rams, and warlike Engines, to force, assail, and batter
down the consciences, and temperance, of Grave, of Sober, and Religious men,
(who are often times drawn and forced to excess, by the Imperious and
Commanding Healthes of great ones, against their wills, and Consciences, to the
scandal of Religion, the encouragement of Drunkards, and Gods great dishonor;
whereas no other policy, or wile, could move or force them to excess:) and
by wrapping them in the guilt, and punishment, both of their own, and others
sins, whiles they intend their honor, good, and welfare. Alas, how can any
officious Healther, Dr. Halles Quo vadis: Sect. 21.
Who has learned by his ceremonious quaffing, to make of himself a beast,
whiles he makes a god of others:) So much as ever think, that God should
bless, and honor those whose Healthes he drinks? yea how can he but
conclude that God will certainly disgrace, and curse them for his sake, since
he dishonours God, and wrongs his Soul, for their sakes? God has promised 1 Samuel 2. 3c.
to honor none, but those who honor him; and to bless and prosper none, but
such as love, obey, and fear him, and turn from all their sins: and can God
then honor, bless, and prosper those for Drunkards sakes, the very echo, of
whose drunken and excessive Healthes do daily Genesis 18. 20. 21. and 19. 13.
Hosea 4. 2, 3, 11, etc.
cry for Wrath and Vengeance on them in the ears of God? Alas, what ever
deboist and graceless men may think, yet certainly, if we will weigh things
with the balance of the Sanctuary: there is not a man whose Health is
frequently drunk among us, with the intemperance and excess of others, us
most Healthes are; but may See Hab. 2, 15, 16. lob 20. 23. Deuteronomy. 28. 20, 21,
22. and 19. 60, 61.
justly fear, that God will rain down showers of Sickenesses, Crosses,
Judgments, and Diseases on him, to his Temporal, and Eternal ruin, for
these very Healthes of his, which do so much dishonor and provoke the Lord,
and hurt the Souls of many others: yea, there is never a one that drinks his
Kings, his Queens, his Lords, his Masters, his Friends, his Captains Health,
or the Health of any other to his own distemper, and excess: but has cause
to fear, that God will See losh. 7, 5, to 26. Jonah 1, 3, to 15. 2 Samuel 24.
10, to 18. And many other examples of this nature, where the sins of one man
has drawn Gods judgments upon others.
curse and Plague them for this sin of his, which was occasioned, and
committed for their sakes. Wherefore, let us no longer deceive our selves, with
this false and vain surmise: that our Healthes do honor, or do good to
others: you see by all these premises that it is nothing so: this then should
cause all sorts of men (especially those of best and greatest note, whose
examples draw on others to Healthes and Drunkenness) to abandon, and cast off
Healthes for ever, with speed and resolution.

3. Object. The third and best objection, and pretense for the lawfulness of
Drinking Healthes, is this: That the drinking of an health, is no more then the
ordinary remembrance, of, or the Drinking to an absent Friend: now it is usual
and lawful, to drink to an absent friend: and therefore by the self same
reason, to drink an Health.

3. Answ. To this I answer, that the Mayor is false: for there is a vast and
large difference, between the drinking of an Health, and the ordinary manner
of our Drinking to some absent Friend. First, they differ in this: that men in
their ordinary Drinking, remember none for the most part but their Friends and
equals, to whom they have some engagements, and that only to put themselves
in mind of them, and to express their loves unto them: but in Drinking
Healthes, men commonly remember their Superiors, or at least their Friends
and equals, with an intent to grace them, or to do some good unto them: as if
the Drinking of their Healthes Ebrietatem sacrisicium putant. Ambr. De Elia and
Ieiun. cap. 17. Joan. Frid. de Ritu. Bib. ad San. l. 1. c. 8. 12. p. 67. 68.
104.
did them some real good: as if it did procure, or preserve his Health: the
former of which is commendable, but the latter not. Secondly, they differ in
this: that when as men remember their absent Friends in Drinking to them, they
do it only out of courtesy: but they drink and pledge men's Healthes in
nature of a duty, as if they were engaged for to do it, and and could not
well omit it. Thirdly, they vary in this: those who drink to their absent
Friends, do seldom, or never make the remembrance of these Friends, a
ground or cause, but only a consequent, or concomitant of their Drinking: they
drink not because they would remember their Friends, but because they are
thirsty, making their thirst, not their Friends, the occasion of their
Drinking: But in Drinking, or pledging of Healthes; men make not their Healthes
a consequent, or concomitant of their thirst, but their thirst, and Drinking a
consequent, or adiunct of their Healthes: Sapientes bibunt, vt ne bibant:
nebulones bibunt, vt^ bibant. Iul. Scalig. de Subtle. Exercit. 131 Sect. 4.
They neither begin nor pledge these Healthes, because they are thirsty, but
they only force and feign themselves to be thirsty, because they would begin
and pledge these Healthes: their thirst is not the ground or cause of their
Healthes, but their Healthes of their thirst: The remembrance therefore of
Friends is lawful, but this Healthing is not, because it does even force a
voluntary, and wilful thirst upon men, and so an excess, and abuse of Gods
good creatures, which cannot but be evil. Fourthly, those who drink to absent
Friends, or Kindred, as they always drink only to one, and not to all the
company, so they put no law nor necessity of pledging on those to whom they
drink, but they always leave them at their liberty to pledge them, when, and
what, and how they will themselves. But those who begin and Health, do put a
Basil de Ebriet. et Luxu: Sermo. Ambr. de Elia and leiun. c. 11 to 18. August.
de Temp. ser, 231. 232.
kind of Law, necessity and force of pledging; not only on those to whom
they drink, but likewise on all the company there present, and they do in a
manner engage, confine, and limit them to pledge them, in the same matter,
manner, form and time as they begin it; measuring other men's pallates,
bellies, thirst, and dispositions by their own, and forcing them to drink often
times against their wills and stomachs, when as they are not thirsty:
therefore, this drinking of Healthes must needs be evil, though the other
be not so. Fifthly, in our ordinary Drinking to absent Friends, there are no
such idle vain, scrupulous, and superstitious ceremonies, rites, or rules
observed as there are in Healthes: wherein our most serious and sacred gestures
are abused so; and in our Drinking, which is natural, is made but artificial:
our Healthes therefore are unlawful, though our ordinary Drinking to our
Friends, be not unlawful. Sixthly, and lastly, our Nos qui sumus genus
pacificum, ad vsum, non ad petulantiam and contumeliam conuiuantes, sobriis
haustibus amicitiae ergo bibimus, vt vere and co^uenienti nomine appellentur,
pocula amicitia. Cle^. Alex. Paedag. I. 2. c. 2.
ordinary Drinking to absent, or present Friends, is seldom, or never an
occasion of Drunkenness, or Excess, where it is lawfully used: it never
breeds any Duells, Quarrels, Murders, Stabbes, Murmurings, Raylings,
Debates, or Discontents, or any such dangerous, or bitter fruits, as the
Drinking of Healthes does: because it never ingageth men to pledge the parties
so remembered: besides it gives no scandal, nor offense to any: it confirms
none in their Drunkenness, or in the excess of Healthing: it brings no
Slanders, no Censures, nor reproaches upon any, as Healthes, for the most part
do: yea it had not its rise and pedigree from Devils, Pagans, and Idolatry,
as Health-drinking had: Wherefore though our ordinary and common (not our
excessive, or irregular) Drinking to absent Friends be lawful and
commendable, yet the Drinking or pledging of Healthes, which differs so far
from it in all these respects, cannot be so.

From these Iustifications, and Apologies which men make in defense of
Healthes, I will now descend to those extenuations, and excuses that are
pleaded for them, which are incident to two sorts of men: 1. To such as begin
Healthes. 2. To such as pledge them.


Those who begin these Healthes, have there excuses, or causions: 1. That they
intend no harm, Excuses for the beginning of Healthes answered.
nor evil in beginning Healthes. 2. That their Healthes are but very small. 3.
That they force none for to pledge them.


For the first of these: That they intend no harm, nor evil in beginning
Healthes. I answer first, that they can intend no good at all: for what good
can men intend to God, themselves, or others in beginning Healthes? Verily,
none that I can dream of. If then they intend no good at all: they must needs
intend either nothing at all, or some thing that is evil: because Hookers
Ecclesiastical Policy l. 2. c. 8 See Mr. Bolton in his Walking with God. p.
1. 86. 187.
in Morrall actions there is no medium: If they intend nothing at all; then as
their Healthing is unreasonable and unnatural, so it must needs be evil,
because it is vain and idle, and has no end at all; and because for every
idle action that men shall do, they shall give an account at the day of
Judgment, as Math. 12. 36. 37.
Well as for every idle word, which they shall speak: If they intend any thing
that is evil, (as men for the most part do, because they begin their Healthes
to draw on others to Drunkenness and excess, or to carnal Mirth and
Iollitie) then their intent must needs be evil: and so the excuse is false,
and idle. Secondly, I answer: that what ever they pretend to color this their
Healthing, yet their intent is evil: for as there is no necessary, no lawful,
nor commendable occasion, end, or motive, to provoke, or stir them up to
begin an Health, so their intent and end in beginning it, must needs be evil:
For it is certain, that every one See Aug. de Tempore Sermon. 231. 232. Ambros.
de Elia et leiun. c. 11. to 18. Basil. De Ebrietate and L^xu. Sermon. Council.
Lateran. sub Innocentio. 3 c. 15. loan. Frid. de Ritu. Bib. ad San. lib. 1 and
2. accordingly
who begins an Health, does intend to engage all others that are present, to
drink and pledge it in the very selfsame Liquor, quantity, and ceremony,
and to the selfsame persons as he himself began it: be they thirsty, or
not thirsty, willing, or unwilling, able, or unable, for to plodge it: this is
every man's end that begins an Health, and therefore he expects, and looks
precisely that every man should pledge it. Now this intent to draw on others to
drink in method, order, course, and ceremony, in art and measure, be they
willing, or unwilling, able, or unable, thirsty, or not thirsty, must needs
be evil: because it is an allurement, and provocation to excess: therefore
the intent of those who begin these Healthes, must needs be evil. Lastly, I
answer: that most men who are given to begin these Healthes, do purposely
begin them to draw on others to Drunkenness and excess, and to ingurgitate,
and quaffe down more then else they would, or should do: they use these
Healthes, but as so many Sigismundus Baro de rebus Moscouitis. Joan. Frid. de
Ritu. Bib. ad San. lib. 1. c. 5. 6, 7. Polyd. Virg. de Invent. rerum: lib. 3.
c. 5. accordingly.
baits, occasions, and pretenses, to allure, and provoke their Guess, their
Friends, and Consorts, to the very Act and Sin of Drunkenness, and to no
other purpose: this their own Hearts, and Consciences, can testify unto them
in the sight of God: therefore their intents must needs be sinful, what ever
they pretend: and so this evasion will not help them, especially, when as they
are to plead with God himself, who knows their hearts and thoughts, far
better then themselves.

To the second excuse: That the Healthes which they begin, are very small: I
answer first: That the smalnesse of the Cup, or Glass, is commonly made up
with the strength and vigor of the Wine, or Liquor: so that these small
Healthes, will sooner intoxicate, and inebriate men, then greater Healthes, in
cheaper, or smaller Liquor: the less the Healthes are, the more strong the
Wine: and therefore the worser. Secondly, where the Healthes are small and
little, in quantity, and measure, they are commonly, the Primum vno, gemino
mox calice, inde tribus, Pocula siccantur. Obsopaeus de Art Bib. l. 2.
more in number: the less the Healthes, the more dense and frequent are they:
so that the littleness of the Healthes, is made up and recompensed with the
multitude, and number of them, (one small and little Health beginning, and
always drawing on another:) so that if all these little Healthes were put
together, they would seem exceeding great. Thirdly, though the Healthes that
are begun at first are small, yet they Cito ad m^iora progreditur, qui paru^
non formidat. Hier. To^. 1. Epist. 14. cap. 1.
always draw on great ones at the last: little Healthes, as well as greater
wedges, make way for great ones: this the Sea Basil. de Ebrietate Ser. Ambr. de
Elia and Ieiun. c. 11. Aug. de Temp. Sermo. 231. 232. accordingly.
Fathers, and experience testify: therefore, the littleness of them is no
excuse. Fourthly, the Drinking and beginning of small Healthes, does either
draw on others to begin Solent minima paulatim despecta in malum magnum
tra^ere. Council. Maticonense 2. Can. 12.
greater or else confirm them in the use of greater: he that beholds a good,
or great man Drinking a small, or little Health, will presently conclude, that
he may drink a great one: so that the example and president of drinking small
Healthes, is as pernicious, and hurtful, as the beginning, or Drinking of
greater Healthes. Fif^ly, the Healthes that most men do begin (as experience
can testify) are often times very great: if their first Healthes are not so, yet
their last Healthes are, which make amends, and recompense for all the rest.
Sixthly, admit, that the Healthes which you begin were small and few, yet since
you have no occasion, no necessary, or lawful cause at all, to move you to
them: since they are scandalous, offensive, and misbeseeming Christians, and
confirm others in their excessive Healths; were it not far better, and less
offensive, to begin no Healthes at all, then to begin or pledge these small
ones? there is, there can be, no hurt nor inconvenience at all, in abstaining
from the smallest Healthes: there may be, nay, there is much hurt in using
them, both in respect of others, and such as do begin them: better therefore
is it to abandon all these Healthes, then to admit, approve, or use the
smallest of them. Lastly, if Healthes be sinful and unlawful, it matters not
whether the Healthes we do begin, be great, or small: both of them are
sinful, odious, and damnable, in the sight of God, and will plunge the Souls
of those who use them, deep in Hell, with out redemption, unless they shun
them, and repent them of them. Wherefore the exiguitie, or smalnesse of these
Healthes, is no excuse, it is no Apology, no Plea at all in the Court of
Heaven, or at the Bar of Gods Tribunal, (to which all Healthers shall be
summoned ere be long:) the least Healthes, if they are sinful, damn men's
Souls, as well as the greatest: therefore, we must avoid them both alike.

To the third excuse: That they force none for to pledge them: I answer first,
that the very beginning of an Health, is a kind of inforcement, and engagement
unto others for to pledge it: and most men take it to be so; because long
custom, and the pra^itie, and wickedness of men, has made it a kind of
Affront, Indignity, Discourtesie, and Wrong, both to him that begins the
Health, to those that second it, and to the person that is remembered in it, to
refuse, or pass it by, and not to pledge it: as Saint Ambrose, Heirome,
Augustine, Baro, John Frederick, and Guagninus, testify in their fore-quoted
Testimonies, and as our own experience cannot but witness. Secondly, though
some are so Wise, Discreet, and Civil, as not to force men for to drink, or
to pledge them against their wills, yet See Vincentius Obsopeus de Art Biben.
di. lib. 3.
many, nay, most that use these Healthes Will do it. Hence, was that common
speech among the Graeciau Drunkardes: Cic. Tuse. Quast. lib. 5.
Ant bibat, aut abeat: Let him drink, or else be packing: Hence, is that
Complement, or Challeng rather, among the Healthers, in the Guagninus Rer.
Polo^. To^. 2. p. 68. Cromerus de Polonia lib. 1. Solomon Neugebauerus de
Polonia l. 1.
Dukedom of Massouia: Aut mihi praebibe, aut mecum armis decertato: Either
Drink to me, or Fight with me: Which is the cause of many Duells. Hence, grow
those many Domitius libertum suum occidis quod potare quantum iubebatur
recusarat. Suetonius Nero cap. 5.
Murders, Stabbes, De ebrietate ad arma consurgunt; calicibus tela succedunt.
Provino sanguis offunditur, and apsum sangu^^em vina fuderunt. Ambr. de Elia
and leiun. lib. c. 12. See 4 Iacobi cap. 5.
Wounds, Quarrels, Fightings, Contentions, and Debates, which we usually
hear of, both at home and abroad; even from this forcing of Healthes: Hence it
is, that many among us (especially, our Seruing-men, our Roring-boyes, and
those of the ruder, and baser sort) are more hot, more zealous, more stout,
and resolute in the defense, the quarrel, and maintenance of an Health, then
in the defense, the cause and quarrel of their Country, or of the chiefest
Article of their Creed: hence it is, that they are more moved, and affected,
that they are more impatient, and angry with men for refusing, or crossing them
in their Healthes, then for hindering them in Gods service, or thwarting them in
their greatest good; as the Hic si quis calicem conuertat, vrgetur ad potum: si
manum reuocat a vine, ori eius infun^ ditur. Ib. c. 13.
pouring of Wine into the refusers mouth, or the throwing of it into his face,
or their Data vina recusa^ Incutiet capits pocula spreta tue. Obsopaeus de Art
Bib. l. 3. See Argument 9.
dashing of the cup against his head, do sufficiently testify: Yea, I may
boldly say, that most of our common Health-drinkers, would hate men more for
refusing, and renouncing of their Healthes, then for abiuring of their Faith,
their God, or their Religion: Yea, they would rather adventure their blood in
the Field, upon the refusal of an health, then for the mainest Article, or
ground of Faith: Most healthers therefore, cannot truly say, they force no
healthes, because their very practice proves the contrary. Thirdly, though
some are so ingenuous, as not to offer any open force or violence to any, to
force them for to pledge their healthes; yet they will entreat, and persuade
them by all the Art, and Rhetoric that they can use, to pledge and second
them in their healthes; and if they still refuse them, they are always apt to
think the worser of them, to censure them secretly in their thoughts, and to
bear them a secret spleen, and grudge within their hearts, if not, to
slander, and revile them with their tongues. Now these entreaties, and
persuasions (especially of Regum praecessunt imperia Amer. Vesput. Nauigatio,
3. Proaemio.
Kings, of Nobles, of Prelates, Maiestrates, or Superiors; of Friends, of
Kindred, of those who are the Masters of the Feast, of such who can do us
good, or hurt in our estates, or of such whose love and good esteem we are
loath to lose) are as so many injunctions, enforcements, and commands:
Wherefore this objection is but false. Lastly, if you intend to force none for
to drink, or pledge you, why then do you begin these healthes? why do you
not wholly exterminate, and banish them from their Tables, since they carry a
kind of force, command and threatening with them? if then you will force none
for to drink against their wills, then banish and disclaim these Healthes, to
which long custom, and the common usage, have added a kind of compulsorie
necessity, and binding law to pledge them, else you cannot but be guilty in
the sight of God, of forcing, and inuiting men to drink against their wills.

These former pretenses, Excuses for pledging of Healthes answered.
and excuses of those who begin these Healthes to others, being thus cleared
and answered: I come now to answer those pretenses, extenuations, and excuses,
which men allege for pledging Healthes; which are far more tolerable, then
those for Drinking, and beginning Healths: because there are some colorable
pretenses, and engagements for to pledge an Health, that is once begun, though
there be no color, nor ground at all to begin an Health.

The first excuse, and pretense for pledging Healthes, is this: That it is an
ordinary, and common Inter causes malorum nostrorum est, quod viutmus ad
exempla: nec ratione co^ponimur, sed consuetudin^ abducimur. Quod si pauci
facerent, nollemus imitari: cum plures faecere ceperint; quasi honestius sit,
quia freqe^tius, sequimur, and recti apud nos locum tenet error, vbi publicus
factus est. Seneca Epist. 123.
custom, for to pledge an Health: and there are few who do refuse it:
therefore, since most men, (nay, great men, and learned men) drink, and pledge
these Healthes, we may lawfully, and safely do it, as well as they.

To this I answer; first, that Christians must live by Precepts, not by
Examples: they must not so much regard what others do, as what themselves are
commanded, and enjoined for to do: the Psalm. 119. 9. Gal. 6. 16. Ioh. 5. 39. 2
Pet. 1. 19.
Word of God must be their Rule, and Square, not the Lives, and Actions of
other men; who Phil. 3. 18. 19. 1 John 5. 19. Psalm. 14. 1, 23. Romans 3. 9, 11.
12.
Walk for the most part, contrary to Gods Words in all things: If then, thou
have no ground, nor warrant in the Scriptures for to pledge these Healthes; but
rather to abhor them, as the Vanities, and Customs of the World; and as the
Rites, and Ceremonies of Insidels, and Pagans, which beseem not Christians;
thou Neque enim si criminum socium inueneris a culpa liberaberis; hoc vnum
itaque specta vt te a eriminibus exuas. Chrysostom. hom. 26 in 1 Cor. 12.
art not for to pledge them, though all the World besides should do it.
Secondly, I answer; that We must not always look what the worst, and most
of men do usually practice; Non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos
faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christus, prior fecerit. Neque
hominis co^suetudinem sequi oportet sed Dei veritate^. Cypr. Epist. l. 2.
Epist. 3.
but what Christ himself by his own example, has taught us for to do: Now
Christ himself, did never teach us either by his Precept, or his Practice,
(nor yet by any of his Prophets, or Apostles, nor any of his Saints in former
times) to drink, or pledge these Healthes: therefore, we must not pledge, nor
drink them, unless, we will digress, and stray from Christ, who is our
Pattern, and our Guide. Thirdly, we must Exodus 23, 2.
not follow a multitude, to do evil: we must not run with the most, and
worst, Math. 7, 13.
who always trace the broad, and ready way to Hell: but we, must always
observe what the best, and holiest, of Gods Saints, and Children do:
imitating, and following them, as far as they do imitate, and follow Christ:
Now, though the most, the worst, and greatest part of men, Peccantium multitudo
non par^s errors patrocinium. Hierom. Epist, 66. Ruffino. Tom. 2 p. 231.
Whose multitude, can yield no patronage to any evil,) approve, and pledge
these Healthes; yet the best, and holiest of Gods Saints, do utterly refuse,
and reject them, unless it be, when as they are overcome, of too much
pusillanimitie, and slavish fear: therefore, we must imitate and follow them,
though they are the smaller number, and not the most, and worst. Fourthly, we
must not so much consider, nor examine what men's ways, and actions, as what
their judgments, and the Testimonies of their Consciences are; because men's
Actions, do often times vary from their Judgments, and Consciences; Witness,
the ordinary Practice, and Lives of many, who live in gross, and known
sins, against their Judgments, and their Consciences. Now most of those who
drink, or pledge these Healthes (especially, such who have any grace, or
ciuility in them) do secretly condemn them in their Judgments: their Hearts,
and Consciences, do secretly distaste them, and they do even condemn, and
judge themselves, when as they drink, or pledge them: Wherefore, we should
here abondon, and disclaim the very drinking, and pledging of these healths,
because the Judgments, and Consciences of those that pledge them, do often
times check them, and condemn them for it. Lastly, I would demand, but this
question of those who make this Plea: Whether they are persuaded in their
Hearts, their Souls, and Consciences, that those who drink, and pledge these
Healthes, do well, or no? If their own Hearts, upon good deliberation,
examination, and advise, shall testify, that they do but honestly and
Christianly in it, when as not only the Fathers, and Saints in former ages,
but even the very Pagans, did condemn them: they may have then some ground and
color for to imitate them: but if their own Hearts, and Souls, shall
secretly upon full deliberation condemn, and tax them for it, as I make no
question but they will do: then let them never imitate that, which their own
Hearts, and Consciences do condemn in others: for fear lest Romans 14. 22.
they condemn themselves in the things which they allow.

The second excuse and pretense for pledging Healthes, is this. That it is an
uncivil, unmannerly, discourteous, and injurious part, both to the author, and
owner of the Health, not to pledge it: therefore I know not how I may well
refuse it.

To this I answer first; that if there be any discourtesie, or unmannerliness
in refusing of an Health, it lies on his part, that would allure, or force thee
to it, against thy stomach, or thy conscience, and not on thine who do
refuse it. It is an injurious, and discon^teous part, to persuade, or force
another, to any vnteasonable, sinful, hurtful, or unlawful thing: but it is
Nequaquam nos facere improbos improkitas alien. ^ debet: quia quo^libet hominum
magis sibi praestare conuenit vt sit honus, quam alteri vt sit malus: and plus
id laborandum est vt placeamus Deo per honestatem quam hominibus per
impuritatem Salu. de Gub. Dei. lib. 7. page 236.
no discourteous, nor unkind part, to give the denial, or refusal in this
case: for else a man might be forced, and drawn to the very foulest sins,
and greatest inconveniences, to avoid discourtesies. Now Healthes as I have
proved, are unreasonable, hurtful, sinful, and unlawful things, which often
times go against men's Natures, Judgments, Hearts, and Consciences, which do
secretly abhor, and utterly condemn them. Wherefore it is See Plutarc. de
San. tuendae. accordingly.
no uncivil, unmannerly, discourteous, nor injurious part, for to withstand
them, in a discreet, and modest manner: as Calisthenes the Philosopher did:
Athenaeus Dipnos l. 10. c. 11. Plutarch. de Ira Cohibe^da. Dialog. Plutarch. de
Sanitate tuenda lib.
Who being demanded of Alexander the great, why he would not pledge him:
returned him this answer: I do not desire O Alexander, to stand in need of
Aesculapius by my Drinking: or as a young Christian Studient did: Joan. Frid.
de Ritu. Bib. ad San. l. 1. c. 10. l. 2 c. 6.
Who being entreated by a certain Prince to drink more liberally, then he
ought to do; gave him this answer: I crave pardon in this most gracious
Prince: I differ but little from a beast already^ and will your Grace enforce
me to become a beast indeed? To give such a modest, cleanely, and discreet
denial as this; or to answer so, as a grave, and worthy Statesman of our
Kingdom did: The Lord Bacons Apothegmes.
That be would pray for the Kings Health, but drink for his own: is no
uncivil, barbarous unmannerly, nor discourtious part: yea, it is a beastly,
and unnatural part, not to do it: Since Chrysostom. Hom. Hom. 55. et 57. ad Pop.
Antioch. August. de Temp. Ser. 231
Horses, Oxen, and Brutish creatures have so much reason and good manners in
them, as to refuse to drink more then they need. Secondly, admit, that
Ca^nall, Ignorant, and Graceless men should deem it an uncivil, rude,
discourteous, and injurious part, to withstand and Health, as commonly they
do: yet is it not better for thee, to be unmannerly, Pietatis genus est,
impiu^ esse pro Domino. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 23.
discourteous, and injurious toward men, then unto God himself? Certainly,
it is no unmannerly, humerous, precise, discourteous, nor unseemly part, Acts
4. 19.
to obey and please God, rather then men. If thou carrouze, or pledge these
Healthes, thou may chance to honor, please, and gratify men, but thou shall
be Nulli dubiu^ est, eos Christo seruire non posse; qui hominibus potius
optant, quam Christo placere: Contenti ergo interim sumus hominibus duplicere,
tantum vt Christ's placeamus. Hier. ad Oceanum. ^ Ep. To^. 9. p. 253
sure to offend, dishonor, and displease the Lord: better therefore is it, to
be unmannerly, and injurious toward men, then toward God himself. Thirdly,
it is far better for thee to incur the ignorant, rash, scandalous, false
and iniudicious censure of others, in refusing Healthes, then to encourage
animate, or confirm them in the abuse, and practice of these Healthes, through
thine ill example: thy refusal of Healthes, upon good grounds and reasons, may
be a means to work some good on others, and to reclaim them from this
Idolatrous, Heathenish, and Sinful practice; which will be the greatest
courtesy, and kindness, that thou can do unto their Souls: Whereas thy
ill example in pledging them, will prove a great discourtesie, wrong, and
damage to them, in hardening, and heartning them in this Abominable, and
Sinful Ceremony: Wherefore it is no discourteous, uncivil, nor injurious
part, to refuse these Healthes, as this carnal, vain, and false deceit,
objection, and delusion does pretend. Lastly it is no breach of Allegiance, no
point of discourtesie, or disrespect to any, for to refuse their Healthes:
because there is no Law of God, of Man, or Nature, that inioynes them. God, and
Christian amity, command us only 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2. 3.
to Pray for, it is the Sea Argument 14.
Devil only, and his Ministers, that prescribes us, for to drink the
Healthes of men: which often times Damn their Souls. It is therefore, the
greatest courtesy, that we can do to any, to refuse their Healthes, because
the pledging of them with their assent, or approbation, does surely hurt, if
not condemn their Souls.

The third objection, and excuse for pledging Healthes, is this: I was
commanded, forced, and entreated, by some friend, or great one, for to pledge
these Healthes; and I had incurred much wrong, and violence, much hatred and
Mala hine oriu^tur omnia quod non Deum sed homines reueremur. Chrysostom, Ho^.
12. in 1 Cor. 4.
displeasure, had I but once withstood them.

To this, I answer first; That there is no Good, no Gracious, nor Holy man, in
all the World, that dares to force thee for to pledge him: and as for wicked,
and ungodly men: if thou would but with Modesty, Wisdom, Courage, and
Discretion, stand it out, they would not be so hardy, as to force thee for to
pledge them, what words so ever they give out; because the Image of God, and
practical power of Grace, which shines forth in thee, being backed, and
seconded by God himself, would even terrify, and Mark. 6. 21. John 18. 5. 6.
Acts 6. 10. 15.
daunt their Hearts. Wherefore, to say that these would force thee for to
pledge them, before thou have put it to the trial, is but a vain excuse, and
mere pretense, to shroud thy cowardice, or excess in Drinking; which will not
avail thee in the day of Judgment. Secondly, admit, thou were put to this
extremity, that thou must drink excessiuely against thy stomach, or thy
conscience, or else, thou must die for it. I answer with Saint Augustine, in
the self same case: Melius er^^^ vt caro tua sobria occideretur, qua^ vt anima
tua per ebrietate^ m^reretur. De Temp. Sermon. 231. 232.
that it were far better for thee, that thy Temperate flesh should be slain,
then that thy Soul should die of Drunkenness: better were it for thee, Omni
necessitate mayor necessitas est salutis, Ambr. Sermon. 62.
since the necessity of Salvation, is the greatest necessity of all others:
to die of the menacing, and injurious Sword, which can but kill the body: then
of this mortal, and Soule-slaying sin, which kills both Soul, and Body too,
without repentance, and that for ever. Thirdly, though thou have men to menace
thee for refusing Healthes, yet thou have God himself to stand by thee, and
encourage thee; If thou do it out of Love, Obedience, and Conscience unto God;
he will protect, and shelter thee from all the evil, and danger, that can
befall thee, for his sake, or turn it to thy greater good, and glory: Acts 4.
19.
Better therefore is it for thee, to depend on God, in Fearing, Pleasing, and
Obeying him: then to Distrust, Offend, or Disobey him, for Fear, or Love of
men. If thou incur the displeasure, or wrath of men in refusing Healthes, yet
thou shall win the Grace, the Love, the Favor, and the Praise of God, which
are far better. Fourthly, if this excuse would serve the turn, then a man
might run into any sin, under pretense, and color, that he was forced to
it, which would wholly euacuate, and make void the Law of God, and man: this
therefore, we must know, that we must rather Luke 14, 26 Math. 16. 25.
part with our lives, then commit the least offense, or sin against the Lord,
for to preserve them: else we are none of Christ's Disciples: Wherefore, we
cannot plead necessity, or compulsion, in excuse of any sin, because Nulla
est necessitas delinquendi, quibus vna est necessitas non delinquendi. Tertul.
De Corona Mil^tis. cap. 11.
Christians have but this one necessity put upon them; not to sin. Lastly,
admit, that thou art persuaded to drink, and pledge these Healthes, by those
to whom thou have most engagements, yet this is no excuse, nor color for thee
in the sight of God, because Gal. 1. 10. 1 Cor. 7. 23. 1 Pet. 4. 2. 3^ 5.
Christians must not be men pleasers: they must not live to the lusts, and
wills of men, but to the will of God: Genesis 3. 12. (...) 17.
Eve was persuaded by the Serpent, to eat of the forbidden fruit, and Adam by
Eve; yet that would not justify them in the Court of Heaven. 1 King. 11.
Solomon was drawn away after strange Gods, by the allurements, and
persuasions of his Idolatrous, and out^landish wives: yet this would not excuse
him to the Lord. Persuasions, and entreaties of our dearest friends (who often
times, do but act the Math. 16. 22 23. Genesis 3. 6. 14. Act. 21. 12. 13.
Devils part in carnal Counsels, and advice, when as we vainly think, they
act their own,) will never mitigate, In this case of pledging Healthes to
pleasure friends, I may truly say: Grandis in suos pietas, impietas in Deum
est. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 25. c. 6.
nor salve our sins, nor yet the pledging of these Healths, when as we shall
come to answer for them before the Judgment Seat of Jesus Christ, (as we
shall be sure to do, ere long:) Wherefore, let neither threatenings, nor
entreaties, henceforth move thee, to pledge, or second Healths, because they
cannot justify, excuse, nor bear thee out in the day of Judgment.

The last pretense, or colorable excuse, or allegation, which men produce, or
make for pledging Healthes, is this. That it is but a slight, and triuiall
matter, for to pledge an Health: it is but a kind of preciseness, and it
savors of a Puritanical^ and factious humor to refuse it: whence, those who
make a Conscience, and scruple of it, are commonly derided, scorned, censured,
and condemned, as humorous, precise, and factious persons: as men more
scrupilous, then wise. Wherefore, to avoid all inconveniences of this nature:
it is the best, the wisest, and the safest course, to make no bones of pledging
Healthes.

To this, I answer; That I have already manifested this Drinking and pledging
of Healthes, to be a Sinful, and Unlawful thing, by conuincing Arguments,
Reasons, and Authorities: If any man can solue these Reasons, and Answer these
Authorities^ so far as to persuade, and fully satisfy his own Heart, and
Conscience in the sight of God: that Healthes are lawful in themselves, and
that he may safely use them: then let him drink, and pledge them at his
pleasure, I will not once restrain him. But if his Conscience, Heart, and
Judgment, upon due deliberation, and advice, shall once persuade him, or
inform him; that Healthes are Sinful, and Unlawful, either in their use, or
in themselves: I answer then, that though the Drinking, or pledging of
Healthes, does seem but Hoc parum non est parum: imo vero est fere totum:
cito enim neglectum sit magnum. Paru^ itaque n^nquam despiciamus, (...) in
magna incidamus. Chrysostom. Hom. 8. in 1 Cor. 3.
a small, a slight, or triuiall thing, to Luxurious, Riotous, and Licentious
persons; yet it is of infinite, and weighty consequence, because it is a sin;
and so draws Eternal death, and condemnation after it. Indeed, this is the
reason, why Heathenish, Profane, Lascivious, and Time, nay, Purse^ consuming
Stage Plays; (condemned, and sentenced, by some two and thirty several
Synodes, and Counsels; by some two and thirty Fathers; by some forty
Christian Authors, and Modern Divines; by some four Heathen States: three
Christian, and six Heathen Emperors; and by some two and twenty of the
Grauest. Best, and Wisest, Heathen Philosophers, Poets, and Christians; as the
inventions, and works of Satan, as the Tertul. De Spectac. lib. c. 24. Cyril.
Hierusol. Catech. Mystagog. 1. Aug de Symb: ad Catechumenos. l. 4. c. 1. Salu.
de Gub. Dei. l. 6. p. 190. to 197. Cypr. de Spectac. lib. Chrysostom hom. ^. 7.
and 38. in Mat. Lactan. de Vero cultis. cap. 20. Basil. Hexaemeron. Hom. 4.
Clem. Alex. Orat. Exhort. ad Gentes and Padag l. 3. c. 2. 11. Arnob.
aduers-Gentes. lib. 3. 4. 5. and 7.
Pompes, and Vanities of this wicked World, which Christians have renounced in
their Baptism: as the Semminaries, Ministers, Fuel, and Fomenters, of all
sin, and wickedness, (especially, of Fornication, Whoredom, and
Uncleanness:) as the very Poison, and Corruption of men's Souls, and manners;
and as Pernicious, and Insufferable evils, in any Christian, or well ordered
Common wealth:) why Effeminate, Monstrous, Strange, and Met^tricious habits and
attires: why mixed Lascivious, and Effeminate Dancing: (I say not Modest,
Chaste, and Sober measures:) why Curled, Broidered, false, and Supposititious
hair: why immoderate Dicing, and Carding, of purpose for to win and gain,
and not for necessary recreation only: why the Odious, and Infernal art of
Face-painting: why Idleness, Wantonness, Pride, Effeminacy, Scurr^litie,
Lying, Swearing, Cursing, Usury, Covetousness, Oppression, Injustice,
Gl^tto^e, Riot, Drunkenness, Healthes, and such like great and heinous sins,
and evil sports, and vanities, which God himself, which Fathers, Counsels,
Modern Divines, together with Christian, and Heathen Authors have frequently,
and resolutely condemned; do now so ruffle and swarm among us, as if they
were the chief an only virtues, Ideo tanta infaelicitate se inebriant
homines, quia putant ebrietatem aut paruum, aut nullum esse pecca^um. Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 232
because they do repute, and deem them but small, or little sins, and
vanities, of which God takes no notice: or else no sins at all. For if men
did unfeignedly believe them to be sins indeed (as they shall surely find
them, to be such at last, how ever they admire, and adore them now:) they could
not play, nor dally with them, they could not hug, nor yet embrace them as
they do. But yet (beloved Readers) this we must learn, and know; that as
these, and all sins else are very great, so we are to repute them great, and
Nullum culpagenus quod ad Deu^ pertinet leave est du^cendum: quia per dignitatem
iniuriam praeferentis, crescit culpa facientis. Salu. de Gub. Dci. lib. ^. p.
203.
no sin small, because they are committed against a Great, an Infinite, and
Eternal God; and so draw a Great, an Infinite, and Eternal punishment after
them. Mat 12^ 36. 37.
Idle words, Eccl. 12. 14. Acts 8^ 22. Psalm. 119. 113.
Idle thoughts, Psalm. 24. 3. 4. 1 Samuel 12. 21. Eccles. 6. 12.
Vain actions (which most men deem but trifells) shall draw men into
Judgment, and without repentance, plunge them deep in Hell, for ever at the
last: and will not Idle. Vain, Luxurious, Heathenish, and sinful Healthes
(and all the fore-recited sins) which have no good, nor profit in them, much
more do it? If so, then deem not Healthes, nor any such like petty sins,
with which men vs^ to dally, to be but toys, and triuiall thin^s, of which men
are to make no Conscience, for fear they Qui modica spernit paulatim decidit:
si enim curare parua negligimus, insensibiliter seducti, audenter etia maiora
perpetramus: Esus quippe pot^sque ad lusum impulie, lusus ad idololatriam
traxit: quia si in vanitatis culpa nequaquam caute compescitur, ab iniquitate
protinus men's incauta deuoratur. Gregor. Mag. Moral. l. 10. c. 13.
draw you on to greater sins, and press your Souls to Hell at last. But
admit, that this Drinking, and pledging of Healthes (which Councels, Fathers,
Christian writers of Modern times; nay, very Heathen Authors have condemned)
were such deminature, slight, and petty toys, and nicities, as most repute
them; yet since they are scandalous, hurtful, and offensive, and have no
comm^ndable, lawful, nor authorized use, it should make us the more ready, and
willing to renounce them. The lesser any sin seems to be, the lesser
pleasure, benefit, profit, or advantage it brings unto us, the more
indifferency there is in it, the more forwards should we be to relinquish,
and foregoe it. He that will not be at so much cost nor loss, as to deny
himself in small and triuiall things for Christ: Suppose, a strange and ugly
fashion; a meritricious, and lascivious attire; a varnished, and painted face;
an effeminate, unnatural, ruffianly, and unlovely louelocke: a profane, and
godless oath, Periurium ipsum sermonis^ genus putant esse, non criminis.
Christi nomen iam non vedetur Sacramentum esse, sed sermo, Salu. de Gub. Dei.
l. 4. p. 132.
the Rhetoric, and Phrase of most men speech:) a surrillous and filthy song,
or jest; an vnhealthie, vain, superfluous and excessive Health, or any such
petty sins, and triuiall evils, which bring no good, no profit, gain, nor
pleasure with them: how will he deny himself, or cross his lusts and flesh
in greater things, which have some sensible, and seeming good or pleasure in
them? Luke 16. 10. 11. 12.
Certainly, he that is unfaithful in the less, will be unfaithful likewise
in that which is the greater: Cum graui dolor amittu^tur, quae eum magno amore
habentur. Minus autem carendo dolemus, qua minus possidendo deligimus. Isiod.
Hispal. De Sum. Bono. l 3. c. 63.
he which will stand with God for very toys, and trifells, as himself
accounts them: will stand more stiffely with them upon greater things, which
have some seeming price, some good, and value in them; his Heart will cleave so
close to th^se, that he will sooner part with God, then them. Wherefore, if
Healthes, (or any of the forenamed particulars) be but vain and nugatorie
trifells in their best acception: if they are such vanities, and nicities,
wherein we may deny our selves, without any loss and danger: let us not so
much undervalue the Love, and Favor of our Gracious God, or the Blood and
Passion of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ (who died to Redeem us, as well
from 1 Pet. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 10. 35.
our vain and scandalous, as from our sinful, and wicked conversation,) as
not to part with Healthes and trifells for their sakes, who have parted with so
much for us: for fear we prove far worse then Judas who Mat. 26. 14. 15.
and 27. 3. 4.
would not betray, nor sell Christ Jesus, under thirty pieces of silver, which
were more of value, then thirty thousand Healthes can be to us, or others.
Fourthly, admit the most, nay, more then can be granted: that Healthes are
things indifferent; yet questionless, 1 Cor. 6. 12. See Ambrose, Hierome,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, and Primasius, on this place. Joan. Frid.
de Ritu. Bib. ad San. l. r. c. 14.
they are not useful, nor expedient, especially, unto Christians; who have
vowed Temperance, and Sobriety unto God. What have Temperate, Sober, Grave,
and Holy men to do, with the Ceremonies of Deboist, Licentious, Riotous, and
Drunken persons? with the inventions, and practices, of Ebrious, and Luxurious
Infidels, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4.
who walk in Reuellings, Banquetings, and excess of Wine? Is it expedient,
for Godly, and Religious Christians: or is it for the honor, grace, and credit
of Religion, that the professors of it should imitate, take up, or practice
the Heathenish, Hellish, Profane, and Complementall Healthes, and Ceremonies
of such men as these: to the blemish, stain, and scandal of the Gospel, and
the encouragement, president, and confirmation of Licentious Drunkards? If so,
what difference, and distinction is there then, between Christianity, and
Paganism? between Grace, and Wickedness? between a Christian, and an
Infidel? between a Holy, Temperate, and abstemious Child of God, Non in
lingua, sed in cord Christianitas est: nec interest quali vtare sermons: res
enim, non verba quaeruntur. Lactan. de Falsa. Sap. l. 3. c. 13. Esse
Christianum grande est, non videri. Hierom. Tom. 1. Epist. 13. c. 3.
whose Temperance, and Sobriety, consist in deeds, and practice, not in
words, and shows alone:) and a Deboist and Ebrious son of Belial?
Certainly, if it be expedient, that there should be some Temperantia
Christiana satis none est esse, verum and videri. Tertul. de Cultu. Faem. lib.
c. 9.
apparent discrepancy, and manifest difference, between Christians, and
Pagans; between Godly, and Sober men, and Swinish Drunkards: between
Professors of Religion (who should Phil. 2. 15. Math. 5. 16.
shine as Glorious, and Resplendent lights, and Lamps of Holiness in the
midest of this our Riotous, Deboist, Perverse, and Crooked generation: not Romans
12. 2. Col. 2. 20. 1 Pet. 4. 2. 3.
any ways conforming, nor fashioning themselves unto the Lusts, the Ways, the
Rites, and Ceremonies of Pagans, Graceless, or Ungodly men:) and open, or
notorious wicked men, who Phil. 3. 19.
make their b(...)ies, and their lusts their God? If it be expedient that the
Lives, the Ways, and Works of Holy men; should vary from the Works, the
Ways, and Lives of Graceless persons, and the sons of Satan: then
doubtless, how ever some may d^eme these Healthes, indifferent in themselves:
yet none can judge them so to Christians, because they are inexpedient, and
utterly unsuitable to their Temperate, Holy, Sober, Heavenly, Gracious,
Exemplary, and inoffensiue Lives. Wherefore the very inexpediency, and
inconueniency of these Healthes, (admitting them to be but things indifferent
in themselves, which I can hardly grant) should cause all good and Gracious
Christians: Facilius illicita timebit, qui lic^ta verebitur. Tertul de Cult^.
Faem lib. cap. 7. Non cit^ ad matora progreditur, qui etiam parua formidat.
Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 14. c. 1.
Who are to moderate, and curb themselves in the use of lawful things, and
things of smallest weight, that so they may more easily avoid unlawful
things, and greater evils, upon all occasions,) for ever to abominate,
renounce, and quite abandon them in their practice; for fear of giving
encouragement unto evil, and scandal unto godly and Gracious men. Fifthly,
where as it is surmized, and objected: that this refusal, and dislike of
Healthes, does savor of nothing else but of a Puritanicall, Singular,
Factious, Indiscreete, and ouer-scrupilous and precise Spirit; which is now the
common, and received opinion, and judgment of the World. I answer, that it
cannot be so, unless we will tax and censure those Fathers, Counsels,
Divines, Historians, Emperors, States, and Heathen Authors, together with the
very Spirit and Word of God, (whose Testimonies, and Verdicts, I have here
produced against Healthes,) for Puritans, and Prescitians: and for
ouer-precise, Zealous, Singular, Factious, and Contradictory, Spirits; which
the most Pe^emptory, and Audacious Drunkard, or the Deboistest, and rudest
Roter, dares not to avouch. Indeed the World is now grown to such a
Prodigious, Impudent, and excessive strain of Wickedness, and Prophannesse:
that it fears not to Malorum solatium est bonos carpere, dum peccantidm
multituuine putant culpem minci peccatorum. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 1 c. c. 4.
Reproach, Revile, Condemn, and Censure, all Grace, and Holiness, all
Temperance, and Sobriety, (nay Morrall Gravity, Staidness, Civility, and
Modesty:) under the Approbrious, and Ignominious, tearines of Puritanisme, and
Preciseness, or of Stoicall, and Factious singulatitie. He that 1 Pet. 4 4.
Will not run into the same excess of sin, and riot, that others do: he
that will not be a Baud, or Pander, to his own, or other men's sins, and
lusts: he that will not turn and incarnate Devil, or a very Hydra, or Monster
of Impiety, and Prophannesse; he that shall but offer to John 7. 7. I say 29.
2. Amos 5. 10. Wisd. 2. 10. to 17. Omnia tollerare ac perpeti necesse est eos
qui veritatem sequ^ntur, queniam veritas acerba est ac inuisa omnibus qui
virtut is expertes vita^ sua^ morteferis voluptatibus dedunt. Lact de Vera
Sapientia c. 26.
oppose himself against the crying sins, and common vices of the Times:
against the Drunkenness, Excess, and Riot; against the Pride, the Vanity,
the Idleuesse, and Lasciviousness; against the sinful Fashions, and
Customs; against the Scurrilitie, Ribaldrie, Swearing, Blasphemy,
Prophannesse, Wickedness, or Licentiousness, of the World, which affront, and
brave God to his face, and bid defiance to his Majesty: He that shall but
Write, or Speak against these sins, or any other: Falsi iusti veris justice
semper inuident, quia moleste ferunt illorum synceritate suam detegi
simulattonem: agunt ^gitur omnia vt subarunt gressus bonorum, and emitatores
sui faciant, quos ad condemnationem suam dolent esse meliore^. Quod cum
obtinere non possunt Approbriis and criminationibus impetunt innocentium vitam,
construentes suter dorsum eorum congertem falsitatum. Prospe^ Aquit. Exposit.
in Psalm. 128. and 139.
nay, he that lives not in them, and fears for to commit them, out of Love,
and Conscience toward God,) is forthwith branded for a Puritan, or for a
Nouellizing, Factious, Singular, Surly, Proud, Critical, Censorious,
Discontented, Furious, and ouer-Zealous Spirit, though he has God himself,
and all Antiquity: though he has Apostles, Prophets, Counsels, Fathers,
nay, Infidels, and Pagans, and the whole Church of God, from age to age, to
back, and second him, and to justify, and acquit him, against this false, and
scandalous imputation. This every man's experience, and Conscience, cannot but
testify, as an irrefragable, and undoubted truth. Wherefore, be not over
rash, nor too precipitate, to preiudicate, tax, or censure others for
Puritans, Prescitians, Humourists, or the like, for disapprouing, or rejecting
Healthes: or for opposing the vanities, Fashions, Sins, and Customs of the
Times, as the manner of most men is, since they have God himself, and all
antiquity, to justify, second, and assoile them. But learn to see the
Devils art and policy, and the Inuidentia illius D^abolica qua inuident bonis
mali nulla alia causae est, nisi quia ill^ boni sunt, tilli mali. August. de
Ciuit. Dei lib. 15. c. 5. Genesis 3. 15. Galat. 4. 29. Mat. 5. 11. 12. 1 Ioh. 3.
12. 13.
inueterate spleen, and malice of the World, against all Holy men: who labor
to suppress, and quite abolish all Temperance, and Sobriety, and the very
practical power of Grace, and Holiness, by preiudicating, censuring,
prosecuting, and reuiling them, under the names of Puritanisme, Singularity,
and Preciseness, in a censorious, peremptory, rash, and unadvised manner,
without any due examination of the things themselves. The reason why most men
judge so hard of the Graces, Ways, and persons of Gods Saints, as to
scandalize, and censure them, and to bring an hard, and ill report upon them:
is because Nolunt audire quod auditum damnare non possunt. Malunt nescire
quiaiam ederunt: quod nesciunt praeiudicant id esse quod si sciant, damnare non
poteranz. Tertul. Apol. adu Gent. c. 1.
they do preiudicate, and forestall them, and doom them to be evil, before
they do examine, try, or prove them to be such. If men would Si iudicas,
cognosce, Seneca Medea. Act. 2. Non potes dementiam dicere qui reuinceris
ignorare Tertul. Apol. adu: Gent. c. 1.
first examine, search, and know, and then pass sentence: if they would not
judge upon Qui auritos tantum testes accipit, vane non sane accipit. Philo
Iudaeus de Iudice lib. Plus valet ocularis testis vnus quam auriti december. Qui
andiunt, audita dicunt: qui vident, plane sciunt. Plaut. Truculentus page 703.
A puleius Floridorum, lib. 1. Iustius est occulta de manifest is praeiudicare,
quam manifesta de occult is praedamnare. Tertul. Apolog. cap. 2.
reports, and heare-sayes, upon bare conjectures, iealosies, or surmises, or
upon the common, and received voice, and fame of ignorant, envious, graceless,
censorious, malignant, rash, and prepossessed Carnallists; (who revile,
reproach, and hate all such, whose Graces blemish, censure, and condemn their
licentious, graceless, sensual, voluptuous, and unchristian lives and
courses:) but upon their own experience, and judicial knowledge, as all
impartial, wise, and upright Christians ought to judge: If they Qui statust
aliquid par^e inaudita altera, licet recte statuerit hand aquus est index.
Seneca Medea. Act. 2.
would hear indifferently on both sides, and weigh the Apologies, the Pl^es,
and Iustifications of Gracious, Temperate, and Holy men: as well as the
censures, scandalls, accusations, and reproaches, of Worldly, Carnal, Wicked,
and Godless persons; as Charity, and Deuteronomy. 19. 17. 18. John 7 50 Acts 25 18.
Justice bind them for to do. I doubt not, but they would then recant, and
quite repeal their censures, and alter, change, and quite transform their
judgments, not only of the Saints themselves; (whom now they Nos quiaserica
vest non vtimur, monachs vocamur: quiaebrii non sumus, net nec chach^nno ora
dissoluimus, continentes vo^amur and trifles: si tunica non canduerit, statim
illud e triuio, impostor, and Gracus est. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 23.
doom for Puritans, Hypocrites, or humorous, proud, censorious, contemptible,
base, and odious persons:) but likewise of these Healthes, and all those other
forementioned vanities, fashions, sins, and ceremonies, or customs of the
World: which the Saints of God, and God himself, together with Fathers,
Counsels, Modern Divines, and Christian Writers, yea Heathen Authors, and the
Church of God from age to age, condemn, and censure. Wherefore in this case of
Healthes, (or other cases of this nature,) let not Qui student damnare tanqua^
nocentes, quos vtique sciunt inno centes conftare de ipsa innocentia nolunt:
quasi vero mator iniquitas sit probatam innocentiam damnasse, qua^ inauditam.
Lactan. de Iustitia lib. 5. c. 1 Sic occupant animos and obstruunt pectora vt
ant^ nos incipiant homines odisse, quam nosse, ne cognitos aut imit^ri possint,
aut dam^are non possint, Minut. Faelix. Octauius. Page 96.
prejudice, wilfulness, or the erroneous judgment, and groundless censure of
the World, direct, or sway your Judgments, as usually they do: but consider
first, what Grounds, what Reasons, Arguments, and Authorities, are here
produced against them, to convince them to be evil, at least, to be
inexpedient, and unbeseeming Christians: Consider how little may, or can be
said, to justify, or approve them, at least unto your Consciences, in the
sight of God: and pause upon it but a whiles, with sincere, and upright hearts,
desirous to be informed, and instructed in the truth: and then I doubt not,
but you will readily confess: that this censure, and condemnation, which is,
and has been passed upon Healthes, proceeds not from any Puritanicall,
factions, singular, contradictorie, melancholy, rash, or ouer-precise, or
zealous Spirit: but from a Gracious, Holy, and sincere Heart, from a
deliberate, and well-aduised ludgement, and from a rectified, and well informed
Conscience, grounded upon good and solid reasons, and upon unanswerable
Authorities, both of God and man: so that you will henceforth disrelish them
in your judgments, and quite abandon them in your practice. Lastly, to this,
that you should incur the displeasures of your friends and others, by your
refusing, and withstanding Healthes, which you are loath to do I answer; That
he is not Non sit tibi amicus qui re vult Deo facere inimicum: qui and tuus and
suus est inimicus. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 231
worthy so much as of the name of a friend, much less of a Christian, who will
sell his friendship, for the refusal, or crossing of an Health, which would
make both thee, and him, an enemy unto God, and so become an enemy, both to
himself and thee: Who would, Melius est habere malorum odium, quam consortium.
Bernard. de Ordine vitae. Ser. 60.
respect or care for such a person, who would prefer his Healthes, before the
Love, the Conscience, the Salvation of his friend, or the dishonor, and
displeasure of his God? esteem not therefore of the loss of such men's favor
and respect, who value thee at so low a rate, as to prefer their cups, and
healthes before thee. But say thou art loath to lose the love, and favor of
such men as these: how know thou, that thou shall procure their hatred and
displeasure, by crossing and refusing of their Healthes? If thou do it in a
Discreet, a Sober, Modest, Grave, and Christian manner, backing thy refusal
with sufficient, satisfactory, and pregnant reasons, as thou ought; thou
may for ought thou know, so far prevail with such as woo and press
thee for to pledge these Healthes, as to convince them in their Consciences,
that Healthes are evil: and so reclaim them from them: so that thou Prou. 28.
23. and 24. 25. and 25 12.
shall gain more love, and true respect from them, by such a discreet
refusal, then if thou hadest yielded, and consented to them. But admit the
worst that may be: that thou should incur the censures, reproaches,
anger, or displeasure of thy best and dearest carnal friends: yet know this
for thy comfort and encouragement: that it is far better for thee to incur
their wrath and causeless censures, Prima virtus est hominis Christiani
contemnere hominum iudicia, and semper Apostoli recordari, dicentis: so
hominibus adhus placer^ Christis serusis non essem. Hier. Tom. 1. Epist. 26. c.
2.
which Christians must contemn: and to lose their love, respect, and
friendship: then to sell the Grace and favor of God himself, thy best, thy
chief, and only friend; and to incur his heavy censure, and displeasure
Which lasts for all Eternity. I 1 Samuel 2. 25.
If one man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? If thou proceedest on to
drink and pledge these Healthes, thou shall certainly sin against the Lord:
thou shall incur his wrath and anger, and strip thy self stark naked of his
love and favor, Psalm. 6. 3.
which are better, and sweeter, to every Gracious, and Holy Souls, then Life
it self: yea, Heb. 10. 26. 27. Nulla est delicti venia, quando sie procedit
misericordia, vt eam sequantur peccata. Isiodor. Hisp. de Sum. Bono. I. 3. c.
3. 64
if thou sin wilfully, after the knowledge of this blessed Truth, and wilt
not be reclaimed from these superfluous, Heathenish and Luxurious Healthes,
though thy Conscience deem, or doom them to be evil: there remains then no
more Sacrifice, nor Oblation for sin, for thee: but a certain fearful
expectation of Judgment, and fiery indignation to devour thee: which will
far exceed all carnal inconveniences, losses, crosses, or disgraces, which
the abandoning, or refusal of these Healthes can bring upon thee. Let this
then now at last persuade and move thee, for ever to refuse, renounce, and
utterly disclaim the very Drinking, or pledging of all Healthes, what ever
carnal motives solicit, or enforce thee to them.

You have now (good Christian Readers) as I hope, received a full, a
satisfactory, and sufficient proof, of the unlawfulness of Drinking,
Pledging, or beginning Healthes^ together with a large, and punctual answer,
to all objections, euasions, pretenses, colors, or excuses which men make, to
justify, moderate, or any way else excuse them. There is nothing now
remaining; but that those who have offended, and dishonored God, or
scandalized Religion, by these Ceremonies, Heathenish, and Infernal Healthes,
and Roundes in former times: (especially those Ministers, and men of place
Dupliciter reum est qui apertedelinquit, quia and agit, and docet. Isiod. His.
de Sum. Bono l. 2. c. 20.
whose ill example has leauened animated, and infected others: should
presently fly to God by fervent Prayers, and sound Contrition, and Repentance;
to obtain the Pardon, and Remission of their fore past Healthes; and Courage,
Grace, and Christian resolution, Ver^ panitens dolet de praeterit is, laborat
de futuris caeuendis: vera siquidem penitentia est, sic plangere commissa,
(...) non committantur plaugenda: quoni^m in anis est panitentia, quam sequens
coinquinat culpa. Bernard, Meditat. c. 4.
to abandon, and renounce all Healthes for future times, both in their
judgments, and their Practice: exiling them for ever, from their Houses,
Tables, Butter^^s, Sellers, Cups, and Lips; as the very Psalm. 16. 4. 1 Cor. 10.
21.
drinke-offering, and Cup of Devils, which Christians cannot drink: and as the
bane, the ruin, sickness, death, and poison of their souls. Now what shall I
say more to dissuade, deter, and move you from these Healthes, then what I
have already recorded of them? They are but Idle, Carnal, Worldly, Heathenish,
Idolatrous, and Hellish Ceremonies, invented, and prosecuted by the very Devil
himself: at least by Infidels, and the deboistest Qui Christianum te esse,
dicis, Gentilium arma depone, Hierom. Tom. 2. Epist. 6. c. 11.
Pagans, in honor of their Deuill-gods: or to draw on Drunkenness, and all
Excess: they are the immediate vshers, harbengers, preparatiues, or
floodgates; the very Baudes, the Curtizans, and Panders, to Drunkenness,
Vomit, and all Intemperance whatsoever: they are the Sea 4. Iacobi cap. 4.
occasions of many Duells, Quarrels, Murders, Stabbes, Hatreds,
Heart-burnings, Reproaches, Grudges, Contentions, and Discontents: they pervert
the true and proper end, and use of Drinking, and so abuse Gods creatures: they
take away all Christian liberty from men, in the use of Liquors, Drinks, and
Wines, and put a kind of force, necessity, and measure upon men against all
reason, and Religion: they violate the rules of Charity, and lustice, in an
apparent manner, and often times cause men for to force, condemn, reproach,
disdain, and censure others, who are far better then themselves, without a
cause: they are such things, as neither good, nor bad men, can safely use
without offense, or hurt, and scandal to themselves, or others: they are such
vain, profane, and Heathenish Ceremonies, as misbeseeme all Christians, and
Religious persons: but especially, all Pleriqu^ Sacerdotes ac Clerici male
viuentes, formacaeteris in malum existunt, qui in b^nis esse exemplum
debuerunt. Isiodor. Hisp. de Sum Bono. l. 3. c. 38.
Clergy men; though many of that Holy rank and order, Quando sine nomine
contra vitia serib^tur; qui irascitur, accusator sui est. Hierom. adu. Ruffin.
Apolog c. 3.
I name not any in particular,) are too to much devoted and adicted to them: to
the ill example of the Laity, and the disgrace, and scandal of Religion: they
are infamous, scandalous, and of ill report, not only among the Church, and
Holy Saints of God; but even among the Grauer. Ciuiler, and more Ten, perate
sort of carnal men; yea among the very Pagans, and Infidels themselves: they
bring no glory at all to God, nor honor, profit, pleasure, nor advantage unto
men: they serve for the most part, to honor and applaud the Devil himself,
or graceless, vile and wicked persons, who are often times Deified, and odored
by them: they abuse, pervert, and much profane, those Sacred and religious
gestures, wherewith we are to worship God, and honor men: they derogate, and
detract from Prayer, and attribute that Divine, and Heavenly efficacy, and
blessing, unto Drinking, that is due to it: Whence some men, (to their shame
and condemnation be it spoken,) are Healthing, and Carrouzing for their
Childrens birth and happiness, when as they should be Praying for them:
Baptizing them in Sack, and Claret, in which the Deuil-spirit Bacchus
breathes: before they bring them to that Sacred font, and holy Water, in which
the holy Ghost himself, does work and move: and so deuoting them unto the
Devil himself, and to his Hellish, and Infernal Ceremonies, before they
consecrate or initiate them unto Christ, or to his holy and Sacred Mysteries:
as if the Devil were the better Lord and Master of the two: (a most Profane,
Infernal, Atheistical, Graceless, and Unchristian practice, the very thought
of which, should cause all Christians for to tremble.) They are things which
the Fathers, and Saints of God in former ages: which Divines, and Christian
Authors both Papists, and Protestants: which Counsels, and Imperial
constitutions; which Infidels, and Pagans have expressly; Nemo contra Prophetas,
nemo contra Euangelia facit, sine periculo. Council. Aquisgranense Can. 61.
and the very Word of God, impliedly, and frequently condemned, as sinful, and
abominable: yea, they are such dangerous, spredding, and pernicious evils, as
will prove the fatal, and mortal sickness, and disease, not only of the
Souls of such as drink and pledge them; but likewise In Christiano populo
vnius faciuus, pestis est multorum Salu. de Gub. Dei. l. 7. p. 264.
of those persons whose names and Healthes they bear; and of those States, and
Kingdoms in which they do abound; if they consent unto them, not laboring
for to cleanse them out, by reformation, and Repentance. O then be willing now
at last, on all these grounds and reasons, for ever to renounce, and quite
disclamie them, without any more delays. And if all this will not persuade you
to abandon them: consider then, what a solemn vow, and ^^uenant you have made
to God in Baptism: which binds you to renounce them, For have you not vowed,
and protested unto God himself, in the sight and hearing of many witnesses,
(who will bear testimony of your perjury, if you still proceed:) Form of
Baptism in our Common Prayer Book.
To forsake the Devil, and all his works: the Pompes, and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the flesh? (which form was always
used in the Sea Dionys. Areopag. Eccl. Hierar. c. 2. 3. 2. 3. Tertul de
Baptismo. and de Corona Militis lib. Cyril Hierusol. Cateches. Mystagoc. 1.
Hierem. Epist. 8. c. 5. Aug. de. Symb. ad Catechumenos. l. 4. c. 1. Chrisost
Hom. 6. in Coloss. 2. Salu, de Gub. De^^. 6. Con^ Constantin^p. 6. in Trullo.
Can. 96.
Primative Church:) and are not Healthes the very See Argument. 14.
inventions, and works of Satan? were they not invented and practiced, by the
Devil himself? were they not a part of his solemn worship, and service? and
were they not at first invented, and used to his honor? Are they not, a mere
Pomp, and Vanity of this wicked World, where in few else but exorbitant,
wicked and graceless persons do delight? and do they not chiefly serve to
satisfy the sinful lusts, and excessive, ebtious, and intemperate desires of
the flesh, which we have vowed to renounce? Doubtless, there is not any
wicked man, nor Saint on earth; no, nor any Devil, or damned Soul in Hell, so
Impudent, or shameless, that can or dare deny it, since See Page 18. 19. 39.
40.
Magicians, and Pagans have confessed it. And will you then so periure, and
forswear your selves to God himself, as to violate this solemn oath, and
sacred covenant, (which you have often times sealed, and confirmed in the blood
of Jesus Christ your blessed Savior, at every Sacrament that you have
received,) in practicing, justifying, or applauding these Heathenish, Hellish,
Profane, and Graceless Healthes, against which you have so seriously
protested in your Baptism? will you be so desperately, prodigiously, and
inhumanely wicked, as to Multarum Gentium (...) extat perfdia animerum, vt
sidem Sacramento promissam obseruare contemmant, (...) ore simulent iuramenti
professionem, dum retinea^t me^te perfidiae imptetatem. Conc. Toletanum. 4.
Can. 74.
prove perjured, and for sworn persons, to your Great, your Good, your True,
and Faithful God: who is able to crush you down to Hell it self, and that
for ever? Beloved, if thus you break your vows, and oaths with God: Non
potest erga homines esse fidelis, qui Deo extiterit infidus. Council. Toletan 4.
c. 63.
as men can never trust you here, because you are perfidious to your God: so
God himself, will Facile ex amica inimicum factes cui promissa n^^ red das.
Hier. Epist. 14. c. 9. 9.
surely turn your enemy: and power out the very strength, and fury of his
wrath, and vengeance on you, to your eternal ruin; because Heb. 10. 29.
you trample under your feet, the very Blood, and holy Sacraments of his
Son, as base, Profane, and common things, and put him unto open shame; in
breaking these your solemn vows, which were thus ratefied, and confirmed by
them. O then let this consideration move you, to cast of all these Healthes,
according to your vows, and covenants: for fear you prove perfidious unto
God himself, to your just, and endless condemnation. If this consideration
will work no good upon you, then ruminate, and ponder in your thoughts, those
many heavy, terrible, dreadful, and amazing Judgments, which God himself
has inflicted upon Health-drinkers, from time to time. It is storied of Senec.
Epist. 83. Diodorus Siculus. B^blioth. Hist. l. 17. Sect. 117. Quin. Curtius,
l. 10. Sect. 4. Plut. Alexan.
Alexander the Great; that he drank his death and ruin, in quaffing of an
whole Carrouse out of Hercules his Cup. Athenaus Dipnos. l. 10. c. 12. Mr.
Beards Theater of Gods Judgments l. 2. c. 33
In that Drunken Feast, or Combat, which this Alexander made unto the Indians,
there were five and thirty who drank themselves dead in the place, and never
revived more, whiles they carrouzed Healthes, and Roundes one to another. It is
Guagninus Rerum Polon. Tom. 1. p. 62. 63. Cromerus and Neugebauerus. De Polon.
Hist. l. 1. Phil. Camerarius cap. 12. Centur. 11. Munster: Cosmogr. l. 4. c. 4.
recorded of Popelus the second, King of Poland; that having incurred the
displeasure of his Nobility, through his ill government, for which they
intended to depose him: he fained himself to be very sick, by his Queens
advice; and there upon sent for twenty of the chief Princes of Pomerania, who
had the principal voice in the Election of the Polonian Kings; to come and
visit him in this his sickness: which they did accordingly. The King upon
their coming, requested them to Elect his Son to the Kingdom after his
decease, which thing they answered they would willingly do, if the rest of the
Nobility would consent unto it. The Queen in the mean time provides a Cup of
sudden poison, of purpose to dispatch them, and presents it to them all to
drink the King her husbands Health: they to testify their love and Allegiance
to the King, drank off the Cup, as their manner was, unto his Health, but to
their own instantanie confusion, and immediate death: and to the subuertion of
all the stock, and race of the Polonian Princes: A sudden, and fearful, yet
a Iudicia Dei occulta multa, iniusta nulla^ August. Tom. 7. pars. 2. often.
just Judgment of God, upon these Princes; who were much addicted, to the
drinking of Healthes in former times: But lo the infinite Aspiciunt, oculis
superi mortalia justice. Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 13.
Justice of God on both hands. Out of the dead and poisoned carcases of these
Princes, there issued such infinite troops, and swarms of Rattes, and Mice,
as chased Popelus, his Wife, and all his Children from place to place, both by
Sea, and Land, till at last they were forced to fly, to the strong Castle of
Graccouia, where they were devoured, and eaten up of these Rattes, and Mice,
Hinc secula discant, indemitum nihil esse pio, tutumue nocenti. Claud De 4.
Cons. Honorij. Pan.
in despite of Guard, and Garrisons, and all those Arts, and Policies of
Fire, and Water-workes, that were used to secure them: as the Histories do at
large declare: so far are Kings, and all their power, unable to resist the
weakest creatures; when God shall raise them up in arms against them. Joan.
Frid de R^tu. Bib. ad San l. 1. cap 7.
At the conclusion of the League between Spain, and the Low-countrie States,
about the year 1608. there were many who drank themselves to death, (and for
ought that men can Judge, to Hell it self,) in quaffing of Healthes, to the
ratification of that League: I my self have heard, See Byerlin. Chronogr. page
94. Mr. Stub^ his Anatomy of Abuses. p. 77. 78. Mr. Beards Theater of Gods
Iugdements. l. 2. c. 33. Mr. Wards Woe to the Drunkard.
and read of diverse, both of our own and other Kingdoms; who have been
drinking of other men's Healthes, so long: that they never enjoyed their own
Healthes, nor lives long after: yea, I have heard, and read of some: who in
quaffing down other men's Healthes, have swallowed down their own Nec sitis
est extincta prius, quam vita bibendo. Quid. Metamorph. l. 7. Non prius
peractum est facinus peceantium, quam vlcisceretur poena peccatum. Salu. de
Guber. Dei. lib. 1. page 38.
immediate, and unexpected deaths, (and without Gods infinite mercy, their own
eternal Damnation, and confusion;) before ever they could rise up from their
knees, on which they drank them. Memorable, Remarkable, and Terrible, is that
Tragical and strange example, of Gods auenging Judgment, upon Mr. Stubs his
Anatomy of Abuses. page 77. 78
two Drunkards, and Health-quaffers in Nekershofewe, a Town in Almaine, on the
fourth day of July in the year 1580. Who coming then, and there into an June,
called for Bread and Wine: which being brought, they disliked the Wine for its
newness, calling for some older, and better Wine: which being brought in great
abundance, they fell to Swill, and Caerrouse one to another, till they were
both as Drunk as Swine. Then one of them pouring forth Wine, drank a Carouse
to his fellow: who pledging him, demanded of him, to whom he should drink?
quoth he, drink thou unto God: he hearing this, drinks a Carrouse, or Health
to God: and then demanas of his companion, of which Wine God should pledge him,
whether of the old, or new? of whether thou will, says he. Upon which he
takes the new wine into his hand, and filling the Cup therewith, reaches
forth his arm, as high as he could, as though God should have pledged him in
good earnest, saying: God, I would feign know what Wine thou likest best: this
Wine is good enough, and to good for thee: if thou hadest sent better, thou
should have had better: but such as it is, take it pledge me quickly, and
Carouse it off every soap, as I have done to thee, or else thou do me
wrong: (the usual speech and phrase of Drunkards now, when as they would
engage, or force men for to pledge their Healthes and rounds.) Note hence, that
Drunkenness is no Apology, nor excuse for other sins that are occasioned in
us by it.
No sooner had he uttered these blasphemous speeches, but the Lord forthwith
proceeds in judgment against him: causing his arm which he had stretched
out, to stand steadfast, and immovable, so that be could not pull it in: and
benumming his whole body, so that he could not move it from the place. In
this agony he remained a long time after, his countenance not changed,
rolling his eyes too and froe in a fearful manner: his breath, and speech
b^eing taken from him, so that he could not breathe, nor speak a word: and
yet he seemed to every one to be alive. Aster this, the people who flocked
thick, and threefold for to see this wretched spectacle of Gods wrath, and
vengeance, assayed to remove him from the place, but they could not stir him
by any strength: In the end they tied Horse to him, to draw him thence, but
they could not move him. Then they assayed to burn the house wherein he was,
but no fire would once take hold of it. Wherefore, persuading themselves, that
God had made him a spectacle to all Drunkards, they s^rceased their
enterprises, wishing the will of the Lord to be done. And in this miserable and
doleful manner, (says my Author) stands this Drunken, and Blasphemous
Villain vnremooueable, to this very day: as a Tragical, Dreadful, and
Prodigious spectacle of Gods wrath, and vengeance against Drunkards, and
Health-quaffers. The very sight, nay, the very relation, or thought of which,
should strike the very Hea^ts, and Souls, of all who are devoted unto
Healthes, or Drunkenness, with terror, and amazement.) The other Drunken
beast his companion, who had escaped the immediate hand of God, was by the
just, and auenging hand of the people, Hanged up on a Gibbet, before the door
of the same House, for an example, and terror unto others. Beloved, these
terrible, and fatal examples, and patterns of Gods Judgments upon others,
(together with sundery other presidents of this kind, which the desire of
brevity does cause me to omit:) should teach us to Maius periculum est, male
viuends, quant cito mortendi. Seneca. Epist. 58.
beware of Drunkenness, and all Heathenish, Profane, Superfluous, and ungodly
Healthes, for fear God cut us short, and hew us down by sudden Judgments, in
the selfsame manner, as he has cut of these. Suppose that God should thrust
in the sickle of his Judgments, and mow us down by sudden death, whiles the
Health, and Cup, are at our mouths, or whiles we are wallowing in our Swinish
Drunkenness: what hopes of Mercy, or Salvation could we have? God has dealt
thus with many others, as the fore-recited, and infinite examples else do
testify: and Cuiuis accidere potest quod cuiquam potest Seen. de Consolat. ad
Marciam. cap. 9. Oportet vt vna poena teneat obnoxios, quos similis error
muenerit implicatos. Council Tolitanum. 4. Can. 74.
may he not justly do the same to us, if we still go on in Healthes and
Drunkenness, since his power and Justice are the same for ever? O therefore
let us now at last consider, and remember these Tragical, and Dreadful
spectacles, and patterns of Gods Judgments; together with those Assiduous,
and Domestique presidents of Gods vengeance upon Drunkardes, and
Health-quaffers, which are every month, or two presented to our eyes, or
ears: How many Health-sokers, and Drunkardes may we see, or hear of every
year, wichin the Verge, and compass of our Island: Psalm. 73. 18, 19, 20. Job
21. 13.
Who do suddenly consume, perish, and come to a fearful end: being cut
down by strange, and sudden deaths, in the very act and continuance of their
sins, before they had any time, or space for to repent? and may not their
fearful ends be ours too, if we continue in the selfsame sins? Let
Aliorum vulnus nostra sit cautio. Heirom. Tom. 1. Epist. 10. c. 4.
their examples then be our warnings, to drive and force us from Drunkenness,
and Healthes, without delay: for fear we end, and set in woe, in horror,
death, and Hell, as they have done. And if Gods Judgments here, will not
deter us from these sinful courses; let us then consider, and settle this
fume conclusion in our Hearts, (the inconsideration, and unbelief of which,
is the cause of all those gross, and crying sins, which ouer-spread the
World:) That the time will surely come ere long, we cannot tell how soon:
Eccles. 12. 14. Dan. 7. 9. 10. Matthew. 12. 36. 37. c. 25. 31. to 38. Act. 17.
31. Romans 14. 10. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Reu. 20. 11. to 15.
When we must all appear in person, before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to
give a just, and strict account of every vain, and sinful word, and thought;
of every act of sin, and Drunkenness, that have ever passed from us: of
every Health that we have drunk, or pledged all our lives. How then shall
those be able to appear, Psalm. 1. 5.
or stand in Judgment, in that great, that terrible, and amazing day of
Christ; who have been Quaffing, and Carrouzing Healthes so long, that they
have even Quos mane insignes armis, spectaueras, vultis minaces, cosdem vesperi
cerna^, sine far vulneratos, sine pugna in^erfectos, sine host turbatos,
sine senectute tremulos, in ipso iuuentut is store marcentes. Ambr. de Elia,
and Ieiun. cap. 13.
reeled, staggered, and fallen to the ground, not able to appear in Judgment,
of stand upright upon their own legs, whiles they Non vixit iste, sed in
vita moratus est: nee sero mortuus est, sed diu. Seen. Epist. 93.
continued, but Vere tune vi^ere quisque creditur, si secundum ^eclum mortens,
in solo Deo viuere delectetur. Isiodor. de Sum. Bono. l. 3. c. 65.
not lived here? How shall they ever hear the Voice, or see the Face of God,
and Christ, with joy and comfort, or make the least apology, excuse, or
justification for themselves at last: who have drunk themselves Deaf, and
Blind, and Dumb, nay, Dead and senseless now? Et^ sil. de Ebriet. and Lux.
Sermo.
Having Ears, and yet not hearing; Eyes, at a yet not seeing; Tongues, and yet
not speaking; Noses, and yet not smelling; Feet, and yet not walking; Reason,
and yet not understanding: being far worse Psalm. 49. 12. 20.
then the very beast that perish: and more like Psalm. 115. 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 135.
15, 16, 17.
senseless Images, Sot^kes, and Stones, which Pagans worshipped; then unto
Reasonable, or Living creatures. 1. Pet. 4. 18.
If the Righteous scarcely shall be saved in that great, and terrible day:
where then shall all ungodly Drunkardes, and ceremonious Health-swillers: where
shall all Iouiall, Crapulous, Health-quaffing, and good fellow Ministers, and
Scholars appear? Certainly, they shall not know which ways to turn, nor
what to do, to plead, or answer for themselves, when Christ shall enter into
Judgment with them; but they shall even be amazed, and utterly confounded in
the very Anguish, Horror, and Bitterness of their Souls, at the very
thoughts, of all their Healthes, and Drunkenness, 1. Cor. 6. 10. Gal. 5. 21.
Reu. 22. 15.
and sink down into the very depthes of Hell, in endless torments. If ever
then you hope for grace, and favor at the hands of God: if ever you expect to
lift up your Heads, or Hearts, with joy and comfort, in that great and
dreadful day: Dan. 7. 9. 10. Matthew. 21. 31. 1. These. 4. 16, 17. 2. These. 1. 7.
89. Jude 14. 15
where in the Lord Jesus Christ himself, shall be revealed from Heaven, with
thousands, and ten thousands of his Saints, and all his mighty Angels; in the
very fullness of his power, and the exceeding brightness of his Glory: in
flaming fire, taking vengeance upon all that know not God: upon all disobedient
imp^nitent, riotous, ebrious, profane, and sinful persons whatsoever; and
punishing them with Everlasting perdition, from the presence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his power: which day will surely come Phil. 4. 5. Iam 5. 8.
9. 2. Pet. 3. 9. Reu. 3. 11. cap. 32. 2^
ere long: O then without any more delays, whiles the Haley on days of Grace,
and Mercy shine so bright upon you: abiute, and utterly renounce for ever, all
Healthes, all Sin, and Drunkenness whatsoever; which have no good, no
profit, pleasure, nor contentment in them: and presently deuote, and dedicate
your selves, unto a Temperate, Gracious, Sober, Strict, and holy Life, for
future times, according to your vow in Baptism, which God will surely require
at your han is at last: that so you may prove Vt esset sobrietatis exemplum,
qui fuerat ante^ ebrietatis lud^ brium. Ambr. de Elia and Ieiun. cap. 12.
Patterns of Temperance, and Sobriety, unto others, as you have been
Laughing stocks of Drunkenness, and Presidents of Healthes, and Riot
heretofore: and so may Live, and Die, and Rise again, with joy and comfort. If
you refuse, reject, and scorn this advice, as idle, and superfluous, or
coming out of season; resolving to proceed in Healthes, and Drunkenness, in
despite of God, his Son, his Word, his Threats, and all his Judgments: I
have no more to say unto you then, but only this? Qui voluntatem Dei
spreuerunt inuitantem, voluntatem dei sent^ent vindicantem. Prosper. Resp. ad
Object. 10. Vincent.
go on and perish: your blood, your doom, and final condemnation, shall
seize, and rest upon your Pereant sibi soli qui periro voluerunt. Cypr. Epist.
lib. 1. Epist. 8.
own heads, not on mine: who seek your Temporal, and Eternal Health, and
welfare, not your ruin.

Heirom. Tom. 1. Epist. 2. ad Nepotianum. cap. 26. Nullum laesi: nullius nomen
mea scriptura designatum est. Neminem specialiter m^^^sermo pulsauit. Generalis
de vitijs disputatio est. Qui mihi irasci voluerit: prius ipse de se, quod
talis sit, confitebitur.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page. Line. Errata. Correction. Readers Epistle. 4 24 Incrediaries
Incendiar^es In the Book 38 67 69 74 17 22 24 28 For Satutes Christians them
Factions. Read Statutes Historians him Factious. Margent 11 17 72 77 y c m d
For cap. 14. numera suba^unt Epist. 6. Read cap 37. munera ubruant 61.


