THE ^^TIMONIALL Cup twice cast: Or, A TREATISE concerning the Antimoiall Cup,
showing the abuse thereof.

FIRST, Written in Latin by JAMES PRIMEROSE Dr. of Physic, in consideration
of a small Pamphlet set forth by the Founder of the Cup.

Translated into English by ROBERT WITTY, Master of Arts, Philiatr.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. and T. FAUCET. 1640.

The Translators Preface to the Reader.
HAving finished my Translation of the Popular errors, or the errors of the
people in matter of Physic, being a learned Treatise, lately set forth in
Latin by Dr. PRIMEROSE the Physician, my very good Friend, it pleased my
aforesaid Author to write something touching the Antimoniall Cup, which is now
adays in such frequent use, and so much admired by some, and to give it to me
to translate into into English, to be annexed to the former Treatise, being an
Error as common and gross as any other; But seeing that the Impression of the
aforesaid Treatise a for some reasons procrastinated for a while, it was
thought convenient at the request of some Friends, to substrast this from the
other, and to set it forth in a small Pamphlet by it self, which ^ow thou
have, being never till now in Print; The other wanting nothing but the Printers
art, shall as soon as may be, be Pressed to do thee service; mean while
accept of this lovingly, expect the other patiently, as it is tendered willingly
by him, who is thine in any friendly office.

TO: WITTY.

A TREATISE CONCERNING THE ANTIMONIALL Cup, showing the abuse thereof.
THere is come not long since into use a Cup made of the Regulus of Antimonie,
so called by Alchymists, which is sold at a very high rate, and is reported to
be good for many things, and diseases, both by him that makes it, and by the
people who are always eager in their pursuit after Novelties, and it is
thought by the people to be a thing of great value, and heretofore not known
by Physicians; when nevertheless, it is very well known of all them that have
any skill in the Chymicks; for the way of making the Regulus out of Antimonie,
is very easy, ordinary, and ancient. But that we may explicate to the people
this error so pernicious, we will first speak of the Cup it self, and then
of its force. Now the Cup has not its virtue from the artificial form
thereof; for so any Cup made of Silver or Gold should do the same. But it has
all its virtue from the Antimonie: Now they that pry into the nature of
Minerals and Mertals, are of opinion that Antimonie does consist of crude and
very impure Sulphur, Mercury, and Arsenticke: And therefore it is so contrary
to our nature, that after what manner soever it be prepared and corrected, it
does even in the least quantity that may be given, offer great violence to the
intralls, and does retain its malignant quality, which can scarce be taken
away by any infusions. If by chance some man of a strong constitution be able
to endure the force thereof, he expels it upwards and downwards, with
abundance of humors; but them that are waeke, and such as do vomit hardly it
does wonderfully gripe and torment; For howsoever it be prepared, it never
lays aside its malignant and deadly quality.

Hence many grave Physicians, as Fernelius, Riolanus, Gesnerus, and the whole
College of Physicians at Faris, do utterly dislike the internal use thereof,
in respect of its deadly quality too hurtful to Nature. Nevertheless to
satisfy the people, we will grant, that it may safely be used, so it be
rightly prepared, and discreetly used. I know it has been diversely assayed to
be prepared by the art of the Alchimists, that though not altogether, yet at
least in some measure the malignitie thereof might be abated, but that art is
not yet fully found out, which can quite take away the force of that Medicament.

Now the common and more ordinary preparations, which are to be sold even small
shops, are the regulus of Antimonie, of which the aforesaid Cup is made; The
glass of Antimonie, which the people call Stibium, whereas Stibium is indeed
the true name of Antimonie it self, and of this Glass, not of the Regulus
ought this Cup to be made, says Sennertus in his Institutions, and Hartmannus
in his notes upon Crollius. Moreover there are made of it Crocus metallorum, or
the Saffron of metals; Pulvis emeticus, Mercurius vita, a Tincture, and an
Oil.

And all these preparations are endued with one and the same quality; to wit,
vomiting and Purging, which manifests that in none of the aforesaid preparations
was the deadliness of the Antimony taken away. Now seeing that in all things,
yea even in the worst of all there are some degrees of pravitie, the people
must know that in all Minerals, that preparation is accounted the best, and
least dangerous, in which the form of the Metal is lost; for then there is
made a greater separation of the pure from the impure; and therefore all
Alchymists do endeavor so to dissolve Gold, a harmless^ Medicament in it
self, that the form of the Metal being laid aside it may be made potable,
and they do not approve of any dissolution thereof, in which it can return to
its own nature; which is inde^d much more true of Minerals that are of a
mischievous nature. It is therefore to be noted that that Antimonie which we
call crude, to wit, unprepared at all, is of no force to move the body, and
therefore the Ancients who were ignorant of Chymicall art, knew no inward use
thereof. Now the first and easiest preparation of all, is that, which we call
the Regulus, in which the form of the Metal is not taken away, but does melt
into a certain form of Lead. Hence Dioscorides says, that Antimonie melted
turns to Lead, having some light knowledge of that Regulus, for it is made of
it being melted only, and so a little refined, and it does retain all the
malignity of the Antimonie, which laid as it were asleep before, under the
earthy excrement. This do Mettall-men use, and mix in Gunnes, Bells, and
other the like engines: but seeing it does yet possess all the naughty and
mischievous qualities of Antimoni^, it must necessarily follow, that the Cup
made of it is most dangerous. Therefore the best Alchymists have quite
abandoned it from any use in Physic, save that by a further preparation may
be extracted out of this Regulus the glass of Antimoni^, and many other such
things far better than the Regulus it self. Wherefore some in stead thereof
have used the glass of Antimonie, as did frequently that most excellent
Physician Matthiolus, the people call it Stibium, and are sore afraid of it,
where as indeed it ought to be preferred before the regulus. Nevertheless
Quercitanus, Hartman, and some others of principal note among the Alchymists,
who do highly extol the virtue of Antimonie, do think this preparation of
the Glass also unsafe, in respect of the mixture of impure Sulphur, which is
not yet taken away. And therefore waving those two as not safe, they do
familiarly use the Crocus, or Hepar Antimonij, Saffron or liver of Antimony;
Pulvis emeticus, the vomiting powder; and Mercurius vitae, Mercury of the life:
Which preparations the College of Physicians at London has inserted in their
dispensatory, and there is almost no shop, in which both the substance and
infusion of them is not to be sold. From whence they that do so much extol
this Cup, may gather, that they use a pernicious and dangerous remedy, whereas
the same much better prepared is every where obvious, and to be sold, yet at a
very easy rate.

Of the force of the Cup.
AS touching the force of the Cup, it does not gently ^^t mightily provoke
vomit and stool^^* ^ow every vomit although it be ^^^^ed by the most gentle
Medicines (...) is nevertheless always more ha^h ^o Nature the^ any Purgatio^
by ye inferior parts, because the stomach was not made for expulsion, but for
reception; for it is one of the noble parts, and of exquisite sense, and has a
very great sympathy with the Brain and the heart, in so much as when it is
affected, the people think and complain that their heart aches. It is
therefore not good to strain such a noble part with such a violent medicine.
But besides, a Vomit does offer much violence to the strength of the whole
Body, strains the Head, brain, muscles of the belly, the breast, and all the
intrailes which are contained in the lower belly, and sometimes in gross
bodies breaks the veins, and lets out the blood. Wherefore if we must not use
other purging Medicines, but with a great deal of care and premeditation, much
less Vomitories; for of all evacuations a Vomit is the most grievous and
dangerous. And therefore many things are to be regarded in the provoking of
vomit. First, the nature of the patient, and his aptness or difficulty for
vomiting, for in them that vomit hardly, there is a great deal of danger,
although they be sick of a disease, which might be cured by vomit. Such are
they that are fat, those that are strait brested, many slender persons, who
have weak stomachs, such are subject to a Cough, or difficulty of breathing,
which have tumors or Ulcers in their breasts, they that have weak heads and
eyes, and such as are troubled with the inflammation, or pain in the Midriffe.
Secondly, the time of the year is to be considered; for it is not convenient
at every time of the year. Thirdly, the nature of Diseases; for in some
diseases it does more hurt then good, and in those wherein it may do good, it
must not yet be always used, and therefore the founder of the Cup is mistaken,
when he says, that the Cup is good for all the Diseases, which stand in need
of Purging, as we shall manifest afterward. Fourthly, the constitution of
Diseases; for it cannot be administered at all times of diseases with out danger
to the patient: The Physician must consider in all Evacuations the beginning,
increasing, state of the Disease, much more in a Vomit. Fifthly, great care is
to be had of preparing the body and the humors, and many things are to be
regarded both before the vomit, and in the very act of vomiting, which are not
to be handled in this place. So as there is no evacuation, which requires so
much consideration, as that which is done by vomit. Now seeing these things can
be known only by a Physician, and that not every one, but by a very learned
and sklfull man, I cannot but wonder at the adventurous rashness of some men,
yea and women, who being unread in the rules of Physic, grossly ignorant
both of Diseases and their causes, their times, and not knowing the method of
Curing, dare nevertheless vex and torment such a noble subject as Man's body
with variety of Medicines; Secondly, persuade unto vomit, the most dangerous
and difficult evacuation of all other; Thirdly, provoke it with a Mineral,
whi^^ is most contrary to Nature; Fourthly, to do it with Antimonie, th^n
which no Mineral is more churlish; and lastly, to use that preparation of it,
which is the very worst of all. Not that I do altogether dislike the use of
Antimonie, for I have often used it with good success, but better prepared.
But especially the founder of the Cup is to be blamed, for selling such a cheap
medicine at so dear a rate, the right use whereof he does neither teach the
people, nor I think he himself knows: And there tore I have known many, who
by taking the infusion of it, have been grievously tormented, and some that
have dyed, who despising the counsel of Physicians have preposterously used
it. For Physic although it be in its own nature very good, is the hand of
God, but like a sword in the hand of a madman, as we have said in another
place out of Herophilus, in our Popular Errors.

Of the Founder of the Cup, and the Authors cited by him.
AS for the Founder of the Cup, he professes himself a Minister, and Preacher
of Gods Word, that is, a man that will scorn to deceive any body, and will not
meddle beyond his knowledge, and therefore without question he has brought us
a very Sovereign medicine, which he made conscience to conceal any further,
though before he was borne, the thing was in use in another name, as appears
by those Authors whom he does cite for the patronizing of his gains, thought
they are men of small note and hardly worth, to be cited. First, he has a
great commendation of the Antimonie it self, extolling it above all medicines
in the world; So do they that commend aurum potabile, and o all the Alchymists
till this Minister have preferred the Gold before it. It is (says he) a
mineral (according to Paracelsus) consisting of Mercury, Sulphur and salt; So
is my glove according to the said Paracelsus. It was first discovered (says
he) by Geber King of Arabia; and yet Dioscorides, Galen, Hippocrates, and
ancienter Authors b^^ore Geber do speak of it: And he called it Magnesia, as
if Geber spoke Latin, but Quercetanus calls it so indeed, Secondly, amongst
all the medicines that are prepared out of this mineral, he disclaimes from
all except the Rugulus, in which he shows his weakness, for the Regulus is
the weak^st, easiest, and coursest preparation of all others* therefore he
adds, and what may be conveniently prepared (...) of the same, and that I like
well, for our of the Regulus may be drawn^ the dowers, the glass of Antimonie,
the Cro^us metallor, and many other preparations; and herein I adhere to the
authority of Bornettus, and Mylius, cited by him; who do not say, that it is
to be used in Physic, but that it is the chiefest examination of Gold, and
the true matter of all Flowers, and medicinali tinctures contained within
Antimony, which is true; for the flowers and other Antimoniall extractions must
be properly drawn out of the regulus, and the worst of them is better then the
regulus it self: Then be brings in Paracelsus with the titles of Oriental
star of Natural, Spagiricall, and Magneticall light and knowledge. Now I am
sure no learned and honest man will approve of such an illiterate man as
Paracelsus was, approving and practicing Magical arts, which he calls the
Syrups and electuaries of the Devil. But let us hear what he says; In his
Book De vita long a, page 167. cited by this Writer, not a word of the Cup,
but only of the praises of Antimonie, as Alchymists use to do, that is,
beyond the deserts thereof, and that it cures the Leprosy, which
notwithstanding Paracelsus never performed therwithall, but howsoever he never
used the Regulus, or the Cup, but has many better preparations of Antimonte
then that Cup is, as appears by the next authority cited by him out of his 6.
Book, Page 22. Where he attributes all these virtues unto the quintessence of
Antimonie, the Regulus being not the essence of it, but amongst all
preparations the coursest and unsafest; and all the passages alleged out of
Paracelsus do in^imate no more, but only that Antimony is an excellent
Medicine, that cures (says he) the Leprosy, Cicatrices, besides many other
diseases, but for these two I am sure it is false, for neither by the Cup, not
by any other antimoniall Preparation can it be performed. And I believe
Paracelsus spoke he knew not what, when he says, As that Antimony refined
Gold, so by the same reason it purifies the Body of man. He must be void of
reason, who will think this comparison true and right, as if there were the
same reason for Gold a Mineral, having some convenience of Principles with
another mineral, and the Body of man, with which it has no convenience at
all: For the fame might be as well said of all Purging medicines, that cleanse
the body of man from all its imparities; but howsoever the Cup is not the right
preparation of it to give to cleanse Man's body. He brings a second authority
of Martinus Rulandus, who calls his Aqua-benedicta the infusion of this Cup,
which is absolutely false, and Quercetanus, Libavius, Sennertus, and Hartmannus
upon Crollius, yea his own Son Rulandus says otherwise; namely, that his
Aqua-benedicta which he commends so much was made of Antimony indeed, but not
of the Cup, but of ye Crocus metallor, otherwise called Hepar antimony, ye
liver of antimony, or some other better Preparation; as if he did say, that it
was the infusio^ of this Cup, yet it is not to be used by every one, except
they have the same knowledge and judgment, that Rulandus has; neverth less he
used other Medicines as bad as this, which he does commend as much, as his
Extractum Esulae, which is absolutely preferred by him before all other
medicines, and antimony it self, sh^wing that no Medicine is good for every
body. But Alchymists have that property, to extol things to the skies, but
when they come to the trial, they are found false, or else loose their virtues
in other folks hands; As for example, that it cured the Frenzy, it is (...),
for in the dissences of the head, vomiting is very hurtful, by the consent of
all Physicians. That it cured the F^lling sickness, it were to be desired but
it does not prove so, except that comes from the stomach, the head being only
affected by the Sympathy of the said stomach. That it heals Impostumes in
the Lungs, and cured the Pleurisy it is most untrue; For breaking the
impostumes in the lungs, if it be given when they are at maturity, perhaps it
will, because of the great straining of the upper parts of the body, but
another vomit may do the like, if the man can bear it. The truth is, those
that have impostumes in the Lungs are so short winded, that they cannot bear
the straining of a vomit; but howsoever an Impostume to be broken, and to be
healed are two several things, a vomit may do the former, but not the latter.
Concerning the Pleurisy; the Physician, that gives such a purging medicine,
that works upward as well as downward, in such a disease, is much to be
blamed, for working against the rules of Physic. Quercetanus is so bold in
his Pharmacopoea, as to speak of such a Cure, but not in a right Pleurisy,
but because that book is full of lies, I will say no more but this, namely,
that neither he, nor Rulandus ever used the Antimoniall cup, or the regulus out
of which it is made, no^ that Quercetanus his Aqua benedicta was made of it;
for he himself says plainly the contrary, 3dly, He brings the book called
Basilica antimonij, commending Antimony but not the Cup; And to show how
largely these Alchymists speak, he says it cures the French Pox, Leprosy,
Gout, and Falling sickness, which, never a one of them ever performed, and yet
ye Basilica speaks of that preparation of antimony that provokes sweating, as
well as of others. So I may say the like of ^rol^ius, who commends the
Antimonie but no^ the Cup, and so Mylius, and ^^^net^us who commends the
Antimonie but not a word of the cup. As for Mylius, he is but a transcriber of
other men's works and has compiled a mighty great volume without any judgment
word by word out of Paracelsus, Quercetan and others, and has indifferently
put in true or false, whatsoever he found written, so I will not give a straw
for his opinion, when he commends the antimony against diseases, which none of
them did ever cure. For Bornettus, I know him well, he wrote his book, being
very young, and I do not think he believes, that the French Pox, and the
Leprosy may be cured by those means. Thus I have sisted all the authorities
of this man in the behalf of his Cup which prove only that Antimony is an
excellent medicine, powerful in operation, and too powerful in deed, but that
the Cup is the pure essence of it, none of them say, nor will any man that has
any skill in Chemistry ever affirm. Besides he brings some Physicians living
(and some very well known to me, but the greatest part I know not) who (is he
says) have approved his Cup: I will make a good interpreration of their
judgment, for without question the infusion of his Cup will work, and such
bodies might be met withal, in which it has so powerfully wrought that being
able to bear it, they have received much good by it, but that they have said
that his Cup was better and safer then other preparations of Antimonie, or then
other purging Medicines, and that a woman having bought it, has also gained
knowledge when, and in what Diseases to apply it, I will not wrong their
judgment so much as to believe it.

Of the virtues of the Cup.
NOw to come to the virtues of the Cup, he makes a great list of all the
Diseases for which it is good, naming almost all Diseases that have need of
purging from Head to foot, without distinction of the several causes of them,
the Cup is good for them because it purges, and by the same reason all purging
Medicines may do the like, and are good for the same diseases, for Nature has
provided variety of remedies, some strong some weaker, of all sorts, that the
Physician may choose what he thinks most fit for his patient, for one same
remedy, in the same disease is not fit for every one. When we read the books
of Alchymists, they commend other remedies as much as Antimonie for the same
diseases. But let us a little consider some particular Diseases named in his
Pamphlet, which J do except against; It cures perfectly the French Pox, the
Kings evil, the Falling sickness, as he says, in the 9, 10, and 13. th Mark,
which is false; nay J say more it is a very gross mistake, and rash boldness
in him, or any man, to prescribe the infusion of this cup in the Plague, small
Pox, spotted Fever, and Purples, for all violent medicines that draw the
venomous humors of these diseases within the body which Nature does expel to
(...) circumference, do work against the rules of Art. It is also false that
any vomit is good for the Pleurisy; and so I say the like of a Consumption: If
the founder of this Cup had well known the nature of these diseases, he would
never have said so. Indeed where nature has need of purging or vomiting this
cup may serve, observing all that is to be considered in the use of those
evacuations; for we do not deny that it will work, but this we say, that it
being the worst and vnsafest preparation of all others, it is better to use
some other then it, and all those diseases that he brings experience for,
(leaving out those that have been killed by it) might have been performed by
other vomits, made our of the antimony, or other simples working the same
effect.

Of the manner of using the Cup.
NOw the manner of using the cup shows the weakness of the man, he bids to
put the Cup into a pot, and cover it with liquour to be above the cup an inch
or two, then to boil it gently for two hours, and so to keep it warm for
twelve hours, then to take a cup full of it or more, and the quantity of his
liquor is a pint of Wine for two, yet it works better says he, if two or
three cup-fuls be taken, and he is bold to say, that it works without any
violence, gives counsel if it should work three or 4. days together, not to
stop it, and in the end to beware of counter feit Cups. Here are as many
Errors as words; First, it is needless to shape the Regulus into a cup,
seeing the Wine is not to be infused in the cup, but the Cup in the wine in an
earthen pot. Is not a little lump of the same Regulus without any particular
shape, as good as a Cup of it? And if one do steep it, will it not think you
infuse its virtue into the liquour, as well as the Cup, and best of all if it
were in powder? But thus the Regulus had been bought too cheap, but we must
have it a cup or a Ring (forsooth) to make the people believe it is not an
ordinary thing. Secondly, being thus prepared by boiling, makes the drink look
so distastfully, and makes it to lose its virtue, so as if a Child has need of
half a pint, a strong man of two or three, as he says. Let the R^ader go to
an Apothecaries Shop in any part of the Kingdom there he may ^i^d a little
Stibium, which is Antimony in glass, of this let him take six grains weight,
let them steep closely in two or three spoonfuls of white wine, and it will be
every whit as pure as it was without any taste, and it will work as well, and
more safely; but if you fear the Stibium, not without cause, take as much of
the Regulus out of which he makes his cup, use it as I have said, and it will
work in as little quantity. Yea steep the Cup in a quart of Wine close
without any fire, for a fourthnight, give but two or three ounces of that Wine,
and it will work with a better effect. Thirdly, that it works without any
violence, it is not so, for I know many that have taken it, who have been
grievously tormented with it, and this is common to all vomits, yea even when
they are provoked by the strength of nature. Fourthly, it is a pernicious
counsel to suffer a superpurgation, and Physic to work so long, if it
happen well in some strong bodies, it is not to be thought that it will do so
in every one. The last, to beware of counterfeit Cups, is to keep the people
continually bound to him; for (says he) if it be broken, bring it to him in
weight, and for Ten shillings he will give you a new one. This is the best
tricks of all his book, a pound of antimony unprepared is hardly worth above
sixe-pence in the Druggisters Shop, for twelve pence or eighteene-pence more,
of that pound one may have half a pound and more of this Regulus, what the
casting of it into a Cup is worth let any body judge, in very deed three cups
of 4 or 5. ounces a piece, do not stand the maker to above ten Shillings.
Besides when the cup is broken, the virtues are not broken, the pieces being
steeped do retain the same virtue, and will work the same effect, as when
the Cup was whole. The metal then being so good cheap, and the preparation
of it so easy, there is no great fear of counterfeit ones, for a counterfeit
one is like to cost more, then a right one.

To conclude, I say, though this Cup should be so admirable, yet it is beyond
the capacity of any that is not a Physician, to adapte the right use of it to
every person, for all Diseases, times, and places, as we have said already;
nor do I think the Founder himself has the full knowledge of these things.

FINIS.
Jmprimatur,

T. WYKES.
April. 24. 1640.

