The other part of Christian Questions and Answeares, which is concerning the
Sacraments, written by Theodore Beza Vezelian: to which is added a large Table
of the same Questions. Translated out of Latin into English by John Field.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Woodcocke. 1580.

To the Christian Reader.
Least any man should be offended with the reading of these things which are
here written, Beza testifies that he will be ready to confer Christianly
with any concerning the same, and give place too those who shall teach more
certain things out of the word of God.

To the Virtuous and Godly Lady, whom the Lord by his grace has made
gracious, and a Partaker of his gracious gifts, in a far better hope both of
life, and calling, then this, the Lady Katherine Duchess of Suffolk: John
Field wishes increase of grace, constancy, and perseverance in his blessed
truth, to the end, Amen.
I Cannot conceal (Virtuous and Gracious Lady) the manifold benefits, that
not only I, but many others of the faithful servants of God have received at
your graces hand. And forasmuch as I am persuaded, that the only glory of God
and desire of advancing his truth, has been the chief Prouokers of this
your goodness: I seeno cause but that I, both for me self, and for them,
(some of them being now a sleep in the Lord, and resting from their labors)
should have care to show that thankfulness, and good duetifull encouragement
toward your Grace, that therein your goodness has justly deserved. And this
is the cause why at this time, I am bold too dedicate these poor labors of
mine unto your Grace, as a poor pledge of my humble duty, and a testimony too
the posterity of your hearty good will, and unfeigned love, to the glorious
truth of God. And albeit in respect of me and my labor, it be most unworthy
your gracious protection, yet in respect of that excellent instrument of GOD
who wrote it, the matter contained in it, and the necessary use of it, for this
time, it is not only worthy your defense, but deserves great thanks of the
whole Church of GOD: as giving light too many hard and doubtful points,
concerning the Sacraments, and clearly satisfying the intricate Questions of
curious demaunders, besides that it stops the mouths of many carping
adversaries both papists, and Vbiquitistes, who maintain, I wotte not, what
strange and monstrous opinions.

And surely the knowledge of these things, how needful they are too all
Christians, may hereby plainly appear, for that Satan the father of Lies,
and adversary of Gods everlasting truth, bestirred himself never more busily,
for the overthrow and corrupting of it, then in this last age of the world,
that partly by the bitter invasion of crafty and pestilent Heretics, and
partly by the malice of ignorance in many that profess themselves Christians,
he might even swallow up (if it were possible) the most beautiful spouse of
the Son of God. But this is our comfort, that he has her in keeping who
will preserve her, who has taken account of her members, and will not loose
one, who will lead her into all truth, and so mightily defend her, that Hell
gates shall not prevail against her. And too her under your name (good Madam)
do I consecrate and auow this poor myte for the causes aforesaid, most humbly
beseeching you too accept of it, with the same affection that I offer it. I do
it not after the manner of the world, to get or crave any thing: I do it not
to puff you up to pride and vainglory: but to prouok you to good things, that
you may go cheerfully on, in that happy course of the Gospel, where into by
his bou^tiful goodness you are entered. Your Grace now waxes old, the days of
your wearisome pilgrimage pass on apace, your continual sickness, pains,
and infirmities are messengers of preparation too an other and better place.
You have therefore to look about you, and to set all things in order toward
that heavenly journey: Not only to give order for those things that concern
the Christian duty of yours, toward that great God, that you may leave an
holy posterity after you, or at least depart with a clear conscience, for
having performed that duty: but also may your self be furnished of that
provision, that may make you stand with peace in his sight. For the Lord
knows us. He sees us and proves our hearts: The wicked he will gather as a
flock together too the slaughter, and will consecrate them to death. There is
no escape too be made from him: for if they fly from his terror, they shall
fall into the pit, and if they escape the pit, yet they shall fall into the
snare. They that are far of, shall be smitte^ with the plague and they that are
at home, with the sword: yea, they that remain, the famine shall consume
them. Where shall the wicked stand? if they escape, the Lion, a Bear shall fall
upon them: and if both Lion and Bear touch them not, yet leaning in their
own home upon the wall, (as the Prophet says) An adder shall sting them. O
that the wicked of the world, that have no fear of God, who so delight in
iniquity, that they never satisfy themselves in sin, nor make no end in
their wrethed pleasures, would but consider Gods judgments: for then
undoubtedly the terror of his name, would be as a bridle to hold them back,
from those monstrous transgressions, that now adays they commit with all
greediness, without all shame and modesty. If covetousness be in the head of
all, (as the Prophet says) Is there any one that shall not perish with the
sword? there shall be no way to fly: yes they shall fly, but not one shall
thereby be saved. If they go down to hell, his hand shall fetch the^ out: and
if they ascend eue^ to heaven, he shall throw them down. Admit they eat and
drink, yet shall they not be satisfied. Their devises and counsels shall be
scattered. because GOD is with his chosen. If the Lord have determined, who can
defeat his purpose? if his hand be stretch^d out, who ca^ turn it away? Fear
ye wicked. What though your concord be strong, and your purpose is too perke
and peer into heaven? shall not the Lord scatter you, Job. 6. 17.
or ever you be warm in your place? Thanks be to God, who has separated us
from the wicked, that we should be free from their destruction. And let us
keep our selves from them, that they make us not sin against our God. If the
Lord deliver them into Enod. 23. 33.
our hands, let not our eyes spare them to the death, let us not pity them,
nor make any league with the^. Psalm. 26. 4.
I have not sit (says good David) with the Counsel of vanity, and I will not
enter with those that deal in wicked things. They that help them are like
unto them, and they shall drink of the wine of his wrath, they shall drink of
that which is mingled in the cupp of his wrath, and they shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone in the sight of his holy Angels, and in the sight of the
Lamb. But the godly that hear this word and tremble at it, that believe in
him, and obey his voice, that love him best and express their love also to
other, these shall lack no good thing, they shall flourishe as the Palm tree,
and as the Ceders of Libanus shall they be multiplied. Their inheritance is
with the most highest, and their righteousness is before him. He will give them
an everlasting glory, and fill their souls with brightness, their bones will
he deliver, and they shall be as a fruitful Gardeine, and as a fountain of
waters that shall never be dry. They shall praise him, because they shall
rejoice in him, and their seed shall be the seed of peace. If they fall, it
shall be to their good: For the Lord vpholdeth them, and they shall not be
confounded for ever. Oh that we had faithful hearts, that we might truly
rejoice in his promises, then should we not fear. But if our sins might make
us sad, that of taste and feeling of heart we might truly be cast down in
his sight, then should we return to him, that has smitten us, and call upon
him that he might heal us. If we believed in him, we should fear him, and
our sins should be detestable unto us. To this end (my gracious Lady)
has God called us now a long time by his word, by signs from heaven, by
monstrous and unnatural byrthes, by terrible and fearful Earthquakes, that
we might leave of this double dealyng in his sight, that we might serve him
unfeignedly, not in a ceremony, as the manner of the world is, that we might
acknowledge his power, government and Scepter, to be ruled by him, and to
couche down under his hand. We have had wonderful fiery impressions,
unnatural swelling and fading of waters, strange and unknown Stars, Comets
and bloody clouds, with a late terrible Earthquake: such a one and so general,
as neither in the remembrance of our selves, nor of our forefathers, the like
has been read of: but alack what warning have we taken by these things?
Either we attribute them to mere nature, and so lessen the warninges of God,
or else we quickly forget them, as though they concerned not us. By the fine
devises of detestable Epicures, and Godless persons, we make them fall upon
other lands, as though the sins of our land were exempt from his
judgments. As if nature were not made by God, or as though these strange
things were not undoubted tokens of Gods anger, already kindled against us:
nay, though our own hearts bear us witness, that there never lived more
unthankful wretches in the world then we, more irreligious, that for the
most part, have turned religion into wantonness, and denied the power thereof,
and these many gracious years of peace, which should have drawn us forward
and advanced us in the schole of God, we are far worse then we were in the
beginning, and at our first entrance: duller, farther of from knowledge, and
more ignorant, then little children. And if there be any thing in us, it is
only in words. The murders that are committed in the la^d daily, are
monstrous, the whordomes, incest, and Sodomitry most beastly and outrageous,
the pride so Luciferlike, the covetousness so excessive, the idleness so
common, the envy so deadly, that every man can bear witness against his
neighbor, and against him self in his own conscience, which is more then a
thousand witnesses, that God in his justice must needs plague us.

The godly groan in this great ouerflowing of sin, and the whole earth
tottereth with the weight thereof, and yet where are the true fruits of our
repentance? O we fast and pray: I am very glad of that good forwardness and
readiness in our Christian Magistrates, but I would to GOD that we knew the
true fast, that we came not before GOD like hypocrites, but as instructed and
true humbled Christians, that these strange things might indeed fear us from
our sins, and make us reformed from the heart: then should the Calves of
our lyppes be Sacrifices of a sweet savor before our GOD, flowing from a
true and lively Faith which should hold us up in a better hope, and should
work in us, both to witness to others, and to seal to our selves, that we were
no counterfaites, but true Christians. And unless this effect be truly
wrought in us, let us never flatter our selves, though in some cold sort we
use these outward exercises, and bow down our heads like bull rushes. No no,
God must have a through change wrought in us, or else he will change our
places: we must savor more of mortificatio^, and holiness must shine in some
measure in us. Let the world therefore, in that same godles contempt of God and
his divine judgment, see what fell upon their predecessors the wicked, that
lived in Sodom and Gomorrhe, and would not hear the Preacher of righteousness.
If they have the like pride, hard heartednes, riot, idleness, and filthiness not
to be named, where will they stand when the earth shall sink at Gods
judgments? Was God just in punishing the Sichemittes, in hanging up those
twelve Princes, in slaying 24000. in the wilderness, in rooting out the Tribe
of Benjamin, in destroying the sons of Hely, in banishing of David, etc? and
will he not punish us, which are sunk deeper in such transgressions? But as it
is a most certain sign of speedy and unrecoverable destruction, when men
besides their sins live in all impuritie and contempt of repentance: so it
must needs confirm Gods great judgment to be at hand, that the world is so
secure every where, and forgetful of those wonderful examples, that have been
in time tofore. Before Babylon becked to destruction, GOD shook it with a
fearful Earthquake under Sparett, the 17. King of the Assyrians. Before that
great fire kindled in Grecia under Phaeton the King, and after a great
Earthquake in Thessalia, in the time of Deucalion, as the hystoryes report, God
destroyed all the inhabitauntes thereof. Before those great judgments were
performed toward Israel, that Amos the Prophet threatened, God Amos. 1.
sent them a fearful Earthquake in the days of Vziah. Orosius in his second
Book and thirteen Chapter, makes mention of an Earthquake at Rome, when
Proculus Geganus Macerinus and L. Menenius Lanatus were Consulles, after which
followed such a terrible famine, that many, desperate through hunger, cast
themselves hedlong into the River of Tyber. There followed also an outrageous
pestilence after an Earthquake, when Marcus Cornelius Magn. and Lucius Papirius
Crassus were Consulls. Before that same famous Peloponesiacke war, that fell
out to the destruction of the Athenians, there was a terrible Earthquake with a
continual fire seen in the air for the space of threescore and fifteen
days, at last a great stone being tumbled out of the air upon the City. What
shall I speak of that which swallowed up Helice and Bura, two notable Cities,
as Eusebius, Eutropius and diverse other Authors witness? Josephus in his Book
de Iudaico Bello, makes mention of an Earthquake in Judea, wherein there
perished thirty thousand people. And Cornelius Tacitus in his second book
says, that twelve of the most notable Cities in all Asia were swallowed up
in one night. In the 21. year after Christ Eusebius affyrmeth that these
thirteen Cities fell with an Earthquake, Ephesus, Magnesia, Sardis, Mosthene,
Mechiero, Caesarea, Philodelphia, Himulus, Tenus, Cumae, Mirthina, Apollonia,
and Diahircania. What should I reckon all: before that war of the Parthians,
when Carbulus was Proconsul of Syria: before the destruction of cruel Nero, at
the death of Titus H. Vespasians son, there were terrible Earthquakes, and
three famous Cities of Cyprus were swallowed up: four of Asia also in the
time of Traian: further two of Grecia, and three of Galatia. Oros. lib. 7. Cap.
12. Eutrop. Antiochia was so shaken, that scarsely Traian the Emperor escaped,
read Dion. Nicomedian, and a great piece of the City of Nice in the time of
Adrian, fell by an earthquake: so did Nicopolis and Caesarea two famous Cities,
after which followed wonderful calamities in the time of Gordian. Tire and
Sydon was by the same means overthrown, and so was many Cities of the East
before the heresies of the Arrians took footing in the world, when good
Athanasius and other faithful Bishops and Pastors were so cruelly persecuted.
I will say nothing of Antiochia, of Neocaesarea, of Dyrachiu^, of Rome, and
Jerusalem it self: Neither will I speak of nearer times. For it were
impossible to reckon all, I refer al godly men to the latter writers already
published, concerning our late Earthquake. This is most certain that it is an
undoubted token of gods displeasure toward us, to draw us to speedy
repentance. It sets forth unto us the groaning of all creatures and of the
earth it self for that restoration, which the Son of God, Jesus Christ our
Savior shall perform at his coming. And I beseech God that our hearts may
be so shaken from the highest to the lowest, that we may call our selves to a
reckoning of our days paste, to shake of our former sins, that we may
mourn before he strike, that he may have pity upon us, that he may molifie
our stony affections, to make us tremble at his presence: to love his Gospel
with a more fervent love, and to couch down with all obedience. This (good Lady)
is the desire of my heart, both toward your grace, and toward all the Israel
of God. In which state I assure my self, if we be found, though the foundation
of the earth be shaken, and the sea make a noise, yet God will keep Syon, and
the Apple of his eye shall not be touched. The Lord Jesus keep us in this
protection, that we and ours may live and dye in the hope and comfort hereof:
to which I most humbly commend your Grace,

this first of May. 1580. Your Graces most humble in the Lord, Ioh. Field.

A Table of the questions expounded in this other part, according to the number
of the figures noted in the margin.
Of the Sacraments in general, and first of the name Sacrament.
1 THat which the Hebrews call Sud, the Chaldeans Razo, the Grecians (...),
and the Latins have turned Sacrament, is not any where spoken of the ancient
or of those same new ceremonies in the holy scriptures, to which
notwithstanding there is not any thing added; 2 Why the Grecians called these
rytes, mysteries. 3 Why the Latins called the same Sacraments.
The grounds of the definition of a Sacrament.
4 That the Sacraments are therefore added to the simple and plain word, that
we also might be instructed by the eyes, and yet that hearing excels the
fight, for the atteyning of the knowledge of things. 5 After what manner the
eyes serve to the knowledge of spiritual things. 6 God gives all the opinions
of Christian religion to every sort of men, though not with the sin and a
like manner of teaching. 7 By the Sacraments although otherwise, yet nothing
more is taught in the Church then in the plain and simple word. 8 The manner
of teaching by the Sacraments, because of the word adjoined to it, is playner
then the other, neither is it without cause thereunto added. 9 Why and how
far forth, Types, Ceremonies, Images and parables are obscurer and darker
then the Sacracraments. 10 Some signs are natural, some monstrous, othersome
voluntary. 11 The Sacraments are neither natural nor monstrous, but merely
voluntary. 12 Of voluntary signs some are only for memory, others are simply
significatiue, furthermore, by others both some thing past is signified, and
some thing present is given, and then that now given, and also to be given is
sealed.
The definition of a Sacrament for the sign.
13 What a Sacrament is, being simply tataken for a sign. 14 What the working
word is, and generally what is the use of words. 15 Sacraments without use,
have not the effect of a Sacrament. 16 Christ him self, not only that which
we obtain in him, is the thing signified, both by the simple word and also by
the Sacraments.
The definition of a Sacrament for the whole mystical action.
17 What a Sacrament is, being taken for the whole mystical and holy action.
18 In what sense the Sacraments may be said to be actions: and how they differ
properly, from sacrifices.
The peculiar exposition of the definition of Sacraments.
19 What are the signs in the Sacraments. 20 What analogy or argument is in
the Sacraments? 21 What the things signified are. 22 Why there is said to be
a spiritual sealing. 23 Why the word of Faith is to be expressed in the
definition of a Sacrament. 24 The object in the Sacraments is both the things
past and also to come. 25 What the sealing or assurance is. 26 What that same
natural establishment is of our consociation or fellowshyp in Christ. 27 What
the efficient cause is of Sacraments. 28 What the matter of the sacraments is.
29 The spiritual and heavenly matter in the Sacraments is threefold. 30 Christ
is not called the heavenly matter of the Sacraments in respect of the Godhead,
or for the soul. 31 In what sense the body and blood of Christ may be called
the spiritual and heavenly matter. 32 These mysteries are not mysteries in
imagination. 33 What the benefit of washing declares. 34 What may be
understood by the benefit of nourishment. 35 What it is to apply the
benefits of Christ unto us in the Sacraments. 36 What the form of Sacraments
is. 37 What alteration or change there is in Sacraments. 38 The outward and
inward matter are also essential parts of the Sacraments. 39 What are the ends
of Sacraments. 40 Of what things past the Sacraments are remembrances.
Of the copulation or knitting together of the signs and of the things
signified in the Sacraments.
41 Whether Christ be present in the place where the Sacrament is administered,
42 How whole Christ, and all that belongs to Christ, differ. 43 The difference
in respect of another thing or another, and for it self. 44 That whole Christ,
but not the whole of Christ, is present in what place soever the Sacraments
are administered. 45 The chief head of the controversy of the real presence
of Christ's flesh. 46 Four opinions of the real presence of the flesh of
Christ, why they stray from the truth. 47 A special manner of Christ's
presence is required in the Sacrament. 48 The manner of this special presence
is to be esteemed by the end. 49 The presence of Christ merely respective, set
forth by examples. 50 The real presence and the sacramental presence diverse.
51 The sacramental presence depends upon the only will of God. 52 The real
distance of the substances of the sign and things signified, does not make
frustrate the Sacraments.
Of the partaking of the signs and things signified.
53 The bodily signs are received by the instruments of the body. 54 The
benefits of Christ, seeing they are qualities, are only received of the mind,
endued with faith. 55 Neither the person of the word, nor the soul of Christ,
can otherwise be received of us then by an effectual virtue and operation, 56
The cleaving or sticking of the same body with ours is monstrous. 57
Notwithstanding it behooves us to be united to Christ himself in deeed, but
spiritually. 58 Why this partaking and communicating of Christ himself is
called spiritual. 59 Why the same is called mystical. 60 Why the same is
called an uniting. 61 The communion of the substance of Christ himself is
confirmed by similitudes. 62 What in effect our communion with Christ himself
is, and whereto it tends. 63 Why there is rather mention made of the flesh
then of the god head in our uniting together with. Christ. 64 Although Christ
ca^ be only applied to the mind endued with faith, yet the fruit of this
application belongs to the body. 65 Christ himself is truly communicated by
faith not only in the simple word, but also in either of the sacraments. 66
What difference there is between the mere spiritual and sacrame^tal partaking
of Christ. 67 Christ himself with the same his gifts, was the matter of the
old types and sacraments, 68 Augustine rightly said, that the Sacraments can
have no astonishme^t as wonders.
The co^paring of the old and new sacraments
69 The old Sacraments agree in some things with the later, and in some things
they disagree amongst themselves. 70 In what things they agree. 71 In what
things they disagree. 72 The multitude of Sacraments does not make the state
of the old Fathers better. 73 How the proportion of our Sacraments is more
significant then of the Fathers. 74 The Fathers and we have eaten the same
meat. 75 and 76 How, the flesh of Christ, not yet being indeed, was eaten
of the fathers.
Of the Sacramental forms of speaking.
77 The Scripture does speak sometime properly, and sometime figuratively of
the Sacraments. 78 What Sacramental forms are proper. 79 The first
Sacramental figurative form is that, whereby the name of the Element is
attributed to the thing signified. 80 The other form, whereby the name of the
thing signified is attributed too the element. 81 The third kind, whereby the
effect of the thing signified is attributed to the signs. 82 The fourth kind,
whereby that which is proper to the signs, is attributed to the thing
signified. 83 A metaphorical body not therefore too be imagined of us in the
Sacraments. 84 Whether to believe and too eat the flesh of the Lord, be all
one. 85 The Sacramental figurative forms, do not darken but make plain
those things which are taught of the Sacraments. 86 What the use is, of the
Sacramental figurative forms.
Of the number of the Sacraments of Christians.
87 That there are only two Sacraments of the Christian Church.
Of Baptism.
88 What the word Baptism imports. 89 What baptism, is being taken for
the first Sacrament of the christian church.
Of the outward Baptism.
90 What the signs of baptism are, 91 Of the forged signs added too
Baptism.
Of the things signified in Baptism.
92 The thing that is signified by the Element of water. 93 The thing signified
by the rytes of baptism. 94 Why baptism was ordained in steed of old
washinges. 95 The sprinkling of the water of Baptism is signified by the
ancient sprinkling of the blood. 96 What it is, to put on Christ 97 What the
outward washing in baptism is. 98 How we dye, are buried and rife again with
Christ in baptism. 99 After what manner Christ may be said to be dead, buried,
and raised from the dead, for our sins. 100 How mutual fellowship in Christ
is established in Baptism.
Of the pattern answering to the figure of Baptism.
101 What the Exemplar is, and what the respo^dent figures of baptism is. 102.
Baptism not only a sign, but also a seal. 103 The causes and parts of
Baptism. 104 What the formal word of Baptism is. 105 What it is to baptize
into the name of the father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. 106 The
Apostles have changed nothing in the formal word of baptism. 107 What the
effects of baptism are, and from whence they arise. 108 Sin is one thing,
and sins another. 109 What the remission of sins is. 110 What regeneration
is. 111 At what time the effect of baptism begins, 112 Baptism abolisheth
not sins only past. 113 How far forth original sin ii taken away by
baptism.
Sundry Questions concerning Baptism.
114 How far forth Baptism is necessary to salvation. 115 Whether the
Baptism of John and of Christ, was all one. 116 All are not to be baptized.
117 The faith of him that is to be baptized does not necessarily go before
baptism. 118 Those are to be baptized, which are comprehended within the
Tables of the covenant. 119 Profession of faith is required of those that are
grown to years of discretion, being to be baptized. 120 Children of Turks
are not to be admitted to Baptism. 121 Neither of the Jews. 122 and 123 The
children which are borne either of the Parents being a Believer, are probably
thought to belong unto the covenant of Christ. 124 We please God also being
about to believe, not yet believing. 125 The promises being of the law in
themselves are made of the Gospel, Christ. 126 What the faith of Parents
avails to their children. 127 The particular hidden judgments of God, are
to be left to God, concerning the children of the godly. 128 What Baptism
seals in children not yet believing in act. 129 Whence those Questions
sprang, sometime accustomed to be made, in the baptism of infants. 130 Why the
children of Papists may be baptized. 131. 132. The Church yet too be in the
papacy, although papistrie be not christianity. 133 A papist being of the
years of discretion and not yet baptized, is not forthwith to be baptized.
134 Upon what condition the children of Papists are to be baptized, also of
Jews and Turks. 135 The children of all sorts of Heretics not to be
baptized. 136 The office of baptizing is commanded too the Ministers of the
word. 137 Why Paul denies himself to be sent to baptize. 138 The
Ecclesiastical callinges of the Papists are unlawful by their own Canons.
139 The papists do vainly boast of the laying on of hands. 140 Baptism
administered of mere private men, is to be accounted no Baptism. 141 The
beginning of our salvation is not deryued from Baptism. 142 Private men do
much differ from those, which, not being lawfully called, do yet exercise the
ministry. 143 The Baptism of the Papists although defiled, yet it is a
baptism. 144 A fault in the essential form of Baptism does make Baptism
of none effect but a fault in the doctrine does not so. 145 They are not
without sin and blame, which offer their children to be baptized of
sacrificing popish priests. 146 The children of the Saints being dead before
they can obtain baptism, are not therefore deprived of the kingdom of God.
147 and 149 The putting off of baptism to be reproved. 148 Why circumcision
was appointed the eight day at the furthest. 150 and 151 What is too be
determined concerning the time and place of administering baptism. 152
Concerning the rytes of baptism, and chiefly of the sprinkling and threefolde
dipping. 153 etc. How the form of baptism is to be observed. 157 The force
of baptism is extended to the whole life of a man. 158 and 161 Why baptism is
not iterated and often used, and yet the supper of the Lord, is. 159 Every one
that sins, does not shut himself from the kingdom of God 160 How far
forth those which be excommunicate and shut out of the kingdom of God.
Of the Supper of the Lord, and first of the sundry names of it.
862 The names of the Supper of the Lord used in the holy Scriptures. 163 The
names of the Supper of the Lord used of the Fathers. 164 and 165 Why the
Supper of the Lord is called a thanksgeuing, and how far forth it is like
unto a Sacrifice. 166 How greatly Satan has abused it by the name of the
Sacrament of the Altar. 167 Of the name of the Mass
Of the Supper of the Lord it self.
168 etc. A definition of the Supper of the Lord, and so a certain short
declaration of the parts thereof. 172 How that bread and that wine differ
from common bread and wine. 173 and 874 What the Sacramental rytes are in
general, and of what things they are signs. 175 and 176 182 The breaking of
bread is a Sacramental ryte in the supper of the Lord, which ought to be kept.
177 and 178 The proportion and agreement of the signs with the things
signified. 179 Why there is a double Element used in the Supper of the Lord.
180 The use of the cup is necessary in the Supper of the Lord. 181 Expedient
that the Elements of the supper of the Lord be received rather by the Hand
than by the mouth. 183 Horrible abuses put in place of the true rytes. 184.
What the blessing of the Supper of the Lord is. 185 Some certain parts of
the blessing are free in the Church. 186 and 187. A certain form of that
Sacrame^tal blessing is prescribed by Christ. 188 The variety of certain
voices in this form does not cause it to be diverse. 189 In what sense the
words of the institution may be called woorking words to such as have virtue
in them. 190 The institution of the supper of the Lord is to be recited and
expounded plainly and in a known tongue. 191 The proouing of a man's self,
in what things it consists, 192 True, and Perfect do differ. 193 A fault in
the blessing how far forth it hurts the supper of the Lord. 194 The
ouerpassing of the breaking of bread does not make void the action of the
supper of the Lord. 195 and 196 The giving of the signs, the taking, eating
and drinking ouerpassed, there is no supper of the Lord. 197 A fault in the
person, or in the doctrine, or in the intention of the minister does not
hinder to make the action less lawful. 198 The unworthiness of the commer
does withdraw nothing from the truth of the Sacrament. 199 This conclusion is
of no force, The whole Sacrament is offered too every one, therefore whosoever
receives the signs, receives also Christ. 200 and 201 Every one hears not
the word and understands the mysteries: neither every one that understands
them, applies them to himself. 202 Christ being received does always save,
but being refused judges,
Of the expounding of the words This is my body, and this is my blood.
203 That the institution of the Sacrament consists not only in these
words. 204 The distribution of these propositions into their parts. 205 Which
is the subject in the former proposition or sentence. 206 Which is the
Predicate or matter following. 207 Of what sort the Attribute is. 208 etc.
There is no Trope neither in the Subject or in the Predicate, but in the kind
of Attribution. 211 Bread sacramentally signifies the body: and bread is the
Sacrament of the body, declare one thing. 212 What the force of this
sacramental Metonymie or putting of one name for another is. 213 A Metonymical
proposition is more plain and evident then a simple proposition. 214 etc. That
these propositions are figurative, is proved by arguments taken from the
words themselves of the propositions, and of the reason of the proposition.
222 etc. Other arguments taken from the things going before and coming after
also from the circumstances and conference of other places of the scripture.
231 An argument taken from the common and substantial form of all
Sacraments. 232. etc. What the specifiall form of the Supper of the Lord
is, and what the force thereof is. 235 An argument from the ascension and
remaining of the body of Christ in heaven. 236. and 237 An argument from the
local limitation, and essential property of the glorified body of Christ.
238 An argument from a necessary consequent.
Sundry questions of the Supper of the Lord.
239 At what time the Supper is to be celebrated. 240 In what place. 241 Of
the night meetings of the Christians. 242 Of the celebration of the Supper of
the Lord in private houses besides the time of the Ecclesiastical meeting. 243
Common bread rather to be used then sweet bread. 244 and 245 Of that show,
carrying about and worshipping used in the Eucharist. 249 Whether all comers
are to be admitted to the Supper. 247 There may be a church where there is not
the use of excommunicating from the supper of the Lord. 247 The Supper of the
Lord is not to be abstained from of those which are pure, because of some that
be impure. 249 Every one is willed to come worthily to the supper. 250 A
preparation to a refutation here after.
An end of the Table of the Questions
To the Christian Reader.
GENTLE Reader, concerning the words of art contained in this book, I must
pray thee to take a little pains, by the circumstances to gather the meaning of
the^. If I should, as some other have done, make them speak English, yet if
thou be ignorant of the arts, they would in mine opinion have been as dark to
thy understanding, and much darker then they be now. And that may easily
appear by those curious heads that have gone about too make Logique speak
English, both to the disagracing of it, and also to the lessening of the force
and signification of those words of Art, which al Arts have and must have
proper and peculiar to them selves: but if thou will mark the matter
diligently, that which goes before and follows, it shall be easy for thee,
to understand what the Author means. In mean time, I for my part have
done the best I can, and will be glad to learn at the feet of any that shall
teach me better. The Lord Jesus increase our knowledge, and give us Faith in
him for ever. Amen.

Farewell, the 3. of May. 1580. I. F.

Errata.
3. Question. For Ceremonies whiles, read which whilst. 15 For from them,
read for them. Ibidem. For condemning that hold, read condemning those that
hold. Ibidem. For words and omnipotency, read in the omnipotency. 55 For,
who is not being, put out being. 59 For misery, read mystery. 94 For, often
repentance, read vsaunce. I55 For, the some, read same. Ibidem. For, in deed,
read in steed. 169 For, mad, read mad. 201 For, such time of men, read
such kind of men. 940 For, the^ attribute, read the atribute. 228 For, as
often things unlike, read as often as etc. 288 For, when had, read when he
had.
The second part of Christian Questions, wherein is maintained the true opinion
of the Sacraments: By Theodore Beza Vezelius.
Question. I.
WHat is a Sacrament?


Answer. All the old Latin Divines almost have so turned, that same Greek
word (...) peradventure following the common translation of the Latin
interpreter of the Bible, who in most places has so expressed it.


Question. Verily I do grant this thing, but I do marvel that the Prophets
and Apostles, the very Writers of both the Testaments, do in no place call
those which we call the old and new sacrament Sud or (...). For that same place
of S. Paul to the Ephe. 5. 32. does not pertayne unto the action it self,
but rather unto the effect thereof: to wit unto our uniting and growing up
together with the head itself.


Answer. It is even so as thou say: and yet for all that we must not
think that the Greek fathers, when they called those holy ordinances,
mysteries, or the Latin fathers when they called them Sacraments, did add
any thing to the word of God. For we are not forbidden for instruction sake, to
use some words be sides the word of God, so that we do it not unadvisedly,
neither do change any whit in the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles it
self.


2. Question.
But wherefore were those same holy ordinances so called?


Answer. Why the Grecians called those holy ordinances, mysteries, the thing
it self shows, to wit, co^paring the^ with the simple preaching the word of
God. Forindeed this preaching is plain and manifest: but these ordinances have
a mystical and secret signification, because they be one thing, and eyt
teach another. As heathen and profane nations had their mysteries and their
mystical secrets, whereby after a wonderful manner Satan did bewich men: so
the first ordained Christian churches in Grecia, that they might distinguish
those holy ordinances (to which indeed they that were newely entered into
religion were not to be admitted) from the simple Christian doctrine, did add
those same words of mysteries and secrets, of a common use, to signify holy
things, albeit in times past they were applied to signify most filthy
ceremonies.


3. Question.
But it seems that the consideration of that same latin word Sacrament
should not be altogether the same.


Answer. Neither in very deed is it. But it seems to me, that the latins
borrowed this word, from that same Sacrament or oath which was woonte too be
used of Soldiers, wherein they solemnly and in certain prescript words were
bound first to the common weal, then to the Emperor: and that plainly
appears out of that learned and ancient writer Tertullian. For so he writes
in his book De Corona Militis: I think (says he) we must search out, whether
warfare be meet at al amongst Christians. Do we not believe that it is
lawful too bring in an Humane Sacrament upon a Divine, and to aunsweare to
another Lord, after Christ, and to renounce father and mother, and every
neighbor, whom the law commands us to honor and love next after God? By
which words this also appears to be showed, that those same solemn
Covenants which were woonte too be required of those that were newely entered
intoo religion; Do thou believe? I believe: Do thou renounce? I renounce;
were taken after a sort from that same Custom of the warlike oath, and so
applied too the Baptism whereby Christians swear obedience to Christ the Lord
and King. And hereof is that same saying of the same Tertullian too the
Martyrs: We are called to the warfare of the living GOD, even then when we
answer to those words of the Sacrament. And also that of Hieronymus to
Helidorus Remember the day of thy nonage, wherein being buried with Christ in
Baptism, thou swarest too the words of the Sacrament. Yea and the very
word of going a warfare is often used of Moses, concerning the whole worship
of God. Now it ought to seem no wonder that the supper of the Lord began also
to be called a Sacrament, which both was joined with the Baptism of those yt
were newly received into religion, as may appear by the 2. Apology of Iustine,
and out of the old books concerning their rites and ceremonies, and also is
the pledge of the vowed and sworn fellowship made in baptism.


Question. But why was that oath called a Sacrament?


Answer. Eue^ because soldiers using holy rites vowed and consecrated
themselves, with ungodly ceremonies whilst many Christian soldiers refused, they
suffered martyrdom.


4. Question.
These things concerning the name do satisfy me. But this does not a little
trouble me, that whereas my mind seemed in our first treatise to be quieted I
know not how it falls out that the very name sacrament being heard, it is
again troubled, as though I know not what new matter were further to be known
of me, and so much the rather because there is no controversy, that at this day
more embusieth christian Churches then that.


Answer. This is the craft of Satan, wc never mocked and deceived me^ more
being addicted to those outward things, the^ with the outward worship of God. Now
here in offense has been committed two manner of ways. For some will seem so
altogether of ye spirit, that they despise all outward things as gross: others
again believe nothing in a manner, unless they may feel and handle it with their
hands. But they that will hear God first speking by his prophets, and then by
his Apostles shall go to neither side. But hereof we shall see more hereafter,
that al things may be handled in their fit place. In few words therefore thus I
answer thee. Although God teach us spiritual and everlasting things inwardly
by his spirit, notwithstanding he seems to have set this law unto him self, to
teach us the same by the senses, wc are given us unless it be when he would
work any thing extraordinarily in his children. Now there are five senses as
it were the messengers of the mind, too wit, seeing, hearing, tasting,
smelling, and feeling. Of these God has made special choice of two, too wit,
seeing and hearing, of which I would gladly learn of thee, whether thou
think to excel the rest?


Question. I think, Seeing, whose place above the rest seems to be
unspeakable.


Answer. Thou art greatly deceived. For albeit the sight seem by kind as
it were too draw nearest the very nature of the mind it self, as well for
the swiftnes of the eyes, as for their sharpness in beholding things: yet
notwithstanding forasmuch as thou can see nothing but that wc is to be seen,
and as a man would say, sightable, and in those things themselves which are
seen, the most notable things cannot be seen, but in mind: and there are more
things infinitely which cannot be beholden then which may be seen with the
eyes: and to be short, seeing whatsoever is conceived in the mind may by the
sound of words, (for sound is appointed to teach the mind by the ears) after
some sort be expressed. It follows that hearing by infinite odds is a more
profitable instrument, then seeing, for ye knowing of those things that are
conceived in the mind.


Question. I came that I might hear a divine, and not a natural Philosopher.


Answer. When thou know to what end these words te^d, thou shall well
understand, ye I do not any whit at all decline from the scope and end of a
Divine. And if it be a wicked thing for them that speak of Divine things, too
touch any thing of natural Philosophy, then then thou must of necessity
blotte out in a manner all the word of GOD. Deniest thou therefore that there
is greater use of the ears, the^ of the eyes for the knowledge of things:


Question. No not so verily, seeing we learn every thing by hearing, and only
behold things that are sightable or to be seen, neither are we cunning in
the^, unless we be by hearing taught of others, both what and what manner of
things they are. But whereto tend these things?


Answer. That thou should know, that when God appointed to teach man,
concerning that same secret will of his (in the knowledge whereof consists
all our salvation) he chose out from amongst all the other senses, that of
hearing, as most fit for that purpose, by which faith comes, and therefore
Romans 10.
righteousness and life, as the Apostle teaches. And her of is that same
authority and worthiness of the word of God so oftentimes witnessed in the
holy Scriptures.


Question. But in vain is it uttered to them that are deaf: And thou have
taught in thy former treatise, that we are altogether by nature unapt to hear
the word of God.


Answer. Now truly any man may very well hear that is endued with the sense
of hearing, and also may understand the meaning of those things he has heard
neither is he deuoyd of reason. But in good earnest to agree and consent to
these things so heard and understood, as right and true, no man can do it,
but by the peculiar grace of the holy Ghost, which notwithstanding is given to
many Reprobates for their farther judgment. To conclude, for a man to apply
the promise of salvation in Christ particularly to himself which is the very
property of faith, this is only given to the elect, which gift we call, the
regenerating grace. This foundation being laid, in deed the word of God is
not preached to them that are deaf. GOD giving us ears to hear, and as Saint
Luke says opening our hearts, that we might apply through faith unto our
selves, those things understood with our ears, which flesh and blood teaches
not.


5. Question.
I see not yet how these things should belong unto the Sacraments.


Answer Yea, but I have said before, that God to the end he might certify
us of his good will in saving us, has also chosen the sense of seeing, which
was the cause of instituting the sacraments


Question. But seeing these same everlasting and heavenly benefits, which are
set forth unto us in the holy scriptures to be laid hold upon by faith in
Christ are spiritual, they cannot be seen but in mind, yea and Christ
himself cannot now be seen by any carnal eyes.


Answer. Thou say very true. But GOD has found out a way whereby he
might in a manner set these things before our eyes, yea which were of them
selves invisible and were for the greatest part (as I may say) not to be
understood. Now that thou may see this matter more plainly, I will not stick
to use a distinction used of that same Dionysius whosoever he were. He says
therefore, that partly the doctrine whereby god delivers unto us those same
holy things, is clear and applied to our knowledge, as when this or that is
spoken unto us in usual and known words: partly darckly and mystically
spoken, which also he calls symbolical, that is, which is so after a certain
sort taught, yt it does not by and by set forth those things naked and to be
understood, but as it were leads us about by certain things enterlaced and
wrapped up. And that it is so, the holy Scriptures plainly show, as we will
anon declare.


6. Question.
Are therefore some principles of Christian doctrine plainlyer and some
darkelyer taught of God, in the Church?


Answer. Surely in this point many have grievously offended, because they
translated those things to the things themselves, that belonged to the form
and manner of teaching: as though forsooth he taught, I cannot tell what part of
heavenly wisdom to be necessary to salvation to the common sort: and another
part to belong I cannot tell to what more perfect men.


7. Question.
Do thou say therefore, that no other thing is taught of God by the eyes or
in the sacraments, then that which is perceived by the ears, or by the simple
word?


Answer. I say that these differ not in the things themselves that are
taught, but in the manner of teaching.


8. Question.
But to what purpose was it to add that symbolical and obscurer manner of
teaching to that simple and plain kind, if no other thing be taught in that
then in this?


Answer. Yea rather that wc thou think to be the harder, is the plainer and
more effectual. For teline I pray thee if that be not more certain unto thee,
which thou per ceiuest by more senses, to wit both by hearing and seeing, the^
that which thou understand by hearing only:


Question.
I grant, if those things whereof some man speaks unto me be also set
before mine eyes. But what if those things be not plainly seen, but be only
shadowed forth by some signs?


Answer. I answer that then that showing forth is more effectual, if the
explication of that sign be added, then if it were only handled in words.
For I pray thee if the Mayor or chief governor giving thee ye possession of
some houses in words, should there with all deliver into thy hand, the keys
the pledge of that possession, whether thou would not be the more assured of
that thing, then if he had delivered those houses unto thee in vare words.


Question Do thou say therefore that this same other way of teaching our
salvation, which thou call symbolical, because it is done by certain signs
set before our eyes has certain words added wherein the very signification of
those signs is set forth?


Answer. I say indeed, yt in this matter, whereof we now entreat, yt is, in ye
sacraments of the church properly so called: For othermise also ye types,
ceremonies, and images in visions, and to conclude parables, to wc, there was
notalwaies added their explicatio^s, they are referred too this mystical
divinity. For God taught ye church more obscurely before Christ was given to
it, the^ Christ himself afterward did, and after Christ the Apostles: and also
he instructed his disciples more familiarly, then ye common people, when he
spoke unto these as they deserved by parables, but opened unto the^ the
mysteries Luke. 18. 10.
of the kingdom of heaven. Now that thou may also the better understand
this, will it please thee, that we divide these sacraments or signs into
several kinds:


10. Question.
It very well pleases me. How many kinds therefore I pray thee are there of
them?


Answer I say, following Augustines stepps in this matter, that some are
natural, as smoke is a sign of fire: others are prodigious and joined with
some miracle of which sort the Lord teaches there shall be some in the
Sun, Moon, and Stars: to conclude, Math. 24. Luke. 21.
other some are either of the will and devise of men, as a bushe hanged up is a
sign that wine is to be sold: or of God as the rainebowe in heaven, is an
evident sign, that the world Genesis 9. 15.
shall never be destroyed with the floode.


11. Question.
But to what kind do thou refer the Sacraments?


Answer. Surely forasmuch as they are neithee natural nor miraculous signs,
they are referred to the last sort, that is, to those that are voluntary,
instituted by the will and appointment of God.


Question. Yea, but they are natural things, especially those which are given
in our Sacraments.


Answer. I grant it: but in that they are sacraments, verily they have not
this of nature.


Question. They are therefore miraculous. For there is nothing more beyond
nature, then that which is performed in the Sacraments, and the Apostle says,
that it is a great mystery that is ordained in the supper.


Answer I treat not of miracles, which also are called signs and tokens
because they sealed the power of God, and ye truth of the prophetical and
apostolical doctrine. Mark. 16: neither of those signs yt were showed to this
or that man for the co^firming of their faith, or to the whole people (though
not to a perpetual use) such as Manna was from heaven, or the passage through
the red sea, but of the ordinary sacraments, ordained for the continual use of
the whole church, whereof Augustine entreating in his 3 book of the Trinity
chapter. x. and indeed expressly naming it the holy bread: These things (says
he) may have honor as religious things, but they cannot be woondered at as
merueilous things. Now that which thou did allege out of the Apostle, is
not spoken of the signs but of the effects which follow the lawful use of the
sacraments, as I will declare in his place.


12. Question.
But these which thou call voluntary signs, or ordained by God, be they of
the same kind?


Answer. No not so. For some are only for remembrances, that is, ordained and
appointed for that use, that they might only be monuments of things past, as
the xii. stones taken out of the botto^e of Jordan, which might be a witness
of the river dried up. Moreover others, are put for signs, that is, such as
either set forth a thing present, or a thing to come: as the rainbow in the
firmament being not only a sign of the covenant begone with Noah, but also as
it were a certain pledge that neither now or ever hereafter there shall be any
more drowning of the whole world. To conclude, others some are so ordained,
that besides that they call somewhat passed, to our memory again, they witness
also, that that thing for the signification whereof they are used, is truly
and in deed given unto us, and they do as it were seal the promise thereof in
us. So Christ breathing upon his Disciples, gave them the holy Ghost, inwardly
in spiring, that which he signified by the outward breathing and therwithal
giving it.


Question. To what kind therefore do thou referrethem whereof we entreat?


Answer. To the last, whereby something past is signified, something present is
given, and that thing now given, and to be given, is sealed.


Question. Will thou therefore, that the sacraments whereof we shall entreat, be
partly reme^brances of things past, and partly seals of things present, and
hereafter to come?


Answer. Yea even so.


Question. Therefore I would at the length that these things should be
declared unto me by some fit difinition.


Answer. I will do as much as in me lies: But so as I touch by the way those
old ones, so far forth as these new may and ought also to be understood
by comparing them with these.


Question. This is the thing also I seek.


Answer. But I cannot yet satisfy thee further, but with a preface.


Question. Why so I pray thee seeing we have now by way of preface spoken so
many things already, and also thou have said that in the sacrament we are
taught none other thing, then what we are taught by the outward word.


Answer. So is it needful that we might aboyd the sophistical cauilles, wc
Satan specially has used in this behalf, thereof taking occasion, for that,
men are taken with none more certain baits then bodily things, wc when they
are referred unto spiritual things whereto they serve, it falls out
contrariwise that we measure spiritual things by the nature of bodily
things, wc is the continual beginning and offspring of idolatry: Wherefore
Augustine wittily and truly repeated this sentence, that it is a miserable
bondage to take the signs for the things signified.


13. Question.
Let us therefore once again use the exposition of that doubtful word.


Answer. I see that a Sacrament in this matter is sometime called the signs
only, and sometime the things themselves sacramentally signified, as we have
said in the first signification: therefore thus I define it. A sacrament is a
visible sign, ordained of God for the church, by the use whereof Christ with
his benefits, with respect eternal life, is so by a certain fit proportion
signified, that also truly and in very deed he is sealed in the hearts of the
believers.


13. Question.
I pray thee that thou will expound this difinition unto me.


Answer. I call that a sign wc Augustine so defines, Lib. 2. cap. 1.
of christian doctrine, that he says it is a thing, wc besides the show that
it offers to the senses, makes by it self some other thing to come into our
remembrance as water considered in the use of Baptism, besides the show of
water that it sets before the eyes, represents unto our minds, the blood,
whereby our sins be washed away. I add, ordained by god that I may show, partly
yt neither by their own nature, neither by miracle, but by ye institution and
or dina^ce of god, those natural things are made sacraments: partly that I may
teach that this change is not to be attributed to ye words themselves
pronosiced, but wholly to the ordination of God: the which ordinance is plainly
expressed in the words themselves.


14. Question.
Deniest thou therefore that woorking word, as they call it?


Answer. If thou call that the working word, that witnesses God to work
somewhat, I admit that speech: If thou call it so, as though God had put some
virtue in the words themselves, I reject this dream, as altogether magical or
enchanting.


15. Question.
What virtue therefore have these voices and words?


Answer. They have this virtue to show unto us the will of God of any matter,
whether he promise, threate^ or command, or to be short, whether he do this or
that. And I say that nothing else is too be attributed to the words pronounced
of any, but that they be signs of those things wc they are said to be. I
add, for the Church, that I may distinguish those particular and momentarie
sacraments, which belong to the whole company of the faithful, and belong to a
continual use from them, I add farther by whose use, that I may confute their
gross error who dream I cannot tell of what divine quality infused into the
signs, which they should have without the use it self, whereupon have
followed infinite superstitions very ridiculous, that I speak no worse of
them.


Question. Thou say therefore (that I may use this example) that that
consecrated bread of the Lords Supper, out of the action it self, is common
bread, which notwithstanding in the action it self is the true Sacrament of
the Lords body.


Answer. I say so.


16. Question
It seems notwithstanding that many of the old fathers being notable men
thought otherwise.


Answer. Of this we shall see more hereafter in his proper place. I add
that Christ and his benefits are set forth unto us by a fit proportion.
First that I may show the thing signified by all those Sacraments whereof we
entreat, as also by the simple word of God, not too be only those benefits
which we obtain by Christ, whereof we have discoursed more fully in our
former treatise: but specially to be that Christ himself, whom whosoever
possesses not, he cannot obtain any of these by him. I call that a fit
proportion, which causes the things signified to be offered by the sign to
the understanding set before the eyes. For I pray thee would thou paint an
herb, that thou might represent a man to him that would behold a man?
Very well therefore said Augustine: Unless (says he) the Sacraments had some
likeness of those things, they signify they should not be Sacraments. But of
this we shall see more herafter. Last of all I make mention of sealing following
the steps of Romans 4. 11.
the Apostle, who not only calls Circumcision a sign, but also a Seal,
that we might know that the Lord in deed performs that which he promises by
the signs added thereto. Now indeed that thing, although it be offered unto
all, yet notwithstanding the believers only are made partakers thereof, in mind
or spiritually, and therefore I added, in the minds of the believers.


17. Question
But how thou do define a Sacrament in that other larger signification?


Answer. So I define it, to be a certain holy action ordained of God for the
church to continue to the end of the world, wherein God by a certain fit
proportion of the signs and things signified, nourishes in us the remembrance
of things past: partly offers unto our minds, even as it were setting the^
before our eyes, heavenly things, wc are declared by the word of Institution
added thereto, and must spiritually be sealed up by the means of faith:
whereby, to be short, the separation of the children of God from the world, and
their mutual fellowship is ratified and confirmed.


18. Question.
I would have thee particularly to explane this definition unto me: and why
thou should call the sign an action, seeing neither the signs nor the
things signified are actions.


Answer. Yea but certain kinds of signs are actions, as by and by I will
declare. But admit it be no action whatsoever here fall out, yet
notwithstanding this general word is set in this definition, because both
the signs themselves and the things signified, are thereto referred, that
doing that God has commanded both they might be signs unto us, and those
things might be bestowed unto us. Now the Sacrifice is also an holy actio^
commanded to the church from above, but only so much differing from this, as
there is difference betwixt to give, and to take. For in sacrifices, we offer
somewhat; in the Sacraments, we receive somewhat. But hereof more hereafter.


Question. I ask not why thou say these are holy, why from above, and to
conclude, why commanded to the church: For I understand these things by the
former. But I demand why thou addest that speech [euen to the end of the world.


Answer. Because I thought that we had purposed only too entreat of the
Sacraments of the Christian church which without all controversy in the end of
the world are at length too be abolished.


19. Question.
Be it so. But what understand thou by the word [signes?


Answer. Two things, to wit, first that which they were wont to call the
element, that is too say, that earthly and bodily substance, as the water in
baptism, and bread and wine in the Lords Supper: then the rites wc are often
used in the action it self, which also are Sacramental, neither only ought
they to be changed or omitted.


20. Question.
And what call thou the proportion?


Answer. That same agreement of the sign with the thing signified, as of the
washing of water, with the washing of blood, and of the nourishment of this
life with the nourishment of everlasting life.


21. Question.
And what are those same things signified?


Answer. Christ himself, as I have said before, with all his benefits
necessary to the salvation of the particular members of the Church.


22. Question.
And why do thou add that word [spiritually?


Answer. That I may show the sealing of these things to depend upon the
heavenly power and mystical virtue of the holy Ghost, and not upon the bodily
understanding or outward senses, or upon that natural and sensitive
understanding.


23. Question.
Why do thou add [by faith?


Answer. First that I may teach, that indeed the signs are set forth unto
the outward senses, and are received of them: but the things themselves are
offered too the mind, and yet notwithstanding are not received of every mind
(albeit they be offered to the mind of all that come to the Sacraments) but only
are received of that mind that is endued with faith: because faith is the
only instrument of receiving Christ.


24. Question.
But why do thou make mention of things past?


Answer. Because our faith looks partly too those things which Christ for
our sake has performed, and partly it beholds the promises, wc are not yet
fulfilled in us.


25. Question.
What call thou Healing?


Answer. A more effectual application by the increase of faith. For the
greater Faith is, the more excellent is the effect thereof, that Christ with his
gifts may be as it were more and more engraven in us: whereto the Apostle
having regard, he says that Christ grows up in us, and we again in him.


26. Question
But what is that same natural establishment of our fellowship in Christ?


Answer. So I call that same spiritual knotte of love, whose bond is, in the
right use of the Sacraments, strongly tied, as it were, of members knit unto
the same head, and quickened by the same spirit, as well by outward profession,
as by the access of the inward affection.


27. Question.
Say therefore what is the efficient cause of our Sacraments?


Answer, Christ, God, and man according to his own good will and power, which
he testifies in prescript words by the mouth of the minister.


28. Question.
And what is the matter?


Answer. The matter of the Sacraments is two fold: one earthly, the other
heavenly, as Ieremias witnesses, wc a man may also call esse^tial parts. For in
very deed whatsoeueuer is in ye Sacrament either it offers it self to the
outward se^ses, and so is considered as a sign: or else it is a spiritual or a
heavenly thing, and so is signified by that outward.


29. Question
What thou did mean by the name of sign, thou have said before, but what
do thou call the spiritual and heavenly thing?


Answer. I call the heavenly thing chiefly Christ himself, then his
benefits, and last of all, the application both of himself and of them unto
us.


Question. Go to then, let us speak of these three severally: will thou not,
as I suppose, understand by the name of Christ, the alone power and operation
of Christ flowing intoo us, and much more also that his only righteousness,
which by imputation is made ours?


Answer. Thou iudgest aright, for Christ himself must become ours, and must
be joined unto us, as in whom are al these things, that we may draw those
things from him, that are in him: and that appears plainly by the proportion.
For thou can not be washed, unless water be applied, and thou can not be
fed, but by taking meat and drink.


Question. But as I guess, thou understand Christ wholly, and not either his
Divinity alone, or his soul alone, or his body alone.


Answer. I understand, whole Christ, and all that belongs to Christ. For
Christ being divided cannot be a Savior.


30. Question.
And is there any difference in these.


Answer. Yea indeed that there is, whereof we will speak afterward.


Question. Go to let us leave this now. But if the matter be so, why do
thou understand Christ by the name of that spiritual and heavenly matter?
Do thou it in respect of his Divinity or Soul?


Answer. No not so. For thou see in the Sacraments mention to be made
expressly, of the blood and of the body: and again of the blood, which as
they are of a bodily nature, so also they are represented by bodily signs, to
wit, by water, bread and wine.


31. Question.
And why do thou call that thing spiritual and heavenly?


Answer. Not because they are of a spiritual and invisible substance: or
because they are now endued with heavenly glory, as the Apostle says that our
bodies shall be spiritual and heavenly, to wit, in glory, and not in substance:
but because they are set forth in these mysteries, not to our bodily senses,
and after a bodily manner. For neither can our bodily senses do otherwise, but
(as the words teach) to be beholden in mind, and to be laid hold upon by the
hand of faith.


32. Question.
These are then but mysteries in imagination?


Answer. So I see some gather: but how undeservedly they so conclude, I will
then show, when I shall come to that question: How we may be partakers of
those things signified?


Question. Therefore let us come to that other part, to wit, to the benefits of
Christ: which therefore are they?


Answer. These are declared of us in the former treatise. But they both may
and ought, keeping the Analogy or proportion of the signs and things
signified be brought to two certain heads, too wit, to washing away and too
nourishment, whereof that is established in the mystery of Baptism, and this
in the mystery of the Lords Supper.


33. Question.
And what call thou washing away?


Answer. The forgiveness of sins, in place whereof succedeth the obedience
of Christ, and the abolishing that is begone of the corruption of nature, to
which sanctification now begone in us, is opposed.


34. Question.
And what call thou nourishing?


Answer. The growth, as it were, and increase of these.


35. Question.
Now there remains the third, which thou did call the applying of these
benefits.


Answer. So I call that same as it were a certain insinuation, which is by
the power of the holy Ghost woorking in us: but is signified by Sacramental,
not vain and unprofitable rites: to wit, by the bodily washing through the
putting into the water and coming out again, and also as well by the bodily
both eating of bread and drinking of wine.


36. Question.
But what is the form of the sacraments?


Answer. Even that same outward action duly and lawfully observed, and also
that inward action of the holy Ghost.


37. Question,
But does this form change the substance of the signs?


Answer. No not so. For they should cease too be signs, if they were changed
into any other substance: because the Analogy or proportion, wherein
consists the whole consideration of the Sacraments, should perish. There is
therefore a Sacramental change, but not a substantial, that is, not
consisting in the change of the thing it self, but in the use thereof
changed, as when water is made the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, and bread
the Sacrament of his body, and wine also of his blood.


38. Question.
But thou a little before did call these [partes.


Answer. I did so, and not without cause. For these two which are causes by
themselves, are also essential parts of the things, as the Logicians do
very well teach.


39. Question
Now what are the ends of these Sacraments?


Answer. Some chief ends to wit, that Christ (as I have said) with all his
gifts may more and more be sealed in us: othersome not so special, as that by
this badge also we should be distinguished from others that make not
profession of the Christian faith, and should be knit together more and more
amongst our selves in mutual love.


40. Question.
And is there no more?


Answer. Yes, this also is to be added. That the Sacraments are also
reme^braunces of things past: as in the ceremonies of baptism, the pouring
out of water does set before our eyes as present, the shedding forth of
Christ's blood: the putting into water and the coming out, his death, burial,
and resurrection: also the breaking of bread in the Supper does after a sort
represe^t unto us, Christ crucified for us.


41. Question.
These things being expounded, I would gladly learn of thee, what the
knitting together of the signs and the things signified is. For thou art not
ignorant, that this controversy is specially handled nowadaies: Whether the
body and blood of the Lord be really present yea or no, that is, in the same
place where that bread and that wine is, or whether the signs remain as some
think, or be abolished, the accide^ts only remaining, as they teach, which
consent with the Pope.


Answer. This controversy is grown so whot and come so far, that for the
deciding thereof, we need rather conscience then knowledge; but the Lord
alone either by some wonderful judgment, or some notable example of his
mercy will decide it: notwithstanding I will endeavor too make it plain when
I shall come too speak of the Lords Supper. Now that I may answer to that
which is demanded, I say, that forasmuch as the things signified both in the
simple word and in the Sacraments be partly things not subsisting or
standing by themselves, as the forgiveness of sins, the gift of
sanctification, the increase of faith, incorporation into Christ, and such
like: that the question of the real presence of the things signified must
necessarily be restrained to some real being. Now as I suppose, no other can
be put but Christ himself. And when they with whom we agree not, concerning
this matter, do not themselves (as I suppose think that Christ should be
divided, as those that complain (notwithstanding undeservedly that the same is
done of us: because that we deny the real presence of Christ's body: Do
thou think that the state of this question is so too be taken. Whether
Christ GOD and man be present in those places themselves, where the
Sacraments are ministered:


Question. So I have read in some of their wrytinges, who notwithstanding
affirm this not generally of all Sacraments, but only of the Lords Supper.


Answer. I would not doubt too affirm the same both of the supper of the
Lord, and of Baptism, and also after a certain manner of those Sacraments,
which were before the coming of Christ into the Earth: neither would I think
my self a Christian, if I should deny this.


42. Question
I am glad that we agree amongst our selves.


Answer. God grant, that at length, we may agree. Therefore hear, I pray
thee: It cannot be denied, but that Christ according too his Godhead is every
where. This likewise is without all controversy, that forasmuch as man's nature
is so taken of the Word, that GOD and Man are one real being, it must
needs follow if thou consider Christ as some one, and singular thing, that
whole Christ is also every where present: and yet not as in the Sacraments in
which undoubtedly there must be appointed some peculiar and special manner of
presence, as I may so speak, that they may be distinguished from other common
things, in which also he is present.

The other thing that I would have well weighed of thee, is this: that which is
spoken of the whole is not yet spoken of the singular parts, being amongst
themselves of a diverse kind. As for example. All the whole that we call man,
we define to be partaker of reason, which yet thou will not say, of no
essential part of man considered in it self. And yet there is somewhat in
this definition, too wit, reason, which is attributed to that other part of
man, even to the soul.

Do thou not see then that whole Christ, that is, Christ considered as a
certain whole and absolute thing, is another thing then all belonging to
Christ, that is Christ who^ thou shall way particularly by his parts. For in
this case let it be lawful for me, to atttribute also the name of a part to the
Godhead.


43. Question.
I see it very well, but is there any more.


Answer. Yea, I would have this farther to be marked of thee, that certain
things do so fitly serve for the establishing of some singular thing, that
that which by no means can agree by it self to some one, may yet be
attributed unto it, as it cleaves and is conjoined with another: the which
thing is so far forth true, that it may also be said of those which yet but
accidentally, only and for a time are joined together: as for example, when a
King is crowned and is honored in his robes, the crown and his robes are also
reverenced, but yet in respect of another thing, to wit, of his kingly
dignity, whereof they are ornaments, not in respect of them selves. For
hereby it plainly appears, that the honor and reverence is not referred
too those things, because when, the king has put them off, no man can endure
to reverence them, unless he be out of his wits, but they are reverenced for
another, to wit for the Kings sake of whom they are worn. Neither ever does
the crown or robes grow up into one real being with the king. Much more
therefore shall some thing be said in respect of another which is joined
personally with another, which yet can by no means in respect of it self be
attributed unto it. So there is attributed to the word taking man's nature,
that which is peculiar to man's nature as when it is said, that God suffered: as
also to maas nature, Acts. 20. 28.
that which is peculiar to the word taking upon it man's nature, as when in
ma^s nature at what time he talked with Nichodemus in the earth, he said that
John. 3. 13.
he was in heaven.


Question. These things thou have handled before. But thou did add that
this was spoken, of certain distinct words, to wit of God and man. But of
the abstract, to wit of the Godhead and manhood not so.


Answer. Unless this be so, the confusion of the natural proprieties of
either nature must needs follow, which are signified by those abstract
words. Therefore we say rightly and godlyly that God was crucified and dead,
but it were ungodly and wicked to say that the Godhead were crucified or dead.
Notwithstanding it seems to me that this also after a certain sort may be
granted without any damage of the faith to be said of the abstract
themselves, so that always we add expressly, that it is not spoken in respect
of themselves, but for an other, that so the co^crete may be understood by ye
abstract to be so determined.


44. Question.
Say therefore at the length, whether Christ him self according to his human
nature, be present in very deed, and in his own substance, wheresoever
christian Churches do administer the Sacraments.


Answer. I say therefore that whole Christ, that is, if he be considered as a
certain whole and one thing consisting of two natures to be present truly and
indeed not only in the sacraments, but also in all things. Notwithstanding I
deny that it follows hereupon, that his human nature considered in it
self, is any where else thon above, so far is it of ye he can be present at
one time by his substance in many places, or every where. And yet again I
grant that if this human nature be considered, not in it self, that is not
in respect of it self. but of another, that is if it be so considered as it is
one real being with the word of whom it is taken, that it is as present
every where as the word it self, from which it cannot be drawn not because
the selfsame nature is present but because it is joined with ye word which
every where is present.


45. Question.
Concerning what matter therefore is the controversy betwixt you and the^?


Answer. Concerning this, that as well they which defend transubstantiation,
as they that defend consubstantiation, will have the human nature it self,
at one time to be both above and beneath, now we teach that it is only above:
neither do we therefore divide the person.


46. Question.
But do they place that presence simply in all things, or in the sacraments
only?


Answer. Such as will have Christ present in all places at once, will have
him in all things, in so much as they will not have Christ as Christ in respect
of his substance to be otherwise in, under, or with the bread then in all other
things: and that by the power of the personal union, which they determine by
the real effusion and pouring forth of all the virtues of the Godhead into
that flesh taken: in which sense they interpret also the assention of Christ
into heaven, and his sitting at the right hand of god. But certain others do so
teach this real presence of Christ's flesh to the people, that they them
selves think that Christ's flesh has obtained this of the Godhead, to which it
is joined that it may be in very deed in many places at tonce as it will, the
truth thereof remaining safe and sound, but that it appears the plain words
of the institution of the Supper that Christ would have his flesh present
there indeed: whereupon it should follow that this presence should especially
be established in the Sacrament of the Supper, other concerning the matter it
self think the same thing: but they fetch this presence from the words
themselves of the Institution, adjoining his sitting at the right hand of the
father, omitting that same power of the personal union. To conclude the popish
Transubstantiatours condemning that hold vbiquitie, place this real presence
in the alone sacrament of the Altar (as they speak) sticking in a woorking
power of certain words and omnipotency of God.


Question. And what think thou of these?


Answer. I think that all these opinions offend in this, that either they
will not or know not to distinguish betwixt a thing in respect of another, and
in respect of it self, which ignorance vexed the Church, so many years by
the Nestorians, Eutichians and Monathelites. And further I say, that there is a
shame full error committed in this, that they draw those things to a
Sacramental presence, which belong too an universal presence and common to all
things.


47. Question
Think thou therefore that those things which thou have spoken of the
presence of Christ's flesh in respect of another, to belong unto al things?


Answer. Yea altogether. For otherwise thou should determine the Godhead
of the Word, to be somewhere absent, and therefore not to be the Godhead.
Notwithstanding it is a speech less heard in the Concrete if thou should
say, that Christ, even man, rather, then the flesh of Christ, is every where in
respect of another. For that same man is also God, notwithstanding not in
himself, but in respect of the other nature, too wit, the Word. But the
human nature of Christ is not the Godhead, neither in it self, nor in respect
of the word: but if it can be said too be every where, therefore it is only
said, because it is one real being with the word and so subsisteth in the
same Word every where present.


48. Question.
What therefore is the Sacrame^tall conjunction of the sign, and of Christ
himself?


Answer. That which agrees to the nature of the Sacraments, and too their
end. Now we have declared the nature of the Sacraments to be such, that by
the signs offering themselves too our outward senses, our minds in a certain
proportion might be carried first indeed to behold the things signified, and
afterward unto those things which are therefore set before us to be looked
upon, that they may be apprehended and through faith by the power of the holy
Ghost, be more and more applied unto our minds.


49. Question.
To be short, then what manner of presence is this?


Answer. Certainly not that which respects situation of place, but that
which is altogether respective, or rather of relation and belonging too
another. For a Sacrament is in that predicament, which the Logicians call
relation.


Question. I would gladly have this made more easy unto me.


Answer. I will do it, if I can, but I would that now for a while the
persons being changed, that my self should take the parts of asking and thou
of answearing. Be not words the notes of those things that we would have
signified in every tongue to the minds of the hearers by certain soundes?


Question. Yes verily.


Answer. What if I should contend, that every thing whereof I should speak
must be present in very deed?


Question. Surely that should seem unto me very foolish, seeing we may speak
also of things past and of things to come, yea of things which never were, are
not yet, or perhaps never shall be.


Answer. Notwithstanding of whatsoever thing I shall speak, I shall
represent the same by my words unto thy mind.


Question. It is so.


Answer. Things therefore are signified by those voices, whereby they are
signified not by a natural situation, and too be short not by their own
substance, but by a certain respect or phrase of speech and habit of words
added, so far forth as they settle them as it were in the understanding of
the hearers.


50. Question
I pray thee declare this unto me more plainly.


Answer. Know thou that the copulation of the Sacraments, and of the
things signified by the Sacraments are altogether like. For as Augustine
said very wittely: The Sacraments are as it were some visible word, as that
which the words sound too the ears, the same they show to the eyes.
Therefore they question most fondly here of the real presence, seeing that
real presence (or rather of the matter and substance it self) in a certain
place, and the Sacramental presence are not indeed continually repugnaunt and
contrary: but yet notwithstanding they so far forth differ betwirte
themselves, that that also which in very deed yet is not, yet is sacramentally
present: whereto Paul having regard, he says that the Fathers did eat the
same meat, 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4.
and drink the same drink, too wit, Christ. And it is so far off, that
this Sacramental knitting should be in vain, that contrariwise as we shall
say in his place, it is more effectual the^ any natural copulation.


51. Question.
But who makes this mutual or respective copulation?


Answer. The will of God declared, in the word of institution.


Question. Will thou therefore that we entreat of consecration?


Answer. I would rather for certain special causes, refer all this to the
treatise of the Lords Supper.


52. Question.
Do they not therefore make frustrate the signs, whosoever teach that the
thing signified, is absent from his substance?


Answer. Surely they do not make them void, unless we say that they are vain
words whereby we do no less ingraue in the minds of the hearers, things
absent then things present.


Question. Who then make them void?


Answer. They that teach, that the Sacraments are only bare memorials of
things pastor badges of Christian mutual fellow, ship, or that the things
which are signified by them are not truly offered, to be laid hold upon with
the instrument of Faith, as it were by the hand.


53. Question
Now I would thou should declare unto me, what manner of partaking that is,
both of the sign, and of the thing signified.


Answer. I suppose thou can not doubt of the first part of this question.
For seeing the signs are bodily things, they are also naturally received by
the instruments of the body of all that come thereto.


54. Question.
Let us therefore speak of that other part of this question, that is, of the
partaking of the thing signified.


Answer. We have showed that Christ himself with his gifts is the thing
signified, of which gifts some of them are made ours by imputation, but the
others are wrought in us and clean too us. I say therefore that these, seeing
they are mere qualities as they are offered to the minds only, so they are
laid hold of by the only instrument of the mind, yet endued with faith,
which is the only hand of the mind to embrace the promises of GOD. This whole
partaking therefore is every manner of way spiritual. For that, whereof we are
partakers, is of a spiritual nature, and is wrought by a spiritual
instrument, yea and the whole action of this instrument is spiritual.


55. Question.
But thou can not say the same of Christ, as who is not being a quality
according to either nature or any such like thing.


Answer. Yea, but first of all, concerning the very person of the word, I
suppose that it were a very wicked thing, too think that we could be
partakers of it, otherwise then by virtue and operation. For otherwise we also
should become Gods by nature: and so that place. 2. Pet. 1. ver. 4. is to be
expounded, and all such other like places, as all Interpreters of any name or
credit agree.


Question. I agree to it, and I detest that dotage of the Manichees renewed by
Seruetus, thinking God to be so present in all things, that he is also a
part of them. But what say thou of the humane nature of Christ?


Answer. Neither do thou as I suppose, think the substance thereof in
very deed too be joined with our Soul. For what is more foolish then this
souldering and sealing together of minds? But thou will not say that the
substance of the Soul can be laid hold upon by any Organe or Instrument of
the body.


56. Question.
But what? shall we think the same of the very body of Christ?


Answer. I grant, that bodily things may be participated by bodily senses,
but I utterly reiecte that real, touching and cleaving together of the body
of Christ with our bodies, as a Monster, then which nothing can be feigned
more false and less fit, for the end of the Sacraments, pretend they what
they will, for the maintenance of this dotage.


Question. Therefore say why thou call that false?


Answer. Because now it can by no means be made too agree with the truth
of the limited flesh of Christ, and it is altogether contrary to the whole
history of the Gospel, as I shall show in his place.


Question. And why serves it not for the end of the Sacraments?


Answer. Because the whole Sacramental Action is wholly referred too
everlasting life, and therefore it must needs be that this partaking must be
wrought by the mind and by Faith, and not by the Instrument of the body:
Wherefore also as the outward signs are set forth too the outward senses,
so the thing signified is set forth to our understanding and faith.


57. Question.
But if thou take away the partaking of the substance it self, then in stead
of the body and soul of Christ, or in steed of Christ himself, thou only
placest the virtue of him.


Answer. Yea but I do not take away that same partaking of Christ him self.
For even like as the body is nourished with meat in this life, and that must
first be taken in very deed: so also I determine (which also I have said
before) that we must partake of Christ him self, so, as we must be made one
with him in very deed, that that same lively juice may be derived out of him into
us. For he neither said, This is my merit: or this is the fruit of my
passion: but this is my body: Neither said Paul, that we were only baptized
into the death of Christ, but that we also did put on Christ: or that the bread
wc Romans 6. 34. 2. Cor. 10. 16.
we break was the partaking of his benifites, but the partaking of his body.
Therefore that I may return to the matter, I do not take away the body it
self, that I may place the virtue thereof instead of the thing signified: now
that which is signified by the sacraments that very self same thing is given to
the end we should be partakers thereof in very deed, neither do I deny,
that we are partakers of Christ, indeed. But I affirm this partaking or
laying hold of or application or communicating to be mere spiritual and
mystical.


58. Question.
Why do thou call it spiritual?


Answer. First that I may shut out, all touching of the body of Christ with
our body, all local coherence and existing together, and to conclude that
mo^struous opinion of eating with the mouth as mere Cyclopicall (howsoever it
be excused with other no less fained devises of not beingseen and being
without place. Next, because this pertaking in respect of us is wrough by the
only hand and mouth of the mind and of faith. For this is the meat, as
Augustine has very well said, not of the belly but of the mind.


59. Question
But why do thou call it mystical.


Answer. That I may teach that this knitting together, whereby we are made
flesh of his flesh and bones of his bones, to wit by a certain spiritual
marriage does depend of the only power of the almighty spirt altogether secret
and incomprehensible to us, which also knitteth nearely together things most
far asunder. Ephe. 5. 30. 32.
Therein following the stepps of the Apostle, who cries out that this is a
great misery.


60. Question.
And why also call thou that communicating [an uniting and knitting
together?


Answer. Because the whole Scripture witnesses that we must be made one with
Christ, that we must be incorporated into Christ, and beknit to him as members
to the head, so that he may live in us, and we in him. Now this connection we
affirm to be not only of a certain consent, as when Luke writes Acts. 24.
31
that the hearts and souls of the believers was one: but also natural, or as
Cyril has very well written, that so must be understood the communion of Christ
himself.


61. Question.
Can thou shadow out unto me after some sort, by some fit similitude this
mystery otherwise incomprehensible?


Answer. Yes verily that I can, even out of the same similitude of the head
and members so usual with the Apostle. I beseech thee therefore whence have
these arms their natural sense and moving? Surely even from the head to
which they are knit after a natural manner, as it were by ioyutes sinews and
artiries which otherwise should become deuoyd of all motion and feeling. Now
imagine with thy self that even as boxes of sweet smelling ointment do even
pierce things very far of, and the secret Magnes is a stone, that has the
property to draw iron unto it.
force of the Magnes preuayleth against iron, though it be removed far from it,
so is there so much lively strength in this my head, that although it were at
Constantinople, and one of mine arms in India, and another in Spain, yet
notwithstanding, by the help of these same fit and convenient joints, it is
able to give them life: imagine I say some such thing with thy self and thou
shall have the lively Image of this our incorporation into Christ. For Christ
him self according too the flesh neither now placed any other where then
above these heavens intoo which he has ascended according to the flesh, by a
physical and natural moving, neither shall come again from thence, before
that same last day does so truly and effectually knyt, couple and ingreffe
into him self al believers placed here in this earth by that same divine power
of his woorking in ye matter which is hindered by no distance of place ye
afterward out of his flesh in which life it self dwells bodily, and which
has not received the spirit by measure, that same lively juice might flow
into us believing in him.


62. Question.
Therefore there is no need either of any local motion, or touching, or to be
short of any placing of the human nature of Christ in the earth, for this
knitting of us the members, unto our head Christ: neither does this same
communicating of Christ himself, tend to this, that there should be a
commixture and mingling of substances, but that out of Christ himself,
spiritually, so joined unto us that same quickening power of his should flow
into us.


Answer. Fie, away I say with all those false and foolish tryfles.


63. Question.
But why do thou rather make mention of the flesh then of the Godheade in
this conjunction or knitting together?


Answer. I do not this, as though the God. head did nothing here, when as
contrawise in very deed, the very flesh of Christ simply and considered in it
self as it is flesh, does not quicken us, but because as the Fathers very
wittily speak, it is the flesh of the word. But in this I follow Christ the
Master, expressly repeating the names of his flesh and blood in this mystery
of our conjunction with him, because we cannot be joined with him, but by
reason of his human nature, and in as much as he is our brother.


64. Question.
But like as thou say, that this meat is received of us only by the mind
endued with faith, shall we likewise think, that the fruit of this union
does only belong unto the mind?


Answer. No not so. For Christ being laid hold upon of us by faith in this
life, does bestow upon us all good benefits as well of the body as of the
mind as many and as much as we have need of, and at the length will also give
unto us wholly everlasting life.


65. Question.
But do thou restrain this our uniting with Christ, to the only mystery of
the Lords supper, as some do?


Answer. Be it far from us. For both in the simple word, and also in
either Sacrament, albeit in an unlike proportion neither equal effect (unless
our unbelief do let it) whole Christ is offered unto us too be laid hold
upon, spiritually by faith, so far is it off that we shut Christ out of
the Lords Supper, as diverse do sclaunder us.


66. Question.
Do thou think then that there is no difference betwixt that daily
partaking of Christ through faith, and that which is made in the Lords supper?


Answer Yea, I think that there is great difference, unless unbelief let
it, betwixt that which I call mere spiritual, and that wc is said to be
sacramental and yet notwithstanding not concerning the thing it self, neither
in respect of the instrument of faith, but in this, because there only by the
word, but here also by visible signs our faith is admonished, and the thing
signified is sealed. Moreover this partaking excels the word in this, that
the simple word for the most part is universally set forth unto the
people, but the Sacraments are given unto every singular person, as it were
by the hand of GOD himself, which thing does woonderfully profit unto that
same particular and full persuasion that ought to be in every one.


67. Question 67. Question.
But do thou think that Christ in like sort was set forth unto our old
fathers, before his coming into the flesh, and all his benefits as well in
the simple word, as in the types and Sacraments joined to the word, also to
be apprehended and laid hold off by faith?


Answer. I am altogether persuaded so, for the self same Christ, yea the same
whole Christ, both in his audible word and also in his visible words, that is
to say in the Sacraments, is set forth to the self same end.


68. Question.
I had almost quite forgotten that which I would gladly have asked of thee, to
wit, how it is that Saint Augustine writes, as thou have cyted, that the
Sacraments can work no such astonishment as miraculous things do, if that
same mystery of the uniting of Christ and his Church together be so wonderful.


Answer. I have answered unto that already, that it is one thing to ask of
the Sacraments themselves, another thing of those things which God does work
by the use of them. Augustine therefore does very well forbid, whether we
respect the nature of the Sacraments or the Sacraments them selves, that they
should be numbered amongst miracles, because it is not strange, neither also
against the order of natural things, that some thing for the analogy and
proportion, and also by the covenant of men should be used for the
signifying of some thing altogether differing from the nature thereof. For I
beseech thee, what miracle is it that the betrothing of marriage to come,
should be signified by a Ryng: and putting into possession of houses, should
not only be signified by the delivering of a Keye, but also confirmed? There
is the like reason altogether to be had of the Sacraments, although not
particularly yet generally, albeit those things which God works in us (if
we rightly use the Sacramences) do exceed the understanding even of the very
Angels them selves.


69. Question.
But that which thou have spoken of our Sacraments, do thou also think of
those same old Sacraments?


Answer. I say both twain in those things which are as I may say of the
substance of the Sacrament it self, do altogether agree, but they differ in
certain circumstances.


70. Question.
Show me therefore how they do agree


Answer. First of all they agree in the efficient cause. For Christ our only
lawgiuer appointed both these and them: further they agree in the inward thing
it self. For Christ was that same tree of life in Paradise, that same Lamb
slain from the beginning of the world, that same Paschall of the Fathers,
taking away the sins of the world, that same spiritual Rock, that same
meat and drink of the Fathers, which thing also is to be thought of those
same types and figures, and to be short, of all the old Sacraments. For very
ryghtly and truly says Augustine in the six and twenty Treatise upon
John, that the Sacraments of the Fathers in respect of the signs, were diverse
from ours, but concerning the signification they were alyke. They agree also
in the word concerning the substance, albeit the voices be not the same. For
there is signified in the word of institution, that Christ and his gifts are
offered unto us in either, to ye Fathers as to come, but to us wc come already:
moreover in both two there is found the self same instrument of applying him,
and the same Faith in diverse signs, as the same Augustine says in his 45.
treatise upon John. Also the self same end and effect is in both of them. For
Circumcision was both the sign and the seal of righteousness by faith. Romans 4.
11. And the Fathers were circumcised in Christ with the circumcision of the
heart made without hands. Col. 2. 7.


71. Question
But in what things differ they?


Answer. First they differ in the signs (by which I understand the
Sacramental rytes them selves) which we have more spiritual and fewer and
less laborsome, further in the playnesse of the word, which in ours is much
more clearer: whereupon also grows another difference in the very measure of
the efficacy and operation it self. For the more plain and manifest the
word is, the more ought we to be moved, and therefore the more effectual
ought our faith to be. Whereto also belong the words of the selfsame
Augustine, that our Sacrament are fewer, easier, more significant, and more
full of Majesty: to which also that may be added, that these differ in this,
because they were instituted only until the coming of Christ: but ours
shall take no end but with the world.


72. Question
If it be so as thou say, it appears unto me that the state of the
Fathers was mightier in two great things then ours: First because they had
more, then because they had more significant helps of faith, then we.


Answer. But I pray thee, whethers weakness of the body would thou
judge to be greater, his that has need of two stays to uphold his going, or
his which leaning upon one staff, does easily go any whither?


Question. Surely I would think him twofolde weaker then the other.


Answer. Even so persuade thy self of the estate and condition of those
fathers. For the multitude of Sacraments, shows not that their condition was
the better, but contrariwise that it was worse. For neither should our faith,
if it were strong enough of it self, need the Sacraments.


73. Question.
But certainly it seems that there was in those Sacraments a more plain
Analogy or proportion of the signs with the things signified. For in very
deed the flesh and blood of those slain sacrifices, did more plainly
represent the flesh and blood of Christ crucified, then bread and wine: and
Manna falling down from heaven did after a sort more lively set before our
eyes the incarnation of the word, also the water flowing out of the opened
rock, the blood of Christ flowing out of his wounded side, then the breaking
of bread and the pouring out of wine into the cup.


Answer. In good sooth those not yet done but to be done, ought to be
represented too the fathers by a more gross proportion then unto us, because
that it is far harder to believe things to come, then already done and
witnessed by a sure and plain history. Therefore as thou have said those
signs did signify the thing to come more grossly and palpably. But in this
thou art specially deceived that thou think the more gross the Analogy or
proportion, is that the more significant it is.


Question. Why so?


Answer. Because the things signified by the Sacraments are heavenly, which
flesh and blood teach not, but that same only Master of truth the holy
Ghost: whereupon all Believers are said by Esaias and by Christ himself, Esaias.
5. 14. John. 6. 4, 5.
to be taught of GOD. Therefore the efficacy of the Analogy or proportion
depends upon the word, whereby is set forth both what it is and whereto
it tends.


Question. Will thou be so good as to set down some similitude, whereby I
may more fully understand what this matter means?


Answer. Verily I am very well content, that also the mouths of the
Sophisters may be shut up. If thou being altogether ignorant of these
mysteries, should see some circumcised, what would thou think of it?


Question. Surely I would think the Parents to be very cruel toward their
new borne babe, so that I should utterly detest them, unless I should
understand their meaning to be otherwise.


Answer. But thou should indeed understand it, if I should show unto thee
that this were done by the commandment of God. But if so be also I should
declare unto thee, by the institution of God, that by the foreskinne were
signified our natural filthinesses and their fruits, which that same son of
GOD to be borne should take away, by the shedding forth of his blood, thou
would a great deal the rather content thy self. Notwithstanding thou
would desire being taught now the self same thing, that the same might be
showed unto thee after a more fit manner, and with less danger of the infant.
Now if that same simple washing should be instituted in the place of that
bloody cutting of the foreskinne, thou would sure prefer this condition
before the other. And the same reason is there of those slain Sacrifices,
which were both laboursom and costly. And concerning those same miraculous
wonders, to wit, of Manna falling from Heaven, and the water flowing forth of
the rock, these are to be rehearsed, in the number of those same figures which
were once showed, and not amongst the Sacraments which are perpetual, against
which our Sacraments are not to be set, but the truth performed in Christ
himself given unto us.


Question. I understand that which thou say, to wit, that the more simple
the proportion is, the more plain the word is, whereby the signification it
self is expressed, the more excellent is our condition then our fathers. But
notwithstanding it seems that that same Analogy of the old Sacraments is
more plain.


Answer. Neither do thou in this point understand what thou say. For in
very deed in circumcision thou see nothing but the cutting of of the
foreskin: that is to say, thou see one only part of the benefit of Christ
shadowed, And yet neither ought the old man only too be abolished, but also
the new man too be borne in us: neither that only too be taken away which
offended God, but also that righteousness to be given wherein he is delighted.
Now the very water of baptism and the rites themselves, do they not declare
either benefit much more playner unto us? And so the difference also of our
Fathers, feasts and of ours, is much more evident. Thou will say that flesh
does more expressly represent flesh then bread: and the slaying of a sacrifice
the slaying of Christ: admyt it. But to what end is Christ slain unto me,
unless I be a partaker of him? Surely no more then dainties set before me,
whereof notwithstanding I shall not eat. Therefore our Sacraments, that first
part not altogether pretermitted, but yet less curiously signified, of which
we are fully persuaded in the history of the Gospel, do set as it were lively
before our eyes, that same other principal part. For in very deed the use of
bread, is much more to the nourishment of this life, then the use of flesh:
and forasmuch as the life is in the blood, and the Fathers were restrained from
all use of blood, which now we are no less commanded to drink in the wine
Sacramentally, then spiritually to eat flesh in the bread: who sees not that
our Sacraments do excel those same old ones, even in the very signs and
sacramental rytes?


74. Question.
Yet there remains another doubt, how it should come to pass, that the
humayne nature of Christ, not yet existing in deed, should for all that be
the thing signified of the old Sacraments, and so indeed that it should be
truly communicated unto the Fathers.


Answer. What think thou therefore that the Sacraments of the old fathers
signified? For neither do I think that thou do agree unto them, who will
have the^ to be certain resemblances joined only unto earthly promises.


Question. Surely I consent not unto that ungodliness, which transformeth the
people of God into a stye of Hogs. But I ask whether they think rightly
enough, who think those same gifts in Christ bestowed upon the Church (which
if it lack it cannot be a partaker of everlasting life) to be promised and
given also in the Sacraments of the old fathers: but notwithstanding, those
were not yet given forth which as yet were not.


Answer. Surely thou do wonderfully mollify the hard opinion of these
men. But I doubt not too say with the Apostle, that they did truly and indeed
eat the same meat that we do, and drank the same drink, to wit, even
Christ himself 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4.
GOD and man.


Question. How so?


Answer. First, because the Apostle plainly speaks so.


Question. Yea, but the Apostle says not in such plain words, that the
Fathers did eat the same meat that we eat, or drank the same drink that
we do, but rather that they did eat the same amongst themselves, albeeit
with a far other effect: as at this day as well the Godly as the ungodly, are
partakers of the same Sacraments, but some to salvation, and othersome to
judgment.


Answer. This Sophistical startinghole is confuted by four reasons. First,
because that Argument of Saint Paul were not strong enough, if the
Sacraments should be made unequal in substance and in very deed. Again,
because the Apostle pronounces in plain and evident words that this meat
it self, and this drink is Christ. Thirdly, because he changes the very
names of the old Sacraments and of the new, attributing the new unto the
old, that he may declare that same thing too be both in the thing signified,
and in the use. Fourthly, that thing plainly appears by the express words
as well of others as also of Augustine, in the 45. treatise upon John, and in
his Book of the profit of repentance, the 102. John. 1. 29. 1. Cor. 5. 7.
Epistle and elsewhere. But now if this thing agree unto the Figures, much
rather is it too be thought too agree, unto the Sacraments which are
perpetual and which are appointed to signify this one thing alone. In which
sense John the Baptist said, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world: and Paul, Christ our Passover, is offered up.


75. Question.
But what if I should except that all these things signify nothing else but
the only efficacy or virtue of Christ to come?


Answer. Yea, but his efficacy depends as well of those things which Christ
should suffer for our cause, as of Christ himself. Why therefore should thou
now be more offended, when I say that the very humane nature of Christ it
self, albeit then it were not, notwithstanding that it was truly and indeed
given unto the Fathers in the Sacraments and sealed up in them: then that
the Fathers were justified and in very deed sanctified in spirit, by the
righteousness of his flesh which yet was not borne. For this is the whole sum
of the benifites of Christ. Furthermore when thou think that the fathers
were made partakers of those fruits which flow unto us out of the flesh of
Christ (or out of Christ according to the flesh) shutting out that same
pertaking of Christ himself and of those things which he afterward
suffered for our sake, thou do even as if reasoning of this same bodily
life, thou would have them too be nourished with meat, who notwithstanding
do not in any sort receive the substance of meats.


76. Question.
What therefore in sum say thou, is to be determined concerning this
matter.


Answer. To wit, that both before God himself promising, and before the
eyes of our faith Jesus Christ was always present, and also the whole
mysterye of performing our salvation: the wc he in very deed bestowed upon all
believers, and al believers as well in the simple word, as in the Sacraments
added to the word, truly and effectually embraced. For John. 8. 56.
Abraham with the eyes of faith saw the day of the Lord, which is a subsisting
of things which yet were not, that is, to which now after a certain sort
those things existe, which in very deed are not. Notwithstanding I grant
the thing it self, that is to say, that Christ himself was not in act given
unto them according too the flesh, or (as they speak) indeed but by right
only.


Question. But what means this thing?


Answer. I will speak therefore more plainly, and now I say in deed, that
Christ given with all his gifts was both signified by the simple word, and in
the sacraments of the new Testament, and offered unto us, to be spiritually by
faith as we have said, laid hold upon, too righteousness, sanctification,
and everlasting life, and that the Fathers had right to the self same Christ
that was to be borne, and to all his gifts, both by the simple word and also
by the promises added to the same word: and yt therefore the fathers were eue^
then truly accounted the members of Christ that was to be borne, through the
power of the same spirit and by the same faith, and likewise were indeed
truly justified and sanctified in him to come: to conclude that their
condition differs from ours, not indeed: but as they speak in the schools,
according to more and less. For Christ is one, and the same things which he
has done for our sake are the same which we look for from him, and our
faith is the same whether it respect things to come, or those things that yet
are not, or those things that are already past.


77. Question
When I consider the manner of speeches which belong unto the Sacraments, me
thinks that I find somewhat to object against thee, touching those things that
thou have spoken, of the signification of the signs and of the thing
signified, and also as touching that which thou have entreated of our partaking
with Christ.


Answer. Those Phrases of speech not only Sacramental but also figurative
are partly proper, and partly borrowes.


78. Question.
Which are proper?


Answer. Those be proper, which distinctly attribute that too the sign,
which belongs to the sign, and that to the thing, which belongs to the
thing: as when Circumcision is called the sign of the covenant. Genesis 17. 11.
Also the sign and seal of ye righteousness of faith. To. 4. 11. And the blood
of the Lamb, the sign. Exo. 12. 13. And the sabbath, the sign of calling too
memory the creation of the world: and sealing the peculiar consecration of the
people of Israel. Exodus 31. 13. 17. And those same two censures, a sign
calling intoo their remembrance that same conspiracy of Dathan and Abiron.
Number. 16 38. So the outward ministry of man, considered a part from the
inward, is said to be nothing. 1. Cor. 3. 7. So the outward baptism of
water, is properly distinguished from the inward efficacy of the spirit. 1.
Pet. 3. 21.


Question. But I find in no place, that this same word [Signe] is attributed
too Baptism or too the Lords supper.


Answer. Why then, deny them too be Sacraments. For Sacraments
undoubtedly are signs. Yea, and the Papists themselves, do grant that the
substance of water and the Sacramental rites of Baptism are signs: and in
that same Sacrament of theirs of the Altar, they do at least appoint the
forms for signs. Further, the thing it self is most evident, that that is
true which Irenaeus witnesses (that I may pass over the other fathers) that
they consist of one earthly and of an heavenly matter, whereof it must needs
be that that be the sign of this.


79. Question.
And what are those same Sacramental or figurative forms?


Answer. First of all, they are those things to which the name of the
Element is attributed too the thing signified, as when the Lamb is said to be
the passover. Exodus 12. 11.


Question. And yet there be some which say, that the Pesach or Passover is
properly spoken of the passing it self.


Answer. Go to, be it so. But yet verily the passing it self can not be
eaten, therefore they must in that place at the least grant, that the Lamb it
self is called the passover, where the passover is said to be prepared and
eaten. So Christ is called of John the Lamb of GOD, and is said of Saint
Paul to be the passover. 1. Cor. 5. 7. Christians are one bread. 1. Cor. 10.
17.


80. Question.
These things verily satisfy me. Go forward, I pray thee declare unto me
the other sorts of sacramental speeches.


Answer. The other sort is directly contrary to this, whereby the name of
the thing it self is attributed to the Element. So the stone set up by Jacob,
is called Bethel. Genesis 28. 22. So the seven kyne and the seven ears are seven
years. Genesis 41. 27. So the name of Jehovah in innumerable places is attributed
to the Arc of the covenant, yea and to the very Altar of Moses. Exodus 17. 15.
So by the name of the tongue of Canaan is understood the profession of pure
religion. Esai. 19. 18. So the name of the holy Ghost is attributed to the
Dove. John 1. 33. To be short, so the Rock was Christ.


Question. Yea, but that same bodily Rock was not said to be Christ, but
that same spiritual Rock.


Answer. I know very well that same sophistical startinghole, as though
forsooth this were spoken of the thing it self, and not of the sign. But what
will these foolish Sophisters answer, if I should ask them, whether Paul
yet meant not that same Rock, whereout that river of waters flowed? Surely they
could answer nothing whereby their sophistry should not be easily
convinced. For they must needs come to this point, that they must confess,
that the name of spiritual Rock, was in respect of that very natural Rock
attributed to Christ in respect of the bodily Rock, (that is as they them
selves interpret it) considered spiritually and so far forth as it was a
figure. Therefore they snarle them selves in their own snares, or else they must
grant that Christ was called the Rock, because he was shadowed by a
spiritual signification taken from the same Rock. But what will they do with
these words of Saint Augustine, in his 45. Treatise upon John? Lo the signs
changed, Faith remaining, there Christ is the Rock, to us Christ is that same
that is set forth upon the Altar: and if thou look upon the visible form,
it is another thing: but if upon the sensible signification, they drank the
same spiritual drink. And in the 102. Epistle, some time the thing which
signifies, takes the name of that thing which it signifies. For so the rock
was Christ, because it signifies Christ. To conclude the same interprets the
spiritual Rock mentioned in the 77. Psalm: not Christ him self (as they do)
but such a Rock as should signify some spiritual thing.


Question. Therefore proceed on.


Answer. So to conclude, that bread is said to be the body given for us:
and that same cup to be the blood shead for us.


Question. But who does so expound this?


Answer. Amongst the rest, Theodoret in his Eranista by express words,
whereof we shall entreat more at large in his proper place.


81. Question.
And is there any more?


Answer. The third kind of figurative sacramental speech is that, whereby
the effect of the thing signified is attributed to the outward signs or
instruments. So it is said that the tree of life was planted in Paradise, and
the tree of the knowledge both of good and evil. And yet was neither life nor
knowledge in those same trees, as if thou should call a tree the Ague, which
either causes an Ague, or else drives it away: but those same trees were only
the effectual signs of these same effects. By the same figure Circumcision
is called the covenant whereof only it was a sign, as God him self expounds
it. Genesis 17. 11. and 14. And that same cupp is called the new Testament in his
blood. Luke 22. 20. So Baptism is called the washing of regeneration. Tit. 3.
5. So the Church is said to be purged by the washing of water, Ephesians. 5. 26.
So the outward word which being only the Chariot as it were of the divine
power, is in many places said to be the word of life and the incorruptible
seed: and to it is attributed, both clensing and sanctification. So the
sacrifices, are in many places called attonements, when notwithstanding the
very blood of Goats and Oxen cannot sanctify any. So also the priests
themselves are said to sanctify and to make an atonement for sins. Leuit.
16. 30. When as it only belongs unto God to forgive sins and to make
clean. So the Ministers of the Gospel are said to bind and to lose, Matthew.
18. 18. And to forgive sins. John. 20. 25. yea also to save them selves and
to save others. 1. Tim. 4. 16. Of which matter if it please thee, thou may
see Augustine in his book of questions upon Leuiticus, Chapter 84.


82. Question.
Is there yet remaining any other kind of sacramental figures?


Answer. There remains the fourth, quyte contrary to that same third kind,
whereby it is brought to pass, on the contrary that that which is proper unto
the fignes is drawn unto the thing signified. And hereof comes that same
inward Circumcision, or, of the heart. So the flesh or the body of the
son of man, is said to be eaten and his blood to be drunk, which being
bodily actions, can not be understood otherwise then improperly of the thing
signified, that is to say, of Christ him self, offered either in the simple
word or in the Sacraments, least as Saint Augustine very well says, a foul
and heinous thing, to wit, the sauadge and barbarous eating of man's flesh
seem to be commanded. And hereof come these same usual manner of speeches
so often in the Fathers, wherein it is said that the body of our Lord lies
upon the Altar, yea also that it is seen, handled, goes into the mouth, is
made, falls upon the ground, is consumed.


83. Question.
Therefore make thou it a metaphorical body, and a metaphorical Supper?


Answer. In deed such are the filthy slanders of certain men, which we
will confute in their proper place: For now I entreat generally of the
Sacraments. In mean time know this, that we neither feign any other body to
Christ then that same true body given for us; nor transform that same most
holy action into those same monstrous Chimeres, but only we say this
(followyng the proportion of Faith) that that same very partakyng of Christ him
self, which is altogether of the mind and of Faith, (for this is the meat of
the mind, and not of the belly) is not properly, but metaphorically declared,
by those same bodily actions of eating and drinking.


84. Question.
Then is it all one with thee, to believe, and spiritually to eat Christ?


Answer. Thou causest me yet again to stray from my purpose. If thou take to
believe, for the very action of faith it self, I consent unto thee. But if thou
take it for the very habit of faith, then even like as thou do distinguish
the teethe the instrument of eating, from the eating it self: so it must
needs be that thou discern faith it self, from that apprehension of Christ
through faith, which is the spiritual eating.


Question. Proceed on.


Answer. I have now finished those things which belong unto those same
Sacramental fourmes of speaking, as well those that are proper, as those that
are figurative.


85. Question.
But when thou shall say that the Sacraments were added unto the simple word,
to the end, the more plainly to show forth the promises, many men marvel
that these figurative speeches are used in the Sacraments, in which the speech
ought rather to be most proper and most plain, least any should be deceived.


Answer. Here I pray thee mark what bold rashness the spirit of error has
in sclaundering, and what power it has (when it pleases God) in persuading.
For these men affirm, that the figurative speeches are more obscure then those
that are proper: but contrariwise they themselves also teach and give many
precepts concerning this matter, that Orators do very well use figures, not
too darken, but to set out and make more plain their speech. Now they are
very well used, when they both adorn that that we would have spoken with a
certain dignity and grace, and better infixe it in the minds of the hearers,
then if any man should use a plain and simple speech. Now forasmuch as the
Sacraments are therefore instituted that they may lead our understanding too
an other thing, which by Gods ordinance they signify from that which they are
by nature: or rather, that I may use the words of S. Augustine against
Maximinus. Lib. 3. cap, 18. that we mark, not what they are, but what they
set out and show, because they are signs of things showing one thing and
signifying another: who sees not that the nature and use of the Sacraments is
much better fixed in the mind of the hearer, when the signs are said to be
the thing it self that they signify?

Let us set down for example sake, that we may dwell still upon the former
example that the Mayor or Magistrate of a Town or City of whom possession is
given unto thee of some house delivering thee a key upon this condition, and
speaking unto thee after this manner, this keye is that same house standing in
that place, which I deliver into thy hands, for to be used and enjoyed of
thee: would not this speech much more confirm thee, then if he should say,
this keye be a sign unto thee, that I put thee into the possession of that
house? Now this reason is set out by Theodoret. in his Eranista in these
words, Christ would (says he) that they that would be partakers of these
divine mysteries (for he speaks of the Supper of the Lord) should take heed
not to consider the nature of the things which they see, but through this
change of names (to wit whereby it is brought to pass, that the name of the
thing signified is given unto the sign) they should give credit unto that
change which is wrought by grace: That is, they should consider that thing,
not as it is by nature, but how by Gods commandment it is used too signify,
that thing. And Augustine in the fiftieth seven Question upon Leuiticus,
Things (says he) which signify somewhat, are wont to be signified by the
name of that thing which they signify. Hence is that saying, the rock was
Christ. For he said not the rock signified Christ, but as it were that he was
that, that in very deed he was not by substance, but by signification. But of
these things more in another place, where we will so entreat of set purpose
of the right understanding of the words of the institution of the Lords
Supper, that we will also confute the contrary expositions.


86. Question.
I would therefore thou should set forth unto me what the use is of these
same fourmes of speech concerning Sacraments so expounded of thee.


Answer. We are by this means taught, that we attribute neither less nor
more to the Sacraments, then is meet. Now they attribute less unto the^,
tha^ is meet, who will have them only to be certain bare reme^brances, shutting
out a doors both the giving and receiving of the thing it self: the which
opinion is herein taken away, because that the name of the sign is attributed
to the thing signified, or the name of the effect it self to the sign it
self, and again the name of the sign to the thing it self signified or too
the effect thereof, as we have showed by those examples alleged. They also
attribute much less then these to the Sacraments, who will only have them to
be badges of outward profession: which opinion is altogether ungodly, and by
the same reason is overthrown. Now we are taught again by these proper
kind of speeches to attribute no more unto the Sacraments then is meet, and
to shun that miserable bondage (as Saint Augustine speaks more then once)
whereby it is brought to pass, that the signs are taken for the things
signified in his third Book of Christian doctrine. Chap. 5. and 7.


87. Question.
But I pray thee, how many Sacraments think thou to be instituted for the
universal Christian church?


Answer. Two, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.


Question. There are which rehearse many more, yea and that amongst those
which have departed from the Antichristian Romayne Church.


Answer. I grant it: but yet the Papists gain nothing, which take this
occasion to slander us, seeing the most Papistical Divines have not yet
agreed, concerning the number of sacraments, but amongst us there is no strife
in the matter it self, as we shall show in his place.


Question. Let us agree upon this, how far I am to proceed in demanding.


Answer. Although this were rather the part of the asker, then of the
answearer, yet notwithstanding forasmuch as it so pleases thee, I signify
unto thee that I am content that the handlyng of the contrary sentence being
differred, thou hear what seems unto me concerning every one of these
questions: so notwithstanding that I may answer shortly, as the matter
requires to the contrary reasons, so far forth as we may way all and
singular things, which are said for the confirmation of the contrary opinions.


88. Question.
Admyt that we have but only two such Sacraments, I demand of thee in the
first place, what Baptism is.


Answer. This word properly declares dipping into the water, and by
consequent washyng away: of which sort many were instituted in the law, Hebr.
9. 10. to which were added afterward the pharasaical washings, whereof
mention is made in the 7. of Mark, verse 4. Now by the figure This figure is a
changing or putting of a near name in signification for the natural name it
self.
Antonomasia it is taken for the Sacrament, by which we are are openly
professed to Christ. But by translation it sets forth the afflictions of
the godly and some great and grievous calamities, yea and the cross it self,
as it is taken. Luke. 12. 50. peradventure fetching the Metaphor from thence,
for that in many places of the Psalms especially are understood by the name
of waters and of gulphes, miseries, wherewith a man is as it were swalowed up.
To be short, it is taken for the pouring forth of the gifts of the holy
Ghost, as Acts. 1. 5. and for the doctrine of John who first baptized: as Acts
18. 25. and 19. 3.


89. Question
How therefore do thou define baptism taken for the first Sacrament of the
Church of Christ?


Answer. I define it to be an holy action commanded of Christ to the
Church, in which by a fit proportion of signs, we do spiritually and
through Faith after a certain sort put on Christ himself, with all his
gifts necessary to salvation, and are therein washed with him, and dye with
him, are buried and rise again, and by which our mutual fellowshyp in Christ
is ratified.


90. Question.
And which are these signs?


Answer. The Elementall sign is water. But the Sacramental rytes are three:
the dipping into the water, the remaining in the water, and the coming out of
the water again.


91. Question.
But there are many more Elements, and many more rytes in Baptism used in old
time.


Answer. I answer out of Cyprian, that we must not mark what any has done
before us, or what any have thought meet to be done: but what Christ who was
before all has done first him self, and has delivered unto others to be
done. But of these things we will entreat hereafter when we shall come to
the confutation of the contrary opinions.


92. Question.
What represents the water, and what is the analogy or proportion thereof,
with the thing signified?


Answer. It signifies the very blood of Christ, and by the figure
Synechdoche whole Christ him self, who by the sheadyng forth of his blood,
has both washed away that same natural malice and corruption that was in us,
and has satisfied for our sins. Now the proportion of water being an Element
ordained for the washyng away of filthiness, does of it self agree with the
blood of Christ, by the sheadding forth whereof only, all the filthinesses of
sin are washed away.


93. Question.
What are those same three rytes or ceremonies?


Answer. To wit, that we must be as it were dipped by a spiritual power and
manner, in the very blood of the Son of GOD: by the force whereof that same
wasshyng away of sins by little and little is brought to pass, that so at
the length we may go away cleansed: as they that are defiled specially with
those same spots which cannot easily be washed of, they must be so long
washed with water, until they receive their first cleanesse.


94. Question.
For So Much as that also was signified by the purifiynges of the law, and that
same benefit also was truly performed in Christ now too be borne, too
them who lawfully and rightly did use the same, what need was there that they
should be abolished, that baptism might be appointed in their place?


Answer. First it behooved that they should be abolished; that he might be
believed to be come already who^ they shadowed too come afterward. Again
forasmuch as they were additions unto the Sacrifices for sins, they ought
too be abolished together with the^. Lastly, their repetition or often
repentance did show their imperfection, and therefore it must needs be that
another washing must come in place which should not be done again too one
person, and which is the Sacrament of that washing which was once performed for
ever.


95. Question.
But what think thou of that same ancient sprinkling of the blood?


Answer. I think that that did more grossly express and represent the
blood of Christ to come, but yet less fitly, forasmuch as blood does not take
away spots, but rather does spotte things that are already spotted.


96. Question.
What do thou mean by the word [of putting on?


Answer. The Apostle so speaks that he may show that that same power of
the spirit is joined to baptism, whereby it is brought too pass that we are
as it were knit and engraffed into Christ himself, so as we grow up into one
body together with him which is the chiefest effect of baptism. Gal. 3. ver.
27. And certainly it seems unto me that this same manner of speaking sprang
from hence, that those that were grown in years being to be baptized should
put of their Garments that either they might put on others: or else being
become new men, might take them again. To which Analogy or proportion the
same Apostle has respect. Col. 3. 9. Ephe. 4. 22.


97. Question.
What do thou signify by the word [of washing?


Answer. The double effect of this putting on, one, whereby this natural
corruption which Paul calls sin, sinning is abolished in us: the other
whereby the fruits thereof, that is to say sins, are forgeuen us, or rather
are not imputed, the punishment which we deserved for them, being satisfied by
Christ: and also his obedience being put in the place of them, whereby he
fulfilled the law for us.


98. Question
But too what end are we said too die, to be buried, and too rise again
into the death, burial and resurrection of Christ?


Answer. By that means the Apostle himself being the Author. Romans 6. 4. etc.
is declared both the proportion and effect of those same Sacramental rites.
For so we are taught to place our whole faith in Christ alone, who died, was
buried and rose again from death too everlasting life for us, inasmuche as he
is our brother. The dipping therefore into water sets before our eyes that
same botto^lesse gulf of Gods judgment, by which for our sins laid upon
him, Christ is as it were swallowed up. The remaining in the water, in what
sort or how short soever it be, does as it were set him before our eyes to
be looked upon, holden in his Grave as it were, by the chains of death. But
coming out of the water, is as it were a lively picture of his victory,
whereby it came to pass that being dead he overcame death, and being buried,
he overcame corruption, that we our selves also being engraffed into him by
faith, (of which engraffting also Baptism is a pleadge) we are become
partakers of ye same power, whereby he performed all those things first in
himself.


99. Question.
But yet that same old man, to wit, corruption was not in him: neither the
fruits thereof, that is to say, sins.


Answer. In very deed none of both these were in him, because he was void of
al vice, and most holy even from the very moment of his conception. For he
came to take away sin. Yet notwithstanding he had both those things upon him,
taking mortality and all infirmities brought into our nature through sin,
except that sin it self, and to be short the punishment laid upon him,
whereby we are reconciled. Now these rites do teach that all these things
are communicated unto us in this Sacrament, our corruption dying in us, being
planted as it were intoo the death of Christ himself, and our sins also
dying with him: that same stay answearing Christ's burial which is between
the dipping in and the coming out, lively paynteth out unto us the proceeding
of the power and benefit of Christ's death by little and little declaring it
self in us. Finally, there follows the coming out of the water again,
signifiyng our new state and condition, the first being abolished, and
aunswearing to the resurrection of Christ: who as he rose again intoo
everlasting life, death and mortality being overcome and swallowed up in the
very grave, so at the length he will work the self same things in us,
whereof we have now received the earnest and pledge.


100. Question.
Now I understand why baptism is called the washing of regeneration, why we
are baptized for the forgiveness of sins, why the church is said to be
cleansed by the washing of water, and to be short, why baptism is called of
Augustine, the Sacrament of faith, and of Tertullian, the sealing of faith. But
yet I understand not that which thou did add, concerning that mutual
consociation and fellowship which we have in Christ.


Answer. This also is an excellent effect of baptism, but yet a secondarie
effect, to wit, depending upon that same former. For that same form of
baptizing intoo one and the self same Christ, does both separate Christians
from al other men, and also join them together, as it were one body under one
and the self same head amongst themselves, as the Apostle speaks. 1. Cor.
12. 13.


101. Question.
I would also know somewhat of those correspondent figures of baptism, And
first what that word (...) means.


Answer. A (...) are called figures correspo^dent to figures, the name of
figures being largely taken, whereby is declared that some Sacrament is not
otherwise properly so called (that is an holy action commanded to the whole
Church as a certain ordinary thing, which is the seal of the promise of
everlasting life) but some certain thing that God has simply appointed also
for this end, that he might signify some other thing to be fulfilled in the
new Testament. So in that Noah was saved out of the waters, and by the waters
themselves in the Arc, it was a Type or figure of Baptism, whereby the
Church, shut up as it were in Christ, is saved. So Israel passing through the
Sea, and coming safe through a Cloud from Heaven shrowding them, it
represented the Mysterye of the same Baptism.


102. Question.
But why do thou use the word [of sealing.


Answer. That I may meet with the slanders of them, that say that we take
baptism, only as a token, or rather only as it were a difference, whereby
Christians are distinguished from them that be no Christians: forasmuch as
this sacrament succeeded Circumcision, which was not only a sign, but also a
seal of righteousness by faith.


103. Question
I would therefore thou should show unto me particularly the causes, the
parts and the effects of Baptism.


Answer. The efficient cause is Christ. The outward and visible matter is
water with the sacramental rites: the inward and invisible matter is Christ
himself, with his gifts. The outward form is the manner of administration it
self, ordained of Christ himself: the inward form the baptism of the holy
Ghost, the essencial parts are the signs and the things signified. The whole
parts, is the Element; Christ himself with his gifts, the action and the word.


104. Question.
But what is this word?


Answer. Teach ye al, baptising them in the name of the father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost. Mat. 28. 19. Preach ye Gospel to every creature: he that
shall believe and be baptized shall be saved. Mark. 16. 15. and 16.


105. Question
What means [in the name?


Answer. Hereby is declared, that Baptism is a solemn vow, whereby he
that is baptized does wholly vow himself too one GOD in Trinity: also a
solemn action in which GOD witnesses, that he receives him that is baptized
intoo his own hand, that in very deed this same form is as it were an
Epicomie or Summarie of the whole Christian faith, with the solemn sealing
thereof.


106. Question.
And yet notwithstanding it seems that the Apostles changed somewhat in that
same form, as being said to have baptized in the name of Christ.


Answer. By these words it is not showed after what manner the Apostles
baptized. For who can probably think that the Apostles in that express
prescription of our Master, in evident and plain words commanded, did
change any thing at all: And it is most plain throughout the whole
Ecclesiastical History, that that form was always kept.


107. Question.
But to what end is that same, [into the name of Christ?


Answer. To wit, that the end it self, the fruits it self, and to be
short, the very matter it self of Baptism might be declared.


Question. But what are the ends of Baptism?


Answer. This shall very well be understood by the effects.


Question. And what are the effects of Baptism?


Answer. If thou call Baptism that only which the Minister does, the
effect of Baptism is nothing.


Question. This seems a hard saying to me.


Answer. And yet so Paul speaks, when he says that he which planteth,
and he 1. Cor. 3. 7.
which waters are nothing. But the case stands thus. In very deed the
ministry of men is somewhat, yea indeed it is that very thing, that whosoever
despises, despises GOD himself. But as I have said before, so God Luke. 10.
16.
uses the ministerye of men, that the whole woorking power rests in God
himself, neither does the same here fall out as in them whom God uses to the
maintenance of this mortal life of men. For fathers in begetting of children
are such instruments of GOD, that the engendering power of the body, and the
receiving power of pouring in life, is engraffed in Fathers and Mothers, and
the same GOD has given his power both to meats for nourishment, and too
medicines for curing of diseases. But in those which concern the Salvation of
men lost in themselves, he so uses their work whom he appoynteth too the
word of salvation, and too the administration of the Sacraments, that
besides the declaration of his will, from whom they are sent, they bring to
pass nothing at all. Therefore the effect of the minister is this, that
pouring forth water, he wetteth him that is to be baptized: but now the only
effect of water poured forth, whether it be common water or sacramental,
appointed to an holy use, if it be simply considered in it self, is, that his
body who is sprinkled with it, be made wet and washed. But he which baptiseth
inwardly by the spirit, (that is to say by his divine power) does alone
perform far other things: to wit, altogether divine and heavenly things
(notwithstanding the ministry of men come between) to wit the forgiveness
of sins, by free undeserved imputation and regeneration which is the effect
of the holy Ghost dwelling in us, and by little and little abolishing sin in
us.


108. Question.
Do thou therefore distinguish between sin and sins?


Answer. Yea, what else? For the Apostle is wont to call that natural
corruption of the whole man, sin, or else the flesh set against the spirit.
John. 3. 6. and oftentimes in other places: which also by it self is sin,
when it dissenteth from the Law of God, and inforceth to sin, whereupon it is
called sin sinning Romans 7. 13. Now all the transgressions of the
commandments of GOD are called sins, that is to say those which sin
brings forth in us, even as a husband begets children by his wife. Romans
7. 5.


109. Question.
What therefore do thou call remission of sins.


Answer. That same great benifite whereby it is brought to pass, that the
satisfaction and obedience of Christ being imputed unto us, those
transgressions are not only laid too our charge, but also in their place the
fulfilling of the Law, performed by Christ is set and appointed.


110. Question.
But what call thou regeneration?


Answer. Another gift of the same Christ, whereby it is brought too pass,
that that corruption both in respect of the guiltiness of it, and in respect
of it self only is not imputed unto us, but also is corrected by little and
little in us.


111. Question.
But does that same power of the spirit by little and little abolishing the
old man in us, and creating the new, begin even from the very first moment of
Baptism?


Answer. Fie upon this error also of the work wrought. The fruit of
Baptism therefore begins in that moment or time wherein faith begins,
which in very deed sometime goes before Baptism, as appeared in Cornelius.
Act. 10. 47. But so^time follows Baptism, as in children that are baptized
sometime slowlyer, and sometimes later, as they grow and wax, and and are of
the number of the elect. Finally the fruit of Baptism is not to be restrained
to that same moment wherein it is ministered to any, as neither is the fruit of
the simple word, the seed lying so long hid in the minds of the hearers,
till that by the virtue of faith wrought, sometimes later and sometimes flower,
showing it self, it fructifieth.


112. Question.
Baptism therefore does not abolish only sins past.


Answer. Yea rather the fruit of baptism is spread forth through out the
whole life of believers. For that same gross error was the cause that many
deferred baptism until death: which is a great wonder that it was not more
vehemently handled of learned bishops.


113. Question.
Do thou not think that original sin is taken away by baptism?


Answer. Surely I think that it is taken away, concerning the guiltiness,
so that Faith be present. But the vice it self although it dye by little and
little in the believers, yet notwithstanding in deed remains: and it must
needs be sin, and be so called, because whatsoever resists the will and
spirit of God, must of necessity be vicious.


114. Question.
But is this same Sacrament of baptism, an instrument altogether, and
absolutely necessary to obtain salvation in Christ?


Answer. No, not so.


Question. And yet not only the late writers, but also many ancient fathers
have thought it so far forth at the least necessary, that they have
esteemed, those destituted of the light of the life of heaven, which were not
lightened with that same outward baptism of the Church.


Answer. Concerning this opinion, from whence flowed that same shameful
error of the Clinicks, and Baptism of Midwiues we shall see afterward. Now
I say that the Sacrament of Baptism is thus far necessary, that he that
neglects it, does also depryue him self (as much as is in him) of the
benefit of Christ, the which sin notwithstanding as all others, may be
taken away by true repentance: but that he can not seem to be a contemner of
Baptism, who through no negligence of his, much less fault, does not obtain
Baptism, in that order which is instituted in the Church.


115. Question.
But do thou think that the baptism administered by John, and afterward of
the Apostles by the commandment of Christ was one and the same?


Answer. I would wilingly that this question were omitted as at this day
unprofitable. Notwithstanding because it makes for the clearer interpretation
of certain places of the holy scripture: and from thence the Anabaptists seek
somewhat, wherevnder to shroude their pestilent opinion, I refuse not also
somewhat to entreat of this thing, when we shall come to the confutations of
the contrary opinions. In the mean time I say that in very deed the Baptism
first ministered of John, and afterward by the commandment of Christ was one
and the same, albeit, it seems to be so much more plentifully performed in
that Apostolical Baptism then in that of John's, as the doctrine is more
plain of the Apostles then the doctrine of John, and yet in very deed the
same.


116. Question.
Now I would have certain questions pertaining unto this matter distinctly
set forth unto me, and first whom thou think fit to be baptized. Fot there
are who think that all are to be baptized without difference, so they resist
it not.


Answer. This foul error flowed out of two fountaynes. For they thought
that the beginning of our salvation was from Baptism: and further that
Baptism saved us, even by the work wrought, as they speak.


117. Question.
Others think that those only are to be baptized, that are of years of
discretion, and are indeed such as make confession of a true Faith, by the
example of the Eunuch. Acts 8. 37.


Answer. The error of these men sprange from thence, that they thought
Baptism to be ministered in vain, unless Faith presently went before Baptism.


Question. What? have thou not said before that the things signified in the
Sacraments, are laid hold upon by the only hand of Faith?


Answer. So it is. But that Faith may follow the Sacrament, yea though it
were ministered many years before, is no more absurd, then if I should say
that (which we think also we prove daily) to wit, that it oftentimes comes
to pass, that the things which we have contemned when they were spoken unto
us, that being marked, they begin to profit us, yea many years after, and
sometimes in the very last breath of our life.


118. Question.
Whom then think thou meet to be baptized?


Answer. All they who can rightly show the conueyances of the covenant, for
the sealyng whereof Baptism is instituted.


119. Question.
But who do rightly show them?


Answer. They who (if they be grown in years) testify their consent.


Question. Wylt thou not then admyt any of years of discretion, unless they
plainly profess a right Faith?


Answer. None in deed. For what else should I probably believe, that I can
seal in them?


120. Question.
To what end then will thou admyt children?


Answer. Neither will I admyt all infantes: for neither will I receive the
children of the Turks, nor of the Jews.


Question. Why so?


Answer. Because they are not comprehended in the tables of the covenant.


Question. But they may be instructed in Christianity.


Answer. Why, let them be instructed or become Catechistes: and then at
length let them be baptized.


121. Question.
I could easily grant this unto thee, concerning the Turks children, and the
children of all those which were never comprehended in the covenant, but wylt
thou reckon the Jews with these?


Answer. Yea, but after an unlike manner. For they indeed were never
comprehended in the covenant, but now the people of the Jews, retectyng the
Mediator, are fallen from the covenant, the Gentiles being engraffed in
their place.


122. Question.
But is it sufficient (as thou think) to be borne of the faithful that none
be rejected and put off from Baptism?


Answer. So I think. For the words of the covenant are plain, I will be
thy God Genesis 17. 7.
and the God of thy seed. Now by the name of seed, the Apostle teaches that
all the Gentiles are contained, followyng the faith of Abraham. Gal. 3. 8. And
the same Apostle also plainly says, that those children are holy, which are
borne, either of the parents being a believer: by which sanctification 1. Cor.
7. 14.
no other thing can be understood then that same comprehension in the
covenant: whereby those that are holy, are discerned from those that are
profane.


123. Question.
But the example of Esau does declare, and also daily experience does confirm
it, that many begotten also even of those that be most holy, do nothing at
all belong unto the covenant.


Answer. Many also of those that are grown in years, professing Faith with
their mouths, are hypocrites. But those same particular judgments are to be
left unto God. But that we should generally hope well of all those which are
borne of the faithful, both the indefinite form of the covenant does
command us, and love does warn us.


124. Question.
But without Faith it is impossible to please God.


Answer. It is one thing for a man to please God in very deed, another thing
to be appointed by this secret decree of God (as I may say) to this good will of
God. For that indeed is brought to pass in those that are of the years of
discretion, their faith coming between: but faith springs from yt same
decree of Gods good will. For why do we believe, but because it so pleases
him? we please him therefore also believing: and we should not indeed believe,
unless first (in the order of causes and time) we had freely and vndescruedly
pleased him.


Question. But why do thou add in those that are of the years of
discretion?


Answer. Because there is another respect of children dying before they are
taught, for as much as Faith after the ordinary manner, is by hearing: and
extraordinarily by the only inward motion of the holy Ghost, of which the one
cannot agree unto infants by no place of scripture, neither can thou gather
it by any little conjecture. For faith (whether it arise by hearing, or
extraordinarily) necessarily presupposes knowledge of the free promise in
Christ, which he applies unto him self that believes: which by no manner of
mean can fall out and agree into infantes.


Question. How then shall we think that infantes are acceptable unto God, that
they should be reckoned of him in the covenant of the Church, and that
therefore the seal it self of the covenant should not be denied unto them?


Answer. First I say, probably that they are to be thought acceptable unto
God, by everlasting election in Christ, of which this is a testimony
sufficient enough, that he would have them to be borne of godly parents. Now
the fitness of this testimony (leauyng unto God those same particular secret
judgments) does appear, out of those plain words of the covenant, I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed. Whereupon also the Apostle gathers,
that even they are holy, who are borne either of their Parents being a
believer: Moreover they please God also in the person of their Godly Parents,
even to a thousand generations, as God witnesses in the law. Exodus 20.



125. Question.
But this is a promise of the law, and we entreat of the covenant of the
Gospel.


Answer. I grant it, but thou must remember that all the promises of the
Law, in Christ, who for us fulfilled that same condition of the Law, are
become promises of the Gospel, and confirmed to all believers.


126. Question.
But thou do not account these infantes in the number of believers,
whereupon it follows that no place is left to infantes for this same promise
of the Law.


Answer. Nay, that follows not. For the faith of the Parents from whom he
is borne, does come between.


Question. Will thou therefore have children saved by the Faith of another,
that is to say, by the Faith of their Parents?


Answer. It is plain that the Faith of others and the prayers of those that
are holy, does profit many unfaithful to mittigate their punishments: yea
also the conversion of Saul teaches that the gift of Faith may be so
obtained for some, if their opinion be true, who have written that this was
granted by the prayers of Steven. Notwithstanding I would not easily say that
any should be saved by an other man's Faith, least any man should so take
me, as if I should say, that the Faith of the Parents is imputed to Infantes,
as it were believing through an other man's faith: which in very deed is no
less false and absurd, then if I should say, that any man could live by an
other man's soul, or be wise by an other man's wisdom. But certainly this I
may say truly, that the Faith of godly Parents coming between, it is
brought to pass that the Infantes either borne or to be borne are holy, that
is to say, are reckened in the covenant, and therefore are saved. Whereof that
thou may doubt nothing, tell me I pray thee whereupon does Faith lay
hold: Does it not lay hold upon that which the promise contains, which is
the object and ground of Faith it self?


Question. Yes verily.


Answer. Therefore the Faith of godly Parents does lay hold upon this
promise, Genesis 17.
(I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) both for them selves and for
their seed. Now this promise is as much as this, I do make a covenant of
salvation with thee and with thy seed.


127. Question.
Therefore should all be saved that are borne of godly Parents?


Answer. Surely we do not without cause presume that they are saved, as
those which seem probably to be comprehended in the covenant, and that by no
feigned conjecture. But in mean time this nothing at all preiudiceth the
secret and particular judgments of God: and it is plain that they are shut
out from the covenant, who when they come to years of discretion, shake off
through unbelief that same grace.


128. Question.
But when thou say that the things signified in Baptism are sealed by
faith only, what shall we say to be sealed in infants, who when they are
baptized are not replenished with any faith in deed, and to those that are
dead before they can be taught the faith?


Answer. Surely we do Baptize them as though they should ouerlyue others.
Now that which I have spoken concerning faith, belongs only unto those that
are come to the years of discretion, and yet their baptism shall not therefore
be in vain. For that shall be ratified in them, that, as I have said, the
faith of the godly Parents coming between, was now bestowed upon them when
they were borne, to wit, the engraffement into the covenant: and therefore
the forgiveness of sin sinning, and finally the whole fruit of Baptism. To
conclude that same solemn naming by the commandment of Christ, of the
father the Son and the holy Ghost cannot be in vain, neither are the
prayers of the Church which are conceived over him which is too be baptized in
vain. But let these things be subject unto the judgment of the Church. For
neither am I ignorant that it may also be said, that faith is so given unto
them by power, as by power and not by act and use, they are endued with a
reasonable soul. But I have showed what seems most probable unto me: neither
does the diversity of opinions in this matter shake or weaken the Christian
faith it self.


129. Question.
Forasmuch as certain old Fathers attributed very much in this controversy
to the faith of the Parents and of the Church, whence I pray you came this
questioning, do thou believe? I believe. Do thou forsake? I forsake?


Answer. I am not ignorant how diligently Augustine studied writing too
Bonifacius too excuse this kind of vowing and promising then used in the
Baptism of Infantes. But who seeeth not that this began from hence that that
which was woonte to be said and done in the Baptism of those which were
grown of years of discretion, were by the negligence of the Bishops, and
peradventure by the superstition of some, drawn too the baptism of infantes?
Of which thing God willing we will then entreat, when we shall come to the
confutation of the contrary opinions.


130. Question.
I have heard what thou do think of the children of Turks and Jews. But
whether do thou recko^ in the same number, their children which take part
with the Bishop of Rome?


Answer. No not so.


Question. But yet you say that the Pope is another Antichrist: and therefore
they who are called Papists must needs be fallen from Christ.


Answer. I grant it. But admit that the Papacy be not Christianisme but
rather Antichristianisme: yet notwithstanding Christianisme has remained and
does remain as it were buried in the Papacy.


131. Question.
What thou meanest, I do not yet sufficiently perceive.


Answer. I say that our Lord Jesus Christ both would and yet will, that his
Church should lie hid in the very bowelles of the papacy it self.


Question. Whereupon do thou geather this?


Answer. By consequent. For I say, that whersoeuer there is a Proper Note of
the Church, that the Church is there.


132. Question
But how miserably is that church defiled, whether thou look upon the
doctrine it self, or upon the mark of Baptism the Note thereof?


Answer. Admit it be so far forth defiled, that it cannot be known of
any but of cunning and skillful men: yet notwithstanding it is in that same
mark of his, I baptize thee in the name of the Father the Son and the holy
Ghost.


Question. What geatherest thou thereof?


Answer. That the Papistrie is at no hand Christianity, but rather so
great a straying, as he that does embrace it and abide in it, he must fall
from Christianity. The same is said of Grecisme which also is so great a
straying from Christianity, that no man can truly be a in opinion.
Grecian and a Christian at this day. I say notwithstanding that the Gentiles
(which now are comprehended generally in those same two factions and inclined
to that cutting of of theirs which Paul manifestly foretold) are not for all
that to be reckened cut of, as long as the outward note of Baptism shall
endure there: and further I say that the Church is geathered out of the
midst and in the myddest of Papistry.


Question. Can thou prove that, by any fit example of the times past?


Answer. Yea forsooth. For what think thou was Pharisaisme, Saducisme and
too be short, Iudaisme in the times while Christ lived? Surely such that no
man was a Jew (if thou look upon the very body of that people) which did not
make the covenant of the Lord in vain. And yet notwithstanding true Religion
was for a time in the midst of Pharisatsme and Saducisme, yea and in the most
corrupt Iudaisme, so long as Circumcision the seal of the covenant flourished
amongst that people. But Circumcision being abolished and the note of
Christianisme being rejected, now the people of the Jews are justly said to
be cut off. The like I think not to be affirmed of Papistry it self: but of
Christianity as it were drowned in the midst of Papistrie, and yet
notwithstanding a little lifting up it self.


133. Question.
But forasmuch as he that is a Papist is not a Christian in deed, would
thou admit such a man being of the years of discretion and not baptized, to
baptism?


Answer. No, unless he were first become instructed and renounce Popery.


134. Question
And would thou admit the child borne of such kind of Parents?


Answer. Neither truly would I do that rashly.


Question. Upon what conditions then?


Answer. To wit, either of some of the Parents or kinsfolks renouncing
Popery and having the child in their custody, would request this of me: or
else some fit witness present, who would promise the godly and right
instruction of the child.


Question. And would thou do the same thing too the child of a Turk or a
Jew?


Answer. Surely I would do it in the first sort. Neither should such a
child be deemed too be sprung from the Jews or Turks, forasmuch as they
renouncing their false religion, and being now baptized themselves, or
requiring Baptism, they did desire Baptism for their children and Offspring.
But if the Question were of those that are of the years of discretion, yea
though there were present a thousand that would promise for them, yet I would
refuse too minister Baptism unto their child.


Question. And why so rather then too the child of the Papists?


Answer. Because neither Iudaisme nor Turcisme is Christianisme, neither in
Turcisme or now in Iudaisme is Christianisme: that is, I have not any
probableconiecture whereby I may geather, that any borne of the Jews or Turks
is holy, that is to say, which does belong unto the covenant of GOD. But now
albeit Papisme be not true Christianisme, yet notwithstanding Christianisme is
as yet in Papisme, as may appear by that, that there has yet remained safe
and sound, that same substantial form of Baptism which Satan yet could
not utterly abolish.


135. Question.
Do thou think the same of the children of every kind of Heretics?


Answer. No, not so, for I except those, who abolishing the baptism of
Christ (now that is the baptism of Christ, which is ministered so as Christ
has instituted) have brought in an other, although they falsely say that it is
the Baptism of Christ, which is said of the Eunomians and Presilianistes and
diverse others.


Question. Would thou therefore baptize these again?


Answer. Nay rather I would baptize the^ being not yet baptized with the
baptism of Christ.


136. Question.
Hitherto therefore has been spoken of those which are to be baptized. Now I
ask whose office it is to baptize.


Answer. Surely it is their office, to whom the care of administering the
word is commanded. For the Sacraments are as it were seals set unto the
tables of the word, and Christ sending forth his Apostles and prescribing
the form of Baptism, has joined these two together.


137. Question.
But Paul says, that he was not sent to baptize. 1. Cor. 1. 16.


Answer That that is not to be understood precisely, but by way of
comparison, it appears by that, that in the self same place he says, he
baptized the house of Stephana, which he would never have done, unless he
had been called unto it. Therefore he says that he was sent that he might
specially labor by the preaching of the Gospel to plant Churches, in which he
appointed Pastors of whom rather as also of their fellow helpers the
Evangelists, all believers (as the matter required) should be baptized. But
it appears that the old Church especially now when baptism was become
more laborsome, used in many things the help of Deacons. But to be short
seeing that Baptism is merely one part of the Church ministry, it is
rightly administered, by ministers only that are lawfully called.


138. Question
But whether do thou believe that the popish either Bishops, or Priests,
are lawfully called?


Answer. I believe nothing less, no not by their own Canons, otherwise not
very pure.


139. Question.
Yea but they have the laying on of hands, or ordination which they say we
lack.


Answer. But how often is it that the Canons do forbid, that he should be
esteemed lawfully ordained, who is not lawfully elected? Now the way of
lawful election is too be sought of us out of the Apostle, especially so
far forth as belongs to the examination of doctrine and manners. Therefore
they want the foundation of lawful ordination, and therefore they boast in
vain of the laying on of hands, which notwithstanding it shall not be hard
for us to show to have more purely then they have it, as perhaps I will show
in another place more fully.


140. Question.
Threfore what think thou of Baptism ministered of private persons, or by
such as execute not the ministry of the word?


Answer. I would esteem it no more, then that which some private man should
do according to his own will in the name of the king or of the common wealth:
or as a feigned seal devised of some private man according to the apishe
immutation of the public seal, and so set to some instrument: or as a fable.


Question. Thou would then much less allow baptism ministered in sport,
or of Midwiues.


Answer. Out upon that gross and filthy profanation of the holy ministry.


141. Question.
But what if necessity do urge it?


Answer. I have already aunsweared, that the beginning of our salvation is
derived from the tables of the covenant it self, and not from the seal set
unto them, which yet notwithstanding if any despise he is woorthely deprived
of the benefit of them: but that he seems not too have contemned them, which
could not obtain them, keeping the right order.


142. Question.
But are not private persons and those which are not lawefully called, to be
thought in like place and degree? Which if it be true, certeynly the baptism
administered by popish priests must be in vain and serve to no purpose.


Answer. Here I will not stick too borrowe that from the Lawyers, which
makes greatly to this purpose: the fault is either in the person, or in the
thing or in both: in the person, as when the Magistrate is corruptly made, who
notwithstanding (as Varro witnesses in his fifth book of the Latin tongue)
is no Magistrate. But the Lawyers do more subtly distinguish between him who
is a Magistrate, (to wit, a lawful one) and him who is in the Magistracy: as
when they dispute that it is one thing too be Proconsull, and another thing
too be in the Proconsulshippe: another thing to be Praetor, then to excerise
the Office of the Pretorship, as is said of Barbarius Philippus: another thing
too be Tutor, then too exercise the office of Tutorshippe: in so much as that
sometimes he that is a Magistrate (as for example if he be an outrageous
man) may be a Magistrate indeed but yet he can not execute the Office of a
Magistrate. The fault is in the act when it is not ordedered rightly, that is
to say, when such things are omitted wc are of the nature of the act it self.
Now in the Papisticall Baptism, the fault is not in the act in which that
same principal form is kept, which other strange and superfluous things
cannot hurt, but the fault is in the person, for they are annexed to the
Bishops and too the Elders, But this fault cannot hurt the action. For (that I
may come more near too our Divines) they that are not lawfully called unto the
ministry, and yet notwithstanding sit in the chair of the Ministry, by
the consent of some men (although deceived) albeit in respect of the Persons
themselves, they be not true Pastoures, yet notwithstanding they are to be
accounted in another place the^ they that have neither lawful nor unlawful
calling. So Caiphas indeed was not the lawful high priest, because he had by
giving of money entered into the high Priesthood, yet notwithstanding sitting in
the chair of the high Priesthood, (albeit unawares) he utters a Prophecy.
And before this Bishop sitting in his seat, the Lord goes to the temple and
observes those divine ceremonies that were not yet abolished. So the Pharisees
so far forth as they sat in Moses chair, are commanded too be heard,
which Chair notwithstanding the most of them had gotten by ambition and evil
means. Finally so are those things holden for firm which some man accounted
a Magistrate commands, albeit he were promoted thither by evil endeavors,
which it is certain happened unto one Barbarius Philippus a servant, and yet
notwithstanding through error created Praetor of Rome. To conclude a faulty
vocation, may hurt the conscience of him who has violently broken in upon
that office, but it does not defile those things which are done of him as if
he were lawfully called.


143. Question.
But that same baptism administered by Sacrifising Priests is defiled with
many spots.


Answer. Thou say very true. But that same essential form of the
Baptism of Christ, by the singular goodness of GOD has remained in it, the
truth whereof cannot be hyndred by any added devises.


144. Question.
Should not Baptism then be true baptism, unless the pure word of the
institution were used?


Answer. No verily, it could not be. For the form gives every thing his
essence or being.


Question. But if the fault in the form as thou say be so great, that it
defile the thing it self: does not a fault in the very explication of
baptism it self do yt much more, in which thou art not ignorant how
grievously the Papists offend.


Answer. No not so. For albeeit that the corruption of the doctrine be
greater and more grievous before GOD, then the corruption of the outward form,
yet notwithstanding it does not so much defile the action of baptism it
self, because the fault of doctrine sticks too the teacher, neither does
it hurt the truth of the Sacrament otherwise rightly ministered: but the fault
of the form is in the thing it self and therefore may be such (as for example,
if men offend in the Element it self, or in the word of institution, or in
some rite) that is merely that it defiles the action it self. As for example
sake, if any should not baptize in the name of the Trinity, or should name
the son inequal, or should baptize in the name of the Virgin Mary, or in
steed of water, should use (specially, wittingly, and willingly) I can not tell
what other thing altogether contrary, or else should omyt sprinkeling or
dypping, certeinely this could not be the Baptism instituted of Christ. But
contrariwise if it might be, that even Satan him self should sit in the
chair of the ministry, and should minister the lawful Baptism of Christ, it
should be the true Baptism of Christ, because it depends neither upon the
knowledge of the minister nor upon his conscience.


145. Question.
Do thou therefore think that they do well, who renouncing Popery and
embracing true Christianity do offer their children to the Priests to be
baptized of them?


Answer. No not so.


Question. And yet thou say that that is a true baptism.


Answer. And yet does not that follow here of. For although that be
available that is given, yet notwithstanding it follows not that, he is
without sin that required it. For seeing that many things are impure in the
Papisticall rytes of Baptism, he is not deuoyde of sin which gives
occasion of the use of the^. that I say nothing that so by this means they are
nourished in their bastardely calling, whom those that should chiefly take
charge thereof, ought by Christ's example too drive out of the house of God.


Question. What think thou the^ to be done of those fathers, who embracing
true religion dwell amongst the Papists?


Answer. I advise the^ yt they spare no cost and leave no way unsought, that
they may provide to have their children baptized purely, and that rather they
defer their baptism, then become guilty of those corruptions.


146. Question.
But what if in the mean time the child dye?


Answer. Surely the child it self, shall not bear the blame: and we have
said often times already, that it is not the want of baptism, but the
contempt of it in it self, that makes a man unworthy of the benefit of the
covenant.


Question. But the Lord witnesses that it shall come to pass, that whosoever
is not circumcized, shall be cut off. Genes. 17. 14.


Answer. If thou understand this of the shutting out as well from holy
exercises of religion, as from civil fellowshyp, because it is added, from
amongst his people, this shall be the manacing, that the uncircumcised were
neither admitted to the exercises of religion, nor to civil offices. But if
thou take this of the shutting out from the very covenant of everlasting
salvation, this that is added, for he has overthrown my covenant, shows
that it must be understood of those only which willingly and wittingly, or
else through negligence, shall have despised Circumcision. Yea rather it is
certain, that they who lived so long uncircumcised in the Wilderness, Iosuah.
5. 4: yet for all yt went to the holy congregations, and were accounted
Citizens of the common wealth of the Jews: to wit, because that fell out not
through contempt of Circumcision, but because it could not be commodiously
ministered in the Wilderness. For it is not probable that Moses and Aaron
would otherwise have neglected it.


147. Question.
But think thou that there is no consideration to be had of the age of those
that are to be baptized?


Answer. For as much as the profession of faith is required of those that are
of the years of discretion, the more diligent that they shall be in knowing the
chief and principal points of Christian religion, the better, they shall
provide for them selves. But the sooner that godly parents shall offer their
children to be baptized the better they shall do: least if it might be they
should be deprived of this benefit.


148. Question.
But yet the Male children of the Israelites were not circumcized before the
eight day. Genesis 17. 12.


Answer. Forsooth because there was another law that let, pronouncing
those to be unclean till the seventh day, that had touched a woman in child
bed. Leuit. 12. 2. and 15. 19.


149. Question.
But it is evident that many put off Baptism long, so that even Gregory
Nazianzen the son of a Bishop him self, came not to be baptized until he
was even now fully grown, and come to ripe years.


Answer. This also manifests as many other things do, the negligence of
many Bishops, of us not in any case to be followed. Moreover Nazianzen himself
does sharply reprove even this same putting off of Baptism, in his oration
upon holy Baptism, with whom notwithstanding I do not consent in this (as
also I do not in certain other points comprehended in the same oration)
because he persuadeth us to put off the Baptism of children to the space of
three or four years, some at less or more, unless (says he) that danger
do enforce us, in which they might learn and answer some mystical thing.
For that very Law of Circumcision shows, that this is a most vain reason,
which was given as well as baptism for the sealing up of that covenant in
Christ.


150. Question.
But what time think thou the fittest to administer Baptism?


Answer. Here in a manner it is incredible to be spoken, how great confusion
was brought into the Churches under the show of order, and specially into the
Greek Churches. For it is certain, by the Acts of the Apostles, that at the
beginning, baptism was ministered as occasion was offered: they for the most
part which came unto Baptism being rather endued with Faith in Christ by
miracle, then by any order of the institution. Afterward as it specially
appears by the second Defensory oration of Justinius, the holy Ghost
beginning to work by little and little by ordinary means, when the
congregations were gathered together, baptism was ministered. Afterward that
all things might be done in order, instructers being ordained, two days were
at the first by a certain custom, then by law, and at length as it were by a
certain superstition appointed for the baptizing of those that were so
instructed. Now at the length, it was brought to this pass, that it was in a
manner compted a great trespass to baptize at any other time then at Easter and
at Whitsontide. Further under the color of this order appointed, to the end
that they that were catechized (such as were in the beginning all those that
were to be baptized as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles) should not be
called every day, nor before a lawful profession: it is in a manner incredible
to think what confusions were pulled intoo the church especially, for that
cause because that whereas baptism in those same that were of the years of
discretion, was the first entrance intoo the congregation of the Church, they
could not precisely wait for the set time of Easter and Whitsontide, but
they must think themselves after a sort condemned, who in the mean season
fell into the danger of death. And heerevpon that, also ensued that they were
bound too discharge an infinite number from those Laws, who also pretended
other things. So crept in that same error to the absolute necessity of
baptism, which opinion when it seemed to thrust down all men headlong into
hell, a wise treacle was given of some, diuising a certain place, in which
they should be placed which were dead without baptism through no fault of
their own, neither should they feel indeed those everlasting pains,
neither be pertakers of that heavenly blessedness, which also Nazianzen has
taught. I omit other infinite things which may rightly cause Christians being
better learned too be ashamed, and were brought in; by the means of those
things which at the first were appointed for order sake.


Question. But what do thou gather of these?


Answer. That for as much as the condition of times at the least is altered
in this, that now none that are of the years of discretion are baptized, and
the inconveniences of those same old Canons are evident enough, that those
same Churches do very well, which so take order for the use of baptism, that
neither infantes, (as much as may be) be deprived of Baptism, not that their
superstition be nourished which tie salvation unto Baptism, neither if it be
possible that Baptism be separated from the daily preaching of the word.


151. Question.
But do thou think that nothing ought to be determined concerning the place?


Answer. Yea, seeing all things must be done in the Church comely and in
order: And forasmuch as Baptism is a part of the mynisterie of the Gospel, I
think that one and the fame place is too be used both for the word and
Sacraments, so as Baptism be ministered in the public congregation of the
Church and with common prayer, neither will I rashly admit those, I cannot
tell what, cases of necessity, that some allege to the contrary.


Question. But what do thou think concerning the rites themselves?


Answer. I think that we ought to stand too the word of God.


Question. But it seems that the word of God requires a through dipping
into the water.


Answer. I grant that the name it self of baptism being taken in the
precise and straight signification does declare no less: neither is it any
maruayle that this was observed in those of the years of discretion,
especially in Iewrie and those same hot countries in which it might be done
without any danger of health. But I think that we must look unto the very
end of baptism it self, which it is plain also that we keep in the simple
sprinkling of water upon the infants wet therewith, like as sprinkling was
sufficient in those same purifications of the law (in which also our baptism
was shadowed: neither ought we greatly to strive, whether with little or much
water the whole body be dipped in, or the head only sprinkled.


Question.
What think thou of that same threefold dipping?


Answer. It appears out of Tertullian that this was then received against
the unity of persons. But howesoeuer it be, why may we not as well use one
dipping alone, that it may be signified that we indeed are baptized into
three persons (as by the words of Baptism it self is understood) but yet
notwithstanding into one God? For it is as dangerous to multiply the essence,
as to appointe one only person. But generally I think we ought not to strive,
either of one or of threefolde dippyng or sprinckling: which also seemed unto
Gregory Bishop of Rome in his first book, Epistle 41. 26.


153. Question.
But here again, there is another thing that I would learn of thee, whether
thou think that this form, I baptize thee in the name, or into the name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be precisely and in so many words
and sillables necessarily to be used. For thou art not ignorant that the
Grecians say, let the servant of Christ be baptized into the name of the
Father?


Answer. I say here omitting the quidities and subtilties of the schoolmen,
that two extreemes are diligently to be shunned of us: to wit, that we
neither fall into the impiety of Magitians, who faigne a certain virtue in
some certain words, forasmuch (as we have said before) as words in them
selves, have nothing else but the force of signification: neither let us think
likewise that it is lawful for us in the institution of the Lord (so as it is
prescribed of him in certain words) to change any thing at all. And now in
very deed concerning that first point, if there had been any power and virtue
in the letters and sounds of the sillables themselves, the Apostles must
always have used the Syriach tongue, forasmuch as it is plain, that our Lord
Jesus Christ spoke in the same tongue. Therefore he changes nothing in the
matter it self, which speaks the same thing which Christ him self has
instituted in that language, that they use that are to be baptized. Yea he
that does otherwise (as at this day is done in that counterfeite Church of
Rome) he does evil, because the Lord will that those things be spoken with
understanding to his, which he would have to be believed and done of all.


154. Question.
I beseech thee therefore, if the baptizer use a strange tongue not understood
of any, whether is the baptism ratified or no?


Answer. The efficacy or virtue of Baptism does not depend of the Baptizer,
so that he (as I have said) want not a vocation although it be faulty. And
seeing that Infantes have as much intelligence (if thou speak in a strange
tongue, as if thou should speak in thine own language) of the fruits of
Baptism which belongs unto them, which afterward are come to their
grows, do depend upon preaching and Faith, which do succeed in their
time. But the calling upon the name of the Lord in others can not be in vain,
although it be wonderfully defiled by their fault who preaching the word, or
administering the Sacrament in the Church, use a strange tongue.


155. Question.
Is the Minister therefore precisely bound to use the form commanded by
Christ, the words only altered by the sound of an other tongue?


Answer. Surely there can fall out no just cause that may excuse any change
in so few words, wherein that same whole and perfect mystery of ye divinity
is declared.


Question. What therefore if any man should say indeed of the Father,
begetter: for, the Son begotten: for the holy Ghost, proceeding? What if in
steed of three distinct persons he should call upon the Trinity?


Answer. To what purpose I pray thee are these things, the Lord has
commanded in this mystery, that we should not call upon the personal
proprieties, but upon the persons them selves, and that upon them distinctly.
I will therefore never admit any affectate or deuized form, in steed of
that which is lawful.


Question. Much less then would thou admyt the taking out of any person,
or any heretical addition, as if any man should say the Father greater, the
Son lesser, or the holy Ghost only proceeding from the Father.


Answer. Thou think rightly. For neither were this the Baptism of the
Church of Christ.


156. Question.
But what think thou of these same speeches, I baptize thee: or by the
servant of Christ be Baptized.


Answer. Christ has not prescribed unto his Ministers what or how many
words they should use in the function of his ministry, but he has defined
the act it self, when he commands them to Baptize into the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Therefore they neither add nor
diminishe from the word of God, but satisfy their office: when they expound
the institution of our Lord it self unto the bearers. And when they be come
unto the actual form it self (as I may say) of the administration, whether
they say, I baptize thee: or whether, let the servant of Christ be baptized,
it makes no matter, so that the form of the action it self which they
exercise be kept. But notwithstanding that I may speak plainly as the matter
is, the form kept in the Latin Churches seems unto me to come more
nearly to the commandment of the Lord, and to be more fit to confirm the
faith of him which is to be baptized.


Question. Why so?


Answer. Because the Minister speaking of himself, when he says in the
first person: I baptize, and then adds the Pronoune, thee, does make the
mind of him which is to be baptized more attentive, as well to mark the
outward action as though GOD himself were present, doing the self same thing
by himself, which the Minister witnesses by his word: as also too apply the
the promise unto himself properly and peculiarly.


157. Question.
But the child which is baptized, understands none of these things.


Answer. I grant it, but he shall understand it in his time: because, as
I said before, the virtue of these words through out the whole life of them,
that are baptized, shows his power in all Tentations, so that we being at the
very point of death may and ought even with this only buckler beat back all
those later temptations of Satan, Auaunt Satan for when I was yet deaf I
heard one that said unto me, in the name and by the commandment of my
Savior, I baptize thee N. in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. This same baptism is unto me a sure pleadge that I am cleansed
from all my sins, and endued with the righteousness of my Christ, together
with whom I dying and being buried, I have now begone to arise again in my
mind and shall fully at the length also rise again in my flesh to everlasting
life.


158. Question.
But forasmuch as we sin every moment, and our sins are washed away by
baptism, how comes it to pass that baptism is not often ministered to one
especially seeing we minister the Supper of the Lord oftentimes.


Answer. It is enough that we are once regenerated and entered intoo the
Church from whence none that is elect is cast out. But to be fed once in the
Church suffiseth not.


159. Question.
Yea, but do not sins shut us out of the kingdom of God?


Answer. No not so. For so none should remain in the Church, forasmuch as
every one is a liar that says, he has no sin. Oursinnes therefore indeed,
yea our least sins deserve a shutting out from the kingdom of God: but to
the elect enjoying the favor of GOD, they are not imputed. Therefore Saint
Paul said not Romans 8. 1 that there is no sin, but that there is no
condemnation too them which are in Christ Jesus.


Question. Let us therefore sin, that grace may abound.


Answer. Yea but Christian faith can by no means admit this. For it
believes nothing but that the word of promise offers. Now there is no
promise of pardon, but to those that repent and amend, and none are further of
from repentance and amendment then they that wittingly abuse the patience of
GOD to sin. Therefore the gift of true repentance is also properly belonging
to the elect.


160. Question.
But what will thou say of those that are excommunicated? For the lawful
judgments of the Church by the word of Christ done in the earth are
ratified in the heavens. Matthew. 18. 18. Now they that are excommunicated are
cast out of the midst of the Church. 1. Cor. 5. 1. and therefore out of the
kingdom of God.


Answer. No man can more doubt that the judgment of lawful excommunication
is ratified in the heavens, then if the Son of GOD himself should pronounce
the sentence, forasmuch as the Church does that which it does in his name.
Yet notwithstanding thou gaynest not that thou striuest for. For neither the
excommunicate persons are simply too be compared too branches, now once
simply cut of from the Vine, but too unfruitful branches wc draw not juice out
of the Vine, and therefore at length too be cut off from GOD, unless they
shortly sprowte again which appears by the fruits of repentance, even
like as it falls out too bows, which in the Winter time be as they were
dead, and yet notwithstanding in the spring time receive their former hew and
liveliness again. For those same gifts of God are without repentance. Now if
so be any continue unto the last in their stubbornness, it is a token that
they were indeed for a time outwardly in the church, but they were never of
the Church. For they had abidden with us (says Saint John) or at least after
their error they had returned 1. John. 2. 14.
unto us again, if they had been of us.


161. Question.
But now if Baptism be therefore not to be often ministered to one, because the
first entrance intoo the Church cannot be frustrate, why in like manner
suffices it not once too have received the Supper, forasmuch as he that is
truly once incorporated into the body of Christ, can never altogether fall out
of it?


Answer. We have told the cause already. For it is enough once to be borne
again, but not to be once nourished: because as in this corporal life we must
oftentimes take meat, by the juice whereof we may be nourished: so being
incorporated into Christ, that we may more and more be quickened in him, the
often sealing of that incorporation, and as it were the nourishing of faith is
profitable. Notwithstanding these things in this similitude are altogether
diverse, because this meat is corruptible which we use to the upholding of
this life, and therefore after the old, another new always succeeds: but
the inward meat which is given in the holy supper, is incorruptible, and
therefore when the Supper is often used, neither is new meat received, nor
that same first meat as it were before rejected received again, but the same
meat which we had taken before, is more and more as it were engraffed in us,
and by faith are strengthened, that so much the more effectually we may be
nourished with that, (that is too say, with Christ, to everlasting life.


162. Question.
This be spoken hitherto of baptism. Now let us come too the other Sacrament
of the Christian Church. How shall we call that?


Answer. Paul calls it the Supper of our Lord. 1. Cor. 11 20. because
that at the first it was celebrated toward the Evening by the Lord, which
also was a long time observed in the Christian Church. He likewise calls it
the Table of the Lord. 1. Cor. 10. 21.


163. Question.
And is it not otherwise called of the ancient fathers?


Answer. Therefore also let us way these names. Certain men do in this
argument reckon up the names of the Liturgy or service, of the Synaxis or the
gathering together of the people, and of Agape ye feasts of love, but in my
judge meant, not rightly enough. For by those two former names are signified not
only those mysteries, but also those other parts of the public woorship of
God. For (...) as all that are not utterly ignorant of the Greek tongue
know, is the self same that to execute any public ministry is, which
afterward is drawn to all ecclesiastical functions, like as the Apostle also
calls himself (...) the servant of Jesus Christ, and his office he calls
(...).


Question. Thou art not ignorant that the old Latin interpreter. Acts 13.
2. has turned (...) sacrificing


Answer. I know it it very well, and in very deed he has done it very
foolishly, unless we will also make the Angels, Sacrificers, as they that are
called (...) ministering spirits. Heb. 1. 14. and Magistrates. Romans 13. 4.


Question. But yet so it seems too be taken. Luke. 1. 23. Heb. 10. 11.


Answer. Nay rather there also it is taken for the whole office of the
Priesthood. The name also of (...) that is too say a meeting together, is
larger, although it were at length translated, too that same principal part
thereof, too wit, too signify the Lords supper. Now they called (...) those
same common holy Banquettes and whatsoever was done in them, as Tertullian
declares at large, in his defense. Jude also uses the same name. Jude the
twelfth verse: the name being taken from hence, because then they used
certain choice, Daynties and Iunkets, and also because Christians did so
testify their mutual Love and most near conjunction.


164. Question.
But what think thou of the name of Eucharist or thankesgeuing.


Answer. The Supper of the Lord was so called, not in respect that it was a
Sacrament, but as it was a Sacrifice.


165. Question.
Therefore with thee, the Supper of the Lord is a Sacrifice.


Answer. It is so indeed, And that in a threefold respect: first in this
respect that we offer some thing to God in the same, to wit, that same solemn
giving of thanks, by that commandment of Christ, As often as ye shall do
these things, ye shall show forth the Lords death. By which reason the
Supper of the Lord may be said to succeed in the place of all those
Sacrifices which they called peace offeringes. Moreover because the alms were
bestowed in it, peradventure by the ordinance of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 16. 2.
the which alms were called Prospherai or Oblations out of that sentence of
Christ, that which you shall do to the least of these, you do it unto me.
Thirdly because it does as it were renew that same sacrifice, of the Lords
death, after a certain sort set before our eyes in those mysteries. Neither
is it otherwise to be expounded whatsoever is read of that sacrifice and
unbloody oblation of Christ in the old and more pure fathers, as well the
Greeks as Latin.


Question Do thou not think therefore, that Christ is offered again unto
his Father, of the Priest in very deed for the quick and the dead.


Answer. Out upon that blasphemy the most execrable of all that ever were.


166. Question.
But what think thou of the name of the Sacrament of the Altar?


Answer. It is certain that there was some kind of altar set in a
convenient place, whether the gifts and offerings were carried, (as also now
the Popes Canon has) out of which were taken bread and wine, wc were appointed
to the holy mysteries. And this was the Ambrie as it were of these Love feasts,
by the example of Christ. And the Minister was wont to stand at that place
blessing the bread and wine. But here see together with me the craft of
Satan. For there is no doubt but using the occasion of this Altar he
transfonrmed the Sacrament intoo a Sacrifice, and that Propitiatory. But in
the writings of the Apostles there is no mention of an Altar, but only of
the Lords Table. Of so grease weight is it, not too bring any thing rashly, no
vee it never so indifferent, intoo the Church.


167. Question.
And what think thou concerning the Mass?


Answer. Of the thing it self, that is to say, of the impiety thereof, such
as the like was never, we will speak in his proper place. Now I say that the
word is altogether barbarous. For the Ancient Latins, too whom that word
was proper, said not Missam but Missas. For I can also show Romanum capitulare
thee, an old Romish Grayle as they call it, in which they say in the plural
number and in the Newter Gender Missa. Neither can that word signify any
other thing, then things sent, to wit, Oblations which every man brought in
their meeting. For concerning that certain men have written of the sending
away of the company, and much more some have made much ado about the
Etimologie of the Hebrew word, it seems too me altogether absurd.


168. Question.
Concerning the names themselves, sufficiently is said. Now I pray thee define
unto me the Supper it self.


Answer. Then I define the Supper of the Lord, to be an holy action,
commanded of Christ to all the faithful of ripe years, too continue in the
Church too the end of the world, in which by a fit Analogy and proportion
of Elements and Ceremonies, the memory as well of his death is lively set
before us, as also our incorporation intoo him through faith, is spiritually
sealed, and our mutual conjunction in him ratified. Finally a solemn giving
of thanks is paid unto him.


Question. I would gladly then have this definition particularly declared unto
me.


Answer. Why I say it too be an holy action, thou have known before in the
definition of a Sacrament: If thou demand of the rest, I will answer thee in
order.


169. Question.
I have understood also before why thou say it was commanded of Christ to
continue to the end of the world, or till he come again, as he himself
speaks. But why do thou add [vnto the faithful that are of ripe years?


Answer. Because that forasmuch as the examining of a man's own self by the
Apostolical doctrine is required, we must needs determine that they are to be
shut out, who neither can prove themselves, neither are able to make confession
of their faith which they might examine.


Question. Will thou therefore have children made men, and finally, those which
are not taught in Christian religion, shut out?


Answer. What else: And therefore the supper of the Lord to be profaned of
those which minister it to Infantes.


Question. And yet to the eating of the Paschall Lamb, in whose place succeeded
the Supper of the Lord, children also were admitted.


Answer. I grant it. But they were of that age, that they could ask their
Fathers, and might be taught of them, as is plain. Exodus 12. 26.


170. Question.
Why did thou add [in the Church?


Answer. That thou might know that it is not a private, but a common
action, that is to say, an action in the congregation, either of some whole
church, or of some particular, finally not to be celebrated of any one
privately but in common, whereof we shall speak afterward, when we shall
dispute against the abuses of the holy Supper.


171. Question.
What call thou the elements?


Answer. That same bread and that wine.


172. Question.
Why do thou add that same bread and that wine?


Answer. That I may distinguish holy things from common things. For so also
Paul speaks. 1. Cor. 11. 16. 17.


Question. But in what thing consists this difference?


Answer. Not in the substance but in the quality and use. For common bread
and common wine are set before us, that they may nourishe this life: but that
same bread and that same wine, are therefore given us, that they might be both
signs and seals of the communicating of that body, given for us, and of the
blood shed for us, and that into everlasting life.


173. Question.
And what are those same rites belonging unto the Sacrament?


Answer. Touching that that belongs unto the minister, to bless, too
break, too power out, to give: concerning that, that belongs to the guestes,
too take too eat, to drink.


174. Question.
And what is signified as well by these elements, as by those ceremonies
sacrame^tally?


Answer. Surely yt bread is ye sacrame^tall sign of that body given for us,
and that wine of that blood shed for us: finally, both two of whole Christ,
as of our ever lasting meat. The blessyng was appointed not so much to
signify some mystery, as partly to confirm those which came to the Lords
Table, partly to perfect that same Sacrament, and partly to celebrate some
solemn action of thanks giving. Of which matter it shall be meet to
entreat apart. Now the breaking of the bread is a sign of the passion of
Christ.


175. Question.
Whence do thou geather this? For there are which refer this specially to
the use of unleavened or sweet breades, which it is manifest was not very
thick, and for the cutting whereof there needed no knyfe. Moreover they say
also, that to break bread, by the Hebrew phrase signifies as much as to
distribute and plentifully to give bread.


Answer. Both the things that these men say, is very true, but this same last
is by no means agreeable to those things which the Lord did and commanded to
be done. For it is written, he brake, he gave, wereby there can not be
(understood by the name of breaking, the distributio^ of bread. Now I grant
that some other, and I add further, that householders were wont, yea, besides
the use of unleavened bread, to break bread to the use of their household. But
the Apostle manifestly shows that this ryte albeit it was common, yet it
became sacramental, and that by reason of those same mentioned punishments
which the lord suffered for our cause, for so much as he wrote, in steed of
these words, that is given, that is broken.


176. Question.
Yea, but one bone was not broken in him.


Answer. I grant it: but yet verily he was torn and rent both with the
torments of mind and body, and there is nothing more usual in the word of
God, then this Metaphor, whereby it is also said, that the heart is bruised and
broken. Now this giving, or outward offering of the signs is to be taken, as
if Christ himself should give him self unto us with his own hand, to be
used and enjoyed, and should insinuate himself wholly unto us, which thing
also in very deed he perfourmeth inwardly by the power of his holy spirit,
unless that our unbelief hinder it.

Now the outward receiving, whereby we lay hold upon the elements as with the
hand, it answers the inward receiving by faith, that betwixt us and Christ
there may be perfected and concluded as it were a certain bargayne, Christ
demanding, Will thou receive me inwardly by faith, even as I do outwardly
deliver thee, these same seals of my promise by my minister into thy hands?
And faith answering, I will Lord, and by faith I receive thee, even as this hand
receives these seals given unto it.

Now the eating of that bread, and the drinking of that wine, declares the
applying of Christ laid hold upon by faith, whereby it is brought to pass,
that being truly made partakers of him, we more and more draw out of him
whatsoever belongs to our salvation.


177. Question.
But what is the proportion and the analogy of these signs with the things
signified?


Answer. This analogy or proportion is manifest in it self. For seeing that
breadeand wine is most fit above other meats, for the nourishing of our bodies,
they do most fitly set forth him unto us in who^ only everlasting life
rests. But the breaking of bread and the pouring forth of wine, does as it
were set before our eyes those infinite torments that the Lord suffered for our
sakes, that we might in a manner look upon him with our very eyes hanging
bloody upon the Cross, and instilling into us out of his pierced side
everlasting life. Hitherto belongs that same saying. De consec did. 2. When
the offering is taken, whiles the blood is poured out of the cup into the
mouths of the faithful, what other thing is set forth the^ the offering up of
the Lords body upon the cross, and the pouring forth of his blood from his
side? Finally the eating and drinking does so expressly and in a manner so
lively declare as it were our transformation into Christ him self, and his
insinuation again into us, whereby he him self lives in us, and we again in
him, that nothing can be more evident. For what can be more nearely joined unto
us, then that which we eat and drink, as that which is transformed and
changed into our selves?


178. Question.
But yet thou have said nothing of our mutual consociation into one body.


Answer. That also appears by the whole ceremony. For seeing that we take
one and the self same meat from one and the self same table, we profess that
we are of one and the self same Household, and we promise each too others
our mutual helps by this solemn ceremony. Hitherto also belongs that same
analogy and proportion of bread and wine, made of many grains into one body,
which lively sets as it were before our eyes our mutual knitting and
growing up together as members under one head. Wherefore also Augustine
calls this mystery the bond of love, which is expounded plainly by the
Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. 17.


179. Question.
But why are there two Elements given in the Supper, and but one in Baptism?


Answer. Because Christ in Baptism is set forth unto us as a Lauer, and
water also only suffiseth to wash away filthiness. But in the Lords supper,
forasmuch as Christ is set forth unto us as that heavenly nourishment, and this
life needs not only eating, but also drinking, not without cause not only
bread but also wine is given in the supper of the Lord, that we might know
that we ought to seek our whole life in Christ alone.


180. Question.
Do thou therefore think the use of that wine to be as necessary as the use
of that bread?


Answer. What else? And therefore that the use of the Cupp was taken from
Christians not without the instinct of Satan. Of which matter we will speak
in the refutation of abuses.


181. Question.
But what do thou think of taking the Sacrament with the hand, which also
the Romish Church took away?


Answer. Albeit I will not say, that the taking or touching with the hand is
so precisely necessary, as the other Sacramental rytes (for he also receives
that receives with his mouth) yet notwithstanding, I think that this also
ought to be restored in the Church. For it is more plain then that it can be
denied, that the ancient and Apostolical Church did the same: and it is
plain, that this same thrusting of the bread into the mouth sprang first from
a certain preposterous and altogether superstitious reverence of the
Sacraments, as though men were unworthy to handle the holy Elements, when as
notwithstanding the mouth is more impure then the hand. To be short there, is
no man but sees, unless it be he which has no eyes, from whence this
superstition comes, that same doting dream of transubstantiation once being
received.


182. Question.
Then thou much less allowest the taking away, of the breaking of bread.


Answer. Thou think rightly. For this being taken away, the proportion or
the analogy of the death of Christ is taken away, as we have showed before.


183. Question.
To conclude the^, what think thou of that, that eating is changed into
adoration, caring about, and finally into an oblation for the quick and the
dead?


Answer. Surely that Satan has even passed himself by bringing this
impiety, seeing that there was never any such gross idolatry heard of, no not
amongst the most profane Gentiles.


184. Question.
Go to then, let us speak of the blessing or consecration.


Answer. Why, thou have already showed what this thing is: forasmuch as by
the name of consecration is understood blessing.


Question. So then I suppose that thou call it, that which the divines also
call sanctification, that is to say, a translation from a common use to a holy
woorship of God. But against this interpretation there are certain stoppes.
For the Evangelists do use in this self same argument of the supper, two
Greek words commonly and indifferently one for another, the one to bless,
the other to give thanks. Now that these do differ within themselves it may
specially appear by this, that to bless, is always taken transitiuely, but
to give thanks, always intransitiuely. Moreover also that same common
sanctification, to wit whereby it is brought to pass, that we may lawfully
use meats, is manifestly distingushed, from thanks giving and prayers, as the
conseque^t from the antecedent.


Answer. It is an usual thing with the Hebrews, whose phrase the writings
of the Apostles do savor of, to understand the consequent by the antecedent,
therefore to give thanks, albeit it be always set down absolutely, yet
notwithstanding it is taken in this argument, for to sanctify with thanks
giving: and again this action of thanks giving is spoken generally of
prayers, the Apostle using the name of intercession, though in an unequal
thing, yet not altogether unlike. So also to bless, when it is attributed to
God, is taken for too sanctify, Moses him self being interpreter. Genesis 2.
verse 3.


Question. But that Christ in the history of the holy Supper, speaks as a
Mediator and as man, hereby it appears, that the Evangelists, as I have
said, use this word, to give thanks, indifferently, which by no means can
be attributed to God.


Answer. Thou think rightly. Therefore there is no doubt, but that in
Paul 1. Cor. 10. 16. that which we bless, Oecumenius has interpreted out of
the Hebrewe phrase and manner of speech, That which we prepare by blessing. Now
blessing is referred partly to God and partly to the Elements them selves, as
it is first instituted of Christ in this matter, as he who after his manner
first blessed God his father, that is to say, gave him thanks. In which
respect also this mystery may be called a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, and therewithal that the son as the Lord of his fathers
householde might sanctify the elements taken, that they might not be that
which they were by nature, but might begin to be that sacramentally, to which
as well in signifying as in giving and sealing they were by his will appointed:
so as also they might take the very names of the things signified, as if they
were the same thing that sacramentally they signified. Now that which was then
first instituted and done of him, as it is performed by his commandment, so
also it is performed by his power, as of him who has said, do this.


185. Question.
But of this blessing there is no certain form prescribed, specially
concerning the action of giving of thanks.


Answer. I grant it. Therefore it was free for the Churches to prescribe a
form of so many and so great benefits as was thought expedient: so that in
the very substance of the matters they went not any whit from the written
word. And hereupon not only that Canon, which they called the Greek and
Latin Canon, but also those manifold liturgies or fourmes of prayer, called by
that name were increased, interlined and corrupted by little and little, that not
only they became the very sincke of all superstition but also of all
ungodliness.


186. Question.
But is there not also some kind of form prescribed of the Sacramental
benediction?


Answer. Yes certes, it is prescribed in plain words of the three
Evangelists and of Paul.


Question. But why rather of this then of that?


Answer. Because it only belongs unto Christ, to constitute and appoint
Sacraments, by prescript words of him self, least whiles we vary from the
words, we also straye from his will. Now it was not needful to prescribe
certain set words which we should use in the expounding of his institution,
in prayer and in giving of thanks. Therefore it ought to suffice us to have
those things prescribed, according to the rule whereof, we ought to require
those of ours.


187. Question.
And what is that same Sacramental form?


Answer. Even the same that is prescribed of the three Evangelists and of
Saint Paul.


188. Question.
And yet these do somewhat vary amongst themselves in words.


Answer. But in the matter it self they vary not any whit at all, therefore
it skilleth not which of these thou follow. But this same little variety in
words shows that we must not stick in the sillables themselves (which is
altogether magical) but we must mark the signification of the words: Neither
for all that, is it lawful for us to go any whitte from the prescript words.


189. Question.
Think thou not then these words are woorking and effectual words?


Answer. No indeed, if thou call them woorking words wherein there should
be some woorking force too work some secret thing effectually. For that
which I had said before, now I say again, that there is no other use of those
words then to declare his mind that speaks. But if thou call them woorking
woorks whereby is declared both what is done of the Pastor, and what ought to
be done of the flock, and also what God him self does, then I will say that
they are all woorking words. For those words, He took, he brake, and gave
to his disciples, show what Pastors ought to do. Again those words, take
ye, eat ye, drink ye, show what the flock ought to-doe. For it follows
Do you this. Finally those words This is my body which is given for you, and
this is my blood of the new testament which is shed for you, signify what
himself woorketh and perfourmethin the minds of the hearers, in this action by
his own power alone. For neither are these things rehearsed in that action of
the minister of the word historically: but that al may understand that then
these things are done, which our Lord commanded to be done.


190. Question.
Will thou therefore that the institution of our Lord be plainly rehearsed?


Answer. Yea, not only plainly, but in that tongue also, which may be
understood of the Hearers, as well adding the exposition thereof, as also
exhortation, that the minister be no let, but that every man may perceive
that which is done there himself. For why are all those things said, unless
it be that they may be understood of all the comers unto it: And why must
they be understood, unless being understood they may be believed: For this
cause the Apostle requires that every one examine himself.


191. Question.
But in what things consists this same proouing of a man's self?


Answer. First in the knowledge of Christian doctrine, and especially of this
mystery, then the full persuasion of faith, thirdly to be short in true
repentance.


192. Question
But who has these things,


Answer. Whosoever is truly a Christian, forasmuch as these are the
effects of the spirit of adoption. But it is one thing to have these things
truly; another too have them in every thing perfect. Yea if these things were
perfect in us, we should neither need the word nor the Sacraments: seeing
that we use them, too the end that they being begone in us, might be
daily increased.


193. Question.
I have heard what thou have said ought to be done, as well of the Minister
himself, as of those which come to the Lords table. I ask thee therefore,
seeing that the formal cause it self of the Sacraments depends of the use
of the institution of our Lord, if any fault be in them whether for that
cause, the making of the Sacrament be hindered.

Let us see this therefore by parts. The Benediction is principally put in the
faithful rehearsal of the institution of the Lord, and as I may say in a
certain applying of the same unto ye signs, moreover in the exposition
thereof, adding exhortations and all other things, whereby every one may be
stirred up to the understanding and lawful use of these mysteries. Therefore
the ouerpassing or rather perverting of this institution, does so corrupt the
act, that it neither can nor ought to be deemed the Lords Supper. But other
things not done so rightly (no, not if there be a false exposition used) do
not yet corrupt the action, as which wholly depends upon the will and
institution of the Lord.


194. Question.
But what think thou now of the breaking of the bread?


Answer. I think that the ouerpassing of that, does not corrupt the act it
self, because it pertayneth not too the very making of the Sacrament, but
only belongs too the true and altogether lawful use thereof: as a spotte in
a fair face does indeed hurt the beauty, but yet notwithstanding it does not
utterly abolish the form it self.


195. Question.
And what think thou of the giving of the Sacrament?


Answer. Surely that the ouerpassing of the Sacrament it self does make,
that that which was a Sacrament does cease too have the reason of a Sacrament,
forasmuch as the Sacraments were instituted to be used: like as wax sealed
with a common seal does differ very much from private Wax and not sealed:
but unless it be applied unto an instrument it is accounted as private Wax.


196. Question.
What think thou of taking, eating and drinking?


Answer. Even the very same.


197. Question.
But what if there be any fault in the person of him that makes the
Sacrament?


Answer. Surely this, that if he be a mere Private person the whole action
is in vain, as we have said in Baptism, but if he sit in the chair of
the Ministry, albeeit he be unlawfully called, if he keep the institution
of the Lord, we must think otherwise, as before we have aunsweared
concerning Baptism For the reason is one and the like of both in this behalf.


Question. What if he teach falsely, or ouerflowe with vices, or thinks or
believes nothing less then that he does, is it therefore no Sacrament?


Answer. No, not so. Whatsoever the Sophisters babble of the intention (as
they speak) of him that co^secrateth. For the making and perfecting of the
Sacrament depends wholly upon the institution of God, by whatsoever Minister
he does it.


198. Question.
Do thou think the like of their fault, or of any unworthiness of those
which do come unto the Lords Table?


Answer. Yea altogether like. And by these it is easy to understand what
corruptions have been brought into the Church of God, substituting in the
place of the true blessing, a magical mumbling: in the place of giving and
receiving, an oblation for the quick and the dead: breaking of bread being
altogether taken away, and giving of thanks changed into that same horrible
carriyng about and woorshipping of a most profane piece of bread, whereof we
will speak in their proper place.


199. Question.
Therefore unworthy Ministers do also minister the whole sacrament.


Answer. I grant it.


Question. Therefore they also that come unworthily, do receive the whole
Sacrament, seeing they receive that that is ministered.


Answer. I have oftentimes greatly meruayled at the efficacy of the spirit
of error in this plain Sophistical conclusion. But one error has brought
forth an other. For this being granted, that both two, that is to say, as well
the Elements as the thing signified, that is, that Christ is given with his
gifts to the body and too all, they have concluded, that he that receives
the Elements, receives also the thing. But this ground of theyrs is most
false. For neither the matter of the Sacrament (that is to say, Christ
himself) is offered to the hands and to the mouth, but to the mind and
faith, to wit too be laid hold upon spiritually as the bodily signs do
witness to the outward senses.


Question. What then do thou determine concerning this matter?


Answer. Forsooth, that the Elements are received of al, but the thing
signified only of the faithful, albeit that both the Elements and the
things signified are ministered to all.


200. Question.
Thou saydest also in the beginning that the simple word does consist in two
things, to wit, in the words themselves and in the things signified by the
words: and that there fore the Sacraments are so far off, from the simple
and naked word, that they also are set before our eyes, and therefore are
called of Augustine [visible words.] And therefore it may be, yea that the most
wicked do understand as well the outward word it self, as the things
signified by it, to wit, this by the sound, but those by the understanding.
Why therefore do thou not think the like also in the Sacraments: too
wit, that both the Sacraments and the thing signified: the Bread and the
Wine, yea, and Christ too be received of all: of some too wit, of of the
believers too life, but of others, too wit, of the unworthy, to damnation?


Answer. First, that which thou say, too wit, that of whomsoever the
outward word is heard, that they should also perceive that which is
signified by it, thou know is not always true. For it has no place in
them, who speaking in a strange tongue, so hear that they do not understand,
which falls out to most men under the papacy. Yea how many do hear those
that speak unto them in a known tongue, who yet notwithstanding understand
not the very meaning of those things that are spoken: For therefore we go to
schools, and to Schoolemaisters, not only too learn the tongues, but
especially that we may understand in deed those things, whose soundes we
perceive well enough. Now this thing is much more to be acknowledged in divine
then in common matters, and by their own nature more agreeable to this our
understanding. But go to let us grant that that in the simple word and in
the Sacrament, there is heard and also understood of all that which is
signified by both: yet for all that I will not grant, that the thing
signified, that is to say, Christ, is received of any others then of those that
receive him woorthily, that is to say, that come unto him with faith. For this
receiving, which by a Sacramental figure (as we have said before) in the
words of eating and drinking is signified, and by the effect is called of the
Apostle the communion or spiritual union, does not only respect the hearing of
our ears nor our understanding only, but declares that which is the only
propertye of faith alone, to wit the spiritual application of Christ
himself.


201. Question.
Is not this the self same thing that some say, to wit that as well the bread
and the wine, as also the very body of Christ and his blood is received both
of worthy and unworthy, but that the fruit of Christ is only received of
them which are indewed with faith?


Answer. No not so, the which I shall easily show thee by a fit
similitude. For let us put the case that there is not only declared by words
to some sick man of some learned Phisitio^ in an unknown tongue, but also in
very deed some such medicines set forth which are required to the curing of
him, and that the sick man does neither understand what the Physician
says, nor what is offered unto him. And the Physician has done his part,
who notwithstanding has done that he has done in vain. Such are they who
come altogether unworthy too the Lords Table, being altogether ignoraunte
of those things that are there said and ministered, too whom nevertheless
the whole Sacraments are set forth. Yea let us put the case in the
second place, that the sick man in deed hears what the Physician says,
yet understands not the meaning of his sayings, either because he is not
attentive, or else because he is not skillful of those things whereof he
hears the Physician entreating. Such are they also who come themselves
unworthily too the Lords table, too wit, with a mind not rightly prepared
to understand those things which are done there. Let us further put the case
that the sick man does well understand both his Speeches, and whatsoever the
Physician gives him, but yet notwithstanding despyseth the things he has
both heard and well understood. Now I demand of thee, whether thou can
rightly say, that such time of sick men, either of the first or second or
third sort do receive the medicines that are offered them?


Question. No not so. For the first sort neither receive the word nor the
things, the other only understand the word, finally the third sort though
they understand both, yet in very deed they neglecte both the word and the
things.


Answer. Thou think rightly. For it is one thing too understand that
which is said, another to apply that to thy self which thou understand,
This Physician of whom I speak is he that rightly administreth the
Sacraments: the Elements, and Sacramental Ceremonies rightlye set forth, is
the talk of this Physician: The medecin that is offered is Christ him self
with his gifts, the only remedy against death only to be applied unto us by
the iustrument of faith as all the scripture witnesses. Herupo^ gather how
greatly they are deceived which deceive both themselves and others, who reason
so that they say, when the whole sacraments, that is, as well the signs as
the very body and blood of Christ himself, are ministered to al comers, that it
is also received of al, albeit the fruits of the Sacrament are received of the
faithful alone, as though forsooth Christ could otherwise be received then to
everlasting life.


202. Question.
Yea, but does not Christ also judge, as he does save? that is to say, is he
not set forth as well to judgment of unbelievers, as for the salvation of
believers?


Answer. Yes verily. But being received, he saves: but being neglected, he
judges. Therefore it is not truly said, that he is received of some to life,
but of other some to death, albeit indeed he be the savior of life unto
some, to wit, to them, of whom he is received by faith: but to other some a
savor of death, to wit, too them of whom he is not received. For death is
not of Christ, who is always life, but of the contempt of Christ.


203. Question.
I pray thee let us come at the length too that of whose exposition this
controversy seems chiefly to depend, to wit to the very true and native
exposition of the words of the institution.


Answer. And which do thou think too be that same institution?


Question. Too wit, this is my body that is given for you, and this is my
blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many, for the forgiveness of
sins.


Answer. But I say, that the institution does comprehend not only what is
given: But also what is prescribed, both too the minister and too those which
come to these mysteries. For all these things must concur in this action.


Question. That I may admit this, yet notwithstanding I think that there is
controversy about these which I have rehearsed.


Answer. Yea, and of others also. For thou know that there is question
also what is broken: and the word do you, is taken of some for sacrifice you,
and again for, make you the body and blood of Christ of bread, as of late,
Santesius was not ashamed to write. But God willing we will weigh all these
things in their proper place.


204. Question.
Now I pray thee proceed to the expounding of those things which I have
spoken of: and first of all, say thou, how thou think that same This is my
body, is to be interpreted.


Answer. I say, that this same proposition does consist of a subject a
Predicate and a coupling Verb (as they speak in Schools.) The subject is
declared by the pronoune, This, they attribute by the term of the Body, the
copulative is the verb substantive is.


205. Question.
But what is the subject?


Answer. Too wit the same that Christ reached forth, taken and broken, to
wit, that same bread as the Evangelists do express. Therefore the word
This, can declare nothing else but This Bread, too wit, the element of this
action.


206. Question.
Now what is the attribute?


Answer. That same veryt body of Christ given, and that same blood shed
for us. And therefore those same determinations are added that is is given: and
that is shed.


207. Question.
And how are these so joined together, that the one may be said of the other?


Answer. To wit, this is the nature of things which be desparate or sundry,
that when they altogether disagree in kind, the one can not properly be
said of the other by no reason: because otherwise things should not be
discerned from things by their specificall form. Therefore if thou take this
proposition properly, it shall be no less false, that bread is the body of
Christ, then that a gourde is a man. Therefore it must needs be a figurative
speech.


Question. But thou art not ignorant that the very letter is toughly mainteyned
as well of the defenders of transubstantiation as of consubstantiation.


Answer. So they say. But of them we shall say afterward. Now it is enough
for me to declare the doctrine of our Churches, and to show upon what reason
it stands until that we shall confute the contrary opinions.


208. Question.
In what thing then placest thou the figure? what? in the Subject?


Answer. No, not so. For that same true bread taken, broken, and given is
properly showed in that pronoune.


Question. What, only the bread?


Answer. Yea, only. For as we shall say in his place, it is not meet here in
any case to set the figure Synechdoche. This notwithstanding is true, that so
is showed not simply common bread, but Sacramental bread, that is, bread
appointed to a Sacramental use.


209. Question.
What, do thou place a figure in the predicate?


Answer. I know that certain men do charge us so, and that not in one
kind of sclaunder. For some do accuse us as though we should here understand
by the body of Christ, the Church: as though forsooth we should be so mad,
not to mark that those words, which is given for you, can not be understood
of the mystical body: or as though in the other member there should be meant
some mystical blood. But others because we interpret the body the Sacrament
or the sign of the body, by and by they conclude, that we make a double
bodyed Christ, or else that we attribute (I cannot tell what) fantastical body,
of which notwithstanding God be thanked, neither of both is admitted of us. For
we are so far of from that, that we should say that another then that true and
only body of Christ given for us, is to be said of that bread, that we
contrariwise contend that whole Christ God and man, is there denominated of
another nature, to wit, the bodily, and that for that cause which we have
showed before.


210. Question.
But if the figure be neither in the Subject nor in the Predicate, it is no
where.


Answer. Thou gatherest not rightly. For thou omittest the third, that is to
say, the copulatyue which knitteth the subject with the attribute. I say then
that the figure is in the very kind of attribution, that is, that in very
deed the true body and properly taken, is said also of the true bread
properly taken, but figuratively, not properly. So if we say that Circumcision
is the covenant: or the Scepter is the kingdom, or that the Paschall Lamb
was Christ, it must needs be that the figure be placed neither in the Subject
nor in the Attribute: but in the Copulative or kind of attribution.


211. Question.
Why therefore do you interpret the body the Sacrament, or the sign or
figure of the body?


Answer. It is all one to say, that that bread is the body of Christ, but
not properly, but not as it signifies the same Sacramentally: and to say that
the bread is not that body, but only the Sacrament of that body. Therefore
that difference that our adversaries object here unto us, is most vain and
foolish. That the fathers as well Greeks as Latins, have spoken both ways, it
is more often showed of our men, then that we ought so often to repeat their
sayings.


212. Question.
But now what manner of figure say thou that this is?


Answer. I say that it is a Sacramental Metonymia, whereby is brought to
pass, that the name of the thing Sacramentally signified, is given to the
sign: or whereby the sign is said to be the thing it self, to the signifying
whereof it is given: the which thing I have proved before by many like
examples.


Question. Why do thou so often beat that same word [Sacramentally] into
our heads?


Answer. That I may always meet with that same shameful sclaunder of
theirs, who as often as they hear the name of sign and signification, they
cry out that we make the Supper of the Lord of none effect, and as it were
transfourme it into an idle picture. Understand therefore a Sacramental
Metonymia to be that figure, whereby is brought to pass, that the sign is
said to be that thing, for the signifying whereof it is so offered to the
outward senses by a fit analogy and proportion, and by the will of God,
that therewithal is offered to the understanding and to faith that same thing
signified, to be received and sealed truly and in very deed.


213. Question.
But it is hard that some thing should be said to be that, that only it
signifies to the mind.


Answer. Nay rather as I have before taught, this same figurative kind of
speaking is much more fit and express, and therefore also more usual, then if
by proper speaking the signs should be said to signify some thing. For when
they are said to be the thing it self that they signify, they altogether
lead the mind of the beholder from the visible thing, to behold the
invisible, and to lay hold upon it by Faith: which is the end of Sacraments.


Question. Notwithstanding, I would have this confirmed unto me, by plain and
evident reasons, to wit, that these propositions, This is my body etc and. This
is my blood. etc are to be taken figuraliuely.


Answer. I will do it, and that gladly. For what can be more acceptable unto
me, then so to open this truth that all color and slight being removed,
it may be seen of all men even as it is. Now I will so order my proofs that
in the first place I will bring mine arguments from these very words of the
institution, This is my body: and secondly of the reason which is taken from
the affirmation of the Subject. Now that, that we shall say of the body, I
would also to be understood of the blood.


214. Question.
Now then, what is thy first argument?


Answer. That which he took, brake, and reached, the Lord commanded to be
taken and eaten. This same he said to be his body.

But he took that very same bread, brake it and delivered it, etc. the
Evangelists witnessing the same.

Therefore he said, that that same bread was his body. But things that are
unlike contrary in nature, can not be spoken properly of them selves. But bread
and the body of Christ are things disagreeing by nature. Therefore they can
not properly be said the one of the other. It remains therefore, that,
forasmuch as this speech of Christ is true, it be understood figuratyuely.


215. Question.
But what now is the other argument?


Answer. In every proper and reguler affirmation of the Subject, either the
general word, or the word of property, or the word of accident is affirmed
of the special: or the special of the singular, but the body of Christ is
neither the general word, nor the word of differencie, nor the word of
property, nor the word of accident. nor the special in respect of the bread.
Therefore it can by no manner of means be said of the bread. Notwithstanding it
is said and that truly, when it is spoken of Christ. Therefore figuratively.


216. Question.
Show also the third.


Answer. If the body of Christ be spoken properly and regularly of this
bread, then the things that agree to the body, agree to the bread, and
contrariwise. But to be borne of the virgin Marie, to be hungry to die for
us, to be crucified, to rise again etc, agree to the body of Christ, but not
unto bread, And contrariwise to be sown, reaped, threshed, kneded, and baked,
agree in deed to bread: but by no means to the body, therefore by a reguler
and common usual manner of speech, the bread can not be said to be the body of
Christ.


217. Question.
Show the fourth.


Answer. If that be a natural proposition, either the same is said of it
self, or else not the same, but a contrary. But neither of both is true.
Therefore it can not be a natural proposition, That the same can not be said
of it self, it appears plainly by these reasons. First because in any
identicall proposition, that is, where the same thing is affirmed of the self
same, the Subject and the predicate must not differ in the thing, but in the
name only: as when I say a blade is a sword, as a target is a shield, the
son of the virgin is Christ, but bread and the body of Christ are not words
of the same signification, but things altogether diverse: therefore they make
not an identicall Proposition. But if now An identicall proposition is a
proposition affirmative of it self.
some froward person will have one and the same substance too be declared in
these two words, first ye must show that neither bread cease to be bread, nor
ye the body cease to be a body. Furthermore in a proposition Identical, the
subject and predicate are conuertible, or standing one for an other. Therefore
if this proposition were identicall or one, the body of Christ might as truly
be said to be baked in an Oven, as it is truly said that bread is the body
given for us. Therefore it is not as the schoolmen speak, an identicall
proposition.

Now again, that nothing diverse, is herein naturally said, is thus proved by
a necessary consequence. If the body as some thing diverse should be regulerly
spoken of bread, surely either it should be spoken essentially, or as the
cause, or as accidentary. We have showed in the second argument that it is not
spoken essentially, as neither being unto bread as the general, or as the
difference, nor as the special, in respect of the singular. Now it can much
less be the causal affirmation. For neither has a body the reason in respect
of bread, of the efficient cause, nor of the end: but the inward causes, to
wit, the matter and form are referred to the essential affirmation. Finally,
it can not be any accidental affirmation, for as much as the body is no
accident, yea and though it were, yet it can not be an accident to bread.

It remains therefore, that by neither of both ways, that same can be,
either a natural or a proper Proposition.


218. Question.
Tell the fifth.


Answer. If that same bread were properly the body of Christ, it should
also be personally united to the Son of God, Of which should follow those same
three most absurd and false things, that the sacramental and personal union
are one and the same, that Christ in this Sacrament should consist of three
natures personally, essentially united and knit together: to be short, that
the bread and the wine should be advanced into a condition infinitely better
then the Church it self. For so the bread should properly be the very body of
Christ: but ye Church should be the body of Christ but figuratively or
mystically: neither is there any faithful man that is very Christ, but only a
partaker of Christ.


219. Question.
I pray thee add also the sixth.


Answer. If that same bread be properly the body of Christ, and that same
wine properly the blood of Christ, as they are distinct signs, so also the
body shall be separated from the blood: or either sign shall be properly whole
Christ. Now if this later be true, the letter shall not simply be kept, but a
synechdoche must be placed: as for example it must have been said properly,
This bread is my body and my blood: and this cup is my blood and my body. And
to what purpose I pray you had there needed a double element?


220. Question.
And will thou add as so the seventh?


Answer. That which is said to be with another thing, or in an other, or
under an other, without commixtion being also joined with a most near
knitting together, cannot properly be said too be that thing it self: As for
example sake although the soul and the body be joined together personally
and inseparably, yet notwithstanding no man will say ye the body is the soul,
or the soul is the body. Much less therefore the sacramental coniunctio^
shall bring this thing to pass, that the bread shall properly be the very body
of Christ.


221. Question.
Will thou also rehearse the eight?


Answer. If that same bread be properly the body of Christ, then it should
sease to be bread, forasmuch as these two things are wholly in kind unlike.
But if it cease to be bread, now the sacrament shall not consist of these two
things one earthly and the other heavenly, unless thou call the earthly
shadows, that is to say, accidences without a subject. But these being
overthrown, the proportion of substances shall be also overthrown, and
therefore the whole reason of a sacrament shall be overthrown. It must needs
be therefore, that that bread be called the body of Christ figuratively.

But now I come to the other rank of arguments, to wit, drawn from those
words which go before and follow those former, This is my body, and from
the circumstaunces and conferences of other places of the Scripture.


222. Question.
Tell the first.


Answer. I say out of the former words, too wit, he took and brake, that
this is plain, that that which he took could not properly of Christ he
called his own body, as of whom it could not be said that he took, held
and brake himself to himself, but as one that gave and brake the bread of
his body received in too his hands, to his Disciples manifestly beholding him.
Therefore August. that he might mollisie, that same sacramental Metonymia he
said that Christ did after a certain sort bear himself in his own hands,
namely, least it should seem to be a vayn Sacrament, the name of the thing
signified is given unto the sign: The same also is to be thought of the cup,
as we shall show in his proper place, into which undoubtedly, Christ had never
yet powered forth that same blood of his contained in his body.


223. Question.
Tell the other.


Answer. If the body should properly be spoken of the bread, and the blood of
the wine, then the words following should properly also be spoken of the bread
which is given for you: and which is shed for you, both which is most false.


224. Question.
Rehearse the third.


Answer. By that that is added, Do this in the remembrance of me, it is
plain that the body is not properly so called of the bread, nor the blood of
the wine, because they were there present together in the same place whereas
bread and wine were: Now remembrance is not of things present, but of things
absent. Therefore Bernard in his 33. sermon upon the Canticles disputing of the
self same thing, opposes Faith, and the show (that is, that that is seen
with the eyes) and also remembrance and presence.


225. Question.
Show the fourth argument.


Answer. The same appears plainly by those words that are added, 1. Cor.
11. 16. As often as ye shall do this, ye shall show forth the Lords death
till he come. Verily he that shall come is not yet come, or if he be now
properly come, these mysteries are no longer to be celebrated. Now all these
things follow, not only if the bread be properly the body, but also if,
within, or under the Bread and Wine he be present in the self same place
where there is bread and wine.


226. Question.
Declare the fifth.


Answer. So I gather it from the Circumstaunce of the time. At what time the
Lord said of that wine, This is my blood which is shed for many, for the
remission of sins, as yet it was not shed forth out of the vessel of the
body of Christ, neither ever after is it read to be gathered in any vessel.
Therefore in that cup then there was not properly that blood of Christ shed
for us between the hands of the tormentours, neither now also is it. Much
less therefore was that wine the^ or now is that same blood properly shed for
us. But that same proposition is figurative which testifies unto us, that we
truly and spiritually through faith are partakers of Christ himself and of
his passion and of all other his gifts.


227. Question.
Declare the sixth,


Answer. I gather also by that, that Chrysostom has written, that Christ
himself was a Partaker of those signs. Hom. in Matthew. 83. But if his body
should be spoken properly of that bread which Christ did eat, and his blood
of that Wine which Christ drank, then should Christ properly eat and drink
himself.


228. Question.
Show the seventh.


Answer. I geather out of other places of the scripture, that this is not a
proper proposition. For as often things unlike are attributed to the same
subject, it must needs be that some of these be taken properly, and some
figuratively, wc I set forth by examples thus: The Gospel is called the power
of God to salvation. Romans 1. 16. And in the beginning of the same chapter it is
called the doctrine revealed from above, concerning the Son of God: which two
forasmuch as they are diverse, it must needs be understood that one be
spoken properly and the other figuratively.

It is geathered not darkely out of John the 17. 3. that Faith is the knowledge
of the true God and of Jesus Christ, whereby we are saved. The same is defined
also to be the ground of those things which are not. Therefore one of these
Heb. 11. 1.
must needs be spoken poperly, the other figuratively.

John is not Elias: John. 1. 21. And he is that Elias that shall come. Mat. 11.
14. Therefore in one of those we must needs grant, that there is a figure.

It is plain that Herod was properly a man. The same also is called a Fox,
one of these therefore must be understood to be spoken figuratively. Of which,
infinite examples might be alleged: and yet notwithstanding these are not
alleged by me, as though they were, to be expounded by the same figure, but to
show that that I have said is true: to wit, as often as unlike things are
spoken of the same Subject, the one of them must be a proper attribution, the
other figurative.

But the cup, that is to say, the wine contained in the cup, is sometime said
to be blood, sometime said to be the Testament in blood: and yet
notwithstanding it is plain that the self same is properly the licoure of the
Wine, as it is called of Christ. It is not therefore properly man's blood, and
much less also it is properly the last Testament of ones will that shall dye:
but it is called blood, because it is the Sacrament of his blood, whereby that
same covenant or Testament of the remission of sins and of everlasting life,
is stricken with us: the same also is the Testament in blood, because it is the
pleadge of his Testament which is sealed and ratified by the blood of the Lord
As the Lord also in Moses in the same place when had called Circumcision the
covenant, himself does afterward interpret it too be the sign of the
covenant.


229. Question.
Show the eight.


Answer. The conference of that place, the 1. Cor. 10. 16. with the words of
Christ in which he calls that same bread his body, and that same cup his
blood: where that same bread is called the communion of his body and that same
cup the communion of his blood, does altogether show that both these
sayings are figurative, or at least wise one of them too wit, either that of
Paul or that of Christ.


Question. To wit that of Paul, is to be expounded out of the proper saying
of Christ.


Answer. Therefore at the length thou art brought too confess that
whosoever does maintain and defend figures in the controversy of the
Sacraments, do not overthrow the Testament of the Son of GOD. But to the
matter. It is easy too show out of our seventh Argument, and out of that that
went next before, that both these were figurative, whether thou do interpret
that out of this, or this out of that: as for example both these Propositions,
This cup for this Wine is my blood: and this wine is the communion of my
blood: (now the like is too be thought of bread) it is diverse from this,
this wine is the licour of the vine, which notwithstanding thou must needs say
is most proper, and therefore so stoutly to be maintened, because as we have
said, overthrowing or taking away the substance of the sign, the foundation
of the analogy or proportion should also be taken away and overthrown.


Question. I would answer that both Christ and Paul passed this over as a
thing sufficiently known. For to what purpose should he have taught his
Disciples, that that bread which he held in his hands, was bread, and that
wine? But undoubtedly it behooued him to teach them that, which otherwise they
would never have believed, too wit, that those things also which he held
in his hands and gave them, in, under, or with Bread and Wine: was his body
and his blood.


Answer. Therefore thou must needs determine that the figure Synecdoche is
in these words, This bread and this cup, and therefore whilst thou
studiest to avoid figures, thou fallest into a figure. But we will way this
Synecdoche in his place, to wit, when we shall come too the confutation. But
thou in the mean time shall not so escape. For with what manner and with how
great conjunction soever thou shalt couple those two unlike things in
themselves indeed together, (such as are the bread and the body, wine and
the blood, yet notwithstanding thou shalt never bring to pass, that the one
may properly be said to be the other. No neither in the conjunction, can one be
said to be the other, but either of them must be made a certain third
thing. Therefore this at the least must be a proper proposition, in, or under,
or with this bread and wine is my body and blood. It remains therefore that
thou confess, that both this saying of Christ, and that of Paul, whether
thou interpret this out of that, or that out of this, be figurative.


230. Question.
How therefore do thou think this place of Paul should be expounded?


Answer. First of all they are to be confuted, who take the Greek word (...)
wc signifies common for distribution, which the matter it self cries out too
be most absurd, forasmuch as bread and wine are substances, but distribution is
an action: and Paul himself expounding that, uses a word that signifies
to participat, and the scope it self of the Apostle requires that it declare
a communion and not a distribution. Moreover it is wonder that they who allow
no trope in the matter of the Sacrament, that they can in this place interpret
the communicating of the body for the body communicated or distributed: that
is, ca^ confound the action with the effect. For neither in good sooth do they
this well, because they refer this distribution to the word of breaking as
though Paul had written, the bread which we distribute is the body
communicated. For the word of breking ought to be taken properly in this action
as we have showed before, and it appears by the word he gave, which is added
to the word he brake, in the narration of the Evangelist.


Question. What therefore think thou (...) to be called?


Answer. Commmunion and fellowship which is the true signification of his
word, and it differs somewhat from (...) as Chrysostom. notes, although Paul
uses the verb (...) and (...) indifferently one for the other. Such as the
Communion is therefore, that is to say, the natural society of all men in the
common nature of flesh and blood, as between themselves and with Christ
himself: such is the communion by the goodness of God betwixt all the faithful
and Christ, into whom they are engraffed and incorporated.


Question. But by what manner of speech may that bread be said to be that same
fellowship and communion.


Answer. With the Logitians it is called a causall affirmation, whereby the
proper effect is attributed to the proper cause, whether it be material or
efficient: wc manner or fashion is to be referred to the fourth manner of
affirming by it self, as they speak in the schools. Now a figurative speech
is when the effect is put for the cause, or else forsooth for the very
efficient cause: as for example, when Christ is called the resurrection and the
life, for the rayser and giver of life: or the cause of resurrection and life:
or for the material cause, as when Paul says, You are my glory or
rejoicing, ye is to say the matter of my glory or rejoicing; or for the
instrumental wc also is it self, efficient, (...) that is to say, being as it
were an under seruer, as when the Gospel is said to be the power of God to
salvation, that is to say, the instrument that God uses effectually too save
us. So also in this place that same Bread and that same wine are said to be
that communion, that is to say, the instruments whereby that same consociation
and fellowship of ours is wrought and ratified in us. Now this same instrument
is sacramental or rather symbolicall and not the very efficient cause, which
is the holy Ghost. Therefore as that same figurative proposition of Christ,
This bread is my body is expounded by this, This bread is sacramental my body:
so also this saying of Paul, This bread is the communication of my body, is to
be expounded by this proper. This bread is the Sacramental instrument of our
consociation and fellowship with the body of Christ. For there the figure is
only in the Copulative, that knitteth the matter together, to wit, a
Sacramental Metonymie or translation: but here also in the attribute is a
figure which they call Metalepsis, too wit, putting the effect for the cause.


231. Question.
But can thou besides bring forth any other arguments?


Answer. Yea that can I. And first of all that same from the essential and
constituting form of all the Sacraments, which is in sum, that they may
consist of the sign and the thing signified, or as Irenaeus speaks, of an
earthly and heavenly thing. But now neither can that that is signified be
spoken of the sign, nor the sign of the thing signified but by the figure of
Metonymie: and therefore the propositions of the first kind are declared by
the verb [signifieth] (understand of the sacramental signification to which
also the giving or ministration is always adjoined) but the latter by the
Verb Passive: as this bread is my body, that is, This bread sacramentally
signifies my body: my body is this bread: that is, my body sacramentally
is signified by this bread. Now that this is the essential form of all
sacraments it appears by the very name of sacraments, as witnesses
Augustine in these words, in his. 5. Epistle: It were ouerlong (says he) to
dispute of the variety of signs which when they belong to holy things are
called sacraments. It appears also by this that that is common to all
sacraments.

As in the tree of life, in that it is a sacrament, there is considered the
outward thing and the sign, the visible plant the spiritual and heavenly thing
Jesus Christ, life: In the tree of the knowledge both of good and evil, a
natural plant also, and the experience of good and evil: in Circumcision, the
cutting off the foreskinne, and the taking away of sin, the imputation of
righteousness and regeneration: in the passover the Lamb and Christ: in the
rock of the desert, the rock and Christ pouring out blood: in the Baptism of
the cloud, the clouds and the sea and the blood of Christ: in Manna, bread
given by miracle, and the flesh of Christ: In the Sabbath the seventh day with
ceasing from work and the mortification of the flesh and everlasting life: In
the Sacrifices the offering slain, and the oblation of Christ made by himself
in the Sanctuary, the entrance intoo into the Temple and heaven in the
Tabernacle, the work made with hand and the body of Christ: in the Cherub in
the Images over the Arc, and the Angels: in the propitiatory or mercy
seat, the gilded covering, and Jesus Christ. So in the appearing of the dove,
the dove and the holy Ghost: in baptism, water with washing, and the blood of
Christ washing us: in the fiery tongues, the natural fire and the holy Ghost.
Finally even so in the Supper of the Lord, bread and wine, the signs, and
the body and blood our Lord the things Sacramentally signified.


Question. But many of these are rather types then Sacraments.


Answer. Admit it be so, yet this notwithstanding is the form of all
symbolicall speeches concerning God. Therefore in the very writings of the
Apostles they are called, Signs, Seals, Types, Figures, parables, shapes and
resemblances. And of the Fathers also, besides that they are called figures,
they are called mysteries, types, significations, similitudes, dark speeches,
and mystical Symbolles, and by such like names.


Question. What do thou therefore conclude of all these?


Answer. That neither the thing signified can be said of the sign, nor the
sign of the thing signified, otherwise then by translation, and that, that is
so usual in the scriptures, as that they never in a manner speak otherwise.


232. Question.
But the Supper of the Lord has a certain proper and special form which
makes that the same is not too be thought of that, which is to be thought
of the other Sacraments.


Answer. Albeit, that this specially belong unto those confutations which I
would differ to their proper place, notwithstanding that the force of the
former argument may appear more clearly, go too, let us speak somewhat also
now concerning this matter. Indeed I grant that the Supper of the Lord has
his peculiar form, whereby it differs from the rest, as well old as new
Sacraments. But to what end is this: For these fourmes, which are called
discerning fourmes, because they do discern the specials of the same
general, they do not take away the constituting in which of necessity all
the specialls must be constituted, that they may be referred to the common
general. So for example sake, a living creature is the common essential form,
and substance of all fourmes perteyning to that gender. Now reason is the
form, whereby man is sundred from all other kinds of living creatures. Now
will thou say that this same special form does bring to pass that that same
general (to wit, living creature) should not be laid altogether by the same
reason of man and of other living creatures: And I pray thee, how if that which
is called differentia or proprium: for now I do not distinguish betwixt
these, should altogether take away the same attribution of gender, should the
distinction consist of gender and difference: Therefore that same special
difference of the lords Supper whatsoever it be, can not bring to pass that
that same common reason which makes a Sacrament, altogether by the same mean,
should less be spoken of the Lords Supper, then of other Sacraments. Now
that same common reason, as we have showed, is that the outward sign should
signify another thing sacramentally. Now nothing is a sign of it self,
forasmuch as a sign is in the kind of those things which are conferred with
another, therefore that same remains common without exception to all
Sacraments, that the thing signified is not the sign: because these two must
be in very deed, and therefore the thing signified, can not be said of the
sign but transitiuely.

But furthermore here I will demand of thee what manner of difference thou
make this to be:


Question. One in the Subject, an other in the attribute, the third in the very
means of the attribution.


Answer. And what in the Subject?


Question Because the Elements of the Supper of the Lord, are diverse from the
Element of Baptism.


Answer. Be it so. But what in the Attribute?


Question. Because the body and blood of our Lord, are the signified things
of the Supper of the Lord.


Answer. Thou art deceived. For in Baptism also the blood of the Lord is
the thing signified. But what in the attribution?


Question. Because only the Elements of the Lords Supper are said in the
words of the institution to be the very body and the very blood of our Lord.


Answer. And what wylt thou conclude thereof?


Question. Forsooth that in Baptism, the very blood of Christ is not present
and given, but only the fruit of the blood shead: but that in the Supper the
body it self, and the blood it self is present, and offered to the mouth it
self.


Answer. Whether these things are truly said or no, we will see in their
place. But I pray thee do thou not mark that thou playest the Sophister?


Question. Why so?


Answer. Because thou chaungest the questions For we did not demand whether
the matter of the Lords Supper and of other Sacraments were one and the same,
but whether in another kind of attribution that same matter of the Lords
Supper, (whether it be only the fruit, or it be Christ himself) be said
otherwise of the bread and wine, then the matter whether it be the same or
another, is said of other signs. Admit then that I grant that which thou
have said, yet notwithstanding there shall not be diverse kinds of
attributions, but also only diverse things shall be attributed. And surely
unless it were so, that is, if the thing signified were otherwise said of the
sign in the Supper of the Lord, then in other Sacraments and also in other
types, they should not be referred to the same kind, for that same general
form should not be the essential form of all: even like as if a living
creature should be said of a man in any other respect then of a horse, a
living creature should not be the common genus or kind of a man and a Horse.


233. Question.
Will thou therefore that there shall be no special form of the Lords
Supper?


Answer. God forbid. But I say that the special form is partly in the
proper Elements and rytes, partly not in the attribute it self, but in the
quality of that attribute: that is to say, because Christ is the matter of
both Sacraments, in Baptism verily he is set out to us, as the lauer and
sealing up of our entrance into the Church; but in the Supper, as the
heavenly nourishment of those that are entered in.


234. Question.
I mean this, that the very body of Christ and his very blood in very deed is
present, in or under, or with that bread and that wine in the Lords Supper,
but not so in the water of Baptism.


Answer. Thou resistest therefore their doctrine, who teach that the
humanity of Christ also is every where present according to the very
substance. But now let us leave this. Do thou not see that the question is
again changed of thee? For neither did we indeed seek that whether the
thing signified were present in the self same place where that bread and that
wine was, or whether it were absent: but this we demanded in what kind of
attribution the thing signified either present or absent might be said of the
sign properly or figuratively: and whether it might be said in an other kind
of attribution of the elements of the Lords supper then of the elements of
other Sacraments. The question therefore of presence or abse^ce makes nothing
to ye matter, neither ca^ by any manner of means bring to pass, that that
which is, or is given, in, under, or with somewhat, either present or absent,
should there fore be said properly too be that very thing, in, under, or
with which it is.


235. Question.
Let us go forewarde then to other arguments.


Answer. I set down therefore first of all that which is most true, that the
body of Christ is truly an organicall and a natural body, the which nature
he had neither then put of, when he instituted the supper, neither afterward
did his glory take it away from him. I set down also this, that Christ
properly is said, according to the flesh, too be ascended, that is, gone out
of the earth vpwardes, above the heavens, having changed the situation of his
place.

I set down also this third thing, too wit, that he shall not return
from thence whether he ascended, before that day wherein he is looked for too
come again.

These grounds being thus laid, so I gather: If that bread be properlye
that very body, and that Wine properly that very blood, Yea further, if the
Body and Blood be properly in, under, or with the bread and wine, they are
then in the same being and occupying of a room, and in very deed are also
present together, and in the self same moment there is present in as many
places that same body and that same blood, as that same bread and that same
wine are present.

But this thing and they hold not in any form of argument or reason. But
they are most certain. Both these opinions therefore, seeing they are against
the analogy of Faith, are false.

Notwithstanding both are witnessed in the holy scriptures, both therefore of
necessity must be true.

But two contradictoryes, if they be properly taken, can not be true. Of these
therefore of necessity, one must be taken properly, the other figuratively.


Question. But who will agree unto these grounds?


Answer. Surely whosoever is a Christian. For he that denies that the body
taken of the son of God was a true, and therefore an organicall body, he is a
Martionite, and not a Christian. He that denies, that Christ came according
to his flesh thither whether he came, and went away whence he went, and
therefore was not truly absent and present in certain places, he is refelled
by the hystory of the Gospel. He that takes away the propriety of a natural
body, (that is to say, which is not in any other place then wherein it is
limited) either from the time of that substantial union, or from the time of
his ascension, he is an Eutichyan and not a Christian. They also that
interpret the ascentio^ of Christ after the mutation of quality and not of
place, and interpret the heavens into which he ascended allegorically, they
are refelled also by the history it self, and by the analogy and proportion
of Faith, and that they may deny one usual type and figure, and altogether
agreeable to the proportion of Faith, they bring in innumerable figures
disagreeing from the proportion of Faith. Finally, they that think that the
propriety of the words in the history of the ascension can stand with that
real presence, either by consubstantio^, or by tra^substa^tiatio^, they
maintein two co^tradictio^s at once to wc contradictio^ that there is no place,
neither in nature nor in the mysteries of faith, we will show in his place.
This collection therefore stands sure and is invincible: Christ according to
the flesh properly, is gone from us above the heavens, not to come again from
thence, before that he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.
Therefore neither the bread which is in the earth, is properly the very flesh
of Christ, neither the flesh of Christ is properly in, or with, or under the
bread.


Question. Yea but this same proposition Bread; this is my body, is no other
wise true, now, then when Christ spoke it, yea, therefore now it is true,
because then it was true, to wit, by the virtue of the same institution. But
then was he himself present. Therefore now also the same presence is required.


Answer. Of this we shall see afterward. Now I say again, whether the body
of Christ be determined to be present or absent, yet notwithstanding that that
cannot stand, that that bread should be properly said to be the very body of
the Lord. Now I proceed to those arguments which are taken from the true
properties of man's flesh.


236. Question.
Say on therefore.


Answer. He that overthrows the essential property of any thing,
overthrows the thing it self: because the definition being overthrown, the
thing defined is overthrown.

But to be limited and contained in a place is the esse^tial property of a body.

Therefore he that takes away the limitation of place from the body of
Christ; he abolisheth the very body it self. The proposition needs no
proof. The assumption is plain by the definition of the body, because it is
said to be a diuisible quantity, according to a threefold measure, length,
breadth and thicknes, and whose parts are bounded with one common bound, that
is to say, the superficies. Also from the diffinition of a place. For a place
is that, through which a touch is made both of that which conceineth, and of
that which is contained.


237. Question.
But I did think that a place was not the essence or substance of the body.


Answer. So the Sophisters trifle. Neither do we say, that a place is the
matter of the body, but placing as I may say necessarily and in it self is
proper too bodies: Neither do we then consider the body as the matter, but as
the quantity. Therefore Augustine speaking very well of the glorified body of
Christ it self, If it be a body (says he,) then is it in a place. And take
away spaces from the bodies, and they shall be no bodies.

But let us proceed.

He takes away the limitation of place, which contendeth that one and the
self same body can be every where and in many places at once properly.

This every one does, which teaches either that this bread is proper by the
body of our Lord, or in very deed will have it to be present, in, with, or
under the bread, and to be given too the outward senses in as many places as
the Supper of the Lord is celebrated.

Therefore. etc.

I know that many flee unto the distinction of a body supernatural,
certain also unto that common startinghole of the omnipotency of God. But to
what endeserues this? For the natural, general, and essential form, by
which every body is a body, being taken away it shall follow, that that body
cease to be a body, from which that same essential form of a body is taken
away, and they play the Sophisters: which reason from the accidental
properties to the essential, of which matter we will speak in his place.


238. Question.
Have thou any other argument that thou can allege?


Answer. Yea that I have, and that of great weight. For the proper, perpetual
and necessary effect being taken away, the antecedent also of the cause is
taken away. I say therefore out of Saint John's verse. 51. Who so ever is a
partaker of Christ, he is a partaker of everlasting life. But it is plain,
that many do receive the Elements of the Lords Supper to judgment. Therefore
none of these are partakers of Christ him self. But if properly and in very
deed, the bread were the body of Christ, and that wine the blood of Christ,
either by transubstantiation, or by real consubstantiation, who so ever should
receive the Element, should receive also properly and in very deed the thing
it self. Therefore etc.


Question. Thou art not ignorant what is answered unto the proposition of this
argument: to wit, that that saying of John and such other like, is to be
understood of those that come unto it rightly and worthily.


Answer. I know it, and I trust I shall easily confute this, as also that
same threefolde or rather fourefold eating.


Question. What therefore do thou conclude of all these?


Answer. Surely that those propositions, this is my body which is given for
you, and this is my blood which is shed for many for the remission of sins,
are necessarily to be interpreted figuratively, to wit, by a sacramental
metonimy, and yet neither for all that, is any thing withdrawn from the truth
of the Sacrament, or from the true participation of Christ himself.


239. Question.
I would gladly also that that were declared unto me, at what time thou
think the supper of the Lord ought to be celebrated. For we hear that the
Christians are laughed to skorne of the Jews, who suppe so early, yea, and
that against the manner of the most old and Apostolical church of Christ it
self.


Answer. Christ did celebrate these mysteries at night for two causes: For
he would compare this new Sacrament which he instituted with the figure
answering unto it. Now the passover was slain betwixt two euenings. And
furthemore it is plain that this was the manner of the ancient, yt they should
sit down once, that is too say, in the eueninges. For (...) and (...) which
the Latins (I think) called Prandium, that is, a dinner, as if a man should
say, the leauings of the former meals, because that that very same day nothing
in a manner was sodden, but somewhat was taken of the remnantes of the former
days meal in a manner they not sitting down neither was it of all, nor of full
provision and iunquettes. It is no marvel therefore, forasmuch as Christ
differred these same mysteries, as it were the sealing up of his Testament into
his last banquet, that he rather instituted this ryte in the Evening then in
the Morning. Now it ought not too seem any wonder, that the old Church,
whiles that those love feasts by little and little were taken away, that they
did end their banquetes with the celebration of this Supper: the which thing
notwithstanding, that it was not every where kept, it appears not only by
the last Apology of Iustine, but also by other testimonies of the ancient
fathers. But it cannot be geathered of any cir, cumstance of time out of the
words of the institution, that Christ commanded any thing concerning the
circumstance of time. Therefore custom has very well prevailed, that the
Supper of the Lord should be celebrated rather in the morning meeting, and of
those that are fasting, then of those that have dyned, that they may come to
the hearing of Gods word and to this same heavenly mystery which is to be
executed with great attention and high reverence, with the redier and better
prepared minds.


240. Question.
But has the Lord appointed nothing concerning the place?


Answer. He appointed the place, to wit, of the public congregation of the
Church, whenas he ordained it amongst his disciples: neither said be, Do
this every one, but do ye this. And Paul says plainly, When ye come
together, the wc thing also the very name (...) and all the old Liturgies or
forms of administering the Sacraments do show: and also the very scope of
these mysteries, in whith our natural fellowship and consotiation in Christ is
ratified, does require. Now to appoint some certain place with a kind of
religion (as it was not lawful in times past too celebrate the Passover other
where then in that place the Lord had chosen) it were a Jewish superstition.


241. Question.
What therefore do thou think of the supper of the Lord administered in
private houses?


Answer. I pass nothing at all of private houses, if the church, that is to
say, the congregation do meet in them, as it was necessary in those same
ancient times under the tyranny of the Roman Emperors, and is yet also
necessary in our times in too many places.


Question. And yet notwithstanding there are, which have once condemned these
private meetinges in the night.


Answer. I do confess, that those same night meetinges are not rashely too
be tolerated, nor otherwise then by great necessity: whereupon also in
times past occasion was taken of casting the Christians falsely in the teeth of
night whoringes. Also in our times no less impude^tly objected to the French
Churches. But if they think them therefore to be condemned, who whiles most
cruel perfecution is hot, came together in our times by night, or yet come
together, surely they must condemn all ye true Apostolical Churches. But it
was an easy matter for the^, whose congregations by the authority and favor of
their princes, being never driven into these narrow streightes of the French
men and other nations driven thereto, that either must want al Ecclesiastical
administration of the word and Sacraments, or else must take whatsoever
occasions of meeting together and comforting one another, it was an easy
matter I say for them too find fault with other: from whom it was again
lawful for them to appeal to the whole ancient and most pure Church, to the
testimony of their conscience, to the fruits of the confession of Martyrs, and
finally to the tribunal seat of Christ it self. And these forsooth accusers
of the brethren, never showed themselves such, in that their war scarce
enduring for a year as it is plain both these were and are who now have
borne the weight of most horrible persecution these 50. years, neither yet by
the grace of God do faint, under this burden.


242. Question.
Let us return again unto the matter. Do thou think that the Supper of
the Lord ought to be celebrated in any other place then in the common and
public congregation?


Answer. This was a custom in the beginning of the old Church, that the
Sacrament should be sent by Deacons to the sick that were absent from the
public meeting, that is to say, at that time that the mysteries were
celebrated of the rest in that meeting, because it was meet that those whom
one disease did let too be present in body, should be accounted as if they were
present: neither do I doubt but that that thing brought great comfort to those
that were sick, the which custom I would very gladly were restored. But
whether it be meet to be celebrated to the sick at that time when the supper
of the Lord is not ministered in the Church of this I greatly doubt.


Question. Why so?


Answer. First, because the Supper of the Lord is not a private action of
any household, but mere ecclesiastical: and therefore that same domestical
Lamb, was slain in Israel, that yet notwithstanding it should not be done
at any other time, then when all Israel did celebrate this mystery.
Notwithstanding I do acknowledge that in this case it is somewhat diverse. For
although it were very meet that these mysteries, throughout whole Christendom
albeit in diverse places, yet notwithstanding daily also if it were possible,
or at least upon appointed, and set days were celebrated, which should
profit very much to the witnessing of that same mutual fellowship and
consotiation in Christ: notwithstanding forasmuch as neither of both ca^ be
obtained for many just and necessary causes it seems, I know not in what
sort, to be contrary to the institution of the Supper of the Lord, that all
the rest of the Church omitting it, some one house extraordinarily should
celebrate those mysteries. Moreover unless that were done amongst all those
that were sick, how shall the suspicion of partiality in respecting of
persons be shunned? Now if the Supper of the Lord be to be ministered amongst
all that are sick, let Pastors see by what means the profanation thereof
may be avoided and how they may satisfy and undergo so great labors. The
custom therefore of certain do nothing at all move me, although that it be
very ancient, because the matter is too be judged, not by Examples, but by
reasons. Finally that is most certain, that by this use the wicked things
were brought intoo the Church: too wit, in the beginning the keeping of both
signs, then the Wine waxing sour, the keeping only of one of the signs,
which error is plainly against the nature of the Sacraments. Hence therefore
sprang another error, as though by a certain magical pronunciation the thing
signified were tied too the sign. To be short, it came so far, that
salvation after a certain sort was tied too those signs.


Question. But do thou think that for these abuses the sick are to be
deprived of this consolation?


Answer. I verily think, that special care is too be had for cutting off
those errors. Neither do I think that the sick are deprived either of the
consolation of the word or sacraments if they be taught, because perhaps the
time of relebrating the Supper with the rest of their brethren shall not fall
out whiles they are sick or in the time of their death, therefore yt they are
not deprived of the fruit of that Supper wc before they had celebrated. For
neither is the efficacy of the Sacraments too be restrained to that time,
wherein they are received, but is spread forth to all the times of a man's
whole life. But if a man think that he can shun al these inco^ueniences, and
think that those mysteries may be ministered to a sick man in the
congregration, he requiring it, upon these conditions I would not be against
this custom.


243. Question.
But what think thou of unleavened bread?


Answer. Although I would not greatly conte^d of that matter as of a high
point, yet notwithstanding, I say that it is a double blotte in those Churches
which rather use unleavened bread then bread that is leauened: for this both
sauoureth of Iudaisme, and it is less agreeable unto the proportion of daily
meat.


Question. Yea, but Christ first blessed sweet bread.


Answer. Forsooth because he instituted this Supper at that time, wherein it
was not lawful for the Jews too use any other but sweet bread. Therefore so I
return the argument upon their own hand. If Christ used that bread, which at
that time was usual, for the celebration of this Supper, the like also is too
be done of us, that is to say, he commanded us to take the common use.


244. Question.
What think thou of adoration?


Answer. There is no doubt but that we must woorship God every where, and
specially in the holy mysteries: neither do I think that there is any Church
in which there is not used a certain solemn giving of thanks, so also both an
inward and outward worshipping, when these reverent mysteries as it were
rather in the heavens then in the earth are celebrated. But in the very taking
of bread, how dangerous worship is at the Table, as that that opened the first
occasion too that bread worship, from whence at the length Satan cast men
headlong to consubstantiation, the thing it self declares. Wise men therefore
have judged an honest reverence directed toward GOD to be sufficient.


245. Question.
But that same ostentatio^ which the Grecians call [lifting up the hoast]
would thou admit it?


Answer. What forsooth, the very mother of that abominable bread worship?
nay if there were now any use of it, would any wise man allow it? For this
same ryte sauoureth partly of the relikes of those same Jewish Sacrifices in
which those same shakings and heauinges mentioned in the law were used, which
were called Teruma and Tenupha: Partly also it is a Greekishe toy, as are many
other rather Stagelike then Religious things, as it is easy to mark out of
their Liturgies. For why should I not speak as the matter is? For we owe unto
them that same mixing also of water, wc afterward fell out to be a new
sacrament.


Question But these things are very ancient.


Answer. What then? yet notwithstanding that same sentence of Cyprian is to
be holde^ what this or that man has done, but what Christ has commanded,
that is to be done, when the matter concerns his true worship.


246. Question.
But would thou admit all unto the Lords Supper.


Answer. That were more and time, which in very deed no man would admit, all
boasting themselves for household servants into his house: which even the very
Idolaters have not done, crying out in their services, away away, be ye far
of, O ye proophane people: which thing also the Lord in times past so severely
forbad, that he took it impaciently that strange fire should be occupied in
his holy services: who also with so many outward laws commanded that even
they which were unawares defiled, should first be purged before he admitted
them into his house, and specially before he admitted them to the ceremony of
ye Passover: and shall that be thought now to be done lawfully under this
color, yt every one shall be believed to come worthily to the Lords table, which
having heard the Sermon shall rushe thither? But I suppose that the Pastors
ought necessarily to know the sheep even by the same order that reason it
self has appointed. First therefore for avoiding of profanation, I think that
with a good conscience strangers are not to be admitted, altogether unknown
to the Pastor: Moreover those whom age it self shows not to be fit to make
examination of them selves, indeed not as unworthy, but to be warned as yet
not fit, least they heap upon them selves damnation. But of those that are
grown in years none to be admitted, unless he have first after a sort
rendered a reason of his Faith, as one not only borne in the Church of God, but
as such a one of whom the Pastor may probably conjecture, to be a Christian,
who must render account of all his sheep before the Lord. Last of all, I
would account those for strangers by the word of God, whose hypocrisy by the
just and lawful judgment of the Ecclesiastical presbytery shall be convicted
to be such, that for a time they shall be inhibited from the common profession
of Christianity, until they be found, heartily to acknowledge their sin, not
that they should perish, but that at the least being enforced by shame, they
might repent and amend, and so the whole Church might rejoice again of the
receiving again of a sheep that had gone astray. I say and am ready to
prove, that this has been the order always kept, even until these times
ever since the Church began, of seuering the profane from the holy, and
revealed hypocrites from the rest of professors of Christian religion.


247. Question.
But do thou think this disciplyne to be so necessary (whereby until the
testimony of repentance they are to be separated from the rest of the sheep,
which might seem otherwise to infect the rest, or unless they be noted with
this kind of mark, not to return into the flock from whence they have
erred,) that where that is not, the Church can not stand?


Answer. God forbid. For the foundation of the Church is far otherwise,
which oftentimes even the very publik ministry of the word, being as it were
overwhelmed (as in the memory of our Fathers in many ages of Popery) was even
as it were buried. But surely it pitieth me concerning those Churches in which
every one, the judgment of the Church being silent, is left unto his own
conscience, because Paul writing unto the Corinthians, having a great deal
less occasion witnesses, that so neither the profanation of the Lords Supper
can be avoided, nor escape unpunished. But also I much more fear those
churches, if they abuse that which is given to edification, to destruction.


248. Question.
But what think thou of them that for the impuritie of others refuse to come
to the Lords Supper?


Answer. I think that they greatly offend: for neither by an others man's
conscience, but by his own must every one be tried.


249. Question.
But is it free for every one, either to come to the Lords Supper, or to
abstain from it?


Answer. No not so: for it is a commandment of God, do ye this.


Question. But the Apostle forbids to come unworthily.


Answer. I grant it. And therefore he bids us to come worthily, but he
commands not that we shun it, although it were better to abstain, then to
come unworthily.


250. Question.
But thou art not ignorant how many things may and are wont to be said
against those things which I have heard of thee, to the confutation whereof,
when it shall please thee we will come.


Answer. I know it, and have already wayed all these things with my self,
of which when opportunity shall serve, we will so handle the matter, that I
trust thou will allow my reasons. Now let it suffice that I have spoken these
things, that thou might understand what my opinion is, concerning these
matters.


FINIS.
IMPRINTED at London, at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Woodcocke.


