PROTESTANTS DEMONSTRATIONS, FOR CATHOLICS RECVSANCE.

ALL TAKEN FROM SVCH ENGLISH Protestant Bishops, Doctors, Ministers,
parlaments, laws, decrees, and proceedings, as have been printed, published,
or allowed among them in England; since the cominge of our king James into this
kingdom: and for the most part within the first six or seven years thereof.

AND EVIDENTLIE PROVINGE by their own writings, that english Catholics may not
under damnable syn, communicate with English Protestants, in their Service,
Sermons, or matters of Religion: and so conuincinge by themselves, their
Religion to be most damnable, and among other things, their ministry to be
void, false and usurped.

Princes have persecuted me, without a cause.

Psalm. 118. By JOHN HEIGHAM at Douay.

With License. ANNO 1615.

A BRIEF TABLE OF THESE DEMONSTRATIONS.
The 1. Demonst. Because by their own testimonies it would be an act, and
offense, unreasonable irreligious and damnable. page 1. The 2. Demonst. In
respect of their Ministers, unlawful, false, and intruded; and not to be
communicated with by their own writings page 21 The 3. Domonst. Because the
not preaching of the word of God, is not among them by their own testimonies
page 49. The 4. Demonst. Because English Prot. by their own testimonies, want
the due administration of Sacraments. page 56 The 5. Demonst. Because these
Prot. manifestli^ acknowledge, that their pretended church, is not the true
church of God. page 62 The 6. Demo^st. Because English Prot by their own
testimonies, are rotorius heretics. page 65 The 7. Demonst. Because English
Prot. by their own writi^ges, are scismatiques. page 78 The 8 Demonst Because
the public Prot. service is false, heretical, justly condemned, and
damnable by their own doctrine. page 85. The 9. Demonst. Because these Prot. by
their own testimonies, are manifest* dessemblers, wilful deceivers, seducers,
liars and perjured in matters of Religion. page 91. The 10. Demonst. Because
these Prot by their own testimonies, are generally most vild ^i^^ed, impious
and gracel^s people. page 106 The 11. Demonst. Because English ^rot. by their
own writings, are not only enemies to the temporal princes claim of
supremacy, in ecclesiastical causes, but deny also his soueraignitia in
matters temporal. page 112.
TO OUR MOST MIGHTY SOVEREIGN, KING JAMES, AND ALL HIS MOST HONORABLE
NOIBLITIE.
MOST MIGHTY KING: and MOST honorable Lords: as among humane and natural
Combinations, non are greater, more general, and binding, then those of one
nature, nation, and kindred: So in nature nothing can be more unnatural,
then unworthily to dissolve, violently to separate, or destroy these unions,
so inuiolably to be preserved. All persecuted Catholics of this kingdom
armen, united and comprehended in mankind, equally as you, or the most
renowned of you, or other protestants. They are of the same nation, our best
belowed England, english with you. And very late and new would that
persecuting protestants disce^t appear, who could truly say, he has noe
priest or Catholic of his family, which in this long and grievous
persecution, he persecuteth not, and himself in them. If any man object, that
Religion for which they suffer, is of an heavenly, and high or nature, religing
and binding not only man to man, but man to his God, and maker, by the greatest
felatie, and homadge: must answer by yout one proceedings; This is so far
from excusinge your persecutions, that it utterly accuses, and in all true
Judgment more condemns them. For your doctors assure us, that the church of
Christ cannot be without true discipline, to punish, and correct offenders,
and make yt an inseperable note thereof; yett your same protestant both laws,
writers, and proceedings are witnesses, that your pretended Examples watrant,
and power to punish (as you do) the Reverend priests, and other Catholics, of
this kingdom, are by many hundred years, to young, to make your Religion so
old, and powerable, that yt may safely and securely persecute your. Mother
church of Rome, that brougt us forth to Christ, and whose obedient and dutiful
children, you and all others ought to be. That claymed authority by which you
afflict us, never received life, until the decaying time of king Henry the
eight; And then your so named Archbishop Parker Statut. An. 24. vel 25.
Henric. 8. Math park in antiquit. Britannic. in Henr. 8. Joan Bal. l.
descr^ptor Brit. in Augustino fol. 34. 35.
writes, that the popes power and Religion had reigned in England above neyne
hundred years. From the first conversion of this english nation by S.
Augustine, as he means, and an other of your styled protestant Bishops in
the words is witness. Augustinus Romanus, Benedictini sodali^ij monachus a
Gregorio primo ad Anglosaxones papistica fide initiandos Apostolus mittitur.
Augustine a Roman, monk of the company of Benedict, was sent from Gregory the
first an Apostle, to instruct the English Saxons in the papisticall faith. And
to prove this faith was then Bal. supr. fol. 34.
received, he adds: Ethelbertus Rex Romanismum cum adiunctis
superstitionibus suscepit. King Ethelbert received Romanisme, or Romi^h
Religion, with the superstitions adioined. For so your writers term that
sacred doctrine. Your blodye law against the venerable priests of that holy
church, and profession, is of noe greater Antiquity, then the seven and
twenteth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Statut. An. 27. Elizab. cap.
and then but the Edict of a woman, not much powerable in spiritual business.
Yett Roman preisthood must needs be as ancient as Roman Religion. Which
your own cited Author Bal. supr. fol. 35 page 1.
farther warranteth in this manner. Augustinus introduxit altaria, vestimenta,
vasa sacra, reliquias, and ceremoniarum codices, quae omnia cum benedictione
Petri miserat ei Gregorius* Nam primum eorum studium erat circa missarum
oblationes, seeds episcopales, ac decima^; and ob id coacta synodo, mandauit
Romanus vbique consuetudines seruari. Augustine brought in altares, vestiments,
holy vessels, Relics and books of ceremonies, all which with the blessing of
Peter, Gregory had sent unto him. For their first, or chief study was, about
the oblations of masses, episcopal Sees, and Tithes. And therefore assemblinge
a synod, he commanded the Roman customs to be kept every where. Then if
(besides our service, and Ceremonies, as the Roman, and command of that
Mother church, Altares, mass, and sacrifice were then in use, our preisthood
could not be wanting: for a principal doctor in your church with public
allowance writes: We cannot dislike the Morton Appeal page 162. l. 2. cap.
6. sect. 1. Reinolds conf. page 550.
sentence of D. Reynaldes concerning the mutual Relation and dependence
between an Altar and sacrifice: But grant that Altar does as naturally, and
necessarily infer a sacrifice, as a shryne does a Saint, a father a son. And
he adds thus, Cardinal Bellarmine said truly. Viz, sacrifice and preisthood
are Relatiues. Then if your doctors doctors, Reynolds, and Morton, with their
approuers, approve this doctrine, they must approve also the antiquity, and
honor of our sacred preisthood, which your new learning and womanly divinity
have pronownced treasonable. And your present protestant Archbishop and all
others directors of M. Mason teaching that all Archbishops M^son epis^
dedicator.
of Canterbury before your first pretended and protestantlie made Bishop
Matthew parker, were from S. Mason in c^ns^crat. of Matthew parker. Suecliffe
page d^ ^ell page 4. 5. Field l of the church Mas^n supr.
Augustine, consecrated after the Roman manner, and otherwise then you
practice, must be of the same opinion, for our priests were made by them. And
as D. Sutclisfe, D. Field, M. Mason and others testify, by this form, Receive
power to offer sacrifice for the quick, and the dead: which is now used in the
church of Rome, in which noe treason, but much spiritual power, and honor is
conteyneth: And such, as it enforces your present Ministry by all pretense
Statut. An. 27 Elizab cap 1. M^sm Sutcl^^eild sup. etc.
they can, to claim, though with note of treason, their calling from that
ordination. And such, that it makes the lawful so ordered to be so
honorable, that a chief doctor in your Religion has written of them in these
most D Couell def of hooker. page 87
reverend terms. ^o these parsons God imparteth power, over his mystical
body, which is the society of souls, and over that natural, which is
himself, for the knittinge of both in one, which Antiquity does call the
making of Christ's body. By blessinge visible elements, it Couell sup page 105.
makes them invisible grace, it gives daily the holy ghost; it has to
dispose of that flesh, which was given for the life of the world and that
blood which was powered out to red^eme souls, Couell sup. page 87 88. 91.
it is a power, which neither prince, nor potentate, king nor Caesar on earth
can give. Then this state, a function so honorable with God, and renowned in
his holy church by the sentence of your own doctors, may not be condemned
for a state of Treason. And so many Reverend priests, above one hundred and
twenty, besides diverse of Religious orders, miserably tortured, and putt to
death, for that only cause in Englang, since that Edics of Queen Elizabeth,
were not Traitors, and malefactors, but happy Saints, and blessed Martyrs. And
your protestant persecution in puttinge so many, the fourth, third part, or
more, of that little company to that cruel death, with other manifold
Afflictions upon your contrie Catholics, has given occasion for strangers,
to think and a famous protestant among you to write, in this manner: The
sufferings and S. Edwyne Sands in his Book, Relation of the state of Religion
cap. 31.
Martyrdomes of English Catholics in these times, are accounted to the height
of Neroes, and Dioclesians persecutions, and the sufferings on their side, both
in meritts of cause, in extremity of Torments, and in constancy and patience,
to the renowned martyrs of that heroical church age. Which noe man can deny,
if he consider how many hundred years we enioined peace, honor, renown,
and above the third part of the possessions, and revenues of this kingdom,
with all Bishoprics, Monasteries, and church livings, with their privileges,
and prerogatives, Hollnish hist. in will. Conq Speed ib. Book of Domesday, etc.
And now are not only spoiled and deprived of them all, but styled, branded,
and reproached with such Infamous titles, additio^s, slanders, and miseries,
as never any such example can be produced of like, and so long persecutions,
prosecuted against the ancient possessioners of Religion, and religeous
preeminences, by so late and new invention, by strangers or enemies; much
less by contrimen add professors of Christianity. And yett his majesty's
regal sentence is: my mind was K speech in parlam 19. of marrh An. 1603.
ever free from persecution, or thrallinge of my subjects in matters of
conscience. And again: Correction without instruction (which, as before, you
cannot sufficiently give unto us) is but tirannie. And writing against
Contadus vorstius, the dutche heretic, proves, that if Catholics should be
in error, yett they are so far from deserving persecution, and persecution of
such nature, that their case needs not fraternall, or friendly correption, or
admonition: The words of his Censure be these: If the subsect of vorstius his
heresies, Declaration An. D. 1612. in the cause of D. Conrud. vorst. page 46.
47.
had not been grownded upon, questions, of an higher quality, then touching
the number, and nature, of the sacraments, the point of justification, of
meritts of purgatory, of the visible head of the church, or any such matters,
as are in controversy at this day betwixt the papists and us: we do freely
profess, we should never have troubled our selves, with the business in such
fashion. And yett all which was done therein, was but a gentle and friendly
Admonition, without any breach of peace, leaque or amity with that people.
Isaac Casaub. resp. ad epist. Cardi Per. in praefat. Field l. of the church.
Your Champion Casaubou, that has privilege, so often to call his doctrine,
the faith of our king, the faith of the english church, tells you that these
controversies cannot be determined without a general council, to whom D.
Field subscribeth, and attributes only to that, power to define, and punish
for such things. And next to that, yields primarie does of Judgment, and to
be obeyed, to the church of Rome, his Field supr. l. 4. cap. 5.
words be these: Yt is more to be respected, and reverenced, then the
authority of catholic doctors, and Bishops; or other apostolic churches.
Casaubon well knowinge the weakness Casaubon supr.
of your cause, adds first: because you have noe hope of a general cowncell,
that so great liberty of writing one against an other might cease: again
he wishes, that, seueris legibus ^trinque coerceretur, that it were brideled
on each side with severe laws. Then you know by your own doctors and
Judgments, how great, and not to be named, offense it is, with severe laws
or edicts to command and execute so undue and rigourous persecutions,
against them whom you cannot Judge, or condemn, not being condemnable.

But because, after so many humble, and earnest suites, and petitions,
english Catholics can find noe hope of other trial, but to make their
professed Enemies in this case, and persecutors, their Masters, teachers,
accusers, Judges, and and sentencers: I am enforced to accept that most
unequal, and unreasonable conflict, to make your own present protestant
writers, and proceedings, Judges between them and us, in their own cause:
knowinge they dare not Lacta^t. firdiuin insti. l. 4. de vera sapient. ca. 12.
Morton in appeal ep. dedicat.
with any impudency deny, against the light reason, and the christian
philosopher; that it is an invincible argument to prove truth, which is
granted or made by enemies themselves: especially seeing by their common
Harolde, Doctor Morton, they have publicly proclaimed yt, in these words: The
assistance of learned adversaries; we admit for the greatest reason of
satisfaction. For if it be held an excellent point of physic, ex vipera
theriac^m, to turn po^son into an Antidote against poison: and in God
accounted an high degree of vengeance, to turn the Egyptians against the
Egyptians: and in David celebrated as a principal matter of triumph, to cut
of Goliath his head with his own sword: and in Christ observed, as an
vnansweareable matter of conviction, to judge the evil servant by his own
mouth: and acknowledged in S. Paul, as the most expedite means of
confutation of the men of Crete, to oppose against them, their own, etc. And
yett to give them more advantage, I will demonstrate only by those english
writers, and proceedings of their protestant Religion, which have been
printed, published, or allowed among them, since his majesty's cominge into
England, and principally within the first six, or seven years thereof, that
english Catholics so grievously punished for refusinge to communicate with
their contrie protestants in sacraments, service, sermons, or exercises of
their Religion, cannot do yt, by their own Judgments, nor they exact yt,
without most grievous, deadelie and damnable syn.

And, because I freely acknowledge myself a priest of the Roman church, and
offer to defend, or prove, against all protestants, or other Enemies, the most
honorable dignity of that sacred function; And your proceedings propose
oaths, to try the loialtie of english priests, and Catholics, knowinge that
we will rather suffer death, and all miseries, as we have done, then to
swear any the least things, which we think untrue: Being now come to my
decaying time, tree and fistie years of age, do take and leave behind me,
as a memorial of my Innocence, this ensuing oathe: and desire it be named.

An oathe of a Catholic priest, his true alleadgeancie, to king and contrye.
Humbly submittinge my Judgment in all religeous doctrine, with all true
Christians, to our mother church of Rome, a Rule Kings sp^ac^ in h^^ ^
parliament.
to all both in doctrine and ceremonies (as his majesty's public censure is)
I protest in verbo veritatis, taking God, and the whole Court of heaven to
wittnes, that I never committed in deed, word, or consent, any treason, or
conspiracy, either against our king James his majesty, whose most dutiful,
and obedient subject in all civil obedience, I humblye acknowledge myself,
and so entreat to be accepted of him; or against Queen Elizabeth, his
predecessor, or any forreyne prince, in whose dominion I have lived. And I call
again God, and the Court of heaven to wittnes, that I never committed against
this kingdom of England my dearest contry, or anyother state, or province,
where I have lived, or my parson in them, living or deceased, murder, theft*
Rapine, violence, usury, oppression, encha^n^m^nt, sorcerye, fornication,
addultery, or other carna^l act with any creature, periurye* false testimoni^,
gluttony, drunkenness, or any great or scandelous sin, to my knowledge
disgracef^lly punishable by the laws of England, of which ^ have been a
student, and by the grace of God, given in my holy Religion, I hope, intend,
and purpose, so to persevere all my life: So help me God, and his holy
Saints.

You see how confidentlie I have sworn such an oathe of fidelity, and
Innocence from offense, concerning temporal Regiment, or duty of a subject
to his sovereign; as I stand in doubt whether any of your pretended Clea^gie
protestant, will second me therein or not: And yett there is noe matter
against your Religion contained in yt, as your so named new oathe of
alleadgeance, comprehends against the Pope, and church of Rome, (as they have
censured) to whom so great respect (as before), is due by your own doctors
sentences: But I am out of all doubt, that many reverend, and learned
priests, of this kingdom will in Innocence add to that which I have begun:
And all the rest of that consecrated company still sufferringe for that most
glorious and holy cause, will be able to perform as much in that kind, as
any temporal Sovereign can in conscience exact of a spiritual and clergy
man; and more then your best and most selected Bishops, or Ministers will
assume to do. For matters of Religion, this treatise will be our warrant,
that we must continue our unity, with our Mother church of Rome, and not with
those, who by their own Judgments and testimonies, are Heretics,
Scismaticks, damnably seducers, and seduced, and such, as by many other
titles, by their own conclusions are men not to be communicated with in
business of Religion, except men would willfullie incur damnation: Such as
your most allowed doctors and writters, are most manifestly proved in this
work, by their own writings. Therefore I crave pardon, that the harshenes or
distasteful evidence of these protestant demonstrations, be not imputed unto
me, but to your own protestant, and puritan doctors, Authors and publishers
of them, to the world: for by their authorities, and in their name I am to
dispute, and proceed in every Argument, and conviction. And because I desire
to bring security to all Readers, that noe english protestant, or puritan,
can by their own Religion take just exception against the weakest Conclusion
of this book: I have not handled any matters in yt, but such as by their own
agreement, ar essential, material, and fundamental in Religion. For how
soever otherwise they disagree, and are not easelie to be distinguished, yett
in these so necessary, and inseparable things, of true Religion, as they tell
us, they all agree. D. Georg. Abb. ag. Hill page 101. 102. 94. 106. 236. 237.
347. Dove persuas page 32. Morton full satisf. page 18.


The words of your present Archbishop, of Canterbury, ar these: protestants and
puritanes did never differ in any point of substance in substantial points of
faith there is noe variance among us. And this he affirms seven times at
the least in one book. The protestant Bishop of Peterborough writes thus: in
ma^ters of Religion we all agree. D. Morton, D. Sutcliffe, D. Willet, Wotton,
Middleton, Powell, the Sutel ag. k^ll page 42 Willet Antib* page 15 Wotto^ def.
of Perk page 28. Middl page 201. Povvel ag ap. ep. page 48. 45. Abr^dg. Edw. holy
knight page 103. of his (...).
Puritanes in their Abridgment with others too many to be cited are of the
same opinion. And it is so generally allowed among them, that they tell us,
non but such as they term Papists, Goliathes, uncircumcised Philistines,
liars, and will affirm the contrary. Your circumcised knight (as he will be
named, writes thus: our formalists and Presbyterians, how soever they be
somewhat different in habit, yett are they united in heart, ready at all
times to Join in battle against any uncircumcised Philistine, that dares
contest against the uniformity of their Rogers pref to the book of articles.
faith. Your public glosser upon your approved articles writes in this
manner: The very brethren themselves do write, that in regard of the common
grounds of Religion and the ministry, we are all one, we are all of one
faith. We are ministers of the word by one order: we preach one faith,
and substance of doctrine. Then which nothing was ever more truly said, or
written. Willet. Antilog page 15. 20.


Your great Controuertist D. Willet writes thus: among protestants of
^ngland there is noe difference, or diss^nt in any substantial point of faith.
As for puritans and Caluinio-papists, they are terms of papists deuisinge. D.
Georg^ Abb. sup. pa. 90. 106. 236. 237. Povvell sup. page 48. 52*
Your present protestant Archbishop of Canterbury is so confident herein, that
he uses these words: Noe Goliath against us, can prove the contrary. D.
Powell with public approbation, has these words: Noe reformer ever
distinguished between protestants, and them of the reformed church. The
puritans do not affirm the division between protestants and them, to be in
substantial points, non but papists affirm, that protestants and puritans
differ in substantial points of faith, and he lies, which says they differ
in substantial points. Like are the testimonies of others, But these are
fully sufficient in this place. Therefore seeing I am to allege only
causes, and reasons essential, and substantial in Religion, from these your
english protestant Bishops, and doctors, why their country Catholics may not
by their own doctrines, and proceedings, communicate with them in matters of
Religion; It is evident, that noe english protestant, or puritan may, or in
conscience ought, to deny any such authority to be cited in this treatise,
or any conclusion truly and scientificallie deduced from such their allowed
principles* for in so doeinge by their general grant before, he should
become, a papist, and a recusant to communicate with protestants; or a
blasphemous Goliath, uncircumcised philistine, or a liar, by their own censure
and Judgment: which would be new and urgent causes to avoid all spiritual
communion with such men. Whereupon, presuminge that noe adversary will so
much disable my studyes in divinity, and arts subordinate unto yt, But that
I am able from granted, and allowed principles, to deduce necessary, and
vndemiable Conclusions: I therefore do confidentlie name this work. A book
of english protestants Demonstrations, for English Catholics recusancie.
Because the most just causes of Catholics refusal to communicate with
protestan^s in Religion, are evidently proved by those protestants them
selves, in this Treatise. And so in all obedient, and humble manner, I take my
leave; I rest and hope to continue for ever, in all dutiful, and beseeminge
obedience, and love, to our most blessed Savior, his Holy church, and
Religion, his majesty, my dearest country, and your Lordships the most
honorable portion thereof; as I have before professed, and obliged myself by
attestation, and bond unviolable.

PROTESTANTS DEMONSTRATIONS FOR CATHOLICS RECVSANCIE.
The first particular protestant Demonstration, why english Catholics may not
communicate in spiritual things with protestants: is, because by their own
testimonies, yt would be an act and offense, unreasonable, irreligious and
damnable.
THAT it is not lawful for any Catholic, or member of the Roman church, to
communicate in Religion, and spiritual things, with the protestants of
England, I demonstrate, by their own testimonies: And first argue thus.

Noe professors of Religion may lawfully, and with security, forsake that
church, and communion, in which by the testimony of adversaries themselves,
there is salvation, and many have been by that profession glorious Saints, to
communicate with a new Religion, whereof there is noe such hope, or certain
expectation: But the state of Catholics by communicating with protestants, and
forsakinge union with the church of Rome, should be in this ^erplexitie, even
by these protestants confession: Therefore they may not in conscience forsake
communion with the Roman church, to join with these protestants, in such
business. The first proposition is evidently true: for good things, and
certain, may not be left, and forsaken for thinge^ either evil, or
uncertainly good. And that men may not communicate in a strange Religion, is
confirmed by D. Couell, and M. Hull, prouinge yt, by many Couell exa^. ^a. 200.
201 Hul. Romans ^ol p. 30. 31 32. 33. 34. Sutcliff. exa^ of petit. pa. 10. 11.
Povvel ref. ^pist. apolo^^tic. page ^5. 23. 26. 27. 100. 114 112. 113. etc.
Field pa. 27 page 182.
examples, and testimonies of scriptures, and antiquity, That we may not
communi^ate ^ith men of a diverse Religion. D. Sutcliffe tells us, that such
communion is reproved by the authority both of the fathers of the church, and
of aun^i^nt Christian Emp^rors. The like he testifies of Holy scriptures. M.
Powell is plentiful in this matters, and not needful to be cited, no^ man of
learning and conscience, affirminge communion in a false, or contrary Religion
to be lawful. The minor proposition, of certainty of salvation in the Roman
church, is thus confirmed by these protestants, D. Feilds words be these: the
Roman and la^ine church continued the true church of God even till our time,
and again in this manner: We doubt not but the church of R^me: in which the
Bishop thereof exalt^d himself, was not withstanding^ the true church of God,
that is hel^ a saving profession of the truth in Christ, and by force thereof
converted many contryes from error to truth. D. Couell writes thus, in the
name of them all: Protestants Couell def. of hook pa. 68.
do gladly acknowledge them of the Roman church to be t^^ family of ^hesus
Christ, they of Rome Were. and still are, in the church, it ^^ strange for any
man to deny them of Rome to be of the church. We affirm them of the Roman
church, Couell supr page 73. 76.
to be parts of the church of Christ, and that those that live and dye in
that church, may be saved. Yett both he, and D. Field give this sentence:
Couell sup. page 76. Field. p. 69. Field page 182.
there i^ noe salvation, remission of sins, or hope of eternal life out of
the church. D. Field further tells us, that diverse of the Roman church even
of the best learned (that could not plead Ignorance) be saved and Saints in
heaven. Their Bishop Barlowe has written how great difficulty it is, for
princes to be saved: Barl. ag. a name l^sse Cathol. Willet An. page 144.
Speed Theat. of great Britan.
yett D. Willet writes thus: it is not denied by any protestant, but many
renowned kings, and Queens of the Roman faith are Saints in heaven, The
names of our most holy kings, and Queens of England, which M. Speed in his
late Theater of great Britanie relates to have forsaken their Crowns, and
kingdoms, to become pore Monks and Nuns in that church and Religion, and to
be, chronicled for all posterities to have been most holy one ^arthe, and
now glorious Saints in heaven, are too many to be recited. Therefore seeing
these protestants assure us, that the church of Rome is the true church of
Christ, they that live and dye in yt, come to heaven, and many such are so
renowned Saints with God in heaven, and that out of the true church there is
noe salvation, remission of sins, or hope of eternal life, and there is but
one true church; Catholics in conscience cannot forsake the Religion and
communion of that sacred and saving Roman church, to communicate with
protestants.

Again I argue thus: That church, and Religion, ^.
unto which all former good Christians of this kingdom, whether Brittanes,
Romans, Saxons, Danes, Noruegians, or Normans kings or subjects were united
in Religion, until the time of king Henry the eight, is still in all prudent
Judgment to be continued in, and communicated withal: But the Roman church
and Religion is such: Therefore not to be forsaken. The mayor proposition is
evidently true: for of necessity that Religion of Christ which is good, and
makes the professors of it such, is to be embraced, and followed, and they
which embrace, and follow yt, to be imitated, and communicated with, and the
contrary to be avoided and forsaken; for as it is the nature of goodness, and
good things, to be desired and embraced: So of evil, and such things, to
be left and refused. The Minor proposition is manifest by too many protestants
to be recited in this place: I will therefore only allege their chiefest
latest, and most approved writers. M. Speed taking upon him the name of the
Author, of the late book, called, the Theater of great Britain, is so
partial a reporter Theater of great Brit. in all christian kings until Henry
8.
of things for protestants, by Instigation of their Bishops, and Ministers,
that he is taxed by all indifferent men that were either the Composers of yt,
or that have perused it with equal Judgment: And yett he is wittnes through
the Regiments of all Christian kings of England from Lucius the first vnrill
the desolution begen by K. Henry the eight, that the popes supreamacies, Holy
sacrifices of Mass, prayer to Saints, and for the dead, reverence of Holy
relics, and Images, pilgrimage, purgatory, and other catholic doctrines, now
impugned by protestants, were ever allowed, and generally practiced in this
kingdom by practice and devout profession whereof (to omit subjects though of
high renown, sons and daughters of kings them selves) more kings and Queens
in England became religeous monks and Nuns, and, now by these protestants,
are honored for glorious kings, Queens, and Saints in heaven, Then ever were
protestant kings, and Queens in all the world, though never so^ unworthy the
name of Theater of great Brit. page 33. n. 8. page 49. n. 5. page 53. page 159
p. 161. page 294. page 298. page 301. page 305. Theat supr. page 344. page 47.
page 302. page 306. page 308. page 310. page 311. page 338. page 361. page 364.
page 366.
Saints, or sanctity. Such were (as these protestants tell us) King and
Saint Ethelbert, king and Saint Offa, and Saint Fremandus his son, king
and Saint Cheldwald king and Saint Sebba, and his son and heir, king and
Saint Sigh^rd, king and Saint Ceolnulph, king and Saint Egbert, king and
Saint Ethelred king and S. Errcombert, king and S. Inas, king and Saint
Richard, kings and Saints Edwards, kings and Saint: Epmunds, and others,
women, Queens and Saints; Queen and Saint Outhburge, Queen and Saint
Etheldred, Queen and Saint Kineburge, Queen and Saint Eadburge, Queen and S.
Eve, Queen and S. Ethelburge, Queen and S. Oswith, king Sebba his wife, (not
named by them) Queen and Saint kinswith, Queen and Saint Ermenh^ld, Queen
and S. Sexburge, Queen and S. Ethelswith, Queen and S. Elfride, Queen and S.
Eanfled, Queen and S. Edgine, Queen and S. Edith, Queen and S. Elfgine,
Queen and S. Emna, Queen and Saint Eleanor with others. That these holy kings
and Queens, now glorious Saints in heaven, (such as a false Religion could
not make them) were of that holy catholic, and Roman Religion which we now
profess, and for profession Theater in those kings and Queens etc. Bale l.
de scrip. Britan. in Augustino. Parker. in antiq. Britan. in Cranmer. will in
Synops. and Antylog. etc. Theater pa. 203. cap 9. Suteliff ag. Kell. pa. 105
Theater sup page 222. king Edw. laws fol. 231. page 1.
thereof undergo so many miseries, not only this their Theater, but their
pretended Bishop Bale before, their so named Archbishop Parker, Doctor Willet,
and others testify, neither was there from the beginning, by their writings,
any Religion, or jurisdiction lawfully practiced in this kingdom, but from S.
Peter the Apostle, and the Popes of Rome, of S. Peter thus they write: That he
here founded churches (D. Sutcliffs argument of Supreamacie) and ordained
priests and deacons, is reported by Simon Metaphra^^es out of the greek
antiquities (not likely to corrupt for the Roman church) and Guilielmus
Eisingrenius in the first of his Century, who says that Peter was here in
Neroes time. They urge for Pope and S. Eleuthertus epistle to king Lucius, the
laws of S. Edward, published by their protestant friend, M. Lambert of Kent,
out of their Bishop Parkers library; And by them and those their published
laws is evident, that the Brittanes did not only receive all spiritual
Jurisdiction, Religion, Bishops, and priests from that holy Pope, but temporal
benefits, more then protestants are grateful for, or I mean to urge or stand
upon. The words of those their cited laws in the very page before, are these,
concerning King Edwards lavve^ fol. 130 pa. 2.
the Crown of England: The whole land and all the Islands to Norway and
Denmark belong to the Crown of his kingdom, and are of the appendancies and
dignities of the king, and it is one Monarchy, and o^e kingdom, and was
sometime called the kingdom of Britanye, and now called the kingdom of
Englishmen. For Lord Eleutherius Pope, who first sent an hallowed Crown to
Britanny, and Christianity by Gods inspiration, to Lucius king of the
Britannes, appointed and allowed to the Crown of the kingdom such metes and
bowndes as are said before. Of our Conversion and Religion by S. Augustine, and
after, they have spoken sufficiently before. I will add but one testimony of
their primative king and Saint Ina^, their words be thus: King Ina builded
the renowned abbey of Theater pa. 298. 299. n. 11.
Glastembury most stately to the honor of Christ Peter, and Paul, where
formerly stood the old Cell of Joseph of Aremathia. Which this king Ina after
a most sumptuous manner new built. The Chapel whereof he garnished with gold,
and silver, and gave riech ornaments thereto: as altar, Chalice, Censor,
candlesticks, Basin and holy water buckett, Imadges and pale for the altar, of
an incredible value. For the gold there upon besiowed, amounted to three
hundred three pownde whaight; and the silver to twoe thousand, eight hundred,
thirty, five pownde, besides prctious gemmes, embrouched in the celebrating
vesteres, he instituted a yearly payment to the Sea of Rome, a penny for an
house on lammas day, called Peter pence. After he had reigned in great
prosperi^y seven and thirty years, and odd monethe^. professing voluntary
poverty, Went to Rome, where in the habit of a Religeous man, he ended his
life in poor estate: And Ethelburga, his wife became a vayled Nun, and was
made Abb^sse of Barkinge near london, wherein she ended her life. The
Brethren of Ina^ were kenten, whose son was Aldome Abbat of Malmesbury and
Bishop of Sherborne. And if we desire Example from the the Norman Race, King
William the first by by some syrnamed Conqueror, may be added, both to
encouradge us to continue in the Religion of the church of Rome, and to be
fearful either to persecute, or forsake yt: of him and his affairs this
Theater entreats thus: His holy father Pope Alexander tke second set in a
Theater sup page 418. n. 19.
foot, sending twoe Cardinals and a Bishop from the Sea Apostolic, in a
Council degraded stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, EgelWine Bishop of the
east Angles, besides diverse other Bishops, and Abbots of the english nation:
deprived for no evident cause, but only to give place to the Normans in
favor of the king. King William gave his oathe upon the holy Evangelists,
and the relics page 421.
of S. Alban^ the Martyr. Pope Gregoire sends hither his bulls against the
mari^d clergy. Pope Gregory in all general Synod excluded the married
priests from execution of their holy offices, and page 422.
forbad they lay men to hear^ their Masses, our Lords body, and the blood of
our Lord consecrated by priests. To show how justly and severely God punished
the hinderance of Masse^, and profession of that Religion, speaking of the
destroying of Religeous howses, and churches, he writes thus: King William
pulls down page 421.
36. mother churches, from man's use, and Gods service in Hamt^hire now new
forest. Richard hi^ second son there dyed, goared with a dear, or blasted
with a pestilent air, and Rusus his other (...). 46.
son mistaken for a dear, shot through with an Arrovve, by walter Tyr^ll
Henry likewise his grandchilde by Robert Curtoise, persuing the chase, was
struken with a bough in the Jaws, and as Absalon le^t hanging until he
died, t^es punishments, with a strange earth quake, and other strange hinges
ascribed for taking away use of Gods service. And speaking of his great
repentance, and virtuous end he writes thus: He page 425. n. 65. 66. 64.
builded many religeous howses. most certain it is that in the very same
place Where king Harolds standard was pitched, and under which himself was
slain, there William the Conqueror laid that foundation (Battle Abb^y)
d^dicating yt to the Holy Trinity, and to S. Martine, that there the monks
might pray for the souls of Harold and page 423.
the rest that were slain in that place, he repents him of his cruelty in
England, does not a^count yt his own, but Gods. He gives his Crown, and
ornaments thereto belonging, to the monks page 422. 423.
of Saint Stephen in Cane. He gives to his son Henry Beaucler^ke only
5000. prounde, without any contry, proph^syinge how he should be heir to
all. The dying king; for king; must dye) having page 424. nu. 56. page 223.
raised up his weak body, upon the pillo^es hard the sound of the great
Bell in the metropolitan church of Saint G^^uis near Roan and demaundinge the
cause, one replied that it did then ring^ prim^ to our ladi^: ^herevpon with
great devotion* lifting his eyes toward heaven, and spreadinge abroad his
hands, I commend myself, says he, to that blessed lady, Mary* Mother of
God, that she by her holy prayers may reconcile me to her most dear own,
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with these words yielded up the Ghost. Their
protestant Archbisop Parker is lately with applaose new printed, and speaking
of the Roman Religion, and authority, abrogated by the new laws of king
Henry the 8. writes thus: Parker Antiq. Britan. p 329.
His legibus, by these laws, the power of the Pope, that had continued in
England above 900. years (he means from the time of our Conversion by S.
Augustine, sent hither by Pope, and Saint Gregory) was ouerthrown^, And M.
Mason, Maso^ book of Consecr. in M. Park.
with his directing protestant Bishops, assure us, that this Matthew Parker was
allowed for Archbishop of Canterbury, by other order, then any his predecessors
in the Sea of Canterbury. Therefore we may not forsake the Religion of Rome,
so embraced and honored by all Christian kings, princes, Bishops, and true
believing subjects, until this time of protestants, by their own testimonies.

Again I argue in this manner: Noe Religion, that is so far from truth and
to be justifiable for good, and holy, that the chiefest professors, and
doctors thereof, acknowledge generally that it is false, erroneous, or
fallible, may be communicated withal: But the English parliament protestant
Religion is such: Therefore not to be communicated with. The mayor proposition
is evidently true, for as these protestants have taught us before, noe communion
is to be had in spiritual things, with men of a false and deceatefull
Religion: for such by noe possibility, can be the infallible, and most
undoubted word, and revelation of God, which by noe power can either be false,
or doubtful: But the fantastical devise, Imagination, and humane heretical
Invention, of seducers. The minor proposition is so generally granted by the
protestants of England, That D. Morton Morton Apolog. part. 2. page 315.
with public pri^iledge, absolutely for them all writes thus: Thesis
generalis, nullus est omnino in ecclesia, cuius Iudicium est infallibilis
authoritatis. Yt is a general maxim, (And so to be received of them all)
That there is non at all in the church, whose judgment is of infallible
a^thoritie. D. Willet gives this testimony: In England will: Antilog. praef.
angl. and pa. 71. 120. 150 43. Praefat. to the Reader supr.
the temporal prince is Governor, Ruler, chief Ouerseer, and Steward of the
church, to whose Judgment and redress the reformation of Religion belongs.
Yet thee adds thus: neither he, nor any in their church have any privilege
from error. And this is so manifest, by the often chaungings, and choppings of
their Religion, by king Henry 8. king Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth, that
(to go noe further) their errors and contradictions defended, and published by
their own statutes, are shameful to be recited, and so evidently known,
that their protestant Bishop of Peterborough, Dove persuasion.
with others do freely acknowledge yt, that all protestant princes with their
church had erred and seduced others. Or if against all hope, or possibility,
in S. Edwyne sands opinion, we Relation of Religion.
might expect a general council by their doctrine, which not only he, but
all protestants confining spiritual jurisdiction to call counsels, only to
the temporal and civil authority of particul^r princes* and contryes,
wherein they rule, and noe farther, much less over all nations Christian, as
the Pope claymeth: yett to expect an Impossibility, larkes if the sky
falls, we should be then in as desperate a case by their Religion, as
before. For in their public article and Rule they have thus defined: general
counsels may ^rr even in things pertayning^ Articl. of Relig ^rt. 21. Field l.
of the church page
unto God. Unto which I will add the public protestant opinion set down by
D. Field in these words: Bishops ass^mbled in a general council have
aut^oritie to interprett scriptures, and by their authority to supresse all
them that gaynesay such interpretation, and subject every man, that shall
disobey such determination, as they consent upon, to Excommunication and
censure of like nature. This is the desolate estate, of protestants Religion,
by their own testimonies, without hope of hop^ls general council, there is
noe hope of truth or salvation in their Religion; And with hope of that which
can never be, the misery is still remaininge, for we are still left in
danger of error, to condemn us, and peril of separation from the church, out
of which (as they teach before.) there is noe salvation, remission of sins,
or hope Couell def. pa. ^6. Field page 69.
of eternal life. Therefore seeing by union and communion in Religion with
protestants, both by their Judgments, and our own also, we should be in
this damnable perplexity, and certain danger of everlasting hell; And by
remaining in unity with the church of Rome, in which we comfort our selves,
and offer to mayntaine against all opponents, herericks, or Infidells, that the
church of Christ, Popes and general Counsels cannot iudicially err in
matters of faith, we are freed from those desperate conditions, and live in
most comfortable hope of true Religion in earth, and everlasting salvation in
heaven, we may not forsake the catholic church Vr^is and orbis, of Rome and
the whole christian world, to join with the parliament, and so miserable
protestant church of England, and one kingdom.

For confirmation of this, though not needinge to be confirmed, and for
further demonstration in this question, I argue thus: Noe men in time of
controversy about Religion may with security, and conscience forsake the
communion of the superior mother and Apostolic commanding church; or that is
taught to have especial assistance of God in matters of Religion: or that,
unto which to adhere by the Judgment of the primative fathers was taken for a
suer taken of a true catholic, even by the confession of protestants; to Join
with an Inferior, commanded, and subject church, utterly destitute of such
prerogatives, and acknowledged by the doctors thereof to be erroneous: But the
Catholics of England by forsakinge union with the church of Rome, and
communicatinge with english protestants, should be in this conscionles and
irreligeous condition: Therefore they may not do yt. The mayor proposition, is
three fold, containing in effect three propositions, as the argument for
brevity, three demonstratiue arguments. The first proposition is this: The
mother, superior, and commaundinge church, may not without greater authority
be forsaken, to Join with a subject, Inferior and commanded church: And it
is evidently true, otherwise yt should not be the Mother, superior, and
commaundinge church; but the contrary, inferior, subject, and commanded.

The second proposition is this: That church which in the Judgment of many has
especial assistance from God, and freedom from error in religion, i^ rather
to be communicated with, then that which by all men, even the best learned of
it self is condemned of error, and confessed to be fallible and deceauing
judgment, And this also is manifestly true: for in the first there is either
assurednes; or contenting hope, to be free from error and obtain salualtion:
in the other noe true hope thereof at all, but a confessed certainetie of
error, seducing, and to be damned.

The third proposition is this: That church which by the primative fathers had
that privilege ^s the adversaries do grant, that to adhere unto yt was a
sign of a true believing catholic, is reather to be communicated with, then
that which never had or claymed such prerogative: And this proposition is
likewise apparantlie true: for in the former there is security from error; and
in the second evident certainty to fall into error, and state of damnation.
Now that the case of english, catolicks should be this, in all this three
propositions, if they should communicate with english protestans, I do thus
demonstrate by these protestans them selves; and first how the roman church
was, and still is, this mother, superior, and commaundinge Church may appear
by the sentence of his majesty, concerning that church in this K speech in
parlam.
words: it is our mother church: it was a rule to all both in doctrine and
ceremonies, when it was in her florishinge and best estate. And in the
conference Conference at Hampto^ page 75.
at Hampton Court, their Bishop, Barlowe relates thus: The kings resolution
is, that noe church ought further to separate it self, from the church of
Rome, either in doctrine or ceremonies, then she has departed from herself,
when she was in her florishinge and best estate, and from Christ our Lord and
dead. D. Downame Downam l. 1. Anticor. ca. 3 pa. 36.
denies not, but both Justinian the Emperor, and the general council of
Calcedon, in the primative church, did attribute to the Pope of Rome, to be
head of the church. And the same D. Downame, D. Couell. D. Sutcliffe Porkins,
Down supr. page 106. ^07. Couell plea of Innoc pa. 65. Sutcliff sub vi^p. 19
Perk probl. page 237. 238.
and others wittnes, that at such time, wherein they confess that church, a
Rule to all, both in doctrine and ceremonies, and not to be separated from, it
exercised this supreme iurisdict^on, in all parts of the world, Asia
Afric, and Europe, Therefore this Rule to all, is not in ruling, departed
from her self, or Christ our head, and so we may not be separated from yt.
Which M. Ormerod proves further, assuring us, that in the Apostles time it
claymed these privileges of preeminence and indefectibilitie, from the
irreuocable grant of Christ in holy Ormer. pict pap. page 78.
scriptures: his words be these: To prove that the church of Rome has the
preeminence over all churches, Anacletus (living in the Apostles time, a
blessed Saint, and martyr) alleges Math. 16. verse. 18. upon this rock will
I build my church, and he expounde^h it thus; super hanc petram id est, super
ecclesiam Romanam, upon this rock; that is upon the church of Rome, will I
build my church. Therefore for any man to say, that we may sepearate our selves
from the church of Rome, because, it is departed from it self, when it was in
her flourishing and best estate, is not only a very frivolous and vain excuse,
but in their opinion and Relation manifestly false, because this church of
Rome, even in that her best estate, did claim and by the warrant and grant of
Christ, registered in holy scriptures, as ample and supreme commanding
authority, over all other churches and parsons, and as due and respective
obedience, as now yt does, as these protestants them selves are witnesses
against them selves: and by such pretended excuse of revolt, and contempt of
superiority, and government, and for the inferior, subject, guilty, or
accused, to usurp power over the Superior, and lawful Judge, all heresies,
scismes, treasons, rebellious, and disobediences, may be mayntayned; and all
Regiment, and Rulers both spiritual, and temporal, be rejected, and
overthrown. And is the like, or worse in effect, then that which his majesty
speaks, of the presbyte^iall discipline, in these words: lack and ^om, and
Will, and Di^k, will censure the king. and his Conferen^^ a^ ^ampt. page 79.
couns^ll, and all their proceedings, at their pleasure.

And from hence also, both the second, and third propositions, are directly
proved. For by this the second proposition, That Catholics in forsaking
communion with the church of Rome, to communicate with english protestants,
should forsa^^ a church by the doctrine of diverse, and credible ^uthorities,
assisted by God from error* is euideytlie true: for not only the present
doctors of the present Roman church so teach, but it was so taught (as this
protestants, assure us) by the learned and holy fathers and popes, of that
sacred church, when by their grant, it was in her florishinge and best estate
and a rule to all both in doctrine and ceremonies. To which I add, the
testimony of D. Downame, telling us that in those times, Down l. 2. Antichr.
page 107. Orm^r.
heretics, though Bishops recanting, did swear to meyntayne that faith,
which the Bishop and church of Rome professed. M. Ormerod says: S. Leo (that
glorious Saint and doctor) did teach, that God did assist and direct that sea
in decrees. And to maintain yt by protestants, that this was the common and
received doctrine of that vnsported time; whereas they now tell us, a general
council is highest judge: D. Powell writes thus: Powell l. 1. Antichrist. p.
230. 231.
Calixtus Pope (in that best time) defined, that all Bishops though gathered in
a general Council, shall fulfill the will of the church of Rome: they which
do not this, are pronounced of Pope Pelagius, to keep a false Conciliable,
and not a Council. Pope Damasus vvrote, that it is not lavvfull for the
Bishops to do any thing, against the decrees of the Bishops of Rome. Where
upon according to this general, and primative doctrine by protestants
relation, their Bishop of Bills. true differ. page 66. 67.
Winchester has written in this manner: The Canon of the primative church made
every thing void, that was done without the Bishop of Rome The canon of the
primative church forbad, any Council to be called, without his consent.
Therefore D. Field directs us, what to do in Field page 20^.
this case, in these words: We must obey without scrupulous questioninge.
with all modesty of mind, and reverence of body, with all good ^llovvance,
and acceptance, and repose in the word of them, that teach us, unless they
teach us any t^ings, vv^ich the authority of the higher and Su^erior
controlleth. Therefore because thus protestants have so confidently assured
us, that the Pope, and church of Rome, is our highest Judge, in authority, and
superiority in this business, we must still, without scrupulous question,
with all modest^ie, reverence, good allovvonce, acceptance, and repose obey
them, still communica^e with them, And forsake all spiritual communion withal
protestants, and others departed and sepa^ated from them.

And from hence, also the third proposition, that to adh^re to the church of
Rome in time of controversy, was (and is) a token or sign of a true
catholic, is evidently proved. An D. Downame grants yt to have been the
opinion of the primative fathers: S. Augustine, and victor vticensis, in
Afrike, were of opinion, that Down. l. 1. Antichrist. page 106. 105.
to adhere to the church of Rome, was a mark of a true Catholic, in those
times. And that it must so continue for ever, is proved by these protestants
before. To which I add this protestant Demonstration followinge.

Every forsakinge of Communion, and communicating, which by protestants
Judgment does, or would make men guilty of all kind of spiritual
disobedience, is to be auoid^d: But for Catholics to forsake communion, with
the church of Rome, and communicate with protestants, by their own doctrine is
such: therefore to be avoided. The mayor proposition is evidently true: for
seeing to be disobedient in any one spiritual duty, is wicked and abominable,
much more damnable must it needs be, to be guilty of all such sins The
minor proposition is proved by D. Field, and the public protestant authority,
that gave privilege to his writing, for entreatinge of the diverse, and
distinct kinds, of spiritual F^ild page 202. l. 4. cap. 5.
obedience, he writes thus: Hither we may referr, those different degrees of
obedience, which we must yield to them, that command, and teach us, in the
church of God, excellently Waldens. doctr. fidei l. 2. art 2, 3 page 27.
described by waldensis, we must says he, reverence and respect the
authority of all catholic Doctors, whose doctrine and writings the church
allows. We must more regard the authority of catholic Bishops: more then
thus, the authority of the Apostolic churches: amongst them more especially
the church of Rome: of a general council more then all these. By which
doctrine of english protestants, it is evident, that all men communicating with
them in Religion, are culpable in all kind of spiritual disobedience, and if
the degrees of obedience, to commanders in the church of God, be (as these men
assure us, excellently described by Doctors, and catholic Bishops under the
Pope, and the Pope is cheifest in these degrees, and as before is proved by
them, noe council can be either general, or allowable without his allowance,
and approbation, by forsakinge communion, with the Pope, and being disobedient
unto him, we should be guilty of a spiritual disobedience. Therefore when
we are assured by these men them selves, that now we live in all true
spiritual obedience; and contrary to their commanding and supreme byndinge
instruction, noe autho^itie on earth is to be obeyed in such things, but
rather to be obedient and subject it self to them, the pretended instruction
of protestants to unlearned catholics is not to be termed instruction, but
destruction, and their pesecution against us for this our so religious, and
just denial to communicate with them in Religion, shall be censured by his
majesty and their Bishopp of Durham, and not by me: his majesty's words, in
public parliament, in this question, are thus* You my Lord of Durham said very
learnedly in Sermon. An. 1603. 19. of March before the K. Kings speac. in parlam.
1. Jacob.
your sermon to day, that correction without instruction, is but tyranny. And
how can England, ever an inferior, subordinate, and dependinge church, take
upon yt power to instruct the highest spiritual authority on earth, (as
before) by their own Judgments against them? And his majesty by himself,
besides that alleged, allows the Pope to be chief Bishop, and prince of
K. admonit. page 45. 46. Casaub. respons ad epi. Card. Perron. pa. 69. 70.
Bishops, as S. Peter was prince of Apostles* And by Casaubon, that all
patriarchall, apostoli^ke, and commaundinge Sees in the world now, do join
with him against protestants, in question now in controversy.

The 2. Protestant Demonstration, why Catholics may not communicate with them
in Religeous things, is* by their own doctrine in respect of their so named
ministers unlawful false, and intruded, and not to be communicated with, by
their own writings.
BUT to proceed, and still in matters essential, because in such things they
will be esteemed to be at unity, and agreement: I will use their own
definition of the true church, subscribed unto, by them all, that are admitted
for ministers in their english protestant Religion: Articl. of Religion. art.
19.
Thus it is: The visible church of Christ is a congregation of faithful men,
in the which the pure word of God is preached* and the sacraments be duly
ministered. So that three things by this their highest decree are essential in
Religion: Field lib. and 2. pa
D. Field calls them proper, essential, and inseparable. True Pastors or
ministers: The puer word preached: and sacraments duly ministered. If I should
only prove, that but one of these three be defective in their church, or not
to be communicated with, I have rendered sufficient reason of refusal to
communicate with english protestants, in their Religion: for in true
definitions nothing must be wanting, or superfluous, for the maxim is
general: That the definition, and thing defined must be conuertible. But for
security I will make demonstration by these protestants themselves, that all
these protestants themselves, that all thus their proper, essential and
inseparable things, are both seperable, separated, and wantinde with them. And
first concerning their Ministry, because it is lately confuted and condemned
at large, by their own writings, I will be breife, and I argue in this manner.

Noe pretended ministers of England, that be made either by imagined power and
authority from a woman, not capable to make ministers, or by power authority
or jurisdiction from the Pope, See, or church of Rome, may be communicated
with by their own writings, and proceedings: But all in England supposed for
ministers be in this case by their own confession: Therefore by their own
confession, and testimonies, not to be communicated withal in spiritual
things. I will first prove the second proposition: and it is demonstratiuely
proved by their general consent, for though they differ by which of those
means they were made, the puritanes justifying that they have noe better
ordination, then Queen Elizabeth a woman could give them, which the teach is
non at all, and the parlame^tarie protestants now defending, and contending to
deduce and prove their supposed ministry by the Roman authority, and
jurisdiction: yett in this they allagree, that their pretended ordination is
either from, Queen Elizabeth, or from the church, and Pope of Rome, neither
possibly can yt be otherwise, for the Catholic Bishops after the death of
Queen Mary being deprived by Queen Elizabeth, in the first year of her
reign as all our protestant historians Fox, Stowe, Hollinshed, Fox^ t^. 2.
monum. stowe hist. an. 1. El. Hollinsh ib. Park antiq Brit. in fin^ Mason l. 1.
2. 3. 4. Consecret. Stat. An. 1. Eliz. cap. 1.
Parker, Speed, Mason and others testify; as also all jurisdiction and power
spiritual under treasonable offense, and penalty, by the highest parliament
law, invested in Queen Elizabeth, they must needs* claim their making, from
that which then was rejected, or from that of Q. Elizabeth then received, and
established: for there is, as they acknowledge noe other to be imagined.

Now to come to the mayor proposition, and first to that protestant opinion,
which teaches their pretended ordination to be only by Queen Elizabeth, I
argue thus: Noe communion and union spiritual is to be had, with men
pretending to be true ministers, but by their own doctrine and doctors are
not such, but usurpers, intruders, bastardly, false, and illegittimate: But the
english pretended ministry is such: Therefore not to be communicated with in
such business. The mayor proposition is evidently true: for usurped, false,
illegittimate and cannot possibly be just, right, true, and lawful things.
The minor proposition is also evidently true, in their writings, assuring, not
only that they were made by Queen Elizabeth, but that for that reason they
are noe true ministers, because she a woman, by sex incapable of such
function, could not give yt unto others. Their reason is a priore, and
demonstratiue, and the same which the Jacob Reas. prot. Assert. Lord Cook.
present Lord chief justice allows for such, and is this: nemo potest plus
iuris in alium transfer, quam ipse habet, noe man can transferr or give more
right unto an other, then hoe himself has. And herevppon they conclude
against this pretended english Ministry in this manner, one of them has these
words: The protestant Bishops are noe approved members of the visible Survey
pa. 5 Jacob. reas. page 9.
church of Christ. M. Jacob writes thus: English protestant Bishops are
plainly contrary to Gods word, and utterly unlawful. A diocesan Bishop is
neither a pastor, nor one of the people in any proper visible church with v^.
M. O^merod relates their Censure in this order: The english protestants Ormer.
pict pu^it. f. 2 g. 4. Dial. 1.
have neither a right ministry of God, nor a rig^t government of the church,
english ministers are noe ministers. The english minist^ry is unlawful. There
is noe right ministry in England, Rogers in Arti^. 36. p. 200. 201.
noe pastors, noe Bishops. M. Rogers writes thus: They write that the Bishops
of our church have noe ordinary calling of God, and function in the scriptures
for to exercise, they are not sent of God inferior Ministers they are not,
according to Gods word, either proved, elected, or ordained. Like is the
Testimony of M. Mason, M. Owen, and others, too many to be reci^ed: Mason pa.
7. 8. Owen pil and her.
Therefore by their judgment, we may not communicate with the^, in spiritual
things: neither can this their pretend^d ordinatio^ be lawful.

Neither can it be auailable for the present Frauncis Mas. in praf l. 1. 2.
etc. Field l. of the chur. Sut^liff ag. Kell page 5. Butler in epist. written
for the mini^^ery.
protestant (so named, Archbishop of Canterbury, director to M. Mason, now M.
Mason, D. ^eild D. Sutcliffe, D. Butler, or any other among them, now to say
they have received true, and lawfall ordination from the Pope, and church of
Rome, as they now say, and by all means contend to prove; for to be made
priests or Bishops by the Pope, and his proceedings, i^ a thing essentially
different, from having only allowance by a woman, incapable either to have,
or give such power; therefore because men in protestants religion may not be
papists, nor liars, nor say that so many of their worthies, Bishopps, and
doctors assuring us before, that they do not differ in any one essential, or
material point, be liars, and dissemblers in religion, we must needs agree
with them, that say the english ministers have noe calling, or admittance, but
by Queen Elizabeth, which by them is none at all. Again both upon the same
ground, and the like extremity in their doctrine, they are enforced to
renownce all ordination from the Pope, and church of Rome, by this their own
demonstration: Noe man can give that to an other which he has not: But, by
them, the Pope has not true ordination: Therefore cannot give yt to others: The
mayor is evidently true, and their own ground, and principle. The minor
proposition has been a common protestant doctrine, and must be justified by
their received opinion, that the Pope is Antichrist, a thing in religion
essential: for Antichrist that is quite contrary unto Christ, cannot by any
means be judged a true priest and bishop of Christ. Thirdly D. Sutcliffe
makes this matter most clear in these his words: The Turks musty i^
Sutcliff suru. pa. 48.
as good a Bishop as the P^pe. therefore in his doctrine, neither of them a
Bishop, or able to make, either Bishop, or priest. Therefore in an other work
with public allowance, as also this has, he writes of us, in this manner: in
Sutcliff ag* D. kell. pa. 4*
the Popes church our adversaries neither have man^r of ordination, nor
substance of function, they have not imposition of hands by bishops, because
they have not lawful Bishops. Therefore their pretended Bishops, if made by
such noe Bishops, be not true bishops. And so there be neither true Bishops,
nor true and lawful priests, or ministers in the english protestant
congregation: and so noe true church, nor spiritual communion to be used
with them, by their own judgments.

And this their new devise of clayminge a consecration de iure diuino, and not
their old admittance from. Queen Elizabeth, was the Protest. offer of confer
page 11.
motive, that urges their own brethren in Religion, first to write in these
words: If prelacie be de iure divine by the law of God, it receaueth breathe
and life from the Religion of Rome. Whose prelacie and preisthood is even by
our greatest adversaries acknowledged to be by divine institution: And this
supposed and granted by these parlamentary protestants, thus they add: They
cannot see how possibly by the rules of divinity, the separation of our
churches from the church of Rome, and from the Pope, supreme head thereof can
be justified. And again in this manner: They protest to all the world, that
the Pope, and the church of Rome, and in them God, (...). pa. 16.
and Christ Jesus himself, have had great wrong, and that the protestants
churches are sc^smaticall in forsakinge the union and communion with them. And
this, he that would be named Archbishop of Canterbury, even by his own
grounds before, should rather have resolved upon, then contrary to his own
judgment, understanding, and conscience (if I may use that word in such
proceedings) maintain, and aggrauate so strange and unchristian
persecutions, against sacred and lawful preisthood in others; which though
only imputative, pretended, and usurped in himself, he would have so much
honored, or rather (by their Religion) Idololatrated, and worshipped as an
Idol, ens rationis chymaera, and noe real thing. And this is one of his
unholy purchases by directinge Frauncys Mason, in so durtie a dawbinge work,
as his book of pretended ordination is. An other noe less profane is this,
to demonstrate himself, and all of his opinion before, for the unity, and
general accord, and agreement of all, both english, and other protestants, in
all essential, substantial, and material points, of Religion, to be
profane dissemblers, seducers, and men of noe Religion. For in this so
essential, and substantial a question, of a true and lawful preisthood, or
ministry fundamental, or foundation in true worship, they are so
diametrically, and contradicto^ily d^^ided, and separated, that some of them
considently, and as matter of faith, believe, and teach, they have noe calling
or ordination, but from a woman, utterly disabled either to have or give yt:
the rest as certainly affirm, that which they pretend to have is from
Antichrist, which likewise can neither give, nor have yt. so that by noe
possibility they can be reconciled, to have any title to a true ministry and
Religion. Their only way of Reconcilement, in some part, (but to their little
comfort) is this, if they will agree, that Queen Elizabeth was Antichrist. But
Concerning their pretended ordination, it is abundantly and demonstratiuely
confuted out of their own laws, writings, and divinity in a particular book
of that subject, and for that cause I had here passed it over with silence, had
I not been advertised, that being diners months since ready for the press,
it is fallen into their pretended Bishops hands, that intend to suppress it.
And therefore in the Authors name, I request them, truly, and word for word,
to publish yt, with the best answer they can make unto yt. And his promise
is, to make noe further reply unto them in that business: so confident he is,
his book to be vnansweareable, and their cause vndefensible. But for fear
they will behave themselves in this, as to my grievous experience they have
very often done in the like before, I must add som^hat in this place. And
first I tell M. Frauncys Mason b. of Consecrat.
Mason, and his directors, telling us that Matthew Parker was consecrated by
four true Bishops, or three and a Suffragane, That no notorious and
contradictory liars are to be believed in their own cause, especially of such
moment: But all or most of the protestant Relators of this by their own
Testimony, are liars: Therefore not to be believed. The mayor proposition is
evidently true: And the minor thus p^o^ed: for first whereas I find three
relators of this pretended Consecration, and Butler epdef of their mis^^on.
Su^cliff ag D. ^ell. page 5.
Parkers Register, Doctor Butler, D. Sutcliffe, and directed M Mason: The first
says, that Ihon Suffragan of Do^er was one of these Consecrators. D. Sutcliffe
his words are thus: Bishop Parker was consecrated hy imposition of hands of
Bishop Barlowe, Bishop Couerdale, Bishop S^ory, and twoe Suffragans, of whom
mention is made in the act of consecration, yett to be seen. M. Mason Mason
in ^ons. Math. Park.
tells, there was but one Suff^agane there, and he was of Bedford. So that
in these three protestant chief writers, and allowed r^lators of this
pretended consecration, there be thr^e diverse and quite repugnant narrations,
of which if not all three, yett at the least twoe of necessity are notorious
lies, and corruptions, and all of them cite Matthew Parkers Registe^; So that
if any cred^^t is to be g^uen to these men, they had seen three different
Registers of this matter, and all of them false, not only for that which is
proved before, but because M. Mason Mason sup.
ventureth his own, their Register, and pretended Bishops creditt, upon an
imagined consecration, in the month of Dec^mber in the second Stow ^istor. An.
1 Elizab. Hollin. and Speed supr.
year of Queen Elizabeth; when by the testimony of their protestant
historia^s, Stowe, Holinshed, and Speed, they were allowed for Bishops, by
Queen Elizabeth, many months before, and practiced those places in the first
year of her Reign. And for his pretended Maso^ Speed and Hollinsh supr.
Bishop and Consecrator Miles Couerdale, yt is evident by Mason himself,
Speed, and Holinshed, that he never was allowed in Queen Elizabeth her time
to have a B^shopricke, or be a Bishop, such is their evidence also of their
pretended Suffragan, or Suffraganes: Therefore if they were not Bishops, they
could not be consecra^inge Bis^ops, to give that which they had not, neither
were allowed to have by those protestants. Again M. Mason tells us, that the
Queens Commission unto these pretended Consecrators, (and other warrant they
had not) was to make them Bishops, secundum formam statutorum in ea part
prouisorum, according to the form of the statutes provided in that behalf.
And yett the statute Stat. Henr. 8. of Bish. Stat. 1. Eliz
of king Henry the eight, and Queen Elizabeth condemns, the making of an
Archbishop, except by an Archbishop, and two other Bishops, or sower Bishops.
And yett by these men, neither of these was observed in this pretended
consecrat^on: further by the same princes laws, their Stat. H^^^ 8. of (...)
ag Stat. ^. Eliz
^m^gin^d Suffraganes had noe power in such thin^s, neither any at all out of
their Bishops iuri^dictions, and without their allowance, both wanting in this
case, when there were noe Bi^^ops of those places to have jurisdiction, o^ give
allowance. So now by these men themselves, the only difficulty remains of
Barlowe, made Bishop as M. Mason says in time of king Henry 8. and S^ory by
king Edward 6 and his new invention. But for Barlowe, we ar^ directly told by
D. Suttcliffe that neither Sutcliff ag. kell. page 4.
h^e, nor any of such creation is a true and lawful Bishop, for M Scory, and
all of his stamp, or making in the days of king Edward 6. Queen Elizabeth,
or king James, from them, not only M. Fox, But M. Mason also is wittnes,
Fox tom. 2 ^^g. 10^4. Mason li 2. page 92.
that they were not reputed for true Bishops, as appears by these their
words, the words of D. Brook Bi^hop of Gloucester the Popes delegate, to
Ridley at ^is degradation: We must against our wills proceed according to our
Commission to disgradinge, taking from you the dignity of preisthood, for we
take you for noe Bishop. And so they thought of the rest. And this was not
only the opinion of divines and catholics, but of protestants, and cheifest
law^ers, and Judges themselves, even in the time of Q. El^zabeth her self. The
opinion and Report of Sr. Robert Brook, chief Justice of the common Brook
Abrid. 1576. titul leases. 68.
pleas, then published are these: It is said that Bishops in the time of king
Ed^ard 6 were not consecrated, and therefore were not Bishops, And therefore a
lease for years made by such and confirmed by the deane and C^apter, shall not
bind the Successor, for suc^, ^ere never Bishops. Therefore if this verity of
the in^alid^tie of those pretended Bishops, was thus notoriously known, and
judged by our common law, and judges thereof, even in civil affairs, much
more, we are to be of that mind, concerning the spiritual and sacred
function it self, and in religeous duties, not in the power of our laws to
limitt. The same is proved in the Reports of Sr. James Dyer Lord chief justice
of the same Court, for, whereas the statute Stat. An. 2. Eliz. cap. 1.
of Queen Elizabeth, concerning her strange supreamacie, in matters of
Religion, gave power to all Bishops, to minister the same unto all
ecclesiastical parsons, within their dioces, and jurisdiction; Bishop Boner,
being deprived from the Sea of London by this highest archiepiscopall, or
papal power of that Queen; and Horn a protestant by her substituted to be
Bishop of Winchester; he thinking himself sufficiently by her allowance to be
Bishop, at least to that purpose, offers this new oathe to Bishop Boner
living, a prisoner within Winchester jurisdiction: The Bishop refusing the
oathe was indicted upon that statute; to which indictment he pleaded, quod
ipse non In nouel Cases collect per ^asques Dyer chris. justice ac ^^om: bank
termin. Michael an. 6. and 7. Eliz. fol, 234.
^st inde culpabilis, that he was not culpable, because the said Bishop of
Winchester was not a Bishop at the time of offering the oathe. After, this was
c^r^fied into the kings bench, and thus related by their chief Justice L.
Dyer. Edmond Bo^^r late Bishop o^ lond^n was certified in the kings Bench by
Doctor Horn Bishop of winchester, for refusinge of the new oathe, appointed
for ecclesiastical parsons, by the statute in the first year of the now
Queen* in the first chapter, offered and ministered to him in Southwarke in
winchester horse there. And concerning the former plea, and Issue of Bishop
Boner, he adds thus: And it was much debated by all the Justices in the
chamber of the ^orde Catlyne, (then chief Justice of England) if Boner might
give in Evidence upon this Issue, that is, That h^e is not thereof culpable,
because the said Bishop of winchester, was not a Bishop, at the time of
offeringe the oathe. And yt was resolved by them all, that if the truth and
matter were such in deed, yt should for that be well received upon that
issue, and the jury shall try yt. Hitherto the words and sentence of all those
protestant judges. So that as by the Censure of the Lord Brook and the
judges then, the pretended Bishops of king Edwards time were clearly adiuged
to be noe Bishops: So the same opinion now in the time of Queen Elizabeth,
by both the Chief Justices, and all other Judges, is, that the pretended
Bishops of Q Elizabeth, her appointinge, were noe Bishops. Otherwise they would
not so disgracefully to their new noe Bishops, and Religion, have refused to
proceed to trial of that matter, and that Issue, with Bishop Boner, a
disgraced Man, and in case, where they themselves were to give Judgment. And to
make this more evident; in the next parliament, in the eight year of that
Queen by public decree, Statut. An. 8. Elizab. cap. 1.
or statute, they absolutely free Bishop Boner, and all others in his case,
from all penalty, and forfaicture, for refusing that oathe tendered by such
pretended Bishops: And for noe other reason, but that it was most manifest in
all true Judgment, that they were noe Bishops; being of necessity either made
by a woman, which they confess could not do yt; or by the pretended Bishops
of king Edwards making, utterly also (as before) condemned by law and the
Judges themselves. And yett of these twoe ab^urdities, that which was the worst,
and most absurd, to be made by a woman, incapable must needs be their case*
For the new Book of co^secr. statu An. 3. Ed 6. ca 12. Stat. 1. Mar. Book of
Article^ of Religion 1562 articul 36. Stat. An. 8. Elizab. c. 1.
form, and fashion, of making pretended Bishops, and priests in the time of
the child king, Edward the sixth, abolished by Queen Mary, was never revived
by the english protestants, until their book of Articles made in the fourth,
or fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, made in their convocation consisting (as
before is evident) only of lay men, without authority received yt: and was
never allowed by parliament until this, in the eight year of Queen Elizabeth.
So that by noe possibility, these after Acts, if they had been powerable in
religeous causes (the contrary whereof is evident) could make so many years
before pretended and unlawful Acts, and consecrations, now to be true and
lawful. Therefore these pretended protestant Bishops and Ministers can by noe
power, by their own proceedings, be lawful; wanting both true form, matter,
manner, men ordering, and the Acts, and Co^c. Floren. in ^nio^. will apud ^arkes
p. 137. 180. and Park ib. ^il^ sur^. p. ^2 mort. pa 2 Apol. p. 340 l. 4 c. 18
Relat. ca. 47, ^eild p. 202. 218.
functions themselves, as is before proved, and ^ppeareth, by the council of
^lorence, which D. Wille^, M. Parkes and others allow for general: which D.
Bil^on D. Mo^ton, their Relator of Religi^n, and D. Field, assure us has
supreme power, and authority, to command all whomsoever, to obey the
definitions thereof Neither need I appeal to general counsels, though their
grant in this Question: for by their own parl^ments, Articles, common
writings, and public doctrine, yt is more then evident, that their pretended
Bishops, by whom their ministers, and other pretended Bishops be made, be
noe more Bishops, then their ordina^y ministers, none at all, noe more then all
lay men be, noe more, nor so much, as king Edward 6. a child, Q. Elizabeth a
woman, and our present, and ever of me most honored king James were, or is,
by their proceedings, which is thus made evident by their own Religion.

Every distinct order has some really and essentially distinct Act, and
office, to execute, which others, from which it is distinguished, have not, nor
can perform: But the pretended calling, of protestant Bishops in England, by
their own proceedings, has noe such really and essentially distinct Act, or
office: Therefore by their ow^e Religion, it is noe distinct order. The m^ior
proposition is evidently true, for, every dist^^ct Order, power, faculty, or
ability spiritual, or other, is so known and distinguished. The minor
proposition is thus proved by themselves. For whereas our Pontifical, and
schools, ascribe to episcopal Order, Po^tifical. in Ord. Sacer. and ep^schol.
insacr ord. in 3. p. d. Th. etc. Articles of Relig. Artie sacram. etc
these Acts, to consecrate, Christne, give twoe sacraments, Orders, and
confirmation, these protestants by their public Articles, and practice both
deny all these: and yett ascribe noe other peculiar Act or office to their
pretended Bishops make ministers, and confirm children. I answer, they deny
both them to be Sacraments, and so having noe mystical consecration, but
being only ceremonies, may be used by men, noe Bishops, and so in all
protestants Presbyteries pretended ministers (allowed by them) are made by
only ministers: and where the ceremony of confirmation is allowed by
protestants, out of England, it is al so ministered by only ministers, and if
these do not give grace effectually as they say, it is not necessary to
appoinct a distinct order for their ministration. So there is now nothing left
for these pretended Bishops, but pretended jurisdiction; but this is from the
king, that is, Queen Elizabeth, and king Edward 6. before supreme in this
business, and so by their Religion more truly and better Bishops, then Ridley,
Parker, Whiteguift, or any of that pretended calling; And as the pretended
Commissioners, Stat. Ed. 6. Stat. An. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. Fox tom. 2 in Ed. 6.
and Eliz. Holin. supr. etc.
of king Edward, and Q. Elizabeth, related by their Statutes, Fox,
Hollinshed, and others, withal power from them to reform Religion, were in
these men's doctrine, more worthy the name of Bishops, then they which have that
name, but want that office, and power* So his majesty in their Religion, by
his supreamacie* inspirituall things, may by his letters patents, and
commission, not only with king Edward, and Q Elizabeth, authorize his Fox in
Ed v. in B. Card Stowe Hollinsh. Speed, etc. An. 1 Eliza in histor.
lay Counselors, and mere temporal men, to Judge, deprive, and depose
Bishops, but to be allowed for Bishops, Archbishops (and higher) patriarchs,
without any consecration, or other ceremony. They which gave this power to Q.
Elizabeth, and our Sovereign, were only lay men, and neither any of them in
particul^r, or all in general equal unto him, that is supreme; Therefore it
is his power by their doctrine, at his pleasure without any ministers
concurrence, or consent, to take order, (and never more need, then when their
Religion is become a mockery of all true Religion) in these affairs: and to
make any the meanest subject, without any im^osing of hands, speaking, or
prayer over him, or other complement in such business, greater in calling, and
dignity, then he that bears the name, Archbishop and primate of all England
among them.

But the present (so named) Archbishop of Barlowe, was a true Bishop and made
by Roman, or true catholic Consecration, in the time of king Henry 8. And
so in time of necessity such as their beginning was, might make a Bishop.
Alas, I cannot tell, how to make they do not differ in any essential, or
material point of Religion, such as this is. But put into this perplexity, I
must use this Dilemma: if their first opinion, That the Pope is Antichrist, and
cannot make Bishops, and priests, be true, then their pretended Bishops, and
ministers claymed by his ordination, are not true, and lawful, but void, and
inualidate: If their second opinion, contradictorie to the first be true; that
the Pope is not Antichrist, but the true Vicar, Priest, and Bishop of Christ,
(as one or the other is most true) Then first (because it is not my nature to
give yt) they must take this infamous and notorious lie amongst them by their
own Judgment* Secondly as their brethren before have told them, they must
confess, that the Pope of Rome, and Offer supr. page 16.
that church, and in them God and Christ Ihesus himself have had great
wrong, and indignitis offered unto them; and that the protestant churches are
schismatic, in forsakinge the union, and communion with them. Thirdly, that
their extremest and bloody persecutions against the sacred priests, and
Catholics of England, have long time been, and still continued, are yett
most barbarous and Antichristian.

Fourthly, that they must do penance, and seek absolution of this (by his
majesty's Censure) their Mother church.

Fifthly, they must still continue in this state, K. speech in parlam.
recantinge their former false brauings, and heresies, or else never to be
credited hereafter. This is all the choice I can propose unto then, let them
make their own election. And which soever they choose, this is their miserable
and desperate case, that they have not now any one true, or lawful Bishop, or
priest (except some few unhappy Renegadoes, from the Roman church) in England,
by their own proceedings. For if I should grant (which Mason proves not)
that Barlowe was a true Bishop, made in the time of king Henry 8 and a
Consecrator of Matthew Parker, which so many their own testimonies before,
deny; yet^ M. Mason has told us before, that his commission, power, and
purpose was, to make him an Archbishop, according to the form of the
protestant Mason sup. in co^secrat. Matthew. park.
statutes, which (as before) was only to give him false jurisdiction without
order: And yett as I have proved by them s^lu^s, true jurisdiction makes not a
true and lawful Bishop. Secondly whatsoever is the Catholic opinion in making
Bishops, and whether only one, or more consecratinge Bishops, of necessity
are required, (whereof we do not dispute) because their commission was only
Stat. Henr. 8. of making Bishops stat. An. 1. Eliz. reviving yt.
according to the form of their statutes; the statutes of king Henry 8. and
Queen Elizabeth, (as before) required four Bishops, and so their practice is
in all M. Masons pretended consecrations of, Young, Grindall, Packhurst, Mason
in cons. of young, etc.
Coxe, Iuell, Pilkinton, Sands, Downame, Bentham, and the rest, though
pretending to be only ordinary Bishops: But for Archbishops their statutes of
necessity require four, and being repealed by Q Elizabeth. Thirdly M. Mason
sup. council. Flor. in union.
Mason, and others grant, with the general Council of Florence, that nothing
is so essential in true ordination, as the true and lawful form, and
matter. And yett M. Mason, and his directors be witnesses, that Parker, by
whom they all now claim, was so far from having the catholic true form,
matter, and manner of consecration, That they plainly acknowledge, He was made
and admitted far otherwise, and in different manner to all true Maso^ineo^s. of
Matthew. Park.
Archbishops of Canterbury before him, from S. Augustines time, and our first
Christianity.

Fourthly, if by impossibility, against all those evidence, and without any
Rituall, or Order at all (then all both ours and their own as before,
condemned,) not one, or any part of any used, or lawful to be used, any man
could be seduced to think, that in their beginning they had true Bishops, of
them which had been made priests, by catholic consecration: yett because M.
Mason, his Mason in consecr.
directors, and others, and their general practice assure us, that noe man,
not being a true and lawful priest, can possibly be made a Bishop, Stowe
Hollinsh. hi^t. An. 1. Eliz. Articles of Relig. etc.
And both Barlowe, and all their other pretended Consecrators, were professed
enemies to preisthood, sacrifice, and holy oblation for the quick and dead,
and that form was condemned by their laws, and a quite contrary by statutes
of king Edward, and Q. Elizabeth made, allowed, and ever since practiced
against yt: these men, as I said, cannot possibly now have either true Bishop
or priest among them, all such in probability dead long since.

But M. Mason obiecteth, that true preisthood Mason in co^secrat. of priests.
is not sacrificing preisthood, nor given by such form, but by these words,
Rec^aue the Holy Ghost, whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, and whose
sins you retain, they are retained. And so the Roman church ever
retayninge in consecration, those wo^des, as well as those of offeringe
sacrifice for the living and dead, they still retained true preisthood, and
the protestants by that title and means received yt from them. I Answer him,
this is but his new and singular invention; for D. Sutchffe speaking their
priests are not called to preach and baptize^, but to Sutcliff. ag. D. Kell
page 4. Field l. of the church etc.
sacrifice Christ's body and blood under the accidents of bread and wine, for
the quick, and the dead. Like is the doctrine of the rest. And allthough we
grant the former words of losing and bindinge, to be requisite to absolve
from sins, yett neither we, nor protestants truly relating our doctrine, can
call yt, the principal act of preisthood, whereof we dispute, and which if it
^ee wanting, the secondary is not given. For proof of this M. Mason himself
brings more testimonies, out of scriptures, Counsels, and fathers, then ever
he, or protestants will answer. I must be breife, Therefore Mason in
sacrific^. etc.
I urge him but upon these his graunts. Christ was a priest after the order of
M^lchizedech, and so was to offer sacrifice according to that Order, for as
the Apostle says, Every high priest is to offer sacrifice to God for the
people, therefore he grants, that Christ's body and blood, given or offered,
to God, for the people, is a true sacrifice. Which Christ manifestly affirmed
to be done, at his institution of this sacrifice, when he said* this is my
body which is gi^en for you, my blood which is shedd for you in remission of
synns. Otherwise he had never performed the function of his preisthood, after
the order of Melchisedech. Therefore seeing Christ's body was given, and his
blood shed both for the quick and the dead, and we are priests after that
order, we are by our preisthood to offer sacrifice for the people, because the
Apostle says every high priest, Archicireus, is to d^e yt, and to be a
priest and high priest, differ not in the preisthood, office, and sacrifice,
but in the Archi, to be higher or lower, greater or less in dignity, and
Christ offering his body, and blood, for the quick and dead, and giving power
to those whom he made priests, to do that, which he then did, Hoc facite,
do you this, which I do, priests also must needs have that power, and that
power be the proper office of Holy preisthood. For at that time were the
Apostles made priests, otherwise we do not find, where any power is
communicated unto them, to be ministers of this so commanded, and recommended
sacracrament. And otherwise S. Thomas not present, when the words of binding
and losing, were spoken unto the Apostles, was not a priest in the doctrine of
protestants, admitting nothing but scriptures in such cases* Neither can those
words, whos^ syns you forgive, they are forgiven, and whose syns you retain,
they are retained, confer that power, which belongs to priests, if they were
not to offer sacrifice, but only to minister sacraments in the Religion of
protestants, which do not teach, that either the priest or sacrament, but the
faith of the Receauer forgiueth syns. And so essential it is to preisthood,
to offer sacrifice, that those which in our languadge we call priests,
sacrifice, and altar, be in other tongues, things inseparable, and
Correlatiues, both in name and deed, Thusiastis, Thusia, Thusiast^rion,
sacrificer, sacrifice, and place where there sacrificer, or priest offers
sacrifice. Which inseparable connection between sacrifice and altar, priest and
sacrifice, D. Morton before acknowledges in these words. We cannot dislike
t^^ sentence of D. Reynoldes, concerning the mutual Morto^ App. pa. 16^. l. 2.
ca. 6. sect. 1. Reinolds confer. page 550.
Relation and dependence between an altar and sacrifice: But grant, that
altar does as naturally and necessarily infer a sacrifice, as a shrine does a
Saint, a father a son. And further these: Cardinal Bellarmine said truly,
viz: sacrifice and preistood are Relatiues. Therefore seeing Relatiues be
inseparable; preisthood and to offer sacrifice, cannot be divided, but
inuiolably united and coniected together. Therefore the holy general Council,
denied such by these protestants before, defines thus. The form Conc. Flor.
in union.
of preisthood is this: Receive power to offer sacrifice in the church, for the
living and dead, in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy
ghost. Neither is this by these protestants other doctrine, then was taught
from the beginning, but it was ever so constantly and general taught in the
church, that it was adiuged and condemned for heresy in Aerius to deny yt. D.
Felds words thereof are these: Arius condemned the custom of the church, in
Field p. 138 l 3. cap. 29. Couell exa^. page 114.
naminge the dead at the Alt^r, and offerringe the Sacrifice of Eucharist for
them, for this his, ^ash and inconsiderate boldness, and presumption, in
condemning the universal church of Christ, he was iust^y condemned. Therefore
protestants have noe preisthood, they are justly condemned for heretics, by
their own censure, and the Roman sacrificing preisthood both by the present,
and primative universal church of Christ, is most holy. Which is further
confirmed by these protestants authorities: first their allowed greek church
censureth these: The doctrine Field of that church Gennad. Schol. def. 5 c. 3.
Field p. 238 Hull Romans pol pa. 86. Middleton papistom p. 64* 45. 46. 51. 47.
48. 49. Relation of Religion. Casau. resp. ad Card. per p. 51. 52. etc
of purgatory, prayer and sacrifice for the dead, was a tradition of the
Apostles, equal with the word of God, as D. Field writes M. Hull says, Leo,
S. Leo, the Pope, appointed Masses for the dead. M. Middleton says: It was a
tradition of the primative church received from the fathers, to pray for the
dead, and beg mercy of God for them, the dead were prayed for in the
public liturgies of Basile, Crisostome, and Epiphanius. And their Relator
wittnesseth, that these Masses, and form of sacrifice, were public in the
church. Therefore M Isaac Casaubon, calling yt the Religion of our king, and
saying, he writes by the kings command, and from his mouth, writes these:
neither is the king ignorant, nor den^eth, that the fathers of the primative
church, did acknowledge one sacrifice in Christian Religion, that succeeded in
the place of the sacrifices of Moses law. D. Morton goes higher, even to the
Rabbis before Christ, granting with his friend Morto^ app. in sacrifice, etc.
Morto^ app. pa. 395. l ^.
Theodore. Bibliander, that they taught this sacrifice of the Christians and
called yt Thoda. And he adds these: These testimonies of Rabbi Cahana, Rabbi
Judah, Rabbi Simeon, are such, if yet^ they were such, that they make so
directly for the Romish article of transsubstantiatio^, that the most Romish
Dostors for the space of allmoste a thousand years, after Christ, did not in
so express terms publish this mystery to the world. They are more plain and
pregnant for transsubstantion, then are the sayings of transsubstantiators
themselves. page 396.
Hitherto, D. Morton. And therefore allthough I now dispute for a sacrificing
preisthood, and external sacrifice, and not of transubstantiation, or what it
is in particular, that being impertinent to my present purpose; yett because D.
Couell with public allowance, before has told M. Morton, that priests (to use
Couell def. page 8^.
his words:) Have power imparted to them by God over Christ's natural body,
which is himself, which antiquity does call the making of Christ's body, it
has to dispose of that flesh, which was given for the life of the world: and
that blood which page 105.
was powered out to redeem souls. And M. Casaubon grants for our king, and
their protestants church, that the sacrifice offered by priests is Christ's
body (to use his words) the same object, Casaub sup page 50. 51.
and thing, which the Roman church believes Therefore, I say, because D.
Morton acknowledges himself but an Alephbethorian in Morto^pr^a^.
Hebrew, not able to Judge of those Rabbines, and I may not dispute, but by
protestants, his f^end and fellow protestant Franciscus Starearus Hebraicae
literaturae callentissimus, most excellent in Hebrew learning, as the Franck
fort protestant allowers of those Rabbines name him, Praefat. prot in p. G^l.
Fra^^^ fur^i An. 1602.
and they themselves are witnesses, do call those and other, testimonies of
the Rabbines before Christ. Irrefragabilia testimonia: undeniable testimonies
of the kingdom of Christ, that all men except madd against the Religion of
Christ, might know the truth. Therefore by all kind of Testimonies in the
Judgment of these protestants, as scriptures, traditions, Counsels, the whole
church of Christ, holy fathers, and the protestant proceedings themselves, the
sacrificing preistood of the Roman church, is Stat. An. 8. Eliz. cap. 1. Fox
in Ed. 6. Regist. e^d. pereg. in Lo^d Reinol. Caluinot. Resp. lustit english
min^sters in state of treason, and protesta^t^^n felony by their doctrine.
Method. pataren. l. decret. ab init. Iams Manuscrip in Can^trig.
lawful, sacred, and most reverent: And the pretended english Bishops, made
either by virtue of the Queens letters patents or commission, as the words of
the statute be, as king Edward made Ihon of Alasco, or by the new toyeish
book of ordination, or otherwise, and their ministry derived from them, is
void, ridiculous, and usurped, none at all.

But before I conclude this Chapter, because I marvel, more then urgent
occasions mouinge me. with what color of reason, or least show of common
civility, this false, adulterate, vnsacrificing pretended ministry foretold
by that badge, of taking away the public sacrifice, and making them priests,
that are mere lay men, by that Holy Bishop S. Methodius, about 1400. years
ago wa^ranted by M. James the protestant in his book of english manuscripts
and do unconscionably persecute the church of Rome, especial the preisthood
thereof, and yett claim and honor their pretended ministry from thence: I
humbly crave leave of his Majesty, my most honored Lords, and other
temporal Rulers in authority, that as I have confuted the vain pretenses of
these men, and demonstratiuely proved by our greatest adversaries, the dignity
of our most holy consecration; so in one protestant Argument, I may prove the
absurdity, and p^rill of protestants clayming from Rome: And thus I argue: All
men borne within this Realm or any other dominions under the Regiment of
Queen Elizabeth An 27. Eli. cap. 2.
in the 27. year of her reign, and ^ynce the feast of the nativity of S.
Ihon Baptist, in the first year of her reign made priests, deacons, or
religeous, or ecclesiastical parsons, made or ordained by any authority,
power, or jurisdiction, derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of Rome,
are Traitors and guilty of high treason: And every parson Wittnigly and
willingly that receive, relieve, comfort, aid or mayntaine any such priest,
deacon religeous or ecclesiastical parson being at liberty, (as all saying
service in their churches be) ^^ to be adiuged a felone, without benefit of
clargie, and suffer death lose, and forfaite, as in case of one attainted of
felonye: But all protestant english Bishops, and Ministers as their Doctors
before have told us were so made, by authority, and power, and ordination
derived, challenged, and pretended by them from the Sea of Rome; and above fi^e
months since that feast of Saint Ihon Baptist in the month of December
followinge, when Matthew Parker their first protestant Archbishop was made
their Sutcliff ag. ^^ll ^a. 4. 5.
Archbishop and first minister maker by authotie and power from the Sea of
Rome, as D. Suttcliffe D. Field, M. Mason, the present protestant Field sup.
Mason epi. ded. in co^sec of Matthew Park. An. 2. Elizab. etc
Archbishop of Canterbury, his director Encourager, and others do testify:
Therefore all english ministers by them be traitors: and all reliuers,
receauers, comforters, ayders, maintainers, or wittingly and willingly
communicating with them, as their wives, children, all goinge to their service,
or sermons, be felons, and to suffer death, lose and forfaite as in such case.
Both propositions be confessed by these protestants for true, and undoubted;
the first being the express words of their parlamen^, and highest
commaundinge law, in the seven and twentieth year, of Queen Stat. an. 27.
Eliz. cap. 2. Stat parla. 1. Jacob. etc
Elizabeth, and confirmed in the first parliament of his majesty. The second
proposition, is the general doctrine of their protestant Archbishops, Bishops,
and Doctors at this present, as is proved before. And if any man of
singularity among them shall deny yt: he incurreth the former inconvenience
to desminister and vnbishop all their so named english protestant Bishops, and
ministers, and make them to be only by the making of a woman, Queen
Elizabeth, which marred many but could make none, as these protestants have
demonstrated before. If any man object; that all Book^ of Ordin. in ord.
Deaco^s. etc
they are made deacons, as appears in their Rituall, of so named,
consecration, and so strictly observing the protestant Religion that they
persecute the contrary, are by this means exempt^d: I answer: there is noe
such provision, or exemption for such men, in that sta^u^^. But the exemption
there, only concerns, ^eare.
and enfraunchizeth catholic priests, that then were come into England, and
had the time of fourt^e days to depart, or such as should after come into
England, and within three days, so (as they term yt) conform themselves,
and noe others, for evidence whe^^^f the very words of that provision and
(...), be these, that follow. Provided (...) that this Ast shall not extend
to any such Ie^ (...) ^eminarie priest, or other such priest, deacon (...)
Religeous, or ecclesiastical parson, as is before mentioned, as shall at any
time, wit^ in the said ^ourtie days, or within three days after that he
shall hereafter come into this Realm, or any other her ^ighnes dominions,
submit himself to some Archbishop, Bishop of this Realm, or to some Justice
of peace within the county, where he shall arrive or land, and do there
upon truly and sincerely before the same Archbishop, Bishop, or such Justice
of peace, take the said oathe set forth in Anno p^imo, and by writing under
his hand confess and ackno^ledge, and from thence forth continue his due
obedience unto highne^ laws, etc. Hitherto the exemption of their law, which
by noe means possible can be applied to their english ministers, none of them
being in either of those only two exempted cases. Therefore, neither by the
laws of God, or this kingdom, it can be lawful to communicate with english
ministers in their service, and Religion, without extreme, capital, and
damnable peril, by their own testimonies, M. Speed Theat page 421.
Speed adds all communicating with married priests, are excommunicated by
general Council.

The 3. particular Protestant Demonstration, for Catholics just Recusancie,
is: Because the not preaching of the word of God, a thing essential to the
true church of Cbrist, in Protestant doctrine, is not among them, by their
own testimonies.
AND by this it is evident, that they have not the other two protestant Notes
and properties, of the true church, preaching of the Articu. 19.
puer word o^f God, and sacraments duly ministered in the congregation of
faithful men: for as the sacraments cannot be duly ministered, where there
be not due Ministers of them: so the puer word of God cannot possibly,
lawfully, and truly be preached without preachers of yt: for sacraments duly
ministered, and due ministers of them, as also the word of God truly preached,
and true preachers of yt, be correlatiues which mutuo se ponunt and aufferunt,
come and go together, as logitians and reason teach us. Therefore S. Paul
knowing how vnpbssible a thing it is, for the truth of Christ's Gospel to be
preached without preachers, and true ministers lawfully ordained and sent,
expresses it by this gradation, as these protestants themselves translate him.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have (...). ca. 10 verse. 14. 15.
not believed; and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach, except
they be sent? And therevppon these english protestants in their most
authori^ed Arti^les, utterly disable all that are not lawfully called to these
functions, And D. Couell gives a reason of it in these words: The church has
Art minist. in the congreg. art. 23 Couell exa. page 130.
noe reason to hear their voice, whom Christ has not commanded to feed his
she^p^.

Secondly there is made demonstration before, first in general, that all
grounds and rules in divinity, scriptures, traditions, Popes, Counsels,
fathers, etc. are against their doctrines and opinions: as also that in
particular in every chief Article questioned between Catholics and them,
they are in inexcusable error, by their own testimonies; therefore the pure
word cannot be preached by them, their church consequently is not by their
own definition, the true church, nor any hope of salvation to be had in their
Religion: And so they are not to be communicated with in such business.

Further I argue thus: noe society or congregation of men having by their own
confession, errors in matters of faith; to be rectified and amended, having
erroneous conceits, desiring, se^king, or wanting reformation in matters of
belief, can be said to have the pure word of God preached with them: But
these english protestants by their own confession are in this state: Therefore*
the pure word of God is not preached with them. The mayor proposition is
evidently true: for as nothing is so undoubtedly true, as the word of God,
which by noe possibility can be untrue, and the pure word of God cannot be
vnpure and false: So errors in matters of faith to be rectified, amended,
etc. cannot by any means be said to be pure, the word of God, or truth, but
the quite opposite, vnpure, the word of the devil a liar, and falsehood. The
minor proposition is thus proved by these protestants: first D. Willet is so
absolute, that their english protestant church is erroneous and false in
doctrine, that M. Parkes writes of him in these words. M. Willet exclaymeth
most bitterly Parkes ag. lymbo p. ^0* Couell exa^. p. 212. 213.
against the protestants english church in the preface before his Antilogie. D.
Couell turning his speech to our king for Correction, has these words. The
church of England which l^et^ prostrate at your graces feet, desires not to
be^ favored in her errors, nor to have her corruptions warranted by
authority. D. Wiliet tells us it, Willet sup. and page 43. petition of 1000.
etc. Answer of the university. King speech 19 mart. An. 1603.
has erroneous conceits it has errors in doctrine. The petition of the
millinarie Puritans write how erroneous the english protestants church is, and
far from having the pure word of God preached in yt. And the two universities
in their Answer, submit their Religion to be corrected or altered as the
king pleased. And the kings Majesty himself in public parliament uses
these word: I could wish from my heart, that laying willfullnes aside, we might
meet in the midst. I would for my own part be content to meet them in the
midd way, that all novelties might be renounced. These he testifies of the
english protestant Religion. And in the Conference at Hampton Court, as their
Bishop Barlowe relates it: concludes this point as all the rest, that
Conference page 47.
errors in matters of faith might be rectified and amended. Then if the king
and whole protestant assembly, and all the rest concluded, that the errors in
matters of faith might be rectified, etc. Their opinion was, that they had
errors in matters of faith, and so not the pure word of God, which by noe
possibility can admit such errors: nor any one least error at all in Religion.

Again thus I argue: None that have been condemned about articles of faith,
or as heretics by general council, have the pure word of God, or may be
communicated with, in such religeous things: but the english protestants are
such, by their own, judgments: Therefore they have not the pure word preached,
nor may be communicated with in Religion. The mayor proposition is* evidently
true, and shall more lardgely be handled in my chapter, that these englsh
protestants by their own testimonies are heretics, in the mean time D.
Couell writing how we may not communicate with such men, does thus define
them. Heretics Couell exa^. page 199.
are they, who directly gaynesay some article of our faith, and are, or have
been condemned, by seem general Council. The minor proposition, that our
english protestants have been thus condemned by their own confession, not
only by some one general Council, which this protestant D. allows for a
lawful condemnation of men for heretics, but by many Cou^^^lls acknowledged
by themselves for general, is proved by them before: And for this place their
generally allowed Article shall suffice, set down in these words. General
Counsels may err and sometime have erred, even in things pertaining unto God,
wherefore things ordained by them as necessary to salvation, have neither
strength nor authority, unless yt may be declared that they be taken out of
Holy scripture. And how declaration with them in this point consists in their
own private deduction (for they can never have any to be esteemed public
against a public general) is thus testified by M* Wotton and the authorized
priuiledg to this book; deduction from scripture Wotto^ def. of perk. pa. 467.
makes a matter of faith. By which Rule, if private men may so censure
general counsels, there never was, or can be any heresy. Therefore by this
doctrine in all probability the english protestants assuredly know how they
have been condemned for heretics, and are as such to be avoided in
communication of Religion. Otherwise they would not so extol private and
fallible deduction, above the authority of general Counsels, to say that
these may err, and their private deductions are such warrant for them, that
they should privilege a man to write in all their names in this manner: We
acknowledge both and hold all matters* Wotto^ sup. page 467.
concluded logically out of the scriptures, to be the word of God, as well as
if they were expressly set down in yt, word for vvord^. And yett they
generally teach, as before, that their church has errors in doctrine, and that
neither prince, nor any among them is free from error. Then Willet art. p. 43*
150.
noe man is left to make these their pretended infallible deductions from
scripture. Therefore the pure word of God neither is, nor by their writings,
can be preached with them.

Further I argue in this manner; Whatsoever is confidently taught, printed, and
published, by men of Religion, is to be allowed and granted by all that
acknowledge themselves to be wholly of the same Religion, with them, in all
things esse^tiall: But the having of the pure word preached, though essential
in Religion, is yet denyde by these consenting protestants to be in their
church: Therefore they must grant it is wanting with them. The mayor
proposition is evidently true, otherwise they should not agree, but dissent in
essential things. The minor is thus proved by these agreing protestants. M.
Jacob one of their agreing protestants writeteh in these words: the protestants
flock Jacob Reas page 52. pa. 52. 53. Jacob reas. episc. dedic. page 51.
of England cannot expect that heaven shall be opened unto them And thus
further: The english p^otestant Religion diminishes the honor, and dignity of
Christ, impugneth the foundation of saving faith, and is contrary to Gods word.
And thus again: Christ's own ordinances necessary to be enjoyed for our
souls health, are wanting in England, t^ere is noe ordinary means of
salvation Jacob exhor page 82. page 79. 8:
to be had, in the english protestant Religion, every man wants the
heavenly food, and perseruatiue, appointed for us, of God, the english
protestant church wants the ordinary means appointed of God, for salvation
to every man Their agreing protestant author of the book named Advertisement,
sp^eking of the errors of their english Advertisement An. 1604. page
protestant church, writes thus: Millions of millions run to eternal
flames, Christianity is denied in England by public authority. Their
Certain them* An. 1605. p. 4^
thus well agreing Author of certain demands has these words: The
protestant Religion of England cannot be kept without breach of the
commaundments. Therefore the pure word of God is not preached with them, their
church not true, their Religion false, noe salvation to be hoped with them,
therefore noe communion in Religion to be yielded unto them. And this is
sufficiently granted by the protestant Bishops themselves, in their public
Conference at Hampton Court, where their behavior and confession was this, as
the protestant Author of the first copy, joined to that of their Bishop
Barlowes, sets down in these words: Canterbury, London, Winchester, fell
down on their knees, and desired, that all things might remain, Conference
at Hampto^ copy 1. annexed to B. Barlovves printed by Iho^windet. Copy 2 sup
least the papists should think we have been in error. And this is
confirmed by a second protestant writer, and Copy of that conference in this
manner: Bishops of Canterburye, London and Winchester making earnest suite,
that all things might stand as they did, least the papists should take
offense, who might say, we would persvvad^ them to come to a church having
errors in yt. Like is the testimony of a third Copy 3.
protestant Copy followinge in the same place. And D. Morton concludes this
matter with this general protestant Maxim, and ground in their doctrine: It
is a general Maxim, there is none in the church, whose judgment is of
infallible Morton Apol. part. 2. page 315.
authority. Then an other Maxim is, that the protestants church is erroneous,
and has not true faith, for every article of faith being ^euealed of God, is
most certain and infallibly true.

The 4. particular protestant demonstration, is: because english protestants by
their own testimonies, want the due ministration of Sacraments: an other
thing also essential to the true church, by their own Religion.
AS I have proved in the former Chapter, that the protestants of England have
not the pure word of God preached among them, because by their own
testimony they have noe true and lawful preachers: So I now demonstrate,
that they have not the due ministration of Sacraments, because they want a true
and lawful ministry, and sacred ministers to administer them: for where the
due and right Actor and doer of a thing is not, the thing cannot be duly
and righly done, because every external Action is an emanation or doing of the
effect from the agent.

Secondly I argue thus: These protestants have not sacraments: Therefore not
sacraments duly ministered. The consequence is evidently true: for where there
is noe action or thing to be done, there yt cannot be either duly or
unduly done; because yt can by noe ways be done. The Antecedent that these
protestants have not sacraments, I thus demonstrate from themselves: for first
they deny five of those seven which the Apostolic Roman church receaueth,
only retayning twoe as they themselves affirm, that is Baptism, and the
Lords supper as they name the most holy sacrament of the Altar. So that if
but one of these twoe, is want^ng with them, they cannot be said to have
sacraments in the plural number, as their definition before contains, but
one only sacrament; and if that is either wanting with them, or not duly
ministered by them, they have none at all duly ministered. Now that the blessed
sacrament of the altar is wanting in their church, I thus demonstrate. First
because as they acknowledge, it is to be celebrated by a lawfully consecrated
priest, or minister, as some of them rather call him, yt self being a
sacrament of greatest consecration, and they have not any such consecrated
priest or minister in their church; therefore this so sacred and consecrated
holy sacrament, not being without such consecration and priest, is not in their
church, and their bread and wine is noe more a sacrament then that which in a
tavern is seet on the table by the drawer of the wine.

And for this present it is manifestly demonstrated by D. Couell, and his
priuiledging protestants, who entreating of lawfully called and sacred church
priests, or ministers has these words: To these parsons God imparted power
over Couell def. of Hook-pa. 87.
his mystical body which is the society of souls, and over that natural,
which is himself, for the knittiuge of both in one, a work which antiquity
does call the making of Christ's body. And in an other book he writes thus:
The power of the Couell mod. exam. page 105.
ministry by blessing visible Elements, it makes them invisible grace, it
gives daily the holy ghost, it has ^o dispose of that flesh, which was given
for the life life of the world: and that blood which was powered out to redeem
souls. Where we see a divine and miraculous consecration, and grace belonging
to both these holy Sacraments, of Order to consecrate, and the most blessed
Eucharist the body and blood of Christ to be consecrated: both which as is
manifest, are wanting in the english protestants church, by their own both
practice and writings. And to make this matter more evident, if it could be,
and further confirm, that these men want this sacred Order and Sacrament of
preisthood to minister this and the other sacraments, he writes of yt again
in this manner. It is a power, Couell def. sup. pa. 87. 88. 89. 91.
which neither prince nor potentate, king nor Caesar on earth ca^ give.
Ministerial power is a work of separation, because it seuereth them, that
have yt, from other men, and makes them a special Order, consecrated unto the
service of the most high, in things, wherewith others may not ineddle. The
Character of Order is an active power, which gives an Ability, publicly to
administer the sacraments. Then the pretended ministry of England, not being
of this holy Order, as is proved from them before, has noe power to minister
sacraments, especial this which consists in so holy consecration, which
they not only want, but deny to be exercised.

Therefore there remains but one Sacrament Baptism, which these protestants
can by any sembl^n^e of reason make claim unto, and if this were granted,
yett they are allreadie by themselves condemned, not having either sacraments
duly ministered, or sacraments how soever duly or unduly ministered, and so
have noe note of the true church by their own doctrine. But I will also show
that by their own testimony they either have not this sacrament, or not duly
ministered. And thus I argue by their doctrine. Noe ministringe of Baptism by
women, lay men, or any but a lawfully admitted minister is duly ministered: But
with protestants in England lawful ministers do not baptize by their own
testimony: Therefore Baptism with them is noe true baptism, or not duly
ministered by their own Judgment. The mayor proposition is proved by his
Majesty's Censure in their Hampton Conference, where their Bishop Barlowe
speaking of three things to be then cheefely entreated writes thus: The third
was private baptism: if private Co^fere^ce at Hampt. Court. pa. 8
for place, his majesty thought it agreed with the use of the primative
church: if for parsons, that any but a lawful minister might baptize any
Where, he utterly disliked: and in this point his highness grew somewhat
earnest, against the baptizing by Women, and laickes The first of the other
Copy 1 sup.
annexed protestant copies reports the Kings speech, in this manner: He
spoke bitterly against Copy. 2.
private Baptism, saying he had as live an ape as a woman should bapti^e ^^s
child* The next protestant copy of that conference speaks thus: The king
concluded against private Baptism. By which it seems, that Baptism
ministered by any but a truly and lawfully ordered priest, or minister was not
Baptism: And then to prove the minor proposition, the english protestants of
england have not true baptism. Because as is proved before, by their own
writings, they have noe true ministers. And so by their own public
communion book, teaching, comm. book tit. publ. Baptism.
that none are admitted into the Church of Christ but by Baptism: the
protestants of England by their own doctrine, are noe Christians* Which
abs^rditie to follow upon this doctrine, joined with the defect of their
protestant ministry, may seem to have been perceived by D. Bilson their
protestant Bishop of Winchester, for that protestant Author of Copy 1. of
Conference sup.
the first copy writes thus: The Bishop of Winchester said, that if h^^
took away private baptism, he ouerthrevv all antiquity.

Further I argue thus: The protestants of England by their own testimonies to
be used in the next chapters, and as appears also by them allreadie, are
heretics: therefore by their doctrie printed, their children are not to be
baptized: And so by them there is noe baptism private or not private among
them because they only baptize children. The Antecedent is evident: and the
consequent published Ormerod dialog. 1.
by M. Ormerod in these words: Children of heretics, and of such as by
excommunication, are cut from the church, may not be baptized* Therefore by
these protestant positions, noe protestants in England being either to baptize,
or be baptized, there is noe Baptism among them, much less Baptism duly
ministered, which is the point in question. And so not any one sacrament to
give grace among them: therefore noe marvel if so great and profane sins
and impieties reign among them, as they testify hereafter.

Further: whereas it is proved, that Christ instituted all those seven
sacraments which be used in the Roman church, with their grace, matter,
form, etc. these men do not retain any one, or not duly ministered by their
own testimonies: Therefore noe true church with them, nor spiritual communion
to be had with them.

To these I add this argument from themselves, so agreing together in all
material things such as sacraments be: noe company where the sacraments be
not, or not duly ministered, is the true church, or to be communicated within
Religion: But the english protestant supposed church by their own testimonies,
is such: Therefore it is not the true church, nor to be communicated with in
Religion, the Articul. 19
mayor proposition consists of their public, and Authorized article of
Religion.

The minor is thus proved by these agreing protestants, M. Ormerod relates
their sentence in these words: among the protestants, sacraments Ormer pict
purit. l. 3. and dial 1.
are wickedly mangled, and profaned, yea and wickedly ministered. For
confirmation whereof, their Bishop Barlowe has thus written, by the testimony
of their late Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Lord Chauncellor before the
king: The vicar of ^a^^sdale was proved before Co^fe^e^ce at Hampton page 99.
the Lord Archbishop to deal bread out of a baskett for the communion, every
man putting in his hand, and taking out a piece. The protestant Author of the
book named, An abridgment Abridgme^t page 72.
of Lincoln dioces, writes thus, of their publicly allowed practical of
Religion; It appoints sundry things, that tend directly to the profanation,
of the holy sacraments, either by prostituting them to unworthy parsons, or
administringe them irreverently. And D. Willet the styled Professor of
divinity, seems to be of the same opinion; And therefore coueteth to
retain a name of a church unto them, though they have noe sacrament at all,
not b^ptisme yt self to be ministered in yt: whereupon his words be these:
It is ^rr^neous to think that Baptism^ Willet An til pa. 127.
and the church can not be sepera^ed.

The 5. Demonstration, is: Because these protestants manifestly acknowledge,
that their pretended church is not the true church of Christ.
AND by this it is evidently demonstra^ed by these protestants against
themselves, that so long time pretending to be ref^^ners of Religion, and
church, they are now convinced by their own Testimonies, not to have the true
church, but rather noe church of Christianity at all. For wheresoever the
pure word of God is not preached, the sacraments duly ministered and lawfully
called ministers to do these things, there is not the true church, but rather
noe christian church at all: But as is proved by these english protestants
such is their st^te and condition: Therefore they either have noe christian
church at all, or at the least noe true church by their own confession.
Therefore noe spiri^uall communion to be had with them, both propositions are
granted an^ proved by ^heses protestants before, and further may be confirmed
by these words of D. Field for the ma^or proposition: There is and always
has been a visible church, Field pa* 21
and that not consistinge of some fo^e scattered Christians, without order of
ministry, or use of sacraments: for all this we do most Willingly yield
unto, And again in this manner. In the Field sup. page 25.
church of God is fovvnde an entire profession of the saving truth of God,
Order of holy ministry, sacraments by virtue thereof a^ministred, and a
blessed* unity and fellowship of the people of God, etc. under the command
of lavvfull pastors and guides. And again in his second book he Field l. 2.
ca. 2. p. 40.
makes this a note inseparable: an union or connection of men in profession,
and use of sacraments, under lavvfull pastors. Therefore demonstration being
made, by these protestants themselves, that their Church so termed by them,
wants these things, which is the second proposition: The Conclusion that
their Congregation or pretended church, is noe church, or not the true church,
is manifestly true: and so not to be communicated within Religion.

Further from so well agreing protestants in all essential things, as they
teach us, I argue thus: Noe society or company of men affirmed by
themselves, or men agreing with them in all essential and material, points of
Religion, to be noe church or not the true church, can in conscience be taken
and esteemd by others differing from them in Religion, to be the true church,
and to be communicated with in sermons, service, Sacraments etc. But the
english protestants are in this condition* Therefore they have not the true
church, nor may be communicated with in such things. The mayor proposition is
evidently true: for noe testimony is greater to a man then his own judgment
understanding, and conscience, and of others not differinge, being an
internal law and direction unto all men. The minor Couell def. of Hook page
65. 75, page 74. Couell exa^. page 3* Ormerod pict purit. k. 1. Ormer dial. 1.
Field episc. dedicat. of the church Couell def. pa. 50. cont. Burg. p. 60.
Wotto^ def. p. 442. etc. D. Abbotag Hill. p. 101. 102. 236. 237. 247. dove
persu p. 32. mort. satisf p. 18. Sutcl. ag. kell page 42 i^ ill. Antil. p. 15.
Middl. pap. pa. 201 Wotto^ def.
is thus proved by these their so well agre^ng protestants themselves: whose
sentence is thus set down by D. Couell in these words: The statute
congregations of England ar^ noe true churches. And again in these terms: the
protestant church of England is noe church at all And further thus: the
protestants of England have noe form of a church. M. Ormerod l^kewise does
thus register their Censure. against themselves in this order: The protestant
church is not the true church of Christ. And thus again: the protestant church
in England is not the true church, it has not so much as the outward face and
show of the true church. Then because D. Field with others assure us, there is
no^ part of heavenly doctrine more necessary in these days, then to know the
church, and true sponse of Christ, and that there is noe salvation, remission
of sins, or hope of eternal life out of the church, This must needs be a
most necessary, essential, and material point in Religion; otherwise
nothing is, or can be necessary, essential, or material, wherefore saying
their protestant Archbishop of Canterbury their protestant Bishop of
Peterborough, their Doctors Morton, Sutcliffe, Willet, Wotton, Povvell,
Middleton, and all protestants as they teach, do hold that they all agree in
every essential point, and none but papists and liars affirm the contrary,
and noe Goliath can prove yt, they all agree and must conclude, that the
protestants have noe church, p. 28. Cou^ll ag. apologet. epist. page 48. 52.
etc.
or not the true church: And so noe spiritual communion is to be had with
them.

The 6. particular protestant demonstration, for Catholics just Recusancie,
is: Because English protestants by their own testimonies, are heretics, and
most notorious heretics.
FVRTHER I proceed in this matter, with this demonstration: noe society,
company, or fellowship of men, that by their own testimonies, or heretics,
may be communicated with in spiritual things: But these english protestants
are such: therefore not to be communicated with, in such business. The mayor
proposition is thus proved by these protestants. Their Bishop D. Dove writes
thus: This proposition noe heretics nor Scismaticks are Dove persuas. page
to be communicated withal, is undoubtedly true, because it is grounted upon
scripture. Tit. 3. Ioh. ^p. 2. Romans 16. M. Hull teaceth by many examples Hull
Romans pol. p. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. Ormer. page p. 51. Powell cons. page 8. in
concl. Sutcl. exam of petit p. 9.
and testimonies of scriptures, and antiquity in this manner: We may not
communicate with heretics and men of a diverse Religion. M. Ormerod is of the
same opinion, M. Powell writes thus: With Idolaters and heretics* good men
ought to have no^ communion. D. Sutcliff handles this point more at lardge:
and first cites the Loadicean council can. 31. 32. 33. which does directly
condemn communion* with heretics, either in Mariadge or in prayer. And he
further speaks thus: The fourth council of Cathage cap. 70. forbids
clergy men all festings and fellowship with heretics and Scismaticks:
Also against communion with such people he cites these scriptures. Deuter
13. Psalm 16. Deuteronomy. 16. Deuteronomy. 29. Sutcl. sup. pa. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Zephan 1. Matthew 7. Matthew. 16, Gal 5. Apocal. 2. number 16. Iosue 23. 2. Corinthians.
6. And calls even the tolleration of any false heretical* Religion,
repugnant to R^asons of Religion, and holy scriptares. He tells further:
such communion is reproved by the authority both of the fathers of the church,
and of ancient christian Emperors. For fathers he cites S. Athanasius,
Gregory Nazianeen, sup. pa. 10. 11. cap. 3.
Hierome, Augustine, Ambrose, Irenaeus, Dionysius, Heraclas, Optatus of
Meleuit. And adds thus: Eusebius l. 7. hist. c. 6. by the authority of
Dyoninisius and Heraclas, prou^th, that such as conuerso with heretics are
excommunicate. For Emperors he alleges the degrees of these primative page
11.
christian Emperors, Constantine, Gratian, Valentinian, Theodosius, Arcadius,
Honorius, Martianus, and Justinian. And to conclude, that all protestants will
seem to be of the same opinion, the protestant Author of the book Abridgme^t
An. 1605. page 18.
named Abridgment of a book of the ministers of Lincoln dioces, writes thus:
By the judgment of the godly learned of all churches, and ages, who have
constantly taught and given testimony to this truth, that Christians are
bound to cast of the cer^monies, and r^ligeous customs of pagans, Jews,
Idolaters and heretics and carefully to shun all conformity with them. And
for this Sup. pa. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.
avoiding of communion, he cites the first general council of Nice,
Augustine, Tertullian, Pope Melchiades, Ambrose, Gregory the great, S. Le^,
the church of Scotland, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Bucor, Musculus, Peter martyr,
Beza, Zanchius, Pezelius, Mollerus, Szeg^dinus, Danaeus, Michabaeus, Zepperus,
Wigandus, M. Rogers, the lat^ Queens injunctions, her Canons, Bishop I^w^ll,
B. Pilkinton. B. Westphaling^, Bilson, D. Humfry, D. Fulke, D. Andrews, D.
Sutcliffe, and other protestants. So that we see, by these men, that this is
only the doctrine of the primative Counsels, fathers Emperors and the present
catholic church, but generally of protestants themselves.

The second proposition, that these protestants are heretics, is directly
proved before by their own writings: for men obstinately settinge up, and
mayntayninge against their lawful superior, and commanding Authority, a
congregation of men wanting true preaching of the word of God, due ministration
of sacramens, and an intruded and usurped ministry, as by their own
testimonies they have long tiue done, and still do, must needs be heretics.
For thus they define heresy: Heretics Couell ex^* page 202. Ormerod dial. 2.
are men obstinately ^rringe in some fundamental point. Such as these be by
their own doctrine before. And these again: He is an heretic, which so^
swarueth from the wholesome doctrine, as contemning the judgment both of God,
and the church, persisteth in his opinion, and breaks the peace of the
church. As these men have long time done in the highest degree and so still
persevere.

Secondly, as I have also proved before, D. Couell exa^. page 199.
Couell writes thus: Heretics are they, who directly gaynesay some article
of our faith. and are, or have been condemned by some general Council. But
these protestants are in this state condemned, as they have acknowledged in
diverse such articles, by diverse counsels which they write and testify to be
general, as the second Nicene Council, the Council of Florence, Constance
Laterane and others, and not in some one article of faith, though that by their
recited definition were sufficient to make them heretics, but in all or the
cheifest articles of their Religion, and yett not only obstinately they defend
their Errors against these allowed general Counsels, and the whole Catholic
church, but most vnchristianely and heretically have in their subscribed
article condemned these their lawful judges, to have erred in those Articu. 19.
things: which is the greatest and most notorious act of heresy, that can
be, and such as destroys all true Religion. Therefore by their own Censure
they are notorious heretics, and not to be communicated withal, in matters
of Religion.

Thirdly I suppose in this place breefely, which these protestants before have
testified at lardge, that they all agree in fundamental points, without
variance at all, And that definition of heresy by them before, Heretics are
men obstinately erring in some fundamental Couell exa^. page 202.
point: And I argue these: whosoever by them^^lues, pretended to agree in all
fundamental, essential and material things, are yett by them selves often
ce^^ured, denounced and adiuged to be heretics, are to be esteemed for such,
and not to be communicated with in Religeous things: But these english
protestants by their own Censures and judgments are in this condition:
Therefore to be esteemed, and in spiritual communication to be avoided as
heretics. The mayor proposition is evidently true: for as the christian
philosopher writes: Satie firmum argumentum est, etc. That argument Lactant
firmian. Insti. l. 4. de vera sap. cap. 12.
or evidence that is given of the enemies thems^lues, is strong enough to
prove the truth: for noe man will deny that, which both friends and opposites
affirm. The minor proposicion, that english protestants by their own censures
are heretics is proved by them in this order. D. Willet writes in these
words: protestants Willet apud Parkesp. 20
have set a foot strange nouel^ies, and paradoxes; vvhirle pilt points,
bubb^^s of new do^trine, strange and unsound positions, contrary to the
scripture. Therefore by their doctrine, heretical; and they be heretics,
which M. Parkes Parkes ag. lymb. inpref sup. ep. ded. Ormer. dial. 2. Ormer
pict pur. intitul Ormer. dial. 1.
speaking of them plainly testifies in these words: they have pestilent
heresi^s. And again: They are heretical, and sacriledgeous. M. Ormerod
writes of these so well agreing* protestants in this manner; They are in the
compass of heresy. And again; They do resemble the Anabaptists, condemned
heretics, in above sourescore several things. And further these; They join
sondrie things with the pharisees, Apostolicks, Aerians, Pepusians,
Petrobusians, Florinians, Cerinthians, Nazarens, Beguardines, Ebionites,
Catababdites, Catherists, Iouinians, etc. All which be condemned heretics,
both by this man's, and other protestants judgment. And he adds further in
these words: there was scarce heresy invented Ormer. dial. 2.
by ol^ here^icks which they have not joined in, revive and renevve with fre^h
and new colors. Therefore by their own testimony they are heretics; if
heretics, or notorious heretics be heretics.

Again I argue in this manner; whosoever are obstinate in their errors, being
such, that strike at main points of faith, shake the foundation it self,
heaven and hell, the divinity, humanity, and the very soul, and salvation
of Christ, are to be avoided as heretics; But these english agreing
protestants, by their own writings, are such; Therefore to be avoided as
heretics. The mayor proposition is evidently true. The minor proposition is
thus proved by M. Parkes, who in his book dedicated to their late Archbishop
of Canterbury D. Bancroft writes of these agreing protestants in these words:
They are head strong, and hardened in Parkes ^pist, dedic.
error, they stricke at main points of faith, shaking the foundation it self,
and calling in question heaven and hell, the divinity and humanity, yea the
very soul and salvation of our Savior himself. Therefore heretics by their
own testimony.

Further I argue thus; whatsoever pretended Religion, does sow swerve from the
holy scriptures, and Gods commaundments, that it cannot be kept without breach
of them, and is so notoriously impious, that by those of their own
profession, and accounted godly among them, it has been accounted to have
noe laws, noe good order, noe discipline etc. is heretical; But the english
protestant Religion by their own confession, is such: Therefore heretical,
and not to be communicated with in spiritual things. The mayor proposition is
manifestly true. And the minor is thus proved by these protestants themselves.
The english protestant author of the book named certain demands, writes in
these words: the protestant Cert. demau^ds An. 1605. p. 42. Ormer pi^^ pur. c.
3.
Religion of England cannot be kept without breach o^ the commandments. M
Ormerod writes thus: it has been conceived by godly men in forreyne
Contreyes, that the english protestants have noe laws, noe good orders, noe
discipline, but that every man may do what he list. Therefore if their own
godly brethren in Religion, and by their own Relation, as he there reproves,
have thus con^eated of them, it will be pardonable in Catholics to think of
them as themselves do and report; and so we may not communicate with such
heretics; especially when D. Couell again writes the like in this Couell
des. of Hooker page 24.
manner; The begynnings, the proceedings, and the end of them, both in England
and Scotland, serve to this end, that order may cease. Therefore they are
heretics.

And to pass over this general state of heresy, whereof they are thus
manifestly convicted, by their own testimony, I will breefely set down, how
by their own confessionalsoe, they are guilty of diverse other particular, and
singular heresies, errors, and paradoxes in Religion, suffered, allowed, and
maintained among them; and so consequently for that cause also not to be
communicated with in matters of Religion; some of them be recorded or
mayntayned by these protestants. M. Ormerod sets down one of their
doctrines in Ormer dial. 1.
these words; children of heretics, and of such as by excommunication, are cut
from the church, may not be baptized. By which opinion joined with their other
protestant doctrines before, the children of all protestants must needs be
damned, because there is noe salvation without baptism. Their Bishop of
Winchester D. Bilson Bilson suru p. 541. 552.
writes these; I do not find any scriptures that allow the Saints
deceas^d, the same place of glory, where Christ now is at the right hand of
God, in the highest heavens, till the last day come. Then if noe scriptures
teach yt, protestants receiving noe other rule, cannot believe yt, and so by
D. Couells sentence; they dissolve that communion Couell ag. Burg. p. 90.
of Sainsts, which we profess to believe as an article of Gods truth. The
doctrine of Christ's disce^t into hell is an article of our Creed, and the
protestants censure puritans for heretic; for denying of yt; yett M. Ormerod a
professed writer against puritans condemninge them of many heresies teaches
this doctrine; The beleeso Ormer. dial. ^. Ormer. pa. ganot. page
of Christ discending into hell, to fetch prisoners t^ence, is like the fable
of Hercules, greing to hell to setch thence Theseus, Pirothous and Cerberus.
Thus he has written with public applau^e and privilege, of this Article of
our faith. Therefore M. Parkes sets down their protestants Parkes p. 92
opinion herein in this manner; Christ's descent into hell is noe Article of our
Creed, but an intruded fable, a patch which some Cobl^r, or patcher, patched
to the Creed; it is against the Analogy of our faith, it inge^dreth many
inco^ueniences, many absurd opinions frivolous fables, and p^antasticall
visions. The common opinion of protestants in their arguments against
transsubstantiation, and Christ's real presence in the blessed sacrament, of
the altar, is that, the true natural properties of a body cannot be
separated from yt. Yett M. Powell with privilege writes thus: The Powell de
Antich pa. 499.
body of Christ after his resurrection had not the natural properties of a
body. Then by their doctrine yt was not a true body, and so noe true
resurrection, and that article of our Creed also is publicly denied: and so
there is noe resurrection of the body, as follows by S. Paul's doctrine and
reasoning thus, by their own translation: if Christ be not risen, the^ is our
preaching 1. Corint. 15 v. 14. 17. 18*
vain, and your faith also is vain, and if Christ be not raised, your says
is vain, you are yett in your sins. And so they which are a sheep in
Christ, are perished. And so there is noe Resurrection, of the body noe
immortality of the soul by this doctrine, for a thing perished is not, but
has ceased to be. Therefore M. Parkes writes of these protestant as before:
they strike at main points of says shaking the Parkes. epi. dedic.
foundation it self, and calling in que^tion heaven and hell, the divinity
and humanity yea the very soul and salvation of our savior himself. And to
make it apparent that they generally give way to all infidelity; The same M.
Powell highely commended by D. Sutcliffe, writes thus, with public
approbation; it is noe more certain Powell pref. l. de Antic^.
that God is in heaven, Crea^or of visible and invisible things, and Jesus
Christ the tru^ m^ss^^^, then that the pope of Rome is the great Antichrist
and the papal church the synagoge of Antichrist. But I have made evident
demonstration before, by their own testimonies, that it is so far from truth,
or appearance thereof, that the pope is Antichrist, or the papal church his
Sinagoge, that they have proved that church to be the true church of Christ,
and the Pope to be the true lawful vicar of Christ, supreme head of his
holy catholic Church, on earth; and to whom all Christians in the world do
owe obedience in religeous business. Therefore these protestants by their own
published and privileged writing have denied God; And Christ Jesus is not the
true Messiah by their doctrine. Then noe marvel though D. Field D. Willet
Field l. 3. e 3 p. 139. will Antil. p. 13. Po^ell l de Artichrist. p. 494 etc.
apud parkes pa. sect. 23.
M. Powell and others deny the virginity of our lady (for shame I omit their
unseemly word^) and others write: David is still in hell to this day: when
they teach that Christ delivered none from thence, neither is the Messiah. Yett
other protestants set all men at liberty, to believe, and live as they list,
to be turks, Jews, pagans, or whatsoever, for they shall all be saved, not
withstanding by Christ whom they have these dishonored and denied; The words
of the protestant Author of the book called Survey, etc. be these; The
english protestants Suru. of co^. B pa. 119.
teach that Christ has actually and effectually redeemed all men whatsoever.
Therefore by them all men turks, Jews, pagans, etc. must needs be saved;
because an act, and effect acted and effected, cannot be vnacted or
vneffected. M. Wotton seeing how other protestants had overthrown the: law and
Religion of Christ, labors for himself likewise to euacuate the promise to
Abraham, and the law of Moses, and leave all mankind in original syn
contracted from Adam and writes thus; Circumcision was not provided for
remedy of original Wotto^ def. of perk. page 447.
sin, any more then for actual, neither did it remedy the one or the other.
The like heresies, and detestable errors publicly printed, and privileged
among them, as also their Authors, and mayntayners are too many to be
alleged, therefore to give some conjecture of the rest I will propose one
Doctor and Professor of divinity in their church, a man highly commended in
protestants judgment, who to omit all other his books and erroneous places
in them, in one only place of his publicly warranted and privileged
Antilogie. This professor Doctor Willet writes thus: Tyndalls Willet Antil.
page 203
opinions are sound and good dostrine as he propounded them, and M. Fox
maintains them. Some of them as they were propounded by Tyndall Fox to, 2.
mon. in Tyndall first edition.
and maintained by Fox do follow in these words: The law makes us to hate
God. It is impossible for us to consent to the will of God. The law requires
impossible things of us. Speaking of man he speaks thus: Christ is in thee,
and thou in him, knitt together unseperably, neither cast thou be damned,
except Christ be damned with thee: neither can Christ be saved, except thou
be saved with him. Every man is Lord of other men's goods. I am bound to love
the Turk with all my might, and power, yea and above my power. There is noe
work better then an other, to please God, to make water, to was he dishes, to
be a Sowter, or an Apostle all is one, to wash dishes, and to preach is all
one touching the deed to please God. To worshipp God otherwise, then to believe
that he is Just, and true in his promises is to make God an I d^ll God moved
the hearts of the Egiptians to hate the people, likewise he moved kings. Paul
was of higher Authority then Peter. If S. Paul were alive I would compare my
self to S. Paul, and be as good as he. The children of faith are under noe
law. God binds us to that which is impossible for us to accomplish* sin
cannot condemn us. So long as the Successors of the Apostles were
persecuted, and martyred, there were good christian men, and noe longer. All
these and other such damnable positions are mayntayned in one place of this
protestant Doctors book dedicated to his majesty, appointed to be written by
their Archbishop D. Bancroft, and published with common privilege. Whereupon,
and from such like proceedings the protestant Author of the book named
Advertisement, speaking of the errors of this their english protestant
Religion, writes thus: Millions of millions run to eternal flames.
Christianity is denied in England by Aduertisem^^t. An. 1604.
public Authority. Of other their heresies, hellish errors, and damnable
devises, against the authority Reg^ll, and cyuill power of Princes* and such
moral affairs, I will entreat hereafter, in the mean time I add these
protestant positions, registered by M. Ormerod in these Ormerod. dial. 1.
words: All sins are equal it is as great a sin, to do any servile
work upon the sabbath day, as to do murder, and committ adultery, it is as
great a sin, to throw a boul^ on the sabboath day, as to kill a man. It is
as great a syn to kill a man's cock, as to kill his Servant.

Their Bishop of Winchester D. Bilson sets Bilso^ Suru. page 467.
down other their strange errors in this manner: the protestants clear not
Christ from sin, it was rife in the pulpitts, and usual in Catechismes, that
the death of Christ Jesus on the Bills. pr^f. sup.
cross, and his blood sh^dd for the remission of our syns, were the least
cause, and mean of our Redemption. And reciting further these protestants p.
466. 474. and def. page 126 122. Bilson sup. pa. 490 def. p. 134. Bills. p. 496.
486. def pa. 131. 136 Bills. p. 497. 503. def. pa. 137. 138. Bills. p. 515. def.
pa. 141. Bills. p. 517. def. page 142. Parkes epis. dedicat. and page 139. and
sect. 20. Povvell l. de diaphor. ep. d^^icat. Parkes apol. epist. dedic.
doctrines, thus relates them: Christ's will was contrary to Gods will. Christ
in his agony knevv not Gods will. Christ was forsaken both in body and soul.
Christ suffered hell Torments. Christ suffered the pains of hell* Christ
suffered the death of the soul. the death of the soul is such pains and
sufferings of Gods wrath, as always accompany them that are separated from
the grace and love of God. God did forsake Christ. Thus our most blessed
Savior, Redeemer of mankind, and consequently, both Christians, and all
mankind is damned with him by these blasphemous protestants. M. Parkes has
told us that: the parson of Christ is profanely and irreligeously spoken of,
the scripture is falsefyed to faste^ blasphemy upon Christ, heaven and hell,
the divinity and humanity, yea the very soul and salvation of Christ our
Savior himself, is called in question. M. Powell has published with public
allowa^ce in his book printed by Robert Barker the kings printer, this
doctrine: To hold that Christ was a law maker is an insolent pseudographema
false scripture. M. Parkes again complains thus: The Creed it self which
has always been the very badge and Cognizance, whereby to discern and
know the faithful from unbelievers, Christians from heathens, and Catholics
from heretics, is the main point in question. Which is confirmed by their
Bishop Barlowe in his sermon before the king Barl: ^erm. septem. 21* An 1606.
in these words: The whelps of those beasts are multiplied with us in
England, of which S. Paul speaks (1. Cor. 15. 32.) which made a lest of the
souls immortaliti^, and the bodies resurrestion. Therefore seeing these be the
most material, D. George Abb. against D. Hill p. 101.
essential and fundamental points in Religion: and their present protestant
Archbishop has peremptorily told us.: protestants and puritanes did never
differ in any point of substance, we all join in all material points of
salvation, and noe Goliath against us can prove the contrary. And Povvell ag.
epis. apol. page 52.
M. Powell says: He lies which says they differ in substantial points:
they are all guilty of these heresies.

The 7. particular protestant demonstration for Catholics just recusancie, is:
Because English protestants by their own writings are Scismaticks.
FVRTHER, that these english protestants are Scismaticks, and so by that title
also, not to be communicated with in spiritual things, is manifest, by that
which is written before; and more directly in this order followinge. Noe
Scismaticks are to be communicated with in Religeous matters: But the
protestants of England by their own testimonies, are Scismaticks: Therefore
not to be communicated with in such business. The mayor proposition is
evidently true, and before granted by these protestans, for this time I will
therefore only cite their Bishop, of Peterborough D. Dove his words be these.
This proposition, noe heretics nor Scismaticks are to be communicated Dove
persuas page
withal, is undoubtedly true, because it is grounded upon scripture, etc. The
minor proposition, that english protestants be Scismaticks, is proved by this
their own definition of Scisme, published by D. Field in this manner: Scisme is
a Field l. 3. c. 5. pa. 70.
breach of the unity of the church, the unity of the church consists in
three things. First the subjection of the people to their lawful pastors.
Secondly the connection and communion which many particular churches, and the
pastors of them have among themselves: Thirdly in holdinge the same Rule of
faith Then, if Scisme is a breach of the unity of the church, and this unity
consists in three things, and so by breakinge any of them, Scisme is
contracted; if I shall but only prove, they have broken this unity in one,
they are proved Scismaticks by their own proceedings. But to prove them to be
in the highest degree of Scisme, I will make demonstration, that they are
guilty in breakinge all these unities. And first concerning their first
unity of subjection to lawful Pastors: I argue thus. At the beginning of
protestancie either the pastors of the Roman church namely the Pope, when they
revolted from him were true pastors or not* if they were not, then their
pretended ordination and Episcopalitie from thence is void, if they were their
true pastors, then they are Scismaticks for their revolt and disobedience unto
him.

Secondly I prove yt thus: every church not clayminge to be supreme, the
superior, mother, or commanding church, and yett submitting yt self and
obedient unto none, is scismaticall: for not to obey a lawful superior Pastor,
is scisme, and their Bishop Barlowe has told us before, that maioritie of
Bishops is Barl. sermon. Sept. 21. 1606.
an apostolical tradition, in all the world, enacted for succedinge
posterity, a canon or constitution of the whole Trinity: Therefore the
english protestant church never clayminge this maioritie above others, and yett
obstinately repugnant and disobedient to that, which ever had this Maioritie,
which as is proved by them before is the Roman church, must needs be
scismaticall.

Thirdly D. Field and these his protestants Field l. 4. ^^. 5 p 202.
have assured us: That among those different degrees of obedience, which we
must yield to them, that command and teach us in the church of God, we must
more especially respest the church of Rome* then Catholic Doctors, the
authority of catholic Bishops, or other churches though apo^^olicke.
Therefore the english protestants so wilfully and maliciously disobedient and
contumelious unto yt, are Scismaticks by their own judgment.

Secondly concerning his second unity, whose breach makes Scisme, and is as
he says, The connection and Communion which many particular Field l. 3. page
70. sup.
churches and pastors of t^^m* have among^ themselves: The english protestants
have not communion, or connection with any either true or pretended church in
the world, in their cheifest points of connection, communion, or coordination,
as namely in their pretended Bishops, and the manner of making them, in Rulinge
their congregation, in the temporal princes supreamacie, etc. Therefore by
breach of this unity also they are Scismaticks, by their own Rule. For
Confirmation whereof D. Couell sets down the doctrine of other protestant
churches in these words: there is no^ Couell def. of Hook pa. 33.
church where the government by elders, or presbytery wants, this being as
essential as either the Word or sacraments. And the protestant Author of the
book called Survey writes thus: The Suru. of comm B. page 24.
english churches differ from all other reformed churches* That they differ
from the Roman and all other churches they willingly acknowledge, therefore
they are Scismaticks by their own Censure. For here we see, that there is noe
true and real connection and communion of the english protestant congregation
or pretended Pastors, Bishops or ministry with any either true or pretended
church, catholic or protestant, reformed or not reformed pastors,
presbytery, or whatsoever they will term them, in all the world. And by this
also it is evident that they are Scismaticks by breakinge the third protestant
unity, In holdinge the same Rule of faith: for these english protestants
agreing with noe other church, true or false in the Rule of faith as before,
must needs be Scismaticks also by this title And so most notorious in this
offense of scisme, having obstinately dissolved all christian unities, by
their own confession.

Further I argue thus: whosoever by mayntayninge their sect or faction in
Religion, are forced to such absurdities, that by the testimonies of their own
Brethren in Religion, they make themselves and all of their doctrine to be
Scismaticks, are to be esteemed such: But the english protestants are in this
case: therefore Scismaticks by their own sentence. The mayor proposition is
evident: And* the minor also proved by them before: and now breefely in this
manner: The protestant authors of the offer of Conference, supposing that the
english parliament protestants will defend their proceedings as they do* write
in these words: They cannot see how possibly, by the Rules of divinity, Offer
of Conference page 11.
the separation of our churches from the church of Rome, and from the Pope
supreme head thereof can be justified. Then by their own Rules before, they
are scismaticks which the same protestants protest expressly in this manner.
They protest to all the world that the Pope and the church of Rome, and in them
God and Christ sup page 16.
Jesus himsel^e, have had great wrong and indignity offered unto them; and
that all the protestant churches are scismatic^ll in ^orsakinge unity and
communion with them. Which is further confirmed by an other of their reformed
brethren though writing somewhat later then my six years limitation, who
speaks in this order: As we have said unto you called Brounists, so
Declaration of the mystery of iniquity An. 1612. page 156.
we say to England, and to the presbytery holdinge of the Pope and that
profession as you do^; Then have you of England and all the nations of the
earth sinned gr^ately to separate from Rome, in that you were all of one
body, and members one of an other, and being bele^uers in Christ Jesus, they
are your brethren, and ought not to separate from Rome as you have done. If you
of England and the presbytery and you called Brouni^^s did make any conscience
to walk by the Rules of Christ's ^erein, you ^ould not wal^e toward Rome as
you do.

Again I argue in this manner: whosoever are, ^ither by themselves, or others
that be in their opinion learned, and consenting with them, in all essential
and material points, condemned and censured to be Scismaticks, are to be
adjudged, and avoided as such, in spiritual communications; But these english
protestants both parlamentaries and puritanes are in this state; Therefore to
be as such adjudged and forsaken in Religeous communications. The mayor is
evidently true; because to be in Scisme which excludes forth of the true
church, out of which by these protestants before, there is noe hope of
salvation, is a point both material and essential in Religion. The minor
proposition is proved by these protestants, and puritanes, mutually condemning
themselves, and their essentially agreing brethren, to be scismaticks. First
their late protestant Archbishop of Canterbury D. Bancroft, then of London, in
their public Conference before the king calls them scismaticks; yt is thus
recorded for action, by their Bishop Barlowe, in these words: Co^fere^ce at
Hampton Court p. 26.
The Bishop of London kneelinge down, most humbly desired his majesty, that
the ancient Canon might be remembered, which says that Scismatici contra
Episcopos, non sunt audiendi. Scismaticks are not to be hard against Bishops.
M. Ormerod speaks of them in this manner: Ormer. dial. 2.
They pe^seuer in inueterate and old Scisme, which by the ancient fathers and
protestants also makes heresy. Therefore protestants are both scismaticks
and heretics. M. Powell himself Povvell cons pa 11. 16 19. page 25. 35. 48.
52.
a puritan writes thus of them: They are Scismaticall, they are in scisme,
th^^r ca^e is ^^ismaticall, they have p^anaticall giddin^s, Sci^mes, factions
and innovation, th^^ are so^ers ^f s^di^ion. scisme and faction, they are
scismaticks, they are guilty of scisme M* Parkes calls them Scismaticall,
heretical and sacriledgeous, they are Parkes Apol ^pist. ded.
headstronge in Scisme and hardened in error. How the puritan protestants,
upon the grounds of our english protestants have condemned all protestant
churches to be scismatical against the church and Pope of Rome, is related
before, and the protestant author of the Cert. consid An. 1565. ^p. dedicat.
book named certain considerations, gives this testimony: The protestants
of England syn against God in their proceedings, their Religion is sed^tious, a
sect, Scisme, it is much like to an evil herb or vve^de, which if it be not
speedely rooted up, but suffered to spread, will soon ouerspreade the
gardons of God vvit^ vice, and impiety, as there will scarce be^ any room
left for virtue and piety. And D. Couell a man of best temper in writing
among them, speaks thus of Couell ex^^. page 139.
their english protestants; The scismes and divisions amongst us have made a
number renounce their office. Then if the protestant Ministers themselves have
thus observed themselves to be in Scismes, and therevppon renounced their
office and communion, Catholick^ may not now begin to communicate with them,
thus by themselves condemned for Scismaticks.

The 8. particular protestant demonstration, for Catholics just Recusancie,
is: Because the public protestant Service, at which they refuse to be
present, and communicate in, is false, heretical, justly condemned and
damnable by their own doctrine.
NOw to come to their pretended church service it self, at which, because
Catholics most justly as before, refuse to be present, and for such
Recusancie or Refusal, are most unjustly and above the measure of punishment
of the greatest and notorious syns, excepting treasons and matters of state,
punished and afflicted, being contained in that their so called Communion
Book or Book of common prayers, I argue thus. Noe man may communicate with
Heretics and Scismaticks, especially in prayers and public service, not
only invented and used, without the allowance of the true and lawful pastors,
but directly opposite and repugnant to the highest spiritual authoritle, and
jurisdiction: But the english protestants by their own testimonies before, are
in this case: Therefore not to be communicated with in such prayers and
service.

Secondly I argue thus: noe new devised order of prayer devised by, consortinge
unto, and in it self conteyninge and approuinge a Religion contrary to holy
scriprures, both the written and unwritten word of God, general Counsels,
decrees and doctrine of the primative Popes, and fathers, and to all churches
of Christendom, both present, and heretofore, derogatorie both to the
triumphant, militant, and patient church of Christ, where ^ll sacraments and
instruments of grace either are absolutely denied, o^ so unduly and
profanely used, that all grace by them is taken away from the lyuinge, from
them that die, from Clergy, from laity, for the married, unmarried, old,
young, Rich and pore, and where there is not true ministry, nor church to
have any hope of salvation in, may be communicated withal, especially if
these most grievous and enormeous absurdities and inconveniences be proved and
made apparent by the chief professors themselves of such a supposed Religion:
But the lamentable case and condition of these english protestants as is
demonstratiuely proved by them before, is such, as is her recited: Therefore
their service not to be communicated with, under most damnable and desperate
syn.

Thirdly I argue in this manner: whatsoever service, rite of sacraments, or
fashion of prayer was condemned by the best learned protestants of England,
Scotland, France, etc. to be foolish trifelinge, and by reason apparent, to
be disallowed, and yett was devised, and allowed by the only authority of an
unlearned child, king Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth a woman, not only
repugnant unto the public approved office of our mother and commaundinge
church, the church of Rome, but different from the custom of all protestant
churches, may not be communicated withal: But the english protestant Service
and book of common prayer is such, by these protestants themselves: Therefore
by them not to be communicated with. The mayor proposition is evidently true:
for the service that should be so received by any particular and not
commanding church (as the english is not, against) the use, order, and
doctrine of all other churches, true or pretended, must needs be both
scismaticall, and heretical. The minor proposition is thus proved: first that
the english protestant service is repugnant unto the public service of the
latin, greek, Armenian and other ancient churches, it is evident by their
liturgies, Masses, litanies, etc. containing the doctrines Miss S. Iacobi
Christ* Basil. Aethiopum Mussarob. Gregor. etc Couell against Burg page 69.
of transsubstantiation, prayer to Saints, for the dead, etc. how it differs
from other protestant churches, and was condemned by the best learned
protestants of them, is thus proved by protestants them selves. First D. Couell
writes in these words: The protestant Bishop of London Ridley (a chief martyr
with M. Fox) wrote unto M. Grindall (after their protestant Ar^hbishop of
Canterbury, that a man of wit^ and learning may find to make apparent reasons
against the book of common prayer. Then I may first conclude that this their
pseudomartyr, practizing that Book and service against wit and learning, was
either unlearned and wittles, or without Religion, grace and conscience, or
both, as others succeding unto him be by his Censure, and such Book and
service not to be communicated with. And to show that this opinion of their
Bishop Ridley, was not singular but common among those first protestants, he
writes thus in another treatise: The first protestants of this kingdom in a
letter Couell ^xa^. page 72.
subscribed with eleven of their hands, whereof Knoxe Gilby, Whittingam, and
Goodman were four, most of them suerly having both learning, and judgment,
call the english protestant Ceremonies, trifles and superfluous Ceremonies.
From whence I first conclude, that their service so censured with so many
learned and judicious men, as this protestant esteems them, may not be
commun^cated with. Secondly I conclude this their protestant Religion and
service to be new against all former churches and ages and so heretical. For
he calls those Censurers of the communion Book first devised under king
Edward 6. The first protestants of this kingdom. Therefore this their religion
never maintained, or taught before, is new and heretical. For Scotland this
protestant Doctor has told us before, that Knoxe their chief protestant
disallowed this their service: which he testifies also in his book against
Burges in these words: Knoxe disallovved the communion book. Conell against
Burg page 69.
And the same of Knoxe was so highely applauded with protestants; That D.
Sutcliffe has told us before, that their Brethren in Scotland had imposition
of hands from Knoxe: therefore Knoxe not being a Bishop must needs be an
Apostle extraordinary, or greater in his judgment. For France and Suitcerland
Calvin and Bucer are renowned among protestants, and Couell sup. pa. 69. 122.
page 47.
yett the same protestant Doctor writes thus: Bucer Censured the communion
book. Calvin censured the communion book, to conteyne many fooleries. And in
an other book in this manner: Examinat. page 185.
Caluiue, Who was in manner of an Oracle of God to all churches that were
reformed, gave this Censure of the englis^ communion book, translated into
latin, to have his judgment of it, that many foolish things Were in yt, not
that purity which was to be desired, was to be filed from the rust,
corrected and many things clean taken away. For Germany the protestant
Author of the Relation of the state of religion has these words: The princes
and people in Germany have Caluinists Relation of Relig. ^. 45.
in great detestation, not for bearing to profess openly, they will return
to the papacy, rather then ever admit that sacrame^tarie and predestinarie
pestilence. Therefore Catholics may not communicate with their country
protestants, in their english service so generally condemned, both by
themselves, and all forreyne protestants. Again I argue thus.

Noe service, or fashion of prayer, and Sacraments, that is by the practizers
of them, and those which in their Judgment agree with them, in all material
points, condemned to have gross errors, manifest impieties, gross and
palpable repugnancie, even in necessary and essential points of Religion,
misapplyeth scriptures to countenance errors, is naught and may be
communicated with: But the english protestant service, and Book thereof, is
such: therefore not to be communicated with. The mayor proposition is
evidently true: And the minor is thus proved by these protestants. M. Ormerod
records the Censure of english protestants upon it, in these words: The
book Ormerod dial. 1.
of common prayers and the whole order of protestants service, is condemned.
And to show that they which thus censured it, were allowed tea^hers, and
preachers among them, he adds Ormer pict purit. d 3.
thus in an other book: preachers in their verbal serm^n^ speak against the
state ecclesiastical, the ^ooke of common prayer, and the Ceremonies of the
church of England. D. Couell ^e^^^eth Couell exa^ page 179.
their s^^^e^ce thus: The communion book^ is boldly despised gross ^rrors and
manifest impieties are in the communion book. The protestant author of
Certain Co^sid^rations, writes in this manner: The protestant communion book
Cert Consider. An 1605. p* 10 11. 12. 13. 17 Suru. page 20. 24.
an^ service is naught, it has gross and palpable repugnancie in yt. An other
protestant writes thus. The communion Book of England is not agreeable to the
word of God* in many things. The communion book as it has ministered matter of
contention, from the first hatchinge of yt: So it will ever be the fuel of
that fire. An other Abbridgm. of luic. dioc. page 15. page 17.
speaks thus: ^he book of common prayer misapplyeth sondrie places of
scripture, and that to the mayntayninge of unsound doctrine. The book of
common prayer contains, in yt sundry things, besides them handled in the
abbridgment (being ver^ many) that are contrary to the word page 73.
of God, it appoints sondrie things, that tend directly to the profanation
of the holy sacraments, either ^y prostituting them to unworthy parsons, or
administering them vnreuereantly, i^ avouches sondrie manifest and apparent
untruths. page 74.
it appoints sondrie things, that bring great disorder, and confusion unto
the worship of God. page 75.
It conteynes sondrie things, that are ridiculous, and absurd, and ^uch as noe
^reasonable sense can be made of* it conteyns in yt s^ndrie evident
contradictions. And to give instance in the public preachers of london it
self: Twoe and tuentie of them have joined together in this Censure of this
their service and published it in printin these words: Many things in the
communion book are Petit. of 2^. preachers of London.
repugnant to the word of God. In the communion book there be things, of
which there is noe reasonable sense, there is contradiction in yt, even in
necessary and essential points of Religion, it conteyneth untruths in says*
the Holy scripture is disgraced in yt* it entoyneth unlawful Ceremontes.
conteyneth corrupt translations of holy scriptures, misapplyeth places of holy
scriptures to the countenance of errors. Therefore not to be communicated with.

The 9. particular protestant demonstration, is: Because these protestants by
their own testimonies, and published writings, are manifest and known
dissemblers, wilful deceauers seducers, lyere and perjured, in matters of
Religion.
CONCERNING the Religeous behavior and manner of life, and conversation of
these men, doctors, preachers, and practisers of this new Religion, I argue
thus: Noe men that are manifestly detected, dissemblers, perjured,
foreswearens, liars, and known deceauers in matters of Religion, even by the
confession of themselves, and their essentially agreinge friends, are not to be
imitated in Religion, but utterly to be avoided in such Communications: But
the english protestant preachers and teachers of Religion, are in this
condition: Therefore not to be followed, but avoided in spiritual
communications. The mayor proposition is evidently true: for of all people
manifest liars, forswearers, and dissemblers with God* and man, are most to be
discredited, and rejected in conversation, especially in religeous things.

The minor proposition is thus proved, by these protestants. The protes^ant
author of the relation of Religion, a man of great creditt and ^^thoritie in
their church, writes thus: protestant Relation of Religion cap. 32.
writers in Relation of things have abused this present age, and prejudiced
posterity. Lou^ and dislike has s^e d^zeled their eyes, that they cannot be
believed. M. O^merod has these word^: It is true indeed, there are ^arebraynd,
inconstant, Ormer. pagan. page ^^. 57.
and sickle headed, among protes^an^^, that are much like unto ^kebolius the
Sophist of Constantinople, who^ before Julian was emperor, carried ^imselfe as
an earnest Christian; under Julian he became an Apostata, and a bagan^ and
after Julian, he would be a christian again. And such were their chiefest
and prime protestants themselves, as their Archbishop Cranme^ before oweinge
all duty and obedience to God, twi^e swearing yt to the pope; to king Henry 8
king Edward 6, Queen Mary, of diverse Religeons, and yett he was an heretic
to God and his church, and a perjured wretch to all those princes, as before is
manifest, and so of others. The same is confirmed to be also agreeable to the
behavior of their doctors in this time, of whom the same protestant Ormer.
pict purit. l. 1.
author writes in this order; They will make as solemn protestations, as any
men can do, and by oathe deny that which they do you shall never find with
any high land, or border thieves, more lies, and vile periuries, then with
these, though they protest and by oathe deny, yett s^ortely after, we shall
see it come to pass. The protestant author of the book entitled offer of
Offer of Co^fer. pa. 9
Conference writes of the parlamentarie protestants showing therein the
reasons of their notorious lying, and dissemblinge, in Religion, in these
words; some standinge upon these points of difference, not for conscience, but
for carnal respects, some because otherwise they know not how to be
mayntayned, but by depending upon that faction, some to gratify their
benefactors and patrons and to please their friends, some for coffeehouse,
and want of preferment, some for giddines of innovation, some for pride of
heart, and self love, some for hatred of order, and restraint of their
liberty, some for ignorance, some to retain the opinion of constancy. And to
show that by their own judgment this profane hypocrisy, dissimulation etc
is general in their Religion, Couell exa^. page 179. Parkes Apol praef.
D Couell writes in this manner: Atheism and hypocrisy is in all states in
this kingdom. M. Parkes has this Censure; heresy and infidelity join and
labor to subvert all grounds of Christian Religion. Their late protestant
Bishop D. Babington in the public Conference at Hampton Conference page 14.
15.
Co^rt, shows how in the beginning protestancie was approved in their
parliament by ambiguous and indirect dealing of the composers of their communion
book, and cites the Archbishop of york to that purpose. What dealinge was
used therein may appear also by so general a dislike of protestants against
it as is before proved, whereupon D Couell writes thus: The first english
Ministers so far dissented, Couell exa^. page 71.
that some books, and the greatest part of Christendom was filled with the
^rreuerent, unholy, and unnatural Contentions of that time. Their behavior in
other Contryes was not unlike, only I will exemplify in Scotland, of which
his majesty in the Conference at Hampton Court relates thus: M. Knoxe Writes
to the Queen Regent K speech in Cofe. pa. 80. 81. 82.
(of whom without slattery I may say, she was a virtuous and moderate lady)
telling her that ^hee was supreme head of the church. But how long trovve
ye, did this continue? even so long till by her authority, the popish
Bishops were repressed. He himself and his adherents were brought in and well
settled, and by these means made strong enough. Then lo they began to make
small account of her Supreamacie, nor would longer rest upon her authority,
but took the cause into their own hands. How they used that pore lady my
Mother is not unknown, who did desire only, a private Chapel, wherein to
serve God, after her manner, with some fevv selected parsons: but her
supreamacie was not sufficient to obtain yt, at their hands. And concerning
the same Question of princes supreamacie in England, so enacted by their
parlaments, to set them in possession, yett that now at this present, neither
parlamentarie nor puritan protestant, in their writings allow yt, but claim
it to themselves, I will prove by themselves hereafter. And the reason of this
their proceedings, proceeds from the state of their desolate cause: for in the
beginning of this their protestant Religion, having noe other means to give
Color to a new pretended Ministry, then by the temporal princes supreamacie
and power in spiritual things, all true religeous preeminencie jurisdiction
and authority being abandoned forth of this nation, by their parlaments edicts
against the Apostolic see of Rome, and Christ's c^tholicke church, they were
content against the example of all their pretended reformed churches because
they could not settle yt themselves, for that present to allow yt to the
temporal Prince: But now settled in possession they pretend a Consecration
again from Rome which they had thus renownced before, and say Confer sup Barl.
Sermon. sup. Cert. considerat. An. 1605. page 46.
they are diuinae ordinationis, by the ordinance of God; where upon the
protestant Author of certain Considerations, does argue and consider thus; if
the english protestants opinion be mayntayned, that Bishops jurisdiction, is
de Iure diuini, by the law of God, his majesty and all the nobility ought to
be subject to excommunication. page 54. sup.
And again in these words; protestant Bishops themselves do not attribute
any more spiritual authotitie unto the king, to make, constitute and ordeyne
Canons, Constitutions, Rites or Ceremonies, then they give unto him, spiritual
po^er to preach the word, administer the sacram^ntt, and excommunicate. Which
as is evident, is none at all. And yett at this present (to omit others) those
protestant Bishops of this kingdom, which most sway, and not only in
spiri^uall things, are known to be both by their education and writings, of
that protestant sect and opinion which before has told us, that their Bishops
and so consequently themselves, are unlawful, against Gods Word, hell
hounds* natural sons of satan, false, bastardly governors, enemies to God,
to the king, and to his people, even in their very callinges and offices. How
these men have behaved themselves in the Questions between Catholics and
them, may appear sufficiently in the first and second general demonstration,
where not only they general grounds of divinity, but all particular chief
controversies of this time, are demonstratiuely proved against them, by their
own writings, published, printed, or allowed with^n the first six years of
his majesty's ^aigne. how the puritan protestants have dealt with their
Bishops, partly appears before: how their Bishops walk toward them, and
one to an other, is evident in that either condemns other to be Scismaticks
heretics, in^^dolls, Offer of Co^fer page 9.
damned, etc. The protestant offer of Confer^nce writes thus: It is notorious
unto all the ^orlde, what indignities, slanders, false accusations and
calumniations, the prelates and their ad^erents, in their private speeches,
public sermons and writings, lay upon the ministers. I will cite one example
most conceruinge them both, Co^fere^ce at H^mpt Count. by D. ^arlo^e 3. other
Copies printed by Wind. (...) ^^fer. page 28, 29,
their Conference at Hampton Court, before the king, and Lords* Their
protestant Bishop of Lincoln, D. Barlowe relates it, wholly for their
Bishops: Three other Copyes printed by Ihon Winde^ and diverse others, relate yt
for the puritanes. Besides the testimony of their Bishop D. Montague thus
cited by the protetestant offer of Conference. It ^^ more then apparent, that
they have fraudul^ntly cut of, and concealed all the speeches, which were many
that his majesty uttered against the corruptions of our church, and practice
of the prelates, as appears by the testimony of the deane of the Chapel.
And yett his cunninge has served him, and his Conscience suffers him, to be
a great Bishop Offer sup. page 29. D. G. Abbot ag. Hill. p. 101. 102. 94. 106.
236, 237. Povvell ag. Apol. epi^^. pa. 52 etc. 48. Dove persuas pa. 32 Su^cl.
against kell* page 42. Middleton pap. pa. 201 Will Antil pa 15. p 20 ^ovvell
^o^sider pa 17. Wott^ d^f. of Perk. p. 28. Field page 170. Morton satisf p 18.
Abridgm. page 39.
among them. And thus it further follows in that protestant Author: Noe
hon^stie was used in that Relation. it seems by the whole manadgenge of yt,
that it was vnder^and plotted and procured by the prelates themselves; abusing
therein his ma^estie, and vsinge M. Galloway as an instrument in the matter, to
the end that they might have the more color for their intended proceedinge.

We have hard before, how constantly and uniformly both their Bishops
parlamentarie and puritan protestants, have written, that they all agree in
all material and substantial points: and as their Archbishop of Canterbury
absolutely affirms noe Goliath against t^em, can prove the contrary; And an
other has with public privilege these words; none but Papists affirm that
^rotestants and puritan^s differ in substantial points of f^^the^, and he
lies which says they differ in subsiautiall ^oints. And such is the common
and general assertion both of the parlamen^arie and puritan protestants as is
evident before and may appear by these their Citations and others to many to
be related; when they write against Catholics charging them with their diverse
and intolerable essential, material and fundamental differences in Religion.

But when they dispute, or write against themselves: then if to be heretics,
is to differ in a material fundamental, or essential point, as they write in
these words; Heretics are neither simple, infidells nor idolaters, but
obstinately ^rring in some fundament all point. Protestants and puritans do
thus differ, for either has condemned others before for Heretics; Therefore to
affirm it is not a lie. B^t they which both affirm and deny it, to serve
their use, and delude their readers, are profane liars and dissemblers in
Religion and so not to be imitated but avoided.

Again the puritans condemn the protetestant Bishops for essential points,
and make them most damned and hellish people, together with their ministers
and adherents as is manifest before; And the protestant Bishops and followers
have in diverse public canons made the state of puritans, excommunication ipso
Constitution etc. can. ecclesiast. An. 1604. can. 3. can. 4. can. 5. can 6.
ca^. 7. can 8. ca^. 9. can. 10. can. 11. can. 12. can. 4. can. 5. can. 6. can.
7. c^n. 8.
facto, And to show that they do not thus Censure them, for things not
essential, but very essential, material and fundamental, things questioned
between them, some of their opinions be there thus expressed; the worship in
the church in England is corrupt superstitious, unlawful repugnant to the
scriptures, and in sacraments. The articles of their religion are erroneous.
their rites Antichristian government of the church of england under his
majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, d^anes, etc. Antichristian and repugnant to
the word of God. The form and manner of making, and consecratinge Bishops,
^reists, and deacons is repugnant to the word of God. They who are made
Bishops, priests, or deacons in that form, are not lavvfully made, nor ought
to be accounted, either by themselves, or others to be truly either Bishops,
priests, or deacons, etc. Therefore so many Excommunications ipso facto, in
number seven together, with so essential differences, must needs be
material points, putting a man, as, they think and ordeyne, out of the church,
and so out of all hope of salvation, as they have taught before

Further D. Couell sets down these protestants doctrine, in this manner; The
Government Couell ag. Burg. p. 33.
b^ Elders and the Pressbitery is the express commandment of God, and as
essential as either the word, or Sacraments And ag^^ne. The discipline Couell
exa^. page 36.
is an essential note of the church men are martyrs in that quarrel, as
well as for the defense of any article of the Christian faith. M. O^merod
Ormer. pict purit. f. 4.
relates their opinion in this manner; Certain of the things which puritane^
stand upon, are such, as that every hair of their ^eade, were a life, they
ought to offor them for the defense of them He has told us before, how, they
have Ormer. dial. 1.
revived almost all old heresies, and besides their opinions, have their
tricks, qualities and conditions. Then if protestants differ not from them in
any essential thing, they join with them in those heresies. They are (to use
his words;) Apostolicks, Aerians, Popuzians, Petrobrusians, Flo^inians,
Cerinthians, Nazarens, Beguardines, ^bi^nits, Catababdi^es, Catharists,
Iouinianists, etc. too many to be recited. Therefore he speaks thus:
puritans differ from protestants in things fundamental, and substantial,
puritans Ormerod dial. 2.
do not agree with protestants in all matters of substance. Therefore seeing
these men be not papists, they must needs be notorious liars, and deceauers
in spiritual things. M. Parkes in his Epistle dedicatorie to their late
Archbishop of Canterbury writes thus: The Creed Parkes epist dedicat.
it self which has always been the very badge and Cognizance, whereby to
discern and know the faithful from unbelievers, Christians from heathens,
and Catholics from heretics, is the main point in question. Then they agree
not in all things essential, and fundamental, for besides this, he adds:
puritanes seek to undermine the foundation of faith. Therefore speakinge
Parkes p. 3.
o^ protestants and puritanes seducing the ignorant as though they agreed in
all essential things, he writes in these words; To deceive Parkes page 89.
the world and make men believe, there is agr^ement in all substantial
points, they affirm, that there is noe question among them, of the Jacob
reas. epist. dedic.
truth. M. Jacob gives this Censure: They are vain words of men unadvised,
yea of corrupt minds* and studing to flatter, which cease not to inculcate,
that the things in question, are indifferent Jacob reas. page 75.
and arbitrary. The matters in question are far from matters indifferent, or
arbitrarie, but are in deed very greatly importinge the common page 82. sup
salvation. These things are far from indifferent matters or small trifl^s in
the churches, as some so^d men sugg^st, and ^ill reiterate* they are directly
contr^^y to Gods word* prejudicial and dishonerable to Holy ca^linge, and
pernicious to the souls of all the Christian^ in the land. Their Supplication
Supplicat. An 1606. Argum 5. Offer of Cons pa. 3.
sa^^h, their cause is ^hole Christ. The protestant Authors of the offer of
Conference, say: the pr^positions (offered, to be disputed, contain in them
the nature of Christ's true visible church, Ministry and worship. The
protestant Authors of the defense of the ministers reasons Defenc^ epist. dedi^.
for refusal of subscription, tell us; very many points are contrary to the
word of God. And add in this manner: if the Questions be of noe substance,
toys* and trifles, what means such vrdginge, and pressing of t^em, and the
more s^uere punishing^ of the not obseruinge them, then of the weightiest
matters, not of our law, but of the law of God it self* vv^at mean all
those diverse and lardge treatises, daily published by them that call them
trifles, in t^eir defense? if trifles? so seriously to maintain them, argues
want of judgment, to know what is meet to be done. They might have added
also want of Religion and justice, to denounce so many several
excommunications for things not material, as before are cited.

Neither can the condition of these men by any moral judgment in their own
proceedings, be otherwise: for having generally by their allowed Articles,
princes letters patents, Statutes, and such protestant Consistories,
vncanonized diverse books of holy scriptures, condemning diverse of their
errors, denied di^^ne traditions, the unwritten word of God, the infallible
authority and judgment of general Counsels, in matters of faith, the
supreme commanding power of the Apostolic See of Rome, endowed with
greatest privileges, from Christ our Savior, not regarding the doctrine of
the learned primative fathers, but condemning these, and all Churches of Error
in Religion, and fantastically making their own private spirits, erroneous
judgment, and deductions from false translations of scriptures, They must needs
fall to, these profane absurdities, of lying, deceauing, wilful corruptions,
falsifications and the like ungodly and unchristian dealings, or else manifest
and lay open their Heresies, and most strange innouations, to the vewe of the
whole world, even the most simple and ignorant, whom they have abused and
seduced by such practizes. I will only exemplify in towe protestant writers,
D. Willet, and M Parkes, both writing with privilege, and public allowance,
one against the other, and either of them taxing the other in this kind of
impiety as follows. M. Parkes writing but against one little book,
published by this D. Willet named Lymbomastix, denyinge the Article of Christ's
descent into hell, has these words: Holy scripture is much Par^es sect. 5. 8.
page 14 144 1^9. 71. sect. 22. 5. 7.
abused, corrupted and straungely perverted. they intrude into the text. the
holy scriptures are belyed the scripture abused, falsefyed. the original
greek yt self clypp^d in citing scriptures, words are left out. they inuert
the scriptures to serve their turn. Holy scripture is much abused, straungely
perverted, notoriously depraved, belyed manifestly wrested, etc. How holy
fathers and such authorities are dealt with, by this doctor in that treatise,
Parkes sup. against lymb p. 70 151 def of 3. test sect (...) def of 1. 2 test p
2 ^. sent 18 21 p 181. 166. 101. 100. def of 2^ place sect. 10 11. 20. def. of
3. test s^ct 7. 12. 15. 16 etc page 7. 10, 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24 25. page 28.
def. of 1. 2. 3. testim. etc. Par^^s Apolog sup. epist. dedic.
he writes thus: He condemns all the ancient fathers, for dreamers,
condemns all the fathers. He condemns all learneb and Godly diui^as, for
enemies of Christ's cross, and bla^p^em^rs of his passion. He justifies m^ste
wicke^ Heretics, and condemns most holy fathers. H^e falsely translateth,
corrupts, indignely han^let^, clippeth, shamely corrupts, injuriously
han^leth, greatly abuses, untruly alleges, mayneth, mistranslateth, much
abuses, notably corrupts, etc. S. Augustine, Origin, S. Ambrose, S.
Chrysostom, S. Leo, S. Hierome, Tertullian, S Bernard, etc. And speaking
generally of their protestant writers he writes in this manner. Every man
makes Religion the handmayde of his affections. We may say now, that there
are so many faithes, as wills, and so many doctrines, as manners of men,
vvhiles either we write them, as we list, or understand them as we
please in so much that many are brought to their vvitts ends, not knowinge
what to do. Men say they know w^ome to fly, but whom to follow they cannot
tell. This age is the last and worst, wherein heresy and infidelity join and
labor to subvert and overthrow all grounds of Christian Religion. by their
doctrine and life, their most zealous followers are become irreligeous to God,
irreuerent toward man, discentious in opinions, disorderous in manners.
Religion it self is brought to a matter of mere dispute, and altercation. Not
without fear, least it befall unto us, as it did unto the builders of babel,
or to the brethren of Gadines. For as the end of scisme is sect. 16.
heresy, so is the end of heresy Atheism. The profession of the Gospel is
made a cloak, wherewith to cover the soul profanation of yt. Hitherto some
testimonies from M. Parkes. The Citations of like nature from his Adversary
protestant D. Willet, are too many, and tedious in this kind, to be related;
Therefore to give some conjecture of them, I will only set down the Title of
his book, which follows in this Willet titu Lordoromast.
manner.

Loidoromastix, that is a scourge for a Rayler: containing a full and
sufficient Answer, unto the unchristian Raylings, slanders, untruths, and
other injurious imputations, vented of late by one Richard Parkes, ^aster of
arts, against the Author of Lymbomastix, wherein three ^undred Raylings,
errors, contradictions, falsisications of fathers, corruptions of scripture,
^ith other gross ouersights, are observed out of the said uncharitable
discourse, by And^^vv Willet Professor of ^iuinitie. Hitherto the only Title
of this privileged protestant Book. What stuff is contained in the whole
work, of this k^^de, and how common a thing it is, for protestant writers to
dissemble, corrupt, falsefie, mistranslate, mi^apply. etc. scriptures, fathers,
and other authorities, to advantage their cause by such de^linges may be
judged by public privilege and allowance given to such writings. Therefore I
shall lawfully conclude this q^estion with these words of M. Ormerod concerning^
Ormer. pict purit g. 4.
protestants; They fill the margents of their books f^ll of places of
scripture^, in a wrong, sense, that ^y this means ^^ey might, more easily
deceive the simple people. they neither care for mayor, minor, nor conclusion,
so^ they may say some thing: the^ point their mergent with s^amefull abu^nge
of scripture. And to show these dealings to be usual, nor only in obscurer
places but in their vni^ersi^ie themselves, cheef^st places of learning among
^^em, in the epistle dedicatorie of the same work he writes thus; There is a
strange manner of preaching Ormer sup. pict. pur^. epist. d^^ic.
in use in many places, ^othe in the universities and else w^ere (...) t^ough
the pu^pit were but a s^^^^olde, in which the prea^^er like a Mast^r ^ss^nce
were to play his prizes, and as though the scripture were but a rattle for
Children, and fools, to make sport withal, he tosseth it hither and
thither, and will not sail to offer yt any violence, to frame it to an
imagined conceit, and to draw it to an idle purpose. Then noe marvel, if the
Ignorant be deceived, and seduced by such writers, and preachers: when noe
Catholic may be suffered to write or speak against them. though they have
by all means they can make, most humbly fought for equal Audience: which the
Protestant Author of the Relation of the state of Religion in some sort
insinuates in these words: Catholics cry maynely in all places Relation of
Religion cap. 29.
for trial by disputation, thus did Campion many years since with us: T^is ^s
I passed t^r^ughe Turricke did the Cardinal Andrea of Constance, and his
Jesuits not long before the same was done to them of Geneu^* and v^rye lately
the Capuchins renwed the chall^ndge. Yett none will be accepted, nor other
answer returned but such sermons and writings as we have related before, and
M. Ormerod describes in these words: Ormer pict purit supr. l. prefat. in
postscript.
diverse books printed against the papists are as fit for the fire, as the
con^uringe books ca. 19. Act. ver. 19* and the publishers of such
fantastical books should be hanged. Book^s are written by protestants, and
suffered to be published, which be a great disgrace to protestant Religion.
Besides their argument of persecution remembered by the same author in the name
of protestants in this manner: The Clin^e, the Gatehouse, the Ormer pict purit.
g. 1.
white lion, and the f^^ete have be^n^ protestants only Arguments, whereby
they have proved their cause those many years. He might have added most
bloody, rigorous, and injurious edicts, Tortures, penalties, arraigm^nts,
judgments, executions etc. And yett they have gained noe more then Julian and
other persecutors have done: Gods Auger unto themselves, and glory and
everlasting renounce unto Catholics for such sufferings, registered by their
own protestant writer a man of great wit, worth, and place among them in
these words; The sufferings Relation of Religion cap. 31.
and martirdomes of english Catholics in these time are recompted to the
height of Neroes, and Dioclesians persecutions, and the sufferers of their side
both in meritts of cause, in extreamitie of Torments, and in constancy, and
pati^nce, to the renouned Martyrs of that heroical church age. Thus this
protestant relates the judgment of forreyne nations concerning english
protestant persecutions toward their contry Catholics.

The 10. particular protestant demonstration is: Because these protestants
contrary to the nature of true believers, and the true church, by their own
doctrine, are by their own testimonies also generally most vile, wicked
impious, and graceless people.
MY next protestant demonstration shall be taken from their lives, manners and
behavior: Before which I s^ppose the common doctrine of these protestants, That
good ^orkes and true faith cannot be separated, testified not only by D.
Willet, D. Field, M. Thomas Rogers Willet Antilog. p. 207 Field Rogers pa. 55.
pa. 56. Articles of Religion art. 12
and others, but also by their highest authorized articles in these words:
Good works do spring out necessarily of a true and lively faith, in so much
that by them a lively faith may be as evidently known, as a tree discerned by
the fruit, Therefore seeing there is, as they tell us, an evident and
necessary conjunction of these, they cannot be separated* which M. Rogers
would not only prove by scriptures in this manner: Rogers sup. cil. Matthew. 7.
16 Math. 3. 12 Ihon 13. 35 luke 6. 36. Ephesians. 1. 1. 1. Ihon 3. 10 Co^fess. Helu
2. ca. 16. Basil ar. 8. Bohem. c. 7. Gal. ar. 22. Belg. 24. Saxon. ar. 3
Witte^b. c. 7 Sueu. c. 4. Powell l. 2. Antichrist. p. 474. 476.
The scripture says and shows that by good works are known, the good trees
from the b^dd, the wheat from the chafe, the true disciples from the false;
the sons of God from the children of Satan, the regenerat^ from the
unbelievers. Heretics unto the Saints and churches, do subscribe. And cites
the protestant Confessions of Heluetia, Basile, Bohemia, France, Belgia
Wittemberge, Sueuia, for thie subscription, and doctrine. To these I add an
other received doctrine of protestants, of the certayntie of their being in
true faith, grace, and to be predestinate, entreated before: and so
confidently taught, that M. Powell calls it blasphemye to deny yt, his words
be these: It is blasphemous doctrine, to say as the church of Rome does, that
says is only in general propositions: as, he that keeps the
commandments, shall enter into life, and he that b^le^ueth and is baptized
shall be saved: and not in these particulars: I shall enter into life: I shall
be saved: or my sins are forgiven. Then if as before by their doctrine true
faith and good works are evidently, and necessarily conjoined to gether, and
inseparable: it is blasphemous by true consequence, to say, that a man, or men,
or church wantinge good works, by their own confession and also overwhelmed
with evil works, and all kind of syns, and iniquities, have true faith, true
Religion, or church, or shall be saved: whereupon I argue thus.

Noe men, society, or Congregation, convicted by their own testimonies to be
^ereticks, which want true faith, can have those things that are in their
judgment inseparable from yt, which be good works: But these english
protestants, as is proved before by them selves, are in this case: Therefore
they have not good works. Therefore not the true church: Therefore not to be
communicated with, in Religeous business. All things in this argument are proved
before, and confessed by these protestants.

Again I argue in this manner: noe men infected and defiled with such evil
works, as depryue, and leave men destitute of grace, can have good works, done
by grace, and in grace; But the english protestants by their own testimonies
before, are in this condition. Therefore they have not good works of grace. The
mayor is evidently true; for, to have grace, and not to have grace, are
contradictories. Therefore if it be true, that protestants have not grace; it
is false to say, that they have grace. The minor proposition is manifestly
proved before, in that protestants are proved by themselves to be Scisma^icks,
usurpers in Religion, profane, liars, dissemblers, feducers, etc. which being
mortal and damnable fyns, must needs depryue them of grace, and leave them
graceless. For as they conclude in their Conference; every Conferenc^ page 41.
grievous sin depriueth of grace and justification. their proposition there is
this; whosoever, though before justified, did commit any grievous syn, as
adultery, murder, treason or the like, did become, ipso facto, subject to Gods
wrath, and guilti^ of damnation, quoad prasentem statum, until they did
repent. Therefore protestants by these their own doctrines, have neither good
works, nor good belief, or faith; And so not to be communicated with, in
such business of Religion.

And from this so generally received protestant doctrine of England, Heluetia,
Basile, Bohemia, Gallia, Belgia, Saxonia, Wittemberge, that the want of good
works is a knowledge and distinguishing sign, belonginge to chafe, false
disciples, children of Satan and unbelievers, to discern them from the true
believers and servants of God, I argue thus.

Noe society, Congregation, or company of men, which by their own
testimonies do not only want good works, but be generally defiled with most
heinous, and grievous syns, can be the children of God, true believers, or to
be communicated with in causes of Religion; But the english protestants are in
this condition; Therefore not the true believers, true church, or to be
communicated with, in spiritual things. The mayor proposition is the common
doctrine of all those protestant churches before remembered. And the minor
proposition of the impiety and wickedness of protestants, is thus proved by
their own writings. M. Hull speakinge of his fellow protestants writes thus;
These are the days whereof our Savior Hull Romans polec. pref^^.
Christ, and his Apostles so long ago prophesied, wherein charity should
wax cold, and faith should searce appear, wherein men should be ^^idebacks
from Christ. and Apostates from true Religion, wherein they should be lovers
of themselves, covetous, cursed speakers, disobedient, vntankefull, unholy,
true breakers, false accusers, despisers of them that are good, traitors,
headie, high minded lovers of pleasures more them of God having a show of
Godliness, but have denied the power thereof: yea wherein men are become users,
newters, temporisers, Atheistes. An other protestant writes in these terms:
The protestans Cort. consid^rat. An. 1605. epist. d^dicat.
Religion of England is much like an evil herb, which if it be not speedely
rooted up, but suffered to spread, will soon ouerspreade the gard^ns of God,
with vice and impiety, as there will scarcely Willet. Antilog pa 28
has these words: We justly complain of the prophanes of these times, and
of the ouerflowinge of iniquity, even where Religion is most puerly
professed. Then that Religion must needs be Parkes Apolog. epist. dedicat.
impuer, by their former doctrine. M. Parkes also speakinge of protestants,
speaks in this manner: every man makes Religion the handemaide of his
affections. We^ are come to that declinge age of the world, foretold by the
Apostle (2. Tim. 1. 2. 3. 4.) wherein men should be lovers of themselves,
fastidious, arrogant, covetous, maledicous, immorigerous, etc. for even such
are these our times, self love has banished sobriety: prid^ humility:
malice charity; disobedience duty; dissension unity; profaneness sanctity;
and in a (...), sayned zeal true devotion. Concerning the pretended ministers
how far they are overwhelmed with wickedness, is spoken before; To which I add
these protestant testimonies: M. Ormerod writes thus; The taunts and
contumelies Ormer pict pur f. 3. l 4.
of Ministers against Ministers are vnchristean. they refuse to salute one an
other, but one spitteth in the face of an other, wishinge the plaque of God to
light upon them, saying they were damned. Neither is this peculiar to english
ministers for the protestant relator of religion writes thus of forreyne
ministers. In the division Relation cap. 4^.
of protestants into their factions, the ministers have so behaved themselves,
that it threatens a great ruin and calamity. neither is there any great
doubt, but if any stay, and agreement could be taken with the turk, all
Germany wers in danger to be in vproare within it self, by intestine
dissension. To this lamentable extremity has the headines of the mininisters
brought it. But of their most wicked both doctrine, and behavior against
princes and common wealth I will entreat hereafter. In the mean time it i^
allreadie evident that this most vile and profane state of wickedness, is not
in some few as may be fownde among men of true Religion, not lyuinge
according to the rules thereof; But general and universal, which must needs
proceed from the nature of their pretended Religion it self, having in yt,
and publishinge to the world, to all men to vewe and follow so many errors
tendinge and leadinge unto all liberty, and licentiousnes of life, and neither
having sacraments, or any instrument of grace, to prevent sins, and their
occasions in any calling or state of men, married o^ unmarried, old or young,
clergy or laity, lyuinge or dyinge, nor any one rule to warrant unto them
for true faith, any one article which they hold, whether in yt self it be
true or false; all which and more absurdities of such nature are
demonstratiuely before proved against them by their own writings.

The 11. particular protestant demonstration, for Catholics just Recusancie,
is: Because the English protestants by their own writings, are not only
enemies to the temporal princes claim of supreamacie, in ecclesiastical
causes, aduauncing their Bishops and presbyteries above yt, but deny also his
suu^ranitie in matters temporal by their consequences.
NOw let us come to those Questions, for which so many Catholics and
Religeous parsons have suffered Martyrdom, and most grievous persecutions, in
the times of king Henry 8. Queen Elizabeth, and our present Sovereign king
James, the claymed supreme spiritual power of temporal princes in cause
ecclesiastical, in this kingedome, and that power and Authority concerning
temporal princes, which these english protestants affirm Catholics do give
to the Pope of the highest apostolic See of Rome, proved before by these
protestants to be supreme head, and governor an earth of Christ's church,
and greatest commanding judge in spiritual causes. I am to prove in this
demonstration; That these protestant Bishops, puritanes, and presbytery, by
their own testimonies give not so much power and authority to the te^porall
prince as we do: And yett arrogate and challendge to themselves in their
pretended Bishops and presbiterie more command jurisdiction and authority
over temporal kings, and princes, then Catholic writers, and schools allow
or attribute, to the Pope of Rome. And that if the parliament had framed an
oathe as much concerning the power of their Bishops and presbiteries, as their
so named Oathe of alleadgeance, concerns the Popes priuil^dges; Noe
protestant or puritan by the grounds of their Religion should, could, or
might have taken yt. What they would or will do in such a case, I dare not
undertake, for men so convicted before to be by their own testimonies most
notorious dissemblers, deceauers, wilful seducers, liars, perjured and
foresworne people in matters of Religion. And this is made most manifest, that
allthough they generally condemn their own Religion for heretical, their
service for damnable, their ministry for Antichristian or none at all, their
supposed ordination for ridiculous; The articles of their Religion for false,
and erroneous, Their Canons and Censures to be ungodly and unlawful, as is
proved by themselves before, and absolutely deny the kings supreamacie in most
dangerous degree as will be evident against them by their own writings in
this Chapter, yett contrary to all ^ruthe, Religion, conscienc^ and moral
honesty they have generally sworn, protested, subscribed unto, and do
practice to their own damnation in these things that which is directly
opposite and contrary to their own Conscience, and judgment in Religion.
Therefore to proceed in my first intended purpose and proposition I argue in
this manner.

Noe men which by their own testimonies, and writings, do generally dislike,
or disallowe of the temporal princes supreamacie in spiritual and
ecclesiastical Causes, and in strange and danigerous order, can or may in
conscience by oathe and swearinge allow yt; But this is the common estate of
english protestants, by their own confessions, published in writing;
Therefore they cannot in conscience swear to the oathe of supreamacie, in
temporal princes, or allow yt for true doctrine. The mayor proposition is
evidently true, for in so dyinge they are perjured, and forsworn, and in a
matter of high moment And all perjury is damnable. And so noe spiritual
communication to be had with such men in such matters, or in things dangerous
unto, or against Regalitie or lawful regiment, allowed by the law of God and
true Religion. The minor proposition, that protestants in England are in this
condition, is thus proved by their own Testimonies; The protestant author of
the book named Certain demaundes writes in these words: The protestant
Bishops do not attributie Cert. demand. An 1605. p. 54
any more spiritual authority unto the King, to make, constitute, and
ordeyne Canons, Constitutions, Rites, or Ceremonies, then they give unto him
spiritual power to preach the world, adminis^er the sacraments, and
excommunicate. But the articles of their Religion confirmed and thus published
by his majesty resolves this matter in these words: We give not to our
Articles of Relig. ar. 37*
Prince the ministrings either of Gods word, or of the sacraments; the which
thing the injunctions also^ sometime set forth by Elizabeth our late Queen,
do most plainly testify. Therefore as the Conclusion before is; The
protestants of England cannot by their own doctrine, without perjury swear to
the kings supreamacie. Therefore parlamentarie pro^estants and puritans also
holdinge this opinion against the kings supreamacie, and yett for preferment,
or other carnal respects, having sworn unto yt, are perjured and forsworn in
a damnable degree. And thus by this title the pretended ministry of England is
a perjured Ministry by their own writings.

Again I argue in this manner; whatsoever, Ministry claymeth their calling to
be by law divine, diuinae ordinationis, do by the doctrine of english
protestants deny the kings supreamacie; But both the parliament protestants, and
puritanes, thus claim their calling of ministry; Therefore by their own
doctrine, deny the kings supreamacie. The mayor proposition is proved by the
protestant author of the book named Certain Considerations, in these words:
if the english protestants* Cert. consider. pa. 46.
opinion be mayntayned, that Bishops jurisdiction is de iure diuino, his
majesty and all the nobility ought to be subject to excommunication,
Therefore by this protestant reason, the king is not supreme: for he that is
supreme or superior cannot be excommunicated by the inferior, which has not
power over the supe-superior, much less over him that is supreme. Again, he
that is supreme, is subject to none, because not inferior, but above, and
commaundinge all. Yett here the king is both named subject, and Censured as an
inferior, and to that penance and punishment so grievous, that the protestant
author of Assertion thus expresses Assertion An. 1604. page 326.
it inflicted on princes by their supreamacies; Excommunication is terrible to
princes, and rulers, a delyuery of the soul to satan, punishment of the
body, and danger of go^ds. Excommunication is so powerful, as it can
constreyne princes and rulers to do their duties. M. Ormerod also remembers
this protestant doctrine Ormer. dial. 1.
in these words: princes ought to submitt themselves to the Seniors of the
church, and they ought to be co^te^t to be ruled, and governed, punished,
corrected excommunicated by their discretion, and at their pleasur. Then
whether these protestants can in conscience swear to the kings supreamacie as
they have done, or swear an oathe so much concerning their Bishops, and
presbitery, as the named Oathe of alledgeance, concerns the Popes
prerogative, and whether it is more reasonable for any one temporal prince to
acknowledge* The Bishop of the cheifest Apostolic See, whom all Catholic
princes of Christendom and the church of Christ ever acknowledged for their
supreme spiritual pastor, and governor, to be also unto him, as he is and
ever was to all his progen^tors kings and other princes; or singularly with so
manifest danger against scriptures, councels, fathers, histories, and all
authorities, and examples, to make himself, his soul, body, life, and goods
as before, subject, and at the pleasure of his subjects, every pretended Bishop
in his dioces, and every Minister of the presbytery in his parish or
division; I leave these for others to conclude, only I add that these
protestants by this their claymed superiority over princes, have within less
then forty years disinherited, deprived, and spoiled more temporal princes
of their lawful territories and dominions as is proved against them by a
Catholic writer of our nation; Then the Pope by any prerogative, title,
Mother. Answ. ca. 8. c. 9. See the protestants there cited.
or claim with the consent of kingdoms has taken upon him to alter the
Regiment of temporal kings, from the first beginning of Christianity to
these days. But more of this matter hereafter.

The minor proposition that both the protestant Bishops now, and the
presbiterie, claim their callings, Iure diuino, by the law of God, and not
from the prince, is evidently proved before. And manifest in probation of the
first proposition. For the laws of this land, (and we admit noe others) are
so far from making it the office and power of any Bishop, presbiterie, parson,
or society whatsoever ^o excommunicate their prince, deliver his soul to
Satan, punish his body, on danger his goods, constreyne, rule, govern,
correct and punish him, at their discretion and pleasure, (as their own words
before be) that the very conspiring or consenting unto such things is a state
of high Treason; and greatest offense to law in this kingedome. Therefore they
must blasphemousely claim as they do other things from the law o^ God, noe
other in force here as before. Then I may say with their own protestant writer
in these words; The kings supreamacie is fallen Certain co^sideratio^s An.
1605. page 47.
down, and overthrown in the most dangerous degree by the english
protestant proceedings. And this might suffice for this purpose demonstratiuely
proving what I promised. But I argue further in this manner.

Whoeseuer do not only say that the protestant Bishops, or presbiterie, have
the supreamacie in spiritual things, and kings have nothing therein to deal,
but must submitt their scepters, and Crowns, lose their Royalty, cease to be
kings, not to be obeyed, to be deposed, vnthroned, bereaved of all power, and
principality, etc. as the protestant ministry shall please, or denownce, may
not be communicated with in Religion, either by the law of God, or of this
kingedome; But the english protestant doctrine is such, by their own writings;
Therefore not to be communicated withal in Religion. The mayor proposition is
so evidently true, that it is manifest spiritual treason, heresy and
Rebellion to God, and civil Treason in most high degree against our king,
by the laws of this nation, to deny yt. And the minor proposition is thus
proved by these protestants: one protestant writes thus: C^rtaine demau^. An.
1605. p. 42. Couell exa^. ^ag. 12.
To establish the command of the civil magistrate the squar and plumet of
subjects conscience, is to wrest the scriptures, and a Tyranny. D. Couell
records their opinion thus; First fruits, tenthes, subsedies, contributions
of ecclesiastical parsons to the prince, are sacrilege and Robbery. D. Willet
writes in this manner; Princes ar^ not to Will^t Antil pa. 151. Assertion An.
1604. Ormer pict purit. epist. dedic. and dial. 1.
be obeyed in all ecclesiastical laws. An other writes thus; The temporal
prince never had any spiritual power in this kingedome. M. Ormered sets
down their doctrine, in these words; Christian Sovereigns ought not to be
called heads under Christ, of the particular and visible churches, within their
dominions princes ought not to meddle with the making of laws, orders, and
Ceremo^ies, for the church. As the ministers Ormerod supr. d. 4.
meddle not with making of civil laws, and laws for the common wealth: s^^
the civil Magistrate has not to ordeyne Ceremonies pertayninge to the
church. Noe civil Magistrates in Counsels, dialog. 1.
or assemblers, for church matters, can either be chief moderator, over
Ruler, judge or determiner. To be breife in this matter; D. Morton perceauing
that denial of the princes supreamacie Morto^ co^f. of the pop. auth par. 3 p.
25. p. 26.
was proved to be the doctrine of their Bishop Bilson, D. Fulke, D. Whitaker,
D. Sutcliffe, D. Couell, D. Downame, D. Willet, M. Hooker, M. Bell, and others,
chief writers among them, denies it not, either for them, or himself; but
refers the matter to S. Leo Pope of Rome, who as he was one of the most
learned godly fathers, that ever were, so he is known and acknowledged by
protestants to be the greatest patron of the Popes supreamacie, that was in
that primative and learned age, and taught as M. Ormerod tells us; that God
did assist and direct that See in decrees. And yett neither king Ormer. pict
pap. pa. 44.
nor Pope must be supreme head when it pleases them; But either their
Bishops or presbitery. M Ormerod thus relates their opinion* Ormerod dial. 2.
To these three ioinily, that is the ministers, Senion and deacons, is the
whole regiment of the church to be committed. And how far this Regiment by
them extends is before expressed even to punish and depose princes; and M.
Ormerod further recompteth in these words; Princes must remember, to subject
themselves, to the church, to Ormerod. dial. 1.
submitt their scepters, to throw down their Crowns, before the church; yea
to lick the dust of the feet of the church. And these so well agreing
protestants are, or were so far from swearinge to the supreamacie of a
Temporal prince, that in Scotland as they themselves witness they caused our
Soueraige king James to swear to their supreamacie: The words of the
protestant defendor of the ministers Reasons are these; The Kings majesty has
not Defense of the minist. reas. page 3. Survey of the Book of common prayer
p. 23*
only subscribed, but sworn to the discipline. An other protestant writer
has these words: is it not generally known, that his majesty has by
subscription, sworn to maintain the discipline in Scotland, in these words?
To the which we join ourselves willingly in doctrine, faith, Religion,
discipline, and use of the holy sacraments, as a lively member of the same;
promising^ and swearinge by the great name of our Lord, that we shall defend
the same, according to our vocation, and power all the days of our life,
under the pain contained in the law, and danger both of body and soul, in
the day of Gods fearful judgment. And yett his majesty has told us before,
that these men to obtain their purpose, first gave supreamacie to the Queen
there; But their purpose now obtained the King himself by their Relation
subscribeth and swears to their supreamacie, as a subject to them as his
Superiors.

What most horrible and odious positions about depriuinge, deposing, killinge,
and murtheringe of princes, not sutinge to their humors in Religion, not
without horror to be named, are recorded by their brother Whittingham
Wittingh. pref. to Goodni* book.
deane of durrhame, and affirmed to be approved by the best learned at Geneua,
Calvin, Whittingham, Goodman, Gilby, Couerdale, (one of their pretended
Bishops from whom D. Sutcliffe before claymeth their ministry) Whiteheade
english protestants and others, and to be seen in they survey of holy
discipline attributed to their late protestant Archbishop of Canterbury Survey
of of Hol. discipl.
D. Bancroft, which I breefely remember here though before the time of my six
limited years: Because the protestant Authors of the offer of conference
speaking in the name of all their protestant profession, call those positions
the doctrine of the worthiest protestants, and thus Offer of Co^fer p. 18. 19
affirm, they consent in judgment with those parsons, and churches, and
together with other churches hold the foresaid positions. And Doctor Couell
will secure me in this point, that I do Couell exa^. page, 35. 36.
not exceed my limitts: his words be these: That it is lawful to kill
wicked kings, wa^ the doctrine of the best and most learned about Geneua and
those parts. Neither need we to seek these obedient doctrines at Geneua
where they deprived their temporal prince, or in Scotland deposinge their
lawful Queen and Princess, England it self will yield us too much choice of
these doctrines. M. Ormerod does thus relate them: what King, Prince or
Emperor shall disanull Ormer. pict purit. epist. ded. etc. 2. supr. d. 3.
the discipline; he is to be reputed Gods enemy, and to be held unworthy to
reign above his people. And more plainly of all princes in general in these
words; Kings and princes are naturally enemies to the liberty of the
gospel; and can never patiently hear the yeoke of Christ. The sup. ^. 1.
government of the common wealth must be framed according to the government
of the church, where there must be equality, and paritie. Whervppon their
Bishop Barlowe thus relates the speech of his majesty in their public
Conference; The presbytery as well agrees with a monarchy, as God and the
devil* lack and Tom and Conference at Hampt. Court. p. 79
Will and Dicke will Censure the King, and all their proceedings at their
pleasure, in Scotland he was a king without state, without honor,
without order: where beardelesse boys would brave him to his face. And in
open parliament pa. 4. sup.
his majesty's words be these: The sect of puritanes is unable to be
suffered in any well governed K. speech in parlam. 19. Mart. An. 1603.
commonvvealthe. Then the parlamentarie protestants agreing with them as they
have absolutely told us, in all essential things, such as these be, must
needs be as guilty in these Crimes. And the rather because their protestant
Brethren that were Authors of the offer Offer of Co^f^r. p. 35.
of Conference write in these words; The ministers do much more advance the
Roall dignity, then the prelates do. Then if the protestant Bishops, with
their ministers do more disallowe the Royal dignity, then the puritans which
as before do utterly overthrow and take yt away, they must needs deny all
Royal dignity and Regalitie, especially if they will retain the name of
protestants: for the same protestants have further written that those positions
so contrary to the princely and Regal state, were the doctrine of the
worthiest protestants. And to Offer. supr. page 18. 19
show that these parliament protestants, and some in credit among them, will
be of the same opinion with these worthiest protestants; D. Morton confirms
the manifest treasons and Rebellion of his fellow protestants in seekinge
Morton Replic part 2. page 100** 101
against the statutes of this kingedome and the last will and testament of K.
Henry 8. not only to disable the Regiment of Queen Mary, and Elizabeth, but
to overthrow the inheritance and right of his majesty, to be lawful Actions.
To justify the Rebellion of his protestant Bishops Cranmer and Ridley he
writeteth thus: Morton s^^* page 110.
whereof can you accuse Cranmar, Ridley and all protestants, for taking Arms
against Queen Mary? from whence I conclude if they were to be accused of
nothing as evil; Then because, non datur actus indifferens in indiuiduo, no^
Act in particular, is indifferent, but good or bad, their Act, not to be
accused for evil, by Doctor Morton; must needs be good. And so to make
Rebellion against a lawful prince is not only lawful but virtuous and
commendable by his divinity. That every of their pretended Bishops and
presbiteries must judge in causes of princes, (...) proved by them before. Yett
he approves these protestant propositions; when a king commands against
God, he usurps page 116.
Gods throne, and herein he loses his Royalty, which is to be obeyed.
Terrene princes bereave themselves of power, when they arise against God, yea
are unworthy to be accounted in the number of men; Therefore we must rather
spitt on their heads, then obey them. He mayntayneth Caluins page 119.
expellinge the lawful prince of Geneua; and these propositions of Luther*
protestant^ hands must be embrued with blood; and that be page 120.
had warrant from God to battail^ against Princes. The positions of Tyndall
were so impious, that I find them not printed in Fore his monuments of the
last editions yett D. W^llet, auoweth them for lawful doctrine. Wherein these
be contained. Every man is Lord of other men's goods. The children of faith
are under no^ Willet Anti page 203
law. Syn cannot condemn us. He that desires more may read M. Fox in the
first edition* He also compares the rebelleous, death of page 178. up.
Zwinglius to the death of good Josias. D. Field speakinge of that great
protestant Rebellion, writes thus. That Zvvingliu^ dying in the Field with
his contry^en in defense of their Religion i^ Filled. l. 3. page 188.
an excellent proof and demonstration of the christian magnanimity, and
resolution that rested in him, Then if it is not only a lawful act, but an
excellent Demonstration of the grea^e heroical virtue, Christian magnanimity;
That princes are not to be obeyed but spitt upon if they differ in Religion*
that protestant hands must be ^mbrued with blood in such affairs, every man
is Lord of others goods Protestants do well in d^posinge or expellings
princes: ^^ these parliament protestants teach us, I may justly conclude; The
opinions of them both be most damnable Owen l. pil. and her. pa 46 47. 48.
49 50. 51. 52. 53.
in this point: And therefore they are not to be communicated with in such
Religion. To these M. David Owen adds the rebellious both doctrine and
practice of these prim^ pro^^stants; The Citizens of Geneua, Ihon Guluy^^,
Christopher Goodman, Knoxe, T^eodore Beza, the outlandish chur^hes in London;
Iunius, Eusebius, Philadelphus, Danaeus, George Buchanan, Thomas Cartwright,
Hermanus Renegerus, Robert Rollo^ke, William Buchanan, and others, their very
names are too tedious to be recited, their treasonable positions, and
practices, able to furnish a whole volume, and not to be contained in this
brouiate. what their agreement is in this point will appear by the very title
of the 9. chapter of his book in these words: The ninth chapter shows the
general Consent of the modern puritanes, touching Owen supr. cap 9. page 46
the coertion, deposition, and killinge of kings, whom they call Tyrants.
Therefore ^seing this killing doctrine, is the general doctrine of them, that
agree with protestants in all essential things, protestants also must hold
them, and we may not communicate with such men, in such things; both for
this, and so many evident demonstrations, of the like nature before, from
their own published, and publicly printed, or allowed writings, and
proceedings in Religeous business. Many others that might be added in this
matter, I Willingly pass over, as little needful, where so many and manifest
condemnations of these protestants both Religion, and persecution, have passed
from their own pens, pulpitts, parlaments, consistories and sentences against
themselves, to their everlasting shame and confusion. Which I would also have
passed over among other sufferrings with silence, had not their manifold, and
late barbarous dealings, especially of some in their foe termed ministry, and
their depen^^nts, and confederates enforced me to this manner of confutation.
That which remains: God of his infinite mercy bless, preserve, and prosper
his Majesty, Queen, and Children, together with the nobility, and this
kingedome with all spiritual, and temporal blessings, and graces: and convert
all that be in error, to his holy truth. An so I make an end.

FINIS.
The faults escaped in printing I pray thee gentle reader of thy Curtesy to
Correct them.


