A SERMON BRIEFLY COMPARING THE ESTATE OF KING SOLOMON AND his Subjects
together with the condition of Queen ELIZABETH and her people.

PREACHED IN SAINT Mary's in Oxford the 17. of November, and now printed with
some small alteration, by JOHN PRIME, 1585.



IMPRINTED AT OXFORD by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University. 1585.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader Grace and Peace.
PRESENT occasion (gentle Reader) moves me to present thee with this little
Sermon, lately preached and earnestly requested at my hands. Once printing
does ease the often copying out. Verily therein is no great matter of such
moment, but only a desire to affect and stir up some duetifull cogitations in
the minds of the hearers in these last and unthankful days.

And soothly, I was the less careful to perfourm many proofs either of the
Princes sacred authority or happy government in the execution and fruits
thereof, being privy aforehand to the printing of M. D. Bilsons very learned
and like careful book in these respects, even now coming forth, by way of
thorough and perfect answer to turbulent wits and troublesome heads, and vain
defenders of falsely so called Catholics against the necessary and merciful
execution of due Justice and her Majesty's Laws.

And herein (good Reader) my very heart rejoices that the long barennesse of
one and the same College at length with much ado first has brought forth him
enabled to encounter with the best of our old deceived predecessors, to
wit: D. Cole, D. Harpsfield, D. Harding, D. Sanders, Dorman, Rastall, D.
Stapleton, Points, Marshall, Fouler, Hide, William Rainoldes and the rest. God
of his goodness increase our knowledge zeal and discretion, to the discharge of
our duties unto the full. Exodus 3.
Pharao non dimittet nisi in manu valida: Popery is not overcome by silence,
ignorance and sufferance. And know you my brethren of greater ability and gifts
(who ever you be) it is a certain experienced truth; Papists never flock
together, never mutter Asdod and Spanish in corners, never vent and sparse
abroad lies and fables at ordinary meetings, never write, crake and vaunt so
fast, but as croking toades against a storm. God make us wise to discern who
be who, and ready pressed always to divert their spite, and defend his truth.
Remember that word: Negotiamim, Luc. 13.
donec veniam. Hide not your talents, omit not oportunities, occupy till I
come. Fare you well in Christ Jesus.

New College in Oxford 27. Nouemb. 1585.
1. KINGS 10.9. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved thee, to set thee on
the throne of Israel, because he loved Israel for ever, and made thee King to
do equity and righteousness.
THese words, some years 1574.
since (as some of you may remember) upon this yearly and happy occasion
were most learnedly, largely, and effectually debated with you. In resuming
the same again, my purpose is not to venture flight with the Eagle, or to run
with the Giant, or any way to compare with that excellent man. Only, for good
reasons moving me there-unto, I have rather chosen to sow in a ground ready
plowed up to my hand, than to break up a new at mine own choice.

Without more ado, or farther impertinent prefacing, these words and the
whole story of the Queen of Saba is not only recorded 1. King. 10
here, but also word for word repeated again in the latter book of
Chronicles, as a matter worthy all memory and admiration. 2. Chron. 9.
For, that a woman and she a Queen, and (as our Savior notes) from the
farthest parts of the earth, Mat. 12.45
only moved with the fame of a wise man, should come so readily to learn
wisdom, is more than strange, and deserves everlasting praise with all
posterity in ages succeeding, and she shall rise at the last day of doom and
judgment to the condemnation of the marvelous sloth of some whole generations.
Some other, Luc. 11.31.
her like, would have dealt after a diverse and a dislike sort, as for example,
reasoning thus: I am a woman, by nature weak and can not; a Queen, and need
not; of sovereign estate and it were unseemly to leave my people at random
and to uenture at auentures and to travel abroad. The way is long and tedious:
the journey dangerous, full of cruel beasts, and of men worse than beasts:
the fame is but a report, and reports are not always true. But she
fore-casteth none of all these doubts and inconveniences, neither the
uncertainty of the event, nor peril of the way, nor tediousness of the
journey, nor dignity of her person, nor infirmity of her sex. She, as a fair
type, and a timely first-fruite of the gentiles, presents herself among the
people of GOD, preferring the adventure for wisdom, more, Prou. 3.15.
than for silver, gold, or what ever thing else of richest price. And being
now come to Jerusalem, conferreth at large with Solomon himself, and
receives special answer in every thing above expectation. After a while,
she surueieth his buildinges, and takes particular view of his whole house
and government, and when she had considered all; the order of his realm, the
array of his seruiters, the manner of his waiters, their attire, their diet,
their blessed room and place whereby they enjoyed the happy presence of so
woonderfullie wise a Prince, that could answer to every her question,
demand, and motive that she could make, she was all amazed, and her spirit
was taken from her. And coming to herself again, she breaks forth no
doubt, by the spirit of God into the words of my text: Blessed be the Lord,
thy God which loved thee etc.

A blessed God and a loving, a blessed Prince, and a blessed people beloved of
God.

A blessed God, to be praised and blessed for ever (as the Apostle speaks)
Amen. Romans 1.25. and 9.5.
But wherewith this Queen begins, namely, with the praise and blessing of
God, God willing, we mean to interlace all, and end the whole. In the mean
while, consider we apart Gods blessings, 1 upon Salomom, and 2 upon Salomons
subjects.


1 Salomons blessing, and lovely estate is therefore termed so and so
pronounced here because god placed him in the throne of regiment amongst his
people. And in truth, to be a plant in the Lords orchard, to be the
woorkmanshippe of his own hands, toward the top, or in the middle, or near
the foundation, or where-about so-euer in the frame of his building, even to
be the poorest doore-keeper in all his house, Psalm. 84.10.
is no small benefit, or common blessing: yet is this more properly his doing,
and he alone chiefly planteth and places all that are allotted to chiefest
roumes. The Sun places not it self above the Moon and stars: The head
sets not it self upon the shoulders: By Prou. 8.15
me (says the wisdom of God) Kings reign: as if it were said, if by
others, as it is complained in the Prophet Osce, Ose. 8.4.
then not by me, and therefore by me alone (says the wisdom of God) Kings
reign: that is, they bear their scepters and wear their swords and sit in
their thrones, BY ME they reign.

And, great reason we thus judge of Sovereign authority. All things in the
world: the least, the vilest, the least of account; the leaf of a flower, the
fall of a sparowe, the feather of a bird, the food of ravens, the fodder of
oxen, the brissell of a hog (as Augustine speaks,) the tears of our eyes,
and color of our hair come all within the span and compass of God almighties
power-full doing, and particular direction. Now, he that cares for little
things, is he careless of the greatest? He that cares for the hair, he can
not but care for the body: and he that cares for the body, cares for the
head; and he that respects the body, the head, the hair, the whole, the
parts, great and less, principal and excrementall of private men, without all
question regards much more the body politic and the head of the
commonwealth. Romans 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.
All authority is of God, and therefore kingly most of all, even as all the
waters ishue from the Ocean, but more immediately the great rivers.

This speech were utterly needless, were we not fallen into the waining of
the world, Jude 8.
wherein S. Iudes reprehension may justly take place: when men are not only
despisers of governors, as Shimei was of David, 2. Sam. 16.5
but evil speakers and misconsterers of authoitrie it self and sovereign
government in the highest degree. Treason against the Prince is no sin
against God, says Euerard Hance, as you may read in the wise and True report
of the Arrainment and execution of the Popish Traitor. Euerard Hance, alias
Ducket


Our present story, of the enthronizing of Solomon informs us better, and
teaches us a contrary lesson, and shows plainly, whence princely government
is deriues and does depend. I know, Berzabe Salomons mother, David his Father,
Nathan the Prophet, Zadock the Priest, were all for Solomon. But Adoniah was
the elder brother, and Solomon the younger; Abiathar the high priest anointed
Adoniah, and not Solomon; Salomons mother was a blemished woman, and Adoniah
was in a kind of real possession of the kingdom, and what humane means can we
imagine then could hinder him and them, and help Solomon to remedy all? Ioab
a great man and a mighty for valor, cunning and courage, would venture limme
and life, and had set his rest upon the cause.

Wherefore Bennaiah when he saw how the world went, 1. Reg. 1.36.
yet on the contrary side perceiving how David was resolved that Solomon for all
this should succeed, wished from his heart it might be so: So be it, said he,
and not contented therewith adds after in few but effectual words, praying:
The Lord God of the Lord my king ratify it. As if he should have said,
Berzabe, Zadocke, Nathan, and I, yea David himself would have it so: but God
say so to. For if God say no it can not be, but if he say so notwithstanding
all vnlikelihoods, if God ratified it, it shall stand, and must be so.

A worthy and a wise and a true saying (and to conclude this matter) most
agreeable to the Psalm: Promotion comes neither from the East, nor the West.
No, Psalm. 75.6.
my brethren nor from the north, nor south. The Lord of Lords and king of
kings and governor of all things, rules, ouerruleth al in all specially al
these cases of regiment even by his plenary power and at his own and absolute
pleasure: as has been vouched in general and in particular is declared that
his mere love to Prince and people it was that placed Solomon, and
disappointed Adoniah.

But in sooth, is it such a blessing so great a benefit proceeding all of love
to be a king? How says one, that the Princely cloak is lined all within with
pinnes and pricking needles? An other that a crown is not worth the stouping
for? A third, that, if profer were made necessarily to accept either present
death, or the Princely Diadem, he would make willing choice rather to go
straitway to his grave, than any way to the chair of estate. And because
domestical examples touch nearest, and affect most, our sovereign and careful
queen the Lords anointed over us, in an exhortation to her council and
judges, for a due consideration over her people, among other words ever to be
remembered of their honors, has these of her self: I care not for my self, my
life is not dear unto me: My care is for my people. In. B. Jewels view of the
Bull.
I pray god who ever succeeds me, he as care full as I am. They, who might
know what cares I bear, would not think it so great a joy to wear the crown.

In the book of Judges the ninth chapter there is a parable and a story to
this purpose; read you the story, Judges. 9.
I will touch only the parable: In deed the sweet fig tree, the pleasant
vine, the fat olive refused preferment, when it was offered. But (beloved)
figtrees, vines and Olives are geisen and rare, and grow not in every ground.
The scratching bra^ble, that is rife and common in every hedge, redily
accepts the offer, and willed all the trees to come under his shadow without
straining cursie at the matter. Generally, Adams children, some more, some
less, and almost al, have some desire to ride the horse they cannot manage. 2.
Sam. 15.
Absalo^ in this affection embezelleth the hearts of the subjects from his own
most loving father. Hester. 6.6.
Aman blown up with this wind would needs ride the kingly horse, and wear
the Princely robe and ring, with sound of trumpet and proclamation made in open
sight. Thus shall the man be honored whom the king will honor. Cyprian. de
Ten. and Ierunio.
Yea ambition (says Cyprian) sleeps (and lodges) in the bosom of Priests.
No, no, Cyprian, lodge it may, but where it lodges it can not sleepne makes
men wake when other me^ sleep. Neither will I wander abroad for proafe
hereof: It caused York to strive with Canterbury, Cardinal Woolsey.
and Canterbury often to struggle with the king, and York again of later
years it made to be against and for the Pope: and lastly to the end to be
Pope himself he would venture all England, as the Pope does always al
Christendom to maintain his triple crown. Philarchie lust for honor, and
love of imperie troubled not only some single men, Nazian. ad Procop.
but (as in Nazianzens time) whole councels were so sea-sick with this passion,
that Nazianzenes quiet nature was fully resolved never to resort to such distem
pered assemblies. But if it be thus in ye priest hood, much worse it can not
choose but be in their minds, whose life is a worldly glory and whose only
desire is to be aloft, to be the monarks, if it be but of a molehill: and yet
some whole dominions are to little for some, and sometimes meaner men of lower
lot can dream even Joseph's dream, Genes. 37.
but not with Iosephes spirit: that all the sheaues of the field must stoop to
their sheaue, that the sun moon and stars, the Queen, Nobles and realm must
bow and bend before a stinking snuf, a Stukeley, Thomas Stukeley.
a faithless person and perjured beast, and yet the best instrument of holy
fathers pride. But pride has had her deserved ruin. As Absolons fancifal
head was hanged in his own locks, and Haman on his own gallows, so Stukeley
and Stukeleis like have had their just deserts, and drank the wine of their own
vintage.

Notwithstanding all this, to use Hamans words to a truer sense, most true it
is: So and so and in greater, truer, and incomparably better sort shall he be
honored, who^ God will honor, with this most honorable calling of being a lawful
prince to the end he be his own lieutena^t, 2. Chro. 9.8.
to sit in ye throne in his own stead, to be and bear the image of his majesty,
to have the credit of kingdoms, and care of his people, to feed Israel, to
guide Jacob, to govern Judah, to be a foster-father and a nursing mother unto
his Church; to be the instrument and angel of God, as the woman of Thecuah
said to David, to be the horse and chariot, the bones and strength; to be the
head, and the eye of direction, for justice, equity and good order in a
commonwealth. This is no small prerogative or common privilege. And in one
word, this was Salomons case: and was this no blessing?

2 In the second place consider we the blessing and love of God toward
Salomons subjects. As the wickedness of the king brings the wrath of God
upon the whole realm Genesis 20.9. so when wise and very wise men govern, the
gouermnent is stable, and they so governed are most happy. As when Solomon
should build the temple, he cared little for hey, for straw, for vnte^pered
mortar, for unskillful workmen, he sent for Hyera^, and provided (as David his
father had done before him) for the gold of Ophir, and cedars of Libanus: Even
so God in the edifice of his chosen peculiar people, for the greater benefit
and beuty of the whole work, he chooses no Nabal, no fool as Nabal was to be
their ruser, but Solomon the wisest man that ever was. If the prince be wise,
the people be the wiser; if he be blessed of God, they be most happy. Si caecus
caeco praeierit: If the head be il, the members cannot prosper: if the blind
lead the blind, they both fall into the pit and the pit is bottomless: but if
the ese be sound, the fish is sweet. A good neighbor (as we say) is a great
commodity, a grations prince has no comparison to speak of. A candle lights
a house, the sun the world: a well is compete^t for a few, it is the stream that
caseth the country: one beam bears an other, one piece of a bough feeds
another; it is the foundation, it is the root that vpholdeth the building and
cherishes the whole tree. Somway semblably in this case, Israel reaped mutual
help each of other, but the sun, the general light, the stream, the
foundation, the root of their bliss and whole repose next and immediately under
God depended altogether and rested most in having Solomon to be their prince.
Under him, their peace and plenty was more than wonderful, silver was as
common as ruble in the streets, and every man sat without any fear at full
ease under his vine. Were these no blessings? No dout the Lords blessings and
rare effects of his singular love, wherein he blessed Solomon and by him them,
pouring the ointment on his head that it might descend and be derived to the
rest parts of the whole body of the commonwealth. Not the poorest woman, but
had access, 1. Kin. 3.17.
and inioyed her right, as appears in the strife for the live child, and
whose the dead should be. So wise, so willing a prince was he, so happy a
people were they, and (which was all in all) so loving a God was God unto them
both.

And here I pray you have resort your selves unto, and view the story as it
lies in the Bible, and you shall perceive I have but tripped over things. And
now, because I am desired to be short, who never loved length, right
worshipful and dear countrymen, look we homeward a little, and as it were out
of the looking glass of this scripture by way of reflection I beseech you
consider what blessings also on us God has bestowed, by what means they have
been received, and what dutifulnes is due therefore. Flattery becomes no
place, but lest of all the pulpit. Be it spoken to the praise of God for it is a
truth, and you, who know any thing and have a true taste of things, know I
lie not; God has blessed her majesty with a wise, a wealthy, a peaceable, and
a godly reign.

THE time was, when Steven Gardener Bishop of Winchester and canceller of
England, a wilier serpent than all his brethren, worse than Abiathar, and as
bad as Achitophel laid his complot to prevent her preferment, and in deed
upon vain surmises without all proof or legal caling to question most
wrongfully brought her Grace to that heavy and doleful plight, that for grief
of mind, and sorrow of heart she heartily wished rather to have been a poor
milkmaid in Woodstocke park than a Kings daughter, and a Queens sister, and
heir apparent to sundry Bealmes.

The Lord William Howard and the Lord Williams, and some others could do no
more than they could.
In all the world she found no friend, no able friend, no firm hope or present
help but in God alone, the sure rock of her foundation. Only he that is mighty
magnified her and took her from the prison, as Joseph from the stocks, and
made her our Queen, and as it were a Martha to provide for Christ in his
members, and as a Marie to hear him in his ministers, and as a very Debora,
to execute justice, equity and truth in this English Nation. And he, that
preferred her at the first, preserves her still, (and preserve her ever.) But
all this was, because he had a tender, a favorable, and fatherly respect to
her and our former troubles for ever more.

Since her happy reign, some unhappy persons (as what field has not some
blasted ears?) have sought (and if they will needs be traitors, long may they
seek but all in vain) the ruin of the realm, and destruction of her person,
but they have not prevailed at al. The master of all misrule Pius the fifth,
and his Bull which Harding and his fellow procured, and Felton affixed in her
principal city, Moortons conspiracy with Westmerland and his accomplices in the
North, Daluies promised aid; the great and popular man with all his potent
endeavors, rumors and vauntings of the Duke of Florence and Don of Austria,
what have they effected? have they prevailed? In late times and very lately of
green memory, Mendoza his travels and treacherous embassay: his and his
casting lots for our garments, Throgmortons beadroll of recusants, and calendar
of Inglish help for the inuading of England, Ardens villainous desire,
Somerfieldes dagge, and Ap-harries dagger, as Stories axe in former times, have
missed their wicked purposes all, and have not prevailed. Foreign enemies, home
libellers and rebels mighty or weak, many or few, subtle or rash, secret or
open, they have undone themselves, against us, our Queen and contrary they
have not prevailed.

Herein it is not to be denied, her sacred Majesty and her most honorable
council have Argus eyes (or rather to speak in this place more religiously,
and less profanely) In great measure, wise hearts have they, as Salomo^ had;
her friends are many and sure, her nobles trusty, her servants true, and her
subjects loyal, her people willing and her realm no beggar. Silver is not as
plenty, as stones in the streets, yet most men have more plate now than their
great grandfathers had peuter in elder age, and for general munitions, the like
store of weapons, armor, shot, powder, and people were never comparable in her
ancestors dates, her navy incomparably strong and the sea about us a maine
defense. But, but (dear countrymen, and christians) as I told you the other
day, except God had watched and warded and kept our city, except he had held
his holy hand over us, except he had risen up like a Giant, and plesaded his,
her and our cause against our, her, and his mortal foes, except he had bard
our gates, and bared his arm and stretched it forth for our defense ( Sanders
warring; Alen libelling; the Jesuits finely lying, sophistically iugling, and
doubtfully answering; the Pope cursing; the Guise practicing; the Spaniard
undermining, Ireland and the North rebelling, and pioners still working) what
had bin come of this little realm?

Notwithstanding, brethren, be of good cheer, lift up your heads, your hands
and hearts; lift up your heads and be of comfort, your hands to heaven and
your hearts to God, the God and horn of our salvation, the Lord of hosts. The
horse of Egypt is flesh and not spirit, their men but men and not God. The
blast of a horn, Joshua. 6. Judges. 7.
the blaze and flash of a broken lamp, little things in the eyes of the world
and less in their own conceit have ouerturned cities, conquered countries, and
vanquished giants when God so would. And one woman by the help of him, in whom
she trusts, even ELIZABETH by the grace of God our gracious Queen is and
shall be, and shall be reputed for ever, the terror of her foes, the comfort of her
friends, the glory of England, the Jewel of the world, and diamond of
christendom. Even so (O Lord) because of perfect love thou have loved her so.

In the mean time unnaturally minded men, traitors to Jerusalem and enemies to
Sio^, having evil will to both commonwealth and church of ours, and thinking
it best fishing when the water is trobled most, ban and curse, rave and take on
like mad men, or losing mates and lost companions, not seeing so much as Balaam
that saw less than his Ass, and yet saw thus much and said accordingly, that
for a house full of gold he could not curse where God did bless. Numb. 23.


But is there no remedy? can no music assuage these passions? Will Ephraim
be wilful? Will Israel trust to a reed? can Papists imagine that strangers
will do them good? and deem they that God will prosper a cursing generation?
And what if their treacheries (which god auert) might take effect? * he, Ose.
8.7
that sows a wind, shall he not reap a whirlwind? do they remember, or
have they forgotten, or have they not read cou^ty Melunes most memorable
counsel to our English nobles? Mat. Paris. Radolph Niger. cap. 47.
who, (after that the barons of this realm, missed by fancy of their own, and
faction of the Clergy and provocation of the Pope at first had brought in
Lodouik the French kings son, to be king of England, in king John's steed)
moved with conscience, falling deadly sick at London, calls certain of the
barons unto him and said: I lament your sorrowful case, and pity with my heart
the destruction that is coming toward you and your country, the dangerous
snares which are prepared for your utter confusion are hidden unto you: you see
them not yet, but take heed of them in time. Prince Lodouike has sworn no
smaloth and sixeteen of his Earls and Nobles with him, that if he get once the
crown, he will banish and deprive them all of lands and goods, at least, if
not of life, even as many as he proves to have gone against their liege king
and his noble person. And (says the worthy Melune) because ye shall not take
this tale for a tale, I assure you on my soul (lying now at the mercy of God,
when it is no fit time to lie) that I was one of them which was privy and
sworn to the same. I have remorse thereof, and therefore I give you this
caveat. I pity poor England, which has bin so worthy a nation that now it is
come to so miserable extremity. And when with tears he had blubbred a space
he begins a little while a fresh again: my masters, I advise you earnestly
to provide for future extremities in season, I forewarn you of good will and
for my conscience sake, and so after a few words to like sense, having
discharged and unburdened his heavy soul for the matter, he gave up the Ghost.

Let English hearts apply this story, I will not amplify. In the book of Joshua
the Gabionites for all their crouchings, Iosu. 9.
old bottles finoed bread, and proffered friendship were made no better then
wood-cleauers and water bearers, drudges and slaves to the vilest function. A
foolish and a desperate sheaf it is that when it has brought in fire and
set the barn all in a flame can possibly suppose it self can escape.
Experience does tell the contrary; reason, religion and scripture do teach us
better: To wit: to forethinke our selves, to think reverently of the Lords
anointed, and to thank God for all his blessings. They who were weary of
Solomon were wearied out with Roboam who succeeded Solomon. But what speak I to
deaf ears, which is, but to powder the flint, to plow the rock and sow the
sand, and so to loose both salt, seed, and labor?

My brethren in christ, my natural and naturally affected Countrymen, I speak
to you: we have gods blessings, we find and feel those bodily and ghostly
commodities which our poor neighbors want, God help them. Neither are our
deserts, better than theirs, for ought I see. Do we think we are priuileged
without covenant of duty or prouiso of forfeiting our estate more than are
others? Security makes fools, and folly brings confusion, and perfect
wanton or waiward unthankfulness makes a perfect separation and divorce
betwixt us and our God. The noble men of Israel, 2. Sam. 1.
where they braued it most, and nothing remembered God, and lest thought of
danger, in the hills of Gelboe lost their lives. God forbid that the mildnes of
our Queen, the fat of our Country, the plenty of the realm, the wisdom of
our rulers, and the blessings of god should be our bane. Nay rather God bless
us with the gift of his grace in thankfulness to bless him ever that he may
bless us always more and more, and as Bennaiah wished, so wish we al, even
god say so for evermore. The happy resolution of this time, the course of this
great assembly, the co^ueniency of my text and al holy writ besides, jointly
with this good example of the Queen of Saba and the Sacrament and Eucharist
which now we shall partake being ye pledge of his good will and paune of his
favor, and seal of his mercies to usward, and likewise also on our parts to
him being the provocation and promise of our thankfullnes, and Sacrifice of
praise, should move al to laud and praise his holy name for ever more world
without end.

Amen.
1. Cor. 10.15. I speak as unto them which have understanding, Judge ye what I
say.


A PRAYER IN CONsideration of the former respects.
AL humble and hearty thanks be rendered unto thee O Lord God almighty, Father
of mercies and compassion, that in this later age and evil days, have placed,
directed and preserved, by thy singular goodness and special providence thine
handmaid ELIZABETH, our dread Sovereign in the Seat of her father, always
maintaining her cause against all her enemies, who in great rage have risen
against her, but thou O Lord was on her right hand, that she should not be
moved. Continue the course of this thy goodness toward us, we beseech thee for
thy holy names sake. Neither be provoked in thy displeasure for our
unthankfulness toward her and thee. Aswage the malice, convert the hearts or
confound the devises of al them that have evil will to thine anointed, and
repine at her good proceedings, and stir up her heart more and more to love
thee, that have so perfectly loved her, and to bless thee, that so have
blessed her, to serve thee her only Savior evermore, by publishing peace and
truth, peace, justice and equity in this church and Common wealth, that we
and our posterity after us may many years meet in this place and the like as
at this time and upon this occasion and to this purpose, that thy blessings O
Lord may be acknowledged, our joy increased, her old age comforted, this Realm
established in the true worship and service of thy holy name through Jesus
Christ. Amen.


