THE TABLE OF THE LORD: WHEREOF 1. THE WHOLE SERVICE, IS THE LIVING BREAD. 2.
THE GVESTS, ANY MAN. 3. THE MOUTH TO Eat, FAITH ONLY.


By GILBERT PRIMEROSE, Doctor of Divinity, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in
Ordinary, and Pastor of the French Church at London.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his shop
at the Royal Exchange. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sir JAMES FOVVLERTON, First Gentleman of his
MAJESTY'S Bedchamber, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
SOoner shall the heaven be without stars, the stars without light, the fire
without heat, the air without moisture, the Sea without agitation, a fair
meddow without grass, then the Church without the poisonous tares, and noisome
weeds of hellish heresies, which springing up with the wholesome and
soule-feeding wheat the Lord Jesus has sowed in the heavenly field of his
Church, have to smoother it, ere it grow to any beautiful and fruitful
perfection. For 1 Cor. 11.19.
there must be heresies, that they which are approved may be made manifest.
Therefore, as God foretelling that Zach. 1.18.19.20.21.
four horns should arise to scatter Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem, foretold
also that he had appointed four Carpenters to fray them, even so foreseing
that by the ever-watching craft of the ever-waking devil, the venomous seed of
deadly errors should grow with the good corn of the Gospel to choke it, he
ordained diligent and faithful 1 Cor. 3.9.
Laborers to weed and pluck them out by the root.

These Laborers are the Pastors of the Church, who should be, not only 1 Timothy 3 2. (...).
apt to teach good and sound doctrine, but also Tit. 1.9. (...).
apt to convince the gainesayers. And certainly, if it be the duty of all
Christians, not only Athenag. in legate. pro Christianis. (...).
to speak of the truth, but also to dispute for the truth: How much more
should the man of God, the Doctor of the Church be Aug. de Doc. Chri. lib. 4.
c. 4. Veritatis propugnator and erroris expugnator.
defender of the truth, and over-commer of error: Never was there in the
Church greater need of both, then now that the Whore of Babylon gives to the
Kings and great men of the earth, great bowls of her phyltres to drink, far
more dangerous then the waters of Aethiopia; Ovid. 15. Metamorphos.
Quos si quis faucibus hausit,
Aut furit, aut patitur mirum gravitate soporem.


For as soon as they have set that golden cup to their heads, they are
possessed with a dizzinesse, and, as if they had drunk a worse Nepenthe then
that which Homer. Odys. lib. 4.
Helena gave to Telemachus, they forget their own name of Christians, and
never speak of Jesus Christ, but to seek under a Herodian color of
worshipping him, to kill him again in his members.

Of what pestilent herbs that loue-drinke is made, who knows not? How all
those that call themselves Catholics are bewitched with it, who sees not?
Where these misshapen and ougly plants, whose bane-giving liquor banishes the
wisest men from their best wits, do grow, who has read in the seventeenth
chapter of the Revelation of S. John what is written of the woman arrayed in
purple and scarlet, of the golden cup in her hand full of abominations, and
filthiness of her fornications, of the name written on her forehead in
capital Letters, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND
ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH, of the blood of the Saints wherewith she is drunken,
of the beast with seven heads she sits upon, of many waters she rules over,
and will not affirm boldly, that S. Hierome strayed not from the Truth, when
he said it is Hierony. ad Marcel linam viduam.
Rupes Turpeia, the Town builded on seven Mountains, Rome, even that Rome
where in Hieromes days was the true Church, the Trophies of the Apostles and
Martyrs, the true confession of Christ, and was then decaying, then beginning
to be Rev. 18.
the habitation of devils, the hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hateful bird?

There is the devils garden, and his Gardener the man of sin, the Son of
perdition, whose emissaries run abroad sowing every where the aconit of his
most venomous doctrine, the only Merchandise these Mountebankes of the fourth
vow fetch from that dungeon of infernal fiends, which being Rev. 11.8.
spiritually Sodom and Egypt, has nothing but fair shows of rotten and
stinking drugges, like the Joseph. de bello Iudaico. lib. 5 cap. 5. (...).
apples of Sodom, which at the first touching vanish away in smoke and ashes,
and worse then Egypt,

Odyss. lib. 4.
(...)
(...)
Abou^ds in evil weeds, and has few or no good herbs. Of these loathsome
and infectious herbs, the best whereof is but Swines-grasse, at my attendance
at Court in July last, I labored to grubbe up with the hooke-weed of the word
of GOD that poisonous Toad-stoole, called Transubstantiation, the last and the
foulest masterpiece of work of the devils husbandry, and wherein he delights
most, because it is most like unto himself: For by it Ceres and Bacchus are
worshipped under the name of Christ, poor Christians blind-folded by the
Corybantes of Babylon, are holden in hand, that a round and thin crust of the
breadth of a shilling is Christ's own self, as big, as tall, as perfect a man
as he was on the Cross, that at the Mass they see him, that at Easter they
eat with the mouths of their bodies his flesh, bones, blood, and whole body,
that therefore they must worship that crust with the worship of Latria due to
none but God: So he makes them the greatest, or at least as great idolaters as
ever were in the world: This seemed so barbarous to the Ambassadors of the
Towpinambauts in France not long since, that although they be the most
barbarous people of the world, and eaters of men's flesh, yet to the natural
light that has remained in their brutish minds, this went beyond all
brutishness, that reasonable men should eat that which they worship, or
worship that which they eat: And certainly, said they, if Our God were as
beneficial to us, as your Christ is to you, we would honor him the best we
could, but we would not eat him. And one of them made a Proselyte by the
Capuchin Friars of Paris, being asked if he was now a good Christian, Yes, said
he, for every day for my breakefast I eat one of your Christ's.

What I then preached in two Sermons, both for the truth, and against this most
abominable error. I have set down in this little Book, which I dare to send
abroad clothed with the livery of your honorable and most worthy Name, that
appearing to the common view with such a goodly face, it may be wellcomer to
the Readers, and as it shall please God to give a blessing unto it, help to
recall and reclaim those that go a whooring with the works of their own
hands, or at least to direct such of our own, who desirous to wind the
spole-fuls of writhed and intricate controversies, for not having their senses
exercised in such a wearisom and painful labor, cannot find the right end
of the thread, and being once entered into the unknown crookes of that turning
labyrinth, cannot go through them without a more assured and infallible guide,
then the thread of Ariadne.

Your Honor having as great acquaintance with all kind of true learning, and
namely with true divinity, as many of the learnedest, I confess this Book
can have no such use to you-ward: Neither was that my intention when I honored
it with your worthy Name: My only desire being to make it a true and public
witness that since that time you vouchsafed me the honor of your love, I
could consider, considering know, knowing acknowledge, acknowledging reverence
your manifold and rare gifts, quite void of all ostentatio^, which the holy
Ghost, as most precious stones, has set in a heart of true godliness, and
which as they have been the happy and godly directours of our then most
hopeful Prince, so are they now the true and faithful Counselors of our
maiesticall, heroical, and religious King, who so long as his royal ears
shall hang at the wise tongs of so moderate and godly Senators, neither shall
the distressed Church want protection, nor his Subjects justice in him, nor he
blesse-bringing prayers and true obedience in them.

If any say a greater work was due to so excellent a personage: your Honor
will answer for me, that Demost. (...).
not great, but good things are best; that good is this little work in the
matter, that it is handled, although not exquisitly in words, yet soundly.
Moreover, I answer for my self, that by your means I came to the Kings
knowledge, and by your recommendation was named by his Majesty to be one of his
Chaplains: Therefore to you are due the first fruits of that harvest, which
such as they are I consecrate to your Honor, and my self to the continuance
of your favor, offering my hearty prayers to God for the increasing of his
merciful and favorable blessings on your grave and old age, on your right
religious and honorable Lady, and all her most noble and godly Family, till
they come to their full measure in Jesus Christ, in whom I remain for ever,

Your Honors most humble and affectionate servant, G. PRIMEROSE.

Of the living Bread which came down from Heaven. Preached at Whitehall to the
KINGS house on the Communion day the 3. of July. 1625.
JOHN. VI. 51. I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven.


FIRST CHAPTER.
I. The whole Christian Religion may be reduced to two heads: The first,
concerning the Savior: The second, concerning them which are saved. God alone
teaches the one and the other.

II. By his Son Jesus Christ.

III. Who sets down these two heads in this Verse.

IV. Four parts of the first part of this Verse.

is concerning the Savior of the world: The second is concerning them which
are saved. It is written in the third Psalm, that Psalm. 3.8.
Salvation is the Lords: Salvation is the Lords gift; Salvation is the Lords
work; Salvation is the Lord himself. Who then can more truly, Who can more
clearly speak of salvation, and of those which are saved, then the Lord who is
the salvation of all them which are saved? As we cannot see the Sun but by
the light of the Sun; so we cannot know God, nor the salvation which is of
GOD, but by the revelatio^ of God, Psalm. ^6.9.
in whose light we see light. And Job. 36.22.
who teaches like him? The sons of men may be deceived in that which they
know, by reason of their ignorance: or deceive by that which they teach, and
like unto the wild fire, called by the Latins Ignis fatuus, lead many a man
into the quagmires, pits, and gulfes of eternal perdition, by reason of their
vanity: For Psalm. 116.11.
all men are liars. But God cannot be deceived in that which he knows,
because he is All-wise: Nor deceive in that which he teaches, because he is
All-good. He is always true: True in his knowledge, True in his teaching.

Ioh. 1.1.
his Word: Not Ignat. epist. ad Magnesian. (...).
a vocal Word formed by the tongue, not a found in the air, beating the
ears: For he was in the beginning before there was air or ears: But a
substantial word, but Gods own mind, Cyril. l. 1. Thesauric. 5 Quia ex ipso
est filius vocatur: quia vero in ipso, sapientia and verbum.
called the Son, because he is of the Father: and the Wisdom and Word,
because he is in the Father: because also God has from the beginning revealed
his Word to the Church by him Ioh. 1.18.
For no man has seen God at any time: The only begotten Son, which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him: He he only Ioh. 14.16
is the way, the truth, and the life: The way wherein, The truth whereby, The
life whereunto we walk. And as Bernard says; Bernard. de caena domini. sermon.
7. Ego sum via sine errore, very tas fine falsitate, vita sine morte.
The way without error, the truth without falsehood, the life without death.
Even 1 Ioh. 5.20.
the true God, and eternal life: The true God, and therefore our Savior:
Eternal life, and therefore our salvation. Wherefore let us now and for ever
listen unto Christ, who best of all can tell us who is the Author, who the
giver, who the Prince of eternal life: As likewise which be they on whom this
most wonderful gift, this blessed and precious jewel is vouchsafed: For Ioh.
3.32.33.
he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth: He that
comes from heaven, is above all: and what he has seen and heard, that he
testifies, and Ioh. 8.14.
his record is true.

I am the living bread which came down from heaven. Concerning them which are
saved he says also in the second part of this Verse, If any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever. The one and the other are uttered in
Metaphorical words, or in two similitudes contracted each of them to one word:
The sense of the first is that which God said unto Christ by the Prophet
Isaiah, Isa. 49.6.
I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the world. The sense of the second is set down in this same
Chapter, verse. 47. where Christ says; He that believes on me has everlasting
life.

with the assistance of the Spirit of God I am to build this exhortation,
considering in it, first, the subject of this enunciation, I am the living
bread, and next, the attribute thereof. The subject is Christ, in the Word. I.
The attribute, is the living bread which came down from heaven. These two are
coupled together by the coupling word, Am: But because this division will seem
too scholasticall and harsh to popular and unlearned ears, we shall follow the
words of the Text, and dividing them into four parts consider, 1. To whom
Christ does ascribe this glory to be the living bread: Even to his own self,
saying, I am. 2. Why he calls himself bread: for he says. I am bread. 3.
The excellency and use of this bread, in that he calls it living, I am, says
he, the living bread. 4. The spring from whence this excellency does flow; in
the words following, which came down from heaven. Let us then begin, and our
beginning and Psalm. 115.8.
help be in the Name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

SECOND CHAPTER.
I. Christ shows that he alone is the living bread which came down from
heaven.

II. In all matters of faith and of manners, arguments taken from the
Scriptures negatiuely are necessary.

III. An easy way how to answer to the Sophistical interrogations of the
Jesuits concerning the Scriptures.

IV. Angels and Saints are no part of the living bread. Exhortation.

WHEN we speak of titles of dignities, or of any excellent quality, it is
necessary to know before all things the persons which are capable of them, and
to whom they belong. Because all persons are not capable of all titles, and all
dignities are not fit for all. For all men are not of one sise: yea as one
little diamond is more to be valued then a thousand big stones; So one man is
often more to be esteemed then ten thousand others, as David's Captains said
unto him, 2 Samuel 18 3.
Thou art worth ten thousand of us. For this cause ^. lib. 1. Tit. 5. de statu
homirum l. 2. Cum igitur. Instit. lib 1. Tit. 2. de iurenat. Gent. and Civili..
vlt. Parum est ius nosse, fi persona, quarum causa constitutum est, ignorantior.
in the civil Law the first question is of the sufficiency and ability of the
persons the next is of their rights, prerogatives, and other things which they
challenge and take upon them: It is so in Divinity, and particularly in this
part thereof concerning the Savior of the world. The Jews desiring that
Christ would feed them more delicately then he had done, alleged unto him
verse. 31. the example of Moses, saying, that he gave to their Fathers bread
from heaven to eat: Whereupon taking a new occasion to speak to them of a
more excellent bread, he answered, verse. 32. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Moses gave you not that bread from heaven: But my Father gives you the true
bread from heaven. Moses is excluded as insufficient to give from heaven the
bread of heaven. And the Father alone is adorned with that glory. For who can
give the bread of heaven but the Father of lights which is in heaven? 2. He
describes unto them the excellency and virtue of that bread, saying, verse. 33.
for the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life
unto the world. See the excellency of it. It is come down from heaven: See
the virtue and use of it, It gives life unto the world. 3. He tells them who
is that bread, and claiming that glory to himself; professed verse. 35. I am
the bread of life. Then the Jews, forgetting the miracle of the five loaves
and of the two fishes, murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which
came down from heaven. verse. 41. But he notwithstanding their murmuring gives
glory to God, and seeking to overcome their obstinacy and stubbornenesse,
affirms again, Verse 48. I am that bread of life, and again, Verse. 51. in
this Text, I am the living bread which came down from heaven, and so often in
the verses following. That as Joseph said, that Genesis 41.32.
the dream was doubled unto Pharao twice, because the thing was established by
God, and God would shortly bring it to pass; so from this frequent repetition
we may conclude, that Christ indeed is the living bread, that he alone and none
other with him, none other besides him is that bread. Yea, although he had said
but once, I am the living bread, this conclusion would be true. For no such
thing is said of any other. Not of Cherubims, of Seraphims, of Thrones, of
Dominions, of Principalities, of Powers, of Angels. Not of the Virgin Mary, not
of Peter, not of Paul, not of any other Apostle. Not of any Martyr, not of any
Saint. As when God said to his people, Psalm. 50.7.
I am God, even thy God, the sense is; I am God, and besides me there is no
other God: I am thy God, and thou have no other God but me. So when Christ
says, I am the living bread, Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 3. cap. 34. Perspicuum esse
arbitror, non aliumpanem, neque aliud alimentum praeter filium dei rationalibus
intellectualibusque substantijs propositam esse: Ipse est Manna verum: Ipse
inquam est panis de caeio qui omni rationali creaturae a Deo Patre praebetur.
it is manifest, says Cyrillus, that no other bread, no other food, save the
Son of God, is appointed to reasonable and intellectual creatures: He is the
true Manna: He is the bread from heaven, which God the Father gives to all
reasonable creatures.

things belonging to says and manners. Because, as S. August de Doctr.
Christiana. lib. 2. cap. 9. In ijs quae apertein Scriptura posita sunt,
inueniuntur illa omnia quae contine^t fidem moresque viuendi.
Austin says, in that which is clearly set down in the Scripture, are to be
found all these things which concern faith and manners. This is manifest by
these words of God to his people. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you observe
to do it: Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Whatsoever things
God commanded, those Moses writ in a book, Deuteronomy. 31.24.
until they were finished: And of that book Moses said, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal.
3.10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are written in the
book of the Law to do them.

Upon this ground God condemned whatsoever his people did undertake besides his
Word in things belonging to his service: David having a purpose to build an
house to God, Nathan approved it, but God said unto him, 1. Chron. 17.6.
Wheresoever I have walked with all Israel, spoke I a word to any of the Judges
of Israel, saying, Why have ye not built me an house of Cedars? All things
amongst that people were 1. Cor. 10.11. Heb. 10.1.
types and shadows of good things to come. The Temple was to be Ioh. 2.19.21.
a type of Christ, as Heb. 9.11 12.
the Tabernacle was. Who then in the house of God was to be so bold as to
establish a figure of the things of God, a type of the Son of God, without
special command and direction from God?

When the people did set up such Will Worship, did not God hew it down with
this sharp and heavy Axe, Esa. 1.12.
Who has required this at your hand? When the Jews through a most fervent
zeal unto God built the high places of Tophet, to offer up their sons and
their daughters to God in a burnt sacrifice, this was a good reason to God, why
such places should be thrown down, and that unnatural devotion abolished,
that Iere. 7.31.
he commanded not any such thing, neither came it into his heart. Commanded it
not, I say, in the book of the Law: Hill. in Ps. 132. Quae in libro legis no^
continentur, ea nec nosse debemus.
For the things which are not contained in the book of the Law, we should not
so much as know them, says S. Hilarie.

For this cause the Apostle after he had declared to the Church Act. 20.27
all the counsel of God, averred that Act. 26.22
he had taught none other things then those which the Prophets and Moses did
say should come, and therefore condemned all Col. 2.23.
Will Worship, though it had a fair show of wisdom and humility. Thus
co^paring Christ with the Angels, he asks, Heb. 1.5.
Unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, This day have
I begotten thee? And again, 13.
To which of the Angels said he at any time: Sit on my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool? Reasoning not only affirmatively for Christ, and
proving that he is the Son of God, and sits at his right hand, because the
Scripture has said it; but also negatiuely against the Angels, and proving
that no such glory belongs unto them, because the Scripture says not any
such thing of them. This is a perpetual and most forcible manner of reasoning
in all substantial points of Religion. God has said it in the Scriptures,
therefore we must believe it: God has spoken nothing of it: Therefore we should
not believe it.

Athanas. in epist. ad Marcellinum de interpret. Psalm. Divina Scriptura est
magistra virtutis and verae fidei.
The holy Scripture is the mistress of virtue, and of true faith, which are
the substantial points of our Religion. For circumstances of time, place, and
persons, have all this general rule: 1 Cor. 14.30.
Let all things be done decently and in order, the particulars whereof are
committed to the wisdom of the Church.

If then God has not said that there is no Purgatory, how can ye say ye
believe that there is none? So they fetter you with sophistical
interrogations, and make you to confess against your own profession, that ye
believe many things which are not written in the holy Scriptures.

Therefore ye must answer far other-wayes, and say, What God has said in the
Scriptures, that I believe: What he has not said, that I believe not. Orig in
Esa cap. 8. homil. 12. Non est verbum post verbum Mosi, post verbum
Prophetarum, multo magis post verbum Jesus Christi, and Apostolorum eius.
There is no word to be believed after the word of Moses, after the word of the
Prophets, much more after the word of Jesus Christ, and of his Apostles. God
has not said, that there is no Purgatory, that the Mass is a propitatorie
sacrifice, that the Pope is the head of the Church: Therefore I will not say, I
believe such things are not: But contrariwise, I do not believe such things
are: For where God has not a mouth to speak, I have not an ear to hear, nor
a heart to believe, nor a tongue to confess: What he has not said in things
belonging to the salvation of my soul, my soul has nothing to do with it.

is the living bread which came down from heaven, because the Scripture says
so: I believe not that the Saints are this bread, I believe not that they are
the least crumme of it. For where the Scripture is dumb, who shall accuse me
if I be deaf? Where there is no word, can I have any faith, seeing Romans 10.17.
faith is by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God?

As S. John the Evangelist said of S. John the Baptist, Ioh. 1.8.
He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that light, and as S.
Paul said of David, that Act. 13.36
in his own age he served the will of God: So may we say of all the Saints
that are now in heaven: They were not that bread, but they did eat of that
bread: They were sent to bear witness of that bread, but they were no part of
that bread. In their age they served the counsel of God, believing, preaching,
confessing that Christ Christ only is the living bread. If any man ascribe
more unto them then this, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 43.
he brings strange fire to the Altar of God, which God commanded him not, and
the fire of heaven shall devour him, as it did Leuit. 10.1.2.
Nadab and Abihu. And to such a man ye must say with Tertullian, Tertull. de
Carne Christi. cap. 7. Non recipio quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers.
I receive not that which thou bring of thine own invention besides the
Scripture.

Yea as S. John when he was in the world, being asked who he was, confessed,
saying, Ioh. 1.20. Ioh. 3.28.
I am not the Christ, I am sent before him: So the blessed souls which are now
in heaven, if they were asked, Who they are, would answer, We are not the
living bread, we are not Saviors: We are come after the Savior, and are saved
by him: And as S. John to draw away men's eyes from gazing upon him, pointed out
Jesus unto them, and said, Ioh. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world: So they would
point at Christ sitting at the right hand of the Father, and say, Behold the
living bread, Behold the Savior of the world: And taking their harpes in their
hands, would jointly fall down before the Lamb, and sing to his glory the new
song, which I exhort you all to sing unto him in your hearts for conclusion of
this first part of my Text, Rev. 4.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power: Rev.
5.8.9.10.11.
For thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, and have made us unto our God
Kings and Priests.

THIRD CHAPTER.
I. Bread in the Scripture has diverse significations.

II. In all these significations Christ is our bread.

III. Similitudes most frequent in the Scripture.

IV. Christ did delight in similitudes.

V. The occasion which moved him to call himself Bread.

VI. Exhortation to an earnest desire of this Bread.

the living bread: We are now to search in the second part of this Discourse
the causes why he called himself bread: For in all Metaphores which are
Epitomes and Abridgements of Similitudes, we must not so much regard whence
they are taken, (as those do which tie their ears to the leaves of the words)
as dig with our minds into the root of the reason wherefore they are used.

Bread in the Scripture has diverse literal significations. When David says,
that Psalm. 104.14.15.
God brings forth bread out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the heart
of man, it is taken in a vulgar sense, which is common to all languages, and so
is it taken in the words of the institution of the Lords Supper. Wherein it is
said, that Mat. 26.26.
Jesus took bread. When 2 King. 6.22.
Elisha counseled the King of Israel to set bread and water before the Army
of the King of Syria, bread is taken for meat without drink. When Jacob
called his brethren Genesis 31.54.
to eat bread, and they did eat bread, he called them to a feast wherein there
was both meat and drink, and both are signified by the word Bread: When
Solomon prayed to God Pro. 30.8.
to feed him with bread convenient for him: When he says, that Pro. 31.14.
the virtuous woman, is like the merchants ship, she brings her bread from a
far off: When Christ has taught us to pray, Give us this day our daily
bread, bread signifies all things needful for the sustenance of this our
mortal life.

Jews magnified much the Manna which Moses gave to their Fathers in the
Desert. But although it was bread, it was not drink unto them, else they had not
murmured for want of water. But Christ is both meat and drink. Ioh. 6.35.
I am, says he, the bread of life: He that comes to me shall never hunger.
Ye see that he is meat: And he that believes in me shall never thirst. Ye see
also that he is drink: He is bread both to be eaten and to be drunk.

The inhabitants of the Maldiuian Isles, crack much of a tree growing every
where amongst them, called Theuet. Cosmograph. 12 book. chap. 21. Gomarra. 3.
book, chap. 94.
Coco, the only fruit whereof furnishes unto them bread, wine, oil, vinegar,
sugar, butter, to feed them deliciously, physic to heal their diseases, Hemp
to make Cables and Sails for Ships, Lint to make cloths to cover their
nakedness: And the tree it self has all the uses that any other tree can
have for fuel, or for tymberworke. Peyrard in his nauigations 2. book.
One who did live many years in those Isles, writes that he saw a Ship of
two hundredth tons, whereof all the timber and nails were of that tree, all
the Cables and Sails were of the outward skin of the fruit thereof, and the
whole load was of the butter, sugar, vinegar, wine, oil, and other commodities
which that fruit does afford. And indeed it is a most wonderful tree, but not
to be matched with Rev. 2.7.
the tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, with our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is all that and more then all that to our souls: He is here
in my. Text the whole and entire food of our hungry and dried up souls: He is
not only Esa. 53.5.
the Physic. out and Esa. 61.1 Mat. 9.12.
the Physician of our sick and languishing consciences. He is Romans 13.14*
the garment wherewith our nakedness is covered, and our persons are graced:
He is 1. Cor. 31.11.
the foundation Ephesians. 2.20.
and chief corner stone, whereupon we are built. He is Ion. 15.1.
the Vine whereof we are the branches: Ephesians. 4.15.
The head whereof we are the members. Ose. 2.19. Ephesians. 5.25.
The husband who has betrothed us: Heb. 7.22
The surety who has answered for us: 1 Timothy 2.6
The ransom which has redeemed us: Zach. 13.1
The water which cleanses and Ioh. 4.10.
refreshes us: Ioh. 1.9.
The true light, Mal. 4.1.
the Sun of righteousness, which inlighteneth us, and brings unto us
healing in his wings. He is the Prophet who teaches salvation: The high Priest
which has mented it: The King fitting at the right (...) Father, who keeps
it in heaven, and will give it unto us.

In material things this is one thing, that is another: And ye seek this
thing in one place, that in another. In spiritual things it is not so: We have
all things in Christ, and Christ is all things unto us: Clemens Paedag. lib. 1.
cap. 6. Cusan. Excitat. lib. 6. exserm. Respice Domine.
Father, mother, pedagogue, health, peace, love, the daily bread of the
reasonable soul, and all in all. In a word, he is salvation it self: 1 Cor.
1.30.
For of God he is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption. For this cause he is called Bread.

bread, and of eating, seeing he might have said in proper and clear terms,
that Heb. 5.9.
he is the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him, as the
Apostle calls him in the Epistle to the Hebrews?

I answer first, O man will thou teach the Word and Wisdom of God to speak?
Exodus 4.11
Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes the dumb or deaf, the seeing or the
blind? Is it not I, says the Lord? And will thou, to render him like for like,
make his mouth?

Secondly, I say that of all words those are most clear and easy to be
understood, which have greatest conformity with our affections and desires.
For which cause God framing his style to our capacity, by similitudes of
worldly things which are most esteemed and affected of us, leads us from the
lower parts of the earth far above all the visible heavens, from carnal and
sensual imaginations to spiritual and godly meditations, from the vain
conceit which we have of our own worthiness, to bungring and thirsting after
his righteousness? Neither did he fetch such similitudes from a far off, but
e re nata, as his servants did light on such or such things, he makes allusion
unto them, and by them instructs his people in the knowledge of the mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven. Because men prise gold above all metal, and value
precious stones at an high rate, he says that he Efa. 54.11 Rev. 21.18.
will lay the foundations of his Church with precious stones, make her gates of
pearls, her walls of jasper, her streets of pure gold. Because the Jews were
much given to bodily exercise, and to renting their clothes in the days of
their fasting, he speaks unto them of a spiritual fasting* which he calls
Esa. 58.6.
the loosing of the bands of wickedness, etc. and Joel. 2.11
the renting their hearts. Because also they were ever bragging that they were
Jews, and had the Circumcision, the Apostle teaches them that the true Jew
Romans 2.28.29.
whose praise is not of men, but of God, is one inwardly, that the true
Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, that all true Christians
Phil. 3.3.
are the Circumcision.

Mat. 6.22.
to lay up for themselves treasures in heaven. To them w.ch told him when he
was preaching, that Mat. 10.47.50.
his mother and brethren desired to speak with him, he answered, whosoever
shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and
sister, and mother: When the woman of Samaria which was drawing water had said
unto him, Ioh. 4.9.10.14.
How is it, that thou being a Jew ask drink of me which am a woman of
Samaria? He took occasion of her speech to call his doctrine, his grace, his
own self, the living water, whereof whosoever drinks shall never thirst:
and by such speeches he brought her to the spiritual drinking of the water of
grace, whereof the wellspring is in heaven. When his Disciples prayed him to
take some meat, he refused saying, Ioh. 4.34
My meat is to do the will of him that seni me, and to finish his work. In
the last day of the feast of Tabernacles, seeing the people very busy about
drawing of water, and pouring of it out before the Lord, as if that had been
the principal part of Gods service, he stood, and cried, Ioh 7.37.38.39.
If any man thirst, let him come to me, and drink: He that believes in me, as
the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water:
This spoke he of the Spirit which they that believe in him should receive.

true love unto him, but only because they had bin fed by him, and had
conceived a new hope, that following such a wonderful King, meat should never
be wanting to their bellies, yea that he would make bread to rain down upon
them, as Moses did upon their fathers in the Wilderness, he by diversion
speaks to them of a far more excellent bread, which he would give them;
even of the true bread which came down from heaven, and endures unto
everlasting life, and exhorts them to labor for it: Showing in all the
Chapter, and particularly in this verse, that he is that bread, and that the
only mean to labor for it, is to believe in him.

If he had clothed them miraculously, as miraculously he had fed them, and if
they had followed him thereupon to make him King, he would undoubtedly advised
them to labor for the raiments which wax never old, and said that he is that
raiment. As indeed the holy Apostle will have us to believe that Christ is our
garment, when he says, that Gal. 3.27
as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and exhorts
us Ro^. 13* 14
to put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Which no man that is not witless or besides
himself, will take literally, neither also any of the other similitudes
whereof there is great plenty in the Scripture, and I have related some few.
Let then Papists tell us, Why the words of this Chapter should be taken in a
literal sense, which they shall never be able to do.

per allegoriam necessariorum pabulorum, by the allegory of necessary food, as
Tertull. de Resurrect. Carnis. cap. 37.
Tertullian speaks, withdraws the thoughts of his followers from the
outward to the inward man, from the flesh to the Spirit, from the food of the
body to the food of the soul, Aug. in Ioh. tract. 25. Ille post miraculi
Sacramentum, and sermonem infert, vt si fieripotest qui pasti sunt pascantur,
and quorum satiauit panibus ventres, satiet and sermonibus mentes; sed si
capiunt: Et si non capiunt, sumatur quod non capiunt, ne fragmenta percant.
that, if it be possible, those which are fed may be fed again, and as he had
filled their bellies with bread, he may also fill their minds with his
speeches: But if they take them: And if they take them not, as indeed they
took them not, i.e. they understood them not, let us take them, least the
fragments perish, as we are exhorted by S. Austin.

Let us, I say, now, even now ponder with our selves that although we do eat
and drink to maintain this mortal and ever-dying life, and that this is the
end of meat and drink; yet the preserving of this life should not be our
principal care. Do ye not all know, 1. Cor. 6.13.
that meats are for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy
both it, and them? And therefore ye should all sigh and groan for a better
life, not of the body, but of the soul, not of this world, but of the world to
come. Wherefore listen, I pray you, to the Son of God, who assures you both
by his word which now I preach unto you, and by his Sacrament which after this
Sermon shall be given unto you, that he is the blessed bread of that blessed
life, for you, and unto you. Come then, come to the Table of the Lord, thanking
him that he vouchsafes to be your bread, and crying unto him with a more
religious and holy desire then the Jews did, Ioh. 6.34.
Lord, evermore give us this bread.

FOVRTH CHAPTER.
I. The excellency of this bread, showed by the Greek word (...), which
signifies both living and quickening.

II. And therefore is well translated both ways.

III. Christ as he is Mediator is living in himself, and quickening unto us.

IV. This bread is wonderful above all other bread.

V. Exhortation to labor for this bread.

the excellent virtue and use of it, set down in the word living. For Christ
says, I am the living bread, according to our translation: Or according to the
Latin translation of Ego sum panis vivificus.
Beza, and Ie suis le pain vivifiant.
the French translation, I am the quickening bread. Cotton an plagiaire de
Geneue.
The Jesuits of France bark most spightfully against this last translation,
saying that the Greek word (...) in all Greek Authors signifies living, and
is never taken from quickening. But as we say in a common Proverb, The dog
that barks much, bites but little.

For to discover to you their impudency, both in affirming too boldly that
which they know not, and in denying shamelesly that which they know. I. The
Greek word has both significations in the Septuagint Interpreters, whose
words the Evangelists and Apostles follow, when ye read in the book of the
Psalms; Psalm. 41.2. (...).
The Lord will keep him alive; Psalm. 119.50. (...).
Thy word has quickened me; Ver. 40.48
quicken me after thy loving kindness; quicken me in thy righteousness; Psalm.
134.11. (...).
quicken me, O Lord for thy Names sake; and other such like places, the Greek
word is the same which is in this Text.

2. The words preceding and following do show that living signifies
quickening. In the 33. verse he says, The bread of God is he which comes
down from heaven, and gives life unto the world. In the 35 verse he says, I
am the bread of life: He is so called, says Tolet. 161. Dicitur panis vitae
quia alio viuere facit.
Tolet, because he makes others to live. The words following, He that comes
to me shall never hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst, are
an evident proof that it is so. In my Text he says, I am the living bread
which came down from heaven, and adds in the second part of the verse, If any
man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, calling this bread, Living,
because it makes them that eat it live for ever. In the 57. verse, He says
in the same sense, He that eats me, even he shall live by me.

3. Many Roman Doctors, Thomas Aquinas, and Ferus, two learned Monks;
Ianssenius, Emmanuel Sa, Maldonat, Tolet, Jesuits, writ upon this Text, that
Vivus pro vivificans.
Living is put for Quickening.

4. But the Jesuits now adays fear leaft Christ be called quickening in this
verse, because they expound it, and all the verses following of the bodily
presence of CHRIST in the Eucharist, wherein they confess that he is not
quickening, seeing in the Sacrament not only many wicked men, but also rats,
mice, worms, dogs, asses, toads often eat him, and are not quickened by him.
Which saying is a most horrible blasphemy.

living: And is not Christ living? If he were not living how could he give
life? Cusan Excit. lib. 5. ex Sermon. Nou in solo pane vivit bomo. Panis qui no^
vivit, non vivificat.
For the bread which lives not, cannot give life. Therefore our translation is
good, and on it* depends the truen of the French translation, as the effect
on the cause. Living, signifies both, and must signify both, that the words
of our. 1. 1 dol
Sariour may be found true. For what comfort should it be unto us, that Christ
lives in us, if he did not quicken us? And this is the drift of this whole
Chapter to show, that he lives in all them that eat him, and gives eternal
life to all those in whom he lives, least we should think him to be like unto
Judge. 14.8
the swarm of Bees, which did live and make honey in the carcass of the Lion
which S^^pson had killed, but did not give life to the Lion.

how Christ is living, and wherefore he is so called. If ye consider him as he
is Ioh. 1.1.4.
the Word which was in the beginning, i.e. as he is true God coessentiall and
coeternall to his Father, in him was life: He was living formally. For in God
to live and to be, are one thing. But in this sense we are all strangers from
God. For what communion can carcasses dead in sin, as we are all by nature,
have with God who lives for ever and ever? Therefore he speaks of himself
as he Ioh. 6.27.5^.
is the Son of man, that is to say, the Mediator between God and man, (for so
is the Mediator called by Dan. 7.13
Daniel) or as 1. Tim. 3.16.
God made manifest in the flesh. For as he is the Son of man, or as he is
Mediator between God and man, the Father has given him to have life in
himself, not to keep it to himself, but to communicate it to all the members
of his mystical body. This is clear by his own words in the fist chapter of
this Gospel, where first he shows that he gives life, saying, Ioh.
5.21.25.26.
As the Father raises up the dead and quickneth them, even so the Son
quickneth them whom he will. And again, Verily, verily I say unto you, the
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God, and they that hear it, shall live. Secondly, he renders this reason
why he gives life to the dead, For as the Father has life in himself, so
has he given to the Son to have life in himself. As the Sun has light,
the fire heat, a Wellspring water in themselves, not for themselves, but for
the use of man and beast: So Christ has life in himself, that he may give
life unto us.

For this cause he is called living, first subiectiue, because he has life in
himself: Secondly, effectiue, because he has it not for himself, but gives
it to all those that have him, as S. John says, 1 Ioh. 5.12.
he that has the Son, has life. Even as the scripture calls Genesis 26.19.
a Well of living water, that which having abundance of water in it self,
springs, and flows, and runs, and imparts it self unto all.

Ioh. 6.27.
perishes: This endures unto ever lasting life. Not only it lives in it
self, but also it makes to live eternally the souls of all those that eat
it: and shall at the last day of the world quicken the bodies of all those
whose souls it has quickened in this world, as he says, Ioh. 6.54.
Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day. His flesh and his blood, or rather he himself by
tearing his flesh and renting it from his soul, He by shedding his blood in
his death is the living bread, Cusan. Excit lib. 4. ex Sermon. Qui manducat:
Ipse est qui est dator vitae and conservator: Quare est panis vitae.
giver and keeper of life, and therefore most worthily called, the bread of
life.

RIGHT HONORABLE, Reverend, Worshipful, and beloved Auditors, remember, I
pray you, Jews of Capernaum, and Ioh. 6.27.
labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures
unto everlasting life. Alas! it is a pitiful spectacle to behold how men
labor for the meat which perishes, Ps. 127.2.
they rise up early, they sit up late, they eat the bread of sorrows: Matthew.
15.17.
It enters in at the mouth, it goes into the belly, and is cast out into the
draught. If men labor exceeding hard for such bread, how should we labor for
this living bread? Not to purchase it: for it grows not in the earth, it is
not sold in the Shambles, it is not to be bought in the Shops. But to reach
unto it, where it is: but to receive it where and when it is offered. It is
offered every where, in the town, in the fields, in our houses, in our
closets: But namely in the Church when the Gospel is preached, and
particularly when the blessed Sacrament is given, as to you, this day. The
preaching of the Gospel is Exodus 25.23.
the golden Table whereupon this show bread is set: This holy Sacrament is as
it were Ve. 29.30.
the golden dish, wherein it is offered unto us. We know what we must do to
receive the outward Sacrament, Panem domini.
the bread of the Lord: If we receive it from the hand of the Minister: for he
is no better then Ioh. 6.32.
Moses, who gave not the true bread from heaven; When we have received it, we
eat^ it, we let it down into out stomachs, we digest it: Nothing is more
easy. But (...) receive Panem dominum.
the bread which is the Lord another work more difficult is required: Ioh.
6.29.
This is the work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. Your
souls must go up to heaven. There the Table is covered: There is the bread
which is the Lord set upon the Table of the Mercy of God: There God the Father
gives it by his eternal will and decree: There the Son gives it by his
merit, and consent: There the holy Ghost takes it, as it were, in his hands,
enters with it into your hearts, and offers it unto your famished souls:
The Cherubims and Seraphims stand by and wonder. Send your faith thither, and
there your faith shall receive it. This is the work which God commands. 1
Ioh. 3.23. This is the work which God himself works in you. Ephesians. 1.3. Phil.
1.29. This is the work, which if ye want, all your works are sins. Romans
14.23. and it is impossible that ye should please God. Heb. 11.6. Which if ye
have, by it Jesus Christ will dwell in you. Ephesians. 3.17. and live in you, and
quicken you so sensibly, that ye shall say as truly, as S. Paul said, Gal. 2.20
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And this life of Christ, or Christ
living in you, shall be so powerful in you, that as 1. Kings 19.20.
Elijah by the strength of that bread and of that water which the Angel of God
prepared for him, went forty days and forty nights, without hunger, without
thirst, without weariness, till he came unto Horeb the Mount of God. So by the
virtue of this living bread, which no Angel of God, but Luk 2.31.
God himself has prepared, ye shall walk courageously and constantly all the
days of your life, till ye come to the kingdom of heaven, where ye shall Mat.
8.11.
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and there be abundantly
satisfied with these Ps. 16.11.
pleasures which are at the right hand of God for evermore.

FIFTH CHAPTER.
I. Christ came not down from heaven as man.

II. Neither as God by a local motion.

III. Neither as sent and approved of God.

IV. But as God incarnate.

V. Three commings of Christ.

VI. What should be the order of our conceptions concerning Christ.

lives, or so powerful, that quickneth. And certainly no other bread can:
But this can, because, it came down from heaven: What is the meaning of these
words? Valentin said that he brought his body from heaven: But that is false:
For the Scripture bears record that Heb. 2.16.
he took on him the seed of Abraham, Romans 1.3.
was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, and Luke 1.27.35.
was borne of the Virgin Mary.

Iere. 23.24.
Do I not fill heaven and earth says the Lord? He is infinite, and without
going, without coming, without alteration, without generation, without
corruption, without any motion whatsoever, August ad Volusian. Epist. 3. Nouit
vbique totus esse, and nullo contineri loco: Nouit venire, no^ recedendo vbi
erat: Nouit abire, non deserendo quo venerat.
he fills the whole world, not as the water, not as the air, not as the
light it self, as if with the lesser part of himself he did sill the lesser
part of the world, and with the greater part of himself, the greater part
thereof. He can he all every where, and contained no where: He can come, and
not leave the place wherein he was: He can go away, and not leave the place
whereunto he came.

he came down from heaven, because he was foreordeined, sent, anointed,
approved, confirmed of God: So were all the Apostles: So are all the true
Ministers of God. Yet the Scripture says not of any of them, that they are
come down from heaven. Christ says, that Mat. 21.25.
the Baptism of John was from heaven. And S. James says, that Iam. 1.17.
every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights. Yet S. John comparing himself with Christ, says of
himself: He that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth: But
of Christ he says exclusiuely to all creatures, He that comes from heaven is
above all. All Gods servants are borne on earth, and called from heaven, but
they come not down from heaven: They receive from heaven, but from heaven they
bring not the doctrine which they teach us. Likewise all the gifts of God are
created on earth by God who is in heaven. And therefore S. James says, that
they come from him: But they are not in heaven, nor elsewhere, before God
create them on earth. Whereas Christ was in heaven before he came down from
heaven, as he said to his Disciples, Ioh. 6.62
What, and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? And
being on earth he feared not to say to Nicodemus, that even then Ioh. 3.16.
he was in heaven. Which cannot be said of the gift of God, which when they are
come from heaven, and are on the earth, are not in heaven: Yea the Angels
themselves when they come from heaven unto us, are no more in heaven, till they
return unto it again.

to come down from heaven, when he makes himself known unto the world by
some strange and unaccustomed work, as Sermon. of the righteous man's evils, and
of the Lords delivera^ces. Sermon. 9. Sect. 3. and. 4.
I have showed elsewhere.

And therefore when Christ says that he is come down from heaven, he will
have us to understand and believe 1. that he is God. 2. that he has made
himself manifest to the world by an extraordinary work, even the most
wonderful that ever was, or ever shall be in the world. He means his
Incarnation, whereby 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was made manifest in the flesh, not by conversion of the Godhead into the
manhood, or of the manhood into the Godhead, not also by confusion of the two
natures into one: But by that most wonderful union, whereby Paul. Aquileienf.
contra Felicem. l. 1. Totus in suo, Totus in nostro: Idem in vtroque: Non alter
in suo, alter in nostro.
remaining whole in that which is his, and whole in that which is ours, he is
the same in both: Not another in that which is his, and another in that which
is ours. And Leo in Natiuit. domini. sermon. 2. De coelesti sede descendens, and
a paterna gloriano^ recedens, etc.
so coming down from the heavenly seat, and not departing from the glory of
his Father, being invisible in that which is his, was made visible in that
which is ours; the incomprehensible was comprehended; he that was before all
times took his being in time, the Lord of all took the form of a servant,
God impassible disdained not to be a passible man, and the immortal to be
subject to the Laws of death. This is his coming down from heaven. Bernard
de Aduentu demini sermon. 3.
Non venit qui aberat, sed apparuit qui latebat; He was not absent from us
before he came: But he was hid till then, and then he appeared.

Venit.
His first coming was in the infirmity of the flesh, wherein Heb. 9.26.
once in the end of the world, he has appeared to put away sin. Of this
coming Saint John says, that Ioh 13.3.
Jesus knew that he was come from God, and went to God. Bernard de Coena domini
sermon. 2. A de^ exiuit, non eum deserens; Et ad Deum vadit, non nos derelinque^^
He came from God, says Bernard, not leaving him: And he goes to God, not
leaving us. He came from God, when being the Son of God in heaven without a
mother, he became the son of a woman on earth without a Father: For his Father
knew not a woman: and his mother knew not a man This is a most wonderful
coming. And the end of it was to take away sin, or as S. John speaks, 1
Ioh 3.8.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil, and so redeem us: He went to God when triumphing over
the Devil, he carried his glorified body into heaven, and sat on the right
hand of God.

When he said to his Disciples, Venit.
that Ioh. 16.5.
he was to go his way to him that sent him, sorrow filled their heart: But he
to comfort them said, Ioh. 14.18.
I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you* Speaking of his second
coming by the holy Spirit into our hearts: The end of which coming is, to be
unto us Ioh. 16.13.
a Doctor to instruct us in his truth: Romans 8.14
A conductor to lead us in his ways: Ioh. 14.16 17.
A comforter to abide with us for ever, and comfort us in all our troubles.

He spoke of his third coming, Venturus est.
when he said to his Disciples; I will go and prepare a place for you, and I
will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may
be also. The end of this coming shall be to save and glorify us: For Col. 3.3.
when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in glory.

Mansit quod erat, factus est quod nonerat, and nunc est vtrumque.
being still that which he was, he became that which he was not, and now is
both: Being God, he became man, and now is both God and man in one person: So
ye have the constitution of his person, necessary to the fulfilling of the
work for which he came. The end of his coming was to be living bread unto us,
that is, to redeem and save us. Ye find in his person all things requisite to
do that for which he came. He came to be bread: Bread he could not be but by
his death: die he could not for man, if he had not been a man. Therefore in
that wherein he is equal unto us, he is bread. Gerhard. Lutphan. lib. de
Reformat. virium animae. cap. 28.
And this must be your first conception of him, when ye consider those good
things which ye receive by him, and which are all comprehended in this word
Bread. The breaking of the bread in the Sacrament shows us, that he was
broken in his death to be our bread: And therefore we must say: He who is our
bread, is man.

The second conception must be; that he is also God; for this bread is called
living, and who is living in the sense which I have explaned, but God? And
therefore in that wherein he is equal unto his Father, he is living, as he
himself says, Ioh. 6.63.
It is the Spirit that quickens: The flesh profits nothing. The flesh is
his humane nature, wherein by death he is become our bread: The Spirit in his
divine nature, which makes his flesh to live, and which gives a quickening
virtue to this bread.

The third conception must be this: The excellency and virtue of this bread
flows from the dignity of his person: And therefore this man and this God
are in him one person: otherwise he could neither be bread to nourish us, nor
living to quicken us. As indeed he says of himself; not as of two, as
Nestorius dreamed, but as of one, Ioam the living bread, which came down from
heaven: Hence it is that whatsoever God did in Christ, we believe that the man
did it, because Christ is a man: And whatsoever the man did in Christ, we
believe that God did it, because Christ is God. Example. When Christ was on
earth speaking to Nicodemus as he was a man, he said that even then Ioh. 3.13.
he was in heaven, because in him man is God. Again, the Apostle says, that
Act. 20.28
God has purchased the Church with his own blood: because in Christ God is a
man: Christ in the Sacrament leads you to this consideration, when he says,
This is MY body, broken for you: This is MY blood shed for you: meaning that it
is the body and blood of him who is God, and therefore it is no wonder if the
body of God be bread, if the blood of God be drink: If I say, the death of so
wonderful and so excellent a person be your life. Luke 1.37.
For with God nothing shall be impossible.

SIXTH CHAPTER.
I. Seeing Christ is God, we must stand in awe of him, and obey him.

II. We should be always ravished in admiration with his coming down from
heaven.

III. His most wonderful humiliation should be unto us a pattern of humility.

IV. In his coming to be our bread, we should acknowledge our own indignity.

V. And nevertheless accept with obedience of faith the honor of his Table.

VI. Exhortation, and Consolation.

Esa. 6.2.
the Seraphims, and with the man of GOD 1 Kings. 19.13.
Elijah cover our faces; stand as we do this day, before his Majesty with
fear and trembling; hear his Word with reverence, receive the Sacrament which
he offers unto us with humility and thankesgiving, and show a cheerful and
holy readiness to do with obedience whatsoever he commands us.

Heb. 7.26.
higher then the heavens, Ephesians. 4.9.
descended into the lower parts of the earth, and was there crudled like
Cheese, clothed with skin and flesh, fenced with bones and sinews: When we
are taught, that he who Phil. 2.6.7
being the Son of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet
notwithstanding made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of
a servant, how can we choose but wonder and be astonished at his humiliation,
whereat the Angels themselves are amazed, Ioh. 1.51.
ever ascending and descending upon the son of man, 1. Pet. 1.12.
ever desiring to look into this mystery, which passes all knowledge.
Because man in his pride Genesis 3.5.22.
would needs be like unto God, God to make amends for that fault, by a most
wonderful humiliation would needs be like unto man, yea Psalm. 22.6.
be a worm and no man, the reproach of men, and the despised of the people.
Ioh. 13.6.8.
Peter was astonished when he saw Christ coming unto him, with water in a Basin,
and kneeling at his feet to wash them; The Creator to wash the feet of his
creature, the Lord of his servant, the master of his disciple, God of man, he
that made all things of nothing the feet of a worm which he had made of clay.
Have we not greater matter of astonishme^t, when we hear and see that the same
Creator of all things became a creature, he who is the eternal possessor and
owner of heaven and earth, came down from heaven and was made man on earth,
that he might be the bread of man in heaven? O wonderful love! O inestimable
bounty! O new, O never heard of before, O peerlesse humility!

preparation to come this day to the Table of the LORD, then this is. O man,
the Son of God descended so low that he came down from heaven, and was made the
Son of man for thee: And will thou who art nothing but the fonne of a man, or
rather a man of sin, will thou heap up the sum of thy sins by taking unto
thy self the wings of pride, to say with the King of Assure, Esa. 14.13.14.
I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, I
will be like the most high? Of whom will thou learn humility, if thou
refusest to learn it of the author of humility? These and many more may be our
meditatio^s when we consider the excellency of the person which is come down
from heaven.

David, Psalm. 144.3.
Lord, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? Or the son of man that
thou make account of him? When King David called Mephibosheth to eat bread at
his table continually, Mephibosheth bowed himself, and said, 2 Samuel 9.7.8.
What is thy servant, that thou should look upon a dead dog, such as I am?
confessing his own unworthiness, although he was a Kings son. How much more
should we Ephesians. 2.3.
who are by nature the children of wrath, acknowledge our selves to be worse
then dead dogs, when the King of Kings not only calls us to eat bread at his
table, but also offers himself unto us to be our bread? Certainly we should
Origin homil 6. in diversos.
follow the laudable custom of the ancient Church on the Communion day, and
say unto him, as the Centurion did, Mat. 8.8.
Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my rooffe. Thus far
should go our humility.

Behold, says he, I stand at the door, and knock; Rev. 3.20.
If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come to him, and sup
with him, and he with me. When he knocks, shall I refuse to open unto him,
because I am not worthy that he should come unto me. Ioh. 1.11.
He came to his own: That was mercy: For they were not worthy that he should
come unto them. And his own received him not: That was sin; As he said, Ioh.
15.22.
If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they
have no cloak for their sin. Mat. 22.1
The great King made the marriage of his Son, and sent his servants to call
them that were bidde^ to the wedding: That was favor: And they would not come:
That was ingratitude: Therefore he was wroth against them, and desiroyed them:
But he gave good intertainment to the poor, blind, maimed, halt that came. For
although they were not worthy to be called, he was worthy to be obeyed. We we
are to day those ghefts, too too unworthy to sit at his Table, and to eat of
his Supper. But seeing he says this day to my sinful soul, as he said once
to the Publicane and great sinner, Luke 19.5.
Zacheus, To day I must abide at thy house; I Will make have, as Zacheus did: I Will
leap down from the Sycomore of pride: I Will run home with the seete of faith
and of obedience, to prepare the lodging of my soul for the Lord of glory: I Will
receive him ioysully into the house of mine heart. And he will say to my soul,
This day salvation is to come to this house. O eternal wisdom of the Father,
thou cryest unto us to day, Pro. 9.5.
Come, eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled: O glorious
spoufe of the Church, thou vouch safest to be our Cant. 5.1.
honey comb and our honey our wine, our milk, and our bread, and thou cryest
again unto us, Eat, O friends: drink abundantly, O beloved: In this blessed
Sacrament thou say the third time; Mat. 26.26.27.
Take, eat, This is my body: drink ye all of it: This is my blood. And shall
we not obey thee? Shall we not follow the example of Mephibosheth? Shall we not
accept with reverence and thankesgiving the honor of thy Table, and the
benefit of thy meat? Papists call not this pride, it is humility: call it not
presumption: It is obedience.

in the flesh, in the Spirit, and in glory. The first was visible in
infirmity, as the Prophet said, Esa. 53.2.
When we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. The second is
invisible, but yet most sensisible in the power of the holy Spirit, crying in
our hearts Romans 8.15
Abba, Father: None sees the Spirit in another: But every true Christian
feels it in himself. 2 Cor. 13.5.
know ye not your own selves, says the Apostle, how that Jesus Christ is in
you, except ye be reprobates? And he says, that Romans 8.9.
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, because Christ is
in us by his Spirit. The third shall be visible in Majesty, when Esa. 52.10
all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of the Lord. In the first
Ioh. 1.11
he came unto his own, and his own received him not: In the second he comes
Verse. 23.
to them that love him, and keep his words. In the third Heb 9.28
he shall appear unto them that look for him unto salvation, Bernard de
Adnentu domini sermon. 5. In primo Christus fuit redemptio nostra: In vltimo
apparebit vita nostra: In isto requies est and consolatio nostra.
In his first coming he was our redemption: In the second he is our rest and
consolation: In the last he shall be our life. O then, O let us thank him for
his first coming whereby he has redeemed us: Let us examine our selves, if we
love him and keep his words, that thereby we may be assured of his second
coming into our hearts by his blessed and holy Spirit to comfort us. And
because he is to come once again unto salvation 2 Timothy 4.8.
unto all them that love his appearing, Heb. 9.28.
and look for him, let us join our selves with the Church and with the
Spirit, and cry with heart and mouth, Rev. 22.17.20.
Come quickly: Even so, come Lord Jesus. For then if we be found having the
oil of faith and charity in our Math. 25.10.
Lamps, we shall enter with the bridegroom to the marriage, and know by
experience that which now we know by faith, that Rev. 19.7.
blessed are they which are called unto the mariage-supper of the Lamb. These
are the true sayings of God; To whom with the Son and the holy Ghost be all
praise, all glory, and all honor both now and evermore.

AMEN.
THE SECOND PART. OF THE EATERS, AND OF THE EATING OF THE LIVING BREAD.
Preached at Otlans before the KINGS Majesty the twelfth of July. 1625.
JOHN VI. 51. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.


CHAPTER I.
I. Christ nourishes not till he be eaten.

II. Four parts of this Text, concerning the eaters, the bread, the manner,
and the fruit of the eating thereof.

soever it be, is not useful for the preservation of the life of man, till he
eat it; Even so Jesus Christ, although he be the living bread which came down
from heaven, as he has said in the first part of this verse; although he live
a celestial and divine life, and Psalm. 45.2.
be fairer then all the children of men, gives not life unto the dead, and
preserves not the life which he has give^, till he be eaten, as he himself
teaches us in this second part of this verse, If any man eat of this bread,
he shall live for ever.

any man. 2. Which is the bread whereof they must eat, if they will eat to
live: Certainly it must be of this bread which is come down from heaven. 3.
What necessity there is of this eating, and what is the manner thereof, to be
considered in the word, Eat. 4. The fruit which he that eats of this bread
shall reap thereby: he shall live for ever: The sense of these four parts
joined with the four parts of the words going before, is as if Christ had
said; Tolet. in Loc. Si ergo panis sum, manduca^ter, pasco: Si vivue sum, vitam
praesto: si viuo vitam immortalem and aternam ac coelestem, viuere alios facio
simili vita: Et ideo si quis manducat hunc panem, viuet in aternum.
If I be bread, I feed him that eats: If I be living, I give life: If I live
an immortal, eternal, and celestial life, I make others to live the same
life: And therefore if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. As
many words, as many mysteries, which are able of themselves to stir up your
religious attention without further encouraging thereunto from me.

CHAPTER. II.
I. Christ is bread common to all.

II. To Gentiles and to Jews according to the Prophecies,

III. And types of the Law.

IV. Fulfilled by the death of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel.

V. Exhortation to thankesgiving for this benefit.

If any man, that this bread is not like unto Exodus 12.43.
the Passover, whereof no forreiner nor hired servant might eat: Neither is
it like unto Exodus 29.33.
the Show bread, whereof it was not lawful for any to eat, but for the
Priests. Levit. 8.31.32. Levit. 24.9. Mat. 12.4.
As in it there is no leaven of sin, so is it like unto Exodus 12.19.
the unleavened bread of the Passover, whereof the stranger did cate, as well
as he that was borne in the Land. As it came down from the third heaven, so is
it like unto the Manna which rained from the first heaven, and was Exodus 16.16.
Number. 12.4.
meat, not only to the children of Israel, but also to the mixed multitude
which came out of Egypt with them: For any man may eat of it.

any man without exception of Nation: Secondly any man without exception of any
person in any Nation. The Prophets did foretell, The Types did figure, Jesus
Christ did affirm it should be so: The calling of the Gentiles ever since the
days of the Apostles shows that it is so. Act. 10.43
All the Prophets, says Peter, give witness unto Christ, that through his
Name whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins. Did not God
say to Eve, who is the mother of all living, that Genesis 3.15
her seed should bruise the head of the Serpent? Did not Noah prophecy, that
Genesis 9.27.
God should enlarge (or persuade) Iaphet, and that he should dwell in the tents
of Sem? Did not God promise to Abraham, that Genesis 22.18.
in his feed all the* Nations of the earth should be blessed? He says not Gal.
3.16.
in his seeds, as of many, but as of one; And to thy seed which is Christ. Did
not Jacob foretell, that Genesis 49.60.
unto Shilo should be the gathering of the people? Did not Moses forewarne the
Israelites, that because Deuteronomy. 32.21.
they had moved God to jealousy with that which is not God, and provoked him
to anger with their vanities, he would move them to jealousy with those which
are not people, and provoke them to anger with a foolish Nation. Was not that
Romans 10.19.
Prophecy fulfilled in the Apostles days? When the Apostle said to the Jews
at Jerusalem, that Act. 22.21.22.23.
he was to go unto the Gentiles, they lift up their voices, cast off their
clothes, threw dust in the air, and cried, Away with such a fellow from the
earth: for it is not fit that he should live. When the Jews of Antiochia saw
that he preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, Act. 13.45.
they were filled with envy. It was to the Messiah that God said by David,
Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. It was to him also that he
said by Esaiah; Esa. 49.6.
It is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes
of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a
light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation, unto the end of the
earth: Which words when the Apostle alleged to the Gentiles of Antiochia; Act.
13.48
they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord, and as many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed: It was of the Gentiles that God said; Esa.
65.1.
I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of them that sought me
not: I said unto a nation that was not called by my Name, Behold me, Behold me.
For so is this passage applied by the Romans 10.20.
Apostle, and must be expounded so. Of them also God said by Hosea, Hos. 2.23.
I will have mercy upon he that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them
which were not my people, Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my
God. This passage is so formal and clear, that by it both S. Romans 9.26
Paul and S. 1 Pet. 2.10.
Peter proved the calling of the Gentiles, including them in the new covenant,
and not excluding the Jews, Act. 13.48.
who were first called, and when Romans 11.25.
the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, shall be called again, and saved
with us, according to the Prophecy; Esa. 57.19.
Peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord,
and I will heal him, that is to say, according to the interpretation of the
Apostle, peace to the Gentiles, which Ephesians. 2.12.17.
were strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and being
without God in the world, and therefore were far off: and peace to the Jews
which had the Covenants of promise, and in that respect had Deuteronomy. 4.7.
God nigh unto them.

Levit. 11.11.
the blood whereof was sprinkled round about upon the Altar; to teach the
people, that the blood of the Messiah was to be shed for the elect which dwell
every where upon the globe of the earth. As when the high Priest did Exodus
20.24. Levit. 7.34. Levit. 10.14
wave the wave offering, and shake it to and fro; and Exodus 29.27.
heave up the heave offering, he figured that which Christ said, that Ioh.
12.32 33.
if he were lifted up, he would draw all men unto him: This he said, signifying
what death he should die.

Mat. 28.19.
to teach all Nations: What he commanded they did: At his death Mat. 27.51.
the veil of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, to
signify that by the power of his death Ephesians. 2.14.
the middle wall of partition between us and the Jews is broken down, the
enmity is abolished, and of twain we are made in him one new man. Now the Romans
1.16.
Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, to the
Jew and to the Greek. Now, according to the prediction of Christ, Mat. 8.11
many come from the East and West, and sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, and these many are. Rev. 7.4.9.
of all Nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues, as well as of Jews. Now
Math. 15.26.27.
the dogs do no more eat the scraps of the childrens bread, which fall from
their Masters Table: But by a most merciful wonder are of dogs made the
children of God, and sit with him at his Table. The Jews were first called to
this glorious feast Upon their refusal Luke 14.21.
the poor, the maimed, the halt, the blind are brought in: This was and is to
the Jews a heartbreaking sorrow: S Act. 10.28
Peter himself at the first repined against it: Act. 11.^.2.18.
The rest of the Apostles, and the brethren that were in Judea contended with
Peter about it, and when they were better informed, they spoke of it as of a
great wonder. S. Paul calls it Romans 16.25.26.
a mystery which was kept secret since the world began: for although that now
by the Scriptures of the Prophets it is made known to all Nations, yet the
manner thereof, that Ephesians. 3.3.5.6.
the Gentiles should be fellow-heires, and of the same body, and partakers of
the promise of God in Christ by the Gospel, not by the Law; by faith, not by
Circumcision, without any observation of Judicial feasts, Ambros. ib.
fasts, abstinences, days, and other elements of the Jewish discipline, was
not revealed to any of the Prophets, was not made known in other ages to the
sons of men, was first revealed unto the Apostles and Prophets of their time
by the Spirit. Now our little children see it and know it more clearly then
Abraham the Father of the believers, then David who spoke so much of it, then
all the Prophets did.

Jews a heart-sorrow, to the Prophets a book sealed, to the Apostles a
mystery, to the first Christians of Judea a wonder, is to us our salvation:
Shall it not also be our joy, and the matter of our tha^ksgiving? Romans 9.23.24.
God has made known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he
before had prepared unto glory: Even us whom he has called, not of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles. And shall not we hearken to the exhortation of
the Apostle, and Romans 15.9.11. Psalm. 117.
glorify God for his mercy? As it is written, O praise the Lord, all ye
Nations: Praise him all ye people: For his merciful kindness is great toward
us: and the truth of the Lord endures for ever. When Christ was borne in
Bethlehem, which is interpreted the house of bread, to be the living bread to
the dead, the Angels of heaven who for their own particular had no interest in
his birth, joined themselves in a great host to praise God, saying and singing,
Luke 2.14.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men: And
shall not we who are these men for whom he is come, we who feed every day on
him, sing praise glory, and honor to God who has sent him to be our bread,
and has called us to eat of this bread? Shall we not say and sing with David,
Psa. 18.49.
Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the Heathen, and sing
praises unto thy Name.

CHAPTER III.
I. All kind of persons in any Nation may eat of the living bread, according
to the Prophecies and types of the Law.

II. And the doctrine of the Gospel.

III. Three uses of this doctrine.

IS Rom: 3.29
GOD the God of the Jews only? Is he not also of the Gentiles? Yea of the
Gentiles also, and of any man amongst Jews and Gentiles without distinction of
persons; According to the prophecy of Esaiah, Esa. 60.3.
The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising. Not Kings only, but Kings as well as men of meaner sort: but men of
mean condition, as well as Kings: Psalm. 22.26.29.
The meek shall eat, and be satisfied: All they that be fat upon earth shall
eat and worship. Under the Law there were sacrifices not only for but also
for poor men. He which had not Levit. 1.3.10.14.
a bullock of the heard to offer, came with a Lamb or a kid of the flock,
and was accepted. And Levit. 12.6.8.
the woman which after her purificatio^ was not able to bring a Lamb and a
Pigeon for her oblation, was quit for two turtles, or two young pigeons. For
Christ is a propitiatory Sacrifice for rich and poor, men and women: And as
all persons of all qualities, which were bitten with the fiery Serpents in the
wilderness, were healed, when they looked upon the Serpent of brass which
Moses had set upon a pole, according to the Word of God, Number. 21.8.
Every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it, shall line. Ioh. 3.14 15.
Even so, said Christ of himself, must the Son of man he lifted up, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life.

spiritual graces which belong to salvation. For as the Sun, the Moon, the
stars, the fire, the air, the water, the earth, which are the most useful
creatures of God, are common to all, young and old, men and women, Subjects and
Kings, poor and rich, wise and ignorant: so Gods saving graces are enjoyed in
common of all his elect. For 1 Timothy 2.4
God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth,
that is, men of all conditions and qualities; Kings, Governors, and men of
note, as well as other men. Not rich men only. For Mat. 11.5
the poor have the Gospel preached to them: Not men by age only: For Christ
said, Mat. 19.14.
Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me: For of such is
the kingdom of heaven. Not men only as opposed to women. For S. Peter says of
women, that 1 Pet. 3.7.
they are heirs together of the grace of life: And of all conditions S. Paul
says, Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.
that there is neither Jew nor Greek there is neither Circumcision nor
uncircumcision, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female, but we are all one in Christ Jesus. All are baptized with one and the
same water: All hear the same word: All in the Lords Supper are partakers of
one bread, and drink of one cup; and when our night shall come, we shall all
receive one penny of eternal life. Act. 10.34.35.
For God is no respecter of persons, but in every Nation, he that fears him,
and works righteousness is accepted with him.

1. Use.
They have nothing more: Let not the little ones repine at the excellency of
the great ones: They have nothing less. We are all Ephesians. 2.19
fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God: We are all Romans
8.17
heirs of God, and ioynt-heires with Christ.

Let us all rather seek the conversion of those which as yet come not to one
table with us. 2. Use.
For Iam. 5.20.
he that converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul
from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins. And when God has opened the
eyes of any one, and turned him from darkness to light, let us give thanks for
him, Gal. 1.22.23.24.
as the Churches of Judea, which were in Christ, glorified God in Paul, when
they heard that he preached the faith, which once he had destroyed.

And looking for a blessing upon our godly endeavors and careful labors that
way, 3. Use.
let us in the mean time bow the knees of our hearts, and open our mouths
with thanksgiving to the heavenly Father, Col. 1.12.13.
who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, has delivered us from the power of darkness, has translated us into
the kingdom of his dear Son, and there has covered the Table unto us, that
there we may eat perpetually of this bread.

CHAPTER IV.
I. Christ is the bread whereof we must eat.

II. As he is God and man in one person.

III. In this sense S. Cyrillus says that we are united with Christ corporally
and spiritually.

IV. Our union with him begins by his manhood.

I am the living bread which came down from heaven, whereunto he adds in this
second part of the Verse, If any man eat of this bread, speaking still of
himself. And therefore Eras. in Loc. Hunc locum veteres interpretantur de
doctrina coelesti.
this bread is not this doctrine, as Erasmus says, although he allege the
authority of the Fathers: Why Christ is called bread, Why living, how it is
said that he came down from heaven, I declared in the exposition of these
words; yet not so fully, but that I left a gleaning for this place.

of this bread, we must exactly distinguish between the object of our eating,
and the action whereby we eat. For nature it self teaches us that bread is
one thing, and to eat is another: Bread is a bodily substance out of us. To
eat is an action of ours, whereby bread is applied unto us, and changed into
our substance. Therefore we must first know what, and next how we must eat.
That which we must care, is this bread: It is Christ as he is God and man: Not
as he is God only: For so he is not bread: But is so far from us, that we
cannot come near him. Not also as he is man only: For so he is not living.
Says he not, that it is Ioh. 6.63.
the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing? It is his Godhead,
called the Spirit, which quickneth his manhood, and makes it quickening unto
us. For Heb. 9.14.
through the eternal Spirit, he offered himself without spot to God: And 1
Pet. 3.18.
being put to death in the flesh, he was quickened by the Spirit, and so was
enabled to quicken us. Similitude
As wood in it self is not able to warm us: But if fire come unto it, it
receives heat in it self, and by that heat warmeth all those that come near
unto it. Even so the manhood of Christ has no quickening life of its own
self, but by the virtue of the Godhead united unto it, it is able to quicken
all the men of the world, if they did come near unto it.

Cyrillus, when disputing against Nestorius who divided Christ, he said yt we
are united unto Christ Cyrill. advers Nestor. lib. 4. c. 5.
(...), divinely and humanely: Idem in Ioh lib. 11. cap. 27.
(...), corporally and spiritually, that is to say, according to his own
interpretation which Papists have omitted in their translations, (...),
entirely.(...): And corporally as he is MAN: (...). Spiritually also as he is
GOD. This is worthy to be observed against Papists, which will have the words
corporally and Spiritually to be expounded of the manner of our union with
Christ: whereas S. Cyrillus expounds them of the object of this union, which
is the body and the Spirit; the manhood and the Godhead of Christ, for he is
one with us in both natures. Even as the same author says, that Idem adv.
Nestor lib. 4. cap. 6.
(...), we are sanctified and revived spiritually and corporally, that is to
say, not only in our spirits, but also in our bodies, because, says he, 1
Cor. 15 53.
this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality. Ex Theodoreto dialogo. 2.
So S. Ignace says, that Christ is joined to the Father, (...), carually and
spiritually, i.e. both in his humane and divine nature, and not partly by a
carnal, partly by a divine manner: For the manner of the union of Christ with
the Father, is wholly divine: And so also the manner of our union with him is
altogether divine, and spiritual. Dare Papists say that we are joined with
Christ naturally, although Cyrillus says that our union with him Cyril. in
Johan. lib. 11. cap. 26.
is natural? Yet he speaks so, because our nature is joined with his
natures; as he prooveth, because 1 Cor. 10.27.
the Church is Christ's body, and we are members of Christ in particular. So
then in regard of the objects which are united, this union is natural, real,
substantial, corporal, spiritual, because his whole person is joined with
ours: And therefore I say that we must eat Christ, not only as bread, but also
as living. And if as man he is bread, and as God is living, we must eat him in
both natures together: For in both natures he is our Mediator, and the bread
whereby we live.

Genesis 28.11.
Jacobs ladder, by his manheed he touches the earth: By his God head he
touches heaven: And by both united together he joins the earth with heaven,
reconcileth man with God, obtains to us the service of the Angels of God,
which Ioh. 1.51
ascend and descend upon him, and by him upon us: But in such sort that by him
as he is man, they alcend from us, and goto him as he is God: and from him as
he is God, descend unto us by him as he is man. In the same order do we cate
him, and abide in him, and he in us. Aug. in Ioh. trac. 42. Adnentus eius
humanitas eius: Mansio eius diuinit as eius. Diuinitas eius quo imus: Humanitas
eius qua imus: Nisi nobis fieret qua iremus, nunquam ad illum manente^
perueniremus.
He comes unto us, says S. Austin, by his humanity: He abides with us by
his divinity. His divinity is that whereunto we go: His humanity is that
whereby we go. If he were not unto us the way whereby we may go, we should
never come unto him, in that wherein he abides with us. But because I have
spoken of this bread largely enough upon the first part of the Verse, I leave
it, to come to the third part of my division, which is,

OF THE EATING of the living Bread, and of the manner thereof.
CHAPTER V.
I. To eat Christ, is to be united unto him.

II. Necessity of our union with Christ.

III. Expressed in the Scripture by many similitudes, and in the sixth of S.
John by the similitude of Eating.

IV. All Papists hold that Christ is eaten in the Sacrament with the mouth of
the body.

V. The liter all sense is not always to be followed.

VI. When it is lawful, when not to ask How.

VII. Papists agree not among themselves concerning diverse circumstances of the
bodily eating.

Ioh. 6.53.54.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you: And of those that eat him he says; Who so eats my stesh, and
drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Whereby it is easy to be understood, that this eating and drinking is a
certain action, whereby Christ is united unto us so near, that we suck life
out of him, yea that he himself beo^meth Col. 3 4.
our life, as the Apostle calls him. Aug. Confess l. 7. c. 10. Nec tu me in
te mutabis, sicut cibum carnis tuae, sed tu mutaberis in me.
It is true that the bread of the earth when we eat it, cannot feed us, till
it be changed into our bodies, because we are more excellent then it is: But
the bread which came down from heaven, is more excellent then we are, and
therefore that we may be fed by it, we are changed into it, and made members of
his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Even as the fire turns into fire
all things that feed on it.

the necessity of the eating of this bread, that is to say, of our union and
communion with Christ. Our felicity is to be joined with GOD, Psalm. 36.9
with whom is the fountain of life. But Esa. 59.2.
sin separateth between us and our God. For 1 Ioh. 1.1.5.
he is light, and in him there is no darkness at all: Ephesians. 5.8.
we are darkness, and in us by nature there is no light at all 2 Cor. 6.15.
What communion has light with darkness? O Lord, thou have made us for thine
own self, that sticking fast unto thee, we may be blessed by thee: But lo by
our sin we Ephesians. 2.11.12.13.
are far off, and Psalm 73.27.28.
lo, they that are far from thee, shall perish. But it is good for us to draw
near unto thee, neither is our heart at rest till it return unto thee. Tell
us then, o Lord, how shall we be again joined with thee? The Son, the Word,
the Wisdom of God answers, Ioh 14.6.
No man comes unto the Father, but by me. And S. Paul tells us why, and
how, saying, Ephesians. 2.13
Now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
blood of Christ. Ask ye why? Because by the blood of his sacrifice, he has
satisfied the justice of God, assuaged the burning fire of his indignation, and
made atonement for us, as Heb. 7 22.
Surety and Heb. 9.15.
Mediator of the new Testament. Ask ye how? Because we are in him. He is our
Exodus 28.11.12.30.
high Priest, who bears us upon his shoulders, and upon his heart before the
Lord, 1 Ioh. 5.11.12.
who has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: He that
has the Son, has life: and he that has not the Son, has not life. For
as Math 13.44.
he who found a treasure hid in a field, could not claim any right unto it,
till he bought the field: So cannot we challenge Col. 2.3.
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and of that Ioh. 1.16.
fullness of graces which is in Christ, till he himself be ours: and so ours,
that we be in him, and one with him by a most real union of his person with
our persons.

Romans 6.5.
the graffe is one tree with the stock wherein it is graffed; Ioh. 15.1.
the vine and the branches are one plants, 1 Cor. 12.12.
the head and the members are one body, Ephesians. 5.31.32.
the husband and the wife are one flesh, Ephesians 2.20.21.
the foundation and the stones builded upon it, are one Temple; and to come to
the similitude of my Text, the bread which was no part of us, because it is
without us, when it is eaten becomes a part of our flesh, and of our bodies.
So ye see, not only by the similitude of eating, but also by all the rest,
that our union with Christ is so necessary, that as a man cannot live without
meat, nor a house stand without a foundation, no more can we live, stand, and
withstand in the evil day, without our union with Christ, according to his own
saying, Ioh. 15.5.
I am the vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the
same briugeth forth much fruit: for without me (or severed from me) ye can do
nothing. Ye see also that he is united with us in all that is his, i. in both
his natures: Ephesians. 5.30.
In his manhood: for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones: And in his Godhead: For 1 Cor. 6.7.
he that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit. Likewise we are united with
him in all that is ours, i. not only in our souls, but also in our bodies, as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.15.
Know we not that your bodies are the members of Christ?

Papists and us about the manner of the eating of Christ. for if to eat Christ
be no other thing but to unite Christ unto our selves; if we know how we are
united with him, we cannot choose but know how we eat him. If we be one with
him corporally, that is, after an outward and corporal manner, then we care
him corporally: But if our union with him be spiritual, doubtless the mouth
wherewith we eat him, must be a spiritual mouth* Papists say that our eating
of Christ is both spiritual and corporal: That out of the Sacrament it is
spiritual: And many Papists, as Biel super can. Miss. lect. 8^.
Gabriell Biel, ^a^^tan. in 3 part. q 80. art. vlt.
Caietan, Cusan epist. 7. ad Bohemos.
Cusanus, Ianseni concordant* c 59
Iansenius, Tapper explicat* art. 15 Lovaniens.
Tapper, Hessel. in lib* de commun. sub vnaspecie.
Hesselius, and others, acknowledge that Christ in this whole Chapter speaks
of the spiritual eating only. Bellarm. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Bellarmin with the rest of the Society, and other Popish Doctors grant that
we must take in that sense all the words of Christ from the seven and twentieth
unto the one and fifty verse, which now I expound. But that from henceforth
beginning at the one and fifty verse unto the end of the Chapter, Christ
speaks of the Eucharist: which opinion Cusanus refuteth by these words of
Christ, verse. 53. Exceptye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you, saying that Cusan. epist. 7. ad Bohem. Necesse
est^ quod si de* omnibus sanctis debet* verificari, qui habent vitamillam
divina^, quod non imelligitur de visibili seu Sacramentali manducatione, sed de
spirituali.
if they must be verified of all the Saints which have this divine life, they
must not be under stood of the visible or Sacramental, but of the spiritual
eating. Which is true: Yet all Papists agree that in the Sacrament Christ is
eaten not only spiritually by faith, but also corporally by the mouth of the
body, in such sort that the true body of Christ enters into their mouths,
and is received into their stomachs. If ye ask how they can believe such a
monstrous Doctrine? They answer, that Christ affirms in this Chapter, that
we must eat his flesh, and drink his blood: And that in the Sacrament he has
commanded us to eat his body, saying, Take, eat, This is my bidy: To refuse
to eat him, were disobedience: To ask how, is incredulity, like unto that of
the Jews of Capernaum, Ioh 6*52. Rhennsta.
who strove amongst themselves, saying, HOW can this man give us his flesh to
eat? This, say they, is the literal sense, and this sense they will follow.

Anthropomorphits did, that God has a body as we have, seeing God says that
he has eyes, ears, hands, feet, etc? Why shake they not hands with the
Arrians, and deny Christ to be God, because he himself said, Ioh. 14.28
My Father is greater then I? Certainly if they had been in Nicodemus his
place, they would not have asked of Christ, Ioh. 3.4.
How can a man be borne when he is old? but said unto him, Lord feeing thou
have said that we must be borne again, we believe that we shall enter the
second time into our mothers womb, and be borne again. And if they had bin
standing by the Samaritane Woman, they would have naught her to believe that
Christ is real and substantial water, because he called himself water: May
they not also with as good reason expound literally, that which Pro. 9.5.
the Wisdom in the Proverbs, Cant. 5.1.
the Spouse in Salemons Song, Esa. 55.1
God in Esaiah speaks of the furnishing of their Table with beasts, honey,
milk, bread, and wine? And when God says, Psalm. 81.10
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, Cant 5.1.
eat, drink abundantly, if we must always cleave to the leaves of the words,
we must prepare our throats and our bellies, and drink stoutly till we be
drunk.

how we may be made partakers of them. To ask how the things which GOD alone
does may be done, as how he created the world, How the Word was made flesh,
etc. is a most horrible sin: August. ad Volusian. Epist. 3. In talibus rebus
Iota ratio factiest potentia facientia.
For in such things all the reason of that which is don, is the power of the
doer. And therefore Zacharias sinned, when he asked, Luke 1.18.20.
How shall I knew this? for I am an old man, and my wise well stricken in
years. But when any thing is to be done by us, it is not diffidence, is not
curiosity, it is docilitie, it is duty to ask How we should do it, that we
may do it well, and according to the will of the commander, so that we go to
him, and ask counsel at his mouth, how he will have it to be don. The Jews
of Capernaum Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 3. cap. 30. Et lib. 4. c. 14.
through presumption and arrogancy, asked Ioh. 6.52.60.67.
how Christ might give them his flesh to eat, and calling his speech an hard
saying, went back, and walked no more with him, whereas Chrysostom. in Ioh. hom.
46.
they should have remained with him, and not departed, they should have asked,
and not despaired. O thrice and four times happy had they been, if they had
propounded to Christ an How of docilitie, as Nicodemus did, when having a good
conceit of Christ, esteeming him so wise that he said nothing absurdly, and not
understanding his words, asked of him, Ioh. 3.4.
How they should be understood, and was instructed. How more happy had they
been, if they had come to Christ with an How of faith, as Maneah did to the
Angel, saying, Judge. 13.12.
Now let thy words come to pass: How shall we order the child, and how shall
we do unto him? And as the Virgin Mary did, when believing the words of the
Angel Gabriel that she should be the mother of the Son of God, and not
knowing if any action of hers should concur with the power of God in that
work, she asked, Luke 1.34.
How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? So we believe that we must eat
Christ: For seeing he has said it, is there any Christian that dare deny it?
This eating is commanded unto us, and to be done by us. Therefore to ask how
we should do it, and to be careful that we sin not by doing it amiss, is
docilitie and faith.

how Christ is eaten, seek in their own brains the exposition of this How,
and decide the question in words so monstrous, that we could not believe it, if
they were not written in their own books. NICOLAS the II. Pope of Rome, and a
Council of an hundred and fourteen Bishops which he assembled at Rome in the
year of Christ 1059. constrained Berengarius to confess, that Decret. 3.
part. de consecrat. did. 2. can. 42. Ego Berengarius. Scilicet pane^ and
vinum, quae in altari ponu^tur, post confecrationem, non s^lu^ sacramentu^, sed
etiam verum corpus and sanguine^ domini nostri Jesus. Christi esse, and
sensualiter, non solum sacramentum, sed in veritate manibus sacerdotu^
tractari, frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri.
not only the Sacrament, but also the true body of our Lord Jesus Christ, is
truly and sensibly handled and broken with the hands of the Priests, and is
brayed with the teeth of the faithful. This canon is against the Scripture,
which says Ioh. 19.36. that a bone of him shall not be broken. And therefore
the Roman Doctors, departing from their maxim, That the Pope and the
Councels approved by him cannot err, say that Christ without any such bruising
goes down from the mouth to the stomach whole and entire, but hid under the
accidents of the bread. There is in S. Bernards works a Sermon de Coenadomini,
of the Lords Supper, but it is none of his: In it the author says, Speciem
panis rodit aliquando sorex paruissimus: Christianus recipit etiam pessimus:
virtutem gratiae spiritualis non nisi praedestinatus recipit. A little mouse
sometimes gnaweth the spece of bread, and a lewd Christian receives it also:
whereas he only who is predestined receives the virtue of the spiritual
grace. By the speces of bread he understands the accidents thereof, such as
are the color, the smell, the savor, the weight, and such like; but it would
be a good piece of learning to tell us how a mouse can gnaw, and a wicked man
eat accidents.

THOMAS the Angelical Doctor of the Roman Church maintains that not only
wicked men, but also fowls, Tho. 3. part q. 80. art. 3. ad ^ni. De defectibus
occurrentib circa Missam.
beasts and worms may eat Christ's body in the Sacrament, and in all the
Masse-bookes many instructions are given to the Priests what must be don with
the mouse which has eaten Christ's body, and with the body of Christ, which the
Priest or a sick man has vomited.

If ye ask how long he continues there? They answer to that also. The Priest
praying in the Mass that Adhareat visceribus meis.
it may stick fast to his bowels, thinks that he continues for ever in his
body. Glossa in can. 23 Tribus gradibus, Certum est quod species quam cito
dentibus teruntur, tam cito in coelum rapitur corpus Christi.
The Canonists say, that as soon as the species (or visible accidents) are
bruised with the teeth, his body is ravished into heaven, as if he were afraid
of a snatch by the way. Thom. 3. part. q. 80. art. 3. conclus. Bellarm. de
Eucharist. lib. 14. c. 1.
Thomas and the most part of the rest say, that he abides in the stomach till
the species or accidents under which his body was hid be consumed, that is, as
long time as would be needful to the natural heat to digest the bread
whereof they are the accidents, if it were in the stomach. This is their
explication of the how the body of Christ is eaten in the Sacrament, wherein
they omit to tell us how it goes out again. But we say that this manner of
the eating of the body of Christ* is impossible in it self, indecent and
injurious to Christ, and unprofitable to the eaters.

CHAPTER. VI. Six reasons why it is impossible to eat Christ with the mouth of
the body.
YE have sundry ways Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 11. homil. 27. (...).
S. Chrysostom exhorts us to eat, to drink, to put on Christ, Showing that
those three must be done by one and the same action. But by the mouth we cannot
put him on: Therefore by the mouth we cannot eat and drink him. Extend this
argument to all the rest of the similitudes, whereby our union with Christ is
expressed. The union of clothes with the body, and of stones with the
foundation is artificial and outward: The union of the head with the members,
of the vine with the branches is natural and inward: The union of the husband
with his wife, is civil, and inforceth not any proximitie or touching of
bodies, as the rest do: For they remain one flesh, although they be as far
separated as the East is from the West. If a bodily manner of conjunction with
Christ, cannot be enforced by those similitudes, because it should be at one
time outward and inward, natural, civil, and artificial, which is
impossible: Let Papists tell why it should be enforced by the similitude of
eating? If by the similitude of eating, why not also by the rest? Here they are
muffled and cannot answer. Cusan epist. 7. ad. Bohemos. Cr^dere igitur,
baptizari, manducare, and bibere, et quicquid similiter per Christum dicitur,
non habet in spirituali intellectu differe^tiam, sed vnu^ solum est, quodper
omnia talia vary exprimu^tur, scilicet quotquot receperu^t eum, dedit eis
potest^tem filios dei fieri ijs qui credunt in nomine eius.
Cusanus one of their own confesses, that all those similitudes, and
whatsoever Christ says after that manner, has no difference in the spiritual
understanding, but it is one thing which by all such things is diversely
expressed, to wit, As many as received him, to them gave the power to become
the Sons of God, to them that believe on his Name.

SECONDLY, in the Sacrament he gives himself, not as glorified in heaven, but
as dead upon the cross, as he said, 1 Cor. 11.24.
This is my body which is broken for you: Mar. 14.24
This is my blood which is shed for many: Do this in remembrance of me. Which
commandment the Apostle explaineth saying, 1 Cor. 11 26.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come. He did give himself to the Apostles so, and they received
him so. For he was not then glorified. Should we desire to receive him
otherwise then they did? To receive him so with the mouth of the body it is
impossible, because he is not now dead, but Romans 6.10
lives unto God. This argument prevents all replies.

Origin, in Math. 15. Verus cibus quem nullus malus potest edere.
Origines, because if they did eat him, they should abide in him, as he says,
verse. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him: and abiding in him they should live for ever, as he says in my Text,
If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever, and so often in the
verses preceding and following: Which moved De co^secrat. did. 2. ca^ 65 Qui
discordat a Christo, nec carnem eius manducat, nec sanguinem bibit, etiam si
tantae rei Sacrame^tum ad iudiciu^ suae praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter
accipiat.
S. Austin to say, that he who is discordant from Christ, eats not his flesh,
and drinks not his blood, although he receive daily the Sacrament of so great
a thing to the condemnation of his own presumption. As likewise he says of
the Apostles, that Idem in Johan trac. 59. Illi manducaba^t panem dominum: Ille
panem domini contra dominu^: Illi vitam, ille poenam.
they did eat the bread which is the Lord, and of Judas, that he did eat the
bread of the Lord against the Lord, They life, he pain.

FOURTHLY, the Lord himself seeing that many of his Disciples took his words
carnally, of his body, Athan. de verb. Christi Qui dixerit verbum contra filiu^
hominis: Quomodo fieri posset vt totus mundus ederet de carne ipsius, quae non
sufficeret paucis hominibus: Ideo dominus de carnis suae manducatione loquens,
sui in coelum ascensus meminit, vt a corporali eos manducatione abstraheret,
and vel inde discerent carnem Christi esse cibum coelestem, et in alimonia^
spiritualem dare.
to draw them away from bodily eating, and to teach them that his flesh is a
heavenly meat, and is given to be spiritual food, he makes mention of his
ascension into heaven, saying, verse. 61.62. Does this offend you? What and if
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? arguing, This is a
strong reason, that Ibide^ trac. 27. Vel tunc videbitis quod non eo modo quo
putatis erogat corpus suum. Certe vel tu^c intelligetis quod gratia eius non
consumitur morfibus.
he gives not his body after the manner which they imagined. z For the heavens
must receive him, until the time of restitution of all things, which God has
spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, because there a he appears in
the presence of God, and b makes intercession for us, and cannot come out of
that Holy place, till his intercession be ended, which will not be till the
worlds end. For Heb. 8.4.
if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest. But he is a Priest: and
therefore, says he himself, Math. 24.23.26.
If any man say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there, believe it not: Behold
he is in the desert, go not forth; behold he is (...), Act 3.21.
Heb 9.24.
in the secret chambers, To. 8.34.
(as when Papists say he is in the chapel, on the Altar in the box) believe
it not: Believe rather S. Paul who says, that 2 Cor. 5.6.16.
whiles we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, and henceforth
know him no more after the flesh, and according to his exhortation, Col. 3.1 2.
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of
God: set your affection on things above, not on things on earth. Bernard, de
Aduentu domini sermon. 1. Incassum laboraret erigere corda nostra, nisi
collocatu^ in coelis salutis nostra doceret autorem.
In vain would he labor to heave up our hearts to heaven, if the author of
our salvation were not in heaven. Yea most preposterously should he endeavor to
withdraw our hearts from the earth, if Christ were on earth. For Math. 6.21.
where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.

Certainly, if it were possible to eat him, the mouth of our body could eat
nothing of him but his body: And what is a body without a soul, but a corpse?
if then Christ Romans 6.9.
being raised from dead, he dies no more, death has no more dominion over
him, it is impiety to think, it is blasphemy to say that his body may be
eaten corporally.

Sursum corda? Why does the people answer, Habemus ad dominu^, but because they
acknowledge that even when the Sacrament is given, Christ is in heaven, and is
not in his body elsewhere? So all that they prattle of the possibility and
realitie of his bodily presence in the Eucharist, is like a spiders web, which
is swept away with the first blast of the truth.

CHAPTER VII.
I. The bodily eating is indecent and injurious to Christ.

II. The reply of the Adversaries impertinent.

III. The same eating is unprofitable to the eaters.

it is indecent, and injurious to Jesus Christ. Are the accidents of a crust a
convenient garment to cover the Son of God? Is it fit that he who vpholdeth
all things by the word of his power, should be borne between the fingers of a
Priest, who is in perpetual fear least he fall? Are the stomachs of men,
which are puddles of infection, Temples well suting the Lord of glory? The
Cherubims and Seraphims, all the Angels of God worship and serve him in heaven.
The devils themselves stoop and bow down their heads before him from the lower
hels, and men which are no better then Grashoppes put him to an open shame,
maintaining, as I have said, that not only wicked men, but also fowls,
beasts, and worms may eat him. Thom. 3. q. 80. art. 3. Quida^ dixerunt quod
statim cum Sacramentu^ tangitur a mure vel cane, desinit ibi corpus esse
Christi, quod etiam derogat veritati Sacramenti. Alexan. Halens. part. 4. sum.
q. 45. in 1. and q. 53. in 2.
To let you see how far the God of this world has blinded them, they dare
say that this blasphemous divinity derogateth nothing from the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Thom. ibi.
Because forsooth he was crucified by sinners without any diminution of his
dignity, yea was by Math. 4.5.8.
the devil transported from one place to another. But these things did befall
him in the days of his flesh: Then he came to be tempted, to be abused and
crucified by wicked men: Then Heb. 4.15.
he was in all things tempted like as we are, yet without sin. But now Ephesians.
1.20.21.
he sits at the right hand of his Father in the heavenly places, far above
all principalities, and power, and might, and dominion. Now Heb. 2.7.
he is crowned with glory and honor. Now Phil. 2 9 10.
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every name,
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. And shall he now, now be in a
worse case then he was in his greatest infirmity? For then he did not enter
into men's bellies, and did not fear the gnawing of worms, nor the teeth of
mice, nor the intrals of beasts.

What? say Papists, is not God every where, and is not defiled? True. But the
body of Christ is not. It is a true body: Therefore if it be in the body of a
man, or of a beast, it must touch them: And it cannot touch them, but it must
be defiled by them. They ask again, Does not the light of the Sun inlighten
the whole air? Is it not spread over the whole earth? Shines it not in the
most infected places, and is not infected? True also. For the light in the
Sun and in the air is not a body, it is an accident. But the body of Christ
is a true body. If the Sun it self were upon a dunghill, it should be
soyled, as well as the air wherein the light is. So the body of Christ if it
touch our bodies must necessarily be contaminated: And although it were not, I
say that it cannot be lodged in the stinking bellies of men or beasts, but it
must be dishonored: Wherefore I conclude, that this eating of the body of
Christ, is not only impossible, but also indecent and outrageous to Christ.

Christ were not dishonored by it? I ask cui bono? The least of the works of
GOD has some use: This which is thought to be one of the most wonderful, has
none at all. Christ must over-turne the whole order of nature, he must be
subject to the intention of a Priest, he must be at once in heaven and on
earth, he must contract his body to the capacity of a little round crust, and
have his head in his feet, and all the parts of his body pellemelled: He must
be kept in a box, and often tarry there till he get a white coat. To what
purpose so many monstrous wonders? To save men? No, no. Many men since the
beginning of the world till Christ have benne saved without this eating. Many
every day go to heaven without it. Many wicked men are damned with it. Those
who communicate every day, reap no profit by it. For no meat does good,
except it stick to him that eats it: Whereas the body of Christ does not
continue in them. But it must scour to heaven as fast as it came from it,
having no longer leave to stay then till the accidents be consumed, and giving
no odds in Paradise to them who are every other day so careful to receive it.
For what end do we eat our daily bread? To sustain our lives. For what end
must we eat the bread which came down from heaven, must Jesus Christ enter
into us? He himself answers saying, Ioh. 6.57.
He that eats me, even he shall live by me, and that for ever, as he says in
my Text. And yet Papists confess that to have his body in our bodies, brings
no such advantage to any man. The Virgin Mary had him nine months in her
womb, and Elizabeth said unto her, Luke 1.45.
Blessed is she that believed. And when a woman said unto Christ, Luke
11.27.28.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the papes which thou have sucked, he
rejected that saying with this answer; Yea blessed are they that hear the
Word of God, and keep it, showing that it is not the having of his body in our
bodies, but the having of him and of his word in our hearts by faith and
obedience that quickens and blesses us. Which I will prove, declaring first,
the true manner how CHRIST gives this bread, and next how we receive it.

CHAPTER VIII.
I. We must learn of Christ how he gives himself, and how we receive him.

II. Christ gives himself unto us by his Spirit.

III. To be in Christ, and to have the Spirit of Christ are equivalent in the
Scriptures.

IV. We have no real union with Christ in the Sacraments but by the Spirit.

V. It is easy to the Spirit to unite us unto Christ.

VI. We must pray for the Spirit.

Cyrill. in Ioh. lib. 4. c. 13. Quaerendum enim ita semper est, vt apud cum
habitemus, and ad alienas sententias non defer amur.
Cyrillus, and make inquiry in such sort, that we dwell with God, and be not
carried about with the opinions of men. Papists believe that they must eat
Christ, because he has said it. We believe it likewise. But when he tells us
also, how he gives himself, and how we must eat him, they stop their ears,
and will not hear: we must not do so: we must say unto him as Samuel did to
GOD, 1 Samuel 3.9.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. He of all can best tell how he gives
himself, and how we receive him. And what he answers to both questions must
be true.

It is the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing, the words that
I speak unto you, they are Spirit and they are life, i. they must be
understood of the spirit, which is Romans 8.2.
the Spirit of life, quickening the flesh of Christ, and Aug. in Johan. tract.
27. Ergospiritus est qui viuificat. Spiritus euim facit viua membra.
making all the members of his body to live by a spiritual union with him. He
had said before verse. 56. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him. And S. John says, that 1 Ioh. 4.13.
hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit. It is then by the Spirit that he gives himself unto us, and
dwells in us. And this giving of himself unto us by his Spirit is so
incompatible with his bodily presence, that he averred for a most certain
truth, that Ioh. 16.7.
it was expedient that he should go away; For if I go not away, said he, the
Cemforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto you:
And what to do? Ioh. 14.16.17.18.
To abide with you for ever. And this abiding of his Spirit with us, is his
abiding with us, as he says in the next verse, I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you.

Romans 8.9.10.
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his: Whereunto he adds,
If Christ be in you, because Christ is not in us, but by his Spirit. This union
of Christ with us extends it self to our bodies. 1 Cor. 6.15.
Know ye not, says the Apostle, that your bodies are the members of Christ? If
ye ask of him How? He answers, Verse. 17.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit. i. e. he is made one with the
Lord by the holy Spirit, as he shows when he asks again, Verse. 19.
What, know you not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in
you, which ye have of God.

Baptism, that 1 Cor. 12.13.
by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, because it is the Spirit that
in our Baptism incorporateth us in Christ. It is also written of the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 12.13
that we have bin all made to drink into one Spirit, because that in that holy
Sacrament he gives his body unto us by his Spirit. Although that his body
should come down from heaven, and enter into our bodies, it could not unite us
unto him, as I have said: for the flesh profits nothing: But that which is
impossible to his flesh, is easy to his Spirit, which if he send from heaven
into our hearts, it will unite us unto him more truly and nearly then our
souls are united to our bodies.

How Christ gives himself to be eaten, 1. Use.
whereunto we must submit our minds and cogitations, without any further
inquiry, following the example of the blessed Virgin, who when the Angel had
instructed her that Luke 1.35.38.
the holy Ghost should come upon her, and make her to conceive, brought into
captivity all her thoughts to the obedience of the Word of GOD, and said,
Behold the handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word. Behold, I
pray you, how the Sun budgeth not out of his heavenly tabernacle, and
nevertheless darting his beams from heaven to earth, communicates it self
to all the creatures that are on earth. And shall we say, that Mal. 4.2.
the Sun of righteousness, must leave his celestial and glorious palace to
make good the word which he has spoken of our communion with him? O blasphemy?
He has said that by his Spirit he will come unto us, and dwell with us: He
will do it as he has said it, Luke 1.37.
For with God no word shall be impossible.

Veni creator Spiritus, Et infunde coelitus. Lucis tuae radium.
Come O most holy and blessed Spirit into our hearts, assured that if we pray
so earnestly, God will hear us: Luke 11.13.
For, says Christ, if ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him?

CHAPTER IX.
I. We must learn of Christ himself how we eat him.

II. Such bread, such eating.

III. Such man, such eating.

IV. Such senses and instruments to apprehend him, such eating.

V. Such end of our eating, such eating.

August. in Ioh tract 27 Patitur enim nos non contradicentes, sed nosse
cupientes.
he bears with us, when we ask of him, not to contradict, but to learn. O
ye that have an ear to hear, hear. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
The secret things belong unto the Lord our God. 1 Samuel 6.19.
Look not with the men of Bethshemesh into this Ark of the Lord: Job. 33.13
He gives not account of any of his matters. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
But those things which are revealed, belong unto us and to our children for
ever, that we may do all the words of this Law. Conformably whereunto an
ancient has said wisely, Ambros. de Vocat Gent. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Quae deus occulta esse voluit non sunt scrutanda, quae aute^ manifesta fecit
non sunt neganda: ne in illis illi cite euriosi, istis damnabiliter inueniamur
ingrati, that those things which GOD will have to be hid, must not be searched,
and those which he has made manifest, must not be denied, least in those we be
found unlawfully curious, and in this be condemned as unthankful. Of these
things is the manner of the eating of the bread which came down from heaven.

Take ye, eat ye, This is my body, he shows how we must eat him, saying, do
this in remembrance of me. These words, says August. de Doct. Christ. lib 3.
cap. 15. Figura est ergopracipiens passioni domini esse co^municandum, and
suaniter at que vtiliter reco^dendu^ in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius
crucifixa and vulnerata est.
Augustine, are a figure commanding us to communicate to his passion, and to
record profitably, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us, which we
cannot do but by an action of the soul.

SECONDLY, Such man, such eating. If he who eats Christ be nothing but a
natural man, let him eat and drink with his natural organes. Ephesians. 4.24.
a new man, 1 Cor. 2.1
a spiritual man, Ro^. 2.19. Romans 7.22
an inward man, if all his organes be spiritual and inward, shall we not say
truly with S. Augustine, that he he alone eats Christ, August. in Ioh. tract.
26 in verba, Vt si quis manducat ex ipso non meriatur Qui^ manducat intus,
nonforis: qui ma^ducat in cord, non qui pren it de^^e
that eats inwardly, not outwardly; who eats in his heart, not he that
thrufteth his tooth into the Sacrament.

Christ says, Math. 5.8.
blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness. Is not he he
himself, Ier. 23.26.
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS? Such then as is our hungring and thirsting after
him, such is our eating of him: If this hunger be in our stomachs, if this
thirst be in our throats, then let us satisfy our gnawing stomachs with him,
let us drink him with our throats: But if this hunger and thirst be proper to
the soul, as David says, Psalm. 42 2.
As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my scale after thee, O
God: My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. What can the eating of his
flesh be, but as S. Cyprian. de Coena domini Esus igitur carnis huius quaedam
auiditas est, and quoddam desiderium manendi in ipso.
Cyprian says, a certain greediness, and eager desire to abide in him? Such
as are our eyes wherewith we see him, such is our mouth wherewith we eat him.
If we see him with our bodily eyes, with our bodily mouth we must eat him. But
he expounds our seeing of him, by our believing in him, saying, Ioh 6.40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and
believes on him, may have everlasting life. Therefore I say that to believe in
him, is to eat him. He said to the belly-god Jew, Ioh 6.27.28.29.
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures unto
everlasting life. O Lord we ask of thee as the Jews did, What shall we do,
that we may work the works of God, for such as is our laboring for this
meat, such is our eating thereof: And thou answerest O Lord; This is the work
of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. August. in Ioh. tract. 25 Hoc
est ergo manducare ^ibum, qui non perit, sed qui permanet in vitam aeternam. Vt
quid paras ventrem and dentes? creed and mandacasti.
This then also, says S. Austin, is to eat the meat which perishes not, but
endures unto everlasting life. For what use make thou ready thy teeth and
thy belly? Believe and thou have eaten him.

4. 2 Cor. 5.16.
We know him no more after the slesh: For Verse. 6.
we are absent from the Lord. And nevertheless he says, Ioh. 6.37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out. Such then as are our seete wherewith we go unto him,
such is our eating of him. Go we unto him with our bodily feet? When he was
in the world many did walk with him in their bodies, to whom he said, Ioh.
5.40.
Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life, showing that even then when
they were present with him in body, they were absent from him; because they
believed not in him: For 2 Cor. 5.7
we walk by faith, not by sight. Therefore the Centurien abiding at home in
his body, went abroad unto him with his faith, and said unto him, Luke
7.6.7.8.9.
Lord, trouble not thy self: For I am not worthy that thou should enter
under my roof: Wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee:
but say the word, and my servant shall be healed. And to that faith which did
not regard the bodily presence of the Lord, the Lord gave this commendation, I
have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. Christ himself says, that
to go thus unto him, is to eat him. Ioh. 6.35.
I am, faith he, the bread of life. He that comes to me shall never hunger:
and he that believes on me shall never thirst. In stead of eating, he puts
coming: in stead of drinking, he puts believing: because the eating of him,
is to come to him: and the drinking of him, is to believe in him. And these two
are one. August. de verbis domini sermon. 2. Vbi credis, ibi venis.
Where thou beleevest, there thou come.

5. Such hands to receive him, such mouth to eat him. The hand wherewith we
receive him is the hand of faith, as it is written; Ioh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name. This seems strange to flesh and blood,
which may ask, Aug. in Johan trac. 50. Quem tenebo? absentem? Quo^^do ^^anum
in coelu^mittam, vt ibi sedentem te^eam? fidem mitte, and tenuisti.
Whom shall I hold? Is he not absent? Is he not in heaven? How shall I send my
hand into heaven that I may hold him sitting there? S. Austin answers, Send
thy faith, and thou have taken hold of him.

6. Such as is our palate wherewith we taste him, such is our mouth wherewith we
eat him. Psalm 34.8.
O taste, and see that the Lord is good. How? Job. 34.3
The ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. So this bread, which is the
word of God, Ioh. 1.14
the word which was made flesh, must be tasted with a spiritual taste,
breeding in Us a delight of it; as S. Basil writes on the 33. Psalm: And as
Tertullian says, Tertull. de Resurrect. carnis c. 37. Proinde incausam vitae
appetendus sermo, and deuor andus auditu, and rumina^dus intellectu, and side
digerendus.
We must long after it, devour it with our ears, ruminate it with our
understanding, digest it with our faith.

7. Christ says, loh 6.56.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.
If then ye can know how he dwells in you, and you in him, ye may easily
conclude that after the same manner ye eat him. Says not S. Paul, that Ephesians.
3.17.
he dwells in our hearts by faith? And S. Augustine, Aug. in Johan. tract. 26.
Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam, and ilham bibere potum, in Christo manner,
and illum manentem in se habere.
that to eat him, is to dwell in him, and have him dwelling in us? What is
that, but to believe in him? He that believes in him, says the same Doctor,
eats him: Ibid. Qui credit in eum manducat: Inuisibiliter saginatur, quis and
inuisibiliter renascitur: Infans intus est, Novus intus est: vbi nouellatur,
ibi satiatur.
He is fed inuisibly, because he is borne again inuisibly. He is an infant
inwardly: He is new inwardly: where he is renewed, there he is satisfied.

FINALLY, Such as are the benefits and the ends of this eating, such must it
be. For the means must be correspondent unto their end. And we may know of
what kind the mean is by the end to which it is directed. If the end of our
eating be to strengthen our mortal bodies, and to make them lusty, tall, big,
let us open our mouths, sharpen our teeth, enlarge our bellies: But if this
bread be, as S. Bernard says, Bernard in prologo de Coena dimini. In ea
(mensa) inuenies cibu^ non ventris, sed mentis.
food for our souls, not for our bellies; if by it our 1 Cor. 15.44.
natural bodies must be made spiritual, we must needs seek a mouth in our
souls to eat it spiritually. That mouth is faith.

CHAPTER X.
1. Three reasons why Christ used the metaphores of bread, and of eating.

II. Great instructions in both.

III. The metaphor of eating teaches us what preparation must go before faith.

IV. And what is the nature of faith.

IF THIS be so, say the Popish Bellarm. de Euchar lib 1 cap. 5. 8. Quis credar
rem facillimam, qualis est credere in Christu^, voluisse dominu^ cum ta^to
offendiculo discipuloru^, innoluere tot abscurissinus metaphoria, cum potuisset
vno verborem totam declarare?
Doctors, why did the Lord involue a most clear and easy thing with so many
metaphores, and give occasion of offense unto his disciples? For he might have
said in one word, He that believes on me.

I answer. 1. that the Lord spoke so unto them, because he desired to stir up
in them a spiritual desire of a more excellent bread, then that was for which
they followed him, as I have said in the exposition of the first part of this
Verse.

2. Such metaphores of eating and drinking were not uncouth unto them; for they
are frequent in the old Testament. But they had a loathing of heavenly meats,
and therefore they took exceptions against his person when he spoke of them,
and would not understand him, as it is written, Psalm. 36.3.
The wicked has left off to be wise, and to do good.

3. Metaphores and similitudes are more popular then words which are proper,
because that by the likeness of earthly things apprehended by the outward
senses, they make heavenly and spiritual things to come into the mind, and thus
are most fit for the instruction of those which being more dull have need of
milk, and not of strong meat.

the living bread, there is greater instruction and comfort in that similitude,
then if he had called himself the Savior of the world: Because the use of
bread is to nourish and to feed, and thereby we learn, that Christ is come
down from heaven to be the true food and life of our fowls. Likewise, when he
exhorts us to eat of this bread, he gives us a more large and full
instruction, then we could have received, if he had only exhorted us to
believe in him. Because this one word of eating teaches us, how we must be
prepared before we can believe in Christ, and what is the true action and
nature of faith whereby we believe in him.

Pro. 27.7.
The full soul loatheth an honey-combe, but to the hungry soul every bitter
thing is sweet. Even so before we can believe in Christ, we must know and feel
out own indigence, and the need we have of his grace, that we may be able to
say to God, Psalm. 84.2.
My soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord: My heart and
my flesh cries out for the living God. If this preparation be in you, ye have
your comfort in these words of Christ, Math. 5.6.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled. For without it there is no coming unto Christ, and therefore
no comfort from him. Does he not cry, Ioh. 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. Can we go unto him? Can
we drink of the fullness of grace which is in him, till we thirst after him?

eating, and shows unto us the nature and true action of faith, which is to
apply Christ unto our souls so nearly, that every one out of the true sense of
this heavenly gift in his own heart, says most truly, as the Spouse does,
Cant. 2.16.
My beloved is mine, and I am his, and as Thomas did, Ioh. 20.21
My Lord, and my God. according to the promise of the new Testament, Zach. 13.9
I will say, It is my people: and they shall say, The Lord is my God. Such was
the faith of S. Paul, when he said, Gal. 2.20.
I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives
in me: And the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved ME, and gave himself for ME. Such is the faith of
every true Christian, according to this saying of S. Peter, 2 Pet. 1.1
ye have obtained like precious faith with us. What seek we by eating of our
daily bread? To live. What seek we by eating of Jesus Christ? To have
communion with him, that we may live by him. The Apostle says, that we live by
faith: Therefore, says S. Cyprian, Cypr. de Coena domini. Qnod est escacarni,
hoc animae est fides.
That which food is to the body, the same is faith to the soul. For the same
cause S. Augustine expounding the words of my Text, says, that Aug. in Johan.
trac. 26 Credere enim ineum, hoc est manducare panem vivum,
to believe in Christ, is to eat the living bread. This is not their
exposition: It is from Christ himself, as we have heard.

CHAPTER XI.
I. To eat Christ by faith, it is no imagination, as Papists say.

II. Neither is it an easy thing by nature.

III. It goes beyond the whole reach of nature.

IV. Therefore we must ask it of God.

V. And although it be weak, be assured that it will eat Christ.

to eat Christ, be no other thing, but to believe in him, there is nothing
more easy then to be saved. What is faith? An imagination in the brain that
Christ has saved us. How easily may we imagine such a thing, and so be saved
by a fancy?

1. Indeed if we did speak of eating of Christ, as they do, it might be said
most truly, that there is nothing more easy. What so easy to any man, as to
open the mouth of the body, and to swallow down that which enters into it?
Is there any Papist that finds any difficulty in it? Yea they hold their
eating of Christ so easy that they make it common not only to bad, as well as
to good men, but also to toades, worms, dogs, asses, mice, and other beasts.

2. When they speak of faith as of an imagination, they teach us what they
judge, and what they will have us to sudge of their faith: They say that they
believe in God. Is their belief nothing but an imagination? They call on God:
And Ro^. 10.14.
how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Ro^. 14.23
For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. What? Will they confess that their
prayers, and in a word, all their most laborious devotion is nothing but an
imagination? Ask of them how they know that Christ's body is in the Sacrament
as big and as tall as it was on the cross, although such a thing came never in
Christ's mind, they will answer, that Christ has said it, and they believe it.
That belief indeed is nothing but a most fond imagination: But will they call
it so?

3. A great many of their Doctors confess, that in the first part of this
Chapter till the one and fifty verse, Christ speaks of the spiritual
manducation of his body, and recommendeth it unto us, and some of the most
learned amongst them confirm by insoluble arguments, that the whole Chapter is
of the same argument. And dare they say that Christ recommended nothing unto us
but imaginations?

4. Since the beginning of the world there was never any man saved but by the
eating of Christ. The Apostle writes of the fathers which were in the desert,
that 1 Cor. 10 3.4.
they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink: Aug. de poenit. cap. 1. to. 9. Eundem non inuenio quomodo
intellig am, nisi cum quem and nos.
The same which we eat and drink, not corporal in the eleme^t, but spiritual
in the signification: For they drank of that spiritual Rock that followed
them, and that Rock was Christ. Was that eating and drinking of Christ before
he came into the world nothing but an imagination? How many millio^s of
Christians die and are saved before they can eat Christ in the Sacrament? And
yet without eating of Christ spiritually there is no salvation. Are they also
saved by imagination? When we shall be called Rev. 19.7.
to the marriage-supper of the Lamb, when Mat. 8.11
we shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven,
when there Psalm. 36.8.
God shall satisfy us abundantly with the fatness of his house, and shall
make us drink of the river of his pleasures, shall that eating and that
drinking also be nothing but an imagination? As we shall eat him then, so must
we eat him now.

folly and his wisdom, our weakness and his power, our shame and his glory
displayed in Jesus Christ, is it an easy thing? Is it an imagination? To know
and to feel how worthy I was of his hatred, and how wonderful is that love
wherewith he has loved me in his dear Son Jesus Christ, is it an easy
thing? is it an imagination? To run unto Christ, to embrace him, to take hold
on him, to lodge him in our hearts, to say unto him as Jacob did, Genesis 32.26.
I will not let thee go, except thou bless me: Or rather with David, Ps.
73.28.
It is good for me to draw near to God, I have put my trust in the Lord God.
And therefore I will never let thee go, that thou may bless me for ever;
To seek and find grace, mercy, peace, life, and salvation in him, and
thereupon to say, Psalm 118.6.14.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear: The Lord is my strength and song,
and is become my salvation, is it an easy thing? Is it an imagination.

Math. 16.17.
flesh and blood do not reveal Christ to be the Son of the living God, but
the Father which is in heaven, and it is as difficile, yea as impossible to
believe in Christ, as to resolve to be a Martyr for Christ: Therefore the
Apostle conioyneth them as two most wonderful and rare gifts of God, saying,
Phil. 1.29.
For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on
him, but also to suffer for his sake. Yea he says, that God displayeth the
same Ephesians. 1.19.20.
might of his power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead, to make us believe.

David, Psalm. 119.18.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law. Let us
all pray for our selves: as the blessed Apostle did for the Ephesians, that
Ephesians. 1.17.18.
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto us the
spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him, the eyes of our
understanding being enlightened, that we may know what is the hope of his
calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints.

Mark 9.24.
Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief, and with the Apostles, Luke 17.5.
Lord, increase our faith; Yet resting still assured, that as the Pilots
trembling Dial in a ship tossed to and fro with ye waves of the tempestuous
Sea, looks straight to the North Pole, as the shaking hand of a poor man
sick of the Palsy, stretches it self forth to receive the rich alms of a
bountiful King, and as a dying man will open his wanne and withered mouth to
let down the restoratiue, whereby his life is restored; So our trembling,
shaking, and weak faith, will in the midde^ of the most tempestuous and
blustery Sea of temptations, fasten her eyes upon Christ, receive him, and eat
him, that in the midst of death, and in the belly of the grave we may be
saved by him.

CHAPTER XII.
I. The eating of Christ by faith is possible.

II. It is not hindered by the distance of time;

III. Nor of place.

IV. It may be fitted to all the similitudes which express our union with
Christ.

V. It is decent.

VI. It is profitable.

Mark 9.24.
If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes: Then,
say I, to him that believes it is possible to eat Christ by his faith. I say
more, that to eat him so is decent and glorious unto Christ, and most
profitable to the eater.

If there were any impossibility in this eating, it should come either from the
distance of time, or from the distance of place. We eat him as dead: And we
reckon from his death 1625. years, which is a long time. He died in Golgotha,
which is far removed from us, and we must go to his cross, and eat him
there. From thence we must go up to heaven, where he now is, and feed upon him
there. Between the heavens where he is, and the earth where we are, the
distance is almost infinite. Behold now how all that, is not any impediment to
faith.

the distance of time. Between the promise made to Abraham and Christ there is
1927. years, and he had eyes, not in his head, but in his heart to see Christ,
as Christ said, Ioh. 8.56.
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. From the first
Passover which was kept in Egypt till Christ there is 1497. years. At that
time Heb. 11.27.28.
Moses by faith kept the Passover, for sooke Egypt, and endured as seeing him
who is invisible. At that same time the Fathers in the desert 1. Cor. 10 3.4.
did eat the same spiritual bread, and drink the same spiritual drink,
which was Christ. How but by faith? For Christ is Rev. 13.8.
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world in the efficacy of his death
toward all the faithful which were from the beginning. So the Apostle says,
that Gal. 3.1.
Christ is evidently set forth before our eyes, and is crucified among us:
Crucified certainly to the eyes of our faith, which seeeth the things past
from the beginning of the world, and all those that are to come till the end of
the world. For Heb. 11.1
faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not
seen, it gives a being in the heart to that which has no being in the world,
and makes visible that which is invisible.

the distance of place also cannot hinder it. For although we traile these our
mortal bodies on the earth, yet Phil. 3.20.
our conversation is in heaven, and our Heb. 6.19.20.
hope is an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters
into that within the veil, whither Jesus Christ, as forerunner, is entered for
us. There by faith Ephesians. 2.6.
we sit together with him: There our faith sees him, eats him, imbraceth
all the promises of God in him. O the most wonderful efficacy of faith! It
sees all things past and to come: It imbraceth the two ends of the world: It
flies backward to Golgotha, and according to the saying of Christ, Math. 24.28.
Wheresoever the carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered together, like
a spiritual Eagle it stoopeth upon him hanging on the Cross. It fastenth her
claws upon his wounds, it drinks the blood streaming out of his side, it
feeds on him with a greedy stomach, and leaves him never till it be
satisfied, and because it is insatiable, and never has enough of him, it
leaves him never. Forthwith and at the same instant it flies above all the
visible heavens, it enters boldly into Gods closet, it Rev. 3 2^.
sits down with him in his throne, and reigns with him most gloriously in
heaven.

his Spirit. By what do we espouse him, that he may be our husband? By our
faith. By what gives he himself unto us to be our meat and drink? By his
Spirit. By what do we all eat and drink him? By our faith. So ye see that
all the similitudes do agree, and concur in the manner of our union with
Christ.

Pro. 23.^6.
My son give me thine heart, then in our bellies, which are puddles of
infection, and stinking sinkes? Is it not more glorious to contemplate him in
heaven, sitting at the right hand of his Father, and to feed upon him there,
where we are certain to find him, then to seek him in a crust of bread, where
he is not to be found?

they shall live for ever: and it is certain that he speaks of earing by
faith, because he said in the 47. Verse, Verily, verily, I say unto you, He
that believes in me has everlasting life. This is the fourth and last head of
this Text, the explication whereof I Will defer to another occasion. I say only,
that he which eats Christ lives already, for he has everlasting life, and
shall live for ever, otherwise the life which he lives could not be called
everlasting. He lives already, for his sins are forgiven him, and Psalm.
32.1. Romans 4.6.
the blessedness of man in this life, is principally in the forgiveness of
his sins: He lives already. For Gal. 2.20.
Christ lives in him, and has made him Romans 6.4.11.
alive unto GOD, that he may walk in newness of life. He shall live for ever,
no more on earth, but in heaven, where the spiritual life of his soul which is
begun here shall be perfected, where Aug. in Johan. trac. 26 Videbit quod adhuc
no^ videndo credidit, Manducabit quod esurijt: Satiabitur eo quod sitit.
he shall see, that which now he believes, shall eat that which now he
hungreth after; shall be filled with that whereof now he is a thirst, as David
said, Psalm. 36.8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. And in the blessed day of
the Resurrection, Phil. 3.21.
Christ shall change his vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body. So he lives, and shall live a most glorious and blessed life
internally in his soul, externally in his body, and eternally in body and
soul together in the kingdom of heaven. Aug. in Johan. trac. 17 Tunc quod
viuet, no^ morietur: Tunc quod sanabitur, no^ aegrotabit: Tunc quod satiabitur,
non esuriet, neque sitiot: Tunc quod renou^bitur, ^on veterascet*
Then that which shall live, shall never die: that which shall be healed, shall
never be sick: that which shall be satisfied, shall never hunger nor thirst:
that which shall be renewed, shall never wax old.

CHAPTER. XIII.
I. As this bread is most wonderful, so must we consider the most wonderful
mercy of God in the giving of it.

II. Papists eat not of this bread.

III. We must value it at the highest rate, and desire no other bread.

IV. A prayer to God for this bread.

Aug. to. 10. Homil 32. Vt panem Angelorum manducaret homo, dominus Angelorum
factus est homo.
This is the food of the blessed Angels in heaven: This is the food of all true
Christians on earth. l That man might eat the bread of Angels, the Lord of
Angels was made man. Of it they, of it we eat continually, and, o wonder,
Ibid. Nec deficit vnde pascantur, nec minuitur esca ipsorum.
it is not diminished. By it they, by it we live for ever. O most wonderful
mercy of God who gives us such wonderful bread! Sion was in a pitiful
estate, when bewailing it she said, Lam. 4.4.
The tongue of the suckling child cleaves to the roof of his mouth for
thirst: The young children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto them. O then
how blessed is our estate, whose crying for this bread God has prevented? yea
who has prepared it for us before we were borne, who has given it unto us
before we sought it? 1 Ioh. 4.10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be the propitiation for our sins. It is a too too little and small
thing to his bounty, yea it has been nothing in his eyes to feed with the
bread which comes out of the earth these our vile and mortal bodies, which
although they starve not, yet they must perish by sickness, by age, or by some
other mishap. In this he has displayed all the treasures and riches of grace
and mercy, that to his spiritual children he has given the true, spiritual,
and heavenly bread, whereof if any man eat, he shall live for ever.

from one Saint to another, from one Angel to another, shows that ye are
ever hunger-starved, ever dried up with thirst like a potsheard, and therefore
that ye have never eaten of this bread. For if ye did eat Christ, he would
satisfy your hunger, according to his own saying, Ioh. 6.35.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me shall never hunger. O then, O
abused Christians when will ye turn your faces to him, and go unto him? O
perishing souls, listen I pray you, to the voice of him who only gives the
living bread, and who cries unto you; Esa. 55.1.2.
Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no
money: Come ye, buy and eat. Yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is no bread? and
your labor for that which satisfies not.

Psalm. 73.25.26.
Whom have 1 in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. My flesh and my heart fails: But GOD is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. Those that are sick refuse to eat bread, and
David says that in his sorrow Psalm. 102.1.
he did forget to eat his bread. Let us not refuse to eat this bread, when it
is offered unto us, and let let us never forget to eat it when we have it. It
is Aug. to. 10. hom. 32 Hac est salus nestra, medicina infirmorum: Cibus
Sanorum.
Physic to those which are sick, meat to those which be whole, strength to
those that are weak, comsort to those that are distressed, life to those that
die.

Esa. 58.7.
to break our bread to the hungry: do unto us that which thou co^mandest us
to do unto others, and break this thy bread unto our hungry souls. The
Fathers prepare bread for their children: And the children look that their
fathers shall give them the bread which they have prepared for them. Luke 11.11.
If a Son shall ask bread of his Father, will he give him a stone? Thou art
our heavenly Father, and we are thy children: Thou have prepared for us the
most excellent bread that ever was: Even thine own Son. Ro^. 8.32.
Thou have not spared him, but have delivered him up for us all, that he might
be our bread, and will thou not give him unto us? In our bodily necessities, we
cry unto thee, Give us this day our daily bread, and thou give it not only
unto us, out even unto them which know not thee to be the fountain of all
good, and therefore cry not for it unto thee. O loving Father thou keep for
us thy children bread more excellent, more rare, and more precious: Even this
living bread, which is indeed our bread, being sent into the world, prepared,
and given for us, that it may be given unto us. This is the daily bread of our
souls, which thou give to thy children by thy holy Spirit O Father we are
thy children: Therefore send thy holy Spirit into our hearts with this our
bread, and give us this day cur daily bread, that eating it daily with a true
and lively faith, we may by it live with thee for ever. To thee who art the
giver of this bread, To thy Son Jesus who is this bread, To the holy Ghost,
who from thee brings this bread into our hearts, be all praise, glory, and
honor, both now and for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

