THE CONSOLATIONS OF DAVID, BREEFLY APPLIED TO QVEENE ELIZABETH: IN A Sermon
preached in Oxford the 17. of November.

By JOHN PRIME, 1588.

PSALM. 23. ver. 1. The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.

IMPRINTED AT OXFORD by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yeard, at the sign of the Tygres head, 1588.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend, Vigilant and Learned father in God, Thomas Cooper the
Bishop of Winchester.
POEMES, RIMES, and Verses, some of them have their delight, such as it is
being sung to the Lute, or Harp, and weltuned instrument, but being read and
duly considered prove little worth: with the Songs in scripture, and Psalms of
David it is never so. If we sing them they affect the conscience, and when we
read them they instruct the soul, as the other parts of the Bible.

To these two ends, I have dealte in a verse out of the Kingly Prophet,
amongst your Lordships countrymen and mine, the Citizens of Oxforde. I know
you wish them well in Christ Jesus with a special affection, and for my self,
I have sufficient experience of your good love to me ward. The considerations
whereof have moved me the rather to make bold, to deliver forth unto the^ in
writing this sermon under your L. name right well reputed of and deservedly in
this place, notwithstanding, that his late most false, shameless, and
vnchristia^ libelling whereof (I doubt not no kind of Sanardrin will allow,
Martine Marpr.
and which I am assured, the best and best learned in the university, in no
degree do affect, but greatly lament, to see such inte^pera^cy of tongs, and
scorching fierbrandes to entermeddle, at the altar of the lord in his holy
temple. Were all things amiss, is this the way to reform, by lying,
libelling and comparatiue reproaches?

Nay, it may be if al his conditions were co^disce^ded unto, yet considering
his immoderat behavior immediately ensuing upon the same, it may be thought
such natures would never be quiet. So hard a matter it is (as the proverb is)
to make a bed for a dog: for he will always have it of his own making and
fassion. Co^tentious men will contend and will never be contented.

The corruptions of Patrons, the inabilitie of Ministers, their requisite
diligence and some like matters of importance to be looked into and provided
for, by strength of best authority, for mine own part I do greatly desire.
But this Gentleman's humor has, I know not what other vagarant and hungry
conceits. I crave pardon in respecting this man as he came in my way, I have
stepped a side.

Truly a Prophet commonly is not accepted where he is born and brought up, and
for that cause Origin says (but whence he had it I do not know) that Paul
never preached at Tharsis. But Oxford in this respect is no Tharsis, and you
joy to hear of their some more towardnes then heretofore.

At the uttering this matter, me thought God moved their hearts, and I saw it
in their faces. Yet because that warmth or heat taken at the fire within, may
be soon cooled abroad in the wind I have yielded to the ordinary mean, in
committing that external cause of their warmth to the press, whereby they may
carry as it were in their bozom a fire about with them: First as a
signification or effect of my hearts desire to do them this good at this time
principally, and then also as an intimation of a greater duty to your Lordship.

Some years sense I conferred Solomon who was David's son, his estate with
Queen Elizabeth's reign before the University, and they have it printed and
reprinted, because some very few at their pleasure, must needs have it so.

Here before the town I have assaied with like breuity to do the like, in
applying Salomons fathers comforts toward us and our Qeene, praying God from
my very heart that his blessings toward father and son, to David and unto
Solomon, may entirely and jointly be and continue most long with her, and with
her realms to the worlds end, and namely in our proportion with us, both
University and Town, and generally so withal the whole Israel of God.

From New College in Oxford. December. 7. 1588.
PSALM. 23. ver. 4. Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me.


THe case with David at this time was not so hard, as to walk in the valley of
the shadow of death. For the Lord was his sheephearde in open sight, and led
him as a sheep of greatest care into his pastures, and they green and sweet
for food, soft and easy for rest, Situated by the waters side for best
refreshing in hotter countries.

Only in this verse he may seem to put the case, and considering the
goodness of God sundry times to him-warde experienced, he solemnly protests
upon the supposall, fall out what may, and though he walk and often converse in
the vallie of the shade of death, that is, in the mids of most gloomie and
horrible dangers, he would not fear, for his hope was with God.

Forecasting what may come
By the way I note: that David amidest his green pastures, where he wanted
nothing, and in his greatest ease, and highest excellency, records the
vallie of misery, and shade of death which might ensue, if God so would, and
therewithal reckons of his safest harbor, and firm repose, even in God
alone.

And this is true wisdom indeed, in fay^e weather to provide for a tempest,
in health to think of sickness, in prosperitye, peace and quietness, to
forecast the worst, and with the wise Emite in summer to lay up for the winter
following.

The state of man is full of trouble, the condition of the godly man more.
Sinners must be corrected, The troubles of this life.
and sons chastised, there is no question. The Arc was framed for the
waters, the Ship for the Sea, and happy is the mariner that knows where to
cast Anchor. But O blessed is ye man, that can take a right Sanctuary, and
knows whereupon to rely and in whom to trust in the day of his need. I will
not fear: for thou art with me.

A sheep is a simple thing to devise escape, impotent and unarmed, and
fearful by nature, and therefore unable to resist danger, whereunto
notwithstanding David resembling him self, voucheth boldly he will not fear,
the Lord being with him.

In the whole I observe, and shall most beat upon these three things. First,
the gate and conversation, the walk of the godly upon David's supposall.
Though I walk. Then, his comfort he conceiueth in all his ways, I will not
fear. And thirdly the ground of his confidence to be in the presence of God,
For thou art with me.

The tennor of David's life, and the ways he walked are manifest in the
comperts and evidences of the Bible.

In his nonage he was the least, and of least account in the family of Isai,
contemned of his father, not called to the feast, and in the camp dispitefully
reproched of his eldest brethren, afterward Saul enuieth, Shimy raileth,
Absalon rebelleth, Achitophell conspireth, etc. These were valleys of vehement
distresses, briefelye these with diverse others as you may read, collected and
quoted, By D. Rainoldes 1586.
and I pray you do in a Sermon of thanks giving at ye apprehension of
traitors, to wit, Ballard and Babington, and their accomplices.

But you will say, how says David he would not fear: did he not fly and
dissemble who he was? Or if he fled, as no doubt he did, from the spear of
Saul, was it not for fear?

Fear is a quality incident to all flesh: and in this, and the like natural
affections, Fear.
a fixed mind, and the constant mean, is hardly obtaned. What David did is not
denied, and it is granted y^ as else when, so namely he greatly fered, 1. Sam.
20.
when he fled to Achis, his and gods enemy, and when he said in a shiuering
perplexity: Surely, there is sca^t a strid betwixt me and death.

In this Psalm, I take it is rather vouched not what the Prophet always
performed, but what in duty must be performed, and what David's purpose was to
endeavor unto for the time to come. For after so many pledges of Gods infinite
goodness under the guidaunce of his rod, and stay of his shepe-hooke,
godwilling he would not fear and this is the grou^d-worke of his affiance.

Peter in the gospel by our Savior in consideration of infirmity thorough
fear denying his master, Mat. 26.
is willed after his conversion by that favorable aspect of our savior, to
confirm his brethren, and to train the^ in constancy: for verily god
requires settled minds, resolute men and confirmed brethren.

So upon occasions past, David found it true that he should not have been
heretofore at any time, and therefore professes, that, for the time to come, he
would be no Marigold-seruaunt of God, to open with the Sun and shut with the
dew, to serve him in calmer times only, and at a need to shute neck out of
collar, fearfully and faithlesly to slip a side, or shrink away.

Newters reproved.
(Good people) in all hartlesse imperfectiones, mark I pray you, that they, who
fear every mist, that arises, or cloud that appears, who are like the
Mulberie tree, that never shuteth forth, or shows it self till all hard
weather be past, who like standers by and lookers on, Neuters, and
internimisters, who like Metuis Suffetius dare not venture upon, nor enter
into, nor endeavor any good action of greatest duty to God, Prince or
Country, till all be sure in one side, are utterly reproved by this ensample.

If the cause be Gods, if the quarrel be necessary, if thy calling suitable,
if it be a cross that God lays upon thee in a matter of faith and truth,
and requisite offices appertayning to piety and charity, though it be a vale
of dangers, Lo, David professes he cannot, he will not yield, he will not
fear, much less despair, and houer a loofe, or let all alone as men amazed
and astonished in their feminine affections.

Peter, of whom before, hearing that the sheepeheard should be smitten, Peter.
and the sheep scattered into sundry valleys of imminent danger,
notwithstanding bosteth himself that he forsooth, he would not forsake his
master, and though the rest fly, he alone would endure the combat, and not
relente at all.

The shepherd is smitten, and the flock indeed is scattered, the rest fly,
Peter more then flies, Presumption performs little.
for he denies; and more then fears, for he, of all the rest, forsweareth
his master. And so it fares ever, when men co^paringly set out themselves as
Giantes, in their own conceits, though it be in causes of best account. Yet in
the end they come short of their reckoning. But David builds upon a surer
rock, then on himself.

In so many his exceeding dangers, he will not fear. Why? the Lord is his
sheep-heard, no Idol, or absent sheepehearde, but ready to help: and able to
succor.

In the book of Genesis this was Jacobs comfort continually in all his viages,
Jacob.
whether from Canaan into Mesopotamia, or from Mesopotamia into Canaan, to and
fro still, Lo, the Lord was with him.

In the six and fortith Chapter, he is willed to repair into Aegipt, and
expressly forbidden to fear, and the reason was, God himself would go down
with him, and conduct him thither, and preserve him there.

And for that as children, which ride on reeds, are soon overtaken in their
folly, so old men may become children again, and rest over much in ordinary
hopes liable to sense, and probable in reason. God wills Jacob in effect, to
forsake such vain cogitations, for chief relief in the usage, as of his own
experienced years, his sons place and favor with the prince, and the like, and
only commands: Fear not Jacob, I will be with thee.

And good cause, and why should Jacob, or Joshua in the first of Joshua, or
Gedeon in the sixth of Judges, or Moses before these, the 4. of Exodus, or any
of us all after them fear, if God be with us, as he will be, Matthew. 28
With his to the end of the world? If God be with us who can be against us,
effectually against us to our final destruction?

If God be with us, what can we want? he that walks in the sun, does he lack
light? He who walks with God by his conversation, as Enoc did, and with whom
God walks by his special grace (for there is a special respect betwixt
the grace of God and a gracious life) what is there, or what can there be
wanting? By the grace of God we are that we are, and his grace in his is not in
vain. In his light we see light, and in his strength we are more than
conquerors ghostly ever and ever bodily if it be for the good of the sufferer,
and for the glory of god, for whose cause, and in whose presence, and by whose
wisdom we suffer, and hold out. Gods providence is known but unto gods own
children.


The true meditation whereof (deer brethren) to the careless and godles man,
is as a riddle, or a clasped book, or sealed letters, which are brought by the
carier and handled of many, but are read of none, nor understood of any, save
of him that of him that opens them, and conceaueth the purport of them, and
meaning of the sender.

Job (the holy man) in his loss of goods, Job.
death of children, personal extremities, wives cursed motions, and to those
unwise inferences and conclusions of his friends replyeth, at one time: Naked
I came into the world, at another time, The Lord gave and the Lord has taken
away, at another to his Wife, o folish woman: and to his friends, o ye
Physicions of no valu. But ever resolutly that even in death he knew that he
had a living redeemer, and so thorough faith controuling his some
impatiencie, recognizeth, that God the redeemer of al his, was also in special
his redeemer, and that it was not with God, as it may be with man, who
standing on the shore, may se a far-of their dearest friends and fellow
parteners plunged in danger, and cannot help them, nor dare come to them.

When I recount the great deliverances of old, in fires, in waters, in miery
caves, and dreadful prisons, of Elias under the Juniper tree, Moses in the
flagges, the three children in the furnace, and of Jonas in the belly of the
Fish, in the bottom of the sea, and altogether entangled, as it were, in ye
roots of the depth, who was with him, or with the rest? or if God had not
been with them, in what case had they been?

These were men as we are, and as saint James speaks of one of them, I am. 5,
17.
subject to the like passions: The only difference is, they were more
excellent me^ in their days, and famous in their times, and therefore the
rather registered as most fit examples of comfort to al posterity for the
time to come.

More general are the ensamples of Israel in Aegipt, and of Judah in Babylon,
both which people God in his good time, remembering his mercy, and pitying
their misery, did wonderfully deliver.

But there is no difference with God, to be with one or with many, to deliver
some few, or greater companies. All is one with the almighty. Some difference
only may be this, which is in books printed of a large or a less letter, and
paper, the matter not varying at all.

When God took his people from the fiery furnace, and mierie clay, and from
the vncessaunt toil of gathering straw, when he brought all Israel out of
bondage, and left not an hoof behind, here the presence of God is printed as it
were in Royal paper and in Capital letters. Again, when Abraham's words, Genesis
22.
Deus prouidebit, when, I say, Gods providence is seen privately, and felt
privately of some one, the foorm and paper are less, and the letter less, but
the providence of God is the same, And yet the personage may be such that it
may be more to do for one, then for many, and I conster David's case to be of
this kind.

David kept his fathers sheep, 1. Sam. 17.
and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a sheep out of the
flock. But David (far unlike some hirelings) follows after, ventereth his
life, redeemeth his sheep, and slaieth the Beast. This had been ouerhard for
David to have done, had not God been with him. For he was but a youth.

Farther, when he came to the camp, and heard the uncircumcised Gia^t brave the
host of the living God, straight way in a monomachie, that is to say, one to
one, himself alone with the Giant alone entered the co^bat, and according to
Saul's wish at that time, The Lord was with him.

In process, when Saul slew his thousand, David slew his ten thousand, every
Damsel could sing of the odds, even to the regreete of Saul, that sought
enuiously therefore to be dispatched of David. But David ever dealt wisely in all
his ways, for why, The Lord was with him, says the text.

Now yet if David for ever after should have lead only a private life, the
case had been less to see to then it was afterward upon great events
ensuing. For God had a purpose to take him from the sheepfoldes, Psalm. 78.
and to place him in room of his master to feed his people and guide his
inheritance, so that al along Gods, being with David, was immediately by him to
be with his people, and with his inheritance.

Princes good or bad are the good or the very bane of their subjects.
For if God respect the Prince that presently is, or apparently and
consequently shall be, it is the benefit of many: for the Prince is as the
stomach in the body of a realm, it receives little for it self, but most
for the rest parts of the body. All sense is from the head, all life is from
the heart. The Prince is as the head and heart of his people and for the
excellencye of his various properties, has diverse resemblances.

If the root be quick the branches grow: if the foundation be sure, all the
building is the surer. A scholerly recital with application herein is over
easy.

And again if the foundation be as a tottering wall, or rotten hedge, or
slippery soil and quick sandy, the building cannot stand.

Like Prince, 1. King. 14.
like people for the most part as it is written, Jeroboam was not a sinner
alone, but he made all Israel to sin. And again, Jeroboam fell away from God
(like a great Oak) and Israel (some as greater arms, some as lesser
branches) but all fell with him.

And contrariwise again in times of better regiment, it went better. Israel
served the Lord all the days of Iosue, Iosu. 24.
and all the like elders that over lived Iosue.

Look to it ye rulers, but you are not the chief rulers, if skilleth not, you
are rulers, less or more authority in rulers, does not alter the nature of
ruling in your degrees. And water may be pure in the spring, and corrupted in
the rivers, if it be not looked to.

But God being both with the spring, and with the rivers, see, how is the la^d
refreshed as in David's time and in Salomons time? And to these happy ends was
God with David, as with a sheep of his own pastures and with the worke-manship
of his own framing, to most sovereign purposes, as you have heard.

AND now to look homeward a little reflexiuely somewhat considering our own
estate, Acts and Monumentes.
even by this glass of David's example, you remember, I am sure, who she is
that said, Tanqua^ Ouis, that she was a sheep, even in the vallie of death,
lead unto, and shut up in the slaughter house, and you may not forget, who he
is that took the knife out of the butchers hand.

You know who she is that built upon the rock, and you know who that rock
is. Who has not hard of that morneful voice, that She had no friend, and yet
comfortable in this, But God alone: for how is he frindles, that has god for
his frind? his word is a good, and a true word. Win-God, and win al.

One said, he was never less alone, then when he was left alone, I say it is
true, in sense that when al men forsake us, and God alone tarieth with us, then
are we never less alone.

Good Queen Elizabeth has found it so, and God mollified the hearts of some
of her foes for his mercy sake at her prayers, and raised up some others,
dutifully and honorably to demean themselves unto her grace, and one ready to
die at her foot, if vilanous bouldnes should cause such need, and after some
long seasoning of so precious a wood for an excellent building, the happy 17.
day of November, 1558. comes, and God makes it manifest to all the world,
that himself was with her in all these tempests, and then the plat-forme was
broken up, and the snare taken away, and a daughter of David had as great
deliueraunces as ever David had, and so her own confession both then an since
is a duefull and true confession, That never Prince, no never creature had ever
greater.

Yet because this world is not the land of entire blessedness, everlastingly to
endure, sundry unclean beasts have entered, with full entendment to stain the
green and fertle pastures wherein God has placed her, and had done so (so it
might have been) if God and his Christ, the great sheepehearde of our souls
had not exerted his arm, and showed himself, and stood in the gap, and
driven away the Lion and the Bear, and the Popes sundry Bulls.

Verily as Elias his servant saw a small cloud by little and little growing to
a greater matter: so (good countrymen) the chief servants of God in the
honorable service of the realm and her Majesty by that prudency which God has
lent them, have a long time since, looking for such extremities, as the wicked
world offers espied the rising and proceedinge of a cloud to come, sometimes
thickning in the North, and sometimes threatening in the West, and of late time,
all the waters of the salt Ocean, and brinish natures ascendinge and leaguinge
themselves together to have overwhelmed us all, but the ground and subject of
their practices and complots failing them, and that only or chief Pole-starre
of these home-conspiracies and foreign drifts and troubles even against her
own only son, being taken away, they have missed their aim, Her will and
testament, mencined in her letters to Mendoza to give away the realm, to the
King of Spain, could not be proved, nor that Tragical execution be executed
and performed. And all these waves breaking in the fale, have swallowed up many
of them, who would have devoured us: and by the providence of him that keeps
Israel, the strong horse and the proud rider, those tale ships, and furniture
in them lie floting in the waters, and sincke in the sea. for since we desisted
to chase and pursue them most of this is come to pass, to the end cheeflie to
show and declare that this was not the work of man, but the hand of God.

At their coming we had warning of the^, at their entry we had a good
beginning in their passage we gained the wind, or rather God gave it us, and
when they were rooted ouer-right us, they were displanted again. In these
things, and in whatsoever else either going before, or passed since, he that
sees not the finger of God to have been, and to be with Queen Elizabeth, sees
nothing and the brightness of God shining upon her, and by her upon us, does
dazell his sight, that he cannot see.

Wherein, the care of her majesty, the vigilance of her honorable council, the
faithfulness of nobles, courage in Captains and soldiers, with joint willingness
of all English hearts in the realm, were merueilous vaileable, and
commendable, but except God keep al in order and except he had united us in
true wisdom to forsee and in hearty rep^ntance to fly unto him, and in his
strength boldly and happily to withstand these titulary conquerers, their pride
might have made the^ more foolish and most wicked to venture upon other men's
dominions without end. Plus vltra, More, still More, was his fathers posie.
Charles the. 5.


But be it that they have received no harm by our resistaunce, as their
lovers feign, be it that our weapons have stunge them like Plinies flies, and
that for the present they do not feel what we have don by Our peccatores, by
our little poor sinners, For so at first they could term our Navy and imagine
of our ships, be it that God by us was not against them, yet certainly, they
cannot deny and we must confess to the worlds end, that The Lord was with us,
and herein we rejoice and praise his name for ever more, and the more we give
to God, it is most true, that the great benefit of the sea about us: wtin our
Queen, her Council, nobles, and peoples: abrod her Admiral, Viseadmirals and
skilful Seamen: or any where else, her forces, polisies, and helps
whatsoever, shall have never a whit the less, as the widdowe had never the
less, 1. King. 17
the more she gave to Gods Prophet.

Wherefore (my good brethren and dear countrymen) lift up your hearts, lift them
up unto the Lord and praise his holy name. He that offers praise, honors
him with an acceptable sacrifice.

Consider then all his benefits, his old, late, and his present benefits
even heaped upon our Queen, and upon us her subjects and lay them all as
diverse sweetes together, to make a Leuits fire of perfect thankefulnes that
shall never out.

When a Spanish Prince and an Italian Priest ruled England, when superstition,
humane devises, will-worshippinges, and gross idolatry in a strange tongue
ouerruled al, then were our goods spoiled, our flesh martyred, our bodies
burnt, and our ashes scattered, and our very souls sterued.

A slight remembrance of this good delivery from these calamities is little
worth and as fire of brush soon extinct, lay altogether which has followed
since, conspiracies detected, rebellions repressed and prevented, invasions
diuerted ever by the Lords own doing, and still blessing embrodered, infolded,
and powered down blessing upon blessing with a full horn? Truly the
deliueraunces of David were but a cast of those which we feed on.

Papists, the peeuishe and worst sort of them bite the lip hereat, and hang
down head not knowing, God knows, that their heads should be hanged up
soonest specially the heads of the richest, for Lutherans and Caluinests, as
well as other. Alas Cardinal Allen, C. Allen.
who ever stands aloof as Pirrhus post principia, cannot be always at hand
with every barberous soldier, to say, This man forsooth is a Catholic.

Well, for this time hither to (God be thanked) Jacobs hand has been strong
enough to hold Esau by the heel, and if some Midwiues help out blooddy Esaus
forces once again, God that has preserved us so long, will not, we hope,
forsake us now.

Yet sweet words lull men a sleep, the best Remora and stay to keep them
of, is an unfeigned repentance, and a general conversion, and certain
determination of the whole la^d to serve him better the^ in former time, and in
all these victories, or happy successes to prescribe al to ye chief directer.

The Fly in the Beasts ear, or the Emmite on his horn cannot say they were
they who plowed the land, and brought, about these matters.

If we have done great things, he has don them by us, and as one said to his
soldiers, if I be an Egle, you be my feathers: so if* Captains or Soldiers
have done any thing, the Lord of hoasts has been with us all in all. And as he
is a foolish Inne-keeper that keeps not a perfect remembrance of his
cheifest geastes by whom he gains: so unwise are we, if we forget by whom we
have profited, and by whom we have so greatly and so often gained,

Leah bears one son, and calls his name Reuben, Genesis 29.
a second son, and calls him Simeon, and a third, and calls him Leui. But
when above expectation she conceiueth, and bareth the fourth time, she
purposely calls his name, Judah, and expressly protests that She will praise
the Lord.

If one benefit move thee not, O England, many should, if many have not done
it, yet this late deliverance passes all others, O call it Judah, and let us
praise the Lord. For any comfort save in the Lord, is like Agars water, that
is soon dried up: but that sweet acclamation in the Prophet Zacherie, Grace,
Grace, Zach. 4.
is the everlasting duty of our Church and common weal and the fatness of
his Olives, and the consolations of his spirit, and his being with our
Candle-stick is our only comfort.

Legendary news in Spain. 1569.
Others imagine fabulous tales, and wicked hopes: fear them not: About the
year of our Lord 1569. or somewhat after, I read, of false news spread in
Spain of a supposed great battle betwixt the Papists and Christians,
wherein an Angel with a Challice in his hand, was reported to have discomfited
many thousands of our Queens subjects for the which putatiue victory, there
were in Spain gratulations and triumphs in the biest degree with concourse of
nobles, ringings and singings, and much mad mirth, for the fortunate success
against the heretics according to the meaning of the Pope-holy league, and
charitable conspiracy of the covent of Trent. Belike some Me^doza sent these
news, they were so true. Sense the Spaniards themselves have had a long thirst
to drink of the same cup, and out of the Challice which the Angel held then
forth. And this fatal year 88, they have sought for it in England, and they
have tasted thereof in Ireland, we know, and I think al Spain would ring if
not therefore, yet thereof by this time, if the king, or rather, if the holy
house would suffer them.

A little thing would make fools feign now, they were so a gogge at nothing
then. But proud Bennadab, must not bost, when he girdeth his harness, as when
he puts it of. But O foolish fugitives and English Seminaries, and seedemen
of these tumults, what mean you, why seek ye amity with every stranger?
Even therefore God has demonstratiuely taught you that your trecheries are
wicked. Why go you abroad? what want you at home? Because our Queen trusts
in the Lord and in the mercy of the most high, she and we have not miscarried,
and God has been with us, and though we be not as we should be, yet, good
God, make us better. They are thine open enemies. To make an end for this time
till on Tuesday next, when (God willing) according to our bounden duty we
meet again, and then we shall ring for them, and sing for our selves and
profess in a most certain verity, that not an Angel, but God himself had a
favorable eye toward us, and an holy hand over us, and that he was as much
with us as ever with any Nation, when notwithstanding all their crakes and
famous Dons, and doutie Aduenteres, huge ships all to be-swathed with gables
and printed vauntes, we lost by them, who are now sent home a wrong way,
neither man, nor ship, nor boat, nor mast of ship. O Grace, Grace.
Thanckfulnes, Thankfulness, call it Judah, and praise the Lord, the King of
Kings, the God of armies and the Lord of hosts, and mighty Iehoua for ever
more. Amen.

FINIS.
2. KINGS. 6. 15 Elizeus servant seeing a great Host compassing the City,
Says to his master: Alas master what shall we do?

16 The Prophet answers. FEAR NOT: For they which be WITH US (to wit God
and his strength) are more then they which be with them. And God opened the
man's eyes, who looked and saw that it was so.


