THE PROMPTERS PACKET OF PRIVATE AND Familiar Letters: Fitted (in sundry
forms) to men's several Occasions, and according to the quality of Persons.
Not unworthy Imitation of the most: But most necessary for such as want either
faculty or facility to endight.

LONDON Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for Sa. Macham, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head.

1612.

To the Reader.
MAny there are, unto whom is not given a spirit inuentiue enough for their
occasions, so that they are always to seek when the necessity of their
affairs calls them to write. Again there are others in whom is no such defect
of conceit, but yet are as much troubled about the manner of delivering their
minds. To direct either and both of these then what and how to write, was this
Work especially undertaken, in hope nevertheless it would not prove
altogether so unuseful for such abler judgments as feel not these others
want in themselves, but that they may meet with something in it whose example
may do them service. So much concerning the general frame of the Work. For
the Letters in particular, there is not added unto every one a superscription
or subscription, but only to so many as might suffice to instance with some
variety what is proper and best fashionable in that kind. And for their
Contents, they are expressed in a Table here following; whereunto having
recourse, a man may find direction there to any such Letter as shall nearest
agree with the nature of the business he has in hand.

A brief Table of the special Arguments of these several Letters.
EXcuse for seldom writing: with protestation of sincere affection and ready
service. Recommendation of a worthy person to the acquaintance and assistance
of some special friend. A pretty prevention of excuse for seldom writing,
concluding with friendly complement. To importune the intercession of one
friend toward another, for dispatch in a money matter, or other case of
importance. A courteous offer, and kind acceptance of friendly offices. An
earnest expostulation of answer to letters long omitted. A complaint of wants,
with vehement solicitation of a friend to get in debts, by fair means (if it
may be,) or by foul, rather then fail. A short quarrel of unkindness for not
writing: concluding in a vow of perpetual amity. A thankful acknowledgement
of kindnesses received, and well entertaining of a servant recommended. A
grateful acknowledgement of kind offices toward ones Son, with request to
continue the fame. A brief recommendation of a friend. An acknowledgement of
courtesies undeserved. A mild taxation for not writing, and for some seeming
negligence in prosecution of a business. A witty excuse for long intermission
of writing. A due acknowledgement of true friendship, which (especially) in
adversity is more apparent than in prosperity. A thankful acknowledgement to
one that has well reported of us when occasion has been offered. A sad and
serious complaint of a friends unkindness and ingratitude. Recommendation of a
poor man to the favor and furtherance of some worthy friend. An earnest
protestation of sincere affection: with some touch of unkindness taken for too
light belief of sinister reports. A pleasant complement, discoursing of the
contempt of the Court, and content of a retired life. Recommendation of an
extraordinary man to the worthy friendship of some honorable person.
Reco^mendation of one friend to another favor and assistance. A promise of
our best endeavor in the education of a child; notwithstanding some doubts of
his capacity and inclination. A second reproof, or rather the doubling of a
friendly admonition. A brief discourse concerning the progression (or rather
the succession and vicissitude of Learning; sometimes flourishing in one
Climate, sometimes in another. An excellent and extraordinary letter of
commendation. A grateful acceptance of a friendly gift, with modest refuse of
things, exceeding either the giuers means, or the receivers merit. An earnest
disswasiue from a cruel and covetous course of life. An expostulation of
unkind misconceits and iealousies in friendship. Consolation for the death of a
Brother or other friend. A complement full of acknowledgement of courtesies
received. A grave intercession to a Father for a Son that has offended: with
friendly testimony of his hopeful towardnes. A short complement upon receipt of
some new courtesy. Excuse for too rare writing, urging with all the prosecution
of some business, upon occasion of the death of a friend, the election of
another in his stead. Thankful acceptance of a friendly counsel, aduising to
follow (or serve) some great man: whence arises an observation of the cold
recompense of services in these days in comparison of times past. Upon
submission of a runnagate and vntuly son, the kind father (under hand) commends
him to the service of a worthy friend, under whose shelter, necessity had
already driven him. Excuse for not coming to congratulate a friends Return;
with protestation and comparison of affection with the forwardest. Thankful
acknowledgement of kindnesses unto ones Son. A private taxation of the
public ingratitude of great persons toward such as have best deserved of them.
Excuse for not saluting a friend passing by us: endeavoring (by the way) to
wipe away his imputation of pride or of forgetfulness. A sad commemoration of
some worthy friend deceased. A grateful acknowledgement of an especial favor
from any great man. A short and sweet consolation in the death of friends. A
modest complement extenuating our own desert in any favor done our friend,
acknowledging all to be but duty. A gentle and easy submission to some new
direction or alteration of our commission. Recommendation of a forward son to
the favor and entertainment of some famous captain in the wars. A complement
most officious and affectionate to a Lady, concerning some serious affairs of
hers A pleasant Irony, in commendation of Law, and the commodity of Law suits.
A pretty controversy compounded in a witty complement. A brief answer to a
bitter complement upon a false ground. An earnest and elegant entreaty,
importuning the assistance of some friend in any matter of importance, and that
with expedition. A kind quarrel of unkindness with a friend for leaving us
unseen and unsaluted having in a manner passed by our door. Intercession for
favor and remission in the behalf of one that has offended, and is
unfeignedly sorry for his fault. To importune a friend to prosecute to
perfection any business already begun. A particular account of sundry
businesses committed to ones care. A most Christian consolation of a friend in
any cross or affliction. An earnest recommendation of a well qualified
servant, to some place worthy of his parts. An amorous complement upon the
first sight, or after some short parley. An earnest protestation of perpetual
love and loyalty. A sad ecstasy for the absence of your Mistress. A
Loue-letter, or the sum of Lovers Rhetorike, in two figures, viz. Flattery and
Faining. Another of like Argument. Another not unlike. Another of the same.
Another, no less earnest, though perhaps less honest. A friendly answer to
such a suter.
A FORM OF Superscription of Letters.
TO my very honorable good Lord. To the right honorable my especial good
Lord and Master, etc. To the noble and every way excellent Lady, etc. To my
honorable friend Sir etc. To my ever honored friend Sir etc. To my worthy
friend. To my truly worthy friend. To my well esteemed friend. To my very much
esteemed friend. To my dearly esteemed friend. To my worthily esteemed friend.
To my most respected friend. To my much respected friend. To my worthily
respected friend. To my more than ordinarily respected friend. To my endeared
and worthy friend. To my dearest friend. To my ever kindest friend. To my truly
loving friend. To my much approved friend. To my well approved friend. To my
approved dear friend. To my reverend friend. To my very learned friend. To my
learned and judicious friend. To the right Worshipful my very good Master M.
etc. Esquire. To my highly esteemed friend.


A FORM OF WRITING Letters.
Excuse for seldom writing, with protestation of sincere affection and ready
service.
SIR, The continual emploiment of my affairs will not permit me to write
oftener unto you: Howbeit you may be assured, whenever you have occasion to
use my service, they shall not so ouer-ruls me. For my affection to you is no
less then your virtue, and the many offices of kindness which heretofore you
have done me, do require. Neither is this affection of mine placed in the
outward complement of words, but in the interior of my heart, where, though it
seem to lie hid and concealed, yet shall it be sure to show it self at al
times when any point appertaining either to your profit or honor shall come in
question. And this your experience shall undoubtedly make good upon every
occasion wherein I may be so much favored of fortune as to be made apt for
your use. In the mean time I remain,

Wholly at your commandment.

Recommendation of a worthy person, to the acquaintance and assistance of some
special friend.
SIr: My purpose is not by any long or artificial letter, to violate the laws
of our ancient and perfect friendship, nor offer wrong to your courtesy and
singular judgment in the commendation of this friend M. P. who being a
Gentleman of sort, and of such parts, that all that know him are induced not
only to love, but to honor him, it shall suffice me to say he is my friend,
and worthy to be yours, the rest you will find in him your self, being well
assured that having once known him, his acquaintance will be very dear unto
you. He comes to town about certain of his affairs, wherein he shall have
need of your counsel and favor: and I cannot doubt, that either you will
neglect the goodness of your own disposition, or his merit, not so much for
that I entreat it, as because your virtue persuades it, and his requires it. I
shall be very glad to understand that he may find you a liberal dispenser of
these offices, and you him a thankful and worthy receiver of them. And I
think not but you will as much acknowledge unto me the notice I have given you
of such a gentleman, together with the means to do him pleasure, as he the
entrance I have made him into the possession of your friendship. Love one
another then (as I know you will) and in your love reserve me such place as I
hope I deserve, and do very much desire.

A pretty prevention of excuse for seldom writing: concluding with friendly
complement.
COsen, it imports not so much (as some say) that friends which have always
made exchange of every good office of love, should be tied to a continual
intercourse of letters. For report that takes account of al things carries from
one to another news enough of both. And for proof of it, I am persuaded that
ere it be long, you will understand by it of all that I do, as by the same
mean I am oftentimes acquainted with your courses: so that it is as good as a
writing to us with letters, wherein we may take no less pleasure, then the eye
does in picture: forasmuch as rumor is nothing else but an open letter where
every man may read what him list. Wherefore never go about to excuse your
self unto me of that, whereof for my part I never mean to excuse my self
unto you: but continue me in your memory with this opinion, that you have as
much power over me and my best means, as over any of your own: neither is it
with bare offers, or the common sacrifices of a good will, that I desire you
should be satisfied: for I am of the religion that makes a nullitie of faith
without works, and therefore be assured to find me much better then my word
in all your occasions: to the experience whereof I refer you, and my self to
be

Always at your service.

To importune the Intercession of one friend toward another, for dispatch in a
money matter, or other case of importance.
SIr, I may justly vaunt, that I carry a mind more apt to give then to take.
But God be thanked and my fortune, I have often times cause to ask, but very
seldom power to do a pleasure. And I rejoice more when I have means to
gratify my friend, then I grieve when I am to importune them. It may be now
you may think this is some preamble of necessity. I am contented you should
take it so. M. Treasurer, though my pension has been due a month and more,
says he cannot pay me without an express commandment from my Lo. and that
also he has no money. Now I that have more occasions upon my back then crowns
in my purse, do appeal from this excuse, and making you the Judge of it, do
earnestly pray, nay conjure you, by that courtesy which yet has never failed
me in my need, not to suffer sentence to pass against me: but as a favor
altogether derived from the goodness of your disposition, let my occasions
through your interposure, find such supply as their present extremity require.
And at any hand, I beseech you, so deal, that the Treasurer may not say he
has no money: for that would prove a fever to him, and a plague to me:
against the which hoping to receive a preservative in your return heereunto I
leave you to the composing of it, and my self

Very desirous in every thing to serve you.

A courteous offer, and kind acceptance of friendly Offices.
WIth more Honor, and by a more worthy person, you might have presented your
letters unto my Lord: but not by any that with more affection and desire would
undertake the office then my self. And that not only for your satisfaction
(the which yet I especially regard) but also for mine own content, it being
greatly to my reputation that a Gentleman of such worth and esteem as your
self, should make choice of me for so good an employment. I very much thank
M. C. for giving your memory that address, and me the means to do you
service, if that may be caled service which redounds to my credit. Thursdaie
next my Lord will be upon return, and then with the best commodity I will
perform what it has pleased you to command, and of all accordingly advertise
you. In every other occasion for your service, I humbly beseech you not to
spare me, to the end that by the way of your commandment, I may get out of
these bonds wherein I stand so obliged unto you, as well for diverse other
favors, as especially for this you presently do me.

An earnest expostulation of answer to letters long omitted.
SIr, I wrote twice unto you by a young man of this place, and it is so long
ago that I am almost out of hope of answer: nevertheless if he be not dead by
the way, which God forbid, or that you be in health, as I much desire, and
still retain the same opinion of me my friendship deserves, let me entreat you
to rid me of this fear, which is much increased by the coming of this
messenger, without letters from you. For though I were not at home, you might
not think me so far, or so concealed, but that your letters would have found
me out. I wrote unto you then at large of the greatness of my business, and
what resolution I had taken, I will not trouble you therefore with any
repetition, but only now desire you to consider that new friendship is not to
be preferred to the surety of old, which like old wines are every way better
than new. For mine own part, I love you in the fame degree with my self, and
in such manner, that I desire nothing more then to be acceptable unto you, I
hope you are so inclined toward me: otherwise I should doubt that not finding
me of ability to give you any promise of profit, your friendship is therefore
decayed: which would prove an incongruity of discretion* and offense of
judgment. But not fearing that ever you will fall into any such error, I
commit you to a return, and my self to an expectation of your answer.

A complement of Wants with vehement solicitation of a friend to get in debts
by fair means (if it may be) or by foul rather then fail.
GOOD Nephew, I know I should very much wrong your love in recommending my
affairs unto you, but necessity which cannot brook delay, compels me unto it.
I am altogether without money, and many things are wanting in my house: now
judge whether I have not reason to press you: with some importunity for the
getting in of such as are there owing me. Those good debtors of mine,
especially the party you wot of, are like dul^ades, that will not stir a foot
without spurring. Wherefore, seeing that both my occasions, and the slacknes of
their nature require it, I pray you egg them forward, and if the spur will
not serve, lay them on and spare not, you must remember that the end of this
month will be the end of your power, and my hopes. For if you with all the
love you bear me, together with the means and desire you have to do me
pleasure, cannot bring these businesses to any good pass, what should I expect
from those whom hereafter I must employ that shall have little ability and
happily less will. The gentleman you mentioned in your last, I have not yet
seen, neither do I think his sight will bring me more commoditity then
pleasure, considering he is a fellow that promises mountains, but never
performs any thing: and in troth I know not what to say to him, for I find such
a distanes between his words and works, that now I begin to hope never to hope
on him more. I will trouble you no farther but only to put M. G. in mind of my
suite, to the end his promises may bring forth effects like themselves; and so
very timely I commit you to God.

A short quarrel of unkindness for not writing: concluded in a vow of
perpetual Amity.
SIr, it a long possession with you were turned into custom, I should accuse
you: for suffering one of your folks to come hither with empty hands. But the
truth is, though I am sorry for that I have received no letters from you, yet
am I not so sorry for that default, as in that it is a certain sign unto me
that as yet you have not thought upon your return because we never receive
letter from you, but when you are upon the point of your coming hither.
Howsoever, be assured that neither your letters nor the want of them shall give
any increase or diminution to that tespect and love I bear you, having always
made this a firm determination with my self, to be still the same I ever have
been and am unto you, I mean your

Humble servant and friend.

A thankful acknowledgement of kindnesses received: and well entertaining of a
servant recommended.
GOOD Cosen, not being able in better manner to answer the greatness of the
obligation, wherein I stand engaged unto you for the good remembrance it
pleases you always to have of me, I must entreat you to rest contented with
an infinity of thanks I presently send you, until such time as occasion
shall surnish me with means to make you a more worthy satisfaction. I am very
sorry my fortunes are worse then competent, and that for diverse reasons, among
the which I account it not the least that I cannot make provision correspondent
to the merit of the young man you recommended unto me. I know not what his
entertainment has been otherwhere, nevertheless if he be as you say, I will
strain my self in cutting off some less considerable charge to give him his
demand. But before we proceed any farther, I would willingly have him send me
an essay of his hand, to the end that he being sure of his wages, and I of the
quality of his service, both of us may remain satisfied, for touching the
rest I wholly refer me to your judgment: so with all affection I commend me
unto you.

A grateful acknowledgement of kind Offices toward ones Son, with request
to continue the same.
SIr, I am to give you many thanks for the favors it has pleased you to show
my son. This is not the first kindness I have recetued from you and yours,
neither was my gallant worthy of it, considering his fault. But you have been
unto him as a Psacos in the midst of a darkness to save him from the
Shipwreck, which without you, he had assuredly suffered. I know not what will
be the issue of it, pray God your prognostication may prove true. I have
entreated. M. P. to join with you, and supply my want of presence in
exhortations. I have also desired. M. F. to take him into his house, and I hope
he will not deny me. The form of his voyage has much displesed me: it may be
God will turn it all to the best. But to tell you, what I think, nothing surely
can be truer the^ that which Tertullian says to his wife. That the pleasure
which we take in our children is full of anguish: neither is it without cause
that Saint Jerome has discoursed very much in one of his epistles, without any
certain resolution taken thereupon, whether of the two were most expedient,
either to marry or not to marry. For my part I believe this question may be
concluded by that sentence of Martial. For doubtless he that has no
children takes not so much pleasure as he that has: but withal he endures
not that trouble and vexation of mind the other does.

A brief recommendation of a Friend.
SIr, I should rather merit reproach then reputation, to recommend unto you the
affairs of M. G. the present bearer. For to his knowledge your bounty is such,
that it extends even to those you never saw. I leave you then to imagine what
assurance he may have of it that has known you so long, and that by his own
virtues sufficiently commends himself, and that is also commended unto you by
one of your most affectionate friends. Touching the request he shall offer for
my cause, I will not press you much in it, being assured you will not do your
self that wrong to deny me: for considering that by our ancient friendship we
two are but as one, the refusal you should make me would but show the little
regard you carry unto your self. And so very kindly for this time I take my
leave.

An acknowledgement of courtesies undeserved.
I Receive no letter from M. I. that is not accompanied with an express and
singular mention of the many good Offices you continually do for me, which
altogether proceeds from the goodness of your own disposition without any merit
at all of mine, and I were worthy to be ranked in the number of the most
ungrateful that ever were, if at the least I did not acknowledge it by
letters, until such time as I may meet with some happy occasion to deserve it
better: wherein I writ to employ my self with so good a will and affection
that you shall never repent any pleasure you have done unto him, that desires
nothing more then to appear how much he is

Truly your friend.

A mild taxation for not writing, and for some seeming negligence in
prosecuting of a business.
SIr, your slacknes rather deserves blame then excuse in my behalf, and I am
glad you are fallen into the same error whereof you have so often accused me.
Your letters at all times would be very welcome, but much more now being so
desirous to understand what success has followed my kinsmans business, which
not long since with such care I recommended unto you. I cannot doubt that you
have forgotten him, the matter concerning him so much, and he a man so
unworthy and unfit to suffer a neglect: besides I have many times heard you say
that an injury in that kind is a cause just and sufficient enough to dissolve
all friendship. But to come again to my first quarrel, I know if you should
be called in question before the God of respect, for all your eloquence you
would be conde^nedeither for a negligent or an inconsiderate friend.
Nevertheless seeing you have had no good opportunity to write, I pardon this
silence, and as one that holds you dear, will content my self with your best
leisure, and conueniencie. I make no question but that you and the rest of our
friends there look for some great intelligence at my hands, but I am not able
to satisfy you with the least occurrence of note. For matters of the state lie
so deep buried in the grave of secrecy, that no man can come to have a sight of
them but with the eye of reason, which judges well enough of that which should
be, but not of that which shall be. Wherefore you must be therewith contented
until the rest shall come to light. And so I pray you continue me in your
favor, whereunto with all affection I very humbly commend my self.

A witty excuse for long intermission of writing.
SIr, I could fetch some color of excuse for this long intermission of writing,
from the many affairs wherein I am continually conversant: but it would be
neither worthy your acceptance, nor my affection. For there is no employment
either of body or mind, that should interrupt any office appertaining to your
pleasure, or the satisfaction of my duty. Wherefore leaving this excuse which
would be more honest then just, I will seek to clear my self with the
plain truth, and freely tell you that I have not written all this while
because I had nothing to write and that I thought letters were neither
necessary for my occasion, nor your contentment. If I had seen that to
substantiate our ancient friendship there had heene need of such triuiall
complements. I should have thought it had been grounded on a less firm and
weaker foundation then it is That virtuous and honest disposition which even
from our youth and first acquaintance I always found in you, has knit our
affections so fast together, that not the strength of any enemy, envy, or
other worldly accidents whatsoever shall ever be able to undo it. Wherefore I
should much wrong your judgment, in believing that you can be so carried away
with the vulgar, as to think that frequency of letters is precisely required
for the fortification of a friendship. I shall never be persuaded that any such
heresy can take hold on you, or that you more esteem of verbal ceremony,
then of action and the true intent of an honest will. For my part, I have still
been more a friend of deeds, then of words, which most commonly little
pleasure and less profit, whereas the other beget them both. My slacknes in
writing shall be recompensed with a desire and endeavor to do you service in
every occasion whereunto my poor but ablest means may extend: whereof because
I persuaded my self you make no doubt, I will here with my humble and kindest
commendations give end to the present.

A due acknowledgement of true friendship, which (especially) in adversity is
more apparent then in prosperity.
SIr, by your letters I perceive you have the same opinion of my love, I
always desired. I am glad I have not been deceived in the judgment of your
wisdom and good will. And since that true and perfect friendship consists not
in words or fair promises but in effects and virtuous executions: I must needs
confess that I have found you of little speech and superfluous appearance in my
behalf so long as fortune favored me; but as soon as my troubles and occasions
began but to knock at the gate of your assistance, you have ever well
expressed the goodness of your generous disposition: and I may truly say I never
met with any, or very few such like. Wherefore be assured, that I will serve,
respect, and love you, as long as I have breath to do it, and that too as
far from ingratitude as may be. I know many that brag and talk of favors
which they never did me: whereas you have dealt liberally with me, and never
spoke of it. They are indebted to me then for that which they charge me with,
but I never received: and I unto you for many pleasures done me, which yet you
never put to account. I will add nothing heereunto, but that if I could send
you my heart in stead of this paper, you should see the integrity of my
meaning. I have spoken with the party you wot of, and my reasons, together with
your authority, have so prevailed, that your desire shall be accomplished. If
in any other thing I may serve you, give as much boldness to your
commandments, as you have always found in my entreaties: so shall I be
confirmed in that persuasion I have that you esteem of me as indeed I am,

Your very humble servant and friend.

A thankful acknowledgement to one that has well reported of us when occasion
has been offered.
To my worthy friend M. etc.
SIr, I should be too too ungrateful if I should not give you a thousand
thanks for the honest mention you were pleased to make of me in the company
you wot of. Only take heed that to a purpose you give not caution for him that
may chance to fail you. It is not the first favor you have done me, nor the
last I hope to receive from you. If there be that in me you speak of, be
assured it is for to do you very humble service: wherein I will employ my
self upon all occasions with as good a will as now I pray unto God to give you
your desires.

A sad and serious complaint of a friends unkindness and ingratitude.
GOod friend, it is no matter of difficulty for those that are in health to
give much counsel and many receipts to the sick. If my disposition could have
received comfort from the discreet and honest letters of a friend, I had found
it in yours, which are furnished with all sort of kindness and accomplished
courtesy. But like unto him that thinks he is mounted on Sedanus horse, my
obstinate despair sets so sure a watch on my thoughts, that it will suffer
nothing to enter into them but vexation and misery. I am sorry your medecin
cannot work that in me which your virtue deserves, able in troth to draw any
other out of the grief of calamity. But leave me I pray ye as I am. For
there is nothing can content me so long as I know that my dissembling friend
has violated all the laws of honesty and reason, and utterly abolished out of
his memory that love and respect I ever bare him. It grieves me exceedingly
that my mind is not as well able to resist the assaults of misfortune, as his
was to execute on me all kind of ingratitude: to the end that in this affair
I might as easily have borne his wrongs, as heretofore I have faithfully
acquitted my self in so many commandments he has laid upon me. Dear friend,
if your love extend so far as I cannot doubt but it does, suffer me to be as
I am a most unfortunate man, and rest you with your fair and kind bedfellow
in all happiness, which I will always pray may be more and more increased,
and continued long upon you.

Recommendation of a poor man to the favor and furtherance of some worthy
friend.
SIr, I know I cannot please you better, then to present you with means to
employ those abilities of your good and liberal disposition on some such
person as shall have occasion to use them. A quality no doubt above all others
worthy, honest, and acceptable to God. Wherefore I that of this affection both
in others and mine own particular, have made such good experience, do
especially labor, being so faithful a servant and friend unto you as I am, to
satisfy you therein; hoping withal by this mean to be able to clear some
part of those many obligations wherein I stand so far engaged unto you. The
bearer hereof is a poor man that is going to London about certain affairs,
whereof you shall be advertised by him at large: he shall have very much
need of your counsel and countenance. A beseech you Sir, impart unto him of
those your favors, wherein you are so rich and abundant, that you cannot
depart with so many as there will be many more remaining behind. And in
regard of merit, you are to hope for more in the behalf of this man, then of
any other that ever you succored, by reason his poverty and want of means
will never suffer him so much as to think of requital. Herein follow but your
own worthy inclination: and rejoice with your self at the excellency of
knowledge that is joined in you to this, that you have neither peer nor
superior in courtesy. Whereunto I very humbly commend my self, and you to
that power from whom I will daily wish you all prosperity.

An earnest protestation of sincere affection: with some touch of unkindness
taken for too light belief of sinister reports.
GOod Sir, I would my heart lay as open to the view of your eye, as the color
of a rose does through the cleerest crystal. For then behalding in it how much
I truly love and respect you, and how much beyond all others I desire your
profit and honor; I know you could not but think it a shame to fall into any
the least suspicion or doubt of my friendship. If you would have measured your
thoughts by mine, you should have seen that I love you because you love me,
and that I respect you because I am indebted to your virtue. I cannot choose but
think it strange that a man of such knowledge, wisdom, and great experience
in all things, should so easily slide into error. You should rather have given
credit to so many proofs you have made of my faith and affection, then to the
malice and envy of men. And to speak somewhat freely unto you: if you be
persuaded that that is true, which you tell me you have heard, you do your
self much wrong; for it would argue great weakness in you, to give ear to
any such thing: it being as vicious to believe every thing, as to believe
nothing: for to be ouer-easie of belief, and not to believe at all, are
cousins in vice by secret philosophy. Well, howsoever it be, I will always
love you as much as you shall desire to be loved of me, and as long as your
virtues have any being, whereupon I have grounded that worthy affection I bear
you. Wherefore I pray you esteem of me not only as of a friend, but as of an
especial and singular friend, for so I desire to appear, and so you shall be
sure to find me as soon as any fit occasion shall offer me the means to make
it good.

A pleasant complement, discoursing of the contempt of the Court, and content
of a retired life.
YOur man passing this way, came to enquire of my health, therewithal to
acquaint you at his return: which in that regard he presumes will be the more
acceptable, by reason of the love it pleases you to bear me. Wherefore you
shall understand that God be thanked I am very well, and not only I, to whom
it is natural to be well in all places, but even a very rogue would think
himself half an Emperor, living as I do, so quieilie, and so well retired
from the slavery wherein I continued but too long. I never was in Paradise (as
far as I remember) so that I cannot justly say what the life of the blessed
is; but sure I am, to starve here for hunger is an happiness to the service
of a Court: and me thinks a Peasant with us is in far better state then a
great man there. When I lie in my bed, and consider a poor servant almost dead
for cold, and fainting with heat, and see green wood to warm him, and dead
drink to refresh him, and if he hap to be sick, little means to accommodate
him; I see him abroad in rain, hail and snow, and when he comes in nothing to
comfort him; Lord (think I) what a blessed case am I in, that am as free from
these inconveniences, as he is always subject to them. As there is no misery
to that of a poor Courtier that is weary and cannot sit, hungry and cannot
eat, a-thirst, and cannot drink, and sleepie, and yet must watch; so I am
persuaded there is no happiness to mine, that eat when I have an appetite,
rest when I am weary, and go to bed when I am sleepie: so that the hours
that I tell of the clock, are but so many hours of my pleasure. Therefore
never enquire more how I do, for be assured I lack nothing to make up a full
and absolute contentment, but your company, which I hope (at leastwise if you
be a gentleman of your word) I shall not be long without. In the expectation
whereof I will leave my self, and you to the tuition of the Almighty.

Recommendation of an extraordinary man to the worthy friendship of some
honorable person.
To my ever honored friend Sir I. etc.
HOnorable Sir, I acknowledge much unto fortune for offering me occasion at one
time to satisfy both Sir Thomas M. and your self some part of those many
obligations wherein I confess my self to have been a long time indebted unto
you, and by the way of continuing friendship betwixt you, alike in goodness of
nature, excellency of spirit, and all other qualities worthy your noble
dispositions: so that he which might behold the face of your hearts, could
hardly discern the one from the other. By experiences and the common opinion
of the world, he is amply possessed of your virtues. And if you have not yet
heard the public voice of renown that goes about proclaiming his worth, may
you be pleased to give credit unto my pen, which may justly say, that a more
valiant, wise, virtuous, or noble gentleman, lives not this day upon the earth.
Embrace one another then at my entreaty, and with the bands of courteous
offices so straightly tie your affections together, that like the Gordian knot,
no worldly accident may be of power to dissolve it. I assure my self you will
do it with a marvelous satisfaction of each other. But yet I beseech you, let
it not be done in such manner, but that like an humble and faithful servant as
I am unto you both, I may find a place in the midst of your virtuous
friendship.

Recommendation of one friend to another favor and assistance.
SIr, if you will have me less importunate and troublesome unto you, I would
wish you to become less courteous toward me. For out of your favor I pick
many occasions to give you trouble. Besides I know not how to refuse my
friends, unless I should show my self neglectful of them, which would prove
a very great wrong to my nature. M. P. for his worthy qualities capable of your
love, is going to the Court about some affairs, in the dispatch whereof he
shall have much need of counsel and favor. And not knowing any one more
liberal of them then your self, he has very earnestly entreated me to
write somewhat more then ordinary unto you in his commendation. Now I that am
naturally inclined to pleasure every man, especially those un to whom nothing
ought to be denied, have willingly undertaken this charge, as well to gratify
him, as to do you service in furnishing you with means to win the heart of
a gentleman of that value he is of. I cannot doubt but that you will exercise
your accustomed goodness upon him, either in regard of my entreaty, or his
virtue, which is such, that as soon as it shall be known unto you, there will
be no more need of my letters. Wherefore I will not go about by any further
Art to wrong your judgment, being well assured you will find that your credit
shall be employed, and my request satisfied for a very virtuous gentleman.

A promise of our best endeavor in the education of a Child; notwithstanding
some doubts of his capacity and inclination.
SIr, the love that I bear you, proceeding from your merit and my obligation,
might assure you: that whatsoever I can do for your son shall be performed
with all affection and good will. For the force of your entreaties cannot be
of more power in that regard then my desire: only it grieves me that the field
of his understanding is not so proper to receive, as I am ready to sow in it
the seed of my little experience, to the end that with his profit, and my
pleasure you might see the fruit of my labors. He seems to me to be borne
more apt for any other exercise, than that ciuility, nevertheless more to
satisfy your fancy then my judgment, I will always keep him near about me:
and be assured that if the travel or diligence of the husbandman can mend and
better a barren ground, I will not be defective in his behalf. For you shall
understand that of all my travel and pains, there is no fruit more dear or
pleasing to me, than that which proceeds from the grain I have sown. The
pleasure which the labourer fools, when with his own hand he plucks the fruit
hanging on the tree which he himself has planted, is very great. How much
greater then ought the contentment of that man to be, who having endued a
tender youth with good manners, gathers the fruit of vextue, coming of it. For
my part I will do all that shall be possible and necessary, so that if things
fall not out answerable to your expectation and my desire, you may impute the
fault rather to the matter, than the workmanship.

A second reproof or rather the doubling of a friendly Admonition.
SIr, in the letter which not long since you received from me, and which as I
am given to understand you received in evil part, I came rather drawn by a
desire of your good, and the love that I bear you, then persuaded by mine own
will to execute the office of reprehension upon you: and as the good Physician
that not to hurt but to heal his patient comes much against his mind to the
vyolent remedies of fire or knife, so did I carry my self toward you, that if
my correction could have proved pleasing and profitable unto you, I should have
been glad that by my means you had recovered your health, or that therein
failing, I might at leastwise have satisfied mine own conscience and the duty
of our frindship. As from a friend then that truly affects you, and not as from
a malicious enemy receive the exhortation I made you. For otherwise you show
that a flatterer is more acceptable unto you, then a friend. And I that above
all others abhor that quality, and that had rather be an open enemy, then a
hollow friend will sooner leave to love you, then dissemble with you, and
rather offend you with a plain truth, then please you with a deceitful lie.
But pardon me I pray you, for speaking thus freely, and consider that your
disease stood in need of a sharp, and strong purge, which I wish may work that
effect in you the case requires.

A brief discourse concerning the progression (or rather the succession) and
vicissitude of Learning; sometimes flourishing in one Climate, sometimes in
another.
To my learned friend.
SIr, whereas you desire a free delivery of my mind upon the matter propounded
in your last, I must needs tell you I am not any way of your opinion to think
that the temperature of the Clymate can make men either more or less learned,
as if there were certain countries more affected to good letters then others.
I will not deny, but that every nation has certain virtues and vices, which
are transmitted from one to another, as it were by an hereditarie and
successiue right: nor have I seen any Country anciently taxed for a vice,
which is not still continuing in the posterity, although it have been
repeopled with new Colonies. But touching so much as appertains to Sciences
the discourse is far otherwise, as may be gathered by very ocular examples:
was there ever greater personages in all kind of knowledge and learning than in
Greece, and was there ever so much barbarism in the world, as that which is
presently in it: Look but upon Affricke, in what opinion of doctrine had it
ever been in? Nevertheless a little after the advancement and progress of
our Christian Religion, there was no country, on the earth that produced
greater Doctors of the Church than it, witness Tertullian, Optatius,
Lactantius, Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine. After the same manner in the
time of the Roman commonwealth, no nation was ever more estranged from good
letters than Germany, which both at this instant, and for six or seven score
years past has been seen to flourish in all kind of studies. And I may say
for it is true that as Monarch yes, so learning and sciences change their
habitation, according to the diversity of seasons. Which is the reason why at
first they flourished among the Chaldeans then in Egypt, from thence they took
their course into Greece, and lastly unto Rome. Afterward we having been
possessed for many hundredth years, together with a continual barbarism they
came at length to soiourne part in Italy and Germany, and part in France and
England, whereas yet they make their abode. And all this by a certain
revolution of things, which is the cause that in some ages we see arms to
prosper in a country, and then again letters. Thus having briefly showed you
that every Nation is capable of Arts and Sciences, according to the diversity
of occurrences, I will leave you to a consideraion of my reasons, and my self
very ready to be commanded by you, upon all occasions.

An excellent and extraordinary letter of Commendation.
To my approved dear friend Mr. etc.
SIr, in that I know you to be an enemy of complement, I will write as
plainly as may be, to the end my meaning may the better appear unto you,
which peradventure covered with the veil of Art would be the harder for you
to conceive. This Gentleman, M. V. is a friend of mine, and desiring to be
received into the number of your servants, he has entreated me to become the
means of it. Whereupon comparing his merit with your judgment, and persuading
my self that with one office I may satisfy two debts, one of duty to you, the
other of affection to him. I am very well coutented to undertake it. Now
because I know that in the election of friends, you and I are as it were of one
taste, I assure my self you will judge him worthy your friendship and my
commendation. I will not speak of what you are to do for him: for you shall no
sooner know him, but you will think you should do more for him than he will
require. Howsoever, until he have obtained that which he desires, I mean so
to oppress you with entreaties, that my importunity shall beget his
satisfaction: and I hope you will not take it in evil part, forasmuch as you
know, that a man is only to entreat for himself, but for his friend he is
both to entreat and importune. When for mine own particular I shall have
occasion of that favor, which so many times heretofore has obliged me unto
you, it shall be then that I will use that madestie, which the love I justly
bear so worthy a friend as M. V. does make me now to forget: although I will
never forget to commend you and all your affairs unto him in whose hand is all
prosperity to give.

A grateful acceptance of a friendly gift, with modest refusal of things,
exceeding either the giuers means, or the receivers merit.
SIr, I have received your letters as well furnished with good advise and
counsel, as with good will and affection, and I am not a little glad we both
iumpe so well together in opinion, that you are persuaded that that which is
for your profit and service, will be also for my commodity and good. If by
many other ways I had not made experience of your friendship this would be an
approved argument unto me of it. Now I shall go with a far better will seeing
my self carried by your direction. I humbly thank you, for the present it
has pleased you to send me, worthy indeed the greatness of your mind but not my
desert: for there is no particular gain shall make me dissemble that which I
am bound to tell you, and that is, how you are to take care not to extend your
liberality beyond the limit of your means, and that in seeking to supply your
friends, you do not wrong your self. Weigh but your fortunes with my merit,
and you will find that so great a gift does neither belong to your ability nor
my condition. I would not have you so bountiful unto me, as that thereby you
should want means, to be so unto others of more virtue and worth, for so I
should show my self more a friend of mine own profit, then your reputation.
What could you offer to one that indeed were worthy, if you think this but a
trifle for me, that am of so little value. We should so give as we may
always have wherewithal to give, and so well manage the gates of liberality,
that they may neither be open nor shut to any. With all thankfulfulnesse I
accept of your gelding, which comes very fit for the journey I have in hand:
but the money I have returned back again to the fountain of your bounty, that
there may not lack water for those that deserve it better then I, and that (it
may be) are more athirst. If you come not hither before my departure, I will be
with you as soon as conveniently I may, to acknowledge some part of those
many favors I continually receive at your hands. In the mean time I wish
your fortunes answerable to your free and generous disposition.

An earnest disswasiue from a cruel and covetous course of life.
SIr, the affection that I bear you is the only cause to make me so
desirous of your good as presently I am. Reputation (me thinks) is one of the
principal and chiefest happinesses we enjoy in this world and as easy to get,
as hard to keep. With these few lines then I purpose to do rather the office
of a friend then of a flatterer, and no whit to disguise the truth unto you,
desiring you as from a true and honest friend to take this advertisement, which
shall bring you if not much commodity, at least wise much honor and credit, and
I doubt not if you have that judgment yet remaining, which I have promised to
my self out of the ability of your spirit, but you will acknowledge that
every petty honor is to be preferred to the greatest profit. It appertains
to the office, not of a mean creature, but of a cruel and inexorable man, to
follow that profession you do, by seeking the death of men, and converting
into their ruin that eloquence which nature for the good of the living has so
liberally imparted unto you, and I know it cannot be done without great
offense unto God. Who though he be very justice it self, yet as singular and
unspeakable mercy, he enclines more to pity and pardon, then to pain and
punishment. And how can you without offense of his divine majesty so often call
into judgment, the life (it may be) of the innocent. Retire your self from
this course, and applying your wit (the gift of God and nature) to a better
use, make more account of reputation then wealth, which indeed is the only
motive that carries you thereunto. For if you please, you cannot want many
other good means both for the one and the other. I am constrained even out of
friendship, hearing the bad and in famous report that goes of you every where,
and that too accompanied with the danger of your life, to write thus plainly
unto you. I should be very glad if it could draw you from so detestable a
practice, and restore you your wonted reputation. Otherwise I pronounce you
unworthy of our friendship, and desire the world should know that I loved you
no longer then I saw you walking in the way of virtue. And so I bid you
farewell.

An expostulation of unkind misconceipts and iealousies in friendship.
SIr, Your wisdom well known of al, and approved unto many, with the
experience I have made of it, would never have suffered me to believe that
which was often delivered unto me by the letters of my friends, had I not
understood as much by the last I received from you, more fraught with choler
then reason. I cannot imagine how a man of such knowledge, and more judgment,
brought up in Court, and continually employed in affairs, should be carried to
an opinion of me, so far from truth, and the bent of my disposition, which has
ever been most desirous to make good unto the world in what esteem I have
always held the friendship of so worthy a gentleman as your self. You may be
persuaded then I never committed any thing against you, which might any way
offend the reputation of an honest and virtuous man, and thereof I wish no
better testimony then mine own thoughts. Of all actions some be voluntary, and
some necessary. If my will shen have never drawn me to offend you, nor any
necessity how great soever it were, would ever permit me to wring our ancient
friendship, would you have me give credit to the perfidious and wicked
impressions of men, or (by your favor) to some light and inconsiderate
suspicion that possesses you, rather then to mine own conscience. Nay sir, be
assured I am your friend, and that I deserve you should be mine yet more then
you are, desiring you that heerin you will neither do injury to the
integrity of my nature, nor your own discretion, unless that (weary of me,
and oppressed with my vnseruiceablenesse and inutilities) you will make this an
occasion to clear your hands of me, which at all times would appear most
unworthy your judgment and my desert.

Consolation for the death of a Brother or other friend.
GOod Sir, I fear this Letter will work effects contrary to my desire, and
in stead of drying up your tears, raise up new storms of heaviness in us
both, upon discourse of your brothers so unexpected and much to be lamented
death, I have put off the doing of this office until now, as well in regard of
the greatness of mine own sorrow, which would not suffer me to write, as also
in that I attended a convenient time when as the extremity of yours should be
so qualified, that it might give way to that little comfort I desire to
minister unto you. But how should I offer you comfort, when as I have as much
or more need of it then your self? For if he were your brother, he was my
very dear and singular friend: if he were kind to you, he was much more to
me: for his affection to you was derived from nature and blood, but to me out
of election and will. He always embraced you with an extraordinary respect,
because he was thereunto bound: but upon me he conferred all offices of love
and liberality which I never deserved. Let us then with one consent lament our
infinite loss, and not only ours, but every man's that delighted in virtue and
honor. Poor gentleman! when he was in greatest expectation of gathering the
fruit which his virtues had promised him, like a fresh and new blown rose,
even in the entrance to his best days, to be cut off by the unlucky hand of
untimely death! Howbeit, this is no little comfort, that he departed this
world with the hope he had given his friends of his virtues, with the fruit
whereof he was a debtor to his parents, with the honor he expected from his
Country, and with the good he had promised al good men, leaving nothing
behind him but sorrow and tears, and a desire always to bewail him, always
to wish for him. He that loved him not, never knew him: he that knew him, and
was not sorry for him, had neither sense nor humanity. But what do I mean
to be carried away thus by grief from my purposed end? Let us leave all
sorrow, and rather envious of his selicitie, then moved with his loss, let us
rejoice at his fortune. He has paid the debt which he ought unto nature, and
the sooner it was, the better, was his hap. For happier is he that by an
impetuous, but prosperous gale is speedily driven into the desired port, then
he that arriues there with a long and tedious calm. And be that knew this life
was but lent him of nature, lived so, as he was not unwilling to die; if he
may be said to die, that is gone out of darkness into light, that leaves pain
for pleasure, and puts off mortality to become immortal. Wherein could the
favor of God appear unto him more, then in taking him out of the troubles and
calamities of this wicked world, before he should know the dangers of times,
the sorrows of age, and the many mischiefs that continually attend on this
miserable life of ours? And well was it foreseen of his nature, that feeling
it self cloied with the false and transitory pleasures of the earth, for to
be possessed of the true and everlasting idies of heaven, made him leave us,
even then when in the very prime and flourish of his years he had attained to
as much honor and fame, as man with long travel as body and mind could in all his life time acquire. But why, Sir, do I take all this pains to find out
means of consolation for you, that with much more eloquence and understanding
is better able to comfort me, and that with more courage and constancy knows
how to bear this brunt of fortune? I will therefore cease to be a further
trouble either to you or my self, and with this comfortable assurance end,
that as reioicing in his glory he is now assuredly living in heaven, so shall
the memory of his virtues have an eternal being in the speech of men.

A complement full of acknowledgement of courtesies received.
SIr, with many favors, as continually you do, you may augment my obligation;
but you cannot add any thing to the love I bear you, or the desire I have to
do you service: for neither the one nor the other can be greater. And would the
time could accommodate me as well with means to satisfy these debts, as it
gives you occasion to increase them. I am indebted to you in much, and my
ability is very small; but it shall be better; if like a rich and liberal
Creditour, you will be contented to take kind words and the good affection of
an honest heart in payment of your courtesies. I have received M. G. his
Letter, which you sent me, unto whom (if you please) return the enclosed
answer: with that one office you shall gratify two friends, and of them two if
it were possible, make me always more ready than I am,

To be commanded by you.

A grave intercession to a father for a son that has offended: with friendly
testimony of his hopeful towardness.
To my reverend friend M. etc.
SIr, the friendship which has been betwixt us from our youth, commands me to
write the present, for to advertise you how your son R. does every day more
and more apply himself to the course you desire of his studies. I would not
believe that which my boys reported of him, but sounded him my self upon the
sudden in his lesson. And if the hunters saying be true, that the Dear is
known by his tract, I will promise you as much contentment from him as you
wish. Wherefore I would counsel you (forgetting matters past) hereafter to
embrace his actions, like a loving father. All that I labor in, is to become
caution to you both: to you, that he shall be so good a son, that as in age,
so in well doing he shall go before the rest of his brothers and sisters: to
him, that hence forward you shall favor him, not only as your eldest, but as
your best beloved. It is no small victory for you, to have subdued and reduced
him according to your desire, to study, after he had for a time followed
arms, whereunto he seemed to be naturally inclined: neither was it a less
victory for him to have subdued himself for to obey you. And in truth you
reap no little commodity by his fault, in that now you know how good a son
you have. Such as in the holy Scripture were sinners, and afterward truly
repented them, were no less esteemed of God, nay many times more than those
which had not sinned at all. I will not stand upon any application, but
commending both it and my self unto you, very kindly take my leave.

A short complement upon receipt of some new courtesy.
SIr, I have received the Greyhound you sent me, wherewithal I am as much
pleased, as he was kindly derived: although I must confess, that in receiving
him I was somewhat ashamed, by reason I thought this new courtesy did vpbraid
me with my not acknowledging as yet in action, how much I am your servant in
will. But howsoever, I thank you very kindly for him, and with such affection,
as he that amongst your friends most desires to appear how ready he is
always to undergo your commandments, and commend your liberality as much as
all your other virtues are above all your like generally commended. And so for
this time I humbly take my leave.

Excuse for too rare writing: urging withal the prosecution of some business:
and upon occasion of the death of a friend, the election of another in his
stead.
SIr, you may perceive by my former, that although I am your debtor for many
Letters, yet am I nothing behind to you in good will: and the more my slacknes
is in that, the more is my readiness to serve you in great matters. I am to
desire you to second the request I have made unto M. H. your uncle and my very
good friend concerning the business whereof I have now written to him* which is
very easy for him, and without means impossible for me to effect. The death
of M. P. your kinsman very much troubled me at the first, but I consider that
with glory and reputation he has satisfied God, his Prince, and the debt
which he ought unto nature. And no doubt but he is now at peace in heaven,
whereas we amidst the troubles and corruptions of the world, are continually
tossed with the tribulations of this miserable life. And seeing it has pleased
God to take from me so good and faithful a friend, I beseech you to accept of
the election I make of you in his stead, with such a mind and affection to
serve and honor you, as I have always carried toward him. May you be
pleased then to receive me into this degree, and though my qualities deserve it
not, at leastwise it appertains to the innated courtesy of your disposition.
I assure my self that the Letters here enclosed shall find such address as
their directions require, and that you will be pleased (if the gentlemen be in
town) to return their answers. I will say no more, but only entreat you to
love me, and to write often unto me, to the end that the gain I make of you,
may give me less sense of the loss I have made of so dear a friend: and so
very kindly I bid you farewell.

Thankful acceptance of a friendly counsel, aduising to follow (or serve)
some great man: whence arises an observation of the cold recompense of
services in these days in comparison of times past.
To my truly loving friend.
SIr, you were not out of reason when like a friend for to comfort me in my
troubles, or rather indeed to possess me with that care which every man ought
to have of the time to come. You told me I should do well to put my self into
the service of some great personage, where you were persuaded I should be well
entertained, and that the sooner it were the better it would be, nothing being
more precious than time. Your counsel seems to me without all question no
less virtuous and wise, than worthy of our friendship; and I am fully resolved
to follow it. But the fear of not attaining that propounded end, is as it were
a very cross to my resolution. For the malice of the time is such, that one is
more deceived in the recompense of services, than in any other practices
whatsoever. Great men think that others inferior to them in fortunes were
expressly made for their only and particular respect, never considering that if
they would put that fantastical opinion out of their heads, they should with
much more contentment be better served. M. Crassus, having many servants, was
always very careful of them, and with all gentleness used them no worse than
his own children. One of the chiefest satisfactions that followed Julius
Caesar in his end, was, that he had well acknowledged the merit of his
servants. But the humor of these ancient virtues is now to seek, and to serve
with loss and prejudice is become even a matter of necessity. Let not the
spur of your affection then post me on so fast to a service, that I repent
me but too late of my more haste than good speed. Nevertheless, because it is
against my nature to be idle, I will do as God shall put in my mind, hoping
to meet with the fortune of some good Crassus; and to that effect let me be
remembered in your prayers, as your prosperity shall daily find a place for it
in mine.

Upon submission of a runnagate and unruly son, the kind father (under hand)
commends him to the service of a worthy friend, under whose shelter necessity
had already driven him.
To my very honorable friend Sir R. etc.
SIr, having always honored and respected you among other my worthy friends,
not only for your virtues, but for a certain kind of I know not what
obligation of nature which inuites me thereunto, I persuade my self that you
also have some instinct and natural inclination of good will toward me.
Whereupon I am drawn with the more boldness to offer you a request I very
much desire to obtain. I am a father; when I say father, you may withal
imagine the tyranny which nature exercises over me in favor of my children.
It has pleased God to give me five sons, of the which I had destined the
third to the service of the Court: but as it commonly fails out, that fathers
purpose courses for their children, and they dispose of them contrary to their
minds, so it happened that he whom I spoke of stole out of England without my
knowledge, about three months ago, and crossing into France, came at length
to Paris, where his means failing him, he has bethought himself, and begins
to represent the parable of the prodigal child unto his father, which I am
very well contented to accomplish. He has craved pardon of me by Letters, and
by the same mean interposed the authority of a kinsman of mine one M. M. a
gentleman of quality, who has been these two years abroad in travel. I
understand he has done his duty unto you, and that you have kindly
entertained him, upon knowledge that he was my son. Now since his fortune
has carried him thither, I shall humbly entreat so much favor of you, as to
take him into your service, with no other privilege then as one of the meanest
in your house. So doing, you shall get two servants at once, the one there with
you in Paris, and the other to receive your commandments in England. If you
can be pleased to satisfy me herein, I wish he should think it were done not
at any instance of mine, but only out of your gentleness, seeing him reduced to
that extremity which in my judgment he is in, whatsoever show he makes. I
hope if you vouchsafe to do him this honor, being in such a school, his
debausche will turn to his good. But howsoever my entreaties run they shall be
always limited with that saying of Cicero. Quod commodo tuo facere possis. I
make no question but there are others that press you with such suites, but
none that have so much desire to do you all service as my self.

Excuse for not coming to congratulate a friends return: with protestation
and comparison of affection with the forwardest.
To my worthy respected friend M. etc.
SIr, it would have been a point of my duty to have come in person for to have
welcomed you home. But seeing my affairs will not permit it, I have sent the
present to supply that office, and to let you understand, that albeit there be
many which for their virtuous qualities do better deserve your love, yet in
regard of my affection, and the continual desire I have to serve and honor
you, there is none more worthy of it than my self. And though you are to hope
for more riches of spirit and fortune from them, than from the poverty of my
understanding and estate: yet are you not to prefer their friendship unto mine.
For if they outreach me in merit, I will go beyond them in good will, and if
the abilities of their mind be more, the sincerity of their heart shall be
less. But herein you are to imitate the liberal, who with a frank and gentle
will imparts of his favors to every necessity; not as a usurer to make profit
of them, but only out of a kind and generous disposition; So it is then you
should be affected toward me, without any expectation of other advantage by
it, than my service, and you are to do it the rather, in that you feel your
self so noble, rich, and virtuous, that whatsoever you can desire or wish for
in another, is abundantly in your own possession, and you have as little
need of fortaine vertnes, as the sea has of the water of little rivers.
Hereupon I will leave to be a further trouble unto you, but not to assure you,
that I desire to live no longer than I shall desire

To serve you.

Thankful acknowledgement of kindness unto ones Son.
SIr, the favors you have lately done me are of such effect and merit, that I
shall never be at quiet till I have made some requital of them. I am ashamed
you should be so troubled with this son of mine, whom I have charged to obey
you in all things as my self, and I pray you do so much as have an eye upon
him as if you were his Father. I thank you very kindly for the apparel you
have made him, and the money you have paid for him: you may accommodate him
with the rest of it as you shall think good. For, for my part, I give you all
power over him, seeing you are pleased to take the trouble upon you, and so
wishing but to meet with some good occasion to acknowledge how much I am
beholding unto you, I commit you to God.

A private taxation of the public ingratitude of great persons toward such as
have best deserved of them.
SIr, Whereas you think it strange that I write no oftener unto the Lady you wot
of: I have always told you, and now tell you again that which I was wont to
say of great Lords, at such time as they deserved it at my hands, that I
remember their greatness and reputation no longer, than they are mindful of
my necessities. He that makes no reckoning of me, teaches me to neglect him,
and he that looks upon me with respect, gives me occasion and desire to serve
him: so that I always go as others go, and no otherwise. You may allege the
many commodities of their favor and countenance, and I may answer that it were
an idle thing for me to trouble my head with a matter I am not sensible of. Do
vt des, facio vt facias; says the love of Lawers: but having done so many
services, and never received so much as a taste of liberality, is the
composition of a water able to quench the fire of an hundred Aetnaes, much more
to discourage me, that otherwise am most ready by all offices of courtesy to
keep the good will of such as please to honor me with the friendship, of which
number, to you, as to one of the most especial, with all affection I commend
me, and bid you farewell.

Excuse for not saluting a friend passing by us: endeavoring (by the way) to
wipe away his imputation of pride and of forgetfulness.
SIr, you told my Cosen that either I was grown proud, or had forgotten you,
because I passed along by you the other day, and did not speak. Now this I
perceive was the cause why you came not along with the rest of the company to
honor me with your presence. But you shall understand that when I met you, I
was so far out of patience with the ingratitude of a wicked friend, which was
newly parted from me, that I continued a whole week together without the
remembrance not only of you, but my self: which together with the knowledge
you are to have of my natural humors, may sufficiently excuse me to either of
your opinions. Besides, I could not forget a Gentleman well derived, happily
married, living with all modesty of his own, a friend to every man, not
meddling nor making with any, one that is contented with his estate, loves
virtue and the virtuous, passes away his time with choice of good company, is
perfect in mind and memory, but of body (to my great grief) somewhat weak and
indisposed. Now judge, Sir, whether I remember you or no, and be no longer
persuaded that either I am proud, or forgetful of you: whose many courtesies
have bound me to be always.

Your affectionate friend and Servant.

A sad commemoration of some worthy friend deceased.
To my singular good friend. M. etc.
SIr, the grief of my kinsmans death has gotten so much interest in my
apprehension that the comfort I was wont to give unto others, is not able now
to do my self any service. Reason disswades me from sorrow, and sense
prouokes me to tears: my power is small, the frailty of the flesh great. I
desire to obey unto the one, the other I cannot resist: so that in the sedition
of so many contrati^ties, I neither understand nor see any thing may content
me. In regard of him I have no cause to complain: he lead the life of a good
man, and died the death of the righteous: for as the Roman Orator says, It is
hard to live well and dye ill. But for my part I have as much reason to lament
as his virtues were without number and end. Howbeit if for mine own particular
I should grieus, whereas for his I am much to rejoice, I shall be thought rather
envious of his good, then a friend of his happiness. I assure my self also that
you take no pleasure in the death of so curteons and worthy a Gntleman, nor in
the loss you have made of one, that for your own good parts and my sake,
loved you as a friend, and respected you as virtuous But not to be a cause
either of more trouble to you, or heaviness to my self, I will cease to
speak further of him, and commending you to God very kindly take my leave.

A grateful acknowledgement of an especial favor from any great man.
To my very Honorable good Lord the Lord etc.
MY Lord I have received the commendations you were pleased to send me by my
brother C. than the which there is no favor I could more desire. Henceforward
I shall begin to think better of my self seeing so noble and honorable a
person has thought me worthy of a place in his remembrance: which intruth was
more requisite for a continuance of your goodness, then for any merit at all
of mine. Howsoever I give your Lordship as humble thanks for it as possibly I
may, albeit I am persuaded that neither with words nor effects I shall ever be
able to satisfy so great an obligatiou. This favor has cleared me of some
doubt I was in, for that I received no answer to the letter I wrote not long
since, in congratulation of your Lordships so deserved aduancements, together
with an humble presentation of my services: but now I perceive the cause of it
proceeded either from the fault of your Secretary, or the negligence of the
post being always well assured that no greatness whatsoever could elate your
mind more then it would be dejected by any adversity the worst of time could
bring. I have nothing to add hereunto but an humble entreaty, that as you were
pleased to remember me with your commendations, so you would vouchsafe to
honor me with your commandments, thereby to give action to the desire I
always have of appearing unto the world how much I am.

Unfeignedly devoted to your service.

A short and sweet consolation in the death of Friends.
SIr, as soon as I understood of the death of M. G. I began to think of you,
and how many times I had said to my self, seeing you always in company
together, like the sign of Gemini, behold an example of true and perfect
friendship. But since it has pleased heaven to divide you: I would wish you to
bear it with patience, and be comforted. For we are not to grieve at who goes
first or last in the way which every man is to take by a necessity of nature.
The world is a residence lent us by the good pleasure of God, and (...) that
continues least in it, is the longer living in happiness. For death does
determine in life, so soon as a righteous spirit does leave that prison,
wherein all the miseries imagination can reach unto are enclosed. What is there
to be seen here upon earth, but envy, injustice, ambition, strife, but good
manners corrupted into barbarous conditions, children and grief, to rich, a
care to poor parents, and a desire for to have unto those that have none? What
is there to be seen but peace engendring war, war shedding blood, sovereignty
a pray to suspicion, subjection the slave of misery and despair, poverty
despised, riches detracted, youth puffed up with rage and insolency, and age
oppressed with infirmity and diseases? wherefore the best is not to be at al, or
not to be long in the way, provided that it all proceed from the good will of
God, whom I humbly beseech to give you that comfort and content I always wish
you.

A modest complement extenuating our own desert in any favor done our friend,
acknowledging all to be but duty.
SIr, I see no reason why by your letters you should thank me for the
pleasures you say you have received of me, unless it be to encourage me that
have been but slack that way heretofore to do better hereafter. To say the
truth, it proceeds from no merit of mine, but from a courtesy that was born
with you, and will accompany you to your grave. For, for my part I do not
think one can be beholding to a man for doing his duty. If you please then
you shall not put these thanks unto account, but turn them into commandments:
upon him that will always most gladly employ himself for you and yours
induced thereunto both by the friendship that has ever been betwixt us, and a
thousand other particularities, the recital whereof would but wast time and
paper. And whereas you write that you fear you are troublesome unto me,
considering the greatness of my affairs: the greatest trouble I can have, is
when I shall not be troubled for you, if at any time you have occasion to use
me, as shall be approved to your experience in all matters where the least of
my abilities may do you service.

A gentle and easy submission to some new direction or alteration of our
commission.
To the right honorable my especial good Lord and Master The Lord etc.
MY honorable Lord, your last of the fourth of Iulie came not before this
morning to my hands, whereby I understand the change of your mind concerning
my voyage into France: and although for mine own particular I could have
wished it otherwise, yet reason persuades me to be contented, assuring my self
that this reuocation is derived from some better resolution. Wherefore I had
rather my desires should want their end, than your pleasure, that your L. may
always know I hold more of modesty and discretion, than of appetite and will,
and that mine own satisfactions are nothing to the respect of your greatness
and service. As Soon as I received your dispatch, I began to negotiate about
the other matter, and by the next your Lordship shall understand what may be
done. In the mean time and ever I remain

Your honors very humble and faithful servant.

Recommendation of a forward son to the favor and entertainment of some
famous Captain in the wars.
SIr, albeit it were reason that your not knowing me should free you from the
trouble of my Letters, yet since it has pleased Sir William I. to recommend my
son unto you, I thought I should have wronged my duty, if I had not
accompanied him with the present. I have destined him to the wars, and he
has been about some three years abroad in travel, during which time he
has given himself unto diverse noble exercises well be fitting his profession.
At his return I thought if he could receive so much honor as to be favored
by you, he might facilitate a way for the time to come, which every good and
valiant mind is to propound unto it self. And because I know that you are the
example of virtue, not only in the subject of Arms, but in every other, I
beseech you to respect him as the son of a father, that exceedingly desires
to find a place in the number of your humble and most devoted servants.

A Complement most officious and affectionate to a Lady concerning some serious
affairs of hers.
To the noble and every way excellent Lady, the Lady etc.
MAdam, I had rather effects should testify the desire I have to do you
service, than the courtesy of that good gentleman M. B. for so should I both
serve you and satisfy my self, whereas by the other neither of us reapes any
commodity at all. You are no way beholding to me for soliciting my Lord of N.
or putting Sir George L. in mind of your affairs. For to the one you have no
need of recommendation, nor to the other of remembrance. The former (according
to his noble inclination) much respects you, and desires your honor and profit
as much as his own: and the other, as well to gratify my said Lord, as for
his particular obligation to your Ladyship, wishes for nothing more than
occasion to do you pleasure. It is not therefore in so small a matter as that
I desire to obey you, but in things of such difficulty, as may show how I am
even covetous of receiving your commandments.

I will say no more at this time, but wish my prayers could obtain you such
fortunes as your virtues deserve, and then I am sure you should be no less
than Empress of the world. Only as I was making up the present, this enclosed
paper came to my hands, which I have sent you as a thing I know you would very
feign see. After you have read it, I must entreat, for some reasons, it may be
committed to the custody of the fire: and so in all duty and affection I
kiss your hand.

By the humble servant of your commandments.

A pleasant Ironie, in commendation of Law, and the commodity of Law Suites.
To my dearly beloved brother M. etc.
GOod brother, I would never have thought that a suit in law could have brought
so many blessings with it as it does. Are you slothful and lazy? make no
doubt but you shall find matter enough to keep you from idleness: you need
no better a raiser of you up in a morning than a suit. Are you proud and
disdainful? I warrant you shall have sufficient cause to court not only the
Judges, but your Counsel and Attorney, nay by my faith their very Clerk. If
of a dull and heavy disposition, you shall meet with store of invention how to
keep you out of your enemies danger. If shamefast, necessity will teach you
rather to be impudent than otherwise. If covetous, no help for it in the
world like this: for there is no commodity in the land bears such a price as
the law does. A man is to pass through so many hands, and every finger ketcheth
somewhat. Besides for the desire we have to obtain our ends, we never think
what it will cost us, till we come to the bottom of our purses. I am sure I
have made dear experience of all this. And they are great blessings I must
needs say, but God keep you from them. Well I have iested enough, it is time
for me now to tell you in good earnest that I think there is no passion more
eager, or that fills our heads so full of proclamations as this does. I will not
except the three torments of our spirit, love, ambition, and avarice: for in
this there is a mixture of the two last, accompanied with a desire of revenge,
which produces very marvelous effects in us. The Italian says, that no man
knows what pleasure it is to be revenged, but he that has received the
injury.

A pretty controversy compounded in a witty complement.
SIr, I know not whether I should excuse the slacknesse of my pen, or accuse
your negligence. For my part, the trouble of my continual emploiment, well
known both to you and every man, may justly clear me of this fault: but the
leisure and good commodity you always have to write, cannot free you from
blame. Nevertheless, not to cast away our money in suits, which you know are
everlasting, full of hazard, and subject to the inconstancy, ambition, and
wickedness of the most part of the Lawyers of these times, I am contented to
stand to the judgment of your own conscience; or if you will, like good
Merchants that have cleared accounts, let us make general releases, so that
neither shall remain debtor to the other. But if you will needs go to Law, I
am agreed: for having reason for my Attorney, and truth for counsel in my
cause, if by the power of bribes you corrupt not the Judges, I doubt not but to
have a verdict of my side. Now of these two ways I leave the best to your
election: assuring you, that albeit you have overcome me with offices of
courtesy, yet have you not gone beyond me either in love or judgment, to
know that I owe more to your good will than ever I shall be able to furnish.
But if an honest mind alone could serve for payment of so many obligations,
make account I should easily satisfy greater debts than these. Whereupon I
inuoke the grace of time that may bring me some such opportunity, as may
thoroughly approve the sincerity of my heart to your experience. In the mean
space let me entreat you to give me occasion to do you service: for I cannot
receive a commandment from any friend unto whom I more desire to obey than
your self, with the assurance whereof I will here conclude, and commit you to
God.

A brief answer to a bitter Complaint upon a false ground.
SIr, I am sorry for the wrong you do your self in complaining of me
without cause. I thought we should have seen you here in the Country ere
this, and it greeues me you came not, as well in regard I have lost the
occasion to give you the entertainment of my house, as that I might have freed
you from this passion of profit which so detaines you from discerning the
truth. But since I cannot do it in person, you are to understand by this
paper, that I have nothing to do now in the Office where you are assigned the
payment of your pension. I have past it over unto another who can give you
satisfaction if he will. Wherefore you have no reason to say you will plain
of me, seeing I have done nothing but that I should. If this will not content
you, within seven or eight days at the farthest, I shall be at London, where
we may meet, and confer more at large of matters. In the mean time
commending me unto you, I commit you to God.

An earnest and elegant entreaty, importuning the assistance of some friend in
any matter of importance, and that with expedition.
To my honorable friend Sir Henry T.
SIr, I will begin with the saying of Plato and Marcus Cicero, because I
persuade my self that the authority of such personages, and the efficacy of
their words will be of more power and esteem with you than mine: although to
incite you to any office of courtesy, whereunto a natural addiction makes you
forward enough of your self, I cannot think there is need of more than a
bare and simple entreaty. Man (say they) is not borne for himself alone, but
for his Country, for his parents, for his friends, and for all other men. And
even as Nature, the universal Mother of all things created, does not produce
so many kinds of beasts, herbs, trees, fruits, metals and stones for her self
only, but freely imparts unto us of those her riches: so we that are to
imitate her liberality, must not be sparing of those abilities and means
which either fortune or our own virtue has acquired us for the good and
relief of others. This being so, I cannot doubt that you, in whom is such a
concurrence of excellent parts, will be wanting to the necessity of my
present affair. And albeit the quality of my deserts, the integrity of my
heart, the respect of my services, and other points appertaining to the
judgment of liberality, cannot induce you thereunto, yet let the love and
obedience I have ever born you, supply all other defects. But that my Letter
may not run out all into preface, nor you be wearied with the long narration
of a matter well enough known to you already, I will refer the rest to the
sufficiency and trust of M. H. For seeing you understand my occasion, I must
hope you will be pleased to take order for it, as with much facility and very
commodiously you may. And because that obtaining this grace, if withal,
expedition be not made, it would be as good as time lost: may it please you,
having taken upon you the one, to undergo the trouble of the other, which will
be of that import in my behalf, that be assured I shall be your perpetual
debtor for it, notwithstanding any satisfaction in the world I can ever be
able to make. Sir Richard G. in the exercise of this favor, as in all other
generous actions, will not fail to second you, since I am so desirous to do
very humble service to you both, and to you especially, and that with all
honor, respect, and as much affection, as I earnestly beseech the Almighty to
add many years of prosperity to your present happiness.

A kind quarrel of unkindness with a friend for leaving us unseen and
unsaluted having in a manner passed by our door.
To my approved good friend M. Richard. T.
MY best friend your departure from M. contrary to my hope and your
determination has not so much displeased me, for the matter you know of, as
in that you passed along so close by me, without taking possession of a house,
and that, that depends on it, which is as much at your commandment as the very
thoughts of your heart, but especially in that you let flip an occasion to
experience how much I desire to acknowledge the many kindnesses I have received
from you: Howbeit seeing it was your pleasure so to do, these letters shall
make faith of my good will, far readier to any thing that concerns your
reputation or profit, than to write. By this time I believe you have heard from
my Gentleman, who it may be will show himself so much my friend as to make me
sue for my money, if it be so, I pray tell him I would not wish him to give me
occasion, that whereas now I talk to him inpriuate, I should complain of him
in public. For there is no reason I should suffer prejudice by another
ingratitude. I have sent you here enclosed the letter I have written unto him
unsealed, that you may read it and then make it up, hoping notwithstanding that
you have so prevailed with him, as he shall not need to see it. If you know
any thing wherein I may serve you, I shall always be more willing to obey,
then you to command. To the assurance whereof I leave you, and my self to be

Ever truly your friend.

Intercession for favor and remission in the behalf of one that has
offended, and is unfeignedly sorry for his fault.
SIr, not being able (as I had well hoped) to obtain any favor of my Lord:
for in the behalf of the poor fellow, I thought good to have recourse unto
your intercession for him He is so penitent and fully resolved to become a new
man, that this good purpose of amendment in him, together with the punishment
of his indurance, is worthy not only of excuse, but of pardon for his fault.
If herein you do that which I could not, you shall bind me to a continual
endeavor to deserve it: and the time may come my Lord may thank you for the
means you shall give him to exercise mercy and gentleness, which should be
conformable to the many other noble qualities over in him.

I send you here enclosed the latin verses, which by your commandment I have
apparelled in English, and that too I assure you with the best clothes in my
shop: but if they be not fitting to the greatness of their quality, I commend
them to the Wardrobe of your most precious ornaments, and you to the protection
of the Almighty.

To importune a friend to prosecute to perfection any business already begun.
SIr, I find so much difficulty in the officers about the payment of the
money, it has pleased my Lord to bestow on me, that if you had not been the
mediator of this liberality, I fear I should have gone without. Wherefore I
beseech you, as before you were the means for the grant of it, so now you
would be the means for the payment of it: Which will be the easier for you to
do, in that the former depended on the will of another, and this of your own.
I cannot be beholding to you for the one without the other, for it will be to
no purpose if they be not joined together. I humbly entreat you then to do it,
as you are bound both to the goodness of your own disposition still enclining
to the aid of your friends, and to me that have always desired to do you
service, as also to the world unto whom it is not unknown how much I have ever
loved and respected you. Let me not be deceived in the hope I have always had
of your favor, especially in a matter that will be very prejudicial to me,
and no way pleasing to my Lord. I will not press you farther at this time,
because I am persuaded that my entreaties cannot be of more power with you,
then your own judgment which knows what is fit for you to do, and necessary
for me to have done: So that committing you to that readiness of will I have
ever found you accompanied with in all my occasions, I rest,

Yours always as ready to serve you.

A particular account of sundry businesses committed to ones care.
To the Worshipful my very good Master M. R. S. etc.
SIr, may you be pleased to take account of such commandments as you charged
me withal at my coming up: of the which to begin with the money due from M.
B. I have received it in, and paid it over here, according to your direction
in that case, to be repaid you again in the Country: for the other bonds that
are in suit, your Attorney promises that faithfulness and care which both you
expect and he in duty is to have. M. R. is not yet in town for there is not any
day but I am at his lodging to enquire after him: to morrow or next day he is
expected, and he shall be no sooner come but I will follow him very close for
a dispatch of that business. I know not well what to say to your suite with my
Lord, every day begets new difficulties, and I doubt some secret opposition
from the party you spoke of when last you discoursed unto me of this matter,
and herein, M. P. my Lords Secretary iumps with me in opinion, if it be so, he
says nothing will prevail but your presence, which if I shall find to be
needful I will so advertise you by the next. Of those things which I am to buy
for my mistrisse so many as the time and my other employments would permit me
to provide, I have sent down now by this bearer, the rest God willing shall
come along with the carrier. Here is no news at all stirring but such idle
stuff as I would be loath by a delivery of it to hold you from your serious
and better employment.

Wherefore very humbly recommending my duty to you, and my good mistress, I
cease to be a further trouble, and rest

Always your humble servant.

A most Christian consolation of a friend in any cross or affliction.
SIr, I cannot doubt but you are persuaded that the tribulations wherewithal
we are afflicted in this life, do not proceed from chance or fatal destiny,
but from a special providence of God, without the which, not so much as an
hair can fall from any of our heads, as the Prophet Amos does insinuate, when
he says, There is no evil in the City which I have not sent. This also is
manifested in Job, whom Satan could not touch without permission first obtained
for it. Afflictions are assured signs of election, so that if you observe the
whole course of the Scriptures, you shall find that those whom God favored
most, he always gave to drink of the cup of his passion: witness Abell,
persecuted by Cain, Isaac by Ismael, Joseph by his brethren, David by Absalom,
and the children of Israel by Pharao. Out of a sensible consideration whereof
Saint Paul said, If we had no other hope in Jesus Christ, but in this present
life, we might well say we were the most miserable amongst men. But the worst
that we endure is nothing in comparison of that which God himself endured:
who though he created all things was termed the son of a Carpenter, was
persecuted, was slandered, was said to be a glutton, a drunkard, a lover of
Publicanes and sinners, a wicked seducer, and one that in the name of Beelzebub
cast out Devils. If we consider what he became for us, we shall see him
naked to cloth us, a prisoner and in bonds to loose us from the chains of
darkness, and a sacrifice to purify us: We shall see his side opened to shut
up hell for us, we shall see those hands that made heaven and earth, pierced
with sharp nails for the love of us, and his head crowned with pricking
thorns to crown us with glory. From his sorrow comes our joy, from his
infirmity our strength, from his death and burial, our life and resurrection.
Comfort your self then in the Lord, and with patience bear the Crosses which
it has pleased him to lay upon you, for his arm is not shortened, but in his
good time will either take you from these miseries, or these miseries from you.
Now many us there yet living in the world whom, oppressed with infinite
calamities, every way forsaken, and utterly boide of all hope of succor, he at
length beheld with a merciful eye, and has placed them in a far better and
more contented estate than ever they were in before. Wherefore trust in God,
and say with that great and holy martyr Ignatius, Let ^er, let hangmen, let
beasts, and all the devils in hell exercise their greatest fury on me, so that
I may enjoy the Lord my God, whom in all my prayers I will heartily beseech to
give you a speedy and happy issue out of all your troubles.

An earnest recommendation of a well qualified servant, to some place worthy of
his part.
To my worthy and most expected friend M. etc.
SIr, as long as you shall be accompanied with a desire to oblige me unto
you, by so many gentle offices of courtesy as continually you show me, I
shall never want boldness to give you occasion still to do it: and the
rather, because I know not any unto whom I would more willingly be beholding
then to so kind and generous disposition as yours. The present bearer Philip
A. is more then ordinarily affected to your service, and knowing the love and
respect I bear you, is persuaded that my interposure will not be a little
available in that behalf, so that he has very earnestly entreated me out
of my interest to make him a way to your favor: and I have undertaken it, for
that I make no question but it will turn to his no little good, and your
greater commodity. For he is a civil, discreet, and very honest young man, he
has his latin tongue perfect, speaks Italian, is pretily seen in the French,
writes fair two or three hands, sings well, plays on the vyall, and indeed is
every way better qualified than I deliver him, as will appear to your
judgment, upon the examination you shall make of his parts, to the which I
will refer him, and wish he may no less exceed the hope I have given you of
him, than you the promise I have made him of your goodness. If I have as much
power with you, as the world thinks, and is due to the greatness and integrity
of my affection, I doubt not but to hear ere it be long, that this commendation
of mine is happily arrived at the port of his deseri: Howsoever, my entreaty
should press you further, were I not assured that you will think you are not
to be importuned for one that of himself is most worthy of regard and your
entertainment. Wherefore to make an end of my sure and your trouble, I will
here give end to the present, and allwaies be most desirous to do you service.

An amorous complement upon the first sight, or after some short parley.
SWeetest Mistress F. as soon as it was my good hap to have a sight of some
part of those many graces and perfections, which every able judgment does not
only commend, but admire in you: I was not long in resolving with my self
whether I should serve and love a creature so rare and worthy to be desired.
But I was longer in discoursing on the difference there is between your worth
and my little value, with the small occasion you have to regard me,
considering I have not been yet so fortunate as to meet with any opportunity
that might furnish me with means to testify unto you how much I am truly
devoted to your service. Neither could I so soon resolve whether I might
presume to discover the hurt I received by the encounter of your beauties, and
that affable patience which the other day you were pleased to accommodate unto
my rude and tedious discourse, whereas you deserved the entertainment of a
far more accomplished spirit. Nevertheless, relying on the greatness and
integrity of my affection, and the goodness of your gentle disposition, I
have not feared in all humility to make an offer of that command and power
which in so short a time you have gotten over me, and which I very humbly
beseech you to accept of: so shall you have a servant, that in all things will
yield you as much obedience, as now with most zealous affection I kiss your
fair and lovely hand.

An earnest protestation of perpetual love and loyalty.
To my ever honored Mistrisse Mrs. Jane H.
DEarest Mistrisse, whenever you can enter into any doubt of my loialtie,
think there is no truth remaining on the earth: for suspecting that, you call
even certainty it self into question. I will always be more ready to
consent unto the hate of my self, than to the love of any other beauty, which
I know must be as far inferior to the perfection of yours, as yours is
above all others worthy and admirable. I beseech you then to take this
assurance of your slave, that all the power he can ever have over his life and
being, is altogether consecrated to your service, and that heaven never
established any thing more durable than his inclination to honor you with all
the fidelity and affection you can possibly desire: so that the worst of
absence, fate, or misfortune, shall serve but for better proof and experience
of it: to the which in all humility I leave you, and my self to be nothing
when I am not

Wholly and only yours.

A sad ecstasy for the absence of your Mistrisse.
To my truly-loued Mistress Mrs. Mary S.
I Did always think (worthy Mistress) that amorous passions had their
effects more approaching to extremes than any other, and that whatsoever
proceeded from them could not be imagined by discourse. The experience which
now I so dearly make, fully assures me of it. I have only tasted the
pleasure one receives from the sight of a thing truly beloved, and thereby
apprehend the perfection of content which the fruition yields. But I am at this
instant so strangely touched with grief for the privation both of the one and
the other, that he that feels it not, is not able to conceive it, and he
that feels it is not able to express it. I digest it then with as much
patience, as pleases necessity, but yet exceedingly honored in that I suffer
for so rare and worthy a subject, and live, or rather entertain the
weariness of my life, with so sweet a remembrance, and with the representation
of so fair and Idea as yours. Provided also, that you chase not mine
altogether from your eyes, but let them see the image of your slave so
replenished with fidelity in his servitude, that it shall sooner fail in
Heaven than in him. And let not (I beseech you) your fair unspotted soul,
which always has produced actions elonged and clear from the imperfections
of other base and common spirits, be subjected to the ordinary effects of time
and absence; but rather live contented with affecting him that will die adoring
you: unto whom, as hitherto I have, so will I ever be

The faithfullest of all Servants.

A Loue-letter, or the sum of Lovers Rhetorike, in two figures, viz.
Flattery and Faining.
To the most accomplished and rarely qualified Gentlewoman Mrs. Jane H.
IF either the excellencies of your beauty were less, or they less known to
you than I know they are, I would not marvel (fairest of all fair) if the
presumption of these lines should give you cause of marvel. But where there is
such an admirable concurrence of perfections as in your most accomplished
self; I hold it impossible for any composition of mortality to be proof
against them: from whence I may well derive an assurance, that you cannot
think it strange, if I say, (as indeed I truly may) that notwithstanding any
opposition which by the ablest seconding of reason I could make, I find my
self but flesh and blood, too weak a temper to withstand the irresistable
assaults of your prevailing eyes, prevailing I may well term them, that in a
moment have not only deprived me of my liberty, leaving me nothing free save
the zeal of an unfeigned devotion to your service; but reduced my will, and
every power of my soul under the subjection of such Laws as shall please
either your rigor or mercy to ordain. Seeing then I can have no other being
but that which would be far more wretched than wretchedness it self,
unless you please to bless it with the happiness of your favor, then let
not the refusal of it (I beseech you) be the cause of his death, that cannot,
nay that will not live without it, but confer such compassion and regard on
my sufferings, as the gracious sweetness of your innated goodness does
promise, and as is due to the infiniteness of my affection: which for faith
and loyalty shall always be incompatible of all comparison, and for
constancy so unmatched, that neither time nor fortune, which unto all things
under Heaven bring alteration and end, shall ever be of power to shake it with
the least motion of change, or determine it sooner than the latest instant of
my breath. And this I vow with as much resolution, as I humbly pray you would
vouchsafe to let me understand how you please to dispose of your creature, who
together with his life and fortunes is and eternally will be

The very slave of your commandments.

Another of like Argument.
To the fair, but far more unkind Gentlewoman, Mistrisse Elizabeth C.
HAd I any power left me (cruel Beauty) over my desires, I could be
contented to discourse alone with my self on the passion of my too wretched
condition, without importuning so obdurate an heart as yours, that unwilling to
free me, takes pleasure to entertain me in it: but since love has wholly
reduced them under his laws, and the subjection of your commandments; pardon
me I beseech you, if constrained by them, I have recourse to your pity, as
the only mean I can hope for of deliverance from the torment of my pains. And
were it not proper to the sweetness of your disposition, yet you owe it unto
him that honors you more than all the world, that adoreth you as the only
mark of divinity which he acknowledges here below, that has no life but
by you, that desires it not but for you, and to be so happy as to spend it in
your service: whereunto I am so devoted, that truth shall sooner fail in the
ordinances of Heaven, than in this resolution of mine. Accept this my devotion
then, and ruling it by what Laws you please, draw out of it all the proofs
which either my life or death are able to give you. And let not cruelty, that
has some limit even in those to whom it is natural, be the perpetual stain
of your fair virtues, nor permit me to find more grace in death than in you;
who griened with my miseries, may rather end them by the end of my life, than
you by the grant of your favor, which only is of power to make me the
happiest, as without it I am now

The most unhappiest of men.

Another not unlike.
OF all other most cruel Mistress, to my infinite grief I find, that no
greater happiness can arrive unto wretched lovers, than to meet with death
whenever they call for it. Upon the writing of my last unto you, I did not
think the Bearer at his return should have found me alive. And yet, alas! I
live still, but strangely grieved because I cannot die, and that there is no
hope of remedy for me in any but in you, who it seems takes delight to
entertain me in torments. My tears wherewithal you see this paper all
beblubbered, and my passions together, will not suffer me to say any more, but
only once for all to put my self upon your mercy, from the which if speedily
I receive not comfort, ever after it will come too late. And this I protest as
far from dissimulation as I am near unto mine end.

Another of the same.
To the sweet and virtuous Gentlewoman Mris. etc.
GEntle Mistress I. If I did think the enemity of our parents had as much
interest in your thoughts, as love has in mine, I would rather dye to give you
satisfaction, then live to be hated of a gentle woman whom I affect and honor
more then all the world. But assuring my self that so sweet and accomplished
a beauty as yours, cannot be accompanied with any such unfriendly disposition,
as to wish ill unto him, that far beyond all reach of apprehension is
unfeignedly devoted to your service, I presume to entreat you to have so much
regard to your own goodness and the compassion of my endurings, as to grant me
the favor of an access, that so I may have opportunity to acquaint you: more
at large with that, which I hope will redound to your contentment, and my
infinite good. And this me thinks I should promise my self out of that more
than ordinary respect and good countenance which of late it has pleased you to
show me, at least wise, if flattering my self, I do not wrongfully apply that
to my particular advantage, which is indifferently conferred on others by the
courtesy of your gracious nature. Howsoever in all devotion I attend your
resolution heerunto: and no less heartily beseeching the Almighty to continue
you in his grace, than I desire to live and dye in yours, I commit you to this
assurance, that I am no longer mine own but

Altogether at your disposing.

Another, no less earnest, though perhaps less honest.
To the excellent in all beauty, beauteous Mistress Francis R.
SO long as I was able by any strength of reason or other seconding whatsoever
(fairest mistress R.) to make head against the violence of those passions,
which for a long time together have very strangly afflicted me, I never offered
more than by looks, to discover them unto you, who only are the cause of them,
and only can give them remedy. But now that I find my ablest forces to be but
a weak and unprofitable resistance against the fury of my sufferings, which
continually assault me with such apprehensions of torments, that all the
pains in the world put together, and compared with them are but light and
tolerable, pardon me, I humbly pray, if casting my self at the feet of your
mercy, I presume with all the vows of my soul to employ such commiseration of
my case, as the present extremity of it requires. If you look unto my deserts,
I know them to be most unworthy of the least regard. It is not upon them I
must stand (for indeed what merit can stand before the eminence of your worth)
but if you deigne to descend so low as the consideration of your servant, look
I beseech you with a pitiful and rewarding eye unto the integrity of my
faith, the resolution of my constancy, the truth of my affection, and the
unbounded zeal I leave to the obedience of your commandment, these are they
whereupon I build the hopes of your favor, and that is it alone whereunto all
my wishes run, there is nothing to be desired I so much desire; in regard of
it the whole empire of the world should be of a very vile and contemptible
respect with me. Upon whom then can you better or more worthily confer it,
then on him that holds it in so high an estimation, and that by all the duties
of an humble, loyal, and truly devoted service will before all others
whatsoever ever seek to continue you for his sweetest and gracious mistress,
as I hope and infinitely pray you would be pleased to appear unto me in your
return heereunto. Upon the expectation whereof I have utterly disclaimed all
other being, to be

Wholly your creature.

A seemly answer to such a Suitor.
To Master H.
SIr, if I carried as little respect to my husbands good, as it appears you
have care of your own safety, I might quickly take a course would prove as
prejudicial to you, as the lewdness of your presumption deserves. You very
much mistake me if you take me to be any of those, unto whom it seems you make
a common practice of such addresses, for by the grace of God I will always
beany thing sooner, than a subject fitting for one of your filthy disposition.
I marvel what should move you to assail me in this sort? has my behavior
been so light (for sure I am I never exchanged word with you in my life) or my
looks so wanton to encourage you unto it? No, I defy you, and all the world
in that regard, and I think if I should put it upon your conscience, you must
say my carriage has ever been such, as would rather mortify then stirrs up
such wicked and unlawful affections. But what do I mean to contest thus with
a man, that has no other ends or consideration then the satisfaction of his
brutish desires, and to that purpose would set upon even modesty and chastifie
themselves were they to be seen under the form of women. In a word then,
since you perceius my inclination to be as far from yours, as yours is from
all virtue and goodness, I would wish you, if you love your life, to desist
from molesting me any more in this kind: otherwise be you well assured I will
make you feel how dangerous it is to attempt the honor of such, as hold it in
a far more esteem than their dearest lives.

FINIS.

