A SHORT DECLARATION OF THE LIVES AND DOCTRINDE OF THE PROTESTANTS AND
PVRITANS, VVHER BY ONE OF INDEP^ENT IVDGMENT MAY KNOW THE holiness of their
Religion.

AS the good tree is known by the good fruits, so the Evil tree by the Evil
fruits.

Math. 7. A ROVEN, PRENTET IN THE PRNT HOVS OF MARIN MICHEL

1615.

ADMONITION TO THE READER.
THE Son of God (Gentle Reader) Shows us in the Gosoell of S. mat. 1Z.
Mathewe that as the good tree is known by the good frutis: so the evil tree
is known by the evil fruits Christ by this similitude teaches us how we may
know and distingish the Godly Pastors and doctors of the true Church of God,
from the decitfull troupres of heretics, which come to us clothed in the
Sheep skine of piety and simplicity but yet within are Ravening wolves
killars of men's Souls for as the Godly Pastors of the Church of God are
known by their good works so the seditious troops of hereiques are known by
their Evil works if any man will compare the purity of doctrine and holy
Lives of the Pastors and Doctors of the Catholic Roman Church with the
pestilent Doccaine and abhominabll lives of our Protestants and Puretane, he
shall find as great differnce between them as is between light and darkness,
life, and death, good and Evil.

As concerning the holy Ancient Fathers you shall see them agree amongst them
selves in unity of doctrine, allthought they have been seueered one from ane
other in diverse places and ages of the world, adorned with rare holiness of
life and Innumerabll Miraclee as an Infallible testimony of God approouing
both their lives and doctrine as aceeptable unto him.

But if you will considder our Protestants and Puritans lives and doctrine you
sheall see such a confusion in their doctrine different one from an other, and
abominable lives without all Miracles, that it is a wonder how any man settled
in his natural wits should follow such vnrullie sellwes to Evident perdition.

As concerining their doctrine 3 thing are to be considered. The confesion of
their erroneous opinions. The liberty they give to all kind of Evil. The
contempt of good woorks as not profitalle to Salvation.

Toiching the confusion of their Erroneous opinions, you must understand that
in the smoeke of Luthers heresy more then tow hundredth damnable opinions were
Engendered by diverse lofty brains (as Rhetius in his atheisms deelareth)
which have dasled the Eyes of many Ignorant souls with such a thic^e mist of
diverse heresies that many thousand souls not knowing what they do go
astray with a wandering foete from the way of Salvation to Evident perditon.

As there is but one line to level rightly to the mark, a hundereth ways to
shut a stray: so there is but one true faith and Religion, whereby true
Christians go to Heaven but an hundredth false faiths and Religions which lead
Ignorant souls and un Godly men to Eternal damnation.

when the Catholics reprotch the Protestants of their desagreeing in the
Chiefest heads of Religion, many of them now a days answer, that a man maybe
saved in any Religin that is prefessed, pouyding he believe to be saved in the
Blood of Christ.

This is the cause wherefore they say althought the Maesse, praying to the
Saints, honoring of Images in Temples be Idolatry nevertheless that good
Papists may be saved in any Religion, because they believe in Christ this is
ane of the greatest deceits that Satan could invent for the damnation of man
when he persuadetd him that he may be saved in any Religon that is professed
in the world prouyding he believe to be saved in the Blood of Christ for when a
man is surely persuadetd to be saved this way, he cares not of what Relagion
he be, whether he be a Protestant or Puritan, Trinitar or Anabaptist,
Caeholque or heretic beeause that all Reliegions are a like to him prouyding
he believe in Christ, and so by this persuasion of Satan he abides with alse
great security in a false Religion, which leads Ignornt souls to Evident
perdition as if he were in a true Religion, which is but one. and likewise the
only sure way to salvation.

Moreover according to the false opinion of Protestants all heretics which
ever were since the birth of Christ (how blasphemous that euere their heresies
were against God) should be saved, as Arrius which deny the divinity of
Christ, Pelagius which affirmed that man might be saved by hes owen proper
virtue without the grace of God and all other suchlike blasphemous heretics,
because they did belue in Christ and presesse them selves to be Christians and
so every one should go as securely to Heaven with a false faith and
blassphemous Religion, which opinion is so contrapie to the holy Scaripture and
upright Reason that it is a wonder how such an opinian should enter in the
brain of man.

For S. Paul says, that there is but one faith as there is but one God*
Ephesians. 4.5. hebr. 12.6.
so he that has not this faith which is but one and worshipe not this God
truly which is also but one can nowise be saved, for it is Impossible says S.
Paul to be acceptable to God without faith, where S. Paul speaks of true
faith which is but one, and not false faiths which are many for. Turques Jews
and heretics believe all in God but all by false faiths, and likewiise serve
him by a false Religion.

Christ to this purpose says: he that will not hear the Church let him be
unto the as an heathen man and publicane. Mat. 18 17.
It is most sure that heathen Infidells have no participation with Christ and
his passion, nor yet heretics and Schismatiques severed from the Church of
God by Excommunication, which Christ compares to heathen Infidells, because
they will not hear or obey the Church of God as Christ Commands them to do.

So a man which has not the true faith of Christ which is but one, and is not
within the true Church of God, which is also but one can nowise attain to
Salvation.

This opinion is also contrary to upright Reason* because (as is mentioned,
above) there is but one way to lenell Rightly to the mark but an hundredth
ways to shute by: so there is but one true faith and Religion to go to
Heaven, but an hundredth false faiths and Raliginos whereby Ignorant souls go
to Endless miseereic. Luther in cap. ad Galall. in sermon. de Moyse et in cap.
20. exoe 20. exodus Calvin. lib. 2. inst. cap. 7. sect. 14.
Thus much concerning their manifold heresies and confusion of our new
Gospellers doctrine.

The second point which is to be remarked in their doctrine is that they teach
men to be made free from the keeping of all Laws as much of God as of man by
their faith in Christ and liberty of their Gospel. so according to this
doctrine men may adore Idols, blaspheme the Name of God contemn and disobey
their Father and Mother, co^mite Murder and Slaughter, Incest, fornication,
and adultery, thifte perjury or any other suchlike crimes without any scruple
of conscience, because they are not bound in conscience to keep the Law of
God, as Luther, Calvin and all our Protestants and Puritans do teach us whose
proper words you shall see hereafter cited in the. 54. Chapter, wherein we
prove that the Protestants and Puritans by their Pestilent doctrine lead
Ignorant souls to a theisme and plain Infidelity.

The third point which is to by marked of their doctrine is that they teach
that the best works, Luther in assert. drt 31.32.36. Call. lib. 3 Inst. cap.
12. sect, 4. et cap. 14 sect. 6.
which Issue from Godly Chrstians are but deadly sins, when they are weighted
in the Judgment of God, so according to this rule of their doctrine it is all a
like to adore God or to worshipe an Idol, to praise God or to blaspheme his
holy Name, to honnour his parents or contemn them to kill a man or save his
life, to sleep with his Nighbonrs wife or with his owen, to with holld his
Neighbors goods or to render them, to declare in Judgment the truth or to
foresware him self, to keep promise or to breach the same, to fast and pray,
or to spend his time in wan to nesse and Banqueting, to spoil a poor man or
give him alms, for do what you list in all these or suchlike other things,
all your works are but deadly sins in the Judgment of God, which deserve no
other reward but damnation.

By this same rule of doctrine when man go to their Churches to preach or
here the preaching, to give or receive the communion to fast and prair upon
sunday to Exco^municat Catholics for not obeing their laws. all these works
of Religion are but deadly sin^es, which is the service of Satan and not of
God because sin is from Satan and acceptable service done to him, as S. Ihon
writteth, and contrariwise it is hateful and odiouis to God as cotraria to his
holy will. 1 Ihon. 3.8.


They teach by the same rule that it is but folly to a man to pain him self
to do any good works, because that when he has done all that lies in his
power it is but a deadly sin, which can not help him to Heaven. wha^ should
a man do then in this Religion but pass his time in the mirriesse, and so
believe to be save in the Blood of Christ, and so he shall go mirrily to
Heaven without all pain and strife.

Now good Reader if you will Iucge sinccrly according to the truth, all
partiality, will you not say that this Religion of the Protestants is more
like to Epicurus Religlon, where all liberty is given to satisfy the
concupissonce of the fleyh than the Religion of Chaist, which restrineth the
concupissance in all disordained desires by preacaing of penitence in asses and
Secke Cloth, by diligent watching in fasting and praying to keep us from
tentation of the flesh the Devil and the wordl. The Religion of Christ
commands to figbt lawfully against the concupissanee of the Eyes the
sinful lust of the flesh, and disordained pleasours of the word: but the
Religion of the Protesto^ts is altogether Effeminaate which yields obedience
to the lust of the flesh, concupissance of the Eyes, and worldly pleasours
which may content the concupissance. The Religion of Christ commands us to
enter unto Heaven by the steraite way of virtue and penionce. But the Religion
of the Protestants leads wordly man mirryly to Hell by the broad way of
carnal liberty and concupissence of the flesh to thie same, so that freely
without all scruple of conscience they may commit any sin they please,
because they are mad free from all laws by liberty of their Gospel.

If Satan would have transformed him self in the shape of a Minister to preach
in a Pulpite, what Greater liberty would he have given men to sin then our
Gospellers have given to their auditors by the liberty of their Gospel, for
good works are contemned by them as nowise profitable to saluarion, and sin
is Cheerihed amongst them ts nothing hurtful to saluarion these are the heads
of Religion which may of the Ministers of England profess, Referie Exode
Guliel. Reginaldus lib. 4. page 10. ct 20.
as VVilliame Keinold a learned English man reports.

First such are deceived as think to be saved by many good works.

Secondly ti is not necessary to work good works to attainae to Salvation,
because we are sure thereof by faith.

Thirdly that it is a great error to think that good works may help to
Salvation,

Fourthly sin does not diminish the Glory of God, all the damage is in the
slander of our Nighbour.

Fyftly Jesus Christ by his Blood has delivered us not only from sin, but
also from all laws does obliedge us in Conscience, thence is that we are free
from the ten Commandments of the Moral law and precepts of the Sacraments

Sixthly thou ought no other thing to God but only faith whereby thou confesses
Iesues Christ, and beleeuest that he is risen from death to life, and so doing
thou shall be saved.

So according to this doctrine do what you please, believe in Christ and you
shall be saved. there liberty given to co^mite all crimes and mischief the
world without all scruple of conscience.

Now if you will consider their persons they are conform in their lives to
this same doctrine.

First if you will behold Luthers life there you shall see his familar
friendshipe, and conference with Satan, in whose felloweshipe he did eat a
bushel of Salt as he affirms him self in A Dutch Sermon to the people: you
shall see his breach of theie Godly vo was, puoertie, Chastity and obedience a
monstrous comunction of a foresworne friar with an apostatisse Nun in an
Sacrilegious bed, and how he could no more keep him self hrom venus game
then he could do from spitting, as he writteth of him self in his book of
Matrimony, likewise he thinks no shame to say if the wife refuse to come,
the hand maid shall be welcome, because the fellowshipe of weemen was as
needful to him as sleep meat and drink.

He shows also his intolerable pride in so much that he says that Kings,
Princes and the Pope him self are not worthy to lose the latchets of his
shoes and that a Thouand Cyprians and a Thousand Augustins are not to be
compared to him.

He shows also his great cruelty and sedition when he did stir up the rude
common people of Germany against their Prelates and temporal Lords in such a
fashion that a hundredth Thousand man of the cu^mon people were slain, and thrie
hundredth Castells overthrown. in one province of Germany called Franconia.

If you will considder the lives of Calvin and Beza there you shall see their
Extreme pride to oppose their privy Judgment to the whole antiquity of the
the Ancient Fathers,

You shall see likewise in their lives, thift Sacrilege homicide, cruel
sedition sttrred up by them in France, adultery, sodomie and bougrie.

If you please to view Sir Ihon Knox life the holy Apostle of Scotland there
you shall see Incest committed by him with his owen good Mother in a cornekill
or killogie. adultery wtih an other man's wife his Necromancie and familiar
friendshipe with Satan, whose Example many of the Minissers of Scotland did
follow as you shall see herefter in the description of their lives.

Considering (Gentle Reaeer) that the tree is known by the fruis (as Christ
sayetd) you may Easily Judge by the fruits and moral works of our New
Gospellers, Mat. 7. ungodly doctrine ungodly Religion.
as much taught by their doctrine as practiced in their lives whether their
Relegious tree be good or no when the tree it self is nothing else but a
confused mas of old heresies patched together like an beggere old Clock,
which were condemned long, ago in old heretics by the ancient Fathers. and
the fruits thereof a liberty to live after the pleasours of this world and
concupissance of the flesh in all pleasant voluptie of eating and drinking, and
Exercise of venus game, and to commit any sin that is as homicide,
adultery, thifte perjury, Sodomie, and other suchlike crimes, without scruple
of Conscience, because men are made free from the keeping of all laws by their
faith in Christ and liberty of their Gospel.

Satan him self could not have given a mor pernicious Religion to mortal men
then to give a confused mas of old condamned heresies, and to teach men that
they should never pain them selves to do any good work because that all
good works are but deadly sins in the Iudhment of God, which can not further
our Salvation but rather procure our damnation and that men should not be
feared to commit any sin that may pleasour him: because that no sin can
condemn him, prouyding he believe to be saved in the blood of Christ, for so
teaching all good workts are banished away as unprofitable to Salvation and
liberty given to man to commit all sins that may pleasour him without all
fear of damnation I pray God to save us from such a pestient Relinion and to
grant us grace to abide constantly in the bosom of the catholic Roman
Church.

AMEN.
A CERTAIN TREATISE WHERE IN ARE EVIDENTLY DECLARED THE ABOMINABLE LIVES OF
the chief pellars of the nevve Gospel, their pestilent doctrine, their
Incalling of Satan and conference with him, whereby they shevve them selves
Iaolaeers, lastly we shevve how their abominable lines and pestiferous
doctrine.
Lead Ignorant souls to manifest Infidelity and Euindnta perdition.
OF LVTHERS ahbominable life and pesliferons doctrina. CHAP. 1
TO Begin first at their patriarch Luther you must understand that he was a
Monk and prossed Friar of the order of S. Augustine, Engendered (as Lindanus
writteth) by a Devil called Incubus transformed in the shape of a man.

This forelorne man did breath his 3. Religous vewes made to God poverty
chstitie and obedience for the disotdained love he bare to honors, riches and
volpties of this word.

He confesses that Satan did teach him that the Mess was but Idolatry and
Eull of it self for thus he writteth in his book Intitituled de Missa priuata
et unction Sacerdotum tom 7. vvitimberg anno 1558. saying: contigit me semel
sub nediam noctoni subito Expergefieri Ibi Satan mecum coepit huiusmodi
disputationem, audi Inquit Luthere Doctor perdocte, nosti enim te quindecim
annis Celebrasse Missas priuatas horrenda essent Idolatria, quid si ^bi non
adfuisset Corpus and Sanguis Christi sed tantum Panem et vinum adorasses et
alis adhoerandum proposuisses: Cui Ego Respondi sum vnctus Sacerdos accepi
vnctionem et consecrationem ab Episcopo.

That is to say: it happened me once about midnight to be suddenly awakned out of
my sleep, there Satan begoud this disputation with me, hear me (said he)
most learned Doctor Luther, thou knoewest thou have al most daily Celebrated
Masses these 15 yeeree by pass? what if such privy Masses were horible
Idolatry? what if the Body and Blood of Christ were not reallie there, but
only that thou did adore bread and wine, and offer the same to by adored by
others? whom to I did answer, that I was a Priest, and that I hade reciued
unction and consecration from a Bishope.

after these words Luther reharseth the arruments which Sathat did bring in to
disprooue the Mass, and that the Protstarts peruse to day for the same effect.
this is the cause wherefore I can not Esteem but good of the Mass seeing that
Satan (which every where does procure the damenation of man) did disprooue the
same.

Now good Reader thou may easily surmise how this woeful Prophet of the
Protestants was send by Satan to disturb and vex the Church of God with his
heresies and not from Jesus Christ to refrome the same. lib. de seruo arbitrio.
Tom. 2. Luther fighceth against his o^ven conscience


He confesses that he did withstand and resist his conseience the space of ten
years to give assent to his erroneous doctrine which he did learn from Satan
and did persuad his Brethren of VVitemberge to do the same in abolishing the
Mass.

Behold this foresworne Monk enneEnnemie to truth condem^eth as S. paul
says by his proper Judgment and light of his owen conscience.

What edification, may you receive by his Example, but to learn from him to
with stond our owen consciennce when we have any Evil turn to do.

He confesses that he was moved with hatred and Envy to depairt from the
Roman Church, because the promulgation of the Indulgences was not granted to
the Religious order of S. Augustine.

he confesses that he was citizen of the Roman Church and after his
depairting thence he shows not to what Church he did retire, but grau^tetd
that he was that time him self alone. In prnfat Tom. 1.
Thus Luther was in no Church at all.

He confesses that he was moved to Excogitate new Errors against the
doctrine of the Roman Church for the great hatred he bare against the Pope of
Rome.

in comment in cap. 30. gsnes page 455
He teaches in his co^mentaies upon the 50. of Genesis that if the wife refuse
to come the hand maid shall be welcome a fine Example of Edifitation to all such
as are prone to abuse weemen by their wedded wives. his infidelity Tom. 6.
comment in cap. 7. Genes. page 105


Luther grants that if he hade been in the time of the Potriarch Noe that he
would not have believed God threatening the destruction of the world by the
general flood,

Luther confesses that he did hate God in his heart, beholding the seuiritie
of his Justice in the punition of sinners. praefat. Tom. 2. his hatred against
God


Luther confesses in his dispate at Lipsia against Doctor Eckius before ^he
Duke of Saxony that his purpose was not begune for the reverence of God ^or
yet should end for his ho^nour.

Luther confesses that he could no more stay him self from venus game then he
could do from spittinh,

This apostata Friar again did rate him self so much that he thought no shame
^o say that a Thousand Cyprians and a Thnusand Augustins were not to be
^ompared to him in doctrine belonging ^o Salvation.

To show that he did climb to the ^ope of pride he thought no shame to ^y
with a braisen front that he would ^ot admite the Angels of Heaven to be ^dges
to his doctrine althought he was ^ached by Satan (according to his owen
confession) to abrogate the Mass

Thus good Reader thou may easily surmie whether this new Gospeller was
rulled with the humble Spirit of Christ or by the the proud Spirit of Satan.

Luther writteth again that good works make no man good nor Evil works make
no man Evil, and that no sin how great so ever it be can condemn the man
but only Infidelity.

Luther writtetg again: let us take heed to keep our selves from sin, but
much more from good works. behold the council of this new Evangelist to be
altogether Sathanicall.

As concerning his auditors he confesses that they are more auaritious,
unmerciful, luxurius, stubborn Ungodly, and much more worse since the time
that the light of the Gospel was reuealled unto them, then men were in the
time of Pope rye. Musculus lib. de Prophetia Christi: and smidelinus conclhis.
4. de Planetis Errantibus affirmed the same.

Lastly he affirmeeth with Calvin that all the works of Just men are but
deedly sins* so according to Luthers and Caluins doctrine and Theology it is
all a like to be faithful and deceitful, to give Alms to a poor man and
spoil hem of his goods, to sleep with his owen wife or his nigbours, for so
much that all the works of lust men are but deadly sins, and their faith so
Effectual in Christ that it shall blotte all their sins away (^s they say)
with the twinkling of on ^ye.

when Luther did Endeavor him self ^o drive away an unclean spirit out of
(...) possessed person, the Devil terrified ^im in such a fashion that he was
cons^rained to take the flight him self, and ^ue his owen life from the
danger of ^at Devil. Staphilus his Disciple as he ^we this miracle did wrote
the apolog 2

And to confirm this pestiferous doc^ine disordained life, and lewd manners
^readfull death did come to him (after ^e was well whitled and drunk of the
^pper before) so suddenly in lying in ^s bed, to charge him to compeare
before the fearful Judgment of God (...) make account of his works, that he
^de not time and space to cry for meicy ^r his sins, as sundry Autors
worthy ^credence wrote of his final end.

So if Sathon hade come out of hell in the shape of a man to preach in a pulpit
as Ministers do what greater show o^ reason could he have set down to giu^
the raines of licentius liberty to the vnruilled nature of man to deliueur the
selves to all kind of uncleanness, Ig^ nominie, malicc wickedness Enu^
mischief murder conte^tion, trecheri^ murmuring, backbitting, pride,
dissen^tion, dissobediencc, crudelitie, and i^ other sins of like kind, and
since pe^suade silly souls that their only faith i^ Christ shall deface and
put away all the^ fromer and suchlike other sins in the moment of an hour.

This is the Edification which Eue^ one may learn as much from the doc^rine of
Luther as from his former life.

Thus much of Luther Patriarch to (...) Protestants.

OF CALVIN'S ABHOMI^ABLE LIFE AND PEST^ FEROVS DOCTRINE. What Edification and
Instruction Each (...) may receive from the wholesome doctrine and moral life
of Calvin Pattern of Perfection to the Puritans. CHAP. 2
BEFore all things you must understand that Calvin was Borne in a Town of
France in the Province of Picardie ^alled Noyon in the year of God. 1599.

He was a great blasphemer of the Name of God in his youth*

Being a student and promoted to a Cure and Chapel he was surprised in ^he
abominable sin of Sodomie, wherefore he was marked on the sho^lder with an
Brunt iron in the form ^n Flower delyce.

Calvin being so defamed as much for his bougrie as for peinition thereof by ^n
brunt iron, he become sacriegious ^n falling his benifice, and after went to
Geneua Changing his Name from Cauing to Calvin to the end that his Infamous
life should not be known by the title of his proper name.

So soon as he did arrive in Geneua Incotinenent he strred up a great sedition
between the Ministers and Citizens of the Town.

For his sedition he was Cast in banihment and by his secreete Craft receued in
the Town of Geneua again.

Of 4. thousand franks which he did receue form the Queen of Navarre and two
thousand Crowns from Monsieur David de Haynault, with much more from sundry
others to distibute to the poor he did Judas like, keep the graaest part for
his owen commodity and Impairt the rest to his owen frinds, and corrupt some
of Counsel to assist his Enterprise against all such as did oppone them selves
to his croftie desings and Malicious attempts, and when the poor Necessitous
did Murmr against his ungodly dealing, he caused them be cas^ in banishment,
as libertins and ungodly Christians.

Calvin likewise gave council to one called Nicolas defer banquerupt to buy
with 3. Tphousand pounds he had^ in his hands Innobile goods in the Name of his
wife and Daughters, an^ so him self being dispossessed of all substance his
creditors should find n^ way to constrain him to pay the^ whom to he was
detfull.

Thus to receive their communion worthily it is not needful to restore ou^
Nighbeors goods but to defraude hi^ if we may (according to Caluins council)
for our owen commodity.

Calvin gave not this council for naught for this banquerupt did
ackno^cknowledg hes benevolence in this behalf with an sum of money, and
Married one of his daughters with Cal^ins Brother.

When Caluins friends offered them ^elues to bring a young prouincell which
hade taken from him the the value ^f 4. thousand franks after he hade ser^ed
Calvin a long time, Calvin would ^ote, Condescend the they should pain them
selves in that matter, which made many suspect that he feared, the young man's
accusation if he hade been brought again to have abused him in the sin of
Sodomie according to his old custom.

Caluins pride and ambition was so great that he would suffer no companion at
all, Therefore the Church of Berne Nigh to Geneua, did call him by contumely
and ^ockrie, the Pope of Geneua.

Caluins pride and ambition was so great that he thought no shame to say openly
in his preachings that he was a ^aophete, that he was Endued with the spirit of
God, that he was send by the Lord, that he could not Err or stray from the
truth, and if Incace (said he (...) I speak any thing astray it is thou o
Lord that deceives me, and makes me to Err for the sins of the people

There never was a holy Doctor of the Church of God that did boast and brage
of such perfections and prerogatiue^ of Grace as this shameless Sodomite and
malicious hypocrite does.

When a Citizen of Geneua hade said to his friend that they Esteemed more of
Calvin then by good Reason they should do, he could never be contented with
that citizen called Peter Amy until the time he should be cast in Prison, and
thereafter come shirte alone with a Light Taper or Torch in his hand and cry
him mercy before the whole world with such amend honorable.

When some of his friends did aeprotch him to have pulled done the Image of our
Lord our Lady and holy Saints in Heaven, and suffer his owen Image to be
set up in public places of the Town, and to be hanged about the necks of
sundry Inhabitants of Town, he answered without any courtessie saying: let all
such as mislike such things burst for malice.

When he went out of Geneua to visie the Church of Bean, he did Ride upon a
Gailziart Steed accompained with 25. or 30. horsemen well Armed with their
Pistolets like Capitaains of war, and not like a Prophet or one of Christ's
Apostles.

When Calvin did persuade silly poor man for a little some of silver to feign
him self to be dead, and sine to arise at his prayers before all the people
when he did pray God. cry upon the silly poor man for to arise at his
praiere and to confirm the truth of his Euangell, the siillie abused man was
found dead in deed, and so Calvin to confirm his Religion did kill a quick
man when the holy saints of the Roman Church to confirm the Catholic
Roman Religion by many other miarcles did often times restore by their holy
prayers the life agains to such as were truly depairted out of this world.

Calvin also stirred up with pride and ambition and vains Gloire that he could
neur to his contentment be sufficiently honored until the time he did writ
letteres and frame sundry works wherein he dmit nothing that might aduace and
extol his dwen honor and set these works out to the whole world in the
Nemes of others to hide in this behalf his rused tree cherie and deeite.

Calvin was so proud in his owen conceit that he did not only prefer him
self to all the heretics of his time. but also to the ancient Fatheres as
accounting nothing of their authority, he would bring in his owen sentence with
a maiesticall authority against the holy Doctors saying Augustine says this
Hierome says that. Sed Ego Vero, as if he hade been the Messiah disputing
against the Jews.

Cap. 13.
All such as did profess this new Relihion could do Calvin no greater pleasour
to purchasse his friendshipe, then to call him often times to dinner and
supper, Cap. 14.
where all kind of dainty meats were in abundance, which form of life made
many poor Indigent to murmr against his gluttony of their carnal Gospeller.

cap. 14.
His Silver Flagons with finest wines, his bread compounded with fine flower,
rose watter Sugare Cannell and Annlseeds were every where carried about with
him to serve for his dainti mouth.

Since the beginning of the world it was never hard or seen that any of the
Prophets send from God, or Apostles from Christ did feed so daintily as
Monsieur Calvin did great Prophet of the souritans, and Cherist him self as
he did in the promulgation of his sensual Gospel for he did deuore and
swallowe down more sugared confits of Portugal and Spain both dry and mole
then many poor silly souls could find morsells of bread for the
conservation of this their mortal life.

Of Caluins sodomie we have made mention before. as concerning his
Impuidicitie there was a great murmr and slander of sundry Dames and
Damosells which did haunt familiarly with him with out any company except a
little Infant leding in their hands, cap. 15.
and some times he take lodging with the fairest Damsel when her husband was
away, and the hand maid benished away, because she said that the print of tow
persons was left in the bed after, the vprising from him of her Mistress.

Calvin gave concell to Madame Iolland de Breed to lit her husband pine away in
his disease witholding from him such things as were necssarie for his
conualescens, with promise to Marie her after his death, which counsoull made
the noble Dame to despite him and retired her self and her husband out of the
Town of Geneua.

Because that no man in the Town of Genenua did oppose him self to Caluins
ungodly practices but the Governor of the Town called Amy Perin, he did
Imagine sundry strategems and treasonable attempts against the Governor,
Either to beraue him of his life or than at the least to cast him in
Banishment, which lastly he did obtane persuading falsely the Gentle men of
Frence (which were retired to Geneua for Religious cause) that the Governor
hade co^spired their death, who with the concurrance of Calvin and his faction
constrained the that Governor to save his life from their danger, retiring
him self to Berne adiaent to the lands of Geneua, in this seditione coused by
him he made sundry young men to lose there lives against the lawful order of
Justice

OF Caluins horrible diseases in his laiter daye^ and Execrable Death.
Calvin in hie latter days was by the Just Judgment of God punishihe^ with
horrible diseases and desperate death for his blasphemous heresies, deceitful
hypocrisies, and Execrable life, for Theodore Beza writteeh that he was heavily
troubled with a consumption of the lungs, with the crampe, collicke, difficulte
of the breath, the Stony Gravel, the Gutte, hemoirods or bloody flux, the
Migrame or Ache in the head, besides these evils written by Beza, he was
cruelly tormeted with the lousie evil the through the whole body, a wirulent
and stinching ver in the fondament, and his secreete Members consumed with
crewling or creeping worms, Match. 99. act. 12.23.
as Antioehus herod's enemies to God were berefte of this mortal life by
consumption crewsinh or creeping worms which did creep like swarms of Bees
plentifully abroad out of their bodies.

He was so painful, and troublesome to him self, and privy Servants by the
Execrable stinch of his corrupted body that no man was able to abide the
pestilent puanture of the same therefore he gave a strait command that no man
should get entress to visie him.

He likewise was so Impatient to suffer the great grief, and Intollereble
pain of so manifold diseases. which he did feel derive from the weighty
hand of the dreadful Justice of God without any hope of mercy (as his final
end does testify) that he did Incall the Devils, swear dsperatly detast and
curse the day and time which he did bestow to the knowledye of letters and
setting out of Books.

Now Gentle Reader behold the desperate end of a malicious heretic, a
treacherous Impostour and cruel killer of men's souls worthy and conformable of
his pestiferous doctrine deceitful hypocrisies, and abominable life.

Hieronimus Bolsecus physician of Lions affirms to have heard with his proper
Ears, these things of Caluins oven privy Servants which did serve him unto
his latter end.

Now let us behold Edification and Instruction we may receive of his
blasphemous doctrine which he writteth against Christ our Sauoiour and
Redemptour.

Before all things he makes God the cause and author of all mischief hynous
C^yms and sinful acts by men committed in this world, and lay all the blame
and Charge upon God first author and cause of the same according to his
doctrine, for thus he writteth in his Institutions: lib. 1. Inst cap. 18. sect.
4.
man by the Just Enforcing of God does that thing which is not leso^e to him do.

Calvin w,itteth again: that men do nothing but that which God has decreed
with him self and appornted to be done by his secreete direction. lib. 1. Inst.
cap. 18. sect. 1.


Eurthermore he writteth: I omit the general concurrace of God whereby each
creature is vpholden and retauneth strainth to effectuat all things, which they
do, lib. 2. Inst. cap. 4. sect 2
I speak of that only action whereby each misdeede may be ascribed to God, to
Satan, and to man without amie absurdity or Inconuonrencie.

Here Genttle Reader thou shall morke how Calvin aseribeth each misdeede as
much to God as he douh to Satan or to man. lib. 1. Inst. cap. 18. sect. 2.


He writteth yet more blasphemously of God saying: Satan is said to deceiun
and Inchant the minds of Infidells, but whence is that unless the efficacy of
Error derive from God him self.

Mark here good Reader according to Caluins doctrine that God works in to
the minds of men the Efficacy of error and althought Calvin makes SaSathan
the Instrument, yet he makes God the chief cause of this mischief and not
Satan and much less the will of mortal man.

Calvin writteth also both blasphemously and without all reverence or fere of
cap 2.17.
our Lord thar he did utter the words of despeartio^ upon the crosser and to be
much affrayed to be condamned for Ever. lib 2. cap. Inst. sect 16. Luc. 22.69.
Ihon 9.37.


Behold the blasphemy which this malicious heretic writteth against Christ
our Saucour, which was as sure of his owen Salvation as he was sure that he was
the natuarall Son of God and that he was to come with great Maieiste,
accompained with his Angels at the letter day to Judge the quick and the
dead, mat. 24.30. suc. 24.26. Ihon. 18.26.
and that his Kingdom was in the other world to come.

Thus Calvin made the Prince of Patience and Magnanimity, (which gives
strainth force and courage to all the M^r^oirs of the world) to faint doubt and
dspaire of his owen Salvation in the time of his owen Martiredome.

What other thing can Caluins breath smell in these and suchlike words, but
Godisse Infidelity to make men think by such lewd reasons that Christ can not
be accounted naturell Son of God in such a servile fear and cursed
desperatio^.

Likewise Calvin does not only take ^way the Fathers Limb and Purgatory, lib.
2. Inst. cao. 16 sect. 3. mat. 23.41. lib. 2. Inst. crp. 16. sect. 10.
which low places of Eartd he calls ^aine Imaginations, fained devises and
^uerile fables, but also he does (against ^he Expeste word of God) take clean
^way the burnig fire of hell, affirming heretically (after his old custom)
that the pains of hell are no other thing but a sorrowful Anguish of the
Soul and terror of the mind whereby Each ^an does feel God wrethfull and
angry against him, as Christ him self did Experiment yet in this mortal life
when he was hanging on the Cross; which heresy was long ago condamned in
^rigmes. as witnesses S. Hierome. Epist ^d Auitum.

Thus Caluins doctrine can not tend to any other scope to make God author of
sin, Christ to doubt of his Salvation and despair at the hour of death, and
to take away the burning fire of Hell Prepared for the ungodly, but to drive
silly Souls from the true Religion to atheisene and Godless Infidelity.

NOW LET US CONSIDED what Instruction and Edification we may receive from
the life and doctrine of Zuinglius Prish Prienst of Zuricke to wne in the
Heluetian country of Tinurie. CHAP. III.
AS concerning Zuinglius Paris^ Priest of Zuricke Meitrpolita^ Town of the
Heluetian Country o^ Tignrie, he did Exchange his meek^ Priestly dignity with
the fieirce offic^ of an Soldier, and lastly was Killed in war.

He writteth him self (as Luthe^ does) to have learned his doctrine from a
Spirit in the Night, but he did no^ Know (says he) whether this Spirit was
black or white which did teach him Berangarius herisie Entombed long before,
that Christ's Body was not reallie in the Sacraament.

This Luinolius Patriarch to all the Puritans writteth blasphemously tha^ God
is author of sin, for these be hi^ words: Numen Ipsum est author est Eu^ quod
in nobis est Iniustu^a. God him self i^ author of that thing which is
Iniquiti^ and Injustice in us.

He wiritteth likewise, that God enforc^h men to homicide adultery, and to
(...) other naughty, deeds which be wro^gh in this world.

Behold here good Reader the edific^ion and Instruction which all ungodly ^en
may learn from Zuinglius and ^aluin, Prince of all Puaitans to Excuse ^eir
sins, when they commit thift, ho^icide, Adultery or any other naughty ^ede
saying that they can not withstand the will of God, which Enforces ^em to do
all Evil deeds,

^HE Abominable life and blaspemous doctrine of Theodore Beza. CHAP. IIII.
THEODORE BEZA Borne in vezile Town of France, being Student as forelorne
son, was wholly ^nt to lead a licertious and riotous life (...) the Town of
Parish and Orleance ^apinn veerely 700 crowns of the be^fice of the Catholic
Church, which ^wothily he did spend in this fashion ^entioned before.

You shall not find since the memory (...) man, a more unclean, lascivious
and shamlesse peete than he was, which has transgresed the bounds and limits
of all honesty, as much in his naughty words as in abominable deeds, for
that could not afford him contentmet to abuse his body with other man's wife
call by proper Name was called Claudiae, and in the abominable sin of
Sodomie with abeutiful^ young man called Audebert, Unless hade proclaiued his
Execrable sins unto the whole world in his book of Epigrames.

THE Epigrame which he die^ compound in the proise an^ commenodatioon of
condida the Taylers vyfe and Audebert his fellovv-Sodomite
ABEST Candida, Beza quid moratis?
Audebertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent parasij tuos amores
Habent aurelij tuos lepores
Et'tu vezeliis manerepergis
Procul Candidula amoribusque
Et leporibus audebertuloque.
Immo vezelij procul valete
Et vale pater et valete fratres
Namque vezelijs carere possum
Et carere parente, et hic et Illis
At non Candidula Audebertuloque
Sed vtrum rogo preferam duorum?
Vtrum Inuisere me decet priorem
An quenquam tibi Candida Anteponam
An quenquam Anteferam tibi audeberte
Quid Si me Ingeminas secem Ipse parts
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat
^urrat altera versus Audebertum
At est Candida sic auara noui
^t totum cupiata tenere Bezam.
Sic Bezae est cupidus suj audebertus
^eza vt Gestiat Integro potiri.
Amplector quoque sic et hunc et Illam
^t totus cupiam videre vtrumque
Integrisque fruj Integer duobus
^raeferre attamen alterum necesse est
O Duram Nimium necessitatem.
^d postquam tamen alterum necesse est
Priores tibi defero Audeberte
^uod Si Candida forte conqueratur
^uid tum Basiolo tacebit Imo.
Thus his Epigrame may be Englished.

O Beza why do thou now make bide
From Candida, which should lie the beside
and Audebert a youth of comely grace
Whom thou behind with Joy did often Imbrce
^r Parish dotd contain thy param ours
And orleance the lilly of thy flowers
(...) vezile why thy Fathers duelling place
^oost thou remain far from the Gentle face
^f Candida and Audebert thy Joy,
Whose felloweshipe dotd keep me from anoy
^ewell vezile my Mothers hatlhing nest
My Father and my Brotheren with the rest
Your harbor now I Easily may want
My Parents and my Brethren as I grant
But Candida and Audeberr by night
I may not want my haly hearts delight
But of these tow, which should I in this case
Now fiirst go see most sweetly to Embrace
whom in this world shall I prefer to the
My candida this time to pleasour me
Or yet to the fuel of my fire
Eaire Audebert my only hearts desire
What if I should divide this corpse of mine
In Egall pairts which dotd to both Incline
VVherreof the one with careful diligence
Should quickly Joy my Candidas presence
The other should go run without a miss
To Audebert his dainty Lips to kiss
Yet Candida most cupid as I know
Does wish my curps al whole and she below
And Audebert a greedy wanton boy
Would quickly strive whle Beza to Enjoy
But with my heart I would them thus Embrace
That with Each I might whole be in Each pla^
But I accunt an hard necestitie
One to prefer in pleasnt voluptie
To the other in this cheerful delight
If I might both Embrace the winters night
But since the force of cruel destiny
Does me constrain with such neceitie
That the one to other I must prefer
To feed my lust where pleasantly I Err
To Audebert the ho^nour I will yeet
who does adorn the flours of venus field
If Candida for this act will complain
She lastly must her self from Sighs refrain
So Ends Bezas Epigrame.
Here good Reeder you may see how Beza ^isporteth him self in proclaiming his
owen ^bho^inable deeds to the whole world as an forel^ane man without all fear
of God in his consci^nce and worldly shame before the Eyes of men.

So soon as Bezas book of Epigrams com to ^he light he was su^moned to
compeare before the ^ords of Session at Parish and to Interpret his ^pigrame
compounded by him in the praise of ^andida the Taylers wife and Andebert his
fellow ^odomite.

Beza knowing that the due punition of such ^nne was nothing less then his
life, he set his ^enifice for the space of five years to one secre^ly, and to
ane other sold it out at the ground, ^d so took the flight to Geneua, where he
was ^ade Caluins Diseciple and successor*

The Taylers wife by him called canedida ^uld not content him being Minster in
Geneua. ^lesse he co^rupted a virg in seruin him in the ^use called Claudia
whom to after she conce^ed he gave a poyoned drink to kill the Child (...)
the woman's Belly. so this Evangelist did make domie and account to co^mith
homicide, sodomie and perpetual adulerie.

The year of God 1560 Calvin and Beza with an other called ottaman conspired
amongst them selves with their assistance to Massacre the King of France called
Frances, the Quneene his Mother Queen Marie his wife daughter to Iame the 5
King of Scotland, the King of France Brother, the Lords then remaining in Court
an^ the good Magistrates. These be the fruits of their carnal Gospel.

As concerning Bezas doctrine he makes Go^ author of sin, as Calvin did
teach before hi^ for thus writteth: oportuit Ergo. and It behooved Go^ to open
up and disclose that only way to him sel^ which is the ordain the fall of Adam
and again^ Querenda est vitn orig^ we must research the origin^all of sin in
the voluntary motion of Instrum^nts whereby God has Just y decreede that wor^
which men do unjustly; but thou wilst say, the could not resist the will of
God, I grant it is tr^ (said Beza) their will could no otherwise do.

Thus if the will of man be constrained to d^ al naughty deeds wrought in this
world, as Be^ teaches us the man may purge him self of (...) sins committed
by him and lay the charge vp^ God which constrains him to work the sam^ for
as S. Austgstine says: no man sins in the which he is constrainetu to do
by necssitie oth^wise Beasts, fools madman and Infants without Judgment or
Reason, should be guilty of sin in the behalf, be hold now Reader the good
Edification which thou may reap from Bezaes abominable life and
blasphemous doctrine against the goodness of God in making him the chief
cause and author of sin.

OF Bucerus an Domincan Friar. CHAP. V.
Bucerus wus a foresworne Monk Dominican friar Master to Ihon Calvin Infected
with Luthers heresy, since with Zuinglius pestierous docrine, which affirms
with Calvin that Baptism is not necessary to Salvation, and that Christ's
Body is not reallie in the Sacrament.

Lastly he recanted these Errors and become a Lutheran agine, he Expyred his
furthast braith in England, and at the hour of his death he affirmed that
Christ was not the true Messiah, but that we should abide an other,

OF Carolrstdms Priest CHAP. VI.
CArolastadius Priest and Archdeacon of VVitemberge (who was the first of
Ecclesiastical dignity in our time which Joined hemselfe to a Sacrilegious
wife by the persuasion of Luther) was banished out of all the Jurisdiction of
Saxony and thus contemnead both by Catholics and Lutherans for his Ungodly
Imperhectio^s he was the first renuer of Berengarius hersie in our time Luther
in Colloquns Mensalibus, fol. 367. and Erasmus Alberus Lutheran writ that he
was taught and possessed with a Deuiill,

OF oecelampadius monk CHAP. VII.
OEcolampadius a foresworne Monk did Sacrilegiously against his 3. Vows of
poverty, Chastity, and obedience Join him self to a wife and lanstly for
punition of his Sacrilege was found dead in his Bed and as Luther says he
was killed by Satan's fiery darts others affirm that he was put to death by
his Sacrilegius wife others ascertaine that he did kill him self with his owen
hand.

SIR IHON kNOX life, the false Apostle of Scolland Extracted out of M. Nicoll
Burns disputation and approved by other Oculare vatnessis which were living
in his teme. CHAP. VIII.
SIR Ihon Knox a renegat Priest of the Town of Hadintowne in Scotland was
Incensed with the burning lust of the flesh, as the Prophet Daniell did
foretell, 12.37. that all fear of God and honnour of the world set asside
did think no shame at all to polute his Fathers bed, in committing horrible
Incest with his owen Mother in lawein an cordnekill who being Excommunicated by
his owen Bihope for such an horrible crime, did in despite by his Bishope and
censure used against him, foresaike at once his Priestly dignity and fanction
with the Catholeque Re^igion and so be come an heretic.

Thus as S. Paul sayet. 1. Tim. 110 having banished away good conscience from
him self did make shipe wrake of his faith, which loose of conscience and
corruption of life is alwise the beginning of heresy.

After that he did foresaike the meekness of Pristhood, he become a cruel
actour and conspiratour of the Cardinal Beatons deatd which was cruelly
Murdered by our heretics first pla^ters of this carnal Gospel in Scotland,
when the Castle of S. Androwes was taken from our heretics which did hold
the same by force Against the Queens Majesty, Knox with the rest of the
heretics conspiratours of the said Cardinals death, were also taken by the
frincemen, and condemned as Slaves unto the Galleyes.

Knex at the last by some quiet conuoy being set at liberty from Galley
Slauene went unto England where he did learn the artie of Necromancie for
better aduancee^nt of his carnal Gospel

The Earl of Murray in the mean seaon ceing in England, Knox did enter in
conference with him at S. Paul's Church in London, where he did persuade the
said Earl that God hade chosen him to be King of Scotland to Root out
Idolatry, Establish the light of their Gospel and that he as a new Josias
should mantaine and defend sir Ihon Knox the new Helias against all Catholic
Pastors which he calletd the Priests of Baal, and liekwise the Queens Majesty
which he Nicknamed Iesabeli.

Which things to perform and atchiue he set out his book Entitled, the
blast of the Trompet against the Regiment of weemen attempting therely to
spoil the Queens Majesty with all there pesteritie of their Regal Diadem
and heriatle of the the Kingdom of Scotland and so at one time did Endeavor
him self to Plant a false Renigion for atrue and to Install an unlawful King
for an lawful Princess in the Realm of Scotland.

This was the Sound Intention and whole drifte of this false Prophet with the
rest of his seditious Ministers to overthrow the Spiritual and temporal
Estate in the Realm of Seotland at one time.

This forelorne Priest retourning from Englnnd to Scotland again did persuade
a Married woman with her daughter to foresaike her hasband to follow him, and
thus shamefullie, Sacrilegiously, and Incestuously, seal and proper fruits or
their Carnal Gopell.

After the death of that adulteress he being an old decreeped Priest at the
pits brinke he did ride upon a pretty Guelded horse with his Silken ^carfe
adorned with an Golden Ring and Precious Stones, as if he hade been a young
Springall and wanton youth: an Evident Sign of an mere worlding full of bold
presumption and Diabolical pride

He did also woo an Gentle woman of the house of Ochiltrie to Marry in this
princly form, and Enchant her so by his Deuillish Art of necromancie that he
did appear to this young Gentlewoman not in his owen shape, an old decreeped
Priest, but as a young Strypling most beutifull to behold and site to fight
courgiosly in Venus fiield and so did Incense such an disordained love in her
heart toward him self, that she could nowise ^iue or take repose without his
accursed Society.

All the world beholding her to be a beutifull, brave and pleasant Damsel,
and Knox to be but an old decreeped priest of an base and obscure condition
and of Ignoble blood, they could not Ascribe the cause of that vehement
affection. which she did bear to such decreeped Priest but his Dueillish Art
of Sorcerie or Necromancie. whereby he did bewitch the young Gentle woman in
such fashon that she could not behold the shame and disgrace, which she did
Incur, when she did link her self in Marriage with such a renegate Priest
and Ignoble person as Knox was in very deed.

The progress of his life did show these things to be most true when an young
wo^an in the Lord Ochiltries house almost did loose her life for fear when she
did Espy thraugh an clift or bore in the door Satan in shape of a black men
in quiet conference speaking with Knox, which was the black Doctor and Master
of School whom froe he did learn his lesson, as much in Sorcerie and
Necromancie as in the Preaching of his carnal Gospel.

A Gentle woman worthy to be believed in thi^ behalf did see Knox face toure
in his neck during the time of his Preaching in S. Gils Church a^ Edinbrugh as
truly She did relate unto me.

As the Arrians did not skare with the Doctrine of Arrians when he did shute
his Entralls in the Iacks with the loose of his life publicly: Euens^ the
puritans are not affrayed at the doctrine o^ Knox which was damnad by God with
such (...) Monstrous prodige as the doctrine of Arrius wa^ in ages long before.

Lastlly when he at the hour of death did assu^ his Brethren that the old
Religion should ari^ again, they said that he did but dotte and ra^ in such
speeches as a man be straught in mind (...) Answerred to them saying: to the
end you man believe such things to be true as I have foreto^ you, go you
Incontinently out of the house where I do lie and when you return in again
^ou shall find my words to be confirmed with a ^rodigous sign after they hade
performed his will ^n this behalf as he hade desired them to do, Entering in
the house again where they did ^eaue him giving up the Ghost, they did find
all ^he lights Extinguished and Knox him self lying ^old dead on the floor
and his face turned in ^is Neck. This is the prodidgious end which ^his
forelorne Priest did make most worthy of his deserts.

The young man which did serve him unto his ^itter end, did, relate all these
things to a Gentle man of Estate worthy of credence which did ^eherse these
thinga as most true unto his frinds as ^hey are tecited abue.

OF M. Ihon Craige a foresvvorne Dominican friar Minister to his Majesty.
CHAP. IX
Master Ihon Craige apostata Friar Minister to King James the sixth of
Scotland, minded to retu^rne to his Monastrie (being at time in Italy) or
laike of Moyen, after he did foresaike the same ^onfesseth that the Devil in
the shape of a black ^ogge meet him passing through Italy with a Pursefull
of Gold hanging at his Neck which he take from Satan. So by the help of
Satan he did continue in his apostussie and heresy of our New Gospel to his
lives end. Nicol Burn in his disputation against the the Ministers of Scotland
cap. 34. page 175. for good angels did never aeare in the shape of Dogs or
Basts, as the Devils have done several times as we Read in the lives of holy
Saints. but in the shape of men Genes. 18 2.19.5. Iosue 5.13.

OF vellax one of the first Preachours of this nevve Gospel in Scotland. CHAP.
X.
This willox was a Necromancer (as Nico^ Burn reports) whose son did
reais^ the Devil Doctor to the Ministers of Scotland in Arthurs seat not
farrie from Edinbrugh, where first they did Preach their Gospel. Burn i^ his
disputation against the Ministers of Scotland CHAP. 21.

OF Paul Mephen an other of the first Cospellers of Scotlan^ CHAP. XI.
This Paul Mephen was a man more like crue^ Soldier, a man of war armed with
h^ Pistles (as the Ministers of France weree) the then like one of the simple
Aposthes of Christ, man whole consecrated to venus Game and feedin^ of his
belly God, and nowisi adorned with Chasti^ and sobriety, which are the chief
ornaments (...) the true Desciples of Christ Burn Ibide^ Chap. 22. fol. 102.

OF M. James Lavvsonne CHAP. XII.
MAsteer James Lousonne Menister of Edinbrugh being banished for conspiracy
against the Kings Majesty did make his final end in despair, Incalling
Satan for his help, with foresaiking of God.

OF Deane Adaam, heriote. CHAP. XIII.
DEane Adame heriote Chanon and Renegate Priest, fominh at the mouth did fall
down in the street where he did walk, that he hade not so much time guen to
him by God as to cry for mercy and grace for remession of his sins,

OF Reader in the Church of Edinbrugh called Dru^mond CHAP. XIIII.
AN Reeder in the Church of Edinbrugh called Dru^mond Alias Doctor Handie
being set up in the Chocks (for punition of his riotousnesse, and abusing of
body with weemen,) at the Marcat Cross of Edinbrugh, he did stobbe and kill
him self to the deatd before all the people to the Imitation of Judas, which
did hing him self after he hade betrayed his Master Christ.

OF Ihon Coynsse Reader in the same Church CHAP. XV.
IHon Coyness Reeder in the Church of Edinbrugh in Reading the prayers one day
did suddenly cry out with a loud voece: I am condemned after such desperate
words being carried home to his house and admonished, that he did not know well
what he hade said. but to have recourse to the mercies of God, he answered
that he did know very well what he hade said* and that mercies door wesshute
up from him and he did end this mortal life the Imataion of Judas.

M. Thomas hebron Minister and Necromancer. CHAP. XVI.
Master Thomas hehron Menister and Necromancer in East Lawdian, a little be fore
the hour of his death seated in a Chair in the Church yarede at his owen
dsire was suddenly killed by a horrible Tampst, which made the Church to shake
in such fashion that it was neereby ouerthrowed to the ground. This was the du^
reward which he did receive from Satan hi^ Mister for hus suruice made in a
false Religon.

OF M. Thomas Ramsay Minister of S. Androvves. CHAP. XVII.
MAster Thomas Ramsay Minister of Androwes did suffer that public sham^ in
the time of his Preaching before all the people that his face did turn in his
neck to the Imitation of Sir Ihon Knox likewise he did openly pro^fesse that
Knox, their false Apostle was (prim^ Genitus Diaboli) and that him self was
(secundo ^atus) a little after he did yield up his furthast ^reath in despair
to the Imitation of Judas pro^itor to Christ.

OF M. George Hay parsone of Raphen. CAAP. XVIII.
MAster George Hay Person of Raphen being altogether dedicated to his gluttony
and dronknesse (as the most pairt of Minister, ^re) which is the daily service
of their belly God ^o confirm this New Religion with a Miracle ^orrespondent
to the same, he did suddtuly give ^p the Ghost in discharging his belly upon
the ^acks to the Imitation of old heretic arrive, which did deny the
diuinitiie of Christ, as the Puritans do when they make Christ, a the Priest
^n his diuenitie as will as in humanite for so or must be a God Inferior to his
Father and not Equal with him in deity when he offreth up ho^nour ^omage
service and Sacrifice to the Father, and ^onsequently as a poor creature,
because there ^au not be a true God but one.

OF M. Patrike Lindsay Minister of kelly in Angus. CHAP. XIX.
MAster Patrike Lindsay Minister of Kelly in Anguse at the hour of his death
did cry ^ut with words of desperation that he was perpe^ualie conda^ned to hell
fire, who being admonc^shed of the Brethdren that he should desist from such
words of desperation, for so much as these words would cause great slander to
the Religion and would move the people to like the worse of the same, when they
should see the Ministers thereof to die them selves in despair, he answered
that they were alse surely condamned as he was, and if he hade known before
that Satan should have hade such power in the world as he did know him to have
at that time amongst the Ministers that he should never have trubled him self
to have served Christ in this new Religon as he did in former times thus he did
go hence in dispiare to the Imitation of Judas proditnr to Christ for Even as
Judas did betray Christ deliuiring him with a kesse to the Jews, so the
Protestants and Puritan betray Christ in abolishing his ho^onu^ true worshipe
and Relgion, to Establish their heresies under pretnce of true faith in Christ,
thi^ is likewise one of the chiefest causes wherefor^ calum did loose his life,
being overwhelmed in the horrible Gulf of deep despair.

OF M. David Black minister of kelly in Aagus. CHAP. XX.
MAstster Daued Black Minister of Kell^ in Angus (after the foresaid Patrek^
Lindsay drinking at the wine in dundie and hau^ing the cupe at his lips yet
before he could ta^ of the same God did sumond him to compeare before the
fearful Judgment. heb. 9.27. by dea^ which did beraue him so suddenly of this
mortal ^ife, that he did obtain not so much time and space from God as to cry
for mercy and grace with ^emission of his sins. Therefore let us not
follow the Example of the Ministers which are (...) dicted to the Service of
their belly God, least Perhaps we make such an unhappy end as these ^aue done
which we have recited before: but let ^s pray with the Catholic Roman
Church ^n her litanies from suden and vnforeknowen deatd ^he Lord deliver us.

OF the Minister called killoch. CHAP. XXI.
AAster Nicoll Burn in his disputation Chap. 22. writteth that the Minister
called Killoch ^id murder his wife and put her to death, buthe ^heweth not
whether it was for adultery, or yet that she did know any secreete point of
Ne^romancie in him, which he feared she should ^isclose. so how ever the matter
be there is one thing sure that Satan hade power over him when ^e persuaded
him to Murder his owen wife Expressly against the Commandment of God.

OF Ihon Baxter Minister of Innernoth. CHAP. XXIII.
IHon Baxter Minister of Innernoth with in the shiredome of aberdine after his
preaching in ^n sunday went to an aile house which was James ^als and there
Exchanged his Strumpet which he did peruse as an harlote before, with an man's
wife called willame Rossie by Name which wife he did abuse in adultery unto
her dying day: lastly he was found killed unto the death in his owen door, and
noman did know him who did kill the Minister, adeath foresuith which was a Just
reward for such an adoulterous life: because all their good works are but
deadly sins it is an^ all a like to sleep with his Neighbors wife as with
his owen to Give alms to the needy, or to spoil^ a poor man, for all their
good works are bu^ deadly siinnes as is taught by them.

OF Ihon Patersonne Minister of alfurde. CHAP. XXIII.
IHon Paterso^ne Minister in Alfurde did Ioyn in Marriage Ihon Tamso^ne a man
duelling i^ achintoll, with an woman call Elizabet^ Robersonne in one sunday
and nixt wednisda^ the after did disolue the said Marriage contracte^ before,
and Married these tow persons to oth^ tow tuantie days therefter. so that
their Ma^riage is nothing eles but open adultery, for Chri^ says whosoever
takes the womad deuorce from her husband, althought the pairtising ^ made for
respect of adultery. yet he which Ioy^ the him self to the woman diuerced
co^mitte^ adulteirie. Mat. 19.9.14 our Ministers thinke^ shame to Mareris one
man to 3. or 4. wifes o^ after on other all living together as the Laird^
Balquha^e may be a notable Expmple of our day

So the Marriage of our New Gospellers be divided in 3. kinds according to the
practiese of their Church, that is in Sacrilege Incest, and ^dulerier in
Sacrilege as when Luther, Knox, Craige, and other suchlike foresworne Monks
Priests and Friars Joined them selves with any woman in an Sacrilegiorus bed
against their vows and promise made to God. 1. Tim. 5.11. Incest as when they
Marry within forebiden degrees as Sister and Brother Bairnes lying in their
owen blood adultery when an man thiketh the woman which is deuorced from her
husband as we have showed above mat. 19.9.

OF David Straitone minister of Colstrue. CHAP. XXIIII.
David Straiton Minister of Colstane after he hade been in anay assembly in
Aberdine coming home by the wae become Mad and in that raging madness did
loose his life by the way in Kincarne.

This was the fruit he received of their sinodoll decrees set out against
afficted catholics to be Spoiled of the Knowleog of God and of him self at
his final end when hade most to do with the

OF Duncane Dauidsonne minister. CHAP. XXV.
MAster Duncane Dauidsone Minister and Person of the Church of Rethe^ did
loose his life in the like rage, which wos a ^ust punition of God, for so much
that he did take in Marriag^ an othermans wife Called Ianet forbes during the
life of her first husband Lord of Auchinhoofe and and Auchinhoofe did take to
him self a Sister of the Lord Aberzeldies as his wedded wife, but in deed in
both the Sides it was manifest adultery. So that by the Ministers laws oppen
adultery as will approved as lawfall Marrirge.

This is the light of their Gospel which can not distingish the ane from the
other that thing which is of God, by that then which is of Satan.

OF Ihon Stroquhane Minister at the Church of Keige CHAP. 26.
Ihon Straquhane did confess to an Gentle man who did relate the same to me,
that Satan did apeare Visiiblie to him a long time before hi^ death, and
chiefly in his bed where Satan did almost strangle him so that la^y he did
loose this mortal life in a Rage without any knowldge o^ God or yet him self,
This is a great curse of Go^ when a man becomes witless at his latter end
when he has most to do with the same.

OF M. Ihon Messer Minister of Mellicke. CHAP. 27.
M. Ihon Minister of Mellieke for taking o^ an young child's brotti took a
little Child of: 7. year old and drewned him this was the crudslitie he used
to a witless creature likewis^ he hade a little black dog that folloed on
hi^ the space of ane year, some tim it would Roeke the crudle, and when he would
be at his supper it would sit at the board with him he on the on side of the
chandler and it on the other, and when he yeede to the watter said, called
ythen to his prayeis, it ever accompined him. also Golden Chainzie being taiken
away theifteously, the seem Minister to obtain the same agane did put an Cock
under an Caldron, Inquiring from the Cock has this man taiken the Chainzie,
he did spear rund about until the time the Cock did crawe when he was Named
who did steel the Chainzie.

To show that this Cock was Satan it is Evident, because that a natural
Cock hade no will nor understanding to Declare where the Chainzie was.
Likewise the Lord of Haddoch who was present at this Revelation of Satan did
Incontinent loose natural wits and become bestraught in mind and did a little
after loose this mortal life.

OF M. Thomas Andersone Minister at the Church of Glass CHAP. XXVIII.
Master Thomas Andersone in an assembly in Elgine being persued in the Chanrie
Church by some of his Brethere^, as it was presuppo^ed to make a sacriffice of
him to the Devil he saved him self on horseback by speed of foot, his boy
being trken by the said Ministers was never seen again, the Lord knows what
they did with him.

OF M. Androvv or then M. VVilliame Dalachindore. CHAP. XXIX.
THis Master Androw Dalachie Minister of Achindore being persued by some of his
Brethren in the same Chanrie Church of Elgine being bereft of his Cloak sword
and his be hinging sleaues did eschape him self out of theer hands at that
time, and for hastiness to save him self did almost drown him self in the
watter of Spey, and after his arriving home did take bed and in few days
thereafter did loose his mortal life.

OF M. Alexander Dovvglas Bishope of Muray. CHAP. XXX.
MAster alexander Douglas Bishope of Murray Being diseased in his body could
no^ obtain his hetlth until the time aprotie young wench was brought to him
at his owen desire to conforte him in his sickoesse. and after that was found
with bairne, he did persuade a friend of his to accept of the Child as his
owen to save him self from that point of dishonnour.

This same Bishope being absent from the Town of Elgine his owen wife and his
Brother M. Gaui^ Douglas did see Satan keeping the Bishops study in his
absence, who was supponet to be his Doctor. in his presence, as he was to
Luther before him.

The said Bishope is full of craft and deceit which he practiced both agains
Catholics and Protestants, his pride is Intollerale as he did chiefly show
when he would nowise be content with his Brother Gauin until the time he did
cry him pardon sitting upon his knees in the Council house fore a little
dissobedience, which truly weighted in it self was no fault at all his malice
lich^oie, and Gluttony are Evident to world, which are the proper qualities of
a profaine Bishope meet for the protestant Religion.

OF M. Bartholl Robertsonne Mininster of Rynie. CHAP. XXXI.
MAster Barthole Robertsonne Minister of Rynie for the time, made a wifes
Testament after she was dead, more for her husbands Commodity, and his owen
then Justice require, in causing his owen man with fained voice to speak be
hind the Dead wife, as it hade been the wife her self for such distribution
of her Goods as the Minister hade Informed his owen man to say. This treachery
was prouen against him, and him self deprived. he made no conscienece likewise
to abuse Ihon Baxters wife in Elgine by his adultery. and when he was
reproved of that dshonestie he answered and said that he played but a little
wanton ticke, and gave her but a Check by the way. Behold the fruits of this
new Religion without any Conscience before God or shame before man there be
tow Reasons wherefore they account no thing of mortal sins? the first is
that a man has no free will and Inherent grace to resist such tentations, but
when the tentation comes they say that they must yield unto the same of
necessity because the Co^manddments of God are in possible to be kepet, and
chiefly this co^mandemants, which is concerning the concupissance of flesh.
The second Reason is as they say, that for the respect of faith which they have
in Christ, neither the sin of Adultery, homicide, thifte, or any other
deadly sin is Imputed to them as deadly sins but as venial and Even in the
mean time that they are Iniust and full of such mortal sins in them selves
that they are made Just by the Justice which is in Christ apprehended by their
faith. This in the doctrine or all Proestants, and puritans, and Chiefly of the
Puritans see calvin lib. 3. Inst. cap. 2. sect. 2.

We may add the third reason which is as they say. that they are not bound
in conscince to keep any law that is Either of God or man, but that they are
made free from all Laws in their consciences by these faith in Christ and
liberty of their Gospel. so you may see how their life and doctrine go
soundly together accordinh to the heresy of the libertins, which have no
Religion Indeed, but an outward show of fained Godliness Even in their most
zealous profession to decrue the world.

Of Makovvly Minister at the Church of kinnimore. CHAP. XXXII.
MAckowly Minister at the Chuch of Kinnimore, the Communion being
Ministrea-Ministreaed to the people, said to some of his friends, Elders and
Officers of the Church that there was a Roasted Gouse in the Ailehouse and
As Much bread and wine after the Communion as was necessary to eat and drink
with propertion to the same, so at the Ministers persausion they consumed the
Goose with the Communion bread and wine which were resting after the action in
the Church.

Now I will ask of them if they hade faith in Christ when they did eat the
roasted Goose with the Communion bread and wine, which did rest after the action
as they hade before? then I say that they eat Christ by the same faith as
really with the roasted Goose and Communion briad and wine together as they did
before with the Communion bread and wine alone, for so much as faith Reaches it
self up to Heaven to receive Christ there sitting at the reght hand of God the
father, and not to the Communion bread and wine to receive him there with a
corporal mouth within the compass of their Sacrament, according to their
doctrine.

If they will reply and say that they hade faith habitually and ot actually in
Christ, because the dead Eliments (that is the roasted Goose with the bread and
wine) could not stir up their faith actually to believe in Christ, without
the word Joined to them to quicken them as the soul does the Body.

Then I will thus argae aginst them if the Minister in the mean time they did
eat the roasted Goose with the bread and wine Joined the word to the dead
Eliments (that is to the roasted Goose with the bread and wine) to quicken them
as the Soul does the Body, saying Brethren in the Lord, you must recall to
memory that Christ did shed his blood upon the Cross for remission of your
sins and sits presnnly at the right hand of God and from thence shall come
to Judge the quick and the dead, who likewse has created and ordained this
roasted Goose with the bread and wine to nurish your Bodies corporally, as the
Body of Christ nurisheth your Souls Spiritually eaten by faith. The must
confess that they receive the Body of Christ as truly by actull faith in
Eating the roasted Goose with the bread and wine as they did before with the
bread and wine alone.

For so much as their faith is als free to go up to Heaven to Christ their
Spiritually in eating the roasted Goose with the bread and wine, as it was in
receiving the Co^mumion bread and wine alone before, and no more stay made to
faith to Exercise her office in their action then in the former unless they
Grant some virtue to be in the Comunion bread and wine, which maketd them to
recerue Christ more Effectually then is in says it self, which thing they
will never grant, because that all the Purians affirm that there is no other
recciuing of Christ but only by faith in a Spiritual form without receeuing
of him in the Communion bread and wine with corporal mauth.

Thus you see Evidently how there is no difference Indeed between their
Communion and a prophaine banquete prepared in a Tavern or Inn for the
corporal Sustentaion of men, or a Jewish Communion, which is without all
virtue and grace to cure a sick Soul, for they agree all in that point of
Religion that Sacraments give no Spiritual virtue or grace to the receiver,
but that all virtue and grace of Justification and remission of siinnes are
only obtained by faith in Jesus Christ, and not by the Sacrament or good works.

Now to conclude this purpose we affirm that their faith is as Effectual and
true in Christ when they eat the roasted Goose, as it we when they reciued the
Communion, so we say that they receive Christ by the self same faith as truly
when they eat the roasted Goose Joined with the bread (as is recited above)
conclision that faith receueth Christ as well with the roasted Goose as with the
Communion braed. because Christ's Body is no more within the compass of the
Co^mu^ion bread then within the roasted Goose, but only in Heaven where faith
gooth up to receive him as with they eat Christ in the Communion bread Joined
with the word, for faith and her office is Euenr where a like free, therefore
the fruit and the Effecr must alwise be a like fore all virtue and grace is
obtained by the action of faith, and not by the Communion bread, as is taught
by them selves.

OF M. George Nicoslonne Minister of Gairtelv in Straithboguy CHA. XXXIII.
Master George Nicolso^ne Minister at the Church of Gairthly after that he did
know surely in an assembly at Elgne in murray hade concluded amongst them
selves to give him up in a Sacrifice to Satan chief Doctor of their black
divinity, he was so much affrayed of their conspiracy against him that
Iincontinent he took the flight from the synodoll assembly to save his life
from such a tragedy prepared for him, and for the greater have to run away
he hade almost loosed his lif in passing amasedly and rashly through the watter
of Spey, and so soon as he come home to his owen house he went sttraightly to
bed where within a few days he gave up the Ghest, which fighting in the
agoi^e of death said unto his wife, if they Beetheren Chainge not their mainers
and form of life which they peruse, they will lastly make all such an end as
the Read friars did before them This Miserable man by ^hese words did declaree
to us that the Ministers ^id ho^nour and worship Satan with Sacrifice and
ouershipe ho^nour as the Read Friars did before them, which by the commandment
of the Pope, with the assistance of Christian Princes were all ^estroyed in one
day, which form of death (as M. George Nicollso^ne did fotetell) should fall
upon the Ministers for the like service made to ^athn. see the history of the
Read Friars, otherwise called Templiars in the French tragical ^istories of
Belfora.

An faithful womon which did hear these words ^f M Georges owen wife when he
did speak of ^he Ministers at the hour of his death did rehearse them unto me
as I have written above:

OF M. Ihon knox Minister of Bally in Enzie. CHAP. XXXIIII.
Master Ihon Knox Minister of Belly in Engzie one Spey side being consecrated
by ^he Brethren as a Sacaifice unto Satan in an ^ther assembly at Elgine in
Murray he took the ^ight from the said assembly to save him self from such
daunyer, and for have to Eschape most ^ade drowned him self in the watte, of
Sp^y. ^athan at that time could obtain no other thing ^f him but only did
deprive him of an Eye which ^e could never obtain again unto his dying day
^ese that saw him spoiled after the fearful sensentence of the foresaid
assembly against him did relate this history unto me.

OF M. Peter BlaeKeburne Bishope of Aberdine. CHAP. XXXV.
Master Peter Blackurne Bishope of aberdin^ is aceused to be witch and
Necromace^ for four causes.

First for so much that he has a Clock so Enchaunted and Charmed by
witchcraft that when so ever any Gentle woman did cover her self with the same,
she was Incontinently berefte wit^ love of him, wherefore it was commonly spoken
tha^ he did purchase to bim self the Lord of Caskibens Daughter by his
Enchanted Clock.

Secondly there was a younhe wenche in Buchannochie which is within the Baronie
of Gigh^ who was so bewitched that she hade no power t^ peruse her Members
Arms and Legs, but wa^ Impotena in their function, wherefore the wen^ hes
Fathar did carry his dangter to the Bishope (...) Aberdine for the famous bruit
he hade to cu^ such dieases as other witches do, to the end the by his aid
and craft the maid might recou^ her health again, which Indeed she hade
confe^red with the Bishope and used his craft in suc^ behallfe? in the mean
time she hade a vision when she saw viuely one Ravening Beast cast the sik^se
upon her, and an other Ravening Beast take (...) of her, that is one Devil did
cast the disease upon ^er and an other Devil take it of.

Thirdly when the witches of the North were ^ccused by the Bishope and other
Ministers ^y the commission which my Lord Marquis of ^suntly hade obtained from
his Majesty to this ^ffect, some of the wtiches did answer to the ^ishope,
and said, if your life were alse would ^yed in this behalfs as ours are you would
be ^und more familiare with Satan then we are

Fourthly when an boy called williame Read ^d spy in the Council house where
the Ministers ^ere assembled in the Town of Aberdine Satan (...) shape of a
black dog, M. Peter Blackeburne ^oderatur for the the time did so Enchaunt
this ^resaide williame Read to end he should not reu^de their secreete confence
with Satan that the ^y did loose his natural wits and became a fool, ^d
likewise did never ritorne to his netiue coun^ey thereafter, as you may see in
the life of M. ^lliame Roberrsonne Minster of Tarland in ^romare more at lenght.

Moreover his ungodly usury is known to the ^orld which takes 15. Marks for
the hundredth ^erely which is a Iewsh form of dealing against Christian.

OF M. VVillame Robertsone Minister of Tarland CHAP. XXXVI.
Masters VVilliame Robertsone Minister at the Chuch of Tarland in Cromare went
to ^e presb^trie of aberdine with his boy called williame Read, which being in
the Councel^ House quyetly, did see Satan in form of a black dog and
retourning home again did speair^ at his Master what such an black dog it
was* his Master understanding that he saw the black dog, Incontinently
directed the boy abacke to M. Peter Blackburne Moderataur for the tim wit^ a
Mistiue letter, when M. Peter understood the truth of the matter as is reciteh
above, he did Incontiently cast such witchraft and sorcerie upon the boy that
he did loose his natural wits, an^ euere since did remain a fool, and did
never ret^ourne to his native Country.

OF Ihon Durie Minister of Manrosse CHAP. XXXVII.
IHON Durie a foresworne Monk being i^ Edinbrugh for sundry of his owen
affairs h^ wife went up unto his Study where when she sa^ Satan like a
blache man lying on a low Bed i^ the Studdie, she was so perturbed with such
a fear and tentation of Satan that she did stric^ her self with a sharp
knyfe in at the shou^ Ribbs so that all the Neghbours did despair (...) her
life, which Nevertheless she did not loose (...) that time Ihon Durie being
returned home (...) Excuse the matter said that the peapll should ^ Interprese
that fact of his wifes in an Evil pai^ because that God did ptrmite his most
holy Se^uants to be tempted with Satan. it is true the God permits Satan
to tempt and Exercise (...) holy Seruantts as it is written of S. Anthon, S.
Hylarion, and many others, but not to be ouer^herowen with Satan's tentations,
as Ihon Duties wife was which was a manifest taken that Ihon Durie was a
Necroamancer and familair with ^athan, to have him so familiarly laidvp upon
^is law beedde in his Studdie, and that Satan ^ade power oner his wife, when
at his persuasion and tentation she did Endeuore to kill her self, as ^hese
who did see this Miserable woman in this ^light did relate unto me.

OF M. Thomas Meluine Minister at kindrimie CHAP. XXXVIII.
Master Thomas Meluine Minister at the Church of Kindrimie being in his Chalmer
^t conference with Satan his wife perceiving the ^me was surprised with such a
horrible fear that ^he Incontinetly become mad and bestraught (...) mind,
which thing being truly known to him, ^or excess of fear that his wife
should reveal his ^creete conference with Satan, he likewise be^o^madde. him
self and bestraught in mind. This ^as the Just hire which he did receive for
his ^ruice made to Satan.

OF M. Robert Cornuell Minister at Linlothgo CHAP. XXXIX.
Master Robert cornuell Minister at Linlithgo being in his Study his Eldest
Daughter ^ome to seek a book from him. to go to the ^choole, and because she
saw a black dog lying upon board conferring with her Father, which leapt of
the board at her entering in the Studdie and did hide him self from her sight,
her Father beat her for temeritie and rashness to come so suddenly upon him as
she did by his Ezpectation. This you may behold how the Devil is Doctor to
the Ministers in teaching them their black divinity condemned by the Aneient
Fathers long ago.

OF M. James Spading Minister and servant to M. Thomas Straquhane Person of
kincare. CHAP. XL.
M. JAMES Spading coming an sunday to the Church of Lumphanan and pasting over
the wette^ of Die in the Coble of Kincarne the Devil apeared unto him
accompaining him the space of tow miles, caused him retire back to the Persons
house, and at his back coming would have kessed the Persons wife, being
refused of his desire kissed an wench in the house, and Incontinaently
therefter he became mad and raging be his mind, bestroode an Ox of the
Persons which he ran to the death so that the Minister i^ his rage and the
Ox did both die at once. The was the due reward which he obtained for h^
obedience to Saahan.

OF M. Arthour Fithie Minister of Interkillevve CHAP. XLI.
WHEN Certain witches. 1605. yeer^ were accused and burined at Brighe^ they
affirmed amongst other things that (...) Arthour Fithie Minister of Inner
Kissowe assistd with them when they consulted with Satan, and Exercise their
craft.

Thus you see how the proper fruits of the Ministers is to be Necromancers or
witches to learn their lesson by conference with Satan.

Moreover when some Ministers and Genth men were drinking in Tavern Satan
came in to them in the form of a black dog, this same Minister Fithie took
an shoulder of Mutton out of the plaite before the Gentle men and did cast the
same in the black dogs mouth which suddenly went away with it, therefore a
Gentleman did say unto the Minister Fithie what was in your mind to cast the
roasted Flesh which was ordained for us in the Devils mouth, might you not have
given him raw Flesh, seeing that there is fire innough in Hell to roast the same
behold here how Satan is not only familiar with there Ministers in their privy
Studies, but ^lso in open In^s before the whole world.

OF M. Androvv Ogstoun Minister of the Church of Canesby in Cathinesse. CHAP.
XLII.
Master Androw Ogstoun Minister of the Church of Canesby in Cathnesse does
^eruse so much a book of Necromancie made by M. Michel ^scotte that year of
God. 1608. ^e is aecused to be an open Necaomancer, that is (...) say a man
which Consulteth with Satan, to Learn from this hellish Doctor the knowledge
of such thing as he thinks Expedient or profitable to his office or condion
of his Estate

Of M. David Coluine Minister of Fersoch CAHP. XLIII.
MAster David Coluine Minister at the Church of Fersoch in Cathnesse, being so
well whitled and drouke at night that he could not learn his Preaching for the
Sunday following he was constrained to rise out of his bed long before day in
winters Night to Study upon hie text and Glosa thereof, in the mean time of
his reading and Studiing upon his books, come in a black dog to help him,
which when a young man o^ twelfe years old his bed follow did espy, h^ was
so amassed at the sight of the black dogg^ that he beeome as it were benumed of
his senses and almost without all moving and feeling Nevertheless with such
power as he hade h^ made a little sign with his hand (because he could not
speak) to the Minister to help him out o^ such a staite as he hade presently,
whereof the lik^ he never felt before, the Minister did nothing bu^ mock and
laugh at the silly Boy, in his great anguish and distress, who seeing the
Minister Ie^ting at him he hade recourse to God praying i^ his heart God help
me Christ help me and a litl^ after his prayer made to God the black dogg^
went away, and the Boy be good to reprotch the Minister of his uncharitable
deed that he would not help him in such a strait, the Minister answered and
said I beheld you to see what you would do, the boy said again you shall see
what I shall do, so saying did Inuest him self in his apparel and went away
from the Minister, so that he would never be bedfollswe to him ageine.

This boy which did suffer this Iniure from the Minister did declare to me this
history of him self, after that he become a Catholic, and how this Minister
thereafter was passessed with a Devil that men were constrained to bind him
hand and feet to save themselus from his furious Rage.

OF M. James Read Minister at the Church of Banchory on Dye side. CHAP. XLIIII
IHON Cheyne servant to M. Ihon Cheyne Lord of Petphichie, being suspected to
have taken away thift'ously a Golden Chain from the Lord of Petfichie, to
purge him self of such a slander went to James Read Minister at the Church of
Banchory on Dye side for the famous report of his great skill of secreete
things by the Art of his Necrmancie, how soon the Minister ^ade received
Eight Marks of Scots money for his reward in this behalf, he conuoyed Ihon
Cheye within a Barn or corn house with a Catte to make a Sacrifice unto
Satan and so sone the Minister hade made round circle with ceten Inuocations
of Satan the Earth began to tretremble and Satan a little after did apeare
in the form of a black Moure with curled locks, the Minister Incontinent
thereafter his arising out of the Earth did cast the Catte to him in a
Sacrfice, since did ask Satan where the Golden Chain was, who did answer
him with a low gross voice as if he hade been spaking out of dark den or
hollow cave under the Earth, that the Golden Chain was in such a place where
it was found in deed, Ihon Cheyne being put forth of barn the Minister was
much troubled to send Satan down again to his former place, Ihon Cheyne was
so affrayed at the sight of this Evil Spirit a^ that time that he appeared
never to be will Satled in his natural wits, but to hau a souage and vild^
countenance and behaueour.

OF M. VVilliame Pape Minister of Dornoch in Sutherland. CHAP. XLV.
MAster williame Pape Minister of Dornoeh in Sutherland ryding home from the
Town of Taine to his owen house in Dornoch, was so assailzred by the way by a
multiude of Ravens, that they did not only scratch his Body with their Claws
and Nailles, but also did rent and tears his apparel with their bills and
becks, his wife asking him after his ariuing in the house, wha^ should be the
cause of his disarryment and trouble he andwered, that it was a multitude of
Raven which did rent his garmints and scratch hodie with their bills their
furious rage in stricking and ^eaking at him with such an Extraordinare power
that with great difficulty he hade saved him self from the dint of their
Claws and beck? which thing so soon his wife hade related to their Nig^boues
they did all suspect that such a multitude of Ravens was a company of Devils,
for so much that such a skirmish or bickring of Raurns against a reasonable man
was never hard or seen hard or seen before, and for confirmation of this
truth after such conflict he was so vexed and beaten in his owen house by the
same Ravens that he was constrained to leave it, and go loge in an other of
his friend, which things show evidently that his trouble and vexation was
caused by a company of Devils which hade power over him, and not by a company
of good Andells.

OF M. Androvv Andersone Minister of Loath Sutherland. CHAP. XLI.
MAster Androw Anderso^ne Minister of Loath in Stuherland being in the morning
Studiing on his books in his prive Chalmer, in come o^ne of his Scholars
called Huchon Aikin to get a kenning of his lessone, and there he saw beside
the Minister a little beacke whelpe as it hade been new whelped, which after
the sight thereof did with such speed return to the door that he did breach
his head and Incontinent thereafter didly bed sick the space of fourteen
days with continual ratdring of his meat by vomit, the Minister ever still
Intysing the boy not to disclose the cause of his corporal disease. Thise was
the year of God 1610. in the month of Deember.

OF M. Robert Bruce Minister first of Edinbrugh and since at Innernesse CHAP.
XVII.
MAster Rober Bruce Minister of Innernesse the year of God 1608. was so vexed
troubled persued with Satan in form a blecke dog and some time in the shape
of a colte or sole, that could not know by what way he should soue him self
from his danger, and beholding that his Spiritual Armours of Preaching and
Prayers could Avail him nothing in this fearful assault of this potent
Ennemie, he hade accoutse to corporal Armor and force of mortal man,
Neuetheelessee siixe men in Arms mour watched this miserable Minister nighuly,
yet could not Empetch this black dog to oppen the door Every night where M.
Robert Bruee did abide, so that it is likly that this frind ehall passesse him
as he heath done others or he leave him at the last.

And the Ministers to color this matter as much as they could to show that
this come not o^ M. R Bruce for their deserving as if their naugnaughtie lives
and heretical doctrine were accep^able to God, but by M. R. Abercromies and M.
Ihon Hamiltouens Sorceries and Enchantments which did hound this hellish dog
upon M. Rober Bruce, to vex and torment him according to their desire. But
this fond Invention of theirs is no thing else but a malicious detrction and
forged lie. First because M. Robert Abercromie at that tim was out of this
Co^untrey in a College of the Jesuits built in the Town of Brownsberge in the
Kingdom of pole. Secondly Catholic Priests are accustomed by the power of
God given to them to cast Devils out of possessed persons, but not to send the
Devil to vixe any man as the falsely allege. Thridly if the Ministers have
the true Religion and the true assistance of God (as they falsely challenge to
them selves) why do they not chaste away the Devil by the virtue of God for
approbation of their new Gospel as Catholic Priests do for confirmation of
the Catholic Religion. But seeing they have noe power over Satan, as
Catholiqe Priests have, they must co^ufesse that they are but heretics and
the bound slaves of Satan, and no true Chaistians.

This black dog at the last (as the event did show) did transform him self
in a familiare spirit, which M. Robeart Bruce did call his God, for M. Robert
and his familiare spirit were seen conferring familiarely in his Church about
twell hours at even or midnight with great lights in his Church, which these
familiare spirit of M. Roberts did furnish, for M. Robeat being but him self
alon talking with this spirit did take no candles to his Chich for to cause
such light in his Church as was seen M. Robert after long conference with this
familiare spirit said to his friends and neighbors that it was God that came to
teach him such heads of Religion as he should preach publicly to the people.

But the Godly Reader may conjecture what a familiare spirit this was that came
to teach M. Robert about midnight by the histories of Luther Zuinglius the
first Pillars of this New Religion which they rehearse of them selves, as M.
Robert does presently of him self.

For Luther thus writteth of him self in his Book of privy Masses. Contigit
mihi semel sub mediam noctem subito experge fiernet ibi Satan mecum cepit
eiusmodi disputationem audi (Inquit) Luthere Doctor perdocte, nosti enim te
quindecim annos celebrasse Missas priuatas pene quotidie. Quid si tales Missae
priuatae essent horrenda Idololatria. Quid si ibi non affuisset corpus et
sanguis Christi, sed tantum panem et Vinum adorasses, et aliis adorandum
proposuisses, Cui ego Respondi, sum Vnctus Sacerdos, accepi Vnctionem, et
Consecrationem ab Episcopo.

That is to say. it happened me once bout midnigt to be suddenly awakned out of
my sleep. There Satan begaud this disputation with me hear me (says he most
Learned Doctor, Luther, Thou know that thou have almost daily celebrated
privy Masses thise 15 years ago what if such privy Masses were hoarible
Idolatry what if the Body and blood of Christ were not realie there, But only
that thou did adore bread and wine, and offere the same to be adored by
others. whom to I answered, that I was a Priest, and that I had receuued
unction, and consecration from A Bishope.

After these words Luther rehearses all the arqumets which Satan did bring
fourth to prove that the Mass was Idolatry, which arguments of Satan's the
Protestants (as yet) peruse to day against Catholic Romans to prove after
the Imitation of Satan that the Mass is no thing else but plain Idolatry.
And as Satan did first call the Mass Idolatry, so the Protestants and
puritans as his disciples call the Mass Idolatry as M. Roberte Bruce does
also but we Catholic Romans esteem the Mass to be the much more holy, and
divine service of God, that Satan does abhor the same, as he does all other
holy things Profitable to man's salvation as the chief author of all Idolatry,
and heresy to purchase the damnaoion of man's presently as he did In ages all
before we will let the Protestants follow after Satan In this behalf as
they do in many other things, considering that no friendly admonition can
move them to acknowelege their fault, and Correct the same for their owen
salvation.

Zuinglus the patriach of the Puritans writes the history of him self, in
his book entitled the help or soccour of the Eucharist. saying that a spirit
came in the night and did teach him that Christ body was not with in the
Euchoist or holy Sacrement really, but only tyepically or figuratively, as the
thing signified as in the figne. he writteth also that he did not know whether
this spirit which did teach him his lesson, was black or white.

Considering now that M. Robert Bruce does follow the doctrine of Luther and
Zuinglius in calling the Mass Idolattrie as Satan and Luther did before him,
and in denying Christ Body and Blood to be realy within the compass of the
holy Sacrment as Zuingliue familiare spirit did teach him, what should we
surmise of M. Robberts familiara spirii, but to he of that same kind that
Luthere and Zuinglius spirits were before night Doctors of dark^sse, and of
the black Gospel, which leads silly souls to evident perpition.

when M. Robert vanteth of him self that he saw the Triuitie and Preach the
same publlckly to the people, we should beliue S. Ihon the Evangelist rether
then a fauce glorioons lying heretic. for S. Ihon thus wreteth* deu^ nemo
vidit vnquau. No man has scene God at any time. this he speaks of mortal
men Living in this world.

when it is written that Moises did speak face for face with God as the frind
with his frind, it is not to be understood that he saw God or yet spoke with
God personally at that time. therefore ^t is said that he speak with God face,
for face because the Angel of God speak to him as an Ambassador in the person
of God for the Law was given to Moses by the Ministry of Angeals ^a S. Luke
writteth in acts of the Apostles. And S. Poul the like to the Falatiens. bal.
3.19. And when Moses defyred to see the face of God, his divine essence or God
in his glory, God did answer to Moses, or reather the angel of God as his
Embassadowr in his person. Non Poteris videre Iaciem merm. ^on enim vedebit me
homo et vevet.

That is: thou can not see my face. for no mortal man may see me and live,
that is abiding ^n this mortal life, he can not see me. than holly M. R. Bruce
did the Trunnite in this mortal life and if M. Robert will say that he was
Ravished up ^o the third Heaven, as S^ Paul was, because he has ^o scriptur
for proefe of the Rauissing, we will ^eliue him no mor than we do a lying
heretic.

OF M. Ihon Chalmer Minister of keith CHAP. XLVIII.
MAster Ihon Chalmer Minister of Keith being a student in Aberine did declare a
^earefull vision which he did see to an other StudStudent called M. Georg
Spence, which is now Minister at the Church of S. Trule, the year of God 1611.
which vision was that he did see a certain broad band going about from his Neck
on side to the ochester hole on the other on the which band was written. This
is thy Condemnation. After this time he was made Master Regent, and since
Subprencidall in the College of old Aberdine, and lastly Minister of Keith, at
which time he was so tempted with Satan te beraue him of his life, that he
could nowise resist the vehemenciee of Satan's tentations, thereafter
declarring his mystery to M George Chalmor his Brother M. George did conuoy
him from Keih to Aberdine and the did desire the Brethern to pray God for M.
Ihon, but beholding that all their prayers were in vain his frinds did conuoy
hom^ from Aberdine to Cullen (where his good Father did remaie to see if there
he migh be fredde from Satan's tenations by his good Fathers prayers, but as ti
was reports Satan did vex him there more thtn before, and taken out of his
bed from his wife did so trouble him in his Chalmer that he could get no
rest at all, nor his wife thereafte^ would never consent to bed with him
again* Lastly he did retire to the Church a Kinth again, and after he hade
married tow perones, with great vexation of Satan in his Pulpite, he desired
his hostage to have his dinner in reddinesse within (...) A letle time. and in
the mean season he would go unto his Chalmer to perform some quiet busines^e
he hade to do, hes host beholding that he did ^emeinne to long in his Chalmer
from co^mining ^o his dinner, he did knock at the door to desire M. Ihon to
come and take his refection: but the good man of the house considring that M.
Ihon ^id make no answer at all, he and some of his Neighbors did breach up the
Door of the Chalmer wherein M. Ihon did remain, which thing being ^one at
their first entrisse they did see the Floor ^uer run with blood, and M. Ihon
Chalmer ^ing over a Chist on his breast his head hanging ^owne and the blood
gushing out at his throat. which was cutted with his owen hand by the
^ersuasion of Satan? These men considering the ^iserable spertackle of their
Pastor did suddenly ^ke him up and sow the cotted Srinnes of his ^roate
together, the gushing of his blood being (...) stayed, they did ask at him why
he would not ^en the door, who answered and said, that ^than would not premit
him to do the same until ^e time he did cut his owen throat with the
^harpest knyfe he head, and that Satan was so ^eat a Philopher, that he did
find out more Rea^s that he should cut his throat then M. ^on could find for
the sauetie of his life.

Likewise an honorable Gentlman worthy of ^edence with a great multitud of
Inhabitants of the Town did thts speak unto bim.

M. Ihon we that are all assisting hire have taken a great occasion of
slander at such a cruel fact as you have used in putting violent hands into
your self considering that you which profess your self to be a Spiritual
Pastor and Guider o^ men's souls to Heaven, take the contrary way to your
self to do aginst the Commandment of God by persuasion of Satdan, therefore
we will desir^ you for the love of God to tell us the troth whether your
calling to Preach the word of God and administer the Sacraments be lawful or
no, and take no fear to tell us the troth in this behalf because your life is
loosed in this world without any hope of Relief.

M. Ihon answered and said, allace our calling is neiiher lawful nor good nor
any wise approved by God, Then the Gentlman replied and said M. Ihon why did
you abuse the people to lea^ their souls to Evident damnation out of the tru^
way of Salvation. M. Ihon answered and sai^ allace Sir the disordained love of
the world di^ move me so to do.

The Ministes hiaring that M. Ihon hade deny and his Religion in this fashion
before the Gentlma^ his Parishoners they were much scandalzed i^ this fact, and
therefore to repair the honno^ which they did loose by the denyell of their
Reli^ion* who wos one of the most learned men amo^ongst them all, incontinently
they did bring ^e artickles of their Faith unto him and caused M. Ihon to
Swear and subscribe them against ^s conscience saying unto him what is this
you ^e doing will you shame us your Brethren and ^e whole Religion professed
in this Country.

He confesses likewise that all his Preaching ^as for pride, vain Gloire,
hypocrisy, and out ^ting of him self, and not for the Gloirie of christ and
Salvation of men's souls, as the M. ^Valter Smyth reports.

He likewise confesses that he often times did ^o^mite bougrie and the sin
of Soeomie, and ^hen he did confess such things his Brethren ^id nipe him to
stay him from confessing of his ^nnes, saying quyely will you shame us all, M.
^on did answer to them saying: This is my case ^ow but it will be yours nixe as
you shall feel by ^xperieace herafter.

When. 14. or. 15. Ministers were standing (...) ths Chalmer and Satan in the
midest of them, ^. Ihon did request all his Brethren to chaste ^way Satan out
of his sight, whose presence did ^uch affray him, but Satan for none of their
^quests and prayers would go away* because they ^de no power to command him.

Lastly Satan did kindle such an fire wiehin ^s bowels that he did request
Earnestly the As^tantes to cut a slite in his side and to power in a Barroll
of cold watter to quench that in fernable sire, which did torment him.

When George Douglas Minister of Cullen, and M. Pattike Dargue Minister of
Fordyce did come to conforte M. Ihon Chalmer in his Anguish and distress,
Satan did so trouble and to^ament them, that they appeared to many to be
^alfe truly possesed and vexed with Satan as M. Ihon was before, never
thelesse with lapps of time their fear and great trouble did some wha^ decay.

Conclusion of this purpose. First good Reade^ you shall understand and mark
sundry things i^ M. Ihon Chalmers former life.

First that he was one of the most lea^ned Scholars amongst them all, and so
konwgainst his owe^ conscience.

Secondly that he was a proud vain gloriou^ man, an hypocrite, and bougrare.

Thridly that he and the Ministers hau no^ power to chasse away the Devil some
them selue^ and that none of them has power to help o^ other.

Fourthly that he did cut his owen throat, a^ Judas did hing him self at
Satan's Instigatio^ And not withstaning all these abominable sin^ and
codditions, the Ministers do openly prea^ in their Pulpits, without all shame,
that he is o^ of Gods Elect, but you must understand him (...) ^e such an Elect
as Judas was before him.

Lastly to hide their Slavery and subjection to Satan their usual custom is
to say, that Satan ^s accustomed to tempt the most Godly men that ^re and
therefore no man should be scandal^zed with such at tentation as it befell M.
Ihon Chalmer. But in that behalf they shawe their great malice to deceive
Ignorant people when they make no distnction between a Godly Christian, which
overthrows Satban in his tentation, and ^n ungodly Minister, which is
overthrown to ^he dead by Satan's tentetons, for Satan did ^empt Christ Job,
S. Paul, S. Anthon, S. Bernard and many other Godly men, which did tread Satan
and his tentations under their feet: But ^ontrariwise Satan does tread
ungodly Minis^ers under his feet by his daily tentations as is Evidently
proved through all the discourse of ^ur book.

OF Master Ihon Straetoun. Minister of Forese CHAP. XLIX.
M. Allexand douglasse and M. Ihon Streatoun contending on against on othere
for the ^ishoprie of Mourray, M. Allexander Douglasse ^t the last by moyen of
friends did prevail against M. Ihon Streatoun, who seeing him self
disapo^nted of his Intent. being lofty minded, was seized with such a deep
displeasure* and sadness of ^eart, that lastly he did fall in a deadly
disease and disbaire of this mortal life. he considering him self in such a
disperat plight, and no remaide to be found for the sauetie of his life, then
he did declaire openly that secret which long ago was lurking in his sorofull
mind, and confess openly that all things, which he did preach to the pople,
were but decefull liee, and strong delusions, which form of life he did peruse
against his conscience for love of riches and preeminence in the eye^ of
mortal men as M. Ihon Chalmer which did cute his owen throt did co^nfesse
before him at the howr of death, his wife likewise a bold chidding scould, who
with her bitier taunts, did ofen tyme^ wex and torment him his continual song
therefore wos, woe be to me that is thus troubled by an^ evil wife and an false
Religion. his consienc^ did of strongly cheche him at that time for hi^ leing
hypocrisy in times bypast, that he did despair of Gods mercy for pre^hing of
his heresies and deceauing of Ignoront souls, when friend exhorted him to cry
for mercy from God about he answered and said that God hade no mercy to give
him.

When the Minister of Nairne called Ross^ came to see his Brother, and to
confort him in hi^ anguise and distress, so soon as he saw M. Iho^ in such a
disperat plight, he was surprised wit^ such a horeible fear that his face did
touren dir^ectly to his shoulder, not all together in his neck^ as Sir Ihon
Knox face did when he was preaching in S. Geels Church of Edinburgh, a Noble
Baron whose name of sete purpose I conceill, said when he saw the Ministers
face of Nairne so turned eway from his right seat, that it was the most ougly
feareull sight that ever he did see or behold with his eyes, when M. Robert
Bruce did com to confort M. Ihon in his misery, his wife said to him Sir you
know not who is here come to visie you. who is that saietd M. Ihon? his wife
answered and said, it is M. Robert Bruce your good friend. M. Ihon answered and
said, he is the first begotten of the Diuill away with him.

This is the friendship which is amongst heretics and all other ungodly men,
when they are in despair of Gods mercy, with a certrine persuasion of there
owen condm^ation they hate most these who were their greatest friends in this
world as a licherous man hates to the extremity that strompet at the hour of
death which with her luring words and gracious entertenement did hold him
continually in deacly sin, curse and maledectione of God, and so with her
decetfull pleasurs lead him pleantly to his eternal damnation. so the greater
there friendship has been in the world with the offense of God, so the
greater shall there hatred be in Hell, because that each on of them with there
worldly counsel was cause each one to othere of their owen Damnation.

How the Ministers did consault with Satan in an assembly at Elgine a
Murray. CHAP. L.
M. Alexander Rason Person of Spynes being in an assembly with the rest of
the Ministers at Elgine his wife called Boniman having receeued a M^ssiue
letter directed to the person, she went to the council house to deliver the
letter unto him, but the rest of the Ministers would not permit him to go out
to her, nor yet she to enter unto him, wherefore she satte daune in the Church
until the time they should come out of the Council house, at last when they
come foortd together she saw Satan amongst them, which sight did stricke such
a fear unto her heart that Incontinently she become, mad and bestraught in
mind and within ten days did loose her life thus you see how they consult with
Satan to learn their lessone from him both in secreete Studies and public
assemblies.

The Deuilli Preaching in the Church of North Berrique. CHAP. LI.
IT is Euidnt to all notabe men which were living about Edinbrugh in the days
of Chanceller Maitland how Satan did Preach to an assembly of witches in the
Church of Northberique, where the Reader of Tranent was Clarque Register which
company of witches were a little after execute by public Justice.

When the Evil Spirit did Preach unto them, his apparel was conform to the
Ministers arrayment when they go to Preach, First Satan was Inuestd with a
long black Gown standing in the Pulpite in the shape of a Minister and since
did begin his Preaching to the witches as the Ministsrs are accustomed to do
in these or such like fashion.

The last time we did occupy this place (dear Brethren and sisters) our
text was of such a pairte of our Gospel whereof our G^osse was in some
measure to your Edification which thing did move Chancler Maitland to laugh
when so ever he did behold the Ministers begine his preaching as Satan did,
after the declaration of the witches.

Thus each one may see how Satan did Preach in the Ministere Church in a
Mininsters arrayment, in a Ministers Puolpite, in a Ministers form to show to
all men, what conformity, anologie and proportion is between Satan and
Ministers in the vrtering of their false Gospel.

Many oculare witness there were which have seen Sanhan preach in the shape
of a Minister as is recited above but no man can be found which has seen him
celebrate the Massee in the form of a Priest in a Catholic Chruch at one
Catholic Alter for so much as Satan darre not seoffe or Jest, at the holy
sacrifice of Mass, which is the divine service of God as he does at the
Ministers Preaching, which is a delightful sport and mocking stock unto him:
but contratiwise, he persuadeth Luther by his sophistical reasons to abolish
the holy Sacrifice of the Mass as contrary to his attempts, which Satan would
never have done if the Mass hade been Idolatry, as the Ministers Impiously
call it, which Idolatry is proper service to Sathat.

OF the Raging tempests which Satan stirs up in the Air during the time
of Minister Preaching and assembli CHAP. LII.
DOmious Nider Inquisitor of the faith writteth in his book a Entitled de
malessais CHAP. 4. that a witchman did confess before the Judge accussd in
Justice that when they would desire any Tempeest to be stired up in the Air
they Incalled the Prince of Devils by express words requesti^g him to send
some of his Inferiors to Execute their desire and to obtain their demand of
Satan they did kill a black foul. and cast it up in the Air in a Sacrifice
to the Evil spirit, which being done, then the Evil spirit stirs up in the
Air some time such Boisterous winds as might pull up great ^rese by the Roots,
and overthrow the tops of houses, some times such ligheings and fearful
shotts of thundar that they did kill both men and beasts, some times such
storms of hail and abundance of showers that they did distroy (...) great
pairt of the suits of the Earth and wrack ^he world with famine.

Wherefore when all men do see such Raging te^psts in the Arre in the time
the Minis^ers do hold their assemblies we can conie^ture no other thing but
that such Effects should ^roceede from the like causes, that is when the
Ministers in their assembles Incall Satan, ho^no^r reverence, and offer up
some Sacrifice unto ^im to the end they learn from him in their ^ublique
conference such things as they desire to know of him both presnt and to come,
and in the mean time to confirm their bloody decrees of ^hese Impious
assemblies set out aganist persec^ted Catholics Satan gives a
demonstration of his consent by sudden stormds of hail and great ^lasts of
wind, which weast and dostroy away the ^ruits of the Earth.

All men do see these thing by daily Experience when the Mindsters do hold
their assemblies and couentions, for the destucion of Catholques and subversion
of Christ's true Religion, which our Godly predicessours did profess before us.

How the Doctrine of the Ministers is the Doctrine of Satan because the
Devil does teach such things to the uvitches as they do to their Auditors.
CHAP. LIII
THese which were Inquisitors the faith write in their book Entitled marlleus
maleficara^ that when the witches profess them selves to be Satan's servants,
Satan gives thm sundry precepts to be kept agianst the Catholic Religion
amongst the which he forebiddeth the witches to make the sign of the Cross
upon them, but to strampe on the same when they get occasion.

Secondly he comandeth them to fast on Sundays, and to make their banquets on
freddayes.

Thirdly he forebiddeth them to make any Sacramental confession of the their
sins and if Incace they make their confession he comandeth them to conceill
their gaert sins, and to confess only some little fatlts.

Fourthly he forebiddeth them to worshipe or adore the holy Sacrament, but at
the time of the Elevation to wincke with their Eyes and not to look to it, or
then to look down and spitte upon the Earth and like wise to centemne Check
and reprotch it with Injuries and despite of the holy Sacrament he commanded a
witch to feign her self to take the holy Sacrament, and to keep it quyetly,
and since for to disho^nour the holy Sacrament, he commanded to Enclose the
same in a pot with a wenemous Toad, which Deuillish Sacrilege being
discloed, this Malicious and abho^miinable witch was punished as she deserves.

After that aman witch of that kind called Sagittaoius hade shote by the
commandment of Satan at the Image of Christ, which wis in form of a
Crucifixe and pierced the same with an Ar^owe out of the which miraculous Blooe
did Issue, ^his miserable man by the virtue of God was so ^nmooueably fixed
that he could not remove ^ut of the place a man passing by did spear at ^im
the cause of his Imobilitie the miserabll wi^ch shaking his head and his hands
in the which ^e shot his Arrow, trembleng with all his body ^ould answer
nothing, the passinger beholding ^ouond adout him did at the last spy the
Arrowe ^xed in the Crucifixe with blood flowing from the ^me, which after he
hade related all things, this miserable wttch was taken by the public
Justice, and after confession made of his Sacreegious fact, ^id loose his life
by such a death as deserves.

This you may clearly see how the doctrine of ^he Protestants is the doctrine
of Satan, because ^ch doctrine is taught by them to their auditors (...)
Satan does teach to the witches, that is the ^ospising of the holy Cross the
contempt of holy ^mages, the depight they have against the wors^iping and
adoring of Christ's blessed body in the ^oly Sacrament, and banqueting upon
fredday, ^sting upon sunday, forebidding of auriculare ^onfession, and if
Incace they make their confes^n to conceill their great sins and to confess
^eir small sins.

How the Prstestants and Puntans for conclusion of our former discourse are
not true Christians, but Infidells Idolaters and vvorshiprs of the Devil.
CHAP. LIIII
FOr better Intelligence of this matter we must understand that the greatest
sin that man can co^mite against God, is the sin of Idolatry, which when a
man gives the sovereign ho^nour, which is only due unto God to any of his
Cretures as wtitteth S. Thomas. the Reason is because is reason that when any
man Gives the souerigne ho^nour, which is only due to God to any of his
creatures, and chiefly to Satan which is Ennemie to God, he pulls the true
God of heaven (as far as lies in his power) out of the Sovereign chair and
Throne of gloirie and places the Creature of God, or than Satan his Ennemie
in the Sovereign Throne of Majesty, and gives to a false God the reerence
ho^nour and worshipe which is only due to the God of heaven.

Now that our Protestants and Puritans commit such an horrible crime you shall
understand by these reasons which Ensue here after.

First when the Protestants and Puritans Incall either tacitly or Expressly,
offer Sacrifice unto him or consult with him, to learn from him Either things
present or to come (as we have shown in the lives of Luther, Zuinglius, and
mani^ Ministers of Scotland as much in their priui^ Chalmers as in their oppen
assemblies) they giu^ by such ritts and cermonies that Sovereign ho^nour unto
Satan which is only due to the true God Heaven because that Sacrifice is an
point of Soueraihne ho^nour whether it be offered up to God by an secret actioc
of the heart or External action of the body, it is forebidden that such
ho^nour should be given to any creature that is but only to God alone, Exodus
22.20. this is the Reason wherefore the Catholic Church offerth no Sacrificee
at all, nether to the Virgin Marie, Angels and Saints of heaven but only to
God alone, wherefor when the witchs Necromancers, Protestants and Puritans
consulters with Satan offer up aniewise Sacrifice unto him, either to ^earne
from him things present or to come, or yet to obtanina any wordly comoditie by
his help, ^hey worshipe him as God and Give the Sovereign honor which is
only due to God to the condemned Devil of hell.

Secondly when the witches, Neeromances Protestonts and Puritans, Incall Satan
to learn from him such things as they desire to konwe, or ^raue his help in
in any worldly matter either ^o^modios to them selves, or Injurious to their
Neighbors.

This Invocation of Satan is an action of false Religion, which is Idolatry,
for so much as by such prayer and Invocation, they ho^nour Satan submitting
them selves unto his power, protes^ing likewise by the same Invocation that
they ^aue need of his help, as of the Prince and author of such good things
as they crave from him. see S. Thomas 2.2. quast. 83 art. 3.

If they accuse the Catholiqes of Idolarite for the Inuoction of the Angels
and Saints of Heaven* much more may we accuse them of Idolatry for the
Invocation of Saints (which are the true servants of God) is with an relation
to God which is Prince above them, therefore it can not be callec Idolatry,
but because the Invocation of Satan is without any relation unto God,
therefore it is true Idolatry for so much as the Invocation finisheth in
Satan it self, and not in God author of all good things.

For better Intelligence of this matter we must understand that Invocation may
by made. 3. ways, first absolutely to God as to the author of all good things
secondly to the servants as God with an Relation to their Lord. thridly to
Satan which is Ennemie to God,

When our Invocation or praieris directed to the servants of God that is to
the Angels and Saints of Heaven that prayer is their Lord: that is we desire
the holy men yet liuind in this mortal life, with the Angels and Saints of
Heaven to concur with us in our prayers, to the end that by their concurrance
and worthiness God may be the more moved to Grant us our request, and of
this kind of Invocation we have many Examples in holy Scripture as Genes.
20.7. Number ^1.7. Job. 42 8. Romans 15, 20. Ephesians. 6.19. but ^hiefly when David
Psalm. 110.7. says: Leuaui ^cuulos meos in montes. vnde veniat Auxilium mihi,
(...) Auxtlium meum a Domino quifecit caelum et terram. That (...): I lift up
mine Eyes to the Montaines from whence help might come to me, my help is from
God which made Heaven and Eaath the Angels ^atriarchs, Prophets and Apostles
are called by ^he Spirit of Prophecy Montaines.

Therefore in an other place speaking of the ^ndation of the Church psalm. 86.
says fundam^ta Eius in Montibus santis. the fundamental ^tones of the Church
are the holy Montaines, ^atriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, which are ^mineniet
and high above all mortal men, in ^onnour digitre and perfection, as lofty
Monta^es do transcend in altitude little hills and hillocks

And in an other place speaking of the Angels and Pastors whereby God does
govern his Church psalm 124.2. Montes Incircuitu Eius et Domi^s in circuitu
Populie sui. that is as if he would say: ^nelicall Montaines do guard the
Church of ^od round about, and notwithstanding him self (...) in the circuit
of his people, and in another ^aceth he says psalm. 90.11. Augeles suis Manda^
dete vt custodiant te in Omnibus viis tuis. that is the lord has given charge
unto his Angels to keep ^e in all they ways.

You see in all these places how God does help and keep his people by the
Ministry of his holy Angels and Sanincts of Heaven. and althought the
Prophet did crave help from the holy Angels, who did keep him in all all
his ways by God, ordinance, yet he acknowlegeth that such help as he did
receive by the Ministry of Angels was from God, when he says* Auecilium
meum (...) Domino qui feeit coelum et terra^. my help is from God which has
creted Heaven and Earth.

But when the Inuoction or prayer is made unto Satan (as it done by the
witches, Necromacers Protestante and Puritas, in is done by Soueraign^ honnour
given unto him without any relation made to God, Because that the Invocation o^
prayer directed unto Satan finisheth in him a^ in the principal author of
such good things, a^ witches, Necrornancers and Ministers do crau^ from him in
their assemblies.

For the prayer and Inocation made to Satan can not be done with any respect
or relation vn^ God (as when we offer up our prayers unto Go^) by the
Ministry of his Angels or Saints) because Satan is neither friend Servant
or yet Em^assadour unto God to bear any embassage be^weene God and mortal
men as the holy Ange^ and Saints are psalm. 9.11. Tob. 12.13. hec. 1.^ Apoc.
8.3, In which places the holy Angels a^ Sainets are a pointed to rule us to
help us in (...) our affairs, wherefore we may Justly crave t^ help as a
mean appointed for our Salvation.

Thridly when the Protestants and Puritans ^nquire from Satan the knowledge of
future things which are to come and chiefly of man, of such things as depend
from the freefly which is not limited or determined to one thing, ^ut
Indifferent to many things opposite they worshipe Sanhan with sovereign
ho^nour as a God for so much as they ascribe to Satan that ^iuine prerogative
to foretell things to come which belongs only to God by the natural
^erfction of his Deite, and to his frinds and ser^ants only by participation
and Revelation. the^fore the prophet Esaias said. 41.23. Denounce ^o us what
thing are come, and we shall know that ^ou are Gods, but to Inquire the truth
of future ^cidentell things from Satan, as from the servant and frind of God
no man can do the same without Great Injury done to God as is said, because
^athan is no friend to God, but his Deadly Enne^ie as it is written, psalm.
73.23. Superbia Eorum qui (...) Odernnt ascendit snmper. The pride of these
which ^eate the does alwise ascend from them unto God.

Fourthly when they make a coue^ant with Satan ^ither manifest or secreets
they foresaike the ^iecdshipe of God and prefer the prince of dar^neste unto
the creator of all thing, as the prop^ete Esaias writteth. 28.15. Percussimus
faedus cum ^orte, et cum Inferno fecimus pactum that is quia posuemas ^endacium
spem nostram. that is we have made a ^ouenant with Death and agreement with
hell, becuse we have set our hepe upon a lie, which is as much to say by a
covenant made with Satan Prince of Hell, we foresaike the true frendhipe of
God, and put our trust and confidence in Satan, which is the Father of lies
for a man can not serve tow Masters contrary to othors in all things as God
and the Devil are. Math. 6.24.

Eyftly if some of the Protestants and puritans will say that they never did
see Satan nor ye^ speak with him, and therefore that such crimes of
Infidelity and Apostasy can not be laid to their Charge as it may be done to
Luther, Zuinglius and other heretics above mentioned.

We answer that althought they have no^ made a band or covenant with Satan
by word^ Express (as others have done) yet we say tha^ have a quiet and
secret band made with Satan when they approve the open covenant and agreement
with Zuinglius and Luther made with Satan in points and heads of Religion.

For Luther him self confesses in his book^ Entitled De Massa priuata et
unction Sacerdotum, tha^ he did abolishe the Mass at Satan's persusion, and
likewise that Satan gave him the title of his book^ wherein he did abolish the
Mass, which title i^ de Abroganda Mista, which band and agreemen^ between
Luthea and Satan* the Protestants an^ Puritans do all approve unto this day,
where^fore they are als guilty in this Crime as Luthe^ which did abolish the
Mass by his covenant mad^ with Satan.

Luther confesses in many pairts of his works, that he did know the Devil
and was so well acquainted with him that did eat a measure of salt in his
fellowshipe and company, aganinst that which is written. 1. cor. 10.20. Nolo
autem vos socios fieri Demoniorum. I will not that you be companios unto
Devils, see the like deuteronomy. 18.20. where it is forebiden to consult with
Devils or yet witches or Necomancer or with any other which foretell things
to come by the the spirit of Satan or to obseure vain Dreams.

Also the Puritans and Sacramentares can not Excuse them selves to have no
society or secreete couenat with Sathen when they Approve the band and
agreement which Zuingius made with Satan Instruction which did teach him in
the Night that Chirsts body was no otherwise in the Sacrament then Mropically
that is by only sign and represntation, and non really substantially as the
Catholics believe. This is Zuinglius owen confession in lib. de subsidion
Eucharistiae surius in his history An^o. 1524. Genebrard lib. 1. Chronogr.
ano. eodem. who desyretd to see more of such matters covenants and bonds made
with Satan let him Read S. Thomas. 2.2. quaest. 95. Art. 4. et Malleu.
Malleficar. Tom. 1. Part. st. quaest. 2. etz. Tom. 2. page 493. et Sequentibus.

Lastly the spirit of God is not contrary to it self as S. Paul wriiteth. 1.
car. 14.32. but Luther Zuinglius with their spirit are contradictorious one to
an other in the Mysteries of Religion in calling Each one an other hertiqoee and
severed from the Church of God.

For thus Luther writeeth in defens. verborum caenae page 381. Serio censemus
zs we Earnestly descerne all Zuinglians Sacra^entaries to be heritiqdues and
severe Severed from the Church of God, which deny the body and blood of Christ
to be reciued with a corprall mouth the venerable Eucharist.

Thus you see how Luther calls Zuinglus with all other Sacramentaes
heretics severed from the Church of Zuinflius adorneth Luther with such like
titles of ho^nour Tom. 2. respons. ad confess Luteri fall. 450. thus writting
Lutherus su^mus ast blasphemous is Luther is blasphe^eus in the highest degree,
a shameless kailleer a furious man bestraught in mind possessed with a Devil,
ablockeheaded fellow a foul loathsome swyne Inuading the Glory omnipotent
power, pure vertiie and divine Essence of God, by manifest fury and Extreme
blasphemy, on heretque Incorrihlte, a false Imposture and dceiuer of the
world, a great deal worse then Marcion the haretque which did diny that Christ
hade a true natural body.

This is the concord which is between Luther and Zuinglius, who were taught in
the Night by two Spirits, which as you may Easill see were tow Devils stirring
up these tow pillars of this new Reiigion to contranous heresies.

THE LV. Chapter shows how their lives and moral Doctrins teaches the
heresy of the lebertens how no man is bound in Conscience to keep the law
of God or yet of men (because they) that they are made free from all laws by
their faith in Christ and libertre of their Gospel and conseueutly that sin
is but an false Imagination of man and each one may do what he lists
vviehout ^ffence of God and nothing may Condemn the man but only Infidelity.
CHAP. LV.
NOw behold Protestant what Edification thou may find in the lives of
Luther, Zuinglius, calvin, Beza, Bucerus, oc co Lampad^, Knox, and others such
like which were acco^ted to be the Pillars and foundatours of this ^w Church,
if thou wist niligently viwe their ^me of life thou shast nothing worthy of
praise (...) to be Imitated by us, but contrariwise thou ^est find manis thing
abominable, and to be ^asted and abhomrred by all good Christians. (...) it
please you to view Luthers life you shall fi^d ^each of Vows made to God
abominable pol^on in a Sacrilegious bed between an apostata ^er and
Apostatesse Nun, a Monstrous coni^ction of tow abominable persons aganinst
the ^e of God and man and how he could no more ^raine him self from venus Game
then he ^ld do from spitting, how he did resist his coe^nce the space of ten
years to Embrace his ererrours, and Give council to others to do the like,
how he did abrogate the Mass at Satan persuasion, and so choice the enemy of
God an^ man to be his Master, so that you may know the holiness of this black
Gospel by his pestifero^ Doctrous which did teach him his lessone.

If you please to behold his doctrine you she see how he relsaleth the raines
of the concupissa^ to all abominable crimes of the world, witho^ all prick of
conscience fear of God or shame (...) the world.

For this he writteth in his book Entitled (...) Captiuitate Babilonia cap.
baptismo. thou se^ how rich the Christion man is who willingly (...) not loose
his Salvation unless he will not bele^ forno sin can condemn him but only
Infidelit^

Again in his book de liberate Christtia^ writteth that on good works do
make a go^ man nor Evil works an Evil man.

So after this sentenee of Luthea you may (...) what you list, for a man is no
better for go^ works, nor worse for Evil, according to (...) doctrine.

Again he writteth in that same book of C^istian liberty, that on Evil
works may make man. Evil or worthy of damnation, but (...) Infidelity.

Ahaine in Sermon, do nouo Testasten to ^eth thus: Caueamus a peccat^ sed
multo magis a b^ Operihus, tantum attendamus dei promissionem et fid^ that is
to say let us take heed hrom sin, but ^uch more from laws and good works,
and ^tend only to the promise of God and to faith.

Again he writteth in cap. 2. ad Galat. that only ^ith is necessary to make
us Just all other thnihs ^e fre and Indifferent neither Commanded or yet
^rebiden Ibidem he writteth: if thy conscience ^cuse the that thou have sinned,
answer I have ^ed then God will punish and condemn thee (...), but the law
affirms the same, but I have no ^ing to do with the law, where fore?
because I (...) made free from the same by Christian liberty.

Again in his book of Christian liberty writ^h: that Nullo opare. nullolege
homini Christiano opus est ^n pea sidem fit liber ab Omnilege. the Christian
man ^th no need of any work or laws, because he made free from all laws by
faith.

As Luther makes all men free from all laws (...) God. and not bound in
conscience to keep the ^e, to Establish his Justification by only haith, (...)
does he affirm that no man is dedfull in Con^ence to keep the laws of
temporal princes, ^cause sayetd he that each man is made free from (...)
keeping of all laws by their Christian liberte (...) faith in Christ.

For thus Luther writtetd lib. de cap. tiuii Babi^ca cap. de Baptismo. hy what
Righi does the Pope ^rine laws upon us, who gave him power to ^ust us in
Captivity, the libe^tie which si given ^s by Baptism. Neither the Pope,
Bishope or any other mortal man has power to bind any Christian with the law
of a sillabe, unless, it b^ the man's owen consent.

Thus you see how Luther affirms that no Christian man is bound in conscinc
to keep^ the law of God, or man that is of Spirituaall an^ temporal Princes.

How Caluins life and Doctrine carry away Inconstant souls to plain
Infidciltie. CHAP. LVI
CAlvin avouches the same doctuine wit^ Luther. for first. lib. 2. Inst. cap.
7. sect. 14 he writitteth thus of the law of God, that is the ten
Commandments Nune Ergo quoueam. Now ther^efor because the law has an power
toward the faitfull not such an power as may bind their con^cience with any
accurse (Infra) or to make the^ affrayed confounding their consciences condem^^
or destroy the aransgessours thereof.

And again lib. 3. Inst. cap. 19. sut. 2. writ^tetd that the law has no
power in the conscinc^ of the faithful to accuse them before the tribuna^
Seat of God (Ibidem) sitth the law leaves o^ man Just or Righteous before
God, either we a^ Excludede from all hope of Justification or tha^ we must be
made free and loosed from all law and so that there is no reguard of good
work thus much concerning the law of God.

As concerning the law of man Calvin bib. (...) Inst. 19. sect. 14. writteth
thus after long diputi^ (...) Christian liberty fam uero cum is no we there^e
since faithful consciences having received ^ch prerogutiues of liberty, as we
have above ^te forth, we conclude that they are Exempt ^m all power of men
(Infra) paul declares ^at Christ is destroyed vnesse our conscience and fast
in their liberty, which verily they have ^st if they will at the well of man
be snared with ^e bonds of laws and ordinances.

Melanch then in confess. Augustana and his ^ologie for the same. the rigorus
Lutherans of ^xonie in confess. Altem bergensi do Subscribe ^e same with
Luther. and Calvin.

Thus Protestant thou may see Evidently ^w Luther and Calvin with their
broad do set ^de the law of God and man with all good works (...)
Establish their Justification by only faith since (...) man is bound in
conscience to keep the law (...) God (according to this doctrne) to what
pur^se should any man pain hime self to work ^od works seeing that he is not
bound in consc^ce to do the same, or yet can he hope for any ^uenly reward at
Gods hands for such things. (...) Moreover if no man be bound in conscience
(...) keep the law of God (according to this doc^ne) no man shall be bound in
conscience, to wor^pe honor and serve God, as is commanded in (...) first
Table.

^ikewise no man shall offend God when he lies ^th his Neighbors wife when he
takes away his Neighbors goods when he be ^ayetd his Mas^ when he
foreswearete him self for any world commodity, when he stays his Nighbour
to fa^ssie his wre^td or co^mitet, any other crime again the law of God or
man, because he is not bou^ in conscience to keep such laws and work go^
works as we have shown above, according (...) the doctrine of Luther and
Calvin, but all (...) shall be free to do what they please by Christ* liberty
without the control in of any law ^it^ divine or human, ar yet of any
conscience.

Thus thou see that these New Gospellers (...) open the Gatte of mischief,
release the veins (...) concupissance to all horrible crimes by the liber^ of
their Gospel,

Besides these things this dotrine of our her^ques takes clean away all
sins, because t^ sin is no thing Else but a transgression, su^ing or
declyning from the law (as the Gre^ word Vom, Impor^eth) 1 Ihon. 3 (...)
there is no law which binds the consciences men, there is no transgression
of the law, the is consequently no sin at all, as S. Paul wit^seth. Romans
4.15. which is the very herisie of (...) libertins* Children Engendered in the
smoke^ Luthers and Caluins heresies abaue mentione^

So thou may Evidently see how the Doctr^ of the Protestants and Puritans
does lead (...) souls unawares to the enter of atheism and (...) of
Infidelity.

When M. welsche in the second pairt of his ^ly obiceth to us that many popes
did lead an ^godly life, we answer and confess that in the ^urch of God
there be white and chafe, mat. 3. (...) good and badde fishes. Mat. 13.48.
some ^edde with the wedding Garniemt others not ^edde with the same Mat. 22.12.
some the^e goats Mat. 25.32. foolish Virgins, some wise ^th. 25.2. some
Veshells of honnour some of ^tumelie. 2. Tim. 2.20. some Reprobate Mat. (...)
14. augast. Tract 45. in Ibhannem, at lib. cont. cres^um cresconium cap. 34.
and amonigst the rest a ^ditor Inddas amongst the Apostles Mat. 26. (...)
wherefore as the faithful Apostles should not ^onemned for the Prodition of
Judas: Right ^he holy Apostles and docours, the holy Martires (...) virgins of
the Catholic Roman Church ^uld not be condemned for the lewd leaves of ^ers.

Albeit some of the Popes in their owen proper ^sons have ouerseene them seules
in their duty, ^ther mortal men do, yet they have not com^ted such crimes as
welsche affirm them lyn^ to have done.

And because it belongs not to my purpose at (...) time, to Examine seurallt
all welsches forged (...) and Malicious detractions in this behalf I will
(...) set down tow Examples for all the rest, ^reby the Indiffernt Reader
may by the Euid^ lies set down in these two Examples by welsche coniectuae
his forged lies and malitio^ detractions in the rest of the Popes lives
detract^ by him maliciously.

As concering the first Example it is of Pop^ (Jane) which welsche alleges
to hau decei^ fully cropen in the Apostaicall seat and likew^ in her Papal
dignity to have conceived a^ borne an Child.

To knew this to be a forged lie and Euide^able, let the Reader Read Cardinal
Bellarmi^ lib. 3. deponti; Kom. cap 24 where he prooue^ this triuth as I
ascerten it to be,

The. 2. Example is of Pope Grehorie the* (...) where welsche brings in a
false Schismatiq^ called Benn^ to accuse the holy Pope Malieus^ (as the Jews
brought in a fall witness to accu^ Christ our Savior) and to see the light
of the purpose Read Cardianall Bellarmine lib. 4. ^ Pontif^ Romans cap: 7. and
you shall find all thin^ in this behalf as I ascetaine them to be and welsc^
liewise a malitiouse detractour and forger of ly^ But we have that aduatage of
the Protestants Puritans that the Doctrine and lives of the h^ Pastors and
Doctors, Martires and Virgins the Catholic Roman Church were co^firm^ by
divine Miracles which is the Infallible testi^ onie of God, and their festuall
days celebrat^ yearly for the same respect by the Catholiq^ Roman Church
for a testimony of the Reli^ous ho^o^s due to their holiness, as to the faith^
Instruments of the holy Ghost true servants and friends of God.

But when our Protestants and Puritas would have confirmed their false doctrine
by false Miracles (and thus to make as much as lay in their powere, God an
false God, and false witness) God did turn their attempt to their owen shame
and reprotch, when Luther did Endeavor him self to cast the Devil out of a
possessed person, the Devil did chasse him away. Staphil. apolog. 2.
Genebrard lib. 2. Chonogr. anon. 1545.

When Calvin did attempt fainedly to raise a man from death to life for
confirmation of his false doctrine he did kill a quick men by his hypocrisy
according to the Just Judgment of God, Bolsecus in vita Calvin.

Likewise knox the chief minister of Scotland Preaching in S. Gills Church in
Edinbrughe did suffer such a public sham before the people that his face did
turn in his Neck as such that did see that Monstrous sight did aelate the
hame unto my self.

Thus as Erasmus says since time they did begin their new Religion they
could nuer cure an lame Horse of his disease.

And concerning their lives yea the patriarchs prophets and Pillars of this now
Religion, which have them seluer out for the to reformers of the world, and as
faithful guids to Heaven, were of such abominable and detastable lives that
no man shall be able to find out more malicious treasons, Cruel seditiions
horrible slaughter of Church men, perturbations of Realms, such pactise of
Necromancie and forcerie, adultery, simonie, and spoling of Church men, and
Catholic Ro^aines of their goods and Guere then was done by Luther,
Zui^ngllsus Calvin, Beza, Knox King Henry the Eight in England and by suchlike
others which did defend them in their Malicious deeds, as you may see in the
history of Surius. Genebrard. lib. 2. Chronogr. Bolsccus in vita Caluene et
Bazae, Stephilus in his Apology, Doctor sanderus in sellise mate Anglicano,
stanislcans, Rescus polonus. lib 2. de atheismis et phalarismis Euangelicorum,
M. Nicol Burn in his Dispution Against the Ministers of scotland, and others
which have written the histories of our days.

For not their abominable libes above mentioned but also the spirit of
contradiction which is amongst them silues in grunds of Salvation, do
Evidently show unto us that they are send from Satan, author of all discord
and dissension, and not from God which is only chief Prince of peace and
concord in doctrine of Salvation, but also the conseruer of the same in his
Church by the perpetual assistance of the holy spirit Ihon* 14 16, ^ 12* and
continual succession of Pastors and Doctors, which keepi the flocks of
Christ's sheepefolde in unity of faith from circumuention of Erruaur as S. Paul
writteth Ephesians. 4.2* if it please the thou may see the these things
plentifully proved in our book Entitled the hunting of the Fox,

Besides these things they have not only made men free, as much from obsruaton
of the law of God, as of the law of man by the pretended liberty of their
gosepll and Justification by only faith, but also they Endeavor them selves
(as much as lies in their power) to aboliish and disanull the law of nature
or light of Reason, which is called conscience, that thus by degree and degree
descending more and more to Hellish Pit profound, they may carry away the
souls of men more craftelie ^hy the hellish lure of crrnall liberty, from the
true service of God, and open the broad gatte and large way to all delidght of
sin ane mischief which leads to perdition, as Christ did forewarne us in
his Eungell.

For better Intelligence of this purpose we must declare the qualities and
condititos as much of a sound as of a wounded conscience to the end we may
know how a good men of a good treasure dotd bring out good things and how an
Evil man out of an Evil treasare does bring out evil things

The wise man says that the conscience is a light which shewth us the way of
life where we shouuld go and liewise the way of perdition, from which with
all diligence we shoud declion, because, and all the laws of the world are
but strea^es which flow from the fountarn of Reasn, and ^eemes which deiue
from the light of conscience, which is the Eye of the soul if we make our
seules free from the obseruatin of all laws, we must also foresaine to
follow the light of upright Reason, which is the mistress, and Queen of all
civil laws approved amongst the sons of men

The ten moral Commandments of God are nothing else but a declaration of the
law of nature which is the light of Reason when the Prophet David p^ie^teth
to himself who show us good and Evil he answers again that the light of
Gods countenace (that is a pr^hticip^ti^ of Gods Eternal wisdom) is printed
and Engraphed in our understanding, which light shows us these good things,
which are to be done, and what Evil things are to be Eschne^.

Because as Gicero says Magna est vis conseienciae in wramque partem* great
is the force of ^ons^^ in ^ith the (...), that is both in good and Evil, we
must show what actions the conscience of man (which is the law of nature)
has both in good and Evil.

The first is, it shows us the good that we^ should do. psalm. 4.7. Rom,
12.15.

Secondly when we do will it defends v^ against (...) ^tion of Evil willars
1. cor. 4, ^ 3.4

Thirdly it is a constant witness of our sidelitie Romans 9.1.

Fourtly it rewards us with Joy and con^e^ment after we have done well
proverb. 11.5.

Fyftly it Engndreth much hope and confidence ^n God 1. Ihon. 3 21.

But in all Evil things has contrary actins.

First it shows the good things which we should do and likewise Evil
thing from which ^ce should decline, and binnetd us by her power and
authority to do good, and decline from Evil. psalm. 4.7. Romans 2.15.

Secondly when the man does against her law and direction she accuses him of
dissobedience Eccles. 7.23. Rom 6.16.

Thridly she condemns him of guilte crime ^ap. 17.11 tit. 3.10.

Fourtdly she punishes him for his misdeed like ^gnawing worm without any
rest. Esaias. 51.8.

Fyftly she brings Evil men to despair of ^reat crimes as it is menifest in
Caine. Genes. 3^^3. and Judas. mat. 27.8.

Thus you see how conscience is a pedagogue and ^hole master, which God did gue
to teach us our ^utie. hold us in awe, and trresie us faom the del^ght of
sin, eun then wben Secrecy promises ^ecuritie to defend and rejoice us whn
we do ^ell, and to accuse and condemn us when we ^e Evil.

Wherefore if men and we men be persuaded (...) their consciences that no man
has freewill in ^e Inward action of the soul to eschew sin and ^ake
Election of virtue, but that all human ^tsions are designed and destinated to
an end by Gods Secreote direction or that the coo^mandements of God are
Impossible and far beyond the reach of man's power, or that all Christians are
made free from the obseruaition of all laws, i^ much divine as haumaine, as
all Protestants and Puritans teach by the liberty of their Gospel.

Then when soever a Gentlewoman is tempte^ with the the lust of flesh, a man
with reunge, (...) seruat with couetosnesse of his Masters goods, (...)
Merchant with deceit in buying and selling a fals^ witness with periu^ie,
law to Judge wrangous^ (...) she for bryberie, they shall have no more scruple
i^ conscince to co^mitehomicide, thifte, adultery perjury, treason, with all
such horrible crime^ when they may Eschew the penalities of Prinies ^ rullers
then Beasts have to drink watter, and ea^ their meat when they are urged by
hungare an^ thrist.

You see now how the doctrine of our Prote^tants and Puritans is altogether
favorable for t^ advancement of sin and vice, with the abolis^ing and
destruction of virtue, likewise how^ leads away silly souls from the true
service (...) God to the center of atheism and gulf of Infidel^

How the Justification of Protestants by only faith stand^ with all Deadly
sins of the world, except only Incredulity. CHAP. LVII.
LVther libe de captiuit. Babilonicae cap. ^ Baptismo thus writteth: thou see
how ri^ ^he man Christian is that Even willingly he can ^ot loose his salvation
how great soever his sin ^e unless he will not believe for no sin can
con^emne him but only Incredulity.

Here you see that their says in Christ wherebe ^hey are Justified stands
with all the sins that ^an can comite in this world as homicide, thife,
^duluerie peoiurie saeriledger treason, deceit, ^ioleie oppressioo, scisme,
hypocrisy, detraction ^f their Neighbors good same, dissobedience of ^hildren
to their parents, of subicts to their Prin^es, of servants to their Masters
pride, Envy, des ^ight, Malice, covetousness of their Nighours go^ds, servants
or other things suchlike, so that ^he co^mtting of such sins can not condemn
^he Baptized christian which believes in Christ, ^ut only Infidelity.

Wherefore it is that these sins can not ^ondemne them, because (say they)
that the Ius^ce of Christ, which they apprehend by faith ^ydeth all these
sins, so that God will not Imp^te them to such as comite them.

Calvin subscribeth with Luther this same doctrine. lib. 3. Inst. cap. 14 sect.
12. thus writting: ^ur corruption and uncleanness being covered with ^he
purity of Christ are not Imputed to us, but ^eing so luied and hid they
shall not come to ^he Judgment of God to aecuse us.

Calvin shows by this opinion, as Luther did before him, that their sin^es
being hid and covered by the Iustce and purity of Christ apprehended by
their faith shall ont appear in the Judgment of God to accuse or condemn them
likewise he teaches that the abominable filth and uncleanness of sin (which
makes the man reseauble unto Satan) does still remain within their souls,
and only hid by the External Justice of Christ, a^ if you would cover an
black Ethiopian with a white garment External^y, you see than what a malicious
spouse full of corrupt stinch, the Protestant soul is to Christ, the beutifull
some of the living God, which is an abominable thing to b^ hard.

Calvin in anitidoto concile Triden tmisess. 6 can 18. writteth: that some
seed of the true lively faith remains still amongst great deadly sins

If their true lively faith abides amongst great deadly sins, then they may
do what they list because their faith will Iustfie them in the midde^ of their
great deadly sins by the apprehensio^ of Christ's Justice which hid then
sins that the^ come not to the Iudgmen of God for to accu^ them. Is not that
a pleasane liberty they take t^ selves to co^mite all sins without scruple
of con^cience or any other repe^hension.

Calvin algane lib 3. Inst. cap. 2. sect. 3. says beholding that Christ does
Justify us not by ap^probation of our proper Innocence but by Imp^utation of
Christ's Justice we are Esteemed to b^ Just in Christ, who are Iniust in our
selves.

You see sin and Iniquity doc still remain ^n the Protestants souls, Even
when they are ^ustied by the Imputatioa of Christ's Justice which they aprehend
by faith, so you may behold that all kind of sin, Impiety, Malce, hypocrisy
and Iuistice may stand with their Justification by ^nly faith in Christ, a
faith foresuith very meet ^o Nurish thieves adulteaers, homieids, Trayte^rs,
hypocrites, falsefiers of their faith, becuse they ^o^mite all these sins wi^h
many others without reprehen sin in the Judgment o God or good, consciences
according to the former Doctrines of Luther and Calvin.

How Justification by only faith does contemn all good works without all
far of God to co^mite Evil works, which are pleasant to the sinner. CHAP.
LVIII.
FOr probation of this point Luther. lib. de libert. Christiano thus writteth:
good works make not the man good, nor Evil works the man Evil. so according
to Luthers doctring good works and Evil are both Indifferent, because they
can nether make the man good or Evil, help or harm him therefore the man
needs never to pain him self to do any good works, or likewise fear to
do any Evil works, because they can not make him worse then he is, but to
do any thing which likes him be, whether it be good or Evil, for it is
his only faith Christ which makes him Just and acceprable unto God or Evil,
for it is his only faith in Christ which makes him Just and acceptable unto
God and not his good works, for as his good works con not help him, so his
Evil works cannot hinder his faith to Iust^fie him, wherefore a man may do
what he lists without hurt of his Justification by only faith, this is the
liberty of their carnal Gospel.

Calvin takes Luther by the hand in this matter. lib. 3. Inst. cap. 19. sect.
2 thus writting for since the law leaves no man Just or righteous, aither we
are Excluded from all hope of Justification or we must be made free and loosed
from the law, and so that there be no regard at all of God works.

Thus you see to Estabish his Iustificaton by only faith, he affirms that no
man should have regairde of good works, but to have recourse only to his
faith, which Justifies him by the apprehension of Christ's Justice without
Regaird of good workee.

Luther again in sermon de nouo Testame^o^ sieve de missa thus writteth:
caeuamus a peccate sed dmulto magis a legilus, et operthus, bonis tantum
att^edamu Dei promissionem et fidem; That is let us tak^ heed the keep our
selves from sin, but much more from the laws and good works let us only
have the Eye of faith and our mind fixed upon the promise of God. so Luther
will have the man to have no regaird of good or Evil works, but only to
considder the prom^se of God by his faith*

Luther again in sermon eodem, sie deus dilexit mundum, this writes: because
the way is strait which leads to heaven thou must be made slender and then,
if thou would enter thereby (and ^ little aftre) if thou will come charged
with sacks full of good works thou must lay them down othtw^see thou can
not enter in at the stratite way.

Luthers Disciples in Colloquio Altembergnsin affirm that we should pray to
prseuere in faith to the end without all good works.

Calvin lib. 3. Inst. cap. 19 sect. 2.4 7. wrtteth that where there is any
assurance of Justification there should be no regaird of laws or good works,
and that all external works are Indifferent to their Justification, for they
can neither help or Impair the same so you see how their Iustifitatian by
faith destroys all good works as not ^eedefull to the same.

How the faith of the Protestants is an abominable faith and sinkefull of all
mischief, corrupt fountain' whence many vennmous springs run out a
naughty ore bearing fruits full of poison and abhominateon. CHAP. LVIIII.
THis assertion of ours is manifest by their owen Doctrine before all things
you must ^nderstand that there is no thing so odious and abominable before the
Eyes of God as sin is, ^or sin was cause that God did expel the ^ebellious
Angels out of Heaven, sin was cause to banish Adam with his Posterity out
of paradise, sin is the cause of all the poverty, siceksse, trouble and
misery, when by men are wexed, tossed and tormoilled in this mortal life*
besides these things it is cause of damnation of many millions of souls* so
that the most perrillons and dangerous thing which is in this world, is that
thing whence does proccede because that sins is cause of all mischief which
does fall upon man*

Now to show that these Iustising faith is that naughty tree, as we have
recited above and Deadly sins the venomous frits thereof it is thus proved
by their owen doctriae.

Luther Patriarch to all the heretics of of ou^ age in Assert^ omuium aat^
suor. art. 51.32 co^^afterrmerh boldly that omrria opera Instoruim sunt peceata
mortalia* that is all the worke^ of Just men are but deadly sins.

So all the works which Issue or spring out from their Just men Justified by
their Iustifiing faith an^ no bette a fruits then poisoned deadly sins so
that when the best and Iustest Preestant that i^ amongst them Goes to the
Church to heat the Preaching to pray God to Reverence and obe^ his Minister
to receue the co^muion to thank^ God there after for the same give alms to the
poor are the Church o^ by the way side dotd (...) other thing but work deadly
sins wherefore ^ were better to him to sit Idly at home then t^ prine him
self to work deadly sins.

As concerning Caluins opinion in this matter ^he is altogether with Luther.
lib. 3 Inst. cap. 12. ^ect. 4. thus writting: but they that shall Earnestly as
it were in the sight of God Enquire of the true ^ule of reghteousnesse, shall
certainly find that all ^he works of men, if they be Judged by their ^wen
worthiness are no thing else but vnclea^nesse and filthiness, that which
amongst common people ^s accounted righteousness is before God mere
wickedness, that which is Judged purity is vncl^annesse, that which is
reckned Glory is but ^hame.

You se here according to Caluins doctrine that, which is Esteemed by men
righteousness is before God mere wickedness, so that all their praiere,
^reachings to men and receiving of the communion, which appear before men to
be the seruicee of God, and righteous works of religion, are noth^g else but
mere wickedness which is the pesti^rous fruits of their Iustifiinh fatth.

Calvin again lib. 3. Inst. cap 14 sect, 9. writ^th in this fashion* thus we
have shown that ^ere comes not so much as one good work out ^holy men, which
if it be Judged in it self des^ueth not a Just reward of shame* so the best
^orkes of Religion and best fruits of their Iustis^ng faith deserves no
reward but shame and ^protch. therefore they they should not find ^lt with
Citholiques which reprotch the acts of ^ their Religion and fruits of their
Iustifiing faith as worthy open shame and reprotch.

Calvin. again in Antidots concili. Ttident. Sess. 6. thus writteth: they are
not so much to be reprotched who said all good works if they be Judged by
exact rigor to the extremity are rather worthy of Eternal damnation then
any reward of life.

So you see how the best works of their Religion are more worthy of Eternal
damnation then any reward of life, if so be what difference put they between
the sin of Lucifer, wherefore h^ was condmned Eternally, and their good
works which deserved Eternal damnation with Satan we are constrained to say
that faith, which yields such damnable fruits must be an unhappy faith,
which brings to man rather Eternal damnation by her naughty fruits then and
reward of life.

Calvin again lib. 3. Inst. cap. 5. Sect. 19. thi^ writteth. let this stand as
a sone foundation vn^ us, which can not be shaken by an^e Engine, the the mind
of man is so alienate and astringed from the Justice of God that it can not
conceive Ente^prise or desire any thing but that, which is Impi^us warsted, or
crooked. The heart of man is Infected and desiled with the poison of sin the
it can breath out no other thing but a corru^ stinch. and althought men some
time apeare ^ outward show to do some good works, Neu^thelesse the mind is
full of hypocrisy, and fa^ obliquitie and also wrapped and Entangled with
frowardness and malitiousnesss of nature.

Beholee here good Reaeer the true descnption of a Protestant set down by
Ihon Calvin their chief Doctor, which is althought the Protestant apeare some
time in outward show to do some go^od works, Nevertheless his mind is full
of hypocrisy and false obliquitie, and also wrapped and Entangled with
malitiousnesse of neture, his heart likewis so defiled with the poison of sin
that he can breath nut no other but corrupt stinch

Then when the Minister or protestant apereth to men outwardly to do some good
works in preaching his new Gospel to his audetours, or in giving the
communion to any man, and in the mean time (as Calvin affirms) his mind is
full of hypocrisy false obliquitie and wrapped in Malice, wherefor should we
give ear to his Pre^cding or believe him, beholding that with such ^eceitfull
hypocrisy and malititious mind, he can ^reath out no other thing but corrupt
stinch. of ^eresie.

Therefore we can say no thing more Justly to ^he Minister then that which
Christ said to an Evil servant: I Judge the by the words of thine ^wne mouth o
naughty servant. because the Minister or Protestant does confess his owen
^alece and hypocrisy where with his mind is in^ected, even when he appears
outwardly before ^en to do some Good works, according to the doctrine of
Calvin, which commands all Ministers and Protestants to hold this vndobted
truth as a sure foundation of Religion, which can not be shaken by the Engine
of man.

You see here most truly how their Iustifiing faith is but an abominable sink
of all Mischief, which can breathout no other thing but corrupt stinch of
heresy philipe Melanchthon Luthers faithful achates confirms this doctrine
of Luter and Caluins whin he writteth in locir ano 1501. Tit. de peceat.
saying: Stfolsoreth therefore that all the works of men as much worthy of
praise as you please are nothing Cztse but sins as wortbie of death otherwise
deadly sins.

So we will conclude wi^h that sentce of Christ, which says; the good tree is
known by the good fruits and the Evil tree by the Fruits Mat. 7.17.
considering than that all the fruits and works of their Iustifiing faith, are
but fill^nesse, vncla^nesse false obliquitie, deadly sins and malitiousnesse
of mind which can braith out no other thing but corrupt stinch, you may easily
Gather that such a Iustifiing faith is no thing else but an abominable sincke
of all mischief a corrupt so untaine full of poisoned springs, a naughty tree
whose venomous fruits do Evidently show the pestilence of the soul from
whenec they do derive.

How the protestants have no true Reltgion of God but of Satan: because that
all the fruits and good works of their Iustofiing faith are nohting else but
deadly sins as we have proved in the former Chpter (according to their
own docrinte) in which consists the service of Sathano and not the service
of the true God of heaven CHAP. LX.
BEcause God is the Creator collator and conseruatour of all good things,
sovereign Monarch of heaven and Earth sovereign ho^nour, ^eruice and
obedience is Justly due to his heavenly Majesty therefore he commands us to
adore and ^ruice and obedince. Deuteronomy. 6.1.13. Mat. 4.10. ^ Tit. 1.17. heb. 5.9.
so Religion is a virtue whe^by we serve God, according to the rules set
^oune by him in the old and New Testament.

That this service consieth in good works ac^table unto God, and not in
deadlly sins which ^e hated by God it is thus proved by many ^xamples of
Godly men let down in the holy ^ripture.

When Abell did offer up Sacrifice unto God ^e Sripture says that God did
approve the ^crifice of Abell as acceptable unto him, and did ^spise the
Sacrifice of Caine as ungrateful unto ^m, It is Evident that God does not
approve ^eadly sins, but does reprove and punish men ^ the same, as it is
manifest in the fall of the ^gells, fall of Adam destruction of the whole ^ld
by, the deludge consumptio^ of the Towns Home and Gomer by the bolts of fire
send down ^m heaven. so it is supperflous to bring in In^erable passages of
the holy Scripture for probation of this purpose.

Likewise the Sacrifice offered up to God by no^ after the general deludg was
so pleasant before the Eyes of God that the Scripture says, tha^ God was
repliinisheed and Rejoiced with the Sweet savor and odriserous smelling of
the sam^ and likewise that God Incontinently did promise never to curese the
earth again. as he did by the general deludge for the sins of men who will
say that God did delightin deadly sin and wa^ replinished with the sweeie
Savor and odoriferou^ smelling of the same, beholing that he hattet^ sin as
a thing abominable and detestable unto him.

When Abraham did offer up his son Isaa^ unto God as God did command hime
his obedience in this respect was so acceptable service to Go^ that he did say
to him: I shall bless the and multi^plie thy seed as the stars of the
heaven and the Sands in the Sea shore, and in thy Seed all nation of the Earth
shall be blessed, because thou dide^ obey my voice.

You see here how the Service of God consiste^ in good works acceptble unto
God and not i^ deadly siinnes This Sacrfice of Abraham was ^ acceptable and
grateful to God, as S. James wri^teth 2.21. that he was Justified before God
in off^ing the same, it is ceren that deadly sin can n^ Justify a man, but
rather make him Impious, a^ cursed, Just, and abominable before God as t^
Scripture witnesses.

^obe likewise was so perfect before God in offering ^is Sacrifice keeping his
Innocence in his mind and heart that God said him self to Satan, do ^hou
not considder my servant Job, that there is ^ot the like of him upon the Eartd,
simple rig^teous sercing God and keeping his Innocence and Integrity. and
again the Scripture says: ^n his great tribulatron in all these things ^ob
did not sin nor speak any fuolish word before God.

You see here how the service of God consists ^ good works acceptabe to God,
as the Sacrifice of Job was, and not in deadly sins which is the ^eruice of
Satan.

When S. Ihon Baptist Praached the word of God to the Jews. Mat. 3 2. and
Bapsttist the^ in the flood of Jordan Marc. 1.4 did wear a garment made of
Camells hair, vilde honey to his refection, leae an austeere life in the
wilderness, all the acts and works of the holy mon were so acceptable service
to God that Christ (as a faithful ^winesse) of his holiness and Godly life)
did affirm that there was no man borne amongst the sons of men greater or
moro excellent then S. Ihon Baptitist. Mat. 2.2.

If his acts and works were no otherthing but deadly sins, Christ would not
have commended him so, but rather reprotched him as he did the Jews for their
ungodly lives.

When S. Peter did glorify Christ and confess him openly to be the son of
the living God^ Mat. 16. that confession of faith was so grateful^ seruics to
Christ that he gave the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven after his resurrection
when he made him ordinare Pastor of his Sheepefold^ as a man worthy of that
office.

When Marie Madalen anoilled Christ's feet^ as it is written Mat. 26.7. that
seruis was so acceptable unto him that he commended her for the same,
ascertaining that she hade done a good work unto him, it is most certain that
Christ would not have commended a deadly sin as a good work accaptable unto
him; Therefore good works where in consisseth the service of God ca^ not be
deadly sins, nar yet Infected with deadly sins, as alms deeds given by
hypocrisy.

Lastly S Paul speaking of the holy fathers o^ the old Testament says that
they over come Kingdoms, wrought, Justice, obtained the promises, stopped the
mouths of Lions.

Here the Seripture testfieth that the holy fathers of the Old Testament,
wrought Justice obtain the promises, stopped the mouths of Lions it is certain
that the holy Scripture would not cal^ deadly sins the works of Justice, not
yet God would not give these things, which he prmised to reward deadly sins.
works acceptable unto him by Miracles in stopping the mouths of Lions and
overthrowing of these cruel beasts by sampson^ David and Daniell the Prophet.

what shall I say the time would fail me if I would ^ringout all the Examples of
good works where^n consisteeh the service of God set down in the ^oly
Scripture then fore we shall content our ^elues as this time of these Exampler
recited abaue by us.

As Satan is Enemy to God in all things so is he ^ontrarie unto him in this
point, and as God will be ^erued with good works acceptable unto him, so ^athan
will be served with Evil wokes and deadly ^innes, which are grateful unto him.
This ts the ^ause where fore he stirs up the hearts of men ^o deadly sins
and when they obey him in this ^espet they are called the servants of Satan
which ^ath dominion over their souls and ringeth in their hearteby deadly
sin.

So as the service and Religion of God does ^onsist in good works accptable
unto him Right^o the service and Religion of Satan does consist ^n Evil
works and deadly sins which are grateful unto him, and because all the best
works of ^he Protestants are but mere wickedness and ^eadly sins before
God, all their service and Religion must be the service of the Devil, and not
^he service of God, therefore S. Ihon in his cao^icall Epistle says 3.8. he
that sins is of the Devil. Christ likewise Ihon. 8.44. you are of your
father ^he Devil and the desires of your fether you do.

Here you see that these which co^mite sin and the deseres of Satan are
accounted by Christ and his Apostlss to be the servants of the Devil, and
sons of Satan and consequently all their service and Religion is the service
and Religion of the Devil from the which I pray God to preserve and and
defend us Amen.

How the Protestants do much Injury to Christ when they take away the
fruits of Christ's passion to Estabsish their Iustificaetion by only forth.
CHAP. LXI.
CHRIST did come in this world and did suffer death upon the cross first to
deliver us from the Slavery of sin Ihon, 8 36. from the power of the Devil
colless. 1.1 ae. from gilt of Eternal da^mation. Romans 8.1. these thrie things
are inseperable one from an other, for man by sin makes him self Enuemie to
God obeying Satan 1. Ihon. 3.8. and worthy of Eternal damnation^ mat. 25.

Secondly Christ did arise agine from death for our Justification, and the
Apostle writteth: tha^ thus by his mercy he might purchasse us grace i^ this
world to cure the disases of our souls. Iuc. 1^ 30. and so make us to Arise
from deadly sin t^n^ewnesse of life according to the example of h^
resurrection.

Wherefore as he that arises from deadly sinn^ by the grace of God to
newness of life is partake of Christ passion, so he that abides still in
deadly sins as the protestants do, are nowise par^participant of Christ's
passion, because in deed by their doctrine, they deny the chief fruits of the
same, which is to deliver us from the slavery of sin. Tyrra^nie of Satan,
and gilt of Eternal damnation as is above recited.

Now that the Protestant abide still in deadly sin, and cnnsequently in the
power of Satan. and gilt of Eternal damnation (for the reward of sin is
Death. Romans 6.23) it is thus proved by their owen doctrine.

Luther speaking of Baptism in tssert art. 2. thus writteth: I know (says
Luther) what they will object to me that is, all such as are said will prove
that no sin is left in us after Baptism but only a defect or Infirmity
(Infra) but I can nowise assent to them which call it an defect, and pain of
sin and not the culpe of sin it self (Infra) in the mean time the favor
of God reciueth and holds us up in not Imputing to the death, the rest of
sin which is in us althought it be truly sin and may be Imputed to us.

Thus you see that the sins of man (after Baptism) abide still in them
according to Luther doctrine, and nowise taken away by the grace and meritr of
Christ's passion, according to that sentence of S. Ihon. 1.29. Behold the lamb
of God which takes away the sins of the world, but only hide them in not
Imputinh the sins of men unto them, as if God should wink at their sins and
not behold or punish them.

Philipe Melanchthon princ to the Lutherans confessionisti in locis co^muni.
Tit. de peccato originaly Embraces this doctrine with his Master Luther.

Petrus Martyr in comet in cap. 5. ad Romans writteth: wherefore if it will be
asked of us if it be sin which remineth in the regederared after Baptism?
we answer that it is sin. see Cardinal Bellarmine lib. 5. de Amissione
gratiae. cap. 5.

Philipe Melanehtoon in Apoloogir art. 2. confess. August. thus writteth
lyingly of S. Augustine saying: Austine sayet: thas sin in Baptism is
renitted, not that it is not, but that it is Imputed to man. This is an Evident
lie which Melanchthon Fathereth upon S. Augustine as Luther his Master did
before him. see Bellarmine bib. 1. de Baptismo cap. 13.

Calvin. lib. 4. Inst. cap. 15. sect. i2. thus witteth Baptism Indeed
promises us that our phaois prowned with the mortificat^on of sin, yet not
so that it is no more no may roman trouble us (Infra) let no man flatter
himself in his owen Evil, when he hears that sin always duelleth in us.

Calvin agine lib. 3. Inst. cap. 14. sect. 12. writteth: our filthiness and
uncleanness being covered with the purity of Christ are not Imputed unto us
but are hidden, as if they were buried that they come not to the the Judgment
of of God to accuse or condemn us.

Remarke that the sins are not taken away out of the Protestants soul, but
only hid by an External Clock of Christ's purity. so deadly sins abide
perpetual in their souls, and consequently they remain in the Tirranie of
Satan, gilt of Eternal damnetion.

Calvin angaine in antidoto Council. Trident. sess. 5. writteth: sin remains
truly in us and is not Extinguished by Baptism Incontinenly but becausc the
abligation of pain is taken away, the sin is accounted nothing by not
Imputation of the same.

Here Calvin opposes him self to the universal Council of Trent which
teaches us that sin is taken away by the Sacrament of Baptism, according to
the sentence of S. Ihon Baptist Ihon. 1.26. behold the Lamb of God which
takes away ^he sins of the world. but Luther and Calvin will ^ot grant, that
sin is taken away out of the Protestats souls by the grace merit of Christ,
but only hid and covered by Christ's External Justice.

Calvin again lib. 3. Inst. cap, 3. sect. 10 writes thus against S. Augustine
and all the Ancietn ^athers, of the habit of concupissance and her ^nuolutarie
acts, but we esteem that to be sin ^hen a men is tiokled by his
concupissance against ^he law of God yea the concupissance it self which
Engnder such desires we affirm it to be ^ne.

Calvin in these words against the doctrine the whole antiquity affirms that
not only the ac^ concupissance is sin, whether the will of man consent or
resist unto the same but also the natural habit it self is inseperable from
the soul o^ man during the the time of this mortal life.

Now good Reader you see how sin never taken away out of the Protestants
soul, by the grace and merits of Christ's passion, but only hide and covered by
an External Clock, according to their owen doctrine.

As it is dishonor to the Chirurgiane which ca^ not cure the wonds of a man's
bodis with his salve but only hide them: so the Protestants disho^nour Christ's
passion as not Effectual to cur the disese^ the soul, and take away sin,
hellish Inferna^ sting clean out of the same, but only to hide the wounds of
our soul with an External salve which can noe cure them.

So you see how they deny the efficacy of Christ passion, meries and grace, as
Insufficent to tak^ away the Infernal darte of sin whereby the Soul of man
is deadly wounded, but let the same remain still within the soul of man
without an^ cure or sauctie from the same.

This is the Miserable Estate of the Protestan^ soul to be continually wounded
to the death wit^ the darti of deadly sin, which is hells Inferna^ sting, and
never to taken away out of their sou^ by any virtue merit or grace of Christ's
passion but only does still remain within that miserab^ ^oule wiehout remeede
during the time of this mortal life.

As Christ is much: dishenoured by the Doctrine of the Protestants, which say
that the Infernal ^ing is never taken out of the wouoded soul by ^he grace
and merits of Christ's passion, but only ^ffirme all with one consent (is we
have reciteh ^boue) that the Protestants souls is so Infected ^ith the
pestilent poison of deadly siinne that no ^race of Christ can cure the soul
and free her from the same.

So Christ is much ho^noured by the doctrine of ^he Catholic Church teocheth
us this Christ ^he true samaritan did power in oil of holy grace ^ the wounded
soul to cure the same, after the ^an coming down from Jerusalem to Jericho
^as Robbed of his Spiritual Garment and deeply wounded by Insernall Thieves,
which depairted ^om him leaving him half dead, as it is written ^uangell of S.
luke. 10 30.

So the protestant would have the silly soul to ^emaine still half dead as it
was wounded by Sat^an, and never to be cured with the grace of Chr^t again,
the true physician of the soul, which is ^eat disho^nour to Christ, and his
grace, and great ^eat hurt (I say) to the Protestants soul, but not ^ the
soul of a true catholic and Godly Chris^an, which is cured by the Inherent
grace of Chr^t, from the pestslent poison of deadly sin and ^nsed from the
power of Satan.

Thus the Protestaants make Satan more powerful to hurt the soul by malice,
then Christ by grace to cure and heal the same, which is a great blasphemy
aginst omnipotent power of God, and an Euidentlye against the holy scripture
when S. Paul says Romans 5.20 where sin did abound, grace did more abound
then sin, than must yield place to grace, as darkness to the light, for
sin and grace can no more stand together, then light, and darkness, life and
death and because the Protestants affirm, sin to be inseperable from their
souls (as they give Example of the concupissance recited above) they must have
continually in their soul spiritual death and darkness which diriuie from
deadly sins and want spiritual life and light which flow from the Inherent
grace of Justification, as the beams of light do flow from the sun.

For as the souse lives by the grace of Justification Romans 8.10 so it dies by
deadly sin Romans 1.15. and as sin fillethe soul full of darkness Ihon.
3.19 so the grace of Iustifiction brings spiritual light to the same Ephesians,
5.8. so the Protestants soul is continually possessed wtih deadly sin and is
also spiritually dead and full of spiritual darkness* that is the miserable
Estate other unhappy souls

An other probation how the protestants deny the virtue and Efficacy of
Christ's bassion to Estahlesh their Justification. by only faith. CHAP. LXII.
S. Paul writteth. heb. 13.12. Jesus suffered without the gate that he might,
sanctify the people with his owen blood, and likewise eleanse his Church from
all spotte of sin by the the lauer of regeneration Ephesians. 5.26. that thus his
Chosen Children may be sanctified tauth and not by a vain Imputation of
External sanctification as Christ did pray his Father for the same, and was
heard of his Father for his reverence. Hebr. 5.7.

Thefore if the the Chosen Childoen of God were only sanctified by an External
veale of Iustce and not in truth and Effect by Inherent Justice and
sanctifiction in the soul in cureng it from the Pestilnt poison of deadly
sin really and Indeed ^hen the chief fruits of Christ passion should be
^aktn away by the doctrine of the Protestants, because chief fruits of Christ's
passion in this morttll ^ife ar to take away the sins of the world Ihon 1.^4.
deliver the souls of men from captluitie of Satan collossen. ^.13. cure the
wounds of the ^oule co^tracted by the fall of Adam by the oil of ^nherent
grace luc. 10.34 reconcile men to God ^y grace, which were Enemies to him by
sin. Romans 5.10. Cleanse his Church and sanctify it from all spote of sin
and lastty deliver it from ^em the gilt of Eiernall damnaio. Romans

So if deadly sin remains still within the ^oule of man (as the Protestants
will hau to do) and his Malrce and Impiety being only covered with an
External veale of Justice he shall by such deadly sin, be son and slave to
Satan as Christ says Ihon. 8.44. and likewise abide still in the eurse and
malediction of God psalm. 118. and gilt of Eternal damnaton. Math. 25.41. and
consequently with out any partciption of the fruits of Christ's passion, or then
we must say (as they teach in deed) that the passion of Christ was not
Effectual and suffioient to deleuer the man Indeed from such miseries as are
recited above but only to cover them with an External veale o^ Justice and
sanctified in truth and Indeed.

So as the covering of a black Ethiopian with ^ white garment takes not away
the blackness o^ the Ethiopian to Make her white Indeed: so the External
veale of Christ's Justice takes not away the hypocrisy, Impiety Injustice
which are realli^ Inherent in the Protestans souls to sanctify an^ Justify
the souls in truth and Indeed but only by an External show and Appearance.

Therefore as the Ethiopian, not with standing the white Garment remaineh still
afilhie stinching black Ethiopian in truth and Indeed so the Pro^testats
soul, not withstanding the Extecnall vea^ of Christ's Justice bids still
full of by pocrisi^ Iniquity and wholly Infeeted with the pestie^ poison of
deadly sin in truth and Indeed.

So the Paotestaants sanctfication and Iustifieatio^ by only faith. is not that
sanctification and Iusti^ication which Christ did obtain by his prayer fr^
Father to sanctific his Chosen Children Ihon 17.17. whose prayer was hard for
his reuerne heb. 5.7. but a false Imagination and vain Imputation of an
External veale of Justice, which neither can Justify not sanctify them in
truth and Indeed, as the grace of Christ Inherent in the soul does sanctify
and Justify his Chosen Children in truth and Indeed Ihon. 17.17.

Likewise if there by no grace at all to cure the soul of man woundeds by the
Infernal dart of deadly sin then the Miserable soul must ly still in that
woeful Estate with that Infernal sting still in the soul without any hope to
be resueued from the seem or his wound to be cured in this mortal life.
behold the miserable Estate of the Protestants soul,

But Luther in assertion onmium artic suorm art, 2. Calvin lib. 4. Inst. cap.
15. sect. 12. answera: althought deadly sin remane still within their souls
(as the concupissance which is inseperable from the same) Neuertelesse God, for
the respect of their faith in Christ, will not Impute their sin^es unto them,
or punish them for their misdeeds how great so ever they be because (says
Luther) where faith is, no sin can hurt the man in sermon sic deus dietit
mundum.

We answer, first guinh and not grating such a manifest untruth that
although God would wink ^t their sins against the rule of his Eternal
Justice, and behold the Protestants in perpetall adultery with the Devil
co^mtting continually deadly sin with him, as S. Ihon says 3.8. who sins
is of the Devil will and desires. Ihon. 8.44. and not to punish and correct
such a villan, strumpet and adulterous sppouse, because she believes in
Christ, then they shall make Christ not a taker away the sins of the world,
but a furtherer and mantainer of sin (which should be a Medicine to cur
wounded soul from the pestient poison of sin) a veale to coucr their Malice,
a elocke to hide their Impiety and Injustice, and a shield to save them from
all punition of theer misdeeds, and detestable crimes committed against God and
their Nighbour. is not that a pleasant Religion for the flesh, an Rnauish
liberty they take to them selves to do all things what they list, since make
the passion of Christ a Bucklare and sheelde to defen them from all punition
desrued for their malicious crimes and mesdeeds

As that man is truly accounted to be man miserable Estate, which by the
persuasion of his Ennemie stricketh him self in the body with an sharp
dagger, and so leaving it sticking in the wound albeit his Prince punish him
not or such a fault^ Right so the Protestants soul is truly Judged to be in a
woeful plihht, which by the tentation of Satan wounded him self in the soul
by the Infernal darte of deedly sin without any remeed^ to draw the same
out of the wounded soul agine albeit God would wincke at his offencs, and no^
punish him for such a deadly sin, to kill him self even to the spiritual
death of the soul agai^nst the co^mademe^te of God and leave the Infermall
darte of deadly sin sticking in the soul,

For the Protestants grant the them selves that albeit God take away the pain
and punition of sin, for their faith (as they allege in Christ) which pain
and punition is both Just and holy and of God* althought it be Dolorous to such
as suffer the same, Nevertheless they confess that the pestilent poison of
deadly sin it self, that hellish sting and Infernal darte do never depart
out of their Miserable wounded soul during the time of this mortal life.

VVhrefore you may Easily see their woeful and unhappy Estate to bear
continully about with them the pestilent poison and Infernal sting of deadly
sin in their wounded soul, with their counterfooted Iustifiing faith, which
can not help them to cure these deadly wounds of their soul but they must
alwise abide in that woeful plight during the days of this mortal life
without any remeede at all..

This discourse is most true in the Protestants According to their owen
doctrine, which are deceived by a false belief and counterfooted faith in
Christ and not truly redeemed by his precious blood, nor yet partakers of his
passion so long as that pestiient poison and Infernal sting of deadly sin
shall make residence in their wounded soul, But the the truth is not as they
say in Godly catholeques, but altogether contrary to their doctrine, for so
mucst as the coming of Chiest in this world and chief fruits of his passion,
were not to suffer that pestlient poison and Infrnall darte of deadly sin to
remain within the wounded soul of man and only to hide that Infernal sting
with the Miserable wounds of the souse by an External salve and reale of
Justice, but for many other fruits and Tffects which Ensue hereafter.

The first fruit and Effect of Christ's passion is to took away the pestiilent
poison of deadly sin out of the man's soul. Mat. 1.22. and Marie shall bring
foori a son and thou shall call his Name Jesus for he shall save his people
from their sins* Ihon. 1.29 behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sin of the world Tit. 2.14. who gave him self for us that he might redeem
us from all Iniquite and purge us.

You see by these authorities of the holy Scripture that one of the chief
fruits and Ewects o^ Christ's passion was to save us from our siinns Redeem us
from our Inequiuies, take away the sins of the world, and purge clean from
them, not that Infernal darte remain within the wounded soul to their lives
end, as the Protestants say

The second fruit and Effect of Christ passion i^ to cure the wounds of soul
by the holy oil o^ Inherent grace. luc. 10.34, the Charity of God is powered
in our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given us heb. 13.12. Therefore Jesus
that he might Sanctify hes people with his owen blood suffered without the
gate Ihon 17.17. and for their saikes I Sanetifie my self that they also may
be Sanctified in truth Ephesians. 5.16. Christ gave him self for his Church that
he might Sanctify it and Cleanse it by the lauer of regeneration in the word
You may see how the wounds of the soul are cured by the oil of Inherent grace
powered in the same and so purified from sin and Sanctified in truth.

The third Effect and fruits of Christ's passion is to reconcile us unto God by
grace who were made Enemies to him by sin. Romans 5.10. for if we were sinners
when we were reconoiled unto God by the death of his son, much more being
reconcilled we shall be save by his life.

Fourthly faith hope and Charity with all virtue given to us are the fruits
and Effeets of Christ's passion with the holy Sacraments.

These are the fruits and Effects of Christ passion, first to save us and take
away sin out of our soul and Redeem us from our Iniquity secondly to cure
the wounds of our hurt soul by the holy oil of Inherent grace powered in our
souls. Thridly to reconale us with God by grace who were made his Ennemies by
sin, Fourthly that so taking away the pestilent poison of deadly sin by the
merit of Christ's passion and curing the viaulent ulcers of our wounded souls
by the holy oil of Inherent grace the Church of God might be Sanctifiied in
truth and cleansed from all spot of deadly sin in deed, and so to be made
with out blame in the sight of God.

Now you may Eascly behold, what great Iniurety they do to Christ when thy
affirm Jesus Christ the only begotten son of God for all the pains and
troubles he ded suffer the space of three and thertie years for all his great
humitie and obedience to his Father, for his most Dolorous death passion, he
could never obtain so much grace and favors from his Father, as to make our
souls free from deadly sin, and to cure the wounds thereof with the oil of
Inherent grace, and so to make us the friends of God and Sanctify us in truth.

They deny all the fruits of Christ's passion by us recited above to Establsh
their Iustication by only faith which is a false faith altogether against the
word of God, as we have proved in our former discourse by the authority of
the holy Scripture.

How the Protestants make Christ one of ihe most deformed Monsters of world
to Estahlishe their Iustfication by only fatth, CHAP. LXIII
FOR better Intelligence of this mattir we must before all things declaire our
purpose by a Smiltude like unto the same.

If you would Imagine a man which have beutifull head well fashioned Every where
whose ^curling licks were like glistring threeds of Gold his Eyes like two
bright shining Stars most ple^alant to behold his cheeks adorned with
beutifull colors, whit and Read well proportioned like Roses and lillies
mixed together his lep most pleasantly framed of crimson color, his teeth
well set in ordour round about like beutifull pearls in his cheek bones, the
breath of his mouth sweet and odoriferouis, like the sweet smelling savor of
co^nall and odorifeoouis flowers, his ^eeke pleasantly shapen, and whinte like
geancing Ioyrie, and since a black stinching body to be Joined to this
beutifull head full of virulent ulcers Pestiferous byles, the Members, legs,
and arms thereof full loothsome Scabbes and venomous ^oiches, from whence does
flow a filthy matter, with a corrupt stinch defilling the air round about,
would you not think such a man to be one of the most deformed Coeatures that
can be Imagined in this world.

Truly this is the pleasant form and shape which they Protestants give to the
son of God when they make him head of their Church which is all ^eoamed and
more black then an Morian or Ethiopian full of corrupt stinch by the pestilint
^oyson of deadly sin, which never depairteth ^ut of their souls, as we have
proouen above by their owen doctring, for they take away all Inherent grace,
(which nurgeth the soul from all deadly sinnee, and makes it holy beutifull
and Just before God) to Establish the their Justification by only faith whereby
the apprehend Christ's Justice to hide there filthiness, Imundictitie and
corrupt stinch of deadly sins, which defil^ their souls.

In this Monstrous pattern set down about tow things are to be considere,
the beutitfullne^ of the head, and deformite and uncleanness of the body, the
beutifullnesse of the head beloneth t^ Christ the son of Good wheme they
allege t^ be the head of their deformed Church. The blackness, uncleanness,
and corrupt stinch of the body pertuinie to the Church of the Protestan^ which
they allege to be the Mystical body ^ Christ because S, paul. colloss. 1.18
writteth the Christ is head to the body of the Church.

As concerning the beutifullnesse of the hea^ which is the son of God, which
they allege ^ be head of their Monstrous and poluted Chur^ there is no
question thereof, because he is more b^utifull then all the sons of men.
psalm. 42. full grace and truth Ihon. 1, 14 without all blamish spote of sin
Ihon. 8.46. 1. pet. 2.22. by the also he is the brightness of his fathers glo^
heb. 1.3.

As concerining the Monstroues of from of the deformed Church it is Easily
proved by the owen doctrine. and beeause they affirm (as ^ have proved
above) that all their good work deadly sins, and that deadly sin does
never depairt aut of their souls, we must declare ^har damnsble fruits and
Effects fleow from deadly sins, and then you shall see Evidently what a
Moustrous thing it is to Join such a pestiferous Church as theirs is, to be a
Mystical body to Jesus Chist the beutifull son of the living God.

Before all things is makes the man Ennemie to God. plal. 91.10 Thy Enemies o
Lord shall pirsh, and all these that wire Imiqiutie shall be destroyed ^ say. And
I shall ease my self of my adueresaris and auinge me of my Enemies.

Secodly dead sin makes the man to Incur ^he curse and Mulediction of God.
psalm. 118.^1. they are accursed which transgress the co^madement Mat. 25.41.
Depairte from me you that ^re accursed unto Everlasting fire for I was hung^ie
and you gave me nor to eat ca.

Thridly it makes the man slave and and naught ^he Child of Sathat. Ihon.
8.44. you are of your ^ather the Devil and the desires of your Father ^ou do
1. Ihon 3.8. who works sin is of the Deull.

Fouruhly deadly sin as hells Infernal dart ^oundeth the soul most cruelly
luc. 10.30. a ^erten man full amongst thieves and they Robs ^im of his
raiment, and wounded him and depairted ^auing him galfe dead.

The Devils are the Thieves which did spoil the ^ule of Inhererent grace, the
spiritual Garment of the souse of all his merits and good works and likewise
did wound him deeply in the soul with deadly sin which is hells Infernal
darte.

Esaias writteth to this purpese. 5. saying. wherefore should you be smitten aty
more, for you fall away more and more, the whole head is sick, and the whole
heart is Heaune, from the sole of the foot to the head there is no thing whole
their in* but wounds and swelling and sores full of corniption, they have not
been wrapped and bound up nor Molified with oil.

Behold the Infernal wounds of deadly sin which is hellish dart, and many
sores full of stinc^ and corruption, Perptually resident in the Protestants,
souls which are not bound up and cure^ be the holy oil of Inherent grace but
only covered with an External veale of Imputiue Justice

Fyftly deadly sin makes the soul more black^ in the sight of God, then an
foul black stinching Ethopian or Morian, is in the sight of man lamentations
of Iermie 4 8. Now their face and visah^ is blacker then a coal they can not
know them in the streets their skine is withered like a stock

The soul of man by deadly sin is made a^ back as the face of man berayed
with Ink and vls dead as a withered brach upon a tree which bear no fruit at
all to the sight of God sixthly deadly sin makes the soul full of corrupt
stinch in the Noise of God and abominable unto him. psalm 13.1. They are corrupt
and abominable in their works plal. 5.11. Their heart Empty and full of
solie, their throat is like an open sepulchere: that is they are full of
spiritual stinch, corruption and abomination.

As a good work ascends up to God with a sweet savor and odorifrous
smelling, as the sacrifice of noe did smell sweetly before God, so the work
which is adioynid with deadly sin is like corruat stinch and abomination
before God, proverb. 15.8. The Sacrifice of the wicked is abominable unto the
Lord but the prayer of the Just is acceptable unto him.

You see here how deadly sin makes not only the soul of man, but also his
work is full of corrupt stinch and abhominatian before God.

Seuintly deadly sin Excludes the soul from Entering in the Kingdom of
Heaven. Mat. 7.22. many will say to me in that day have we not by thy name
done many Great works and Miracles and then I will profess to them I never
knew you depairt from me you that work Iniqitie.

This was a true faith in Christ whereby they did ^east out Devils and work
great Miracles, and preach in the name of Christ, Nevertheless because they
did work deadly sins, which are works of Iniquity their faith in Christ
could not save them but were most Justly excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven.

S. Paul likewise. 1. cor. 6.9. thus writteth: know you not that the Iuinst
shall not possess the Kingdom of God, do not Err, neither fornieators, nor
seruerc of Idols. nor adulterers, nor the Effeminate, no bugrers, nor Thieves
shall possess the Kingome of God.

These corinthians whom to S. Paul writteth were Christians and beleuers in
Christ, yet their faith in Christ, with such sins as are recited above could
not Justify and save them as Luther says in Sermon sic Deus dilevit mundum,
where faith is, no sin can harm the man.

Eighthly deadly sin makes the foul of man a nest of Infernal corpions. a
den of dragons a Dungeon of Devils Esaias. 13.21. and Beasts shall lodge and
make their habiation there, their houses shall be full of dragons, shall dwell
there and the hoaie sayres shall dance thee a howlets shall cry in their
palices, and the sirens in their Temples of pleasours.

The Deulls ar called Beasts because they stir up the hearti of men to
beastly desires. actions and manerse The Devil also has the co^none Namea of
some Beasts, by Reason of some harticulare confortmltie he has to these Beasts
in causing men to sin.

The Devil is called a dragon, because he Infectech the soul with the
pestilent poison of sin as the Dragon does the air round about him with a
venomous quality which Issues out of him.

The Devil is called and ostriche for so much as theostriche consumes the
hard iron by a natunaturall quality which is in him so the Eeuill sPoileth the
soul of man, by deadly sin of all grace, merits and good works before God.

The devil is called an how late, be use that as such a foul works all her
chief works in the Night so the Devil makes feeble Inconstant men by his
tentations to seek privy places, dark corners and lureing holes to perform
the Devils desires in committing deadly sins. Therefore Christ says: he
that does Evil hatteth the light that is for fear of reprehnsion.

The Devil is said to be Satire because he shall accuse us bettely befote the
Judgment of God of all offenses and sindes committed, which are not blotted
away by true penitence.

He is called a svrene, because as some writ that such a Monster Marine
(which is a women from the wast up, and an fish from the wast down) sitting on
a Rock in Sea, by her sweet songs did alure passingers to come to her and
since did kill them: Right so the Devil does allure men by his fweete
aentatians to deadly sins, that tbus he may kill them by Eternal damnation.

S. Gregory in the first books of the Kings in cap 7 writteth: that alse many
Devils aelident in the hearts of men, as therc be silthie and vnclea^e desires

Therefore S. luke writteth that seven Devils did go out Marie Magdalen when
our Lord Iesue did deliver her soul from the pestient poison of deadly sin
'which Devils did lodge within her body, during the time she was defiled with
the seven deadly sins

Here you may see that the Protestants are continually possessed with Devils.
by an spiritual and Invisible possession, because that their sins do^ never
depairte out of their souls, as they writ them selves and where so ever
deadly sins are there the Devil does make his habitation, as it is Evident
by these former authorities of the holy Scripture.

Nyntly deadly sin makes the man quilti^ of Eternal damnation. Mat. 25.4i.
Depairt from me you cursed to Everlasting fire, for I was hungered you gave me
not to Eat, I was thristed an^ you gave me not to drink.

If such be damned unto hells fire which gave not meat and drink unto the
poorem the ti^ of necessity, how much more shall they be da^ne^ unto hells
fire, which co^mite thifte homicide adultery, sacrilege, perjury, and other
such like hynous crimes which are fore bidden by the comma^demint of God.

Now to make a collection of all these thing recited above which accomdainie
deadly sins we s^ll do^clude most truly, that because the Prote^tants souls
(according to their owen doctrine ars alwise possessed with deadly sin, thev
mu^ have also these propper qualities and condition in their souls, which are
vnsearable from dead^ sin, that is to be Enemy to God to be accurse of God,
to be the Naughty slave and Child of the Devil, to be deeply wounded in the
soul by deadly sin which is hells Infernal darte, to be spoiled of all
grace and merits, to have the soul black before the Eyes of God, as an black
Ethio^ian is before men, to be withered like a dry stock without any soap of
grace or devotion, to ^e full of corrupt stinch and abomination before God, to
be Excluded from the Kingdom of He^uen, to be a nest of Deulls and and den
Infernal Drago^s to be compaimons to hellish spiritss and guilty of Eternal
damnation, what thing in this world can be more accursed, miserable, and vnhapie
^hen the soul of the Protestants which abide per^etually in deadly sin, and
consequently all these ^ormer miseries, which are vnsparable from deadly sin.

But they will say to me that they will cover all their Imundicities,
uncleanness, abominations, ^urses, corrupt stinches, virulent ulcer,
pestiferous ^oiches, venomous byles. Infernal scabes, cont^cted by the banne
of deadly sin in their souls with the Justice of Christ apprehended by their
^ith, which shall cause God to wirke at all their ^nnes, and abominations, and
so not purish them ^ Calvin writteth. lib. 3. Inst. cap. 14 sect. 12. ^ur
silthinesse and vneleanesse being cuered with ^e purity of Christ are not
Inouted unto us, but ^e hiddee, as if they were buried, that they may ^ot come
to the Judgment of God.

We answee first that they do great Injury Christ the son of God, who ar
the true phisiphisition of the world come to take away the Infernal darte of
deadly sin out of the souls of men, wounded by Infernal thieves, and to
cure their wounds with the oil of Inherent grace powered in their wounds, as
it is written lue 10.33. when they teach tacitly by their doctrine that he
could not merit or deserve so much grace at his fathers hand, by his
obddience death and passio^n as maigt takee away the Infernal darte of deadly
sin out of the Protestants soul, and eure^ their wounds in truth, with the
holy oil of Inherent grace powered really in their wounded soules^ but was
constrained by the Insufficiencic of his merits, death and passion, to let the
Infernal darte of deadly sin, remain still within the wound^ souls of the
protstants and cover only their virula^t ulcers, pestifrous boiches, venomous
byle^ and corrupt stinch of their Infernal scabe contracted by the pestilent
poison of deadly sin with an Exteeranll veale of his owen pure Justice an^
let them ly still under such a wourded the death luc. 10.34. o miserable estate
of Protestant souls to ly half dead wounded an continual pyned by
Innumerable soires without any remee^ at all.

Godly Catholics are deliuerd from such miseri^ because our Loud Jesus by the
mirits of his dea^ and passion has taken out of their souls the Infernal
sting of deadly sin and cured the wounds with the oil of Inhrent grace
powered their wounded soul luc. 10.34.

Secondly we answer that they dod much shame ^o them seluees when they
confess taeitly that as a black stinching Ethiopian is covered with a white
^hirte, a corrupt sepulcher and filthy Iackes with white lyme a stinching
dunghill with whire snow: ^ight so the Imundieitie, corrupt stinck, Infernell
^laewnesse, virulent ulcers, pestiferous byles, and ^enemous boiches contracted
in their souls by deadly sin. hells banne and Infernal poison ^re only
covered and hid by an External veale ^f Justice, which is as far distant
from their sil^hie souls as the heaven is from the Earth^

VVherefor such an abominable Church which ^ full of Imundicties like aofithie
Iacks and stlnch^ig dunghill is no wise worthy or yet deceet to be ^alled the
holy Church and beutifull spouse of our lord Jesus the beutifull spouse of
Christ, who ^ath sanctified his spouse and Church with his ^eeious blood, heb.
13.12. and Clcansed from that ^nfernall spotte of deadly sin and has made
^er holy to him self without blame. Ephesians. 3.12. ^ the end then might be some
decent proportion ^etweene him self and his spouse in the honorable and of
Marriage, which is made by Judgment ^stice faith and Mercy ose. 2.19.

Therefore it must be the holy Catholic Ro^aine Church whose faith is much
commended by ^e holy Apostle Romans 1, 8. which is the only true ^ouse of out
Lord Iesue Christ, most beutifull ^fore God, cleansed from the Infernal spote
of ^adly sin, apoc. 1.5. in her holiest Members from whence she takes her
Domination as the son of God witnesses when he says cani 4.7 my love thou
art beutifull and no spotte is in the

S. paul. Romans 8.3. wrireth to this purpose tha^ God has sent his son in the
similiade of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin that the
Justification of the law might be fullefilled in us.

You see here that the son of God did condemn sin in the flesh (that is in
the sacrifice of hi^ fleshy offered up to God his father upon the cross. that
so the Iustificaton of the law might be fullfilled in us. Thus Jesus is not
only Just in himself, but the holy Membeas of his Church are all^ Just in them
selves by the Insluence of grace which thy do receive from Christ their head,
for such Iustics and perficetion as the law did requir^ of thm, it was
fullfilled in them by that grace which Christ did purchasse for them upon the
Cross, by his holy death and passion that the^ might be some decent proprtion
between the bridgroome and his spouse in the band of Ma^riage, the head and
the Members by Mistcall vn^ on o^ grace, for otherwise if the holy Member of
his Church were not holy and Just in the selves by the Influence of grace
flowing from the head. the holy Scripture could not be true when it says,
that the Justification of the law wa^ fulffilled not in Christ only, but also
in us althought mor perfectly in the son of God then in ^

The Iustication of the law can not be fullfille^ in the Protestants which
walk after the flesh because all their best work selves, are deadly sins as
they confess them selves, but in Godly Catholipues which walk after the
spirit, because all their good works, are works of Justice according to the
law and acceptable service unto God, as the Prophet Malachias foretold. 3.5.
saying: hey shall offer up Stcrifice in Justice and the Satrifice of Judah,
shlbe acceptable unto God.

Tbridly we answer that they dishonnour them selves when they compare them
selves to withered branches which bring out no other fruits but deadly sin,
which fruits are grateful to Satan Ihon. 8.44. for so doing they fulfill his
desires, they are also hateful to God, as the Impious and his Imppitie are
sap. 14.9. therefore the protestants can not be lively branches resident in
Jesus Christ, which is the try of life, becouse such boughs as bring not out
good fruits pleasant to God are cut away from Jesus Christ the true try of
life, to be burnee (as fite fuel) in hells fire Eternally, as S^ Ihon
witnessth. 15, 16. as Christ is glorified when the branches bears good
fruits: so he as disho^noured when the branches bears Evil fruits as the
Protestants do.

So Godly Catholics must be these branches graffed in Christ the try of life
by the Inftuence of he grace, which bear good fruits acceptable unto God, as
the Protestants are withered branches which are acceptable fruits unto Satan.
Ihon 8.44. who^e to the fire of hell is preparee, and likewise to all withered
branches which bear no good fruits wcceptable unto God, as the Paotestants are
if they amend not both in life and Religion.

Fourthly S. Paul writteth Romans 8 29. that God has predstinated all his Flect
to be made like the Image of sone that he might be the first borne amongst
many brettheren.

As concerning the Protestants which bearie continvallie deadly sins in their
souses, they are rather conform to the Image and similitude of Satan then to
the the Image and similitude of God because that as the Inherent grace of God
in the soul of a Godly catholic makes such a catholic like unto Christ,
which is full of grace, and truth Ihon. 1.14. so the Infernal spotte of deadly
sin in the Protestants soul chief cause and author of sin, that Christ
calls Satban their father, for so much as the Protestant co^nittinng deadly
sin continallie performs so doing Satan's desires will and gartfull service.

whrefore it restaeth that the Godly Catholques, which are Justified by
Inberent grace resident in the souls. should be called the Elected brethren
of Christ, because they are like unto the Image of Christ by the brightness of
Inherent grace which is resident in thcir souls, and not the Protestants,
which by deadly sin resident in their souls are made like unto Satan,
chief author of sin, for which cause Christ calls him their father Ihon
^.44.

Likewise as a mulitude of black Morians or Ethiopians can not be truly called
the brethren of such a on as most fair and beutifull. so the Protestants
whose souls are like be called brethe^en like unto the beutifull son of God,
because they are more resernbland to Satan by the black ^nfernall spotte of
deadly sin, then to Christ by ^nie brightness or beutifllnesse of Inhercnt
grace, ^s Godly Catholics are.

As these which are Endued with Inherent grace are parteipant of Christ's beutie
and grateful unto God, so these which are filed with the Infernal spote of
participant of his Infernal blackenesse and alse grateful unto him as they
are odious unto God. sap. 14.9. Now to conclude this Chapter according to these
authoities of the holy Scripture recited above which declare to us the proper
conditions whinh are inseperable from deadly sin, if a spouse which were
Enemy to God, sttumpet and harlote to Satan, deeply wounded in the soul by
deadly sin, hells Infernal dart, spoiled of all Inhereth race mertis and
good works black before God, as a foul Morits or Ethiopian is be fore man,
withred like a dry stock, without all soap of Grace aeuotion, full coreupt
stinch and abomination before God full of corrvption like a Rotten sepulcher
or stinching dunghill full of spiritual and virolent ulcers, pestilent
boitches, venomous bylles, Inferntll scabbes contracted by deadly sins in the
soul, excluded from the fellowshipe of all holy pirits and citzens of heaven,
(...) nest of Devils den of Infernal Dragonse a Partaker of hellish damned
spirits guilty of Eternal damnation if such a spouse which is disfigured and
deformed by all these former abhomrnable qualities and conditions, which
follow foot for foot the pestilen poison of deadly sinnes^ were Joined
Either as spotse, ar yet as a mistical^ body to the beutifull son of living
God as head to the same, which is the brightness of his father^ glory full of
grace and truth, would not that conjunction of such a moustrous body, that
noble and beutifull head, appear to be the most monstrous conjunction that can
be Imagined by the Enmin^ of man there is no man Endued with his natural^ wits
which can deny the same.

Truly deadly sin which is alwise resident in the souls of Protestants and
likewise in all their works (as is taught by them selves) disgrceth
ciffigureth so their mistiall and unhappy Chrac^ with such abominable
qualities as ane recit^ above, that it can nowse be called the Imaculaat^
spouse or Mystical body of Christ, the beutiful^ son of God, wherefore it
rests that the Cath^olique Roman Church, much commended by the holy Apstle
S. Paul. Romans 18 should be truly Esteemed the unspotted spousce of Christ as
she is termed by the holy Ghost. cant. 4, 7. Thou a^ whole beutifull my love
and no spote is in the.

Althought that good and badde fish be in Christ's net Mat. 13.47. good corn
and Cockle in his field (Ibidem) wise and foollish virgns in his Kingdom Mat.
25.1. Sheep and Goats his Sheepefold Ibidem. 32 his Church is call holy ^
unspotted from the Just and holy, and not from the wicked and ungodly, for
there be many Just and wisemen in the Church of God, and their works ^n hand
of God Eccles. 9.1. as the holy Scripture witnesses in diverse places, as of
Abell, Noe, Job, Zacharias Elisabeth, S. Ihon Baptist, and others ^uch like
Genes. 6. Job. 2.5. luc 1. luc. 16 7 Ihon, ^7.12. 1. cor. 6.11. 2. pet. 2.7.

How the Protestants. deny Christ to be Redemptor of the world to Estableshe
their Justification by only faeth. CHAP LXIIII.
FOR so much as the Protestants will Acknewledge no graes or Inherent Iustics
by the gift of God to be in the soul of a true Christian where by ^e^ may be
truly called Just before God, they have ^course to the Justice of Christ, to
the end they ^eing clothed Externally by his Justice apprehended by their
faith, and likewise their malice, ^mpictie, Iniuffice, hypocrisy, and all
other deadly ^nnee resident in their souls, hid and buried by ^he same
Justice they may appear Just before God ^ho are truly Impious and Iniust in
them selves.

Luther thetefore in his co^mentarie in the 2. ^hap. to the Galatians thus
writteth: Ergo fide ^pprehensus Christus Therefore Christ apprehen^ed by faith,
is the Christian Iustics whereby God ^steemed us Just, and gives us
Everlasting life,

Calvin lib. 3. Inst. cap. 11. see. 2. thus writteth ^ontrariwise he shall be
Justified by faith, who set^ng a side all works of Justice apprehends
Christ's Justice by faith, being covered he shall apeare not as a sinner, but ar
Just man in the sight of God.

Calvin again lib. 3- Inst. cap. 2. sect. 5. Christ does Justify us not by
our proper Innocence, but by the Imputation of Christ's Iustes and Interession
that we may be Esteemed Just in Christ who are in our selves Iniust.

The rest of Lutherane agree with this doctrine of Luther and Caluins. see
bellarmine lib. 2. de Just. cap. 2.

This doctrine appears to make much for Christ's glory in External
appearance, but when it is sounded to the deep it shallbe found much Injurious
to Jesus Christ and full of Infidelity, by menie reasons grounded in the holy
Scriptuse, because the Protestants can not defend such doctrine unless they
deny Jesus Christ to be the Redemptour of the word.

The first Reason is taken from the these authorities of the holy seripture,
where it is written tha^ Jesus shall save and Redeem his people from the
sins and Iniquities. Mat. 1.21. and Marie sha^ bring forth a son and thou
shall call his Nam^ Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sin Tit.
2.14. who gave him self for us that he mig^ Redame us from all Iniquity.

For Christ says verily verily I say unto y^ that who so ever commits
sin he is servant unto sin, and the servant abides mot in the hou^ for
Ever, but the son abides for ever if t^ son therefore shall make you free
you shallbe free Indeed Ihon 8.34.

If the Protestants committing sin as Christ says ar ye seruats to Sathhan
how are they made free Imdeede, for so long as they abide in sin, commit
siine, and are fllaues to sin they are not faued from sin and Iniquiitie,
nor Christ llk^wise can not be called a Redeemes and saueour men from sin so
long as sin remains. in them, and they slaves and servants to sin, as a
Physician can not be said to have cured a man dieased so ^ond as the disease a
bidetd within his body.

The seconnd Reason is taken from the victory of Christ which he has obtained
against Satan Colloss. 2.13. and he has spoiled the peralities powers, and
has triumphed the^ in this same Cross

This victory and triumph of our Lord Jesus Christ against Satan can not
consist in no other thing but in that wherein Satan resists unto God, which
is no other thing but sin for as all goods are of God, so all Impiety,
malice, Imquitie and Inustice, are cheefely from Satan, who by his Malicious
craft did deceive our first parents, and ^raw them with all their Posterity
by original sin from the obedience of God unto his owen ^ubiection. 2. cor^
2.3. wherefore our Lord calls ^im the the prince of this world Ihon. 12 13 by
^eason of the sovereign power and Dominion he ^btained over men in making them
to disobey ^od and serve him by sin.

Wherefore if our Lord Jesus head not taken away which is the obedince and
feruics of Satan whreby he obtanineth power and Dominion over the souls of
men, he can nowise be said to have triumphed over Satan nor spoiled him of the
souls which he did possess by deadly sin nor God likewis can not be
Esteemed to have delivered men from the pewer of darkness and translated them
to the Kingdom of his deaire son as S. Paul writteth colloss. 1.13. if
deadly sin abides still in the souls of men, by the which men are detainend
captive in the the power and Domininon of Satan.

You see then that if deadly sin abidoth still in the souls of men, and only
covered by an External veale of of Iustics (as the Protestants will have it to
be) that our Lord can not be thought to have triumphed truly over Satan and
spoiled him truly of the Souls, of men, which he did possess by deadly sin,
because the External veal^ of Iustics, Imagincd by the Protestants takes no^
away the Kingdom and dominion of Sathha^ with his seruics and obedience, which
he has i^ the soues of men by deadly sin, so long as deadly sin (which is
the service of Satan) abides sti^ in their souls.

As concerning the guilte or deserte of panie whcih follows the sinner it
depends from the ordinance of God which makes his law wit^ such ondition
that whosoever should transgres^ his law should be worthy of punition.

The punition of sin is likewise from the Iusti^ of God, which punishes each
sinner according to his misdeeds.

but sin it self is properly from Satan and such as obey him against the
commandment of God wherefore Christ triumphed against Satan must properly
consist in taking away deadly sin it self out of the souls of men, wherefore
Satan has obtained dominnon over them, for otherwise Christ can not triumph
over Satan, or destroy his Kingdom or dominion, which he hatb obtained over
the soul of men by deadly sin, unless he take away deadly sin (wherein
consists the service of Satan) clean fourth of the souls of men by the
Infusion of his Garce, as the sun Chaceth away the darkness of the night by
the co^municution of his light dispersed through the Air.

Thus you see how the Protestants deny flatly victory ane Triumph of the son
of God against Satan, when they affirm that deadly sin (in the which
consists the Kinghom and pominion of Satan) abides still within the souler
of men and only cuered and hid by an External vcul^ of Justice Imagined by
them.

The third Reason (not unlike to the scond) i^ that the coming of the son,
of God in this word was to destroy sin, which is the work of Satan as S.
Ihon writteth. 1. Ihon. 3 8. he that sins. is of the Devil, for this
purpose the son of God wos manifest that he might disoluee or drive away the
works of the Devil

Wherefore if deadly sin abidoth still in the souls of true Christans and
all their works likewise deadly, sins worthy of damnation (as is is taughe
by the Protestants) then consequently they must confess that the coming of
Christ in the world was to no purpose, and him self dispnited of his
principal Intent considering that he could never by all his merits, and
sufforing, difolue deadly sin, and deirue it clane away out of the souls of
true Christians, and make their works meritorious and acceptuaby unto God.

Thus you see how the Protestants deny they Redemprion of man from sin and
Iniquity with the destruction of deadly sins in the souls of Christians,
which are Satan's works which destruction of sin should have been the
chief fruit of Christ's passion, consequently they must deny Christ to be
Redempton of the world because all men are detairied in captiutie of Satan by
deadly sin, inseperable from the souls of men (as the Protestant write of
the concupiance by other deadly sins in the which Satan's Kingdom and
dominion over men do properly consist

The fourth Reason is that the coming of Jesus Christ in this world was to
make the sons of Satan the sons of Good and hairs of his Kingdom, as S.
Paul writteth to Titus his disciple of 4. but when the bountifulluesse and
humanity 3. our saueour God did appear our by works of Iustce which we hade
done, but according to his mercies he saved us by the lauer of Regenerarion and
^nnoution of the holy Ghost which he has powered upon us abundantly through
Jesus Christ our saucour, that we being Justified by his grace we should be
maid hairs according to hope of life Everlasting.

S. Paul she weth by these words that the chief cause wheoerefore the son of
God did appear to us by his Incarnation and passion, was to save us and
Justify us from our sins and Iniquities and make us the son of God and
heirs of Eternal life, by the sacrament of baptism or lover of Regoneraton.

Wherefore if all deadly sins and Imqities Remain still within the souls
of men. and all their works deadly sins also (as is taught by the
Protestants) they are not saved and Justified from they sins, and Iniquities
by the merits of Christ's passion, and consequently they are not made the sons
of God, and heirs of his Kindome by the Sacrament of Baptism or lauer of
Regeneration, and so Christ's Incarnation and passion are unprofitable to them
to make them the sons of God and heirs of his Kinhdome.

For so long as deadly sin remains within the souls of men, and them
selves workers of Iniquirie they must be sons of Satan and not of God as
Christ him self says. Ihon. 8.44. speaking of ungodly men: you are of your
father the Devil and the desires of your father you will do, again. 1. Ihon.
3.8. who commits sin he is of the Devil, which things are true in the
Protestants but not in Godly Catholics.

Thus if deadly sin makes the man son to the Devil, as the holy Scripture
avouches, is Impossible that he be also son to God, and likewise brother to
Jesus Christ, who is the first borne amongst many brethren. Romans 8.29. for
sundry Reasuns.

First because no man (as our Lord says) Mat. 6.24 can serve tow Masters the
one contrary to the other (as God and the Devil are) consdering then that
deadly siinne makes the man servant and son to God, servant and son to the
Devil bouh together.

Secondly because such an assertion carith with it self an Evident
contraction, for as God and the Devil ate contrurtie on to an other in will
and Effection, so their children and servants must be contraie in all points.

Thridly because deadly sin makes the man son and servant to the Devil.
as is prooed above, he can not be called the brother of Jesus Christ, unless
you style our Lord Jesus with that most horrsble title to be son and servant
to Satan and his bretherene are, which thing is most horrible and blasphe^ous
to be hard, for they can not be called brerherene of Christ as sons of God,
but only of Satan by deadly sin, therefore the most be called (as they are
Indeed) the sons of the Devil

Thus you see how the doctrine of Instification by only faith, and deadly sin
abiding in the soul, drives the Protestants to shameless absurdib^ and
horrible blasphemimies aginst the ho^nour of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But they will say that our Lord Jesus Christ covers their Impiety,
Injustice, Mallce hypocnsie and all other deadly sins resident in their
souls with his Justice apprehended by their faith as we have recited above.

we answer that their assertion in this behalf is both false and
blasphemous, because they make Christ (man) Injurious unto God, and kindly
friend to Satan, when they make him to mantaine and protect with an External
veale and Imputation of his Justice, the ho^nour and service done to Satan, by
homicids, Theeeues, adulterers, deceitful Traitors and other malicious sinners.

Lilkewie they make our Lord by such belief in him not to seek the ho^nour
and serusce of God, which is the overthrow of Satan and destauction of deadly
sins, but to desend and hide Satan possessing the souls of the protestants
be deadly sin and Satan are alwise Joined together, which stirs up
togethere. and Endeuonreth him self to concur with them to offend God in all
human actions is not that a God office the ascribe to Christ to cover and
hide with the Imputtation of his Justice apprehended be their faith all
horrible Crimes and Misdeeds of cruel Murderers deceifull Traitors, common
thieves wild strumpets, false hypocrites, shameless prriinrers, and all
blasphematours of the name of God.

What greates frindshipe can Christ show unto Satan, then to maintain and
desend him and all his servants in their crimes and misdeeds, with an External
veale of his Justice Imputed to them, and to save Satan's servants, that they
come not to the Judgment of God to be accused and to be purished for their
sins and misdeeds is not that grateful service made to Satan and
fortification of his Kinghome against the aduancment of the Kingdom of God,
which consists in the Expelling of Satan, and all deadly sin^es out of the
souls of men (when Christ did cast seven Devils out of Marie magdalen, when
he did purge her soul from deadly sin, as S. luke reporteh in his Euangell.
8.2.) to the end that as Satan did Reign and domine in their souls as their
Prince and King by deadly sins so God should thereafter Reign in their
souls as Lord and Prince by Inherent grace whereby men do seure and obey him,
and so men are translated from the power of Satan to the King, dome of his
dear son.

Therefore Christ cnme not in this worldd to hide Satan and his works in the
souls of men by an External veale and Imputation of his Justice but Rather to
Eypell Satan out of the souls of men, as he says him felfe Ihon. 12.31. now
the prince of the world is cast out, and likewise to destroy his works which
are deadly sins, as of the Devil, for this purpose the son of God was made
manifest, that he might dsolue and drive away the work is of the Devil.

Wherefore if our Lord Jesus did come in this world to disolue and drive away
the works of the Devil out of the souls of men, which truly beleelue in him,
and serve him after his commandment, then it must be a graet blasphemy to say
(as the Protestants affirm) that Christ did appear in our humanity to hide
and cover deadly sin^e Satan's works in the souls of men by an External
veale and Inpuerent grace, can no more abide to gether in the soul of man,
then death and life, light and darkness, which are in comparable together.

The fifte Reason is that the son of God did suffer death to the end that the
Justification of the law might be fullfilled in us and not in Christ only as
the Protestants affirm.

S. Paul thus writteth, Rom 8 3. for (that was Impossible to the law in as
much as it is weak because of to flesh) God se^ding his owen son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, and by sin condemned sin that the
Justification of the law might be fullfilled in us, which walk not after the
flesh but after the spirit.

You may see by these words of the apostls that God did send his son to
condemn sin by the Sacrifice of his flesh offered upon the Cross to the end
that the Justification of the law might be fullfilled in us.

Wherefore if such Justice as the law of God does require of us be not sound
in a true Christian by the grace of Christ, then God is disapeinted of his
Intent, which send his son to offer him self in a Sacrifice to purge us from
our sin^es and Iniquities, that the Justification which the law of God did
require of us should be ^ullfilled in us by the grace of Christ, and likewise
Christ's passion should be fruittesse, and unprofitable unto us that could not
daserue or merry as much grace at Gods hands as might truly purge us from our
sins, adorn our souls, with as much Justice of Inherent grace as the
fulness of Gods law might require of us.

To say that God is di^apointed of his Intet and Christt passion fruittesse in
this respect, are tow open blasphemies, the one against the power of God, the
other against the merits of Christ's passion? which is the doctrine of the
Protestants who affrime that the Justification of the law is only fullfilled
in Christ by Inherent end actuell Justice and not in the true Members of his
Mystical body, which is Expressly against the holy Scripture above recited.

As withered branches disho^nour much the tree so doformed and filthy Members
disgrace the beutifull head: Contrariewise as beuitifuill branches and
fruitful boughs do much adorn the tree: so beutifull Members in the
Mystical body of Christ belong to the hon^or and beuitie of the head as S.
Gregory auocheth and Reason it self confirms.

Now to conclude this purpose behoiding that deadly sin abiceth still in the
Protestants souls and that all their works also are deadly sins worthy of
dammnation, if they be Judged according to their worthiness in the Judgment of
God as it taught by them selves, it follows consequently that Jesus Christ
has not redeemed them from their sins and Iniquity that he has not
obtained victory against Satan in distroying his workee in them which are
deadly sins, and Expeling Satan him self with deadly sin out of their
souls, and that he has not obtained by his death and passion so much grace as
might purge their souls of deadly sin, that the Justification of the law
might be fullfilled in us, wherefore Christ can not be a Redeemer of the
Protestants from their sin^es and Iniquities, not yet from (he captivity of
Satan, whose power and dominion over them consists in deadly sins as they
teach of the concupissance by many other deadly sin^es not likewse they can
not be redeemed from the gilte of eternal damnation which vnsparable from
deadly sin as we have proved above.

Thus you see how Christ is no Redeemer of the Protestants from the sins and
Iniquities, Tyrrnie of Satan and gilte of eternal damnation, according to
former doctrine because the chief fruits of man's Ridemption consist in these
things recited above, which things they deny as much against these holy
Scriptures recited above, as to their owen confusion and Evident damnation.

It is not so with Godly Catholics because he has saved and Redeemed them
from their sin^es and Iniquities, delivered them from the Tirrarnie of Satan,
which he obtained over them by deadly sin, and translated them in his
Kingdom, and likewse has purchassed as much grace by his death and passion
from God father, as might purify and cleanse their Souls from all spote of
deadly sinne^ that so the Justification which the law of God did require of
them, might be fullfilled in them, like^wise being formally Justified by the
grace of Christ Inherent in the their souls they might be made the sons of
God by adoption and hires of the Kingdom of heaven.

How the Protestants muke God false in his promise to Establish their
Justification by only faith CHAP. LXV.
GOD promised in the old Tsta^ent to purify the hearts of Godly Christians
from sins and Iniquities and to write his law in their hearts, and not in
Tables of stone as he did before, when he gave the law so written unto Moses,
Exodus 31.18. so that the Justice which the law of God did require in the oide
Testament as it writuen in the hearts of true Christians by the sprit of grace,
which is to love God with all their hearts and their Nihhbour as them soul.
Romans 13.2. therefore the Protestants to Establish their Justification by only
faith, and not by the law of God written in the hearts of true Christians by
the Inherent grace of Christ, are constrained to make God false in his promise,
as is proved by the authority of the holy Scripture which Ensue heareafter,

Moses Deuteronomy. 30.6. thus writteth: Lord God shall circumcise thy heart and the
heart of thy seed to the end thou love they Lord thy God with all thy heart
with all thy mind.

Wherefore if no man can be found that loves God with all his heart and mind
(as the Protestants ^firme) God must be esteemed false in promise.

The Prophet Ezechiell. 36.27. I shall put my ^irit in the midest of you and I
shall make you ^a^ke and keep my Judgments.

Wherefore if no man con be found which keeps the Judgments of God and
walks in his ^o^mandements, as the Protestants avouch, they ^halbe
constrained to make God false in his pro^ise

The prophet Iermie writteth also to this ^urpose Ierenie. 31.31. behold the
days shall com says the Lord) and I shall consumare upon the ^ouse of
Israel, and upon the house of Judah a New Tastament, not according to the
Testament wh^h I left to their fathers in the day that I took ^eir to bring
the^ out of the land of Egypt, because ^hey did not continue in my Testament
and I negl^cted them (sayetd our Lord) but this is my Tes^ament which I will
dispose the house of Israel after these days (says our Lord) giving my ^wes
in their mind, and in their hearts I shall write them.

In these sentnce of the holy Scrpture God has ^romised their things to be
Exactly acconplishid and performed in the New Testament.

First that he should circumcise and purge them that believe truly in him all
spote of deadly sins, that so being purified from their sins. they may ^oue
the Lord God with all their heart and mind.

Secondly that he should write his laws and graffe them in the hearts of true
beleeu^s by the grace of Christ, which is powered in the hearts of the faithful
by the holy Ghost which is guen them a the Apostle writteth Romans 5.5.

Thridly that he should power his spirit upon faithful in such abondance that
he should make them to walk in his co^madements and keep hi^ Judgments.

Now I will ask at the Protestants whether Go^ has performed his promise or
no? if they wi^ say that God has performed his promise in the behalf then
they must grant that the faitfull a^ not only Justified by faith but also by
the law o^ God written in their hearts, and mind, as the ho^ Seripture above
mentined shows most Euiden^tlsi in Exprisse words. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Iermie. e1.3
and likewise by walking in the commandments ^ God, and keeping his Judgments.
Ezechiell. 36.2^

If they will say that God has not performe^ his promise in this qehalfe, to
save their Iustific^tion by only faith then they must make him to ^ false in
his promise and consequently to be a lie when they make his word and his deed
not to g^ soundly together qut contraie one to an othh^ which is a manifest
blasphemy* for so much God, which is the first, and Eternal truth, can n^
wise lie mor be false in his promise as the Apos^ writteth. Tit. 1.2. hepr.
6.18.

But Luther in visitatio. Saxonice Melanch the in locis vlti^o edntis titul. de
lib. arbirt de pecea^ Kemnitius in Examen council. Prident grant ^ that men may
Kep the commandments Externally, that is not to kill not co^mite theefte or
adultery, or other such like things which Luther called civil Justice or
Iustics of the flesh, but they deny that men may keep the Interior acton of
the soul from sin and Imundicities. so that these Moral works in keeping
the commandments* Externally are Just before men but Iniust before God,
because that the Inward action of the soul is not correspondent in Iustuce to
the outward action of the body and in this self (accondring to their doctine)
God has prforrmed his promise, therefore Calun affirmieth with Luiher, Melanch
then and Kemnitius that works, which amongst the common people is accouted
Righteousness is before God mcere wickenesse.

We answer that if it be true as Protestant^ teach they give much ho^nour to
God in the performing of his promise, to make an hypocrite for a true Christan,
which worketb good works Externally before men and in the mean season
remainetb still vnelane, Impious and Iniust in the Inward action of the soul
in the presence of God.

Thuse you see good Reader how their blasphemous doctrine of Justification can
not stand with the promise of God, and truth of the holy Scripture, because
that Establish their doctrine of Iustificrtion they are constrained to make God
a liar and the holy Scripture false as we have proved above in confronting
their doctrine with the promises of God, and Sentence of the holy Scripture.

But it is not so as they sav in Godly Catholics that work, which is Just
before men is mere wickedness before God, for so much as the law of God
written and graffed in their hearts by the grace of Christ powered in their
souls, as is proved above makes the in ward action of the body both Just
before God and acceptable unto him for otherwise the law of God can not be
said to be written in their hearts, by the yertue and power of God, unless
they be called from ally Just by that same Just law, which is formally
resident, and the Inherent in their souls, and the action^ also Just, which
derive from the same.

For as the Moon and Stars are full of brightness by the light which
resident in them althought the light which is with in them, begiuen to them by
the sun and the Air likeise bright by the light which Inssue out of them:
Right so the soul is full of Justice where of the law of Justice is graffed
in the power of God and grace of Christ and all the actions of body also Just
before God which spring out from that law of Justice given by God residedt in
the fouse.

How the Protestants abolish and vuull that ordinance of God vvherby we ^re
commanded to pray for grace and Remission of sins to Establish their falls,
Religion and Justification by only faith. Chap. LXVI.
THE Protestants teach all that the grace of Justification whereby the man is
formally Just, is no gift of grace reident in the soul of man, but only the
Iustce of Christ Appreheoded by their faith (as they allege in Christ) as we
have shevven else where before.

They teach also that the Efficient cause of their Justification puts
nothing really with in the man, but is only an action resident in God vnhereby
he accepts them in his sauoura and friendshipe for the only respect of their
faith in Christ,

Thridly they teach that no man is to be Esteemed to be one of the faithful,
but such as believe undoubtedly that theey are received in the favor of God
with remission of sins for their faith in Christ,

Fourthly it is taught by them that they are als certain of their Iustifiication
and salvation, as they are certain that Christ is the son of God, and that
such as will not believe his own Justification and salvation as he beleoueth
Christ to be the son of God, not to be Esteemed as a faithful Christian but
an Infidel, and likewise that faith is the only true Iustifiing faith,
whereby they believe them selves, as certainly to be Justified (that is to be
received in the favor and grace of God with remission of their sin of God.

For probation of this point Martiuus Bucerus a Domiean friar (Master to Ihon
Calvin, as Calvin vauntetr him self) in Colloquio Ratisbonefi vvritteth that
his faith makeeth him as certain of his Justification and salvation as it maketb
him cert^n that Christ is God or the son of God, and that such as believe not
the one as cerrenly as the other, is not to be Esteemed one of the faithull.

Calvin his Discple lib. 3. Inst cap, 2. seci, 19. thus vvritth to the same
purpose Saying vere fidelis non est no mam is to be accoundted truiy faitfull,
but such as are truly persuaded that God is both a merciful and bounuifull
Father unto him, and that the benignititie of God and likvvise have such a
confidence in the promises of Gods benevolence that he may account him self
most certain of an Infallible Expectation of Salvation.

Kemnit^us in Examen, council. Tridant. Sesse 6. cap. 12. reproteheth the
universal council of Trent, because the said council teaches us that no man
can be certain of his Justification and salvation, without an special
Revelation of God, where he holds the contrary, that each faithful
Christian should hold him self certain of his Justification and salvation.

Petrus Mattire in his comment in the 8. to the Romuines does Auoch the same^

Luther also in assert. Art. 10.2.12. Melanch then his Disciple in Tit^ de fide
et in Apoleg confess. August. Art. 4. et d 9. do all affirm this doctrine, of
the Certainty of Iustincation and Saluaton, because the Puritant affirm this
doctrine of the certainty of Justification and salvation more boldly then the
Protestants I have put the Puritans in Rank before the Protestants.

Now considering that these Puritans and Protestanas are alse certain of their
Justification and Salvation by their Iustifiing faith as they are certain that
Christ is God or the son of God. I would a^ke at them vvhefore they pray God
more for the the Remission of their sins, then they do pray him to send his
son for the Redemption of the world, beholding also that they believe their
sins to be as truly remitted unto them, as they believe Christ already to be
send for the Redemption of the world.

They have no more Reason to pray for the Remission of their sins (which
are already remitted by only faith) then they have to pray God for the
Redemption of the world: because he is already send by God the father for
this same respcet.

Therefore as it is a Blasphemy to pray God to send his Son for the
Redermption of the world, because God the Father has send him already for
the same respect, as the holy Scripture and Araickles of our faith do m^
Evidently declare unto us. as so it must be Ablasphemio and point of Infidebie
to them to pray God for the remission of their sin, which they have
already obtained by their faith in Christ, because their sins are already
remitt,d by the blood of Christ, as it makes them certain that God the Father
has send his Son for the Redemption of the world.

Thus you see good Reader how the Purieans can not pray God for the Remission
of sins vnlasse they blaspheme God, according to their own doctrine, if it
be true vuhich they affirm by their common doctrine reciteh above that their
faith makes them als cerien that their sins are remitted, as they are certain
that Christ is the Son of God, and already send for the Redemption of the
world.

Scondly prayer is a Godly work and painful Action of the body, as when
the Prophet David said; my ^hroai^ is become hear whilst I did cray to o
Lord all the day long ^fal. and as when our Lord did vvatch the whole night
long.

Therefore when any man obtains grace and Remission of sins by humble and
puinefull prayer as the publicane did luc 10 10 14 they must confess that a
man is Justified by good works, and not by only faith if they will say (as
they do in deed) that all such as are Justified, obtain grace and Remission
of sins by only faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, and non by any painful
work of prayer, then they must confess that all prayers offered up to God for
grace and Remission of sins are spent in vain, because that men do never
obtain grace, and Remission of sins by pracer offered up to God, but only by
faith in the blood of Christ, so they must likivvise confess that Christ the
^onne of God has commanded us to pray for the Remission of sins in vain,
when be teaches us to pray in this as hion, for give us our trespasses as
we foregine them ^at trespass against us Mat. 6.12.

^hus you see how their faith and Religion can not stand ^ith the ordinance of
God whereby we are commanded to pray for grace and Reuission of sins, but
either they must say that their Iustifiing faith, is a lying faith, when rhey
affirm that men do obtain grace and Remission of sins by it only, or then
that the ordinance of God, whereby we are commanded to pray for the
Remission of sin^es, is vain and to no purpose: because men (as they say do^
never obtain remission of sins by prayer offered up to God, but by faith only.

wherefore to say that the ordinance of God whereby we are commanded to pray
God for grace and Remiss^on of sins is in vain and to no purpose, is an open
blafphemie against the vvisdome of God, who can neither do or command any
thing in vain, but all to seem purpose, therefore we must say that the only
Iustifiing faith of the Protestans it a falfe lyiuh faith, and directly against
the holy Scripture and ordinance of God, we are commanded to pray for grace
and Remission of sins which things are obtained from God, not only by true
faith in Christ, but also by humble prayer the fear of God penitence and other
suchlike virtues, and not by only faith.

Thrtdly to pray God to do the thing which he has already done, as if man
would pray God to bring him save and sound not of his mothers womb, after he
is already borne, is no vvorrhipe of God, but Jesting and Scofflng of his
divine Master.

So when the Protestant desires God by his prayer Justify him* remite his
sins and make him his Child by ihe grace of adoption, which things God fath
in Christ. according to his own doctrine what can such prayer be but Iusting
and Scoffing of God to crave again from him that thing in his prayer, which
God has already given to him before for the respect of his faith.

If a poor man after that he has received an hundredth Crowns from a Prince
delivered to him in his Right hand, would hold out his left hand aganine, and
request Prince to give him that same hundredth Crowns in his left hand, which
he hade received before in his Right hand, would not the Prince have lust
occasion to say to such a one? what means your Impudency to bold out your
left hand and Crave from me the 100. Crowns which I did deleeuer unto you
in your Right hand when you did believe me to be a liberal Prince before? so
God may Justly sav unto the Protestants when the prayer God for grace and
Remission of sins what misbeleefe and Infidelity is this in you to crave
grace and Remssion of sins from me in your pra^ere: consideing that yeu boue
alread obtained these things from me before, for the respect of your faitb in
the blood of Christ which was shed for the Remission of your sins.

If you be Certain that your sins are temitued by fyith why Crave you then
Remission of them by prayer? if you think to obtain Remission of them by
prayer then you must b^leeue they are not remittaed by only faith in Christ.

So their Iustifioation by only faith and praying for Remission of sins can,
not stand together.

Considering then that Justification by only faitf and praying for Remission of
sins can not stand together, we must foresaike the Justification by only
faith, which is the doctrine of Protestants, and Embrace the praying so.
Remission of sins, which is the ordinance of God and doctrine of Christ as a
true mean to obtain grace and Remission of sins.

FINIS.
APPROBATION.
LIbrum hunc Anglica Sermon conscriptum nihil continere quod alieni sit a fide
Catholica testimonio doctrinum prorumque hominum eiusdem nationis accesermur.
Dactum Rothomagi Februarij 1615.

Sign, GVTION, Vicarij Generalie.


