AN EXPOSITION, AND OBSERVATIONS UPON SAINT PAVL TO THE GALATHIANS, TOGETHER
with incident Quaestions debated, and Motives removed, by JOHN PRIME.

1. Cor. 10.15. I speak to them which have understanding: Judge ye what I
say.

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARN and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at
the sign of the Tigers head. Anno 1587.

TO THE MOST WORTHY, LEARNED, AND REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, JOHN PIERCE, the Lord
Bishop of Sarum.
RIGHT Reverend, being desirous to show some part of thankefulnes for your
Lordships favorable and undeserved respect and kindness to me-ward, and with
that intent looking into my papers and study notes, specially into such as
were delivered every other week at ABINGTON by OXFORD in your Lordships
Diocese, among other things of greater length, I resolved to reuise and frame
out this exposition upon S. Paul to the Galathians, with Observations,
Questions, and Motives: The rather for the shortness of the text, best fitting
with my leasurelesse occasions, and likewise for the waightinesse of many
matters either naturally arising, or incidently taken, and accordingly
discoursed.

Wherein to declare in what sort I have gone in and out before that people and
their worshipful neighbors repairing to them, and joining with them in this
service for these many years together, albeit I have much abridged, and
somewhere enlarged and altered, yet for the most part these READINGS may be
called but the REMEMBRANCES of things, that have passed amongst the^, and now
are briefly set down in this short impression.

And herein plainly to confess what I think of this bookish humor of writing
books: truly, in them that can write why should they (as it is in the Poet)
Periturae parcere chartae? They have a gift and a talent that way, and why
should they hide it? For others, who may be better occupied, there is no reason
they abuse the Reader, and pester the world with unprofitable vanities.

For my self the last of many, and for the rest of greatest ability, al our
books are but entra^ces to the book of books, unto the sacred Bible, and book
of God: which were it indeed deeply imprinted in the hearts of al me^, I could
easily have spared this simple labor, and could and would have wished even
LVTHERS wish, upon the same very condition that he did: That al books else
were in a fair light fiar.

But men being men (God so ordering it) require and need humane helps, and
Master LVTHERS book upon this very Epistle, is a profitable writing, and full
of comfort.

Every man cannot readily use the Scripture strait-way, every man cannot at
the first blush tell which Scripture is fittest for confirmation of this or
that article in faith, which fairest for exhortation in manners, which fullest
for refutation of errors, and therefore by preaching, by penning, by conference
and by imprinting God has provided sufficient aids as the times have required,
that men may look and look again upon things, examine the spirits, compare
matters and causes, ruminate and chue the kud, meditate the state of their
salvation, and go the ways there-unto with a clean and a cloven foot, that
is, as ISICHIVS says, with a wise, a discreet and a distinguishing
understanding.

To these ends I have performed this present account of my dealing in your
Lord-ships Diocese, humbly craving (may it please your Lord-ship so to accept
thereof) it may be a slender monument and meane-pledge of greater duty to your
Lord-ship, and of my good will and FAREWELL to ABINGTON, and likewise to the
Gentlemen and Justices near adioining.

The Lord preserve your honor to his holy will, and blessed pleasure.

From the New College in OXFORD, 1587. IANVAR. 30. Your L. to command in
Christ, JOHN PRIME.

THE EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLE PAVL TO THE GALATHIANS.
The Argument.
PAVL had preached the gospel some 14. years together, generally among the
Gentiles, and namely to the Galathians. But by reason of the largenes of his
commission, he was not to dwell in any one place, and therefore departed from
Galatia, and betook himself into other parts of the world.

This opportunity of the Apostles necessary departure and absence, by the busy
instruments of Satan, who never sleeps, was soon espied, and as soon taken.
Incontinently they conveyed in themselves, and being crept in, with all
endeavor they labor to bewitch and inueigle the Galathians minds, and the more
effectually to discredit the synceritie of the Gospel, fair pretenses of
Moses name, and of the Laws prerogative were made, and ever, a thorough special
disgrace of Paul's person was most shot at.

Whereupon ensues 1. a direct defense of his vocation. 2. a dew maintenance of
the cause. 3. and a true reformation of a deceived people, both in matters of
faith and conversation.

CHAP. I.
1 PAVL an Apostle not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father which has raised him from the dead)

2 And all the brethren which are with me unto the Churches of Galatia,

3 Grace be with you and peace, from God the Father and from our Lord Jesus
Christ,

4 Which gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us from this
present evil world according to the will of God even our Father.

5 To whom be glory for ever and ever Amen.

Calling, either by name, or unto office.
PAVL an Apostle.) He describes himself by his calling. And as the word
(calling) does signify either the name that a man is known and called by, or
the state he is preferred and called unto: so S. Paul expresses both, 1. his
name (Paul) and, 2. the state of his office withal (to be an Apostle.)

Calling by name.
1 Touching his name, it is too light a labor much to stick at names: when we
have caught such small fish, we but cast the^ into the sea again. And it has
ever been thought a vain curiosity, so Judge. 13.18.
carefully to make enquiry for the messengers name and titles, when the message
is most certain. Wherefore for this matter that rule is best and may suffice;
that where the writers of holy writ and Scriptures are known, that there God
uses such so specified by name, as certain instruments to declare his will,
voutsafeing to show the children of men with what quill and pen himself
would write.

Again, when the writer of Scripture is less known, know we; that, we are
to esteem no less of those divine Scriptures, than of the rest, even so far
forth as if they came immediately from himself without our knoweledge of any
certain humane means in the penning.

2 After his name, follows the calling of his office. Calling unto office, or
state.
(Paul an Apostle) Calling to any funetion is either in earthly things or in
heavenly matters. And in heavenly things calling is either general to be Romans
1.7. 1 Cor. 1 2.
Saints, sanctified and washed in the blood of the Lamb, or else Romans 11. 1
Cor. 1.1.
special to be a teacher and a minister in the Church of God and house of
Saints. And this calling is either ordinary and appointed orderly by
imposition of hands according to the right touch of conscience in the called,
and the good choice of the caller: or else calling is extraordinary whenever,
and of whomsoever it pleases God immediately by himself to call unto, and
enable for the work of his spiritual harvest. Such a calling was Paul's by a
voice from heaven at noone, whereof himself speaks: Acts. 26.9.
I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision, (and voice.)

Thus was he ordained to his office, and (as he here adds) neither by men
(called) neither by men (instituted) but extraordinarily in heavenly things a
Numb. 10.2.
consecrated trumpet put Romans 1.1.
apart to preach the Gospel even from heaven, and by God himself. Called not
of men, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ and God the Father which raised him
from the dead.

Both natures in our Savior.
By the way you will object, that if Paul were called by Christ, and therefore
not by man, then belike Christ was not man. I answer: these words deny not
our saviors humanity, though they rather prove his Deity and Godhead. For if
ye mark, in the same tenor of speech they couple him equally with God, and
expressly they term God his Father; and, such as is the Father, such in
substance is the Son. And because the Father is God, therefore by consequent
necessarily ensuing, the Son also is very God. And yet, mark withal, his
Father here is said to raise him from the dead. Which must needs be spoken of
Christ's humanity. For the Deity neither dies, nor reuiueth; neither falls,
nor rises, nor is raised again. Wherefore Paul was called by him, that is not
denied to be man, but by the 1 Timothy 2.5.
man Christ who was both very God and perfect man, and so a fit mediator
between God and man.

And now being thus called, in the second, third, fourth, and fifth verses, he
sends greeting: wherein would be considered, 1. The sender, 2. The persons to
whom he writes, 3. His entry with an holy salutation.

1 He that sends chiefly is Paul (of whom in part has been, and in part
hereafter shall be declared) then they with Paul, who sent their greeting, are
annexed: All the brethren who were with Paul. My note is, that whereas flesh and
blood is of a corrupt nature, full of wrath, pride and swelling, whereas every
man deemeth his lead to be silver, and his glass diamond, whereas some can
brook no superior, some no equal, Paul was altogether of a contrary mind, of
an humble, meek and lowly spirit. And albeit his gifts were more than were all the gifts of many, his labors incomparable, and his calling Apostolical, yet
he calls every of them that were with him brethren, and conioyneth them with
himself in his own Epistle. A charitable consent in Christians most forceable
to persuade in cases of Christianity.
And this was then, and will be ever, as it were, a twisted cord of greatest
strength the better able to draw men to christ, when Christians draw all one
way, and drive against sin, and lift all with one shoulder to further the
truth, and altogether live in charitable manner like brethren one with an
other.

Paul and all the brethren. He excepteth none that includes all, and he
accepts of all that excludes none.

The persons to whom the Epistle is directed.
2 To the Churches of Galatia. The The name of the Church taken diversely.
name of the church is diversely taken, either for the whole Church catholic
in times, persons and places, or for the parces of the whole professing in
earth the Catholic faith. And therein as every part of the sea is called the
sea: as the English, the Spanish, and the French Sea, is termed the Sea: even
so every part of the whole Church professing the truth may and does well
receive the name of the Church, as the Church of England is the Church, and the
Church of Scotland the Church, etc. And, because in Galatia their congregations
were copious, they are plurallie termed the Churches.

Whole churches may be seduced.
And herein it were not amiss to be noted, that not only some small church truly
so called, though in some points imperfect, but many Churches may tread awry,
whole populous Churches may be seduced. Psalm. 116.11.
For truly, men whether sole and single, or assembled and making a Church or
churches, are but men, and therefore prone to sin, and soon deceived: and as
the moon does often ecclypse, so Churches may sometimes err.

Men cannot his still the white, shall they not therefore aim at the mark?
And yet an other good observation it is, that if any man therefore will needs
be wilful, and unwilling to contend to perfection because all men necessarily
have imperfections, verily that man is unwise, and wants grace, and can be no
child of the Church of God, which is an house of such men as invoke and call
upon the holy name of God. 2 Timothy 2.19.
And whosoever so does, of duty must evermore more and more depart as far as he
possiblely may from all iniquity. And to this end both every where Paul
preaches, and here writes and wishes as follows.

The greeting.
3 Grace and Peace.) Grace is Gods favor: peace signifies gods blessing in
Genesis 43.23.
a prosperous estate. Grace goes before, and Peace follows after, and both
proceed by the means of Christ our Savior.

Rhemish, Test. Page 384.
Wherein I cannot omit a Rhemish and a peevish note, that misliketh the usage of
this salutation, appropriating it to the Apostles without all reason, and
foolishly inferring that because Heretics, and namely Manicheus, have used
it, therefore we may not use it.

The salutations were used of the Apostles may be used by others.
I pray you, why did Paul request that mutual prayers be made for him, if
others might not pray for him, as he did for them? And why may not al pray,
especially for Grace and Peace? Or may I not wish them to my self? Or if to my
self, why not to my Romans 13.9.
neighbor? Or wherein lies the let? May I not wish a man Gods grace? Or may
I not pray for the peace of men? Or may I pray at all, and can I pray almost
for any thing, and not for these things, and with these words?

For the other point that Manicheus did use it, Epiphanius haeres. 66.
I find he did. And what of that? The best things either in hypocrisy may be
pretended (for hypocrites pretend not the worst) or else the best things to
purposes may be abused. And what then? The Pharisie abuses his long prayers:
the tempter abused the holy Scriptures: the Corinthians abused the Sacraments,
Baptism, and the Supper; and Manicheus abused this good salutation, which yet
is not the thing is so found fault with in him. But he took upon him to be an
Apostle as the word is most preeiselie and properly taken: which his fault
was reproved, as appears in Austine. Tom. 6. contra Epist. Funda. c. 5. and 6.
And which title because the Pope being also a Bishop does claim, he most
resembles Manicheus.

The abuse of things abolisheth not their good usage.
But to the matter, whether he used or abused this salutation, it skilleth
little: for our parts, we are not disposed to mislike the innocent sheep fell,
because the ravening woolfe has sometime put it on: we are not so fond as to
refuse the Ark of God, 1. Sam. 8
because the Philistines had once got it into their hands: we cannot, neither
will we (God willing) refuse the usage of our godly greetings, because your
coyishnesse would bar us thereof, and appropriate good words at your
fantastical pleasure. As well you may, for ought I know, interdict men of well
doing, as of wishing well unto their neighbors and brethren.

And farther if you imagine (as it may seem you do) that there is some
operative and working benediction in those words: beside that the event has
proved the contrary (for what is now become of that graceles and unhappy
Church of Galatia:) the very words following confute that your folly most
sufficiently. For Paul wishes Grace and Peace not as enclosed in his words,
and interlaced in his lines, or fixed to his letters, but to be given by God
and by Christ which gave himself etc.

In which fourth and fifth verses are to be learned these three convenient
observations, as they lie. 1. The end why Christ gave himself, to deliver us
out of this present world. 2. The enducement thereunto, according to his good
will. 3. Our duty therefore in giving him glory and deserved praise for ever.

The end of our delivery by Christ.
1 Delivery presupposes captivity, and the greater the enemy, the dearer the
ransom, and the ioifuller the deliverance. The enemy here named is the world,
the ransom Christ, we are the delivered. The enemy mighty, the ransom
precious: and therefore our delivery most joyful. But he that is in hell
thinks many times there is no other heaven. So fair a gloss can the world
set upon the matter, and so forcibly can it woork. Genesis 29.
In the book of Genesis Laban made promise to Jacob that he should have to
wife for his faithful service fair Rachel, and Jacob in hope thereof indureth
al toil and pains. But when the time of his covenant was expired, Laban in the
night substituteth Lea in steed of Rachel: Even so O guilful world, how sweet,
how pleasant are thy promises, but the things thou yeeldest in the end how
bitter, how full of gall are they? Thou promisest bewtiful Rachel, but thou
performest squinteyd Lea. He which sees thy vanity, and discerns thy
wiliness, would he be deceived, or ought he not of all things most to desire
his deliverance from thy thral:

The world a transitory and a wicked world.
Our Apostle describes this world worthily in two words, terming it the
present wicked world. The wickedness of the world may seem delight-some, yet
such delights endure not long. They are but a basket full of summer fruit, a
Jonas his gourd, they spring in the night, and fade the next day. That which is
past, is as if it never were: that which is to come, is utterly uncertain: and
that which is present, is but a glimse for a moment, a morning dew and gone
again.

Notwithstanding were the world only a fickle and a transitory uncertainty,
the benefit of our delivery were the less. Glass is a brickle metal, and yet
a clean. The world is not only unstable and fading, even the very fashion
thereof, but it is (as Saint John speaks) altogether set on wickedness, Our
deliverance from the world* does not drive men to shorten their time in the
world.
and therefore Christ gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us
out of this present evil world. I say not: neither says Christ, from not
being at al in this world, but from living after the fashion of the world: For
it is written: Thou shall not kill, that is, thou upon a fear or fancy thou
shall not dispatch, as not an other, so not Aug. de ciui. Dei li. 2. cap. 20
thy self out of the woorld: Thou shall not dig thine own grave and enter
into it before thy time, no, Thou shall not hang thine own winding sheet
before thine eyes, thou shall not be cause or occasion of thine own death.

Job.
When holy Job cursed the day of his birth it was but a pang of imperfection.
Act. 16.28.
In the Acts, when the prisoner would have killed himself, Paul cries out
that he should do himself no harm, as if to kill were to hurt himself. Then if
to kill were to do harm, verily to live cannot be harm. And were it
absolutely unlawful to live, or laweful to live or not to live when man's lust
were, and with 2 Machab. 14.
Rasis to leave the station wherein God has placed us, there could have been
no doubt, Philip. 1.23.
or no great doubt in Paul's choice to the Philippians where he casts with
himself whether it were better to choose life or rather death for the desire
he had to be dissolved, and to be with christ. Yet in fine he resolves for
considerations that it were better the course of his race to be continued. And
then why chose he life, if to live were utterly il, and simply naught, as some
in their impatiencie imagine?

Ioh. 17.15.
In Saint John our Savior prays for his, not that they be taken out of the
world, but that they may be preserved from evil. For the creatures in the
woorld, and the woorlde, and our life therein though evil and tedious, are not
in fault. The faults of the woorld must be shunned, and from them we are
delivered: namely from the guilt of sin, thorough Christ: 1 Ioh. 1.
and by his spirit from the degrees of sinning wilfully, lustfully, or finally
to death. But, which is my second note, who is he, or what is it has
delivered us? the grace of God through Jesus Christ. And why?

The inducement why God vouchsaued our deliverance.
The causes of gods doings must not be sought for elsewhere then in God
himself. His grace, his favor, his mercy, his fatherly goodness, his
pleasure, purpose, will and good will, are the only things specified in
Scripture, as agent causes of sending so great salvation to the sons of men.

Our Apostle Paul every where intentiuelie looking into the state of our
redemption, when he feeth the father satisfied, the Son sacrificed, man saved
from sin, and delivered from the world, he has always recourse only to the
goodness of God, who is most free in willing, inflexible in doing, repentant
in neither, and in both without all compartner. For who has or can be his
associate or Counselor, Romans 11.34.
to induce him this way that is unchangeable in all his ways, especially in the
mystery of godliness, in the incarnation of our Savior, and in the giving of
his Son? So that neither beyond, nor on this side his will Paul neither says
nor sees any thing, neither find I ought that may be compared.

Our duty in regard of our delivery.
3 Teach a fool this doctrine of his deliverance, and he cannot tell what it
means: wash a raw brick and it turns to mire: that is, tell a wilful
sinner that he has so gracious a god, such a through savior, straitway says
he, Grace shall save, and Christ shall deliver: I will live at pleasure and surfeit
every hour, the rather because my Physicion is skilful, and able, and willing
to help. God bless every good soul from presumpteous sins. Paul's example is
clear to the contrary, and in the meditation of the goodwil of God and great
work of Christ as somewhere he gathers unspeakable comfort Romans 8.
(If God be with us, who can be against us?) so here he rendered dew thanks
for so peerlesse and endless favor.

And great reason: you read when Isaake was borne, and Genesis 21.8.
weaned, great feasts were kept. But (brethren) when a man is regenerated and
borne anew in Christ, and made the Son of God, when he is weaned from the
world, greater reason incomparably greater that we keep an 1 Cor. 1.8.
holy feast, a feast unto the Lord, to whom Paul says be praise for ever and
ever Amen. Wherein would be Continuance in thankefulnes is thanks worthy.
noted not only Paul's praising God, but his vehemence and continuance: for
ever and for ever.

Feast-makers bring in the woorst wine Johan. 21.10.
last, and the best first: so many continue not in the course of like
thankfulness as at the beginning, little considering that God is to be praised
for evermore, without intermission of convenient time. 2. Relaxation of
everlasting duty. 3. Exception of seasons as excluding his praises which are
most due at any time and for ever and for ever, Amen.

6 I marvel that ye are so soon removed away unto another Gospel from him
that has called you in the grace of Christ.

7 Which is not an other Gospel, save that there be some which trouble you, and
intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ.

8 But though that we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise tha^
that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

9 As we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach unto you
otherwise than that ye have received, let him be accursed.

Two kind of persons are noted in these verses, viz. the seduced, and the
seducers. 1. He maruaileth at the one sort, 2. and defieth the other.

1 I marvel.) Wherein he first sets down the lightness of the men, The
reprehensio^ of the persons seduced.
that so suddenly were beguiled; and then the weight of their transgression,
that were carried quite into an other Gospel from the grace of Christ whereunto
a little before they were called, by Gods mercy, and Paul's ministry.

Inconstancy and lightness.
A wise man is no wave, no shouting star, no starting bow. A discreet
christian goes discreetly to work, he tries the spirits, proves all, and
after dew trial approves the best.

True; in changing from the better to the worse; whether to day, or to morrow,
sooner or later, all is a matter in effect: but to flit in a moment, to change
with the weather, as the weather-cocke, is small wisdom and great shame.

Whether a man be cast away at his entering the sea, or make wrecke in the
maine Ocean, I grant it skilleth little, yet the one much more argues the
unskillfulness or the wilfulness of the Pylot than the other.

Constancy and perseverance.
An old Disciple as Mnason in the Acts. 21.16.
Acts, an ancient professor, a constant christian, are good titles. A fugitive
head, a foolish virgin, a deceived dove, a seduced Galathian are spoken in
great reproach. S. Paul wondreth at such their inconstancy. And yet observe
withal the Apostles lenity, and great discretion. He shakes not sea and sand
together. He knew full well where the spring of their folly began. The
Galathians were deeply plunged in the sea, the fault was most in the mariners.
The young child was bitte with the dog: with whom is the mother angry most?
With the child, or with the snarling curre? Likewise the seduced Philippians
Paul calls brethren, the seducers he terms dogs. Phil. 3.
Beware of concision, beware of dogs.

And yet in our text here, because no man must be foded up in his folly, as if
it were no fault, foolishly to follow him that goes wilfully before and
leads after into error, he both marueleth at their sudden recoiling, and
likewise also expresses the greeuousnesse of their error, in falling, even
clean from the Gospel to the Law, from Christ to Moses admixt with Christ.

And this was more than strange, and set the Apostle all in a maze to see and
consider their so heinous a trespass. For, think you, was it possible, a
ground to receive seed so willingly, as did the Galathians, to grow up green
so fairly, and so suddenly without cause to be blasted, and come to nothing?

A man may let a thing out of his hand in desiring to comprehend more, when
his hand had as much as it could hold before, though he think not so.
But did the Galatians quite renounce christ? Did they cast away his grace? Were
they transported into an other Gospel? Verily Paul charge them with no
less. Yet happily, they might imagine (wherein their error, being so well
enstructed of Paul before, was the grosser) that the addition and putting of
the Law unto the Gospel, and that the coupling of Moses with Christ had not bin
the abiecting and the casting-away of Christ. For the coupling of two things
together, does not seem to be a throwing away of the one, but a conioyning of
them both, and a casting away of neither. And so in this fancy were they
removed into an other Gospel, which yet in it self was and is sincere,
intyre, inviolable, and is no other and could not be bleuded with legal rites,
or admit the least admixture at all. For Christ will be Christ alone 1 Cor. 1.13.
undivided, and only preached in the Gospel, or no Christ at all, and these
forsooth were persuaded he might be invested with Moses, with ceremonies,
with circumcision.

Fair pretenses verily, but (brethren) there is no devil to the white devil:
there is no leprosy so dangerous as the fairest, as is the whitest. Leuitie
and inconstancy.
But yet thus to reele too and fro, to be allured so hastily like a child,
won with an Apple, and that from the syncerity of the Gospel under what
pretenses soever, from the grace of God, from the merits of Christ Jesus, was a
most heinous fault, and almost inexpiable, and therefore Paul wisely and
worthily reprehended it in these unwise Galathians, that would gadde and run
after every false Apostle, that would but hold up his finger.

The reproof of the seducers.
2 These are reproved, as they well deserved, for corrupt minded men, purposely
set, egerly bent, and fully (...)
intending to tourmoile the Church and pervert the Gospel of Christ. To sower
his dowe and to soder his goulde, to trouble his truth and the clear water of
their Christian profession they were entered into by Paul's teaching, and their
Baptism.

Therefore Paul is earnest, and because the mystery of the false Apostles
endeavors had not altogether perverted them, yet he forewarneth what in part
they had done, and what in fine their sleights would effect, even in precise
terms a full diuorst betwixt Christ and them. And therefore he foretells the
imminent danger to the seduced, and bouldly denounces a Vae and woe to the
seducers.

And whereas not only the name of Moses, but of Peter, James and John also were
pretended, and therein for that it might be thought a private matter of envy
to name any of these, wisely and figuratively, 1. Cor. 4.6.
as under the persons of Apollo and of himself upon like cause he deals with
the Corinthians: so here he puts a case, and makes a supposall, and
thereupon auerreth, that if, not man who ever, but if a very celestial spirit,
and an Angel from heaven should play the pranckes these men had done in
melling together things of intempered natures, namely the Gospel with the
Law, they should defy him, and in defiance say, Christ's curse come to him.

The Gospel.
The preaching of the Gospel was so carefully regarded of Paul, so certainly
received of the Galathians, so glorious in it self, so respected of God, that
neither the Law of Moses, nor the names of men, nor the Doctrine of Angels
were to be compared, much less preferred. Yet lest in caring neither for high,
nor low the Apostle might be deemed to have ouer-shotte himself in choler of
mind, and heat of words, distinctly and advisedly he repeateth them once
again, and farther manifestly to show that he does what he does, and speaks
what he speaks upon due considerations and firm grounds, he lays open his
heart and meaning more at large.

10 Do I now persuade men or God? Either do I seek to please men? For if I
yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

The sense is not obscure. What do I (says Paul,) persuade I man, or God? Do
I curry favor with the world? Or pretend I men's names in Gods matters? Seek I
to please men's fancies? Or fear I their faces? Serve I two so contrary
masters? I cannot. I do not. You may guess who iugled in this case with both.
For the Apostle seems to point at, or rather to paint out some. In this
speech, I mark two things. The hard lot of the preacher, but yet his
necessary duty many times to displease.
1. The great frowardenesse of man. 2. The strict or hard condition of the man
of god, to serve him alone, and in serving him to displease man.

Man's wisdom must not be controled, or his will thwarted, corruption will not
be salted, but we are the salt of the earth, and the servants of God. Saint
Paul could not glauer, we must not flatter. If we do as he did, we do as we
should. If otherwise, we serve not God, but men, and men, and not God must pay
us our wages.

But were we the sugar of the earth, and servants of men to feed their
fancies and to speak to their humors, how would men admire us and our doctrine,
flock to our sermons and frequent our lectures? But because we are Mat. 5.13.
salt, and salt is sharp, because our endeavor is to profit you, and to please
God whom we serve, and not your itching ears, our persons are the less
esteemed, and our teachings refused.

But to the text. Now, when Saint Paul had showed his encent, and uttered his
meaning, and declared how he stood upon his necessary duty, due to Christ
and in Christ alone, he puts it down plainly whence he received this
doctrine, and how and whereupon grew this his so weighty a charge.

11 Now I certify you, brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, was
not after man:

12 For neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it but by the
revelation of Jesus Christ.

Saint Paul goes not to woork at auentures, he standet^ ^ot upon
uncertainties, he neither bought not stole the letters of his orders, he was
not as Iere. 28.15.
Hannany that ran before he was sent, neither was his doctrine as Number. 3.4.
strange fire. For he taught them that which himself was taught even by
Christ. In so much that if others were immediately called to the Apostle ship, so
was Paul, and that by no means of men as well as any. But hereof before.

13 For ye have hard of my conversation in time past, in the Jewish Religion,
how that I persecuted the Church of God extremely and wasted it,

14 And profited in the Jewish Religion above many of my companions of mine
own nation, and was much more zealous of the traditions of my fathers.

Paul enlarges the former matter of the unlikelihood of his learning any thing
by man, most evidently by the tenor and race of his former life.

His whole conversation, and continual practice, his earnest zeal was quite a
contrary way, and might he have had his own forth, when he carried other
manner of letters to Damascus, Acts. 9.3.
than are these he now writes to Galatia, he would have made a quick dispatch
of Christian profession.

Yet no doubt many an old head might and did get before Paul in devising
harm, but Paul hied him after, and not (...).
an equal of his in years, but was his inferior, yea far behind him in his
zeal. So fast he profited in the Jewish religion, that it was impossible for a
man to hold him back, or hinder his course. But when he was thus in all have
posting to Damascus, God turns him another way, and sends him into Arabia,
and then brought him back another man.

15 But when it pleased God (which had separated me from my Mothers womb, and
called me by his grace)

16 To reueile his Son in me, that I should preach him among the Gentiles,
immediately I communicated not with flesh and blood:

17 Neither came I again to Jerusalem to them which were Apostles before me,
but I went into Arabia, and turned again into Damascus.

When you look upon Paul in part describing himself, or when you read his
fury laid forth in the Acts by Luke, Acts. 9. and 22.
no marvel if you marvel how he should be thus changed. But look also and see
the means of his change: for he shows in these verses: wherein because the
Text is plain, some few observations will be best, as. 1. Of the cause of
Paul's conversion what it was. 2. The end why. 3. And his obedience thereto.

The cause of man's conversion is not found at al in man.
1 In the search of the cause of man's conversion, a proud Papist would seek
after some purity in nature, some preparation in man, and for some favorable
willingness thereunto in himself: but look we upon Paul being left to
himself, and see this one man, and know al men what we are. Nature works
alike in all whereuer it works.
For if there be any odds, the difference is not in men naturally wherein we
agree, but above and beside our nature where lies the ods. Paul rides a
maine, his commission is in his bozom, and care at his heart for the overthrow
of Christians, and Christian profession, when it pleased God, here is the
cause, when it pleased God, even then to alter him wholely and call him
effectually: here is the cause, and in nothing else. Nay from the womb was
Paul segregated by the providence and will of God: and here is the sole and
only cause, both in the womb where there neither was nor could be cause at
al, and afterward in the world, when there was great cause to the contrary,
but that so great was Gods goodness, so good his pleasure.

The fruit of this example, and of the lesson therein is double, both for an
assured confirmation of our faith, and also to imprint a necessary remembrance
of our duty to so provident and loving a God, that not only cares for Genesis
39.20.
Joseph in the pit and prison, or Exodus 2.6.
Moses in the flags etc. but has a special purpose, in his chosen before he
framed, and when he fashioned them in the womb.

2 The end why God called Paul is apparent to reveal his son in Paul, which
was his special and private, and endless comfort. But the use God would put
him to, was the commodity and instruction of the Gentiles. Neither could the
Apostle have revealed that unto others, if it had been hid from himself. And
therefore as it were to tinde the candle that should light a house, was Christ
revealed to Paul that Paul might in preaching reveal Christ to them that
should believe.

God uses ordinarily external and ordinary means.
And thus it pleases God, as without means to call Paul at the first, so
afterward, by means of Paul, to win others. Pharao himself could have
delivered out of his Kingly provision corn to his subjects, but he sent them
to Joseph, and said to his people: Genesis 41.55.
Go to Joseph. Our Savior when by miracle he multiplied the five Loaves, and
the two Fishes, He gave to his Disciples, and his Disciples (I say) his John.
6.11.
Disciples (gave) to them that were set down. Likewise, in spiritual food and
relief externally, and in public order by the ministry of men, and by the
mean of preaching both then it pleased God to recall the Jews, and call the
Gentiles, and now Ephesians. 4.13.
still he vouchsaueth us that his accustomed goodness by men to deal with men,
and to anner this outward mean of preaching, to the inward woorking of his
holy spirit.

Ready and resolute obedience, where God warranteth, without al respects.
3 For my third note, Paul being thus freely called, and fully illuminated not
to shine only to himself, or to some few, but purposely for the instruction
of many, and namely of the Gentiles (for so general was his commission)
obedientlie, immediately, and strait way as it were an arrowe out of a bow, or
a boole down a hill, or a lightening out of the Heavens he hastes about his
business, and incontinently without farther debate or delaie iournieth, but
whither? To Jerusalem? To the holy City? To his ancesters? To them that were
Apostles before him? Nothing less. He neither regarded the place, nor
respected their persons: but the mighty and merciful God that called him, and
sent him sufficiently warranted, and he went accordingly about his calling.

1 Samuel 3.8.
Young and yet ignorant Samuel when God called him could not tell what the
calling went, and went to Ely when he should have harkened unto God. But Paul
knows what he does, he consulteth not with any at al, neither with the
Apostles, that might seem to advise him better, or authorize him farther,
neither with flesh and blood, kif or kin, one man or other, that could
affection him best, or affect him most: but as it is storied of the 1 Samuel 6.12.
new milch-kine that carried home the Ark, when their calves were shut up, that
they went straight, and turned neither to the right hand nor to the left: so
Paul shutting and resigning up al his thoughts, directly and forth right
respecting no one consideration at all what ever under heaven, resolves
himself most readily upon the obsequent and due performance of his Apostolic
office. And great reason: for he had warrant alsufficient, and ability most
convenient. The express warrant of God needs not the allowance of men, few
or many.
And why should men then depend upon farther councels and consultations of men,
either prouincial or else general, when they are expressly commanded and
enabled from God himself, either immediately speaking, or in his Scriptures
directing?

18 Then after three years I came again to Jerusalem to see Peter, and abode
with him fifteen days.

19 And none other of the Apostles saw I, save James the Lords brother.

20 Now the things which I write unto you, behold, before God I lie not.

21 After that, I went into the coasts of Syria and Cilicia: for I was unknown
by face unto the Churches of Judea which were in Christ.

22 But they had heard only: he which persecuted us in time past, now preaches
the faith which before he destroyed.

23 And they glorified God for me.

Paul went to Jerusalem when you see, three years passing between his calling
and his going thither, and why, to see Peter, and all the middle while he wanted
neither ability nor authority in the trade of his function.

In the remnant of this Chapter would be observed two matters. 1. First a doubt
which must be resolved. 2. And then a duty that ought to be learned.

1 The doubt is, why Paul should go to see Peter. Stapleton. de do. prin. l.
6. c. 13.
For our adversaries reason herehence in effect thus: Paul went to see Peter,
ergo Peter was better than Paul: and if Peter were better than Paul, then
Peter's successors are also better than Paul's: and the The Popes supremacy
derived from Peter.
Pope succeeds Peter, therefore the Pope is better than any else, and head of
al.

I will not dispute the question whether the Pope if but locally and in place
only, and why more at Rome he, than others at Antioch succeeds Peter:
whether so or no I dispute not now. Suppose he there succeeds, what then?

Personal privileges are nothing to him, who has nothing but a local
succession.
Privileges specially granted for personal respects and properties, die with
the person, yea many times before the person, if he leave off to be so
qualified in person, as he was before, and wherefore at first the privileges
were granted forth.

Wherefore suppose Peter had the pre-eminence, and put case the Pope succeeded
Peter in place: Yet if he have lost the qualities which were in Peter, and
which were the causes of Peter's pre-eminence, what is this to such a sorry
successor? If the Mat. 5.13.
salt have lost his saltnes in what place soever, wherefore is it good? If
water were commendable in the spring, what is that to prove the goodness thereof
in the river, if there it be corrupted? But I mean not to meddle with the
matter and claim of succession now. Yet as he succeeds Peter, so he
succeeds Paul too, and so belike, he is better and worse than himself.
Better, as succeeding Peter, and inferior as succeeding Paul.

But what if Peter had not this supremacy which this man callengeth? Then
questionles is his title nothing worth. Herein stands the case, and hereupon
we join ishue for the present: whether Peter were supreme head, absolute
governor, and chief ruler of the Apostles in such sort as the Pope now
claims, The aequality of the Apostles commission. Ite, praedicate: Go ye,
preach ye. Mat. 28.18.
or no. We say no, they say yea. We show the equality of their commission, 2
Cor. 11.5.
and namely that Paul was not inferior to any, and therefore not to Peter,
and therefore also not Peter superior to al apparently. A great part of their
evidence is this piece of Scripture of Paul's going to see Peter.

We grant, and it is plain he went to see Peter, but that therefore Peter was
head to rule Paul, it will not follow. To go to see, is not to go to serve
Peter.
For he went to see, not to serve nor to subject himself. But (...) to see,
here may signify more than to look upon a thing slightly after a vulgar
manner, or else upon a curiosity to go to see. Paul no doubt went of a great
good purpose mutually to acquaint himself, and to see Peter a most reverend
person, and as one of a most excellent spirit, and of rare virtues, and his
ancient in calling, and in such like respects, and yet no way by way of
subjection. For (as Chrysostom. in Epi. ad Galat. cap. 1.
Chrysostom voucheth) Paul needed not Peter, nor Peter's warrant, he was HIS
EQVAL, AND (...).
PEIRE IN HONOR, that I may say no more, says he: as who would say, he spoke
with the least of Paul, when he made him but Peter's equal. Then, as equals may
go to see their equal, so did Paul go to see Peter, his equal in office, but
ancient in the calling to the office of the Apostleship. The Prince may go to
see a subject, is therefore the Prince by and by become a subject, and that
subject the Prince, whom the Prince voutsaueth so to visit? But Paul tarried
with Rhemi. Testae. page 497.
Peter fifteen days: a great proof. What if he had tarried fifty? As his
coming unto, so that his continuing with Peter argues neither supremacy in
Peter, nor subjection in Paul.

This argument has been lately handled, and right learnedly answered in a
printed Between M. RAINOLDS and IO. HEART cap. 4. diuis. 3.
Conference, and that by a most lively and fit example, thus in few: The
virgin Mary. the Mother of our Savior the blessedst among weomen, after the
holy Ghost had ouershadowed her, in have (not after 3. years) up to an hilly
country (no easy journey) went not only to see, but to salute her cosen
Elizabeth, and tarried with her no small times, as 15. days, but 6. months.
And what of all this? May it be inferred hence, that therefore Elizabeth was
Mary's better? Even as well as that therefore Peter was better than Paul,
because of Paul's iourneying to, and abode with Peter. The reason is one in
both. But ambition blinds their eyes more, in the one than in the other.

Yet, 1. the very cause why he went is plain, for mutual comfort, and
brotherly Conference is betwixt aequal. In hanc epist. Hieron. cap. 2.
conference, 2. What he did there is notorious, he disputed with the Greeks,
3. And expressly he learned nothing of or by men, he was a Master, not a
disciple, and he had Disciples: and had he bin instructed, authorized or
lessoned by Peter, and not otherwise enabled most perfectly above others
himself, he should not have been put to reason with the Act. 9.29.
Grecians. And if now he had been first entered to be Peter's scholar, why went
he before into Arabia, and what had 15. days been to euolue the Law, to
examine the Prophets, to sift the Scriptures, to learn the whole body of
Christian belief? And this, I say, this was it that the false Apostles
objected against Paul, that he was inferior to the Apostles, that he learned
of them, and that Peter was all in all above Paul, which Paul flatly denies
and diversely shows to the contrary. Yea, and to put this doubt the more out
of doubt, he swears it was not so. Now the things which I write unto you,
behold before God, that I lie not. To lie by word of mouth is much, advisedly
to write an untruth were much more, but to swear, and in the sight of God to
depose a falsehoode, were too too bad. 1 Cor. 44.
Al which faults were far from the blessed Apostle, and therefore we may credit
his word and believe his writing, and assure our selves under his sacred oath
that it is a certain truth that Peter was not superior to Paul either for
warrant of his office or order of his teaching, notwithstanding his going to
see Peter: and then let the Pope claim from Peter at his pleasure, and in
truth, what can he gain?

Afterward with convenient speed Paul hastes into the coasts of Syria etc.
For the Apostolic business was to be followed, Exodus 12.8.
and as it were roasted with a quick fire like the Paschal Lamb.

Now the Churches when they heard of this strange alteration, they were not in
admiration of Peter, as if he had converted or confirmed Paul, nor yet of Paul
himself that was converted. But when they heard that Paul was among the
Apostles, as Saul among the Prophets, they mused much, and were right glad, but
they glorified God for Paul. And this was a most Christian duty to rejoice at
the conversion of a sinner, and in joy to render al praise to god that
converted him.

Psalm. 114.
In the Psalm when the Sea fled, when the river turned his course, when the
mountains leapt, and the hills skipped, and the earth trembled, the Prophet
enquiring the cause of these miraculous events, answers himself, and says,
this was done by no humane power, but by the powerful presence of the God of
Jacob, which turns the rock into a water-poole, and the flint into a fountain
of water. Semblably it was more than a wonder to see Paul thus altered, thus
relenting, thus altogether changing his former life.

Men rather praise the means than the author of goodness.
But in such cases commonly there is no mean in humane judgments. For 1. either
we envy thereat through malice. 2. Or we magnify too much through folly,
rather men the receivers, than God the giver. we gaze on Act. 3.12.
Peter, we sacrifice to Act. 14.15.
Paul, we glorify not God, neither for Peter, nor Paul.

When Paul that sought to root out the faith and Christian profession, now
planteth the faith, I esteem him as a planter: but he 1 Cor. 3.7.
that waters is nothing, and he that planteth is nothing, and nothing
deserves not any thing, and therefore not ame praise, in comparison of God
that gives the increase, and made Paul a planter, and Ephesians. 10.11.
who woorketh all in all, according to the counsel of his own will.

In the receipt of water, I praise the spring for the ishue of the water, and
not the condit, as if it sprang from the condit pipe. In the sight of light,
the glass is but a mean to lighten the house, the cause of light is in the
sun. But at this time I speak not of means, or of ministerial instruments
whereof there is a due 1. Cor. 4.1.
regard, but of the sovereign cause of our stony hearts now being mollified,
of our forth in sin sometime as it were a maine water course that way, now
quite changed another way. I speak of Paul once a persecuter, now made a
preacher of the Gospel, and when I speak hereof, I speak of God, and of his
only work, and therefore in only glorifieng God therein, these churches did
their duty. Tu vade and fac similiter. Go thy way whosoever thou be, learn
this lesson this day, and in like cases do the like. If Ioh. 8.50.
Christ the natural Son of God sought not his own glory, but his fathers,
what must we the adopted do? What is our duty herein think ye? And I pray
you brethren most earnestly among many duties think well on this. Make not more
of the lantern, than of the light that shines through the lantern.

CHAP. II.
1 THEN 14 years after, I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, and I
took with me Titus also.

2 I went up by revelation, and declared unto them that Gospel which I preach
among the Gentiles, but particularly to them that were the chief, least by
any means I should run or had run in vain.

3 But neither yet Titus which was with me, though he were a Grecian, was
compelled to be circumcised.

4 To wit for the false brethren which were craftily sent in, and crept in
privily to spy out our liberty, which we have in Christ Jesus, that they
might bring us into bondage.

5 To whom we gave not place by subjection for an hour, that the truth of the
Gospel might continue with you.

IN these lines are set forth, 1. the circumstances of Paul's second viage to
Jerusalem, 2. his conference there, 3. and how stoutly and wisely he
demeaned himself, upon occasion offered by certain false brethren.

1 In the circumstances, 1. he shows upon what inducement he undertook the
journey, viz. upon no private fancy, but by evident revelation. 2. Then he
went not secretly and by stelth, but with Barnabas, and he took with him
Titus also. So went he with good company, and as it were the curtains of the
Exodus 26.5.
tabernacle twisted and knit together, or Ezech. 1.16.
Ezechiels wheels, one in another (I mean) arm in arm, in perfect amity,
great frindship and mutual comfort, and that under sufficient witness. Peter's
reside^ce in Rome 25. years impossible.
3. Another circumstance is of the time, then 14 years after, which being well
looked into does plainly argue the impossibility of Peter's being, or (as they
speak) of Peter's sitting (forsooth) so long at Rome, quite contrary to the
nature of his apostolic office, 25. years together. For without al
controversy and contradiction Peter lived not above 40. years after our
Sauiors passion, and if at the least he were 18. years at Jerusalem, when Paul
who doubtless was called Acts. 9.3.
after our Saviors ascension, came thither, and found him there, how possibly
could he rest first at Antioch 7. years, and then at Rome 25? For 18. and 7.
and 25, make more than 40. It cannot be. These were the circumstances.

2 In Paul's conference, 1. the matter he conferred of may be considered. 2.
the persons with whom he conferred, and the end of his conference. 1.
Touching the matter which he declared unto them, more in place convenient. Why,
I pray you, was Paul in doubt of the goodness of his cause, of the certainty of
his doctrine, of the assurednes of his doing, that at the length he bethought
himself of this conference? Did he put his doctrine in Rhem. Test. Page 499.
trial now, and to the approbation of others as the Papists imagine? The whole
drift and tenor of his speech is to the contrary. He was called negatiuely not
of men nor by men: affirmatively by Christ, and by Christ alone, by an
Heavenly vision, by a celestial revelation. Three years were between his
first calling, and before his first iourneying to Jerusalem, and fourteen
before this his second journey. Shot he all this while at random, ventured he
without a warrant, or knew he not what he did, and dealt he at adventures? No,
by no means, no. This conference was no dubious or disputable communication
too and fro, pro and con: houering up and down uncertainly: (...).
he opened his doctrine, he declared and showed it to them, how Christ was the
accomplishment of the Law, and abolishment of former ceremonies, and that the
partition wall was taken down, and that the Gentiles were to have a common
entrance with others into the knowledge of Christ. This was the matter of his
conference and communication. 2. The persons with whom he conferred, were the
chief. 1. If there were mo chief than one, then was not one and namely Peter
not chief of al. 2. He conferred with the chief. For why? To confer with
the foot when a man may have conference with the head were no wisdom. 3. he
conferred particularly, or privately. Wherein neither he disdained them, nor
they him, though they there were the chief. But for that, (...).
he priuatlie and as it were a part did communicate his cause, may be observed
a general caution that would be seen unto, which is, Private conference.
that to make a matter publickely controuersed and in common demurred, when
private notice can do that is to be done, and remedy the whole, were great
folly and little discretion. Paul as he was paineful in undertaking this
journey, so was he wary and careful in collating the matter with the chief
and that in private manner.

Learn, my brethren, learn this wise and worthy lesson. If any thing fall out
in the variance of causes, and varieties of judgments, first to confer, and
then conveniently and in due sort to go Matt. 18.15.
to thy brother secretly, to deal with thy equals reverently, much more with
thy betters, and with men in place, and placed in authority, dutifully, and as
thou should; yea, if thy cause be Iudae Epist. verse. 9.
good as was Paul's, and therefore much rather in causes uncertain. There is
most ease in so doing, and less shame in the eyes of those who are enemies,
and gladly behold the troublesome conferences of us, whom yet otherwise they
know to be the very children of God, but that men are men, and have their
imperfections, and that the soundest body sometimes sends forth an angry
whelck, which is made much more the worse for scratching (I say) much more the
worse, both for the inward pain, and also to the outward show of the
beholders.

In the 2. book and of Samuel the first chapter David being certified of Saul's
death amongst other lamentations in most lamentable manner breaks forth into
these words: 2 Samuel 1.20.
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon, least the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, least the children of the uncircumcised
triumph. Gath and Askelon were of the chief cities of the uncircumcised, who
were Gods enemies. David wishes that Saul's death might be concealed from them
if it were any way possible, and it grieved David the more, that most gladded
and reioiced them that were Gods enemies. With like affection (brethren) it
were to be wished that imperfections either were not at all, or at the
leastwise because offenses must be, that they were not grown to that groth
and bigness, that they may be discerned among the enemies of us and of our God.
For a private conference and a quiet composition were far better.

3 My third note was why Paul went again to Jerusalem, provoked by revelation:
but to what end? To the end that he neither might hereafter run, neither that
his running (for he calls the execution of his office no idle Matt. 20.6.
standing, but a laboursome running) that his running in former time also might
not be in vain. Paul had an eye to the fruit of his labor and to the end of
his function.

In vain diversely taken.
But was it possible, that Paul whom God set a work, should work in vain? In
vain is here that, which did not answer to the Apostles wish, when his
purposed intent took not effect. Which the rather came to pass, because of
slanders raised up, that Paul forsooth varied from the chief Apostles, that
he impeached the dignity expressly of circumcision, and that he generally
sought the abolishment of ancient received rites and ceremonies ordained by God
himself: which when weak minds heard, they were soon enueigled with
entising words, and Paul's preaching became in vain to them, and unto them
unprofitable.

Wherefore to declare that the rest of the Apostles with him and he with them
were of one uniform judgment, he takes sufficient witness, undertakes the
journey, conferreth his doings, to the end to stop the mouths of cauillers,
and to the farther confirmation of the infirmer sort, that his running might
not be in vain to them ward. For doubtless otherwise divine operations and
services according to Gods secret purpose, they never are, nor can be in vain.
Which way soever his two edged sword strikes, it strikes to the glory of God
whose sword it is. Humane labors many times loose their end, and miss the
mark: with Esaias. 55.10.
God it is not so.

If thou sow thy field, overmuch moisture rotteth, cold kills and heart
parcheth and marreth all. But, the spiritual seed of the word whether it
take root or no, or how-soeuer it spring up, whether it rest or not rest in
the hearts of the hearers, in respect of Gods glory whose husbandmen we are,
or in regard of the certain 2 Timothy 4.8.
Crown reposed, and of the reward prefixed, which God will assuredly render
to all his faithful servants, it is never, it cannot be in vain.

In vain they hear who hear with an evil or a itching ear, but the
preacher after his dutiful pains at the Matt. 20.8.
evening of the day and end of harvest, though the sheaues, though the people
will not be gathered, he shall receive his penny nevertheless. The laborers
pain is never the less, though the event be not aunswerable.
The black Aethiop goes into has and comes out as black as he went in,
notwithstanding the keeper of the bath has his fees as well for the Aethiop,
as for the fairest. But here Paul respects only the profit of his auditorie,
and speaks not of the purpose of God either in rewarding himself, or
revenging them.

3 My last observation out of the former verses was to mark, how wisely Paul
deals, how stoutly and upon what occasion. Certain false brethren were
craftily sent, and privily crept in, as fine intelligencers and vnder-mining
pioners of Christian liberty. But Paul wisely discerns, and courageously
resists them, and suffers not Titus to be circumcised for all that, neither
would he yield so much as a foot of ground unto them, neither in an inch of
truth, nor for a moment of time. For a little yielding in so great matters is
not a little.

There is difference between a necessary contention, and a desire of contending.
But, the controversy was but a quarrel of ceremonies, and what need so much
a-doo then? Had it not been better to have been quiet? To have slept in a
hole skin? And to have redeemed peace, though it were with loss? nay verily,
the loss of liberty, of truth and verity is more than may be easily borne, or
quietly digested, and the root of true peace is the bond of peace. And he, Who
is the truth, he is our peace also, Ephesians. 2.14.
which has made both one, viz. by taking away quite the partition of
ceremonies. And therefore the reteining of these ceremonies, either in whole or
in part is a very breach of perfect peace, and a bringing in of an heavy yoke,
and a Jewish seruility. Wherefore no marueil if Paul were earnest.

For what reason, that because some wily and wilful men, brethren in name, but
false indeed, and therefore no brethren, nay what if very brethren should hap
to link and knit, and band themselves and run all in one as it were a shole
of fish, being carried and driven in heaps upon an opinion, what reason that
the truth of God should yield, and that the Lord himself should stoop, rather
than men should be at variance, some holding with, and many times, many siding
and sorting themselves against a good cause? Paul's doing is a better
president. But such wisdom, courage and constancy are not every where found,
and not always there performed where they are much expected and greatly
required.

Of all things, a busy waspe, and a quarelling or stubborn cursed nature is
woorst. But if the cause be Gods, if thy calling and gifts be according, there
is no Eccl. 4.28.
relenting at al, no starting back, no shutting neck out of the collar in such
cases, in cases whereunto a man is expressly and duly enabled, warranted and
commanded. Zeal without discretion is naught, discretion without zeal is
nothing worth.
Wherefore, 1. zeal without wisdom is never good. 2. And yet, what is
wisdom without zeal? 3. But zeal and discretion seemly united in one (as it
was in our Apostle) is as the throne of wise Solomon, and as the strong 1 King.
10.20.
Lions at the stays and ascending up unto his throne.

6 By them which seemed to be somewhat [ I was not taught] (whatsoever they were
in time past, it makes no matter to me. God accepts no man's person) the
chief added nothing to me.

7 But contrariwise, when they saw that the Gospel over the uncircumcision was
committed unto me, as the Gospel over the Circumcision was unto Peter,

8 For he that was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship over the circumcision,
was also mighty by me toward the Gentiles.

9 And when James and Cephas, and John knew of the grace that was given unto
me, which are counted to be pillars, they gave to me and to Barnabas the
right hands of fellowship, that we should preach unto the Gentiles, and they
unto circumcision.

10 Warning, only that we should remember the poor: which also I was diligent
to do.

Paul in his conference gave no place to the chief, and the chief brethren
gave nothing to Paul by way of authorizing his person, or adding to his
doctrine. 1. and he shows why it should be so, 2. and withal declares the
chief Apostles due consenting unto him, 3. and only requesting him to have a
careful eye to the poor, which Paul respected and did full diligently.

The motive of Antiquity.
Among the arguments the false Apostles used against Paul, a maine matter was
made, and drawn from Antiquity, that the other Apostles were ancienter than
Paul, and therefore questionles to be preferred.

Truly, personal preferment was not the mark Paul shot at. For he could be
ever, and was often well content in all things to give and yield so far forth
as might stand with the glory of Christ. But in this ceremonious quarrel opposed
against the truth of Christ, and Christian liberty, as before he defied an
Angel, if to that end he should come from heaven, so now he declares that the
name of Antiquity in the Apostles might not carry him away nor drive him aside.

They were his ancients. What mattereth that to me, says he? And indeed it
skilleth little. There is no prescription against the Prince, and why should
there be any against the truth, be it later or sooner in whomesoeuer? This or
that time, past or present, or future and to come is not in the nature of
truth; neither are matters of faith measured by years, nor is any point of
religion liable to be decided by continuance pretended.

Job. 32.
Elihu said well: There is a spirit in man, but the inspiration of the
Almighty gives understanding. As if he had said: man is made not only of a
body, but of a body and a soul, and that soul is a reasonable spirit, and
that spirit in process of years and tract of time gathers politic
experience, as it were a stone that has been long pitched in one place
gathers much moss. But all that experience is but mossy, terrene and
earthly; true wisdom is from above, from the Father of lights and God of
knowledge, reueiled in his Son, which illuminateth every man not only coming
into the world, but either entering into, or else continuing privately or
publicly in the house of his church. And therefore Elihu reformeth his
thoughts and voucheth, that he was mis-conceited when he thought that it was
the length of days should speak, and that the multitude of years should
teach wisdom.

But yet of old and still many men embrace rather Elihu his first opinion
concerning age and antiquity, than his later judgment, afterward well
rectified and truly reformed. So an old prophet soon deceived the young
Prophet, whom neither the threats, nor entreaty of 1. King. 12.
a king could move at al. So Josh. 9.
old shows, old battles, finds bread, torn sackes, tottered rags, like
rotten relickes with proffered service ( seruus seruorum) and pretense of
coming from far, deceived Iosue, because he rather respected such trinkets,
and consulted not with the Lord.

Our adversaries know how humane affections lean this way, and therefore they
bear the poor people in hand that theirs is the old religion, and ours is an
yesterdaies bird: but with the like truth and with the same spirit the Jews
said our saviors doctrine was new, the Apostles preaching new wine, and the
false Apostles here object that Saint Paul was an vpstart, and deuoid of
Apostolic warrant.

Sooner or later called, it skilleth not, old or new if true, it forces
little. If the name of new were always naught, why would Christ call his lovely
commandment Johan. 13.34.
a new commanded? If the name of old were always good, why did S. Paul command
and advise the Corinthians that the 1 Cor. 5.7
old leven, the incestuous person be purged out? If you will recourse to the
first head of all in this question, it were another matter. For God is for
ever, and before Satan and Satan's fall, the Law was first given, and then
ensued the transgression: first the husbandman sowed his ground, and afterward
the enemy came and sowed tares. And which is to be observed, there was no long
time between. For Satan took the next opportunity of ignorance and security,
even the next night, as it were, when the ground was yet new turned and trimmed
for seed, the enemy sparst some of his tares in the field and Church of God.
And then while truth and error were yet but green in the blade, the difference
was not so easily discerned, Mat. 13.25.
til the growth was greater.

And, as it is this in the cause of truth compared with error, so is it in the
professors and Doctors of truth compared among themselves, the first teacher
is not always best, for then the usher must needs be better than the
schoolemaister, and the country schoolemaister, than the university Reader.

Peter and Andrewe, James and John and others were called before Paul. He
asks what was that to him? There was no difference or prestancy therein. He
had antiquity enough, that had Christ for his author. So that in all material
respects if they were Apostles, so was Paul. Nay 1 Cor. 15.10. 2 Cor. 11.23.
he labored more than al they. And a great deal of labor in a shorter time,
is more worth than less labor in a longer space.

And as it is this in teachers, so generally may it be, and sometime is (my
brethren) among the rest of beleauers: one believes sooner, and another later.
God can teach him in one day, as much as thou have learned in ten before. An
old and an humble graie whiteheadead Latimer or Whitehead (to mention these
two only in steed of many) is a venerable spectacle and a reverend sight,
but a converted soul saved out of the fire, and thus to become a preacher of
the Gospel, is a most admirable mirror in mine eyes. And yet thus can the
spirit of Christ blow and purify and work even thus mightily where and upon
whom it will and therefore it was not prejudicial at al to Paul that he was no
sooner called, that was so effectually called in the end.

James and John, Andrew and Peter because of their calling before Paul, were
grown in good credit. True. And therefore Paul tells them that
notwithstanding that, God does not accept men's persons and external credit. God
can and does raise up instruments of his glory in latter days some passing
and exceeding many of former times. Wherefore Paul with great right and reason
sets it down, that he borrowed not his light of others who were before him,
but ascribes al to God almighty, whom he shows to be no respecter of
persons.

How God accepts, and accepts not of persons.
Yet herein may arise some question. For does not God accept persons? Who then
shall be accepted, if he accept none? That, that we are, we are by grace, by
favor, and by acceptance. Then certainly he accepts some. He accepted Jacob
when he rejected the elder Brother Esau. Yea, whom he accepts not, he does
reject. Therefore in this sense it is true, he accepts persons, to wit
according to his good will, purpose, choice and pleasure.

But for any thing acruing to man, or rising in him, externally by mean of
ordinary circumstances, God is not respectively partial, to prefer one person
before another, the rich before the poor, Peter before Paul, for that cause
and therefore, because Peter was first called, and because many had a better
opinion of the one, than of the other. And this is Saint Paul's meaning in these
words: God is no accepter of persons.

2 In the second point, I observed a declaration of the Apostles friendly and
full consenting to Paul. As there was great reason why he should stand upon
the authority he had received of God: so when the Apostles saw 1. His
commission in the Gospel, and 2. the grace of God in him among the Gentiles,
they strait joined mutually together in one society. Wherein you mark plainly
1. the evidence of Paul's authority. 2. the limits of his charge. 3. and their
equality and association among themselves. Trial and proving goes before
consenting.
1. They first saw and knew so much before they yielded. The eye commonly is a
true informer of true knowledge, when they saw, they knew. But seeing and
knowing here may be alone, the outward sense for the inward understanding, but
til they knew, they did not join. Ios. 9.14.
The Gibionits deceived Iosue, because Iosue was ouer-credulous, but they upon
thorough trial found Paul's evidence good and found. 1 Timothy 2.7.
2. the limits and bounds of his calling reached unto the utmost parts, and as
it were to the hems and skirts of all the woorld, and namely and chiefly to the
Gentiles. Chiefly to them, not folely among them, for he had a hearty
consideration and desire for Romans 10.1.
Israel also. But the Jews were rather Peter's charge, and the Gentiles were
chiefly committed to Paul, and the Jews more chiefly to Peter. Wherefore the
papacy that claims from Peter, may better seek a chiefly among the Jews,
than among us the Gentiles. 3. And this was concluded among them that neither
should more than was convenient, put sickle in the others harvest, and that all
should in their lot labor, and he rein they agreed, and they which were
reputed pillars gave to Paul and Barnabas their right hands upon it.

How Ministers are well resembled to the pillars in a building.
It were not amuse over and above to note how the Apostles, and after them the
ministers of Gods Church may be called, and should be reputed, and he indeed
the pillars of their congregations. The stay of an house are the pillars
thereof, even as the strength of man's body, are his hones. And such should men
of our vocation be, the walls and watchmen of a cuy, the beauty, the strength,
the defense, 2 King. 2.12.
the horse and chariot of Israel, as was Elias. Of old such were the old
Patriarchs and Prophets, afterward such were the Apostles and Evangelists,
and such are now good Bishops and vigilant Pastors and Teachers till the
coming of Christ, whom in the mean while he Ephesians. 4.11.
gave to his Church for the gathering together of his Saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the building up of his body.

Judge. 16.29.
It is storied of Sampson, that he took the middle pillars of the Philistines
temple, and pulled them both down at once. These pillars are stronger than so.
They shall not fail, they cannot fall. God that hewed them out, will hold them
up, and who shall pull them down? Job. 1.19.
The wind out of the wilderness ouer-turned Jobs house. It is not so with Gods
house, it is founded on a rock, and fixed on sure pillars, and these pillars
are fixed, Sampsons strength will not, and Satan's cannot pull them down.

Fugitives and lookers-back from the plough they once laid their hands unto.
For if al these pillars yield, the whole edifice follows after. When but a
minister shrinketh, the faith of many is much weakened. But (dearly beloved) be
not deceived. Al should be pillars firm and strong, that seem to be: some
seem and be as they seem, some only seem to be, and be not indeed. And
what if some such have defected? What if some certain have gone out of the
door, that came in at the window? What if certain that were among us, but
never of us, Acts. 1.25.
have gone into their own place, and showed themselves, as Judas among the
Apostles? What if certain have with-drawen their shoulders from Gods labor,
and being but green timber, and that not of the Lords hewing, have shrunck
away, misliking this great duty yet good service of ours in humility to
support and stand under others to do them good? Nay what if some in steed of
holding up, hale and pull down? Certainly the judgments of God are just, and
will be hard and heavy toward al these in that day. And yet for all this the
Lords house shall still stand upon her pillars, upon such pillars as are of
imputrible wood, of wood that will not rotte, well seasoned by the Lord, and
therefore cannot fail, but shall endure unto the end.

3 The last point was the Apostles petition to Paul to remember the poor,
which he not superficially or slightly, but with earnest endeavor performed.
Wherein I note, 1. both the case of Christians, 2. and the care of the Apostles
to supply their need. 1. So The state of the best, in this world is many
times worst.
was it ever, Pharao was at his ease, and Israel at his task. Lazarus lies
without doors, the Rich man goes gayly and fares deliciously every day. So
our Savior was borne in a stable, and laid in a cratch exiled in his infancy,
and in the whole race of his life had not where to rest his head. Thus it was
of old, and thus it will be for the most part ever. 2. But yet so much the
rather, because Pharao oppresses, the world neglects, and Herod persecuteth,
because poverty most abounds commonly where men are best, because others
care not at al for us, therefore the Apostles did, and we must care the more
one for another: Care for the needy very requisite, but seldom undertaken.
Remember the poor.

Genesis 37.
In Joseph's dream the lean cow did eat up the fat, but it is now no dream the
fat cow deuoureth the lean, the full ear eats up the poorer corn, the rich
man waxes richer and richer without end and remorse, and who remembers or
once thinks of the poor, Phil. 4.18.
as if the sacrifice of alms were an out-worne ceremony, and out of date?

For doctrinal points, they add nothing to Paul but only put him in mind of
this merciful remembrance. And blessed is he, Psa. 41.1.
qui intelligit super egenum, Who considers the needy.

Chrysostom Tom. 5.
worthily mistiketh too much curiosity in bestowing thy alms, but yet there is
a diligence and an intelligence therein. For some make a trade of begging as
friarly mendicantes and voluntary rogues. Wherefore blessed is he who wisely
considers the distressed: Joseph in the prison, Lazar in the hospital, the
fatherles, the widow, the stranger, the needy housekeeper that has a poor
honest wife and many small children lying and living upon his hands and his
only handy labor.

But you will question with me, what had Paul to do with the providing for the
poor? In assuming certain officers to see to the poor, they left not off to
be as careful for the poor, as conveniently they might.
He was no Deacon, he was an Apostle. And the Apostles had given over that
function, as appears in the Acts, Cap. 6. verse. 2.

What they gave over, they had before. For no man can give over that he never
had. And therefore I am of opinion that the care for the poor is no
disparagement (as I may so call it) to the nature of the Apostleship. Whereas
the Apostles once were lawfully careful both for preaching, and also for the
poor, and now again the Apostles expressly request Paul to be mindful of the
poor, which I interpret to be, not only by exhortation in the poores
behalf, but by convenient procuration of reasonable means. I mislike that
hand that thinks to hold and gripe overmuch, and to deal in more matters
than it can well span or comprehend: and yet I like not that opinion which is,
that because a man cannot perfectly use any one talent well, therefore having
more talents given him, he shall employ but one. Wherefore I say as said the
Apostles, O Paul thou Apostle, whereuer thou go, so it be no hinderaunce to
thy proper function, as sometime it may be none, remember the poor. Much
more (thou Preacher) whereuer thou art fixed, remember the poor. Cast thy
bread upon these waters, hide thy gift in the fertile ground of the poor man's
bozem, thou can not effer thy sacrifice upon a better altar. O remember the
poor by all good means in these dear and hard hearted times.

11 And when Peter was come to Antiochia, I withstoode him to his face: for he
was to be blamed.

12 For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles, but
when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them of the
circumcision.

13 And the other Jews played the hypocrites likewise with him, in so much
that Barnabas was led away with them by that their hypocrisy.

14 But when I saw, that they went not the right way to the truth of the
Gospel, I said unto Peter before al: If thou being a Jew live as the
Gentiles, and not like the Jews, why constrainest thou the Gentiles to do
like the Jews?

Hitherto we have looked into the causes and consequences of Paul's journey the
second time to Jerusalem, and of his conference with Peter and with others
there. Here we are to behold Paul's conflict at Antioch with Peter alone, but
yet openly in the sight of al: wherein we see, 1. the boldness of Paul
reprehending, and 2. the fault and frailty of Peter offending. I purpose in
the whole to note, 1. the cause and desert of this reprehension, and 2. the
manner of Paul's usage therein.

1 Touching the fault and cause deserving, it fell out thus, as the tert
shows plainly enough. Peter being at Antioch companied with the Gentiles,
frequented their tables, and did eat as they did. Great men sinning cause many
to sin with them.
But when certain came from Ierusasalem from James, Peter (belike no supreme
terror of all the world) was in a fear of James his messengers, and began an
other course, sequestered himself, drew back, and took his diet a part. And
as a great tree does not fall, but many little boughs fall with it, so with
Peter sundry flocked aside, yea and Barnabas was carried away with the stream.

And this was the cause, verily no small cause of Paul's reprehending of Peter.
For hereby the Jews were ensnared, the Gentiles amazed, Barnabas seduced, the
truth perverted, Christian liberty enthrauled, the veil which once was rent,
was patched together, and hung up again, and the partition wall that was taken
down, was built up anew, and all now brought to this pass, as if the kingdom
of Christ should consist in the difference of meats, and the use of
ceremonies. And those whom Acts. 10.15.
God had cleansed began to be suspected of pollution and uncleanness, and all this by Peter's tredding awry and not going with an upright foot in the ways
of the Gospel. And was not this cause sufficient soundly and roundly to take
up Peter?

2 The manner of Paul's reprehending was downright and plain. For what else
should be done in such a case? How might he best reclaim the Jews, reform
Barnabas, and comfort the Gentiles? A Public reproof in cases very necessary.
private dealing and a secret reproof of Peter's dissembling and the Jews
backe-sliding perchance had been to little effect, and when the fact was open,
if the reproof were but secret, what might the Gentiles think? They saw the
fault, they hear it not reproved. And if otherwise Paul should have sought
privately to confirm the Gentiles, and Peter had not been checked at all, it
might have been a greater scruple than before. Wherefore publicly in the face
and sight of all (because it was most requisite so) Paul reprehendeth Peter
openly in terms as you see.

And he goes directly to the root of this offense, and first purges the
heart and stomach whence sprang the fault. If thou) nay if it were mine own
cause, If we, whose education has been amongst the Hebrews, have forsaken
those rites, shall the Gentiles by our example gather doubts of conscience in
the ceremonials? Neither thou, nor I, we seek not so to be justified, and
then what need this halting and limping, this auck-ward treading in the ways
of God? So earnest was Paul, and reason good. A Reave. 3.16.
Laodician professor, a lukewarm reprehension in causes of highest importance
was never good.

Porphyries ^ pagans motives.
Upon this, and upon some such like occasion, the enemies of Christianity, as
namely Porphiry, an old capital arch-enimy, argues on this wise: Paul and
Peter, do you not see how they vary and jar? Can they or either of them be
in the right way? Paul reprehendeth Peter openly, ergo Paul was a peremptory
proud person. Peter dissembleth, and cannot be excused. Ergo both were in
fault. For excuse of them both our new Rhemish. Test. Page 502.
Rhemish Masters tell us, that this is a school point, and much debated between
Saint Hierome and Saint Augustine, and they seem to incline to Hieroms
opinion, that this whole combat was a set thing agreed-vpon between them,
between Paul and Peter for a purpose.

Their schools, and these wise men have very evil luck. If there be an
infirmity or fancy in any of the ancient Fathers, by and by they make that a
school point, and as it were their Tennise Bal to play withal, and in the end
they resolve and conclude with the worst part ever.

If any reasonable indifferent man but look into the text, he will see
plainly and say boldly it was no secret set match nor pretended devise. For
Peter was blameworthy, and both wherein, and also how he offended is largely
described. And if we believe not Saint Paul's word, yet we cannot discredit
his oath. Now the things I write, before God I ly not, Cap. 1.20.
says he. Neither was Paul any sophist to dally in words, neither was he a
papist to dispense with oaths, neither yet a plaier of a counterfeit part, as
it might be upon a stage.

Hierom for his fancy alleges authorities and reason such as he could. Aug.
in Epist. 9. 11. 19.
Saint Augustine answers them both in sum and effect thus: first for his
authorities they were not sound, and that there were better authors against him
than with him, and then were Hieromes authors never either so godly of life, or
skilled in learning otherwise, yet it skilled not in controversies so greatly,
as to ouer-beare a truth. For what man brings and teaches except it be
founded upon Scripture, or probably collected and gathered out of Scripture, it
binds not the conscience to believe and embrace that. Such sovereign honor,
and absolute obedience is only du to the word of God, and to nothing else.

As for Hieroms reason, thus he reasoned, but quite beside reason, even that it
were better Paul should yet herein write an untruth, than that Peter should
be though to have done amiss. Yea? Says Augustine, by the like unreasonable
reason, were it better to discredit the book of Genesis, than grant that Noe
the preacher of righteousness, or that Loath a righteous soul, should offend,
the one in drunckennesse, the other in drunckennesse and in incest too? etc.

No, no (my brethren) better all flesh should appear to be flesh, that is,
frail and sinful, than that the least iotte or prick of Gods sacred book
should be impeached. Psa. 116.11.
Al men are liars, God only is holy in all his works, and true in all his
saiengs, both in foretelling future events, and things to come, and in relating
and registring facts and deeds which have bin past.

Neither take we delight in the recital of the sins of men, neither can
Porphiry take advantage to discredit the truth by a true report of an humane
infirmity. The purpose of Paul herein is plain, and it was this: 1. That for
his authority, it was from God. 2. For his doctrine, it was by revelation, and
not learned of Peter as it was objected, which appears by his practice
therein. 1. In Arabia. 2. In Jerusalem once and again: 3. And lastly in Antioch
in such sort as we have seen.

The motive of contention and of unity.
This unreasonable motive of disagreeing, and of the breach of unity, our
adversaries press us with, even as Porphiry opposed the Primative Church. But
I ask them, and I require their answer: is contention and the breach of unity
ever the infallible badge of false professors? I could except and give
instances many, but my meaning is not to cast yncke upon the whitest lawne. I
demand is contention a certain sign of a corruption? We contend with them,
and they with us, as Agar molested Sara. What? Therefore are we and they both
naught, because either contend each with other?

Genesis 32.24.
In contending, I grant, a man may spraine a vain as Jacob in wrestling, and
as Luther said, he that wrestleth with a collier, albeit in the strength of a
clean cause, he fall the collier, yet in falling him, he may soil himself.
And this may be somewhat sometime to the professor, but nothing to the
profession. Yea, though the light of truth it self in striving with darcknes
suffer some kind of dimnes, yet must we not therefore accuse the light.

But, say they, when a professor of one religion strives with a professor of
the same, then belike, the professors are both naught, and their profession not
good. No forsooth. For so might we condemn both Paul and Peter, both Austine
and Hierom as you see, and many others. No doubt in some skirt or hem, in an
out-part of a matter, where notwithstanding always the foundation is kept, the
1 Cor. 3.15.
loss will be the less: nay, even in some material points diverse men have
thought diversely, and have not been so strictly dealt withal, nor straight
way condemned.

But can our Papists a little at their best leisure from their busy tracheries
and rebellious enterprises against our Prince and peace, can they look
homeward and as it were by way of reflection take view of themselves? Verily
there was never sect so cut, never heresy so divided, never wood he wen into
so many chips, as is popery mangled in it self, resembling the very thildren
of Israel at the Number. 20.13.
waters of Merib and strife, and much like the Iug. 7.22.
Madianits and Cadmies brood fighting and warring each with other unto the
death. And herein if one would follow William Rainoldes a late writer in his
vain, in collecting antilogies and contradictions of Papists, as he would
seem to do out of the professors of truth, no time would serve. So endless
and infinite are the brables and brawles of Popery and Popish divines, made up
altogether of untempered mortar: and hereof if any doubt, I dare, and do make
offer of plenary proof, as about the authority of councels, about the
autenticknes of the Hebrew Text, about original sin, about inherent
righteousness, and innumerable questions of greatest moment.

In the mean time this may suffice briefly, but truly to signify that
Popery is divided and at whot strife and contention in it self, and therefore
is, as themselves do argue against others, no true profession. And again if
unity be a sign of the truth, we (dearly beloved) we, we have the greatest
unity that man has ever known amongst men in any Realm.

Accessory matters have diverse accidents. Substantial points of greatest
moment in our Church have the fairest unity, and that more generally than has
been seen in any age. In the Exodus 26.20.
book of Exodus the two Cherubims in the one sits opposite and contrary
right against the other, but both of them look into the propitiatory and mercy
seat: altogether so, how ever men be affected in questions not of greatest
importance, yet all of us, all look directly on the mercy of God, not one of
us looks either to the right hand or to the left, or backward on himself,
upon his own supposed purity of naturals, preparation in nature, liberty in
willing, or merit in working, al of us jointly and only we fix our eyes, and
look per rectam lineam upon that serpent that heals us John. 3.15.
all.

If, (as Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 18. c. 42.
by some it is imagined) as the Septuagint interpreters were, so not seventy
but 70. times 70. of our learned men were separatly seated in their several
selles, and to set down their judgments in Cardinal and chiefest points of
belief, I am assured of such a perfect harmony in sense of truth, as if they
should all speak with one tongue, and write at once with one pen. So that, if
necessarily ever unity might demonstrate the true way, we having so good an
unity, by consequent we are in the truth: and if dissension infer and prove
error, our adversaries and their school-brablers with their Friarly varieties,
infinite sectaries and opinatiue Doctors are heirs apparent thereunto,
notwithstanding their motives and demandes against us, and claims for
themselves.

Now to come back again to our text, Paul reprehended and reproved Peter,
and that verily so, and yet we make it no Motive to condemn Peter utterly, but
to commend Paul the more. Peter profited him nothing, but Paul benefited Peter
in this just reproof. My distinct notes in and of them both are these: In Paul
I observe, 1. The lawfulness of his vocation as before, 2. The equality of his
degree, 3. The thorough execution of his office to the full without respects. In
Peter, who was afeard of an arrowe without a head, fearing them who came from
James, I mark, 1. The infirmity of man, 2. The weight of examples in great
men, 3. The reforming of himself.

But here as when a man has cut an eele or a snake into twenty pieces, yet
every piece will still wag: so our adversaries still strive and struggle, and
shift for life when they are in sight past all hope, though their arguments and
answers, reioinders and replies have been cut a-sunder the very hart-stringes
of them more than an hundred times: for they see, if Peter did err, as no
doubt he did here in dissembling, as Mat. 26.70.
els-where in denying our Savior Christ, then the Pope may er, and therefore
they have coined diversities of cases wherein neither Peter did, nor the Pope
may err, and namely, how the Pope may err Rhemi. Test. Pa. 206. and. 502
In conversation and manners, yet in faith definitiuely he cannot err. With
whom a little I shall reason and dispute upon the occasion offered, the rather
because this darnel has taken root, and spread up far and wide in sundry
unsound places.

The Pope may er, and has erved in his manners and conceits notoriously and
that in matters of the Church faith publicly, yea and that DEFINITIVELIE.
To go by degrees in this question: questionles the Pope has monsterously
erred, as Platina and the rest of his own chroniclers, preachers and writers
witness, in conversation and manners, and in faith too. And no merueill. For
such as is our says, such are our manners, and says James, such as are our
manners, such is our says. But ever a true faith in things to be believed, is
the Ioh. 8.39. Iam. 2.18.
spring of woorking in every thing, and the lack of faith is the want of
works. And the defect is first in faith, before it can be in the work.
Their reply is, that Popes in deed privately may err in their own faith and
manners, but not publikly as Popes endued with the spirit of God. But why tie
you the spirit to your selves? We tell them that even Romans 3.
private men are led by the spirit, and so are as free from error as the best,
and the best learned Popes. And where they reioine, that private men are not to
define in matters of faith, we tell them again, no more are Popes, nor yet
Angels. The ground of faith is the word of God, and faith comes by hearing of
that word. Wherein to make the Popes decretall Epistles equal with the word
Distinct. 19, in Canonicis.
Gratian has evidently falsified S. Austen de doctrina Christiana lib. 2. cap.
8. and this his abominable forgery, is in the very foundation of faith, and yet
is Gratian allowed by the Pope, to wit, by Eugenius, as appears in the life
of Gratian, prefixed before the Decrees, and therefore I may and do conclude
that the Pope in sight has erred in the maine ground and foundation of our
faith, in the very allowing of Gratian. A public allowa^ce of a false ground
of our faith is a public error in the faith.
And I trow this his allowance was no private liking, but a public allowing.

Farther we find that, Boniface the eight that For at his entrance, that Lion
in his reign, and Dog at his death, has Extra, de Mayor. and obedient.
DEFINED that it was ( Omnino) every way necessary to salvation to be subject
to the Bishop of Rome. Whereupon I reason thus: That which is every way
necessary, was never unnecessary. But Aenaeas Siluius epist. 288.
Ante Nicenum Concilium, etc. Before the Council of Nice, the Church of Rome
was little respected. Nay in the Anno. 328.
Nicene Council, the Popes messengers sat neither in the First, Second, or
Third place. And the Council it self was called and summoned Iussu
Imperatoris, at the Emperors commandment. And therein Constantine who
indicted the Council took no more upon him than he might and ought. Neither
was he deligated thereunto by Bishoppely power. For the Eusebius. in vita Constable.
orat. 3.
one and only God appointed him to that ministry. And what the Bishops had
overthrown, Constantine renewed and Theod. lib. 1. cap. 14.
built up. I pray you where was then, and where was all this while that mere
necessity unto salvation to be in subjection to the Roman prelate?

Some good Anno. 198.
time before this, when Victor a Bishop of Rome was tampering and ouer-busily
intermedling with other men's doings, he was vehemently reproved by Eusebius. lib.
5.
Ireny in France, and countermaunded by the Bishops of Asia, (...) they
dissuaded him as much as he would have persuaded others, wherein was no
subjection, but a slat resistance, even as Paul resisted Peter. I could be
large herein, but I refer them, who would see many good particulers in this
case learnedly laid forth, D. Bilson.
to D. BILSON against D. ALLEN and the Jesuits, in his book entieled, A true
difference between Christian subjection, and unchristian rebellion, Part. 1.

And, whereas some say, Victors reproof was in a matter but of discipline,
verily discipline and direction in regiment is their God, and whereof they
esteem more than of heaven it self. Wherefore be it wherein it shall be, therein
certes they were not subject to the Romish Bishop. And a truth in doctrine
imports us much more than a rite in discipline: therefore if they might
resist him in discipline, where was then that subjection every way necessary to
salvation? And if he might err in discipline, much more may he err in
doctrine. For the decision of reasonable orders, is far easier, than doubts
in doctrine. Therefore if the Pope may so soon stumble in the plain, he may
far sooner ouer-shout himself in a suffer way.

Directly for the Popes erring in doctrine, Lyra in ^. Matthew.
Lyra is clear and full: Many Popes have bin found to have bin Apostataes.
Many, and not a few only, have bin certainly found, not probably thought to
have been Apostataes. It is no fable, no forgery, they have bin found, and
convinced so to have bin. But Apostasy is a forsaking of the faith: and every
Apostata is always an eager persecutor of his former faith. And therefore the
Pope may be not only a decider of error, but a persecutor of the faith.

If they ask me what be in special the Popes errors, I tell them, he erreth,
in hiding the candel of the Scriptures under the bushel of a strange language,
in praying ignorantly without understanding, in not praying to God alone, in
worshipping Images, in mangling and deprauing the Sacraments, in preferring
himself before Gods word, and above his Church, and in a thousand mo. And,
sirs, why ask you me? Lyra says your Popes have bin Apostataes. You may not
mistrust his report; he was a Friar, and therefore a credible witness and not
partially affected but to the Papacy, and therefore the more force-able against
you, and the less to be suspected of you. You follow him, you Harding detec.
Page 256. Mast. Harding counts Lira a good interpreter of the Text, but a
slender witness to depose a truth.
gladly use him in the opening of a text, and in exposition of Scriptures, why
not a great deal rather in his depositions for antiquity in a matter of
story? Or was his outward sense corrupted, and his inward judgment good? Could
he not rightly discern a fact in men, but rather a truth in the text, and
that about things depending on the text, as in questions of faith and Apostasy
from the faith? If there were any fault in Lyra, it seems to be rather for
that in favor to that see, he touches but in general, and treats not the
particularities of your Popes Apostasies.

And yet while the momuments of times and books of writers before Printing was
invented, were hardily copied out, and were few in number, soon lost, and
easily corrupted, and being in your own hands and handling, and your selves
ready to make away the evidences which made most against your Pope, what
marueil if Lyra, and Lyraes like be used, as Acts. 5.2
Ananias and Saphira used their goods, and so authors in steed of their whole
and perfect works brought to light by halfes, maimed and imperfect? And yet
God has so provided that there should be notwithstanding some, and those
sufficient witnesses in popery to convince their Popes of grievous errors. But
let us view their dealing a little in this behalf. But first be it remembered
that Lyra says, that many Popes, though he name them not in special, that
many Popes have played the Apostataes from the faith, though particularly he
cites not wherein and in what points: yet this is sufficient. For there is no
multitude without a number, no general number of Popes, without particular
Popes. And it may be he meant the whole faith, and therefore does not put down
the specialities. Now for farther proof of their corruptions.

Pope C. Laudabilem de conuersione infidelium.
Celestinus decreed an error flat against Saint Paul (that the crime of heresy
dissolueth the band of marriage) in so much that Innocentius was feign to
repeal the same, and decret the contrary. If they ask me now where is that
decree? Truly I cannot tell what you have done with it. Since ye came to this
fine shift, that the Pope could not, forsooth, err, that paragraph could not
be much seen abroad. The gloze says it was among the Decretals. Lib. 1.
aduers. haereses. cap. 4.
Alphonsus de Castro saw it there in an old book, marry (sirs) if you can
use the definitions, decrees, and determinations of your Popes after this
fashion, and then come and require us to show that your Pope has decreed an
error, and that not what we count an error, but what your selves would repute
error as well as we, truly we need reply no farther, but that iniquity is
spunne of a fine thread, and that this is the very mystery of Antichrist, and
that he departs from the faith, and yet under a most presumptuous pretense
that (...) he cannot err in faith.

When God was most served almost alone locally in the territory of Iewry, they
were perilous and lying words to affixe wisdom, the word and the law to the^
that visibly occupied their callings in the Church of god. Ier. 18.
And why is it not so much more now when whosoever fears God, Acts. 10.
and therefore wheresoever god is feared, there, there is no such respect of
persons, or places as sometimes was.

For the very Church of Rome, by name Paul warns to look to her duty, to see
to her footing, and puts down the condition of her standing: Romans 11.20.
and either in the one of the other, the warning or the condition does argue,
that they are not better than the natural branches, but that their church may
be cut off, if they grow wild: and if they could not grow wild, which is, if
they could not er, what need Paul warn them, or they care for his warning?

If it be replied, that there may be error in some members, but not in the
head, which is the Pope, this will not serve, Romans 1.7.
for the Apostle writes to all at Rome without exception, and where the text
gives no cause of distinguishing, why should the gloze distinguish at all? And
the errors which Rome is willed to take heed of, are worse than some once
defining of an error, for they may finally cut her off. And in the mean time
let no man fear, that God will lack a Church, though Rome become apostata: that
he will want wine, if she become vinegar: that he will not have a Jerusalem,
though Rome be made a den of Thieves, a nest of unclean birds, and worse than
Babylon it self. And how holds that argument: the Church shall not be
divorced, ergo not Rome? It will not follow. For Rome is not the whole Church.
But she perhaps is the firt place and the Jerusalem of the Church, Brist.
reply to D. Fulke. Cap. 8. Par. 2.
as Master Bristow bears D. Fulke in hand, and for proof thereof, he
refers him to the Acts of the Apostles if he have any insight therein.
Yes his insight in the whole libraries of God and of men is well known at home
and abroad, and that to your shame and grief. And therefore ye need not
like Babish and 2 King. 2 23.
Bethlemite skorning and mocking Boys to fellow Fulke him and flout him as
you do, but rather stand in aw of him, D. Fulkes books unanswered.
whom ye dare not, certainly have not answered to his aunswers to most of your
books. Well may you mock and more at him whose have and pen of a ready writer,
yet ever with great judgment, you can not imitate. But now, at and without
your request (Master Bristow) D. Fulke has intentiuely reuiewed often every
leaf and line in the Acts of the Apostles, and finds you a lying reporter.
And how could it be otherwise? For neither is Rome there termed the Churches
Jerusalem, neither does the church now require a local Jerusalem in earth at
all. Galath. 4.
Whereof more hereafter upon fitter occasion.

The old starting-hole from Christ's praying for Peter, was personal and upon
imminent future danger to Peter, and nothing else. Wherefore even as he that
gathered Manna more than would suffice him, it Exodus 16.20.
putrified, and did him no pleasure: so he that will gather too much of a text,
it can serve him to small purpose. And generally our Savior prayed for the
rest of the Apostles, and by the like reason why should not their successors
claim the like immunity of not erring? Nay, our Savior prayed for every
believer, John. 17.20.
and then by the same reason every private faithful man is in as good case, as
is the Pope.

As for the Popes DEFINITIONS in faith, I showed before, and say again (but
that he takes upon him to define, and because that now is made the question)
that his Definitions are nothing, and nothing worth. We have but one
Defining-Master and Iam. 4.12.
Lawgiver, which can teach and control the heart. Yea every sere Christian is
to try other men's spirits, to try 1 These. 5.21.
all, and therefore also to try and examine the Popes pretended Definitions.
And what need they be tried, if they could not err? If I were sure this gold
were pure and perfect and nothing but gold, what need the touchstone? But
because the judgments of men are uncertain, the spiritual man and child of
God, judges all things because he can, and tries them, because he must, and
therein is judged of 1 Cor. 2.15.
none, nor prejudiced of any, and therefore not ouer-borne by the Pope, and
therefore also not necessarily subject to his papal decisions.

Which warrant of Paul's, clean came against the hair, the Pope applies and
appropriateth to himself, and his Popely judgment, making it a new necessary
article of salvation to be subject to him, because he (if we believe him) is
only that spiritual man Extr^ de maio. and obdient.
that judges al, and is judged of none, specially being once in his
consistory, in his court, and in Council house at Rome, though yet in truth
S. Paul wrate not that sentence to the Romans, but to the Saints of Achaia and
Church of Corynth. Whereupon it may be notwithstanding a little suspected least
he may miss the quishien in his definitions, that thus mistaketh Scripture to
prove his authority, and pierelesse Sovereignty in his defining.

I know what will be and what has been answered lately in this behalf: that
the Pope may, by your leave, even in his consistories and in his decrees fail
in the allegation of Scriptures, but never in his purpose be alleges them
for. For no fig leaf is broad enough to cover the greatness or grossenes of
his intolerable allegations, and yet albeit they fail in their proofs
concluding, and in the Stapl. de doctr. prin. li. 4. ca. 15.
means of proving, yet for the matter they would conclude, their conclusion is
cock-sure.

A very strange case. Can a man err in the means to the end, and not err in
the end it self? Can a man fail in his foundation, and will not his building
totter? Err in his proofs, and obtain his purpose? If the Pope can do all this, I know not what he cannot do. No doubt he can set-forth at midnight and
not wander in darkness. Nay, he can wander in darkness, and gad and magge
quite out of his way, and strait with a trice, when the matter comes to be
shut up with a definitive sentence, to a decretall or a rescript judicial, the
man is at home, notwithstanding all his former vagaries in the night before. Is
not this good stuff?

If I mistake not, whether you rescribe or subscribe, there is small
difference, and a Popelike rescript or subscript is alike available and
autentique. Liberius.
But Pope Lyberius subscribed to Arrianisme, the greatest heresy that ever
was, and he subscribed as Pope, for otherwise Constantius would no more have
regarded his private subscription, than a drop of water among a Sea of
subscriptions. Now how distinguish you? what help now?

Even thus: As when we show that Pope Honorius was a monothelite: that is to
say, one that denied the two wills of both natures in our Savior, you
answer, he was so in heart, but outwardly in his Hard. detect. page 254.
decisions he was not so: so contrariwise you tell us, that Liberius ratified
Arrianisme by his Idem. pa. 250.
Subscription and handwriting, but this was not from his heart, but outwardly
for fear.

Say you, for fear? What then? But I pray you, in the mean time were not
these iolly-fellowes, and constant Popes? The one was rotten at the heart, and
had a true hand. The other had an erring hand, but a true heart. And must the
hand in the one excuse the heart, and the heart in the other excuse his hand?
Alas poor souls in what case were they, that depended upon either heart or
hand of such Popes? Where was Peter's faith that never fails in his
successors? In the heart of an heretic? Or in the hand of an hireling? His
successors heart feared, his successors hand erred, his successors tongue
consents to error, and the terror of the Emperor and two years exile, or as
In catalog. Ec. scriptorum.
Jerome writes the Solicitation of Fortunatianus a Bishop brought Liberius
quite to an other bent. Fregit, it altered him quite and clean.

Master Harding answers, Detect. page 250. b.
Alas this forced subscription argues the lack of fortitude, but certanly it
proves not heresy. For an heretic subbornly defends his opinion.

He defined it. Whether he, and how he defended it, whether so or no, I care
not, I cannot tell. He did define it, he did promulgate it by his subscription
so far forth, as his Popely approbation could stretch unto. This much I
allege it for, and so much it clearly proves. And how could this sorry,
frail, and fearful reed confirm his brethren, who was so infirm and weak
in himself? And if his brethren, the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons near
Rome in Italy, and the Senate of his Council should have helped him, yet they
did not, and if they did what they could, he was the more incurable, and then
belike Christ prayed rather for them, than for the Pope. But I fear me the
footmen fled where the horsemen fell, and the Lambs quaked, when the bel-wether
ran away, and that the Bishops more than yielded, where the Pope subscribed.

Notwithstanding, what charter, privilege or promise has the assembled
consistory and synod of Rome for not erring more than has any other? Mat.
18.20.
When two or three be gathered together (not at Rome, nor designed from Rome)
the promise does hold. And therefore the Romish assemblies are not freed
specially, but with the same conditions indifferent to others, though fewer in
number, less in show, and lighter in credit in the optnion of the woorld. For
fewer than two or three, and withal to make a number, cannot be, and yet unto
two or three gathered together in the name of Christ, Christ made the promise
of his presence, and the assistance of his spirit to comfort them in troubles
and to instruct them in doubts, but this must be always understood to be in
a rateable measure according to the capacities of humane vessels. For men are
men ever, even the best whether single or assembled, and so where they have to
deal in Gods things they may admixe somewhat of their own, and so also miss
in the matters of their consultation, and therefore councels great or less are
not even measures to leuil or limit al his causes by.

Every man knows (says Austine) Lib. 2. contrae Donatist. c. 3.
that (of Councels) the provincial give place to the general, and that the
general councels and plenary are often (not seldom) mended the former by the
later. The place it self would be repaired unto, it is very, very worth the
reading, where there is set forth a plain prerogative of the scriptures to be
deuoid of error, by way of opposition to other writings of Bishops or
Councels, prouincial or plenarie howsoever. My note out of Austine is, that if
general Councels might be mended, they might and did err. For faults and
errors are they, that are to be amended. For we amend not that which is right,
but that which is amiss. The same Aug. contra Maximinum lib. 3. cap. 14.
father writing against an Arrian, does he bring Scripture, or else the famous
Council of Nice, most famous in condemning Arrianisme? Nay, erratis nescientes
scripturas. The cause of error is the ignorance of the scriptures. And
therefore the reformation of that disease was to take away the cause. Austine
therefore alleges Scripture, and whereas the Arrian might after a sort, and
perchance did pretend the Council of Ariminum for his opinion, Austine does
not call the council Dete pa. 112. b.
a schismatical and an heretical conuenticle, as Master Harding does, but
goes this way to work: whereas the Nicene council makes for me, and the
Ariminum council for thee (agnizing council to be against council) neither
ought we to produce, either I the council of Nice, or you the council of
Ariminum as prejudicial (either way:) neither am I bound to the authority of
this (the latter,) nor you to that (the former.)

Master Harding to help for ward that which he would say, says that Saint
Austen was content (only) to lay aside his advantage upon condition, and as
it were upon Ibidem.
composition, and that this his present doing was but for the present time and
occasion: and this he proves because Austine says: Detect. pa. 113.
I will not lay against thee the Nicene Council, as who would say he could if
he would. But he would not for the present time. I WILL NOT.

Lord God, it is a world to see the wilfulnes of them that will not see.
Austines word is not as Master Harding forces him to speak, I WILL NOT of
choice, but, I OUGHT not of duty. True, he would do, what he did, but it
was not in his only pleasure so to do for the time. For he took the
easiest, the wisest, the surest, and the most necessary way. And why does not
Master Harding english (nec tu debes) thou will not, as well as (nec ego debeo)
I will not?
Sed nec ego Nicenum, nec tu DEBES, etc. Neither of both OUGHT to allege,
neither is either of us BOUND to councels, I to this, or thou to that, as it
were with prejudice either to other. But let the combat be between matter and
matter, cause and cause, reason and reason, by the authority of the scriptures,
not by witnesses of whom soever proper (to either) but common to both.

If Saint Austine deuolue all to an equal debating of things, and to the
authority of the Scriptures, I see no reason we fly the Scriptures. If
Austine neither would, as Master Harding makes him to speak, nor ought as his
own word is, to stand and to rely upon councels, as Nec Ego, nec tu
detineris. Neither part was bound to be ouerruled by general Councels.
bound to them, why should we? If Austine grant the Ariminum council to be a
general council, what is Master Hardings denial thereof? Pigghius voucheth it
was Universal Concilium hand dubio, there was no controversy but it was a
general council. Aduersus Luciferanos.
Ierom calls it the whole woorld, saying of this council, that the whole
woorlde when it perceived how deceatfully it was seduced, it mourned to see it
self become an Arrian (unawares.) And therefore I marvel why Master Harding
should call it an heretical conuenticle in a corner of the woorld. And howebeit
Arrianism were an heresy of heresies, yet they indirectly confirmed it, and
being fraudulently circumuented when they saw the error, were very sorit for
their offense which they had committed in the simplicity of their conceat of
understanding, that it would be no great matter to relent in a (...).
word, and in favor of a general peace.

If Detect. Page 250 b.
force could excuse Liberius, simplicity in these deserves softer words. But
both by Liberius his Yet Platina reports that it was upon respect of benefits
and favor.
forced subscription, and by this general councels misconstruing, the capital
heresy of Arrianisme was much confirmed. And therefore we were best, as
Austine advises, to try our matters and causes at the touchstone of the
infallyble word of God, and not at the erryng determynations of Popes or
Bishops, either sorted by them salues, or seated together, and that of late
times not so much in a general, as in a Gehennal council of Pragmaticall
Machiuels, devising how they may cosen the woorld, and exyle the true and
right profession of perfect christianity: wherefore they must be withstood,
with courage and boldness in the sight of all men as Paul resisted Peter. From
whom notwithstanding, verily as from one man, and not as from a general
Council of many, the Pope makes this his impossible and improbable claim of
not erring, but how erroniously we have declared. Hier. Ec. l. 6. c. 5
And Pigghius says in the behalf of the Pope, that there is not a word in
the scriptures properly for general councels.

15 We which are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles,

16 Know, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by faith in
Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law, because by the works
of the Law, no flesh shall be justified.

Paul having justified, and made good his authority by sundry proofs, 1. By
his immediate calling from God. 2. By his dutiful diligence therein. 3. By his
equal conference with the cheifest pillars, 4. And lastly by his just
reproving Peter, though he went not with aswift foot from the Gospel, yet
because he went not with a right foot in it and toward it, now draws
happily, by this and such like occasion to the chiefest matter and argument
handled in this Epistle, and shows abundantly that no ceremonious rite, no
nor yet (which God more respects) can the works of men, justify man. And
this he declares by his own example, and by the example of others like
himself. We, says he, whom he describes, 1. by their condition, 2. by their
judgment in christ.

1 By condition (in a word to say) they were Jews, and by nature Jews, that
is so born, and so descended. Phil. c. 3.5.
And elsewhere Paul says of himself that he was a Jew, an Hebrew, of the tribe
of Benjamin, a zealous fellow once, and a follower of the Law. So were the
Jews, so was he, and not sinners of the Gentiles, sinners both by nature, that
is, by birth, and by their bringing up, and so thought of by common reputation,
and called by our savior very Matt. 15.26.
Dogs. Where, by the way I mark two things, 1. the great goodness of God
toward the Jews, 2, and their infinite ingratitude toward him. So that what
ever they were by their default, yet by their condition such they were, and so
were esteemed of God, even as his peculiar people, but with Psalm. 147.20.
other nations it was not so.

2 The Apostles and Disciples over and besides their condition very good in
former time, yet now altered to a better state, were also of a right judgment
in christ, and they knew (we know) they knew that the truckels and swathing
clothes of old ceremonies were for them, but while they were children, whom God
so tendered and kept for a time, and to that end that those ceremonies might be
means the rather to lead them to Christ, and not that they should be justified
in them, or in any thing else that they did or could do.

I cannot say, as our Savior said to Nicodemus, John. 3.10.
Are you Masters in Israel, and know not these things? I know you know them:
yet give me leave a little that all may learn that which most of you know.
Neither is there any knoweledge in all the woorld like to this. Wherefore the
repetition thereof cannot be ungrateful.

An enquiry how man may be Justified before the judgment seat of God.
A time shall come, and a doom must be, and a day is a ppointed when all flesh
shall appear and hold up hand (as it were) and answer: guilty or not guilty,
before the tribunal seat of God, that sees the heart, and searches the
raines. Here in this plea of Justice is required, thou be neither accessory,
nor principal to the least breach of the Law, if thou will live and be
justified, and be quit thereby. Luke 10.18.
Hoc fac and viues. Do this and live. Do not this, thou can not live. Or
do what thou will if thou do not this, if thou do not the Law, only and
wholly that, it will be thy undoing, thou can not live, leaning to the Law, and
meaning to be justified thereby.

Job. 9.28.
At the very remembrance hereof holy Job will fear his works, as nothing more,
and David in remorse of his own either secret sins or open faults and in
consideration of the frailty of al flesh trembles and says: Psa. 130.3.
If thou, o Lord, mark what is done amiss, who shall abide it? Who shall stand
in judgment, and sustain thy wrath? Whereupon I reason and make this
reckoning: If Job the just man feared, if David a man according to Gods own
heart trembled at this trial, alas, what shall others do? If the strong soldier
fear and fly, what shall become of the weak, the same, the blind? What shall
become of the utterly impotent? If the wind blow away the solid wheat, where
shall the chafe rest? O Lord who is he, or where is his dwelling, that we may
go to him, and common with him, and hear a man that can say, and faie in
truth, my heart is clean? And if the heart be not clean, how unclean are the
hands? If the spring be corrupt, how polluted are the rivers? Who in the
woorld, who one can answer one for a thousand? And he that answers not
all, answers not one. In many things (says Saint Iam. 3.2.
James) we offend al. And in including all, he excludes none, and the
Scripture has expressly Romans 3.9. Galath. 3.22.
concluded all under sin. If then all be concluded under sin, if al offend,
and that in many things, and if he that offends in any, offends in all, in
what case are we al? How can we be justified by the Law?

These things touch us nearly, and concern us much. What Vrim and Thummim
may we consult in this case? Esa. 46.
Repair we to the Lord in the and six fourtith Chapter of Esaias, who resolves
us on this wise: Hear me ye stubburne hearted that are far from Justice. As
if it were said, if any of you presume in pride, or precend in hypocrisy of
much justice, you are ouer-bold, you are deceived, and you cannot deceive God.
It is a pride and a pretense of righteousness, from whence in very deed you
are far wide. Hear me, harken not to your selves, to your selfe-wit and
ouer-weening. I will bring near my righteousness, neither shall your
iniquity frustrate or make vain my promises, or sequester my purposed mercy
from my elect amongst you, and from my church unto whom I will show mercy. I will
give my salvation in Sion and my glory in Israel.

Then I ask, will Israel be glorified, will Sion be saved, will man be
justified, will hypocrisy speak truly, will stubburne hearts be mollified,
and froward minds rectified? Then harken what God says: Glory, Salvation,
Righteousness, and Justification, the acceptance of us as just, yea of us
very impious and Atheists by nature, is Gods only grace and free gift. A
vanting and a vilde spirit is only in man, who naturally has but a sorry, a
naughty, and a slight conceat of the mercy of the father, and of the infinite
merit of Christ his son.

Come we home to our Apostle: We know that man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by faith. It is not an opinion, Opinio est entis, and
non entis. Opinion is of things that may be so, or may be no. But we know
says Paul. And whereas there are but two ways to be quit, either plea of
our own innocence, or help and trust elsewhere to be justified, we must
lean either to the one or to the other, either perfourning the Law which no
man can, or embracing Christ, only relying in him by faith, by only faith in
Christ. If it be quarreled why cannot man be yet justified by the Law, what
should be the cause thereof? It is An inevitable reason why Man cannot
possibly justified by the Law.
answered by Paul flat: al men are flesh. But why cannot flesh? Why? Al flesh
is fleshly. al flesh is grass, even the very grace thereof. And what is hey
and stubble to save a man? Esaias. 4.6.
And the grace thereof is but as the flower. Some flowers are green, yellow,
red, stammel, purple, or white etc. These are but gay colors, and what are
these before the face of the wind, in the heat of the Sun, and in the sight
of God? Wherefore flesh and blood may not, cannot, dare not, should not
prosume to appear, where it can stand, in judgment, before the consistory of
our God, in the strength of it self, and without our advocate. Nay the heavens
are not clear in his eyes, nor the very Angels, and celestial spirits, much
less man, who dwells in an house of cley, and in a body subject to the soil
of sin, who drinks in iniquity as a dry ground does a rainey water.
Wherefore by the Works are imperfect and being as perfect as they may be, they
beno deserts but duties. Christ is our righteousness at the right hand of his
father.
works of the Law performed by man by his fleshly arm and strength we
even the regenerate, we be not, we cannot be justified, Saint Paul knows
and acknowledges that by faith in Christ, and that by Christ alone in whom we
believe, we be pronounced in him to be that we are not, nor can be of our
selves, nor in our selves. So that here is guilty and not guilty, righteous
and not righteous. Not righteous but guilty, by the Law, by works, by
nature, and in our selves: but in Christ who is made our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption we have all that we have, and in
him, who has paid all for us, we have al and enough. And this knowledge,
brethren, being thoroughly learned, perfectly believed, and fully settled in a
sanctified soul, most honors God, and comfort man above al things that
can be named.

17 If then while we seek to be made righteous by christ, we our selves are
found sinners, is Christ therefore the Minister of sin? God forbid.

18 For if I build again the things, that I have destroyed, I make my self
a trespasser.

19 For I thorough the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might live unto God.

20 I am crucified with Christ, but I live, yet not I any more, but Christ
lives in me, and in that that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
in the son of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me.

20 I do not abrogate the grace of God, for if righteousness come by the
Law, then Christ died without a cause.

Upon the former matters premised, Paul may seem to argue thus: if while we
seeking (which was granted on every side) to be made righteous by Christ, yet
we be found notwithstanding sinners (by relying to the Law which the false
Apostles would have annexed) is Christ therefore become the Minister of sin,
which must needs be if he be coupled with the Law? Phy, out upon (...), it
were most absurd, it cannot be, and God forbid. Christ and the Law cannot make
one fabric or building.
If any man should build up the Jericho, which he had destroyed and was
accursed, were he not to be accursed? If Paul should build up the Law,
which accurseth, though it were with the coupling of Christ, in the building,
yet should he show himself to be a transgressor, in setting up of the Law
with Christ, which two to stand together were utterly impossible. For to that
end entered Christ, that the Law might cease. To that end Paul exemplyfieng
in himself, voucheth, he was dead to the Law, and therefore had not to do
with the Law at all, was crucified with Christ and fixed to Christ, and unto
Christ alone.

Justification by acceptance or imputation excludes not a measure of inherent
sanctification. And dying to the curse of the Law, shuts not out good living
according to the rule of the Law.
And yet least Paul being dead from the Law and crucified with Christ, might
seem by this doctrine in himself to be an ensample of dying unto God, and
living to the world. verse. 20. he says, But I live: and because no man should
mistake him, he shows 1. in what measure of goodness he lives, as he might,
in the flesh, and 2. withal shows how it came to pass that in the flesh he
might live, saying that he lives by Christ and thorough faith in him. In him
who has loved me, and given himself for me. Whereupon I note 1. the freeness
of the giver, 2. the preciousnesse of the gift, 3. the certainty in receiving,
4. and the need of the receauer. 1. The freeness of the giver. For what is
freer than gift? And then a gift proceeding of love? Which loved me. 2. For the
preciousnes of the gift, what can be more precious than the Son of God, and
the heir of al? He gave himself. 3. The certainty of receiving is uttered in
the specialitie of speaking, for me. But O blessed Paul, what mean these
Christ is not received in a general conceat, but by a special applying.
enclosures? Why? Is Christ (thy) Christ? Is he (thy) Savior? And is he not
rather the Savior of the world? That which is thine, is none of mine. Is it
not so? In worldly things true, the right and propriety is in the true owner
only, and in him alone, and in none other. In spiritual rightes it is not so
altogether. Christ is the Christ of all in general, and in special too, yet
not a divided Christ, but whole and entire whosoever he is. In natural things
see a resemblance hereof: the Sun in the air is a general light, in the eye
a special; and the sound in the air a general noyce, yet seerely discerned
in the ear: so Christ is a general Savior of all that shall be saved, but
specially is he received, discerned, and applied by the eye of faieth, which
faieth comes by hearing him generally delivered, but specially applied. As
take, eat, take, drink, at the Lords Supper, feed on him by thy faieth. And
blessings so specially and certainly taken have ever a quicker taste in the
receauer, and provoke thereby the more thankfulness toward the donor. 4. The
need of the receauer appears in this, The price of the ransom does prove the
need of the party and the hainousnes of his trespass, who is to be ransommed.
that if a less ransom, would have done the deed, so great a payment had not
needed. But so much it cost to save one Soul. And whereas he says, Christ
gave himself (For me) it is plain in how hard a case he was before, that
Christ must die that we may live, or else we die, even as the Ram was
Sacrificed, that Isaake might be saved. Wherefore of his perfect mercy and for
our pure need, Christ dyed for thee, for me, and for us al.

Why Christians die, though Christ died for them.
It is but an easy demand, and soon satisfied, why I must dye, though Christ
died for me. Yet God doubtless requires no double satisfaction, he desires
not to be twice paid for one debt. Notwithstanding, nothing is more certain
than that death is the common and inevitable Lodge and Receptacle of the
living. The Wiseman shall dye as well as shall the Fool. David when he had Acts.
13.36.
served his time, was reposed to his Fathers, and the statute is general and
cannot not be dispensed with, al must dye. By sin Romans 5.12.
came in death, and as sin is in all, so must all die. If there had been no
sin, there should have been no death nor dissolution, no not of our mixed
bodies, no more than there shall be of the very same bodies after their
restitution and glorification. By sin death entered, and must go over all.
But the question is, why we dye, whom Christ has delivered both from sin
the cause, and from death the consequent of sin.

As we are delivered from sin, not that it be not, but that it sting not: so
are we delivered from death, not that it come not, but that it conquer not,
that it lead us not in a triumph. o death where is thy sting? The sting of
death is sin, but sin is done away, and therefore o grave where is thy
victory? Death is no Death to a good Christian.
Thou take hold of us, not because we are stung to death, but because of a
natural necessity indeed inducted thorough sin at first, yet for that the
guilt of sin is taken away, death is no right death now, but a dissolution,
and a passage to a better life, and a very instrument, whereby mortality
puts on immortality, and whereby we live for ever. And the assurance of our
certain departure hence, is hence-foorth a noble monument of the weight of
sin, to weane us from sinning, and to win us to Christ in perpetual
thankefulnes, for that we are freed from the curse of the Law, against sin,
from the guilt of sin in it self, and from the danger of death for sinning,
and all this by his infinite desert in dying for us, that otherwise should have
died a death everlasting. This grace would not be abrogated. I abrogate not
the grace of God, this grace of his Gospel.

Steven Gardener.
Steven Gardener in King Edwards time when he stood much, but falsely upon his
innocence, and would not yield that he had offended, yet at length, being
asked whether he would accept the Kings pardon or no; nay says he, I am
learned enough not to refuse the Kings pardon. In like manner men may dally and
play, and use fig leaves at pleasure, truly the greatest wisdom in the end
will be to renounce all, and crave mercy, and stand upon pardon, and to trust
unto Christ, and only in him. Grace is rejected when works are annexed.
And for a good farewell and end of this Chapter, be it remembered and written
in the hearts of humble men for ever, that we after the example of our
Apostle, we disanull not, we reject not, we frustrate not, we abrogate not, we
throw not away the grace of God, which necessarily ensues by meashing or
adnexing either the association of Ceremonies, or the observation of the Law
unto his free, and absolutely free Grace, free in GOD though deserved by
Christ, our Jesus and only Savior.

CHAP. III.
1 O FOOLISH Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth, to whom Jesus Christ before was described in your sight, and among you
crucified?

2 This only would I learn of you, Received ye the spirit by the works of the
Law, or by hearing of faith?

3 Are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the spirit, ye would now end
in the flesh?

4 Have ye suffered many things in vain? If yet in vain.

5 He therefore, that ministers to you the spirit, and works miracles among
you, does he it through the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith?

O YE foolish, bewitched, and disobedient or incredulous Galathians. These are
vehement speeches. But this vehemence proceeded of great zeal, and this zeal
for them was grounded upon many reasons: 1. Christ was described before their
face, and crucified in their sight. 2. They had received the spirit, and the
graces of the holy Ghost; not by the deeds of the Law, for they were Gentiles,
but by the Ghospel preached unto them. And the Law in comparison is flesh and
gross, the Ghospel is spiritual. Should they begin with the better, and
relaps to the worse? Be entered and begin in the spirit, and end, and be
finished, and seek to be perfected in the flesh? 3. They had endured many an
hard brunt, for the Gospel, and should they now frustrate all their
sufferings? 4. He that ministered unto them, and confirmed his ministry with
miracles, that is, Paul, had not so taught them the Ghospel. These respects
made him vehement and very earnest. In the whole, I behold four principal
matters. 1. The procliuity and readiness of man to be seduced. 2. The duty of
the preacher in such a case. 3. The condition of the Law. 4. The dignity of
the Gospel.

Man's nature is foolish and froward, prone to evil, and obstinate in sin.
1 Man by nature has a vagary disposition, drawn from his mothers womb. Even
as birds are caught with a whissell, and fish with a bait, so open but a gap,
he (a disorderly thing) will desire no more. Once persuade man that the evil
he does is good, set but a gloss upon the errors wherein he delighted, and
he is carried with full sails. And a fool will be a fool, and think himself
marvelous wise.

Evil entents are never without fair pretenses.
Satan has gay helps and shows to further this folly, The Ostrige has as
many feathers as the Hawk. These Galathians were not only inwardly fools, but
externally bewitched. There is a bodily, and there is a spiritual bewitching.
Of the former more in the fifth Chapter following. The spiritual bewitching, is
meant here. they say, children are soonest bewitched; we aer ouerchildish in
Gods matters, and therefore the sooner deceived, especially if the deceiuer be
his crafts-master. A fine flatterer wilbee more in the books of a fool; than
a perfect friend. To the weak eye the clearest and the truest light is most
offensive, and to the sick of an ague, the best drink is worst: and as to
children, and unto weomen with-childe untimely fruit, or unwholesome food
seems better, than better meat, so we see it in Adam, and in Adams children
being in an ague and distempred with his fall, and (as it were) with-child with
their own fancies: affection misleadeth them, and folly makes us prone to
every inconvenience, and in this sinister conceit, and ouer-weening were the
Galathians deceived. And it being put in their heads that Gods Law would do
very well with Christ's Gospel, and that works jointly with faith would the
rather justify and save, than faith in Christ alone, they were carried headlong
into that most pernicious error, and so become, 1. fools in their
understanding, 2. Bewitched in opinion, 3. And disobedient to the faith, clean
contrary to their education and training up, contrary to their own
conversation in the Gospel, contrary to their former sufferings not at al, for
the Law, but only for the faith in Christ alone. Was this no folly?

They who had endured many storms and dangers every way only for Christ, thus
wilfully at the haven where they should ariue, to cast away themselves? Except
they were bewitched and out of their wits, they could not possibly be so, so
disobedient, to fall from their spiritual comfort, and to become as gross as
the old Jews for their ceremonies, and worse than the Jews as to dream that
any works could save, either without or yet with Christ, as to that purpose.

Works are duties to be done, but when we have done al, it is Christ that
saves: and works do not justify. That is a fleshly, a gross and a foolish
imagination. There is no spirit, no spiritual wisdom in it, and mark, mark
with an attentive ear, and with an intentive eye what Saint Paul auerreth and
says, that they were fools not to end as they began, beginning as they did,
in Christ.

The division of A first and A second justification is a fools devise in Saint
Paul's judgment.
Our Papists tell us of a first Justification and of a second Justification; the
first free in Christ, the second merited by works. Paul tells them they are
fools, they must end as they began if they will be saved. Christ only saves,
only justifies, when? At first. And why not at last? Will ye begin with
Christ, and end in your selves? The author and finisher of our salvation is our
Savior, and the end is greater than the entrance, and he that gives us grace
to be justified in this world, he only gives us also the glory of our
salvation in the world to come. Are ye bewitched, and will ye be fools,
charm the charmer never so cunningly?

Paul gives us a fair president and pattern to work by, both, 1. In the
manner of his dealing with the Galathians, 2. And also in his Doctrine he
treated to them. 1. A leperous tongue, a flux of a foul mouth must be
stopped, a rauing Dog must be more than musled, the Or that goreth all that
comes in his way must be killed.

I deny not strong wine is good, but least it fume in the head, delay it with
water, it will be better. Zeal is requisite, and he that hates a realous
Preacher, is an enemy to his soul, and a frind to his sins: but zeal
tempered with charity and discretion is the true zeal, a A fire of Juniper
coals, is (...), a zeal ungrateful, and not to be liked.
scalding zeal and a scorching heat is not the fiar that works effectually,
and separateth things of dissimular and diverse natures, and unites men of
similar and like condition, rightly and truly together: I grant if Paul had
been a cold frost, he might have let all alone, and suffer to freese together
Law and Gospel, Moses and Christ, faith and works, the flesh and the
spirit, as we see in the A cold reproof is unprofitable and rather freeseth
men in the dregs of sin, than otherwise.
frost sticks and stones and mire and such like matters of different and
dislike natures to stick and freeze together. No, Paul was zealous to bark
against sin, and withal, discreet, to do it with intent to recall sinners, to
win, and not to sting their persons.

The Mastiffe is not driven away with a fragment, nor errors with fawning looks
and flattering words. If a man touch a nettle crisily it stingeth the sooner.
Paul takes them up in terms as before, o ye foolish, etc. Yet with a meaning
to amend them, and not with a trumping mind, which is too too bad in any case
in any man to be-foole men as many do, and which is condemned by our Mat. 5.
Savior.

The purpose of the reprouer does make much in the manner of reproving.
The end in our actions does distinguish our doings, and the purpose in our
words does put and make the difference in our sayings. Saint Paul's drift was
to reform them, to restore them, to recall and reclaim them to their first
estate, he was the salt of the earth to season them with sharpnes, and not the
gall of the earth to grieve them with bitter speech. And demanding whether all
their former pains and his preaching should thus come just to nothing, and be
in vain, he qualifieth discreetly, and with a good affectionate correction
that saying with this addition (If yet in vain.) He sees the worst, which was
very bad, and therefore reproves them worthily: notwithstanding declaring his
intent, and hearts desire, he hops the best, and wishes that his labor and
their good beginnings might not be as water spilt to no purpose, and to no
profit: but all in vain.

When the patient is past hope, the Physician will never tarry: but while he
applies Physic, the sick man may recover. The Galathians were far gone,
even like sicke-men when they katch after motes in the air, which is a very
evil sign: so they catching after ceremonies, things which now were less
worth than motes, their case was hard. Howbeit Paul in tender love, discreet
zeal, and charitable hope, leaves them not in their extremities. And desires
to ransom and redeem if it were but a tip of an ear, or a top of a toe out of
the jaws of their cruel deceauers.

2 The doctrine he taught them is evident, what it was by their default. For
if they defaulted by adiecting to the Gospel, which could suffer no addition,
then the simplicity of the Gospel was the single truth which they disobeied, o
ye foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
truth? Therefore he taught them the truth. He taught them neither wine, nor
weomen, I mean, neither the fancies of man's brain, nor the lusts of man's
heart, but the truth of God, which was the verity of the Gospel, which also was
the truth in regard of former figures and types. Ioh. 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses: but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
Wherefore it was a vanity to preach other things, and a vae and a vengeance
hung over their heads that durst venture farther, or would not go so far, as not
to betake them to their undertaken task of preaching the Gospel.

To preach and speak is one thing, and to preach the Gospel is another thing.
Except the Trumpet be blown with the breath of the Lord, it gives an
uncertain sound or a false alarm. The sum of the Gospel is Christ, and him
crucified. Paul painted this doctrine among the Galathians, and Christ was even
crucified by him among them. Yet he was not one of them that put Christ to
death, neither died our Savior in Galatia, but in mount Caluery in Jury. Paul
painted out Christ, not with the ^encil, but (...) is said (Sed carmina mayor
imago) So Paul's preaching, and Paul's writing was Paul's painting.
And he painted Christ among them, yet was he no image-maker, no Painter, no
Goold-smith to make Crucifixes, no Carpenter to frame Roods, this was a verbal
Painting, but yet a lively description of Christ, and that according to our
saviors own prescript direction. Go and preach. Not go and paint me out.

The contents of the Gospel summarily cited, and specially reckoned up.
As in one word summarily the argument of the Gospel is Christ, so (in some
few words to say a little more amply) the Gospel contains the glad
year, the acceptable time, the joyful tidinges, that is, the birth, the life,
the death of christ Jesus. The mystery of his incarnation, the innocence of his
life, the agony of his death. The grace of his words, the power of his
woorking, the merit of his cross, his mighty resurrection, his glorious
ascension, his session at the right hand with the father. The glory of Israel,
the joy of the Gentiles, the Savior of the woorld. The promised seed, the
expectation of the faithful. The anointed of God to be the Prophet of truth,
the sacrifice for sin, and the king of his choosen. 3. My third note, If we
look to the Law, we shall find the first draft of this painting, to be a
gross, a fleshly, a rawer kind of knowledge fit for such a people, til the
fullness of time when now God would not distill by drops as before, but
pour down in plenteous sort his spirit upon al flesh. 4. Wherein was, and
is my fourth note of the prerogative and dignity of the gospel.

But reuert we to my second note, whereon I rest for this present: this
gospel, and those things in the Gospel and many more of like nature, and of
like inestimable price were the matter of Paul's preaching, and that as by one
man came death and a passibility of and a pronenes to corruption in a guilt
both of the first and second death: so by one, and therefore by nothing else
came very life, even life everlasting, and not as our adversaries say, a new
ability forsooth to live, so that we our selves will purchase salvation by
woorking and deserts of our own. Paul did not so teach Christ.

Number. 21.
As the children of Israel iourneyed toward the promised Land, many of them
waxed weary, wayward, and wanton, and their soul lothed the bread of heaven as
a wearish and a waterish food without relish, they murmured against God and
against Moises. Wherefore the Lord sent fiery stinging Serpents among them,
and had not Moises prayed, and had not the Lord taken compassion on them by a
brazen Serpent to be erected whereon they should look that they might be
recured, there was no remedy but death.

Appliably to speak (for this story was but a figure of Christ.) The brazen
serpent a tipe of Christ upon his cross.
In the wilderness of this world what Dragon more fierce than sin? What
Serpent so fieris as Satan? Who so is strung hereby, is enflamed to death in
everlasting flames. Notwithstanding it has pleased God to prescribe a perfect
and a sovereign help.

That Serpent was erected, so was Christ exalted on the cross, he was
crucified on the tree. And still is (as it were) crucified before our eyes by
preaching him crucified: and in the beholding thereof is health and salvation.
And we may sat in faith, that Luke 2.30.
Simeon said, when he saw our Savior in the flesh: Mine eyes have seen and
do see my salvation. So effectually the preacher painteth forth Christ in
precious colors. And when I hear what he preaches, by hearing comes my
faith, and my faith is fixed in Christ who is only and alone preached, to be A
JESUS, to be that Serpent, and to be A SAVIOVR. This was the duty, which
Paul discharged. And even as the Mat. 2.9.
Star that stood right over the place where Christ was borne, so Paul
perpendicularly and directly stands upon Christ, upon his nativity, and upon
the rest of his life, but the The chiefest argument of al our sermons, is,
Christ Jesus on his cross.
death of the cross was a chief action significantly showing what we
eternally deserved, and should have felt, if he had not died. And therefore he
painted that out most. Genesis 30.37
And as Jacob when he would have the Ewes to yeene speckled Lambs, stripped
wands and made and laid them of a party color before the eyes of the Ewes when
they came to the watering trowes where they usually were wont to engender, that
they might conceive and bring forth accordingly: Christ is our savior,
works are but the duties of Christian men saved by Christ, and no saviors of
themselves.
even so when men come to the wateringes of life, when you repair to our
Lectures, Readinges and Sermons, THE CHIEF CONCEAT we would imprint in your
minds is Christ, and Christ as your only Savior, and your Christian works
we teach not as Saviors, but as fruits and signs of a saved people. So we
preach, and so we teach, and so did Paul and all the Apostles and Scriptures
before us.

The imitation of Paul in the matter of his teaching is necessary and pertinent
to all, but Paul puts them also in mind that he wrought miracles amongst
them which was proper to that time. The motive from miracles.
And therefore we marvel to hear our adversaries to make any motion and
demand for miracles, specially in the waine of the woorld. For will you hear?

Miracles are not all true, which you obtrude, nor to a good end. Many are but
pipt nuts, illusions either of false men, or of lying spirits, as that images
should light their own candles, that the Roode of Naples should give the
Schoolmen high thanks for devising and distinguishing how they should be
proportionably and duly worshipped, a very gewgaw in divinity, and as true a
miracle, and to as good a purpose, as are the rest of your Legendary woonders.

Again, Miracles are not for all men. Mat. 12.
A froward and a perverse Nation asks for signs. Signs and Miracles are
for 1 Cor. 14.
infidels, and not for believers.

Ezechias in his sickness, and Gedeon as it were in his nonage asked and had
signs. But these were either willed so to do, or extraordinarily moved
thereunto.

True, we must neither ask signs vnoffered at all, nor refuse them if they
be offered of God. But do they forgette that they are Christians? This motive
does argue them of incredulity. Paul comes not now again to the Galathians
with new signs and miracles, he only remembers them what he did at first.
Young plants newly planted may be watered. But Christianity is now of a
good grouth. The watering by Miracles, and by extraordinary means has ceased
ordinarily to be, long since. The ways to know the truth, and true
professors, are no bipathes now.

I do but reason: he that can and list to read a most famous place for this
question, let him resort to Chrysostom every where, but specially homil. 49.
In Matthew. And likewise to Austen, De vnitate Eccl. cap. 19. To whom also he
seems a prodigious wonder, that seeks wonders to confirm his faith Aug. de
ciuit. Dei lib. 22. c. 8. The truth of doctrine does distinguish miracles, but
miracles must not carry us from true doctrine.
yet. (At these days.)

And I pray you (ye Miracle-mongers) what will ye do with your Miracles?
Suppose ye could work wonders. For the time and questions sake be it granted
you. What then? You by your Miracles would admixt your viid sweat to our
Saviors sacred blood, your pilgrimages, your wil-seruice, your works, your
deeds, your pretensed deserts, your wicked lives to his precious death. Is
this the Gospel? Could Saint Paul's Miracles confirm the simplicity of
believing steadfastly in Christ, and shall your miracles (think you) force us to
a compound object and mark for our faith to look on?

Whether God speak, or howsoever he work, he is never contrary to himself,
and therefore your Miracles that thus cross his word, they are not of God,
we cannot follow you by them, we care neither for you nor for them in that
respect. Signs though true, yet without the word are little, but Deuteronomy. 13.
miracles thwarting his word are lies or monsters, and we abhor them. And
talk you at pleasure of believing by your miracles. If you believe not the
Scriptures, you will not believe if an Angel should come from heaven, or a
Luke 16.31.
dead man from his grave. He that refuses ordinary food in Canaan, he that
will not be instructed by the word taught by Preachers in Schools and
Universities, and in other places, but first learned by long endeavor, great
labor and study, if he were extraordinarily fed with manna immediately from
heaven, he would grudge and murmur and repine no less, there is no question.

To conclude all that I have said, is: that 1. miracles are neither al good, 2.
nor for all persons, 3. nor for all times. 4. we have the old miracles, with
the truth, and we need no new. 5. you falsely and profanely pretend new, to
overthrow the old. And so much for the motive of miracles, making most and
altogether against your selves.

6 Even as Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

7 Know ye therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children
of Abraham.

8 For the Scripture foreseeing, that God would justify the Gentiles through
faith, preached before hand the Gospel to Abraham saying, In thy seed shall all
the Gentiles be blessed.

9 So then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.

The false Apostles, and Pharisaical enchanters opposed two maine helps, as
they dreamt, greatly furthering their commixing of Christ with Moses: To wit.
1. the privilege of the flesh, 2. and the worthiness of their works.

Paul refuses both. And to make the matter more manifest and plain, 1. first
of al he depainteth out the cause lively before their eyes by the fairest and
most famous example of ancient memory, namely of Abraham. Abraham believed,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. Abraham did as many good woorks,
as the best. But he believed not in his works, but in God the woorker of his
salvation.

Abraham's faith manifoldly proved to the utmost.
This belief brought him from Caldea, from his fathers house, from his native
country and dear kindred. In this belief he came into Canaan, and not rested
there, but walked through it, and being constrained by famine, went into
Egypt: and thorough belief by occasion of grombling and churlish servants he
sustained the departure of Loath, even the loss and cutting off as it were his
right arm, as likewise he tolerated, as he might, the strife and brables of
Sara and Agar in his own bozom. And for a great time the barrennes of Sara
whom he most loved was no doubt a worm and a grief of al griefs at his heart,
but by faith he overcame such natural passions, and when God willed him to
number the stars if he could, and said, Even so shall thy feed be, Abraham
believed, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, in that he trusted
in the promise and believed under hope against hope (in man's eye) but he
believed strongly and constantly, he staggered not at the matter, neither
considered his own dead body, nor his wives dead womb, being most assured
that he that is almighty, might, and that God, who had spoken the word, would
do it indeed. Romans 3.3.
And therefore (says Paul to the Romans) it was imputed to him for
righteousness.

And yet farther when this promise was performed to prove Abraham's belief,
and to set it on the tenters, and to try whether it would hold out or no, and
whether it were a firm, a true faith and a sure, God wills Abraham that he
should offer and sacrifice up his only son which was now new borne unto
him, according to the promise.

Abraham the next Genesis 22.3.
morning without farther delay prepares al things, and takes the pains to
go a journey, and undertakes readily to sacrifice his Son in a mountain
some way distant off.

What? Was Abraham the man who is termed (...)? Was he without fatherly
kindness? Were the bowels of natural compassion estranged from him! Was he
crueller than Dragons, and worse than the Ostrige, that but Job. 39.18.
forgets her kind? Or would God deprive him of wisdom, and deuoid him of
common understanding? What God intended ( viz. to prove Abraham) was said
before.

When Iepthe was to sacrifice his daughter, and as some think, not to kill her,
yet he Iepthe.
rent his clothes, and was sore troubled. Jeremy.
When Jeremy saw what befell the people whom he never begat, notwithstanding
his belly, his belly, his inward parts throbbed and yairned, and his eyes
were full of tears. David.
DauidWhen was informed of Absolons death, he blubbreth and cries: Absolon,
Absolon, O my son Absolon. Yet was Absolon an ungracious imp, and a
rebellious child.

Isaac, Isaac, O my son Isaac. Why does not Abraham utter some such tender
words? For the Father to kill his own and only Son, in the fathers extreme
age, and in the childs entrance into the woorld, and with his own hand, and
without all reason apparent to the woorld, is more than ever was read or heard
of besides. He Genesis 23.2.
lamented greatly for the death of his wife Sara, Isaackes mother, and does he
seem to laffe at, or to be so careless for the murder of his and her son? Or
did he not love him for some secret respect?

Love him? He loved Isaac most dearly, as appears by his will and Genesis 25.5.
testament, he loved him as the last pleadge of his and Saraes old age, as the
comfort and joy of his heart, as the delight of his eyes, as the very light and
life of his life, and as the gift of God to be the Original of him that should
come after, whose days before hand Johan. 8.56. Where God is the commander
there is no reasoning about the commandment.
he saw, and in whom he knew all nations should be blessed, and yet because
God had commanded, without farther inquiry of the causes of Gods mandat, he
yields full obedience, being certainly confident in his old and constant
faith, that God for all this would be as good as his word, and that if need
were, out of the very cinders and ashes of Isaac he could raise up a new
Isaac, as it were a Phoenix as good as the first. For he that gave him one
Isaac beside the possibility of nature, could give him another beyond the
probability of man's conjecture, and therefore he meant even with a good will to
give Isaac to God whose he was, and willingly acknowledging that all was
Gods, he does as he does in a firm faith and a sound belief. And thereby
Abraham's faith was the better proved, and gods promise never the less
established, by whose providence Isaac was delivered, and a Ram substituted,
and this is to be known for ever, what God requires of man, namely a
thorough, and resolute trust in him, and in nothing beside him.

Abraham's Faith is not only his special Faith, but a principal pattern to all the faithful.
For the case is a document to the woorld, and not only a private matter, and a
singular occurrent, I mean for the imitation of Abraham's great faith. And
therefore he is called the father of the faithful, and an ensample of faith.
Now to come to Saint Paul's purpose.

As the father obtained righteousness so do his children, as the root lives so
do the branches. The way to heaven is one and the same that it was, and is
alike to all that was to him. Abraham became a father of many nations. But was
this spoken because he begat them? No. Abraham's fatherhood is not from his
flesh, but according to his faith.
For why is it said OF MANY, but because there were more to enjoy the blessing,
than ever came lineally from his loins? Abraham's fatherhoode is spiritual. If
it were a fleshly prerogative, why should not Ismael make claim as well as
Isaac, Esau as Jacob, Saul as David? etc. The Gentiles receiving in belief the
promised blessing, are made the children of Abraham not descending from his
raines, but endued with his faith and belief. This is clearly Paul's doctrine.
Then if the flesh cannot help, can yet the works of the Law? No neither.

10 For as many as are of the woorks of the Law, are under the curse: for it is
written, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the Law to do them.

11 And that no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident.

2 The cunning fine false fellows in their second help stood much upon the
worthynes of working according to the Law. You must and do know, what I tell you.

The parts of the Law are Viz. to be considered in this case, and therefore I
speak not of the Judicials.
two. 1. either ceremonials, 2. or morals. The ceremonials consist in types and
shadows, the morals in works and deeds. Of the former sort we have spoken,
and must treat again more in the fourth chapter.

The moral Law is flat contrary to the nature of faith (verse. 9.) They that are
of faith are blessed. And as many as are under the Law, are under the curse.
The Law and Faith flat opposite and contrary.
Wet and dry, heat and cold, fire and water, light and darkness, heaven and hell
are not more contrary than blessing and cursing. The same spring cannot send
forth blessing and cursing, sweet and sower water. If it curse, how can it
bless? And if it bless not, how can it justify? But by the Law comes a
curse and malediction, I say by the Law moral, by the Law of deeds. Cursed
is he that continues not in all things, which are written in the book of
the Law to do them. Among the number (of al things) I think the moral law is
comprehended. (Which are written) I guess, the moral Law is written in the
book of Deutronomie, and in the Tables of the Exodus 20.
Decalog as well as the ceremonial and which are written (TO DO THEM,) and I
take it (DOING) belongs most properly to the Law moral, which is of deeds.

Ye papists would blind us in the day of light, and make us believe Saint Paul
speaks of the ceremonial Law which curses and cannot be borne, and cannot
justify. But not of the Law moral, not of the justice of the Law, which your
Rabbi Vega and graund interpreter of your Tridentine convent says: Vega. de
Just. lib. 14. c. 24. Paulus nunquam opponit.
Paul never opposed to the Law of faith. If he never toldly before, this is a
master-ly, and a ly with a witness. Blessed are they that are under
faith.).(.cursed are they that are under the Law. If cursing and blessing be
contrary, then is the Law and faith contrary, and I say again this repugnancy
is chiefly betwixt faith and the moral Law. For therefore is the ceremonial
Law in one respect contrary to faith, because it binds man to the perfect
observation of the morals under pain of a curse, which is a dangerous
Doctrine, an absurd opinion, and an impossible adventure. For Paul lays it
down that no man is justified by the Law, etc. He means not only the
Jews, who somewhat, or among the Jews he means not only the Priests and
Leuits and the like, who were most occupied in the ceremonies: but NO MAN, no
not any man where ever under the cope of heaven can be justified by the Law
moral. For he means that which he thinks might extend to any, which in his
own judgment was not the ceremonial, but yet by name also afterward, 4.
Chap. the ceremonial rite of circumcision is rejected even therefore, because
it was a covenant and inducement, and as I may so speak, a brissel to draw in
the yoke of the morals in the causes of justifying, which Paul could not brook.

So that this controversy of justification is no new question. The false
Apostles were predecessors to the Papists in the chiefest ground of their
intolerable pride of works. Mary if man's works were perfect, then the case
were altered. And then man should not be man, or the works of man should be
perfecter than man the worker, and so God should accept the work before the
workdoer. But god respects first Genesis 4.4.
Abels person, and the^ his work. And if the person be imperfect, the works
cannot be perfect. And therefore man's imperfit works cannot claim by the law
which requires perfection which is far from man since his fall.

The Law requires al or none in the question of justifying.
The Law is not content with a good entrance, and a reasonable continuance, but
cursed is he that continues not (without interruption) in all that was
written. Pharao with much ado granted leave unto Moses to go aside a little
and Sacrifice. But Moses would not accept thereof, because God had commanded
him otherwise. And he would not go but according to the form prescribed with
male and female, with young and oulde, with their children and servants, with
their cattle and al, eue^ with all or with none: he would not, he durst not
leave one houffe behind. Exodus 10.26. Iam. 3.2. The distinction of venial sin
is a vain conceat.
Se^blably the Law will have all or none. Yet in many things we offend al, and
that not slightly, or venially after a Popish fancy, for he that offends in
one, offe^deth in all, in offending him that will have all or none. And the
breach of all I trow is mortal sin accusing and accursing all, and how then
call you these pretty pety venial sins? Or how can the Law accru as cause of
justifying, wherein should and does consist everlasting bliss, whereas it
lays an heavy curse upon all that lean thereunto? Durgus. fo. 298.
The Scottish Jesuit says, Moses Law extends not to the least points of the
Law, but note: That where God commands, a hide, a hear, or a houffe is not
to be omitted.

Other of the papists fondly restrain the word (All) to all that go to work
only with natural faculties, and who exclude and shut out grace quite in
offending, or else in doing the Law. If this were the Galathians opinion, let
the Law also win the goal, and wear the garland. Let Papists be beeleeued,
and let Master Stapleton be credited. No. The false Apostles in words and in
their doctrine, even as the Papists, they taught the grace of God, and annexed
the Gospel of Christ, and then callenged the name of Apostolic teachers
(though they were false Apostles in so doing) yea so far forth, that they were
reputed men linckt in and joined with Peter, who never was imagined to teach
the Law utterly secluding faith. Wherefore that is but a frivolous conceit:
and therefore verily, verily if we stand to be justified by the Law in what
state soever, the nature of the Law accurseth, and therefore I pray you
recognize your De vniu. Just. doct. lib. 6. c. 13
interpretation, Master Stapleton, and I trust even as the country fellow, the
more he told his geese, the fewer he found them: so the oftener ye look upon
your Imaginations, the worse ye will like it.

But Saint Paul leaves not the Galathians thus. If blessing, if happiness, if
justification, if salvation, if life everlasting, (for all these diverse words
in sound, are one and the same in sense and meaning) if these come not from the
Law, whence come they then? Paul shows.

11 For the just shall live by faith.

12 And the Law is not of faith, but the man that shall do those things, shall
live in them.

13 Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for
us. For it is written: Cursed is every one that hangs on tree.

14 That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ
Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith.

Diverse words may inculcat one and the same thing after a various manner of
speaking.
Whereas Justification comes, 1. Not by the privilege of Abraham's flesh, 2.
Nor by dignity of works, because of the woorkers imperfection and the exact
perfectnes required in the Law, Paul directs three distinct ways, yet al of
them meeting and agreeing in the end, and indeed not the ways but the words
are diverse, whereby our justification is uttered to be attained.

We are not justified by Law. Whence then? 1. First by faith. 2. The^ by
christ crucified. 3. And lastly by the promise of the spirit, and these three
are but one. Living, redemption and blessing in sense is one. So living by
faith in Christ, redemption purchased by Christ, and the spiritual promise of
Christ has not a diverse meaning, whereby we live and are saved. For my faith
is in christ, the promise was of Christ, and Christ is the perfection and
performance thereof in the days of his flesh, and upon his Cross. But
consider we apart the variety and so the vehemence of the Apostles words thus
varied.

Faith instifieth.
1 The first speech is, that the just shall live by faith. This was proved, and
sufficiently proved before by the example and faith of Abraham. But abundant
proofs for the foundation of christian faith are not superfluous, and must not
be tedious to ears and minds erected and settled to hear and mark the
evidences of their salvation.

The Prophet Abacuc says Habak. 2.4.
that the just shall live by faith. In the end of the first, and in the
beginning of the second chapter of his prophecy, the Jews appear to have bin
in a pitiful case. Their enemies were no small enemies. The Chaldaeans were a
terrible and a fearful people, a bitter and a furious nation, well manned, and
horses as fierce as woolues, swifter than the Leopards, and of flight like the
eagle hasting after her meat.

These Chaldeans molested the Jews on every side, spoiled them as the East Wind
the fruit, devoured them as the great fish deuoureth the small, yea they caught
the Jews as it were fish into their nets, and Prosperity, and prouender in an
excessive measure marreth man and beast.
they took them as fast as they could cast in and pull up, and thereby they
grew fat, and their portion was great and plenteous. And thereupon they wared
in love of their own might, and wanton again with their prosperous success.
They Sacrificed to their nets, they burnt incense to their yarn, they were glad
in heart, stroked their own heads that could devise, and kissed their own hands
that had compassed so great matters.

The Jews in this hard case what should they do? Round about, wheresoever
they looked, they saw present danger, and no possible help, or hope in man.
Notwithstanding God does denounce that the pride of the presumptuous that
trusted in themselves, should come to nothing, and the just should live by his
faith, and his people for all this, because they trusted in God, they were just
(even as the Caldeans were therefore unjust because they crusted in themselves)
and the Jews as they were just, so should they live in god, in whom they
trusted, even by their faith. And therefore their justification with God was
their faith, and trust in God, and in God alone, most then, when all helps else
failed, as appears in their greatest extremities.

Works are imperfect.
Imperfect deeds were no deserts, and could not help out of bodily calamities,
much-lesse in cases of salvation everlasting, and the just man believes not in
himself, much-lesse in his works, his faith goes out of himself and rests
in God through Christ, in whom amongst a million or a myriad of Caldeans, in
the midst of all fierce and false Catholics, our faith in Christ shall never
fail. We are justified in Christ, we are saved by Christ, we live by Christ.

And thus is only faith in him, opposed and set against all the meritricious
or meritorious putatiue deserts of frail and sinful flesh supposed to be
answerable to the law, which can never be: for if the Jews could have done
the Law, they might have claimed of God their deliverance for their good
works. For he that does the things of the Law shall live in them. No they
needed, and so do all, an other redeemer which must save them and all out of
the hands of the Law and from our breaches thereof, and the Caldeans rage is
but a phillip or a flea-biting to the curse of the Law.

(Christ redeemeth:) is the only comfort of a conscience, that has a sense of
sin and any taste of true consolation.
2 The redemption from this curse is Christ on his Cross, hanged on tree. The
Jew stumbleth at this faith, and the Gentile scorneth this Doctrine: but the
godly says in heart, that which Ignatius uttered in words: My love is
crucified. The object of my faith, the ground of my hope, the mark, the matter
of my trust and confidence, my delight, my love, my life, the cause of life
everlasting, my full redemption, and perfect salvation, my Jesus was Crucified,
and endured the curse for my sake.

This was no slender punishment, nor small pain, and were it the grief but of
a bodily torment, it were grievous: but our redemption was not in respect of
the pain of the body only, or of the sorrows of the soul only, but in
regard of the sins of both, and that not for one man, but for the sins of
the world.

The penitent sinner.
The better to conceive the force of this deserved pain, and the effect of
sin, see it in a repentant sinner: he stands far off, he beats on his
thigh, knocks on his breast, hangs down head, waters his eyes with
tears, and wearieth his heart with sighs, and finds no rest in his soul
for sorrow of sins, neither should he ever find rest at all, were it not for
this redemption which is in Christ. The state of a forlorn castaway.
For the reprobate who has no part in this salvation, how many bees has he
in his head, how many pegs in his heart, how many very helles in his soul, how
many traiterous thoughts that trouble him everlastingly? Even such is the force
of sin, where sinners are left to themselves.

But Christ our blessed Savior has taken that upon him, that we could not
bear, and has endured the curse of the Law, not for the sins of one man, or
in one kind, but for the sins of all the world Sufficiently, and for all the
sins of al sorts in all his chosen Effectually, to their full and final
redemption.

If now there be any that can challenge any part of this ransom, let him
commense his action against our Savior that has taken, and against Paul that
has prescribed and given him the whole glory of man's redemption, as who only
sustained (being not only man, but God and man) the insupportable weight of
sin, in satisfieng for sin, in pacifieng the Father, in answering his
justice, in enduring the curse and malediction of the Law.

From what things we are redeemed.
O my brethren, let Papists ride upon a reed, or catch hold on a ragge of a
tottered good work, this, and only this is our redemption which has redeemed
us from the intolerable yoke, the importable burden, and the insufferable curse
of the Law, from that servile fear, and legal terror which the Law
induces, wherein Austins short and sweet difference (being well understood)
betwixt the Law and the Gospel appears, which he delivered to be in two
words: FEAR and LOVE. We love good works under the Gospel, according to
the rule of the Law, but we fear not the curse of the Law, wanting that
perfection which in right it requires, for we are redeemed and ransomed, our
debt is paid, and our curse was abolished when our Savior was crucified. We
love him, and in love we live well. but in case especially of life everlasting,
we lean to no other redemption, than to his Cross, for so we live, as we
love, and so we love as we believe, and so we believe as we know, and we know
in part: Ergo we believe, we love, we live, but in part as we should. And a
partial perfection, a maimed imperfect performance of the Law, alas what can it
do? It is imperfect, so that still, and ever when we have done what we can,
we have done but that was but due, and therefore not deserving, for due is
duty and debt, and no desert. Nay we cannot do so much as we should, or if we
could do all, yet we were unprofitable. And therefore this is our refuge, and
only resolution to cleave to remission of, and unto the redemption from our
sins. And with what face can one and the same mouth crave his pardon, and
challenge his guerdon? Believe in Christ, and trust in merits? Once again:
this is the truth we hold, and the trust we have, Christ is our redemption.

The blessing comes by promise.
3 The blessing of Abraham then comes unto many promised by God in Christ, and
received by faith. For the promise of the spirit, the spiritual promise
requires no humane fleshly help, but a firm faith altogether relying upon
the goodness of the promiser. So that justification, bliss and the heavenly
inheritance comes by promise, and if by promise, then not by the Law, verse
18. This our adversaries see well enough, and yet against the hear, Rhemish
test. page 430.
I fear me, against their own conscience they rave and rail at this truth,
and call the words of the holy Ghost, A frivolous and a false evasion of
heretics. Because we say That heaven is our reward not due to works, (not
due to the Law) but to the promise of God. Is this a frivolous or a false, or
an evidently false evasion? Or is it a shift or an evasion of heretics? Verily
if this be heresy, we worship our God and receive his free promise according
to the way which you call heresy. But in calling us heretics, you term
Saint Paul an heretic, you charge the holy Ghost with heresy. And no marvel.
Old ignorant Priests say: that S. Pole was a Saint, but Paul was an heretic.
Your old Priests were wont like bold blind-baiards to vouch upon their
priesthood that Paul was an heretic. Yea even the old famous Fugger was
content at length that Gesner should teach his children some piece of the
Testament, but in any case they should not be trained up in any of Paul's
Epistles. For doubtless Paul was a very Protestant, a perfect professor of the
truth, which pardoners, mass priests, and merit-mongers cried out against.

In the question of Salvation, Paul stands ever upon Grace, Mercy, Favor,
Gift, Faith, and the promise, etc. And if by these, and namely, If by promise,
then not by the Law, verse. 18. But these words savor of heresy, belike; o
come not near them, least they infect, and make thee an heretic, like unto
Paul.

Nay, my Brethren, embrace them, and bind them up as a treasure, and bear in
thy breast, lay them to thy heart as the only treacle of thy soul against the
day of temptation, and the assault of the cruel find.

The promise rises from the goodness of him, who promised, not from the deserts
of men to whom God made his promise.
Thy works when thou wast not, could not provoke God to promise a due stipend
unto them as deserving, when they were not: but his promise was as ishuing out
of himself, and therefore free and gracious, and so not meritted and deserved.
And if this be heresy, by this heresy we live, and in this heresy we trust
to end our days, hoping after this immortality to enjoy that free promised
inheritance through Jesus Christ our Savior.

15 Brethren, (I speak according to man) though it be but a man's testament,
when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate or adds thereto.

There are three principal matters handled by our Apostle in the residue of
this chapter. 1. First, that inuiolably the promise was so to be received, as
it was delivered. 2. Then in whom the promise was made. 3. Thirdly when and at
what time it was solemnly ordained.

For the due respect of the promise to be in sense so constered, as it was
meant by the intendment of the promiser, without adding or alteration, the
Apostle condescendeth to the capacity of a common example in man's ordinary
experience. I speak according to man. After the manner of men, taking the best
way to be understood. The plainest teacher is the best teacher.
Where, by the way I note: that the plainest way of teathing is best. Not to
fetch and skir about without distinct proofs in doctrine, and fit application.

Vain affectation in preaching.
As the ignorant loose talker is no preacher, so the curious Corinthian Orator
is no right instructor. Colors of vain affectation, minsing of phrases,
bravery of speech, pruning every syllable as the Dove her feathers, is not
worth a feather. Saint Paul speaks not to show himself in the wisdom of
words. Apollo in the Acts is reported to be eloquent, but withal his might was
out of the Scriptures. Lime is white and fair, but stone and sand, firm and
strong downright precepts do better in the building up of a good
understanding. Spiders webbes and curiosities are little worth, plain
parables, easy similitudes, most familiar, and best known are ever best.

God that made the preachers tongue could have made it as woonderfully glorious
as man could wish, but he will not have his Gospel so uttered, his Christ so
preached, our faith so instructed, his truth so taught. He commands the
conscience, he seeks not to please the itching ear. The curious ear is not
the good ear.
And by such intising words the simplicity of the Gospel leeseth her proper
effect. For the Lord deals with you as with his children, and you must
attentively listen what he commands you by us, and not respect the frame of
our sentences, or the conueiance of a Rhetorical grace of utterance.

Curiosiry in the Country.
O Lord, Oxford should not, neither does it sin so deeply in this sin, as does
the country. Young men, coming latelier from their secular studies, and
labors in humane learninges, come unto you, God be thanked for them, and a
while retain some more remnantes and spoils of Egypt than either their elders
do, or themselves will afterward, being farther enriched by longer travel and
exercise in the book of God: and will you make and force their ensamples even
against their wills to prejudice a daiely or a weekly endeavor in a discreet,
a distinct, and in a careful and most plain manner of delivery? You may not.
De conducendo loquitur iam Rhetore Thule. The country now can brook nothing
but a flaring, gaudy garish eloquence falsely so called. When saint Paul
speaks after the manner of men, he means not thereby to tickle the ears
of vain men, but to affect their hearts, and to enstruct their souls, and
the rather by this his plainnes. And that is eloquence indeed.

He that has wealth and wit withal, will never be without his will and
Testament made while he is in perfect health.
Now to the Apostles purpose, his plain proof is a comparatiue proof drawn
from the testamentes of men, which men of old were ever willing to make, being
far unlike our unwise worldlinges now adays, that either dare not for fear,
least a wise and advised making of a will should cause them to die the sooner,
forsooth; or else for private respects they care not like infidels, if their
friends and familes go together by the ears, and fight for their goods after
their discease, as it were Dogs for a bone. Whom because the examples of
Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, and of many others cannot move, yet me
thinks, they should be as careful as was Achitophel, first to put their
house in order before they put their foot into the grave. Who so lists to
see a large scholerly reckoning in this case, John Wolphius is as plentiful as
any I have seen for this matter in his Commentaries on the second of Kings.

Corrupters of Testaments.
Now once again for the Apostles reason, he argues thus: If a man make a will
and testament if should be inviolable, and it is a villainy to corrupt a man's
testament. Look to it you which be witnesses in wills. But what is man to God?
Between the Majesty of the Almighty God, and the state of man, there is no
ratable respect. But if a man make a will, it must not be altered in part, nor
abrogated in whole. See it in a case: If I be the adopted son of a man,
only upon condition that I accept thereof. And when I have made acceptance,
may others, pretending neerenes of kin, or upon what pretense soever else,
annex other conditions of their own devising? By no means so.

If men deal, or should deal thus with men, may man deal worse with God?
Ier. 35.14.
The children of Recab obeyed their father, and dwelt in tents, and drank not
wine because their father commanded them so. The Lords promises of grace and
favor whereby we are his adopted children, are his covenants, his will, his
testament. The seed of woman shall bruise the serpents head. This promise was
first made in paradise, but because it was more solemnly ratified with Abraham,
that in his seed al nations should be blessed, the Apostle cited the promise
confirmed with Abraham. And this was gods covenant, his promise, his testament
to be laid up and kept unviolable in the Arc of every good conscience, and
to dispose otherwise of this his Testament, than it pleased him the maker of
the will, is to despice the testator, albeit thou deal therein upon never so
good a mind. Gods doing needs not mandeuisings.
For what I pray are men's minds to gods will, our dregs to his wine, our devises
to his promises, our Codicils (as it were) to his perfect Testament?

The Painter exposes his workmanship to the view and correction of wise and
skilful sightes, because many eyes may see more than one. It is not so with the
only wise God, he needs not our counsels either for his own glory, or for
man's behoof. Wherefore what need the addition of the Law to be mingled with
his free promise? Why rather submit we not our selves to his will, and our wills
to his word, and blessed covenant and testament? Why subscribe we not to his
only mercy rather than to a counterfeit will pretending his mercy, but not
only mercy wherein his will was ordained? For the better clearing of this
point, harken farther what Paul says.

16 Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not, and to
the seed as of many, but, And to thy seed, as of one which is Christ.

17 And this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before of god in
respect of christ, the Law was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot
disanul that it should make the promise of none effect.

18 For if the inheritance [ be] of the Law, [ it is] no more by the promise,
but God gave it freely unto Abraham by promise.

The Pharisees thought that al in all was in Abraham's person, and in his
posterity after the flesh. Saint Paul shows that the root of the blessing
was neither in him nor in his al along descending naturally, but IN A SEED,
not in seeds, as in many, nor in any, but only in the promised seed, and
this seed he expressy means to be Christ: To thy seed as of one which is
Christ: the seed of the woman, the seed of seeds, the spiritual Isaac, the
seed of Abraham, the author of life, the bound of all the promises which is
Christ performed. And such as is the performance, such was the promise. Saint
Paul tells us this seed was but one, for Christ is but one. Wherefore in the
way of salvation, we repair neither to Abraham, nor to Abraham's race, much
less to other men or means, but only to the promise, which had his
accomplishment fully and wholly in Christ.

In few, out of the former respects I gather these short inferences and
conclusions: 1. The blessing is of promise, ergo free, and not of deeds
foregoing or foreseen. 2. The blessing was a free gift to Abraham, ergo most
free. 3. The blessing was in one certain seed, ergo not in many. 4. And in one
alone, ergo not in any thing else, and this one was Christ accordingly
performed, as he was first promised to be the sole and only Savior
all-sufficient of all that trust in him to be saved.

1 Yet over and above the former considerations, the observation of the time
when the promise was granted to Abraham makes the matter quite out of doubt
touching the freeness of the promise.

This covenant of the promise was made, and a bargain is a bargain amongst
men, Gods promises are infallibly constant.
but God is not as man that he can rise and sit, eb and flow, neither will he
repent, but where he promises, and as he freely promised, so will he not
after and change his promises.

This promise and covenant was made fourteen hundred and thirty years before
the Law was made in mount Horeb. It was made, and shall it not stand? The Law
moral given in the mountain cannot be joined with Christ.
It was made so long before, and shall the Law (I say the Law not ceremonial
as the Papists do, but the Law of the two tables, and the ten commandementes
made in mount Horeb:) Shall this Law coming so long after disanull the Lords
former promise? God is not contrary to himself either in the essence and
substance of his being, or in order or tenor of his doings and sayings. His
promise is a promise, and as it was free at first in the promise, so is it free
in the perfourmance, free then, and free now, and for ever free. For Gods
after-doinges do not thwart or contrary his former deeds, which must needs
be if Righteousness should come by the Law.

19 Wherefore then [ serued] the Law? It was added because of transgressions,
till the seed came, unto the which the promise was made: and it was ordained
by Angels in the hand of a mediator.

20 Now a mediator is not of one; but God is one.

1 When the Law entered, and what that infers ferreth has been said: Now
see, 2. why it entered, and in whom it ended.

2 It entered because of transgressions, to teach us our faults, and so to
train us to Christ, in whom it ended. Yea when the Law was first made in great
majesty by the reason of the presence of angels and other circumstances of
great reverence, eue^ then it was ordained in the The variety of expositions
upon this place is an endless laberinth. I have shortly paraphrased what I
think.
hands, and in strength of a mediator to follow. And a mediator is of things
different in themselves and contrary. Wherefore the Law and the promise are
contrary and not one, though God in giving his Law, and in making the promise
be one. Yet because the former reason might be misconstred, as if Paul said
that in all respects they were contrary, he questioneth as follows.

21 Is the Law then against the promise of God? God forbid: for if there had
been a Law given which could have given life, surely righteousness should have
been by the Law.

22 But the Scripture has concluded al under sin, that the promise by the
faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe.

How the Law is contrary and not contrary to the promise.
These words ( Is the Law then contrary to the promise? God forbid.) may seem
to revoke what I said right now. For I showed that they were contrary, and I
say they are contrary. But (my brethren) mistake me not, but mark (I pray you)
mark what I say, and how I vouch all that I say out of our Apostle: If there
had been a law which could have given life, then what needed Christ? If the
Scriptures had not concluded men under sin, what had needed the promise? So
that the Law fulfilled (if it could be) by men, is contrary to the promised
salvation by God. But when we look into the glass of the Law showing our
transgressings, into the Scriptures concluding al, Romans 3.9.
even A L, without exception of any, under sin, the Law and Scriptures send us
and school us to Christ, and so the Law being thus lawfully used is not
contrary to the promise, God forbid, but a serviceable help to drive us to
Christ, in whom we find that which the Law will never allow us.

If we seek life in the Law, it is a killing letter; if salvation, it works
condemnation; if righteousness, it concludes all under sin; if rest, it is
a temporal ordinance and endured but till the seed came, and in the seed was
made the free promise, and is obtained the perfect blessing by faith in Christ
of all that believe. The Law considered in it self, what it works
The Law cannot teach thus much, but he that looks into the law, and sees
his sins will seek for help, I wis not in his deeds, or in the Law: Mat.
13.
and when he has found it in the Gospel, he will not leave it for all the
geld, Jewels and treasures in the world.

23 But before faith came we were kept under the Law, as under a garrison, and
shut up unto that faith which should afterward be revealed.

24 Wherefore the Law was our schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be made
righteous by faith.

25 But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmasters.

The lawful use of the Law was, and some-way to some may be in cases, to be by
resemblance, 1. A prison, 2. A schoolmasters, 3. A tutor. A prison for the
guilty, a schoolmasters for the unskillful, A tutor as it were to the ward and
pupil. For this third similitude, we will debate more in the beginning of the
next Chapter.

The Law a prison.
1 For the first similitude of the three, no doubt they which were in prison,
and felt what it was to be in prison, and what it was to be delivered, longed
to be delivered. And when the deliverance came, which was Christ, the keeper
yielded up his keys, the door of the prison was opened, and the prisoners set
at that good liberty which we call, and is a Christian liberty, no carnal
security.

The Law a schoolmaster.
2 The Law also was a schoolmasters, and that in two respects: either because
of their ceremonies, or else for their morals. The ceremonies kept the Jews in
on every side, and sequestered them from other people: the decalog and moral
Law follows them hard and drives them and us all to confess our weakness,
and so schooleth us to crave aid of Christ, because it was utterly impossible
to reach home, and to attain unto the haven of blessedness by the Law, and so
the Law in this meaning becomes deseruice-able to force us to Christ, and
being now in Christ, our dutiful obedience proceeds of faith and trust in
his mercy, not upon a performance of his Law, which if we could and did
perform, Christ might be excluded. For why came Christ, but to free us from
the prison, and to take us out of the hand of our former schoolmaster? These
similitudes are pregnant and plain to this sense, and to this sense only Paul
does apply them.

26 For ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus.

27 For ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

28 There is neither Jew, nor Grecian, there is neither bond, nor free: there
is neither male, nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

29 And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise.

And when we are once preferred unto, and received of Christ, 1. We are the
sons of God in Christ, 2. We are baptized into Christ, 3. We have put on
Christ. Here is no mention of the Law, here is no difference of peoples, Jew or
Grecian, no distinction in condition, bond or free: no respect of sex, male,
or female. All are one in christ. and if we be Christ's, it follows by
necessary sequel that we are Abraham's seed, and heirs of the promise without
the Law now, as well as he was, long before the Law was made.

O Christian man, what art thou? Know thy calling and consider the blessed
state of Christian profession: thou art the son of God, but by what means?
Through faith. In whom, and by whose merit? In Christ.

Christian Baptism disproueth justification by the Law.
As many things demonstrate this truth, so in the Church does baptizme being
received of all sorts and sexes generally most evidently declare the same.

The bath of thy regeneration does tell thee who art baptized into Christ, that
thou thereby have an entrance into his family, and can not serve any master
but him.

And as when men enter into a Bathe, they put off all their apparel before
they enter: so all else, Law and nature, works of either, and al must be put
off, that christ may be put on. Revel. 12.1.
Vestis virum indicat. It thou be a Christian, thou art only cladde with
Christ. The whole Church in the revelation walks and treads all mutable
things under her feet, and she is attired only with the Son of
righteousness, with the cloth of his spinning, and which was made of that wol
that he the innocent and immaculate Lamb of God did bear.

The motive of being of the religion they were baptized in.
Many among you say they will be of the religion they were baptized in. And so
we desire them to be, and not in part, but even altogether of the same
religion they were baptized into. For will ye live as ye believe? But will you
believe as you were baptized? We require no more.

The substance of Baptism preserved in the mids of Popery.
By the special providence of God aminds the contentions not only of old in
the Church of Corinth the very form of Baptizme was retained, but also in
later times of greatest corruption the substance of Baptizme was preserved. I
speak not of spetle in the child's mouth, of salt in the water, or oil in his
breast, of the Priests breathings, and such like impertinent superstitions. But
for the form and substance of Baptism, it was preserved, and therein ye were
baptized into Christ and have put on Christ, if ye be Christ's. And now dear
brethren and Christians, be of this religion on Gods name, and in Gods behalf
I heartily pray you, which if you will be seriously and entirely and as you
should, the Dagon of al Popery will fall and break to fitters before this Arc,
and then you shall be indeed as you are or would be in name, true Christians,
right Catholics, the very seed of Abraham and heirs of the promise, made in
that one seed, by whom and in whom all happiness does come and consist.

And it would be noted distinctly here in the last verse of this chapter,
which was touched before, that all who believe are called the seed and right
posterity of Abraham, but yet that there was, and is but one seed, which is
Christ, by whom his whole seed and race else are blessed according to the faith.

How man is made blessed in the seed of man.
And albeit it seem in the eye of a reasoning head, a very hard and impossible
thing, that blessing should come at all by the seed of any man, yet this is a
case beyond the reach of reason, and rules of nature. By nature, who can say my
heart is clean, much less the seed, and that in such an effect as to cleanse
others? And yet by that one seed is meant the person of Christ, and by Abraham's
seed is generally meant the whole race of believers, yet with all the very
matter of propagation is thereby inferred and therefore named. Luck. 1.
And our Savior was the very seed of the woman, the seed of Abraham, and and
the fruit of the virgins womb, perfect man, and yet far from sin. How may this
be? How? What if I ca^ not tell how in reason, a stone should be cut of the
mountain without hands, how the dry and dead stock of Iessy should spring
and fructify, how a virgin should conceive and bear a child, and yet remain
a virgin? These are articles of faith, and not of sense, nor of reason.

Man's corruption is and was in his qualities, and not in his substance.
This is sure, the seed of man, and man in his substance was not corrupted with
Adams fall, for then Christ taking the substance of our nature should have
been sinful in nature, but he was like and of the same substance, yet was
there this difference only of his being far from sin in the qualities of
man in sinning, and all this well was and might be, because he was not simply
man of the seed of man, but God manifested in the flesh, and Marie his Mother
conceauing him, she being ouer-shadowed by the holy Ghost. The powerful virtue
whereof does sanctify yea many a man in good part even in this woorld. And as
after our dissolution from this world immediately our souls, and our bodies at
the resurrection generally in the twinkling of an eye, and moment of time
shall be purified before they enter that place, whereinto Revel. 21.27.
No impure thing can enter: So great reason that the cause of our entrance into
Heaven should be, as no doubt he was, deuoid of sin, a most blessed seed,
though a seed, yet a seed blessing and imparting of his blessedness, whereby
we are heirs and coheires with him, and by him of everlasting bliss. And
this is the mystery of piety, The incarnation of Christ, a matter to be
believed, and not to be argued or talked of, but with dew aw, and that out of
the express Scriptures, for our greater comfort and constancy in believing. (*)

CHAP. IIII.
1 THEN I say, that the heir as long as he is a child differs nothing from a
servant, though he be Lord of all,

2 But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the Father.

3 Even so, we, when we were children, were in bondage under the rudimentes of
the woorlde.

The Law resembles the office of a tutor.
THE third Simile is of a tutorshippe which remains to be explicacated in the
entry of this Chapter, yet therefore the less to be debated because of our
former examples tending to one and the same end already handled.

If the father discease in the nonage of his child where wisdom is not, and
discretion wants to dispose and order his patrimony, the Father by will
appoints tutors. In common experience this is an ordinary course.

God for purposes best known to his eternal wisdom, and finding defects in
his people, the Jews, to bridle them from farther inconveniences, he bounded
them in with ordinances, and as it were tutored them by such orders as was best
for them and for that time. And as children are foolish to choose their own
tutors, so the Jews were to serve, and to be ruled, though being children, yet
as it were servants under the rudimentes of his Law, til the time of perfecter
age. Wherein appears. 1. The defect in men under the Law, who were as
pupils, and though they were heirs, yet in usage were they dealt with as with
Servants, and 2. The dignity, full age and perfection under the Gospel.

4 But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his son made of a
woman and made under the Law,

5 That he might redeem them, which were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons.

Curiosity in Gods actions is not good.
When the fulness etc. A foolish fly can no sooner see a light, but it flies
into it. Man naturally is given rather to know what he cannot learn, than to
do what he knows, and should learn, to the end to do thereafter.

If the Kings of Persia might wear a Lawne before their faces because they
would not be commonly seen, why may not the King of Kings, the invisible God
keep the reason of his doings under the veil of his own determinations and
counfels, or why was it forbidden men to run before or to pry into, or to
press too near the Arc, but to repress man's vain humor in quareling with or
enquiring after the causes and reasons of Gods dealings? To this very same end
Paul here entering into the declaration of the coming of our Savior, to
mussel the mouth that is open ever to question, why he came but now, and why
not before, he shows the fulness of time was not til then.

God does al things in number, in measure and weight, in order, and time. There
is no confusion in his actions, though he keep the causes secret to himself.
And what man is worthy to be of the privy counsel of the Almighty God? There
was a time prefixed by God, and that should content man. When the fullness of
that time was brim full, then, and not before then, he performed his purposed
will.

He could, he that is Almighty could have with a word, ipse dixit, he spoke the
word, and al things were created, he could if he would have made all the whole
Fabric and furniture of the world in a moment. But he would not. Why? It is a
vile, an Atheists and an impious ( WHY.) He did not, and therefore he would not.
For whatsoever he would, he has done both in heaven and in earth.

The causes of the course of things in ordinary events are not known to man.
Thou curious man, answer me but to the least, why, that I shall ask. Why
was thou not borne, as soon as thou were begotten? Nay why was thou begotten
at al, and not rather framed as God made Adam? And when thou art borne, why art
thou not an old man strait? Why is not every black hear gray and hory in an
instant? Why is it not high noone at the rising of the sun? If time be
required in these things and in the like, and if in the requiring of time,
recourse also must necessarily be made to God so ordering the process of
things to have a forth by pase and pase, and by degrees, by little and little,
til there be a ripenes in continuance, I pray thee why, may not God appoint a
fulness of time for the sending of his son into the world, but thou must put
in thy quare, and thy why?

For shame lay hand upon thy mouth, subscribe to his will, resign thy self up
to his wisdom, adore his counsels, and be not curious in any of his doings.
For he that is curious in any, will be ouercurious in many. There is no stay
in folly. It is an 2 King. 20.10.
easier thing for the sun as Ezechias said, to go on extraordinarily many
degrees, because it is naturally prone to go on, than to return back against
his course but a few: so curiosity is soon emboldned, but hardly repressed,
and seldom reformed.

In the fulness of time God sent his Son made of woman, and made under the Law,
that he might redeem them which etc. Wherein is set forth, 1. The person of
Christ, and 2. His office.

The person of Christ fully laid forth.
1 His person is being God sent his son, and being man made of a woman. The wise
Grecian, and the wilful Heretic at the very hearing hereof are at their
wits ends, and quite besides themselves. Eutyches denies the Godhead,
Nestorius the manhood, Marcian the body, Apollinaris the soul of our Savior.

The natural man considers only natural things, he knows that every
child has a father that begets, and a Mother that bears, but these things
in Christ he cannot find, he knows less herein than is storied of
Melchisedeck, whose parents are unknown. And indeed therein was Melchisedeck
a type of Christ
Melchisedeck a type of Christ.

So was he. For according to his humanity Christ was without a natural
father, and according to his divinity without mother. And yet notwithstanding
was he begotten of his father before al worlds, and borne of his mother in the
woorld at the fulness of time, being the Son of God and the son of a woman.
The son of God, and such as is the father, such is the son. The father God,
ergo the son God also. And the Son of Marie. Such as is the Mother, such is
the fruit of her womb: and therefore because the Mother was a woman, her son
is a man, even the man Jesus perfect God and perfect man, having both natures
absolutely united in one person, our Immanuel, god with us, equal to the father
touching his godhead, inferior to the father touching his manhood. Equal to
the father as being in the Phil. 2.6.
form of God, inferior to the father, as being in the form of a servant,
man. Wherefore in essence, being, substance, and nature he was both. Forma dat
esse, and he was formally and therefore verily both. Equal to his father as
being the personal word of his father Job. 1.1.
in the beginning eternally, with God coequally, and very God essentially, and
yet inferior to the father, as the word became flesh, dwelt amongst men,
was made man, and manifested in the flesh by infallible arguments: he hungered,
thirsted, waked, slept, and slept in a ship like a poor natural man
ouer-wearied with labor, and he slept so soundly, that neither the rufnesse
of the sea, nor the rage of the tempests, nor his Disciples redoubling Luke
8.24.
their calling (Master, Master) could skant awake him. He was tempted in the
wilderness, reproched in the cities, and skourged in the hal, and crucified, and
made a curse, and a subject to the Law in every point, yet these things also
concern rather his office, but such was his person.

2 The office of Christ.
His office, which he erecuted to the full, was in one word: to redeem them
which were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons.
Wherefore the servitude under the Law, and the adoption to be Sons are two
diverse and contrary things, and cannot stand together. For Christ's office was
to redeem us, first from the Law before we might be received into the
adoption to be Sons. And thus was the natural Son of God made after a
supernatural manner very man, that of servants, we might be made Sons.

And if we will needs require reason in the greatest work of God, Why Christ
should be both God and man to the effectual performance of his office.
great reason was it the hy-Priest of the new Testament, and mediator
between God and man should be both God and man in the execution of this
pearlesse function: God whereby he might preuail by his equal ominnipotent
power, with the father, and likewise was it requisite he should be man, that
being like to his brethren in all respects, sin excepted, he might have a
full experience of all the infirmities, wherewith man is beset.

Neither did Christ what he did and endured only in that proportion, as he
is the head and the Church his body, the head with the body mystically, but
truly so called: but also in the days of his flesh, he and only he satisfied
the Law, and that by his personal and proper satisfaction and sacrifice we are
redeemed from the Law, and ransomed from the curse.

Into this his office under heaven nothing must intrude. The Pelagian, the
Jew, the Papist, will find it a matter of greater charge and cost, than our
impure nature, or the impossible Law, or our imperfect works can defray and
perform. All abilities, congruities, dignities, co^dignities, welwilling, or
our best woorking can never make us Sons: and when we are Sons, we are
thereby heirs not of a first supposed justification alone, but heirs of all that follows after, even of salvation in heaven: The fraction of two
iustifications is a fond division and a false.
that frappet or fraction of two iustifications, and of double inheritaunces is
but a puppet of Papists devising, as if Christ's office should have bin to
deliver us first that we might be redeemers of our selves afterward. No no.
For we men bring never a farding to the payment, neither of our first as they
call it, nor as we speak to our full and final redemption, and namely to our
salvation, to life everlasting, which is Romans 6.23.
the gift of God.

S. Paul could have made the division if it had bin a right division, partly to
God, and partly to man, if Christ could have parted stakes in a matter of such
importance that brought him being very God from the top of heaven and the bozom
of his father, that he might be the only giver, and we but the receauers of our
redemption from the Law, and adoption to be Sons.

6 And because ye are Sons, God has sent the spirit of his son into your
hearts which cries Abba, Father.

7 Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son: now if a son, then
also the heir of God through Jesus Christ.

The working of the trinity in the salvation of man and in the assurance
thereof.
In the woork of our happy redemption see the gracious goodness of the holy
Trinity, by all means woorking a clear understanding in us, that we may know
and acknowledge both what we are, and by whom.

The father sends the spirit, even the spirit? of his son into our hearts.
Wherein we see and observe the evident * distinction of the persons, and
therein the Scriptures are plain, that the persons are three distinctly. 1.
The Father, 2. The Son, 3. The Holy Ghost. 1. The Father who gave his Son
and sent his spirit. 2. The Son who gave himself: And 3. whose the spirit
is, even the spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son, and these three
are one.

In sense I can distinguish many things that in nature differ not, for example:
The ye, the snow, and the water, and yet all these three are of one substance,
and of a watrie nature. But neither sense nor reason can deal in these cases,
it is our Creed. There is a blessed Trinity in a sacred Unity, Quod lego,
credo. I read it in Scripture, and therefore believe it in heart, and leave
off to reason whereof I cannot, and I may not reason.

Well. God sent the spirit of his Son into the hearts of us his sons.
Sons by nature, and sons by adoption.
So that he is the Son, and we the sons of God; he by nature, and we by
adoption through Christ, whereupon the Apostle makes these collections: If we
be sons, and sons of a ripe judgment, out of our nonage and wardship of
the Law, farewell al servile fear, nay, because we are sons God has sent
his spirit, which cries in our hearts that which a carnal heart could never
bring forth, Abba Father. And because we are Sons, by consequent we are
heirs: but how? Through Christ, Sons through Christ, Heirs through Christ,
sealed and settled with that prerogative, and most singular privilege of the
holy spirit of Christ.

The Papist like an Atheist iesteth at the spirit of God, in the sons of God:
but what marueil if men laugh at that, they know not what it means? But if
they were the children of God, and inheritours of heaven, they might know, that
they are not Christ's, who want his spirit, even this crying spirit.

The certainty of salvation most assured by the spirit of God and other
infallible grounds. Heb. 4.
A wavering mind has a stammering tongue in the case of his salvation. But the
spirit of christ cries, and has an audible voice in the consciences of
Christians. The Ankerite speaks simperingly and hollowly, as it were with the
mouth of death out of his grate, but the spirit opens and culargeth our
hearts, and forces forth a bold and a free confession, and therein we have
access even as Gods dear Children unto the throne of grace, and not unto a
terrible consistory, or tribunal of fear, but a most gracious Father, and
merciful God.

Alas, alas Popery flies after butterflies, and beats the air, and aims
at uncertainties: alas it knows neither the right means, nor the perfect
certainty of man's salvation. But (brethren) faith is a sure ground: Hope is an
infallible anchor: with God there is no variablenes: his promises are all yea
and Amen: his spirit does not speak, but Romans 8.
cry thus much in our hearts. Neither is it an uncertain sound, or a false
alarm, it is the cry of his spirit. I could dilate and I have debated these
things in a treatise of Nature and Grace, which you have in you. hands, and
therefore I refer you thereunto, where purposely I have refuted their
chiefest arguments which either Master Stapleton or Pigghius (both being
chief Papists) have brought in this matter, greeuing the spirit of God as much
as in them lies, The spirit rese^bled to a seal,
whereby we are sealed unto the day of our redemption, I say whereby we are
sealed. For thereby are we sealed, and this seal is set and imprinted on the
hearts of Christians.

To an ernest penny,
The spirit is also called an earnest penny, a perfect assurance of a greater
sum, and a full payment, which shall be discharged in heaven. To an inunctio^.
Likewise it is termed an inunction, the anointing of God, whereby we are
inaugurated and destrinated to an infallible inheritance certainly reserved in
the hands of a strong keeper against that famous day of our redemption. And
therefore they who are Sonns, are Heirs, and they who are Heirs shall inherit.
So says, nay so cries the spirit.

Papists seek to infirm this faith, to weaken our hope, to call Gods
promises into question, and with outcries to confound the cry of the spirit.
But thou who art the Son of God, in thy bozome, in thy breast, in thy heart
thou have, thou bear a spirit that defieth, and cries out upon all
doubtfulnes and Popish despair.

In the seventh chapter of Toby, Toby. 5
when young Tobyas came to Ecbatane, and after questioning, Raguel had learned
that he was old Tobyas his son, Raguel leaped and kissed him, and blessed
him, and said unto him: Thou art the son of a good and honest man. If Raguel
did this in respect of Tobyas parentage, why do not our adversaries as Raguel
did, and what should Toby the Son do in respect of himself, that he was
the Son of such a Toby? Yea what, what should he do that feels in his faith,
and finds in his soul, that he is the Son, not of a good and honest man,
but of the good and loving god? Should he not joy in heart, or should he fear
and tremble, and doubt of his estate? But in the former story Raguel was right
sorry, and wept when he was informed that old Toby had lost his sight, and was
blind. Even so verily, whose heart does not bleed to see the blindness of our
adversaries, that are not only deprived of the light of this comfort, but
desire also that no man else may see any more than they do themselves?

Flesh is frail, Satan is a tempter, sins do terrify us, the law accuses
and accurseth, and popery tells us there is no certain help nor hope in
Christ, except you merit by woorks: and by what woorks? Or else you fry in
purgatory, or purchase a pardon, or kill a Queen, or betray our country, and
this is the only compendious method to be assured of heaven: believe them who
list, for faithful subjects, and the Sons of God cannot. Yet is it more than
strange that men can trust in villains, more than in God who never deceived
any that trusted in him. Trust in God (brethren) Johan. 16.33.
Confidite, Mat. 9.2.
co^fide fili, trust confide^tly. Build thine house upon the rock, and dwell
in safety, and rest in peace. He will not deceive his servants, muchlesse his
sons. Thou art his son, thou have his spirit, the ernest penny, the pawn,
the pledge, the inunction, the cry of his spirit.

A man may talk of honey, that cannot taste the sweetness thereof.
I do not deny many, as the Enthusiast, the Family of love, and their like, may
iangle of the spirit, who are not spiritual, may talk of the book of life,
whose names were never written in the check and register of Israel. But these
proud Cedars and great Oaks, that seem to stand, but stand not indeed, when
they fall, their fall wilbee great, and the fiar durable that such fuel makes:
But he that stands in Christ, shall stand for ever. He that is engraffed into
Christ, shall grow, flourish, and fructify, his leaf, his life shall never
fade. He that is once Christ's can never be but Christ's. A wind out of the
wilderness may ouer-throwe the house where Jobs children were banketing, but
Jobs heart was fixed sure, Job. 18.15.
Etiamsi occidat, tamen sperabo, If God should kill Job, yet would Job live in
hope and trust in God: no, the gates of hell, and power of satan cannot
prevail against the children of God. Of them whom the Father gave to Christ,
he Ioh. 18.9.
lost not any one. Judas the lost child, was among the rest, but not of them,
and when he fell away, he went into his own place. Wherefore all the time he
seemed to be a disciple, and a believer, it was but a seeming and putatiue
supposal either in himself, or unto others. It was but a shooting star, no
firm light, a false noise, no true cry of the holy ghost.

Because the fool thinks himself wise, and is not: therefore does not
wisdom know that she is wise?
But what then? What concludes the Papist out of this? Some may seem to stand,
to be in Christ, to be Gods Sons, to have his spirit, and all in vain.
True. What then? Ergo the cry of the spirit is uncertain: Ergo the being and
continuing in Christ is not certain. Yea? There is a difference between
seeming to be, and being indeed. There is great ods betwixt a flash of a
fancy, and a faithful persuasion. But how shall I know whether my conceit be
right, whether my under standing be a glimmering light, or a true
understanding, whereas a fancifull man may persuade himself as thoroughly as
the faithful? As thoroughly? Say not so. Or if so, what then? If the mad man
standing on the shore, think all the vessels that come in, and their lading to
be his, and be deceived, shall not, cannot therefore the true owners discern
their own, and claim their right, because the mad man is deceived? Because the
sick persons mouth in his distemperature is out of taste, cannot therefore a man
in good health relish his drink and meat? Ioh. 3.
Qui credit, habet vitam. He that believes has life, he has it, he does not
doubt whether he has it or no. He has life, life everlasting.

I grant sometimes even the best children of God, are brought to narrow
straites, somewhat stops their cares, they cannot hear, somewhat dulleth
their hearts, they cannot understand what the spirit cries and seals unto
their hearts at all times alike, and yet they are their Lords, and they cannot
perish, and they must not despair.

David Abeit a man according to Gods own heart, and therefore no doubt a man in
whose heart the sport of God was in great measure: yet such is the frailty of
our nature, even holy David, and that after he had endured many storms,
vp-held with the promise that God would place him in the room of his master,
yet at the last he fainted, and faied in his infirmity: 1. Sam. 20.
that there was but a step between him and death, surely one day I shall fall
into the hands of Saul. And therefore he fled to Achis, and flattered the very
enemy of God. Notwithstanding after all this, reforming his frailty, and
coming to himself again, he found that God was faithful, and that his
promises were certain, and as constant as the sun, and vuremoueable as mount
Sion, and that ever God knows best, how long it is best to detain his own
upon the tenters.

No doubt when, like Dalila, a deceatfull suggestion, the subtle find, a
melancholy humor, infirm flesh, natural imperfections, or forceable
considerations what ever have done their woorst, jointly all, or severally any
of them, when they have learned where lies our strength, when they have
battered our strongest holds, when they have cut off Sampsons hair, yet this
hair will grow again, and his strength return, and that man or woman whom
the Lord so tries is the pure and perfect gold, and so in the end will prove.
1 Cor. 10. (...).
Only expect we in patience the Lords leisure, knowing assuredly that God will
make us a forth, and a way amids al temptations. Neither will he suffer his
children to be tempted above their measure. David had his Goliath, Sampson his
Lion to encounter with. God knew the measure of David's courage, and Sampsons
strength. Physicians give the strongest potions to the strongest bodies. And
health is most acceptable after the greatest sickness. And the joy of the sick
soul is then enlarged, when it returns after sorrow, and then is the cry of
the spirit heard with a quicker sense, when for a while it had not been heard
at al. And thus much for the consequent, that because we are sons, we are
therefore endued with his spirit, assuring us though not ever alike, Romans 9.
that we are his sons, and heirs, because it cries, and certifieth our
hearts, that God through Christ is become our father.

8 But even then, when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them, which by
nature are not Gods.

9 But now seeing ye know God, yea rather are known of God, how turn ye
again unto impotent and beggarly rudiments, whereunto as from the beginning ye
will be in bondage again?

10 Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.

11 I fear of you least, I have bestowed on you labor in vain.

The best way of discerning, is ever to compare matters, times, persons,
causes, conditions, and circumstances together. Paul takes this course, and
shows them, 1. What they were, they knew not God etc. 2. What they are, they
know God, or rather are known of God etc. 3. And therefore their relapse is
strange to the beggarly Elements, and thereupon he fears their greater
danger to ensue.

The effects of Ignorance.
The condition and state wherein the Galathians lived was in ignorance, and
living in ignorance of the living God, they served them, which by nature were
no Gods. For certes if they had known the true God, they would have served
him.

Ioh. 4.
The woman of Samaria if she had known with whom she talked, as Christ requested
water of her, so would she have craved of him the waters of eternal life.

Mat. 25.
The wise Virgins had their entrance with the bride, and have their due
commendation, for they were wise. But the folish virgins though virgins, yet
because they were fools and ignorant, reaped the sour fruit of their security,
and are reputed thereafter, and were excluded when the bride was entered.

Ephesians. 2.
The Ephesians to whom our Apostle writes the next Epistle, what were they? How
lived they? Read the second chapter. They followed the sway of this sinful
woorld, Satan led the dance, he went before, and they thronged after, their
whole conversation was altogether, in the lusts and will of the flesh. Ask ye
the reason? They were Aliants from the common wealth of Israel, they were
strangers from the covenant of the promise, they were in the same case were
these Galathians and all the Gentiles else, they had no hope, and were very
Atheists, that is, men without God. Ask ye why they were Atheists, why they
hoped not, why they trusted not in God? The answer is easy, and was laid
down in the words before: because they were strangers and unacquainted with
gods promises, Testimonies and Laws, because they were Aliantes from the
statutes and ordinances of his church and common wealth, because (in one word)
they knew not God, therefore they served false Gods, and by name Diana, and
cried out like man men, Acts. 19.
Magna est Diana Ephesiorum: Great is Diana the Gods of the Ephesians.

Read the thirteenth and the fourteenth Chapters of Wisdom, and you should see
it vouched that many inconveniences, specially Idolatry and the service of
strange gods and very Idols came in by Ignorance.

And were men's eyes in their heads, and their sight cleared and enabled, so as
to discern but indifferently, it were impossible that the wicked invention,
the doctrine of lying, the discipline of vanity, the multitude of Idolatrous
services should so prevail, and that men should serve as God, that which is
incomparably worse than man, that man made by his creation after the Image of
God, should creep to a material cross, gad to a shrine, say, my father, to
a piece of wood, yea that a man purposing to sail the Seas should call upon a
stock and a rotten Roode, more rotten than the vessel that carries him. But
ignorance is the mistres, the mother, and the nurse of this devotion, or rather
superstition.

Romans 4.21.
The Romans because they knew not God, they glorified him not, but became
unthankful, vanishing away in their Imaginations. And why? Their foolish hearts
were full of dareknesse. And being fools they turned the glory of God into the
similitude of innumerable, increadible and corruptible vanities. In this state
at the first were the Romans, the Ephesians, the Galathians etc. And al through
ignorance.

I could dilate and be long, and enter disputation with our known and nearest
adversaries, because of their introducing and bringing in, because of their
maintenance and supportation of intolerable Ignorance and Idolatry. I know they
have shifts, and distinctions curiously wrought: but spiders webs cannot hold
out wind or weather. The worshipping of Images.
The ignorant is ignorant, he knows not the difference they vainly make of
Douly and Latry, and Hyperdouly, and it is a toy, and greek as we say to the
people. And it is greek indeed and that to the English man, that knows
nothing but his own language. And in his ignorance, he creeps and
croucheth, lifts up hands and falls down, and adoreth all the Images in
their Temples, and knows little (God knows) what these sorry proportions and
terms mean. I ask you, do you know them? Douly, Latry, Hyperdouly? I know you
know them not.

O learn to know God, and thou will worship God alone, and in such sort as
himself has prescribed. But live in Ignorance, and strait thou rangest
inordinately, and seruest strange gods even as the children of Israel, when
the only God had wrought their strong delyuerance, yet sacrificed, and gave
the praise thereof even to a Calfe that eats hey.

And say not, say not brethren that you, you serve not strange gods for all
this. The Israelites said they worshipped God when they adored a Calfe, you
say you worship God, when you fall down before the Image of the father, before
the picture of his son or of his Saints: but they worshipped strange gods
notwithstanding, and so do you, in that you worship God after a strange
manner, which is not Gods-worshippe, but a will worship, and an idol of your
own devising, and that expressly against the scriptures, and all for want of
true knowledge and by reason of ignorance.

The making of Images.
Moses conuenting the people of Israel together commands on gods behalf on
this wise. In the day the Lord spoke unto you out of the mids of the fire in
mount Horeb, Deuteronomy. 4.
you hard a voice, you saw no similitude. Take heed therefore as you love your
souls, that ye make no graven Image, no representation of any figure, neither
of male, nor femal, nor of any creature. These words are clear and plain,
and need no commentary.

Esaie. 40.
The Prophet Esaias likewise is as vehement herein as was Moses: all people are
but a drop of a bucket full in comparison of the Lord. The woddes of Libanus
can neither find him fuel for friar, nor beasts for sacrifice. To whom shall
men liken so worthy a God? What similitude can set him forth? Shall the
Carpenter make him an Image, and the goold-smith cover it with gilt, or cast it
in a frame of silver plates?

Or because this is ouer-costly for the poorer sort, what shall the poor man
do? Get him into the Forest, and choose out a tree, and cause it to be
carved out?

O know ye nothing? Says the Prophet. As who would say, they are utterly
deuoid of understanding, and that it is an extremely ignorant extrauagant
imagination to deem that any protraiture or imagery of better or baser, either
matter or fashion can fit and frame out a conuement worship of the living and
eternal God.

For has not the Almighty imparted his pleasure herein, has he not made a
veil betwixt the seat of his glory, and the earth his footstool, betwixt
himself, and our sightes, that possibly we cannot see and discern him as he
is, and therefore must not go about to expres him in a dumb and earthly figure
as he is not? And to whom will thou make him like, whom thou have not seen?
Will thou make him like to whom he is not like, and to whom he neither can,
neither will be likened?

A graie headed man is a monument of our mortality, not an expression of the
Godhead of the father.
The form of an aged gray headed father with intent to declare his ancientnes,
because he is the ancient of days, is but a good intent falsely called good.
For there is no good intention without the direction of true faith, and a right
faith rests on the foundation and ground of the word of god well known and
wisely pondered, and the word of god is full and flat to the contrary, and
dare thou upon thine own head make him like an oulde man, whose years bring
age, and whose age brings death? Good Intentes, School distinctions, secret
traditions are the only foundation of images and imageworship.
Any secret tradition added to this intent to bolster it up, is but a basterd
slip, and the watering of it with some few fond distinctions may make it show
green a wh^le, but the thunder of gods spirit proceeding from the breath of
his mouth, will blast and wither it, and finally root it out and confound all
such devises so expressly and oppositely set against his manifest precept: Thou
shall not express God in form of male or female, or of any creature.

God the Son, is no more to be depictured, tha^ God the father.
And farther, as god the father will not be pictured of thee, nor cannot be
carved by thee, so will not, neither can god the son be portraited out more
than the father, or otherwise than is prescribed. For the son is very god of
the same substance with his father.

It is replied, that as he was man, so may he be pictured. The historical
picturing of any thing that may lawefully be pictured, is not the chief point
of the quarrel betwixt our adversaries and us, and yet herein we require their
wisdoms greatly. But in their ignorance they not only made Images, but in the
gross darcknesse of later times Images have received an Idolatrous worship,
and this principally, this is that pernicious Popish error which we most abhor.

Ioh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, for they bear witness of Christ, this is a true teaching.
But gaze upon his Image, were a doctrinne for Demetrius the siluer-smith, for
Alexander the copper-smith, for Licippus tools, or Apelles pensill.

Ephesians. 4.10. No warrant for Images in the word of God.
Saint Paul intending to show that our Savior ascending on high,
notwithstanding left behind him sufficient woorcke-men and spiritual artisans
for the accomplishment of the frame and furniture of his Church, to wit,
Prophets, Apostles, Teachers and Pastors, and yet he makes no mention at all
of Painters and Carpenters, of Caruers in wood, and Engrauers in stone.

Also God has spoken of old sundry both ways and times by Vrim and Thummim,
by visions and dreams, by his holy Prophets: and lastly in person by his
son, and still and ever inwardly by his spirit, and outwardely by the
ordinary preaching of his word, yea in and to the consciences of natural and
wicked men, he has not left himself without a witness at any time. Among all
these means, or any other that I can tell, these sacredimages are not
mentioned. If they were so sacred and holy, so requisite as they bear us in
hand, it were more than a wonder there should be such silence of them.

If Christ's personal presence were not requisite, why require they so much the
picture of his person?
Concerning the image of Christ's humanity, how can it concern us so much? When
himself was personally present, was it not expedient he should depart? And yet
is it so necessary that his corporal image must be retained? While he was on
the earth, were not his Apostles dull of understanding, slow of belief? Did not
Peter deny, Thomas doubt, and all fly and forsake him? And while himself was
in place, his image was needeles, and when he entered the heavens, he promised
the assurance of his spirit, and the assistance of the holy ghost. Of his
corporal shape and feature what pattern, I should say, what picture left he,
whence nothing is learned though the painter should perform his duty never
so well, but only the outward lineaments of his humanity?

Ioh. 20.17.
Marie Magdalen was not permitted to touch him after his resurrection. For a
fleshly usage since that time much and since his ascension especially is and
was much more inconvenient. For we walk by faith, and not by the outward
appearance, we serve God in truth and spirit, and blessed is he that
believes, though he see not his flesh, much less the image thereof. The
flesh profits nothing, neither eaten with teeth, nor seen with eye. Christ
cares little for the gazing of the senses, but for the stedfastnes of the
heart, and so far only for signs external, as they be ordained by
himself, expressly to such purposes, as his eternal wisdom has given out
direction.

D. Clement.
Doctor Clement in Oxford when the Church was supposed to have been on fire,
ran to the pix, indeed in the pix were many pictures made on the wafer
cakes, yea and these cakes he and all Papists like him think to be very God,
the Son of God, and the second person in the blessed Trinity. O gross
ignorance, and grievous Idolatry, many cakes, many images, many Christ's, and
yet these cakes, these images, Baruch 6.^
these false Christ's cannot save themselves (Doctor Clement) much less thee
out of the fire, as likewise else no image.

Satan the prince of darkness has a great drift herein to take the book of
Scripture out of men's hands, and to force them to hold up hands and hang
down head, before a puppet of cloutes, before a titularie image of Christ, and
not only of Christ, but of all his creatures, yea the vilest creatures, as
Saint Anthonies pig, Saint Georges horse, Saint Frances rags have their room
and place in the chiefest places of our sacred assemblies.

There is no point in popery but serves for gain.
Images make Pilgrimages, Pilgrimages make the pot sees, and without ignorance
there would be no Idolatry, and without Idolatry the Popes kitchen would be
cold, and the living god should be served as he ought and would, and the
persons and things which by nature are no gods, should be esteemed accordingly
in their own nature, Christians would never relaps to the first follies the
Gentiles were borne and trained up in, and the Israelites and Jews sometimes
for wantonness, and ever for want of good knowledge and true instruction, were
tainted with.

But now seeing ye know God.) The comfort of true knowledge.
Once they knew not, now they know; they were in darkness, they are in light.
And in this light is life, for in their darkness was death and confusion. And
as while Toby lacked his sight, and when Sampson had lost his eyes, both were
in a comfortles case: so the want of this knowledge of that inward sight of
God was the he auiest lotte that might befall, and the restitution or graimt of
this good understanding was a very heaven of joy. If labor might compass it,
the traficke thereof were much better than of silver, goolde, even the goolde
of Ophir.

The Galathians knew, but the Apostle by way of correcting himself, or else
rectifieng the sense of that saying, adds that they were known of God. For
our knowledge is as water infused into a vessel, and not as water in the spring
where it flows naturally, and he knows not god, whom God knows not first,
and whom God endueth not with his knowledge. The 7000 that served not Bal that
by nature was an Idol and no God, those 7000 served God, but therefore they
served him, because he first had King. 19 18.
reserved them unto himself.

And no man, yea no man (the case is no special case) no man comes to
christ, and to this knowledge of the son, but the father drives, nay John.
6.44.
draws him thereunto.

But now for the Galathians being brought to this pass, that they were well
enstructed, after all this knowledge (which was a blessing of blessings ensuing
upon their former ignorance) any way to relapse again was a passing folly,
and perfect shame.

And to speak directly to the purpose the Apostle prosecuteth, they who were
so ignorant, were delivered not only from their ignorance, but also from the
prison, the schoole-house, the none-age, and service the Jews were detained
in, and should they desire to be in case that the Jews were before?

They had the body, and they catch after the shadow, they have Christ, and in
Christ, al-sufficiency, and they will have Moses withal. They have the master,
and they care for the servant. They have the fish, and they esteem the shel.
They were as men of perfect growth, and they long for the swathes and truckles,
and beggarly elements of the Jewish childhoode. Is not this a very
childishness?

The ceremonies at the first were beautiful rites, but being expired are but
beggarly Elements, and al their beuty is most perfectly found in Christ who^
they signified.
By the way be it noted that Paul calls the ceremonies once ordained of God,
impotent rudiments, and beggarly elements, in deed beutiful at the first when
they were instituted, as it were a new garment. But now in continuance as an
out worn vesture, torn and tottered, and things out of date. Every thing has
his time. The husk is for the good of the Corn to keep it in the ear, but
when it is winoed, the husk is a beggarly chafe.

And what need a rich man be a beggar, and a beggar at a beggars door? Mat.
9.20.
The woman in the gospel had an ishue of blood twelve years together, went
to the Physicions, spent her money, and wasted her body, and al but scant to
some little purpose: at length she came to Christ the Physicion of our souls,
and found remedy of her bodily sickness. Whereupon I ask, now, were it not more
than a folly being thoroughly recured to recourse to her old unprofitable
Physic? To repair to any Gilead, if there be no treacle, no healing gome, no
souerain balm, no helping medicine in Gilead?

The Apostle for the foresaid respects fears least al his former labor with
them were but lost. He looked for an 100 fold, for 60 fold, or at least for 30
fold increase, espectally after so good a feed time. But their ceremonious
servile observation of days, of the saboth, and of months, and years and
times, decreased his expectation, and increased his Apostolic care and fear
in their behalf.

What things are abolished in the Saboth, and what remains to be observed on
our Christian Saboth days.
And here you see fit occasion is offered to treat somewhat of the use of the
saboth, and holy days, 1. There was a ceremonious use of them, 2. And there
remains a civil usage and an ecclesiastical order in them among us yet.

The bond of the ceremony in the Saboth was of a stronger twist to keep in the
Jews, and they were willed precisely to remember to keep holy the Saboth both
in their minds and in the bodies of all that ever was in their housen. The
servant, the stranger, and their cattle were not excluded. This rest so
determinatly set the seventh day, is not so prescribed to us Christians, I
say so as to the Jews, whose Saboths had many significations.

The ceremonious use was various.
1 First, their Saboths were tokens they should rest with ease in the promised
Land. 2. their Saboths were signs they should rest spiritually with all
happiness in the Messiah to come. 3. their Saboths were figures of eternal
felicity in the Land of the living.

1 First for their rest in the promised Land of Canaan, so many of them entered
that rest, as were of a patient spirit, and with whom God was pleased should
enter and possess the land.

2 As for the blessedness in Christ promised, all the promises have had their
accomplishment in him, and in him are they, yea and Amen.

3 Concerning the fruitio^ of ever lasting bliss, we walk in faith, and live
in hope, and not up figures: Colos. 2.16.
the kingdom of Christ consists not in meats, and drinks, in a new moon,
a sabbath or a piece of an holy day. Every day is a feast to a Christian man:
every day is Alleluia praise the Lord, and every time is a rest, and a saboth
unto God, and therefore the Galathians in restraining me^ to such strict
observations did Iudaize therein, and it was not convenient.

The civil use is still expedient.
2 The civil use of the saboth was to prefixe a set rest to men, even to thy
servant, yea for the very beast, for God is a gracious God, respecting the
basest of his creatures. And continual toil has no continuance. As the moth
breeds in the garment that is not worn, so the garment is soon worne-out
that is ever worn, and where there is no change at al. Wherefore ceremonieus
circumstances being taken away, the civil use of the saboth stands in force
and effect as before.

The ecclesiastical use is continual
3 The ecclesiastical use of the saboth remains also much more with us. For
we have but changed the Jews saboth, which was Saturday, into our Christian
saboth, which is the lord day, wherein the Lord rose from the death, and which
we call Sunday, retaining the name gentility was accustomed to at the first.
But that forces not: for christianity goes not by names. In truth our Sunday
is our saboth, and therein albeit a Christian life be a continual saboth, and
albeit the Jewish ceremonies be repealed and cancelled as appeire either by our
altering the day: notwithstanding because God is the author of order, and
because he should not be served uncertainly in our public service, our
saboth as a set time is wisely set down, and relligiously should be observed.

We read of the Lacedaemonians, that by common exercise and continual endeavor,
could dehaue and demean themselves very warlickly in the camp, but to use the
time of peace they had utterly no skill, as if their hands had bin made only to
handle their weapons, and themselves born to live and dye in the leager:
semblably many (if yet many) can tell meetely well (I dare not say well) but
some can tell right-well how to trade in the working days: but how the saboth
and holy day should be holily passed over, al as poor souls scant the
thowsanth man knows.

The covetous man has ever a geob of woork to do at Church time: the wanton
person chooses that time for his sins, when others are best occupied: vain
men and idle fukes, either house it in the Alehouse, or houle it in the Alley,
and pass the time at some inordinate and unlawful disport or other, while the
calves of our lips are in sacrifieng, while the incence of our praying is a
burning, while the minister stands at the Lords table, Nehem. 8.4.
while Esdra is in the pulpit reading and expounding the Law of God.

Private prayers exclude not the church-seruice.
I know men may pray and read at home, and at what hour they list among their
private families. But do you, or dare they contemn the Lords ordinance? There
is no ceremonious difference of days: true. Yet principally certain times are
fixed to raise up a mount (as it were) or to build up a high tower, whither me^
may ascend, and many eyes together may look round about, and take a full view
of the goodness and benefits of God laid forth and displaid by the
interpretation of the Scriptures.

You say you read at home, and pray at home. If you did, yet is not the
congregation to be thus shunned: say so who will, whom I see not usually at
Church, I dare say and do vouch, that his so saying is an untrue saying. If it
be night, it may be thou sleep, if woorking day, it may be thou art
occupied; if it be holy day, never tell me thou praiest duly at home, that wilt
not voutsafe to step out of doors to join in prayers with the assembly of
Gods children, and thy fellow brethren.

Parlor praying, and secret preaching at times of public service.
And of al things, that is a singular pride and nicenes that is grown in, to
turn the Church-seuice only into parlar prayeng, and private preaching, even at
those times when the congregation is gathered together in public place.

If Elias were in flight from the face of Iezabel, if Jonas be cast into the
Sea, Jeremy into the miry dungeon, or Daniel into the den: in the time of
persecution, whether in caves and marshes, or in places whereuer, there is no
difference of places. Under a Juniper tree, on the mountain, in the
wilderness, out of the whalles belly, in every place pure hands may be held
up to that hand that gives most richly, and casts no man in the teeth. But
still I speak of the Church-prayers, of public places in times of peace, and
of set times in public places: and that the Church-minister put in use the
practice of his Church vocation then and there especially when it is most.
seemly, and where the word it self would be preached and the sacraments
ministered.

That the husband man praise God in the field, the girl at her needle, the
maid at her wheel, the weauer at his loome, and every artisan at his trade, or
that the father and master of his children and whole household read a chapter
distinctly, sing psalms devoutly, pray together heartily at home at entry of
their labors and end of their daily worck, is an exercise much wanting, and
greatly esteemed of God, and comfortable to the soul, and by these good means
the very working-daies after a sort are turned into a religious continual kind
of Saboth unto such.

But still I missike that sancifull demeanor in some, in not keeping the
public Saboth in public fort. The prayer of one godly man is forceable, but
virtus vnita fortior. God who that hears one, will hear many, and the prayers
of many joined in one make a more forcible entrance to the throne of grace,
and there is singular comfort in this conjunction.

When we eat, or when we drink to satisfy hunger and thirst, it skilleth
not: but when similiars meet, their meat and drink to them a great deal more
good: In the church meetings if men could taste spiritual joy, as well as they
can corporal meats in sociable companies, the comparison is unequal. I might
enlarge and speak directly. But I fear me I have lost my way, if not my labor
and intent herein: therefore to return.

For you my (good breethren) that seem to keep, and I hope, observe the saboth
as you should, you who ioin in prayers with us, who frequent our sermons,
partake gods sacraments, who rest from sin unto God the seventh day, make ye
also the rest of the week suceable to this beginning.

For otherwise were it not more than a folly to rest one day in body from
labor, and in soul from sin, that the six days following we might run to al
excess of riot, and weary our selves more tha^ before, and as it were resting
our selves, and our horse, a little, to the intent afterward immediately we might
ride him and our selves out of the way with fuller course?

One day teaches another: I knew in what meaning the psalmist so speaks. I
use the words to this sense: let one day teach an other, the holyday teach the
working day, the sunday the weekdaies, the lecture-day those days wherein
there is no lecture, Luke 1.75.
that all the days of our life, with Zachary and Elizabeth, we may serve God
in holiness and righteousness, which is the right use of the true saboth.

To speak to the obstinate recusant, I reckon it lost labor: he is obstinate
and will not: recusant and absent, and cannot hear me: yet I see no reason in
their recusancy, from our Churches, from our saboth assemblies. I fear some
secret Padde in the straw. I see no reason in the woorlde, nor find any
reasonable answer in them, with whom I have reasoned in this behalf, and
therefore I fear the more, andyet I fear them not, but fear their dangerous
recusancy, most dangerous and damnable unto themselves.

There is utterly no cause in our Church-seruice of recusancy from Church.
What, I pray you, what should thus withheld the^ and keep the^ off? The whole
body of our service whereof consists it? What one part offends them? The
Psalms we sing, are the songs of the prophet David, of just Zachary, of the
blessed virgin, of godly Simeon, and of other holy men. The lessons are taken
out of the old and new Testament, the collects were framed in ancient time,
and many of them used afterward even by themselves. The rest of our prayers are
requests to God for lawful and necessary uses. Ioh. 8.
So that as our Savior spoke to the Pharisees concerning himself, so may we
say of his divine service unto the^, Who amongst you can reprove our service
and Church Liturgy, of sin, that you should thus shun it? But to let them
pass who are rather to be compelled with discipliue, than induced by
persuasion, I come back again to our selves.

I speak even now, against pretenses of private and home-praying: there are
others which are content to come, but they come by leisure, and they continue
at pleasure.

Coming short (...) divine service. Nehem. 1.7.
Our prayers begin (as you know) with an humble, true, lowly, and necessary
confession of our sins, the like you read of in the first book of Nehemias:
And who that means indeed an amendment of life, and to reuert from his oloe
ways, and daily to go for ward in newnes of life, willingly would slack his
presence from such a work? And how can your minister request you as many as
be present to say with him, when most be absent? There is a near conjunction
in duty between the sacrament of the supper, and the sacrifice of prayer:
wherefore let Saint Paul's exhortation prevail in the latter, as in the former.
1 Cor. 11.33.
When you come together, tarry one for another, that that may verify in
truth, that we sing at the entrance of service, Come and let us sing unto the
Lord: come, come altogether.

Tarying out the whole service.
Now for the continuance to the end, verily god will not be served by halfs, a
piece of service is not sufficient, as it were the Dog, at the waters of
Nilus, touch and go, lap and away. No. The continuing is as godly as the
beginning, Nomb. 6.24.
and the blessing in the end is as the blessing of Aaron and his sons, which
God commanded: and all the people ever jointly tarried for. And this I noted once
unto you, many years since, upon occasion that Saint Luke does set it expressy
down, that albeit Zachary tarried ouer-long in the Temple, yet they Luke 1.21.
tarried and expected his coming forth.

In the days of Popery, ignorance and superstition, when the Priest stood a
longer time before an heap of stones, you tarried and stood before the Priest
attired like the Priests of Egypt, and you understood him, no more than you
understand an humble-bee, a sounding brass, or a tinckling cimbal, or any
other uncertain noise. Our service is of a convenient length, our Sermons are
not long, we know your capacities. Small viols must be filled by little and
little: we teach you precept after precept, line upon line. The Jews came every
day to the Temple, and tarried long: you come but seldom, and the time of your
stay is very short.

By brethren, give me leave to speak the truth, negligence at first, grows
into a contempt in the end, but wilful transgressions cannot escape an heavy
doom. You know and read what became of him that gathered but a few sticks on
the Saboth in a high hand.

1 Samuel 21.6. Mat. 12.1.
Inevitable business, or urgent necessity has no Law, as appears in the
extremity of David's taking the shewbread, and in our Sauiors disciples, that
gathered and used the ears of corn: but wilful profanesse cannot escape, we
are neither Jews nor papists that iangle of the Saboth superstitiously they
know not what. We are Christians to use our saboths ciuilly in charity,
ecclesiastically with all piety and holiness unto the Lord.

12 Be ye, as I: for I am even as you. Brethren I beseech you: ye have not
hurt me at al.

13 And you know how through infirmity of the flesh I preached the Gospel at
the first.

14 And the trial of me which was in the flesh ye despised not, neither abhord,
but ye received me as the angel of God [ yea eue^ as Christ Jesus.

15 What was then your felicity, for I bear you record, that if it had been
possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes and have given them unto
me.

16 Am I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?

Paul leaving a little, and yet not leaving the matter, falls into an
Emphatical and vehement personal discourse, 1. Of himself, 2. Of the
Galathians, 3. Of the false Apostles. In these verses of himself altogether
and of the Galathians, and afterward incontinently of their seducers. Of
himself he shows 1. What he was, and 2. What he yet is to them-ward.

At the first he was their preacher, the argument of his preaching was Christ
naked upon his cross, not invested with the Law. For he preached unto them
the Gospel. The manner of his teaching seemed infirm. Paul's preching after the
plainest manner.
For Saint Paul as has heene showed always altogether respects his matter,
and he that laboreth words and plausible utterance most, most commonly least
conceaueth and worst contriueth what he would desire to utter. And the man is
very unwise that more esteems the value of a fine mil-sixpence, than of six
pence halfe-penny of common coin. Paul regarded the substance of his doctrine.
Hereof more before. 1. He preached Christ, 2. In infirmity, and 3. Most
constantly amids many trials. The troubles of Christians are but trials.
Where by the way note that the troubles of the Saints are but trials. And
therefore they were the better born and disgested with great constancy and
patience. And that Paul did neither warp in the Sun, nor shrink in the
water, but as gold that melts, but melts not away: so he felt his
afflictions, yet he fell not under them, but endured his trials whatsoever.
Thus was Paul amongst them first.

Now, what is he now? Is he changen? They were changed, was Paul? Does the
Elm forsake the vine, which would otherwise fall, except it be vpheld? The
child is slipped out of the cradle wherein it was laid, does not the Mother and
the Nurse run and stoop to take it up?

This is perfect charity and the principal duty Perfect charity omitteth no
means to reform men's errors.
especially of the preacher to Love and that continually without interruption,
to love beyond the desert, and above the demerits, good or bad of any man, and
to give our life for the brethren, either because they are brethren, and that
they may continue so, or that they may be brethren, if they be not, and to
loose even our life or liberty, which is as be are as life, to win the weak,
and so to for-goe and become all, to save some.

Paul omitteth none, and continues all means, neither bands or beuty, foul or
fail, neither oil nor vinegar. O ye foolish Galathians, etc. This was a
rough speech, this was vinegar. Brethren I beseech you: This is a fair
entreaty and a supplying oil. He both weepeth and sings with them, and all
to imprint a through affection in them toward the truth.

And in this affection he requesteth them to be as he was, for he was as they
were. The request is most reasonable, that they should be as Paul was. For
Paul was right, and they were seduced. And yet Paul's reason for that he was as
they were, may seem no true cause. For indeed Paul was not as they were. Yet
so he says and argues For I am as you are.

The answer is easy and ready. Paul was in kindness to them, as they were to
themselves: but in the syncerity of truth Paul requires they should be as
he was, which now they were not. For then what need he desire them to be that
they were already? Wherefore in kindness he was as they; in acknowledging the
truth, they were once as he, but were not now as once they were, and as now
Paul was.

But least Paul might he thought to reprove them or thus to request them upon
some private quarrel and offense, given or taken, and thereby desirous to
intimat that they were out of the way, with a greedy and hasty humor finding
fault even where no fault was, under a colorable kindness, he protests that
they never hurt him. Naie to show their kindness to him ward mutually, he also
speaks directly of their persons, how sometimes they were affected toward
him, as he was yet unto them.

And speaking of them, he agniseth 1. How they reverenced his ministry, 2. How
they loved his person, and 3. He expostulateth and reproves them that they
were estranged without just occasion.

First Paul begins with their virtues how they loved and reverenced him and
embraced the truth, and thereby shows plainly that he goes to woork, and
deals with them upon no malice. For they loved him, and he loved them, and
for love he was bold to reprove them. The affected affects most.
And this mutual conceat gives a good edge to his persuasions.

For as in an awger or a perser the point does pierse, yet the handle and the
have helps not a little, so in persuading or dissuading, when the matter is
(as it were) hatred with love, and handled with a good liking on both parts, it
pierseth the better, and thereby takes an easier forth, force and effect.

And as in war when it is mollified and softened, first, the print is received
with the fayrer impression: so when men's minds are least auerse, and most
wel-minded to the speaker, the speech is the deeper imprinted, and soonest
prevails.

Paul uses this wise way, and first he makes a Catolog of their reverence,
kindness and love.

They reverenced him as the angel of God: and reason. Mal. 2.
For the good minister is the Angel and messenger of the Lord as appears in
Malachie the second Chapter, and in the Revelation indiuerse places: yea they
received him as Christ Jesus whose messenger Paul was. Neither were they
alienated from him beholding his troubles, but rather they took all that befell
him as experiences, and arguments and demonstratiue proofs of his inflexible
constancy.

The good usage, or abusinge of Gods ministers God re^ecteth as ^one to
himse^fe.
And herein they did their duty. For he that contemns the Embasseter,
despises the sender of the embacie, as 2. Sam. 10.
Hanan who abused David's messengers, abused David himself. And the ministry
is an embacy from Christ Jesus, and therefore the Galathians did worthily
esteem Paul as Christ Jesus, and therein they reverenced not so much Paul as
Christ, even as he who receives the servant, receaueth the master also. Not
because he so receaueth the person of the servant, but rather the function of
the service authorized and warranted by the master.

In this sense as they reverenced and received Paul, and that with an intensiue
and pasting love, in so much as they would have pulled out their eyes, and
have given them unto Paul to have done him good.

Exodus 32.3.
When the children of Israel gave their eare-rings I say not their ears, but
their eare-rings, it was much: the ear is an instrument of an excellent sense,
and their eare-rings amongst them were reputed an ornament of the ear, but the
eye in respects is better, and to be preferred before the ear: the eye is the
guide of the whole body, and the comfort of the life. Compare the eye with the
rest parts: thy right foot or hand are necessary members, the one is the
supporter and state of thy person: the other the executioner of thy actions:
but the eye is the counseler and direction of al thy doings, yet they would
give him even their very eyes, thereby siguifieng that nothing was so near, so
dear unto them, as was Paul, as was their preacher, by whom they counted
themselves happy, and blessed and verily therein most blessed were they.

But see the change: their love was as the love of mother or sister, and their
minds as the soft war, behold this soft war is now as hard as born. And whom
they counted their reverend friend (such is the portion of Preachers) they
reckon their greatest enemy.

The cause is a causeless cause, and that which should be a farther cause of a
continual love. Am I become your enemy because I tell you the truth? The sun
is offensive to bleare-eied men. But the Galathians were egle-eyed, and cannot
brook the light of that truth, they once most delited in. The mad man hates
no man more than his keeper. The foolishma^ despises most his careful teacher.
The child abides no man worse than his tutor. Chro. 10.8.
Roboam utterly neglects the true and ancient counselors his father left.
Flattering Prophets that speak of quishions to the Elbow, of wine to the taste,
and of silk and pleasing things unto the ear. Cur opus est teneras mordaci
radere vero auriculas? Preach in generalities, thou art a Preacher for our
turn and town: or preach of matters impertinent to men of your own vocation,
it likes you very well also: Impertinent vagrant reproof of the absent, is
sooner harkened unto, than are necessary truths or needful applications
special to the present auditory.
but when we begin to open your festers, to power vinegar into your wounds by
way of special discreet advised application with the best intent to better your
hearts, O you cannot abide that. Yet if we power never so much vinegar beside
your wounds into vocations diverse from yours, and persons which are absent,
you say we are bold men, and men of an excellent spirit, as if you would have
us to be bold with others, where we are not, and not with you, of whom we have
charge. For you wish that we tell the truth, mary not to you. Or if we do, we
may take up Saint Paul's complaint and say: We are become your enemies, because
we tell you the truth.

17 They are jealous over you amiss: yea they would exclude you that you
should altogether love them.

18 It is a good thing to love earnestly always in a good thing, and not only
when I am present with you.

In the third place, Paul's personal speech is of the false-Apostles, whom he
never names, either not voutsauing to name them that were unworthy to live,
and therefore not worthy to be named: or else purposely passing over their
names in silence, that it might appear to be as it was indeed, no personal
grudge on his part.

Notwithstanding on their side, they sided it out in their riuality or
procality, as I may so call it, I mean in their wooing ambitious humor they
sought to be in with the Galathians, and to be, and as we say, who but they.
Things well used being be^ if you il apply them, there is nothing worse.
And to this end were they thus jealous and zealous over the Galathians, that
the Galathians again might be enamored, and in love (as it were) with them and
their teaching only.

Paul is far off from finding fault with Zeal, Love, Care, and earnest
Endeavors. All these are good being well used and rightly placed. And it
follows of the contrary that these and the like things are too too bad being
ill applied. What smells sweeter than the well compounded pommander? But taste
of it, it tastes bitter, and offends the taste. Drinck wine moderatly, it
gladdeth thy heart, take it immoderatly, it giddieth thy head. Infinite are the
parables may be brought in this sense.

Infinite siur in perfect trifles is a troblesome toy and no good zeal.
Zeal is good wisely used in a good matter, and that continually, and not like
a fire of brush, or of a bassin of thorns, where is much crackling and little
heat, and that too for a small time. The goodness of the case makes the
goodness of the zeal, and the greatness of the Mat. 23.23.
argument intends the force of our labor employed thereupon.

Ion. 4.9.
Jonas the Prophet lamented more his green gourd than he considered the
diuastation of all Niniue. Pythagoras thought that the soul of a man was in the
life of a bean, and he was as earnest for the one as for the other. It is good
to be very earnest in a very good cause, and the false Apostles were in a wrong
opinion, and yet perfectly earnest, and what should we be, in a right? My
principal note is, that the false Teachers thought if they could keep the
Galathians from Paul, they could do well enough, as the Wolf offered peace to
the sheepheards upon condition the sheephards would yield up their dogs,
thinking if that could be compassed, they would deal with the sheep
afterward at full pleasure.

19 My little children of whom I travel in birth again, til Christ be formed
in you.

20 And I would I were with you now, that I might change my voice, for I am in
doubt of you.

I observed the Apostles tender kindness, and singular love toward the
Galathians, variously set forth as you see, and diversely repeated, and in this
place under the name of his children. Little children who are ever cared for of
their parents most then, when they they are least, and least able to care for
themselves. A regular affectio (...) m^e affection.
This affection was likeliest to affect them. For a man cannot give to an
other, that he has not himself, and he affects soonest, that is thoroughly
affected, and it must be a live cole that can kindle the dead cole.

They were as dear as his children to him, and he was as careful as their
mother for them. For he was spiritually with-child of them. He was in travel
once and again of them, once was much and again was exceeding love. But the
woman would not loose her lost grote, the shepherd his scraied sheep, Paul
his former pain and travel. And therefore he traueleth again with them, even
till Christ be framed in them.

One matter receives but one f^e, (...) according to the qu^ of the (...)
This is a lively pattern of painfulnes to be in preachers, to be instant and
urgent, and never to give over. But the end of our pains is, to frame christ,
to imprint Christ in the hearts of christians. And as no one matter in the same
part of the matter receaueth two forms: so where christ is imprinted, he is
imprinted alone. For the superinducting of a new form, defaceth the former.
And the addition of the Law, abolisheth the Gospel. And as wax and water
cannot mix together, so Christ and any thing with Christ cannot meet in the
salvation of man, and the impression of Moses dasheth out the inscription of
our Savior, and except the form of Christ, christians have no form at al, and
without christ, we are but as the unshapen Embrio, and the unformed creature or
matter without his perfection.

For help herein to repair that form, which was imprinted in the^, Paul
wishes he were present with them, and because of his absence, he doubts the
rather of their good recovery.

In our Church for the Reformation of things amiss, and for the better
establishing the reformation in good and great part is made already, God be
blessed therefore, and for the means thereof, two learned men have written
their minds, somewhat different, but yet for all that, without al doubt, though
the one partwind and twist contrary to the other, yet both parts have this mind
and purpose, to twist and make a coard, that should keep men in best order.

But this I can avouch, and do aver by occasion of the text, that the due The
residence of the minister a most requisite matter.
presence and residence of the good minister is the preservation of the parish,
and the absence of the pastor is the bane of the flock. And if men were endued
with Paul's affection to carry the names of the tribes and care of souls on
their breast and in their heart, they would wish as Paul did to be present with
their charges.

I know there is a difference betwixt the mere and mixed Non-resident, betwixt a
party-care and a plain security. The mere Non-resident is a rechlesse
Creature. The distinction of mixed and mere Non-residents excuses neither.
The mixed Non-resident has pluralities of livings, and lives well in his
common conversation, and preaches, happily upon one of them, and keeps the
better house there, where he lives, by reason of his other livings.

That such a one keeps the bigger house, I grant, but that he keeps the
better, if betternes be rightly conceived, I vetterly deny. For that is sincere
and good that is not mixed with evil, and he that robs one to pay, or to
gratify another with fuller measure, is no upright dealer. The husbandman may
proine off some bows, that some others may grow the better and the bigger, but
the case is diverse, and even like unto the unkind father that will starve some
of his children, to feed one of them the fatter: and like the unnatural mother
that will kill the rest of her children having many, to make one the greater
heir and iollier-fellow.

It were far better that there were greater regard taken in this behalf. But
remedy this, and remedy all: and remedy not this, and I stand in doubt, I fear
least the semynary and seed-men of all evil may prevail farther, than God
grant they may. Mat. 13.25.
For the enemy ever sows his tares then most, when the husbandman is
asleep, and what will not Satan do in the continual absence of him that
should be continually present with his people, and president of their doings?

I fix not the pastor as it were the shel-fish to his shell, or like the
Moncke unto his sell. There may be rare private necessities and publicke-weale
causes of some absence, but the best resolution in such insident circumstances
is, that the conscience assuredly know, that God is not mocked with vain
excuses whatsoever, nor answered with purchased dispensations upon frivolous,
false or cursory pretenses.

Not only the personal presence, but a competency of experienced skill is
required in the resident Minister.
Paul wishes himself present with the Galathians, to the end he might
consider of circumstances, that he might change his voice amongst them, that
is, that he might accommodate himself and apply remedy, as he should see
fittest occasion.

The Phisicions counsel is good, but his presence is better, always for
prised that the Physician be not only a good booke-man, but also a skillful and
a cheereful practisioner.

Job. 2.13.
Jobs frinds when they came to visit him, they sat inconsolably mute and dum,
and when they spoke at last, they went to work upon true principles
misconceaued and miserably applied.

Better such Physicions kept them away from their parishes. A learned careful
minister is an inestimable jewel.
But the presence of that minister that has a present dexterity upon all
occasions, is a precious jewel, that can speak (like the good Lawyer) to the
cause, that can find out the cause of the disease, that can f^te his
playsters, and apply his Physic, that can handle his spiritual instruments,
that can divide the word aright, that can break the bread to the household in
due season, that knows molles aditus and tempora, that knows how to tune
and temper his doctrine, sweet or sharp, where to cut and where to supple, when
to take a d^t course, and where to use as it were a side-(...) by way of
parable like to the woman of Thecua, and the Prophet Nathan. 2 Samuel 24.


The Popish Sir John, the ignorant curat, the sorry hind, the shame of our
calling, and the bane of our Church, that speaks Asdod or Gibbrich, or any
language rather than the Scriptures of God in congruent English, and in
distinct hearty manner to our Peoples capacities, is an unprofitable Sir in the
former respects.

Wherein notwithstanding truly my meaning is not to vpbraid any simple,
virtuous godly man, that in a competent sufficiency is enabled and does
accordingly his best endeavor, but rather I lay down and leave this note to
remember the reader, if he be a learned Minister, that he of al men most carry
the bowels of Love toward his parish even next his heart, and that he
voutsaue them his presence for whom Christ has dyed and that in such sort as
he may best address himself (because he best can) upon all occasions incident
unto his flock, which doubtless are many and of great importance, and that we
deal with some particular men sometimes, as Paul wishes to do here with the
Galathians, Act. 20.
changing his voice, and as he did at Ephesus, where he admonished them not
only in general, but specially every one of them (as occasion served and
required) day and night continually, and that with tears in most effectual
manner.

In the old sacrifices, the hear and the tongue were due to the Priest,
thereby to intimate unto him, that from the heart sincerely, and with his
tongue significantly he was to demean himself, in casrs of conscience, and
controversies arising, and in scruples whatsoever, and as matters should he
offered, so to minister present remedy, in due sort accordingly, without
farther delays. Neither is it sufficient to leave some physic in our parish,
and go our way. Aug. Epist. 5. Marcellino.
Vindicianus in Austine told his patie^t, that Vindicianus did not.i. that
himself being the Physician did not minister the Physic, and therefore it
would not woork. In the administration whereof, many circumstances and various
admixtures are required: so in the Physic of the soul, so in the music of
the soul, sundry are the receats, and diuersely confected, diverse are the
notes, and much cunning requisite in changing the voice, in speaking soundely to
the affected conscience. But of this, this is but a note.

21 Tell me, ye that will be under the Law, do you not hear the Law?

Paul wished that he might he with them, wherein is scene the generality of
Paul's special care even for the congregation where personally, by reason of
his Apostolic office, he could not be still resident. And verily the mind of a
godly heart is a register and a note-booke to remember him always of more
matters than are exposite to the sight, and subject to the sense. We say, out
of sight, out of mind, and that the heart rueth not, what the eye sees not. But
it was not so with our Apostle.

He stood in doubt of them. He wishes to be with them. And because that could
not be, he supplieth that want, as he might, by writing, by reasoning, and
earnest expostulating matters to the quick with them.

Tell me.) Will ye needs be under the Law? Are ye wilful? Do you know what
ye do? Do you consider, do you see the ways you take? A wise man's eye is in
his head. Have ye not read, nor do ye not hear what is written in the Law?
Lay your hand upon your hearts, and your hearts upon Gods Law, and speak
advisedly, and say sincerely, Tell me, will ye be under the Law? Let us reason
a little.

22 For it is written, that Abraham had two sons, one by a servant, and one
by a free woman.

23 But he was borne of the servant, was borne after the flesh, and he which
was of the free woman [ was borne] by promise.

24 By the which things an other thing is meant. For these [ mothers] are the
two Testaments, the one which is Agar of mount Sina, which gendreth unto
bondage.

25 For Agar of Sina is a inountaine in Arabia, and it answers to Jerusalem
which now is, and she is in bondage with her children.

26 But Jerusalem which is above is free: which is the mother of us all.

Why the book of Genesis is comprehended in the Law.
You will needs be under the Law: well. It is written in the law that Abraham
had two sons, etc.) But where is that written in the law? By the law here is
meant the book of Genesis. But why goes that book under the name of the law?
There are many reasons why. 1. It was written by Moses, by whom the Law was
conveyed unto men, and who was but a minister of the Law and of things annexed
thereunto. 2. Then in the book of Genesis, expressly the Law of circumcision is
enacted. Thirdly by sundry ceremonious rites, and typical shadows the people
of God are in that book trained, and legally custructed, as namely and in
special, by the story of Abraham and his family. Viz. by his two wives. Sara,
and Agar, and by his two sons, Isaak and Ismael.

In these stories every thing is literally true, yet withal figuratively is
exe^plified the liberty of the Gospel, and the bondage of the Law: the
condition of the Jews, and the stare of Christians.

The mothers of Abraham's children were diverse, and therefore the one was free,
and the other bond. The manner of their birth was different, and therefore
accordingly the one was after the flesh, the other by promise; the one by
nature, the other by special grace. Ismael was naturally borne of young Agar.
And Isaac above the course of nature was borne of Sara, even supernaturally
and miraculously.

By these matters are mystically employed the two Testaments, and the one is
Isaac, the other is Ismaell. The one is Agar, the other is Sara. (Is) for is
signified.
Where note as we go: that the word (is) is taken for is signified. And so is
it lightly ever in sacramental and mystical matters. By the free and bond
Mothers and children are signified and set forth either freedom or bendage.
And you must observe by the civil Law touching liberty or bondage, that it is
otherwise, than by the common Law of our nation. By the civil Law it is as it
is in these exampls: Partus sequetur ventrem: The Child follows the
condition of the Mother. If the Mother be free, so is the fruit of her womb.
If the Mother be board, so are her Children also. And bondage and freedom are
resembled in these Mothers, and therefore also in their children.

Now (as if the Apostle should say) Tell me. Compare these cases, and tell me,
will ye be Agarenes? Of whether Testament will ye be? Will ye be bond? Will ye
be natural? Will ye be fleshly? And will ye be wilful?

Civil liberty is of an inestimable price, much more spiritual.
In civil respects, what case more heavy than thraldom? What thing more precious
than liberty? What? Will ye but the rope about your own necks? Will you like
County Egmon in the Low countries make your selves the bridge to bring in a
proud lord, that shall cut your throats, or make ye slaves? Are ye so devoted
to your own harm? This is even to loath liberty, and to long to be in Egypt,
and in the house of boundage. Does any wise man but desire to be a child in
his swathes, when he is once come to perfect age? Or would the iourny-man be a
prentise again? Wishes the Graduat that he were in his A. B. C. Would the
delivered person return to his prison? Shall the freeman thirst after his old
bondage? Shall Saraes children be so much as nursed of Agar? Tell me, shall these
similitudes be verified amongst you?

This similitude of Sara and Agar our Apostle prosecuteth with an other also of
mount Sinay and Jerusalem. The Law was given in Sinay, and received in
Jerusalem. Sinay is in Arabia far from Jerusalem, and Sion which God loved.

Agar is Sinay. (Is) mark again that phrase. Agar which kept such a stur in
Abraham's house, is by signification Sinay, where the Law was given in wind,
thunder, lightnings, and in much terror. But Jerusalem is the Church of God,
which could tell how to expound the Law of God in Christ, and how to use for a
time the ceremonies, and not everlastingly to enhamber themselves with them,
being once delivered from them, by the coming of our Savior.

But were not these false Apostles even from Jury, that abused these
Galathians, glorying in the name and title of Moses and of the Law? And did
not Jerusalem hir-selfe play Agars and Sinaies part, pretending the Law and
refusing Christ? True, and therefore the Apostle distinguishes, and shows
that there are two Ierusalems, the one which then was, and was (...).
answerable unto Agar and to Sinay, the other is from above and the mother of
us all.

At the first, the former Jerusalem. diversely taken.
Jerusalem of these two was as the second. And many excellent things are spoken
of her, but how was she changed from hirselfe? She was not she that once she
was, even the epitome, pattern and glory of Gods Church: but now her wine is
turned into water, her silver into dross, her Temple into a den of thieves,
her City into a lodge of murderers, and hirselfe of a mother is become a
stepmother, and Jerusalem is translated as it were into Arabia, or Sinay out
of Arabia is brought into the land of Palestine, and made the very
metropolitan City of al Judea. And Agar, there has gotten the vpper-hand of
her Mistress. Wherefore this old Jerusalem is not any longer the Jerusalem of
God, or the natural mother of his people.

The other Jerusalem is described, 1. To be from above. 2. To be free, 3. And
so be a mother, indeed the mother of us al.

That saying of Cyprian is in every man's mouth, that he who has not the Church
for his mother, cannot have God to be his father. It is a good sentence. For he
that is not a child of the church, is not the child of God. The whole church
is the spouse of God, and every believer is a part of the spouse. And every
one, as in some respects, he has the resemblance of a child: so in some
considerations he may receive the name of a mother, according to the proportion
of duty, whereunto he is called. For the whole church does the mothers duty by
some of her principal members: as Paul did the mothers part in traueling and
being with-child with these Galathians, and yet Paul himself was a child of
the universal Church: and he that is not a member of this mystical body, is
none of Christ's, the head, nor of GOD the Father of all.

And God as he is the Father of all things generally by his creation: so more
specially he is the father of us his children by regeneration, whereby we are
ascited into his Church, and incorporated into the body of his chosen. But this
is performed from above, but yet in the lap and womb of the Church, and by the
mean of preaching, by the help of sacraments, and such like benefits of
motherly care and provision in spiritual manner.

And as the good mother does conceive and bear her children, and does 1 Samuel 1.
nurse them too: so does the Church nurse her children also: and that with the
sincere milk of her two dugges of both the Testaments, I say, sincere, as
being neither mingled with water, nor marde with soute, nor burnt to the pan,
but 1 Pet. 2.2.
most sincere. (...).
It is her part to offer it so: and it is your duties so to receive it so.

Wanton children and unwise lust after and had rather eat chalk, dirt and
baggage, ceremonies, rites, traditions and such like stuff. But these are but
false appetites. The true mother and Church will debar her children of such
food.

This our mother is a free woman, no Berta, not bond as Agar was, and such as
is the mother, such are al her children. For she is not partialy fond upon some
of her children more, than unto some. Such then is the state of Gods Church,
even a house-ful of Isaakes; Sara and her litle-ones: Jerusalem, yea a heavenly
Jerusalem and her free children. Not that Jerusalem, that the^ was, and now is
not, but a free city which was from the beginning, and is from above, and for
ever, the mother of us al, the chosen of the father, the elect of God, and the
Catholic Church.

1 The Romish stepdame chalengeth these privileges, and lays claim to this
motherhood, 1. King. 3.22.
even as truly as the harlot before Solomon made title to the other woman's
child, when she had stifled her own, and had rather the child should be divided
a-sunder than she would seem to loose her pretended title. And so our mistres
of Rome, had rather al christendom should be divided and rent in pieces, than
that she should not seem to be that which she is not; the oecumenicall and
catholic mother of all the world. Yet 1. she is Romish, and how can she be
Catholic? 2. She is too too ceremonious: she cannot be free. 3. She holds
by the visibility of the place, and therefore is not from above, as our mother
is, which is most 1. Catholic, 2. and 3. Spiritual.

The Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church.
1 Will you that I examine this woman's claim a little? The Romish Church is but a
particular Church, if yet it be a Church: and if she be a mother, she is a
mother in the Churches behalf at Rome, and not the mother of us all. Paul
making mention of our general mother, has not the least reference in the
world to Rome at all.

As Augustine says, touching the Donatistes, that would compass Christ's
kingdom within the territory of Africa, Ager non est Africa, sed mundus: so we
tell the Papists: the field of Gods Church is not included, neither in Africa,
nor Italy, nor in places annexed and tied necessarily to any one place under
heaven.

A local conceat in cases spiritual is a mere fancy.
It is a special error of the wicked to put confidence in places more in some,
than in some, and that with great contempt of some places, whom they will not
like, or do not love, or cannot fancy.

The 1. King. 20.23.
Aramites being conquered in the mountains thought, that some special gods
were protectors of the mountains.

Nomb. 22.41.
Balaack caused Balaam to change his standing twice, as if the effects of
blessing and cursing stood only, or rose only out of the places.

How disdainfully speak our adversaries, as the Jews did of Bethleem and
Nazareth, so they of Witenberg, Tigurine, and Geneua, and of Brist. Reply to
D. Fulke. Page 120.
Rome so proudly, that any indifferent man may soon discern the spirit of
Antichrist, and the tunes of her that sits as a Queen and mother of
spiritual fornications upon the seven hills, and being but a particular place,
challenges to be the Catholic Church of Jesu Christ, and mother of
Christians.

The motive of Names.
But do not men call the Roman Church the catholic Church? Indeed they call
themselves so, as Iezabel called her self a Prophetess to teach the truth,
being in truth a vile witch to seduce the people, and to make them to commit
fornication.

The minister of Sardi had a name to live, but he was dead. In the Gospel
Jerusalem is called the holy city then, when she had polluted hirselfe, and
became profane.

Bad names fained upon men by enemies, prove nothing. And good names show a
duty of doing, they prove not the doing of duties. The Roman Church should be
catholic and sound in the truth, she cannot be catholcike for direction of the
truth in all the world, necessarily she, more than other places. For God that
accepts not persons, accepts not places. Act. 24.14.
If things went by names, Paul should have bin an arch-hereticke, and his
enemies should have bin the friends of truth.

Our To the reader. Robert Points in his Testimony of the Real presence.
Countriman Robert Points thinking this motive of names able to move
mountains, and desirous to have themselves fairly cleeped and us skornfully
by a name reproched, and specially for that we are commonly called
Protestants, either wilfully or witlesly abuses and corrupts the words of
Scriptures to his foolish purpose, and says: 2 Par. 24.
Quos protestants illi audire nolebant. In the 2. of Chronicles the
PROTESTANTS, forsooth, would not hear the prophets which God sent unto them. In
which few words (says Master Points) the malice of our chief Protestants of
our days is manifestly prophesied of, and plainly described. And this he
voucheth to be an admonishment both in name, and conditions expressly of their
(the Protestants) extreme malice and stubburnes.

Of such motives I doubt not, ye have good store, as The displaieng of
Protestants in prol. P. 2.
Miles Huggard Queen Mary's hosier, bodged up to your hands. But I had thought
that the name of Protestants had not been so ancient, and we guess the books
of Chronicles were not written in Latin so expressly to hit upon the name of
Protestants, and we take that the matter you allege, is a flat story of the
present fact, and not a fore-prophesieng of a future event. And we tell you, and
by occasion of your falsifieng (master Points) we tell the woorld you have
told a tale of a tub, of the man in the Moon, and of Protestants of your own
making.

How and when the Name of Protestants came first up.
May it please you (brethren) to bear with me, and in a word I shall show you
both why we are named Protestants, and what the name of Protestants means in
that place of the scripture. For Master Points is quite beside the Text.

In the year of our Lord Sleid. Com. lib. 6.
1529, after sundry debateings precedent for the reformation of things amiss,
and some agreement accorded upon in that respect, yet it was put in the head of
the Emperor how to devise for a contrary course to be taken in a meeting at
Spiers. Whereupon the Princes of Germany were constrained to frame, and did
frame out their lawful Protestation. A thing usual and known in every common
court to protest against the iniquity or nullity of proceeding. So did these
Pieres, Princes and Nobles of Germany and others associating themselves in so
just a cause concerning the honor of God and glory of his name. Whereupon the
name of Protesting and Protestants was not unwillingly accepted of al who
misliked disorders. And so it became a common appellation unto this day. And
this is the true original, or short and plain narration to the demand and
motive for the name of Protestants.

Now for the allegation of Points his Scripture (and so may I call it, for the
scripture it self is to another sense) and if his grammar would serve him but
to conster the words, he would soon have seen his palpable error.

Verily, the meaning is that God sent his Prophets, and his Prophets went and
protests the wrath of God, but there were (not Protestants) but there were
that would not give ear to the protestations of the Prophets, quos
Protestants, illi audire nolebant. There were, that would not hear the
Protestants, and these Protestants were Gods Prophets. Religion goes not by
Names.
And hence if we would trifle in names, we might make a fair show by the name
whence foolishly he seeks our utter shame. But it is too vain a labor to
argue of names good or bad, the one way or the other.

But back again to our purpose, what ever we are called by you or otherwise,
are you called the catholic Church? Who calls you so? Your selves. We do
not. But suppose you were so called. Things go not by names. For then, as the
countryman says, we should have no Wood-hens, for all the birds of that kind
are named and called Wood-cockes. And were he not then a proper wise man, that
would ground his reason upon common speech? This were good for your Popes, who
having ill favored faces, and wriemouthes, and worse manners, and yet when they
can get and clammer up into the Papacy, they change their names into words of
flattering signification.

But you see names are not forceable proofs, neither against others, nor for
themselves, either for the goodness of their very Popes, or for the
Catholicknesse and Motherdome of their Church.

The Rhomish dame is too ceremonious to be the free Mother.
2 Secondly as the Roman Church being at the most, when she was best, but a
Church, and therefore not the Catholic whole Church, so Rome as she is now,
she is too servile a dame to be the Mother, of those who are free, and freed in
christ. She is too Ceremonious, too Slavish, too Peevish in her Ceremonies, and
God which has abolished his own rites, must needs abhor her trinkets which
seem to some fair, and greatly adorning, and gracifieng all, like the Iuy
about the Tree, which in the end will be the death of the tree it embraces.

What are her Duckings, Beckings, Fiskings up and down, apish Illusions,
infinite, endless, and purposelesse Observations, with terror of Conscience,
and trouble of mind, only occupied and set on work with frivolous
wil-worships, and fond conceats in every thing to draw men from a solid and
sound understanding of the substantial points of true devotion? Col. 2.
Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, Eat not, Marry not now, but when we appoint;
not you, but you whom we permit, and al upon pain of damnation and peril of
salvation, in as many as miss the heavenly hestes of holy Rome. Is this the
spirit of Christ, pacifieng our minds, or rather intangling our souls with so
many wind-laces?

The true worshippers John. 4.23.
worship in spirit and truth. And what spirit is there in these and these like
toys? There is no substance, no truth, no grain, but all chafe in these
ears, in these filly-follies. Reply to D.F. Page 119.
No marvel if Bristow require in Christians not the spirit of truth, but the
spirit of obedience: but of what Obedience? To what? And whom? If men were but
meanly directed by the truth, it were impossible they should so obediently
delue and dig, and so grouelingly serve in the mines and mysteries of slavery
it self. Wherefore because Rome is not Catholic, because Rome is too too
be-spanged and set about with Ceremonies unfruitfully, therefore she is none of
our Mother, nor we her children.

3 The Catholic Church is not locally tied to any territory. The motive of the
visibility of the Church.
Both for the consideration of Catholicisme, and also for that she descends
FROM ABOVE, and is by grace, and holds not of any place, and looks upward,
and seeks those things which are above, and sets her affections on
heavenly things.

There is much ado about the VISIBILITY of the Catholic Church. May I tarry
you now in sifting somewhat more that question a while? Paul describes the
Church to be from above, spiritually, by special favor, and reflecting again
upward in inward hartines and requisite duties.

Our adversaries seek her on earth, and require her to be liable to the ey,
and locally visible, and that in Rome as Jerusalem was in Jury, where God for
a time was best known.

We speak of the catholic Church The Catholic Church property taken, what it
means.
which is the society or company of all the Saints of God, of al times and
places, the whole body whereof cannot be seen, nay the means whereby any
part of the Church is made a part and continues a part thereof, is secret,
inward, and invisible: and the certainty thereof is an article of faith, and
not object of the ey sight. Credo Ecclesiam, not Video Ecclesiam. I believe
that God has a chosen Church, and that the Lord knows who are his, though I
discern it not by sense. For the glory of the Kings Daughter is from above,
and it does not, but shall appear to every one who be who.

Visibility is not of the Nature, but of the duty of the Church.
Wherefore visiblenes to be seen is not necessarily of the nature of Gods
chosen. Notwithstanding men being chosen of God, and coapted into the number of
his Saints, of duty must not conceal what they are, but publikly, openly and
in a visible order every man according to the proportion of his calling is to
keep and retain a seen and a sightly exercise of his profession.

And yet times in places may go so hard, that a man might seek and not find
an evident face of true professors in public manner, The complaint of Elias
discussed and urged.
as in the days of Elias, when he complained that he was left alone for ought
he knew. Wherein I note that Elias knew not of any more, if you will, of no more
Prophets: for what if we grant to that our adversaries sorry cauillation,
that Elias was left a Prophet alone. What? As he knew no more prophets beside
himself, so he was hid from the sight of others, and no man knew what was
become of this Prophet. Then was the Church left without a Prophet to see too,
and where was then the form of a Church visible, keeping her outward orders in
apparent aspectable show?

Master Stapl. de doct. Prin. l. 2. c. 13.
Stapleton and the rest shift in this case, but shifts will not serve. They
except, that if it might be thus in the kingdom of Israel, yet the Church was
visible enough in the tribe of Judah. This is but a poor shift. For Israel was
not so bad sometimes, as Judah, and Judah no better than Israel. And even in
the days of Aza much about these times, 2. Chron. 15.2
when Aza came to the crown of Judah, Azariah tells the King, that if God be
sought after, he will be found; but if he be forsaken, he will forsake even
Judah too.

And when Elias fled out of Israel, he fled not to Judah, as knowing whither
to go, and where to join himself in the society of a visible Church, but
passing by the confines of Judah, he left his man in 2 King. 19.3
Beersheba, and himself fled into the wilderness, and there complains, that
he was left alone.

And least this complaint may seem only to be the affection of a watery eye,
and of a troubled mind that could not discern that which might be discerned,
and so not to be stood upon by us, that so much allege it in this cause,
observe that God in answer to Elias told him that he had reserved 7000 to
himself, and our adversaries to show that Elias complaint was imperfect and
untrue, they urge this answer of the 7000 reserved: but can they mark
withal, that God says, he had reserved them to himself, not in the sight or
to the view of Elias? For Elias lied not, but God kept them to the secret
knowledge of himself.

And can they yet farther mark for an vna^swerable answer to their often Sander.
visib. monarch. Page 207.
replied and and P. 295.
multiplied triumphing cauillation, that when we (no doubt) unduly force this
ensamble for the inuisiblenesse of the Church, yet ever this (they say) was but
matter that touched Israel, and the ten tribes, but Judah and the whole Church
it did not concern, I say, can they mark that the Romans 11.4.
holy Apostle Saint Paul uses this very ensample to the very same purpose that
we do?

For the Jews seeking their own righteousness, missed of Gods righteousness:
and though they hard the Gospel, yet they gainesaid it, and were a disobedient
people, and therefore God refused them, who at first refused him.

Whereupon the Apostle questioneth in effect thus as I take it: Did God reject
his people? And were they rejected? And were the people that once were his
people, now no more his people?

His people and his Church, in sense and signification is al one. If God had no
people, he had no Church. But he had rejected and cast off that his people,
where was then his Church.

The Apostle answers himself one way for the future time by receiving in of
the Gentiles, and another way for the present time, that albeit the Jews were
cast off, yet God had a Church. What, a visible Church? No, but he had a
remnant, and that remnant, where ever it was, was his Church, and that Church
was secret, seen and discerned only of God, and this Church and remnant was
exemplified (says Paul) by those secret 7000 reserved by God inuisibly, as in
the days of Elias, so was the state of the Church thus invisible, and so
showed and expounded to be by the Apostle and by this very example of Elias
time. What say ye? Is it not so?

Questionles our adversaries see as much as we tell them, but every man must
fetch his light at their candle, Romes visibility is but a sightly mart of
Religion.
and therefore their light must needs be a blazing star, and their Church not
only a visible Church, but a visible Monarchy withal.

And they seeing that God is less bound to them than to Judah and Jerusalem,
and that if Jerusalem might be ecclipsed, much more might Rome, and therefore
they say that the Church in Israel was invisible, but not in Judah.

But why is God more linkt to Rome than to Israel? Well, Israel by their own
confession might, and did loose her beuty, and Paul alleges that for the
secrecy of the whole church reserved to the sight of God, and not unto the
eyes of Elias.

And all the Scripture is plain that Judah did sometime justify her Sister
Israel in sinning more excessiuely, than did she, and that God was not bound
to keep either the one or the other in his visible service whether he would or
no.

Of all the places where God has been chiefly worshipped, principally in
Scripture are named three: Bethel, Silo, Sion. A word of every of these.

Bethel.
Bethel is by interpretation the house of God, and Bethel was the gate of
heaven, and in Bethel was the ladder whereby the very Angels ascended and
descended from God up and down, notwithstanding even in Bethel Jeroboam set
up the goolden calfe. The matter was goolde, the charge great, the intent
fair, but the calfe was an idol, the intent was irregular, beside and against
Gods word, Hos. 10.8.
and so Beth-el became to be Beth-auen, and of the house of god was made the
house of iniquity, and the ladder of discention into hell it self.

Silo.
Concerning Silo, Iosue placed the arcke there, where it remained 300. years:
but sundry enormities arising, and when Hely once suffered his youthful sons
to rome at riot to the great reproach and shame of Gods sacrifices, what ensued?
His sons were slain, the Arcke was taken, Hely brake his neck, the place
was a desolate place. For the Lord forsook his habitation in Silo where he
dwelt among men, Psalm. 78.
he refused the tents of Joseph, and his seat in Silo.

Sion.
Touching mount Sion and Judah, God indeed more singularly chose him a seat
there, because he had a favor thereunto, he loved it, and therefore he chose it.

David provided brass, iron, stone, wood, and timber, David defraid silver,
and much gold, toward the fabric of a place for God, but David a man much
according to Gods own heart, yet David was not the man that should make out and
perfect that frame.

But Solomon by name, the Prince of peace, and the man of rest, expressly in the
word of God unto David was the wise man that was appointed to this work.

And when the temple was built, the Lord most gloriously appears to Solomon,
and with his presence sanctified the holy place, and spoke unto Solomon on this
wise: I have heard thy Prayers: I have hallowed thy house, which thou have
built to put my name in it for ever, and my heart and mine eyes shall be there
continually.

Jerusalem,
Yea to say generally of the whole city, many glorious and excellent things are
spoken of thee o Jerusalem. The Prophets taught in thee, the offspring of David
reigned over thee, the forefathers of blessed memory, and lineage of believing
Abraham were thy citizens, all the godly sacrificed there, and the sacrifices
were commanded of God, and continued from Moses time.

No privilege of any value, nor promise of good things was any way defective,
or wanting to that place, whereunto no place was comparable under heaven, it
being the very pledge of heaven it self, and the only place where the God of
heaven delighted most.

But lo, the offspring of the first man Adam, who when he was in honor was as a
beast, and fell from his innocence, and became a fool, and was disobedient,
and therefore was turned out of paradise, and the earth for his sake cursed,
that was made good a little before, lo I say the children of Adam, and Sons
of a sinful Parent, even the inhabitants of Jerusalem become like their first
father, and abusing the Lords kindner, they suppose that the Lord was in-loue
with the walls of their City and Temple, and sitting securely under the
summer bower of this conceit, though they committed Robberies, Murders,
Adulteries, Idolatries, worse than Egypt, though their Prophets taught lies,
and their dery children gathered sticks, and their weomen kneaded dowe to make
cakes to sacrifise to the Queen of heaven, yet they thought that they, the
spouse, they could not be divorced, he would not pluck off that precious ring
from his finger, suffer the girdle of his lomes to rotte, tread his own crown
under his feet, abhor his inheritance, forsake Jerusalem, plow up Sion, and
refuse the Temple.

He could not, or he would not. No? The Prophets forewarne the contrary,
Ierem. 26.
and namely Jeremy, that except they repent, that god would turn their
blessings into cursings, and make that blessed city (otherwise being the
praise of the world) the extremest curse, and the very shame of nations.

The Jews could not believe it, but the Jews felt it in the end, and feel it
to this day, and euersince the two she bears Titus and Vespatian ruinated
their city, famished their people, wasted their land, and made hauock of all,
they are a vagabond nation in the eyes of all the world.

This is an undeniable verity. And that which fully fell upon them at the
length, fell upon them as well for their former as their latter sins in
forsaking their Lord, in polluting his Temple, in defiling the priesthood, in
killing the prophets, in one word, in diuorsing themselves from God, and in
breaking themselves from the stock of the natural olive, whereinto they were
engraffed, and so of a people became men that were not Gods people, and of a
church became no church, muchlesse the visible Church of the living God, and
yet God still had a remnant, but this silly secret remnant proves not the
visibility we dispute of.

Wherefore when no shifting can possibly put off the evidence whereby we show,
that the show of the Church is not ever in sight, and that the clamorous cries,
Ierem. 4.
o the Temple, the Temple are lying words, and will not serve their turn, and
that the true Church may be ecclipsed, as in the days of Elias, expressly, 1.
By the prophets deposition, I am left alone, 2. By the answer of God, I have
reserved 7000. To my self. 3. And by the exposition of Paul: that the church
was brought to be a secret remainder; when nothing will help indeed, though
Sanders set a fair face, and a big look upon the matter, yet he, master
Stapleton, Eisingrinius and the rest that have dealt in this argument, are fain
to come to this point, that albeit the case might be so with Jerusalem, and was
with her in the end, yet since the propagation of the Gospel it cannot be so
with Rome, and Rome cannot, she cannot be removed, she cannot, not cannot in
congruence of her own dewry, or likelihood in opinion conceived once of her,
but possibly she cannot be deuorsed at al.

Let us hear one of their own beasts bray out such bold sounds in his own
voice. Bristow in his reply, or rather in his fumbling confused hoge poge to D.
Fulk has these words: Brist. reply Cap. 8. Par. 2.
The synagog with her Jerusalem might be and should be divorced. But the
Church of Christ with her Jerusalem (which is Rome if you have any sight in
the Acts of the Apostles) should never, nor never might, nor may be divorced.

For our insight in the Acts I have said sufficiently before. Supra. Page 70.
And against the church of Christ we have no quarrel. But the Jews might be
divorced, we take your confession and it is true. Yet you oppose the church of
Christ to the condition of the Jews. We tell you, though the externe face of
the Jews be gone, yet in Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentil, and as most
notoriously the nation of the Jews fell away, and the Gentiles were received
into their room, so yet when they were received, they were accepted, not as it
were another Iewry, and that to the end that locally God might be served among
the Gentiles with a new erection of an other Jerusalem which should be Rome.
No. Rome is too Psalm. 2
narrow a room for the church of God, neither will God be so locally worshipped
as when he was only known in that one corner of his own choice.

I cannot tell what to say to these fellows. Rome has no more promises than
the borrow of Abington.
The Jews were beguiled, but the Romanistes are be witched. The Jews might
seem to have more cause, but verily she was less presumptuous, than are
these Romish lovers. Jerusalem had many promises: Rome has not one, no, no one
more she tha^ the least borrow, village, or ha^blet amongst the Gentiles. Rome
is praised in her youth I grant, yet no otherwise than other 1 These. 1.8.
churches, but that Rome that was, is not the Rome that now is. She was a chaste
virgin while she was young, but her old bones now are rotten and putrified
with innumerable fornications, and her praises in her highest honor were never
comparable to Hierusalems estimation. Why? Peter taught in Rome. What then?
Christ taught in Jerusalem. But Peter was martyred in Rome. And what of that?
Christ suffered at Jerusalem. And I take it the death of either is rather is
the shame, than the praise of the places. But where, in what one place not only
in the Acts, but in any place in all the Scripture is Rome termed the
Jerusalem of the Church? Or why is god bound to a visible Church now made up
of the Gentiles more than he was to the Jews? for to speak of Peter's rotten
chair at Rome, is a roming vagrant imagination.

Nay, are not the promises of God made with the same couenantes of duty, and
with the same conditions and prouisoes of forsiting our estate, like as did the
Jews, if we shall do, as they did?

The ensamples of the old Testament are warnings under the new.
If God forsake Bethel, is that nothing to Silo? Or if God forsook Bethel and
Silo, is that to be neglected of Jerusalem? Or if Jerusalem, Sion, Silo, and
Bethel be all forsaken, is this not to be regarded of the Gentiles? Cannot, shall
not, may not, the church made up of Gentiles with her Jerusalem, which is
(pardy) Rome, be divorced? May she not, can she not, shall she not be divorced?

If Sem should be thrust out, and Iaphet admitted, were this no enstruction
to Iaphet? Or why are the 1 Cor. 10.
ensamples of former times written? Or is God the God of the Jew and the God
of Israel to take vengeance where they sinned, and not on the Gentiles? Or brake
he off the natural Olive, and will he spare the wild? And to whom by name
were these last words written? Were they not written to the Church at Rome,
Romans 11.
where she stood in case then to be broken off, which is a word equivalent and
of like meaning to the word of divorced?

I grant she may cry out the Church, the Church, the visible Church, the
Mother Church, and yet the Romish papacy is but a lying strumpet, and a hard
stepdame to the true members of the Church of Christ, and this is the mystery
of iniquity sitting in the Church, or as Saint Austine says: Aug. de ciuit.
Dei lib. 20. c. 19.
In templum Dei, for and in steed of the church, and is not the Church, but an
Antichristian company, so that the visible brag and show of the Church is not
the Church, and that 1. Is one point in this question, and 2. The other point
was that God is not bound to a visibility at all, and for both points we have
showed sufficiently. For for that of the invisible case of the Church, the
complaint of Elias is pregnant, and then that numbers bearing the name of the
Church, and bragging of the Temple, are but liars, is proved by the Prophets
and Scriptures to have been exemplified even in the best places, and whereof
in special Rome has a fair warning by the Apostle to the Romans.

We do not deny, but profess and thank God therefore, that hitherto since the
ascension of our Savior, Mat. 15.
the little musterd seed has grown to that height, that the little birds have
made their nests therein, but the puttock, the kite, and birds of cruel kind
have come to their nestes, and dealt hardly with the small foul, yea they have
taken their places, and their own possession, and that under fair pretenses
no doubt. And the Church and kingdom of God, being of condition as the waters
of Siloe at the foot of Sion, running softly, she makes small noyce, when
she receaueth great injury, yea even when the Scote and Otter have taken up
their lodging in her tree.

For if we reuolue such stories of ancient time as but scriueners and writers
could afford us when printers were not, and while no enemies wanted, yet shall
we find that the spawne of heresies was infinite, and to this day we see the
number of infidels are without number, and alas what discerning could there
be of some one grain, or two in comparison amongst so much chafe?

At such seasons, when the whole church, as the Church of Sardy, had defiled
her clothes, Revel. 3.
that is to say, that outside, and outward sight and show of her self, might
not Bertram in Germany, Hus in Bohemia, Sauonarola in Italy, Wicleue in
England, Armochane in Ireland take up almost even Elias complaint, that they
were left alone? And this was an old course of most ancient time, to see the
church brought to a narrow strait and a low eb.

In the days of Noe but eight persons were left when the find came. In the
time of Lot he alone and a few of his were saved when whole five cities were
destroyed, and as Elias complained that he was alone, so Micheas stood post
alone against four hundred, who were called Prophets, as well as he: and if
then, as many times else, a man should have be-taken himself to the more
visible number, should he have done well?

But you say in the new Testament, ever join to the most that profess the
name of Christianity, and you cannot miss.

In deed, I know that the The motive of multitudes.
Motive of multitudes and generalities is linckt in with the demand of the
visiblenes of the Church. For ever the mo, the more visible. And you think you
have the greater number, and the mator part, yet how long you shall keep them,
God knows, but therefore you argue, that the truth should be ouerborne with
the number of your voices, and the visiblenes of your glory, because your pomp
is great, and your number many, and the waters innumetable where the whore
sits.

Give me leave a little, and pardon mine unaccustomed length in these quarrels
of great importance: for as I wish to open the very truth, so would I not
willingly pretermit their pretenses of truth for maintenance of error.

While they run alone, they are ever foremost, and when they buz into your
ears, and you hear no man but them, what marvel if they seduce them that are
ready to be missed?

Actius the Poet.
When Actius an old Poet played on the stage, he pleased every man very well,
when he pleaded at the bar, he never got cause, and being demanded the cause
thereof, his answer was, that on the stage, he made every man's part, and no
man spoke, but what he delivered them first, and gave to every one his kue, as
himself thought best: but says he, in the pleading place, I cannot carry it
so away. Mine adversary replieth, opposes, answers, and sifteth matters so,
that I cannot bolster up a had cause as I would, but it will be controlled.

I need not apply: our adversaries when they plead alone, they please fond
recusants: when they plead in writing, it will not prosper, as in the present
question. For though the name of the church be honorable, yet when the
spiritual nature thereof is enquired after, when it is known what is meant by
her Motherhoode, to what conditions she is hound, and to what straites she
has bin brought and may be again, then our adversaries cannot tell whither to
turn them, to prove a visible ioylity necessary ever in determinate places.

At length with much ado, being forced to forsake the practice of the old
Testament, they fly as you have hard to the promises of the new Testament, and
finding none for Rome directly (notwithstanding Bristows brag) they claim the
promises generally made to the Gentiles full fondly for Rome, being but a
particular member, and infer that under the new Testament the number of the
professors shall be mo, and therefore more visible, and that most and ever in
Rome. That they shall be more, they prove by the next verse we mean to
proceed in, which we will take along with us and so go on.

27 For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear no children, break
forth and cry thou that trauelest not. For the desolate has many more
children, than she which has an husband.

First before we treat any farther the question, consider the text a while to
our own comforts. In the first of Samuel, Anna the mother of Samuel, had a
loving husband, 1 Samuel 1.
but a long time she endured the reproach of barrennes, and her sorrow was
thereby greatly increased, and her soul grieved.

But in the end God respected her, and made grant to her petition, and gave
her a son according to her earnest desire, and thereupon she brake forth,
and said that her heart reioiced, her horn was exalted, and her mouth enlarged.

The calling of the Gentiles a most comfortable doctrine.
This case was a private case, but the case and state of us Gentiles was a
general matter, and Iewry was sometime the fruitful mother, and as Anna, so
were the Gentiles the barren woman, and that without an husband, but at length
Gentilisme now altered from Gentilisme, and ascited into favor, and accepted
of God through his grace, the Lord opening her womb, this barren woman has
been a fruitfuller mother than she that bare many, in so much that sundry
places every way most unlikeliest for any fruit at all, much less for plenty
in great abundance, has borne a greater harvest than grounds in sight more
batsome, and of greatest likelihoode.

And here (dearlibeloued) let us never forgette the days of our calling, and
the times of our happiness, and the infinite goodness of our God, who has passed
from his old own people, and has gone over many and mightier nations than
the kingdoms of England, Scotland, Denmarcke, Sueueland and other like cold
countries, and has caused their corck to sinck, and our iron to swim, and has
powered his dew even as well beside the fleese, as upon the fat fell, and has
made our bitter waters as sweet as the sweetest, and has effected that the
very barbarous outplaces of the woorld are become as fertile and as fruitful
for truth and godliness as many nations else far richer and likelier in the eyes
of man. And this is the common joy of the Gentiles in general, but nothing
special or proper to Rome and Italy. But does not this general blessing prove
a generality of multitudes, and do not multitudes prove a visibility and an
ocular, and an ey demonstration of a Church? The motives of multitudes and of
the Churches visibility jointly handled with due answer to their chiefest
cauils.
Now for the nature of multitudes must be spoken, as likewise of the visibility
of the Church, as being a question winding in it self continually in the same
debate. Every church and congregation (for there is not an hears-bredth
difference in the two words) whether it be made up of the godly, or co^pacted
of the malignant, it consists necessarily of a number, and every number,
though some number be a greater multitude than some, yet every number is a
multitude, so that without a multitude, no church, no congregation good or bad
can possibly be. And therefore it is a forest of folly when controversy is of
the church, to deuolue al to one sole man, holding in pretense but from Peter
as from one man. Notwithstanding albeit a church is a multitude congregated,
and so may be visible, yet simply a multitude being gathered in most visible
manner does not evidently argue the goodness of the multitude, or that it
therefore is the visible Church of God. Mark.

The church of God is a chosen people called out of the world, called by God,
constituted in the covenant, and professing the faith. These whether they be 1.
More, 2. Or few, 3. Or of equal number, so they be a number, it skilleth not.

1 A little before the deluge and drowning of the old woorld there were more had
than good, for all flesh had corrupted his ways. Genesis 6.


2 But in the Arc after-ward there were more good than bad: only Cham was
perfectly naught, and in the rest, though a small company, consisted the
Church of God.

3 Under the parable of the 10. virgins in the Gospel the number is even, so
many and so many, five wise, and five foolish virgins.

Wherefore either the plurality or paucity or parity of numbers, the morenes
(as I may so speak) the fewnes, or the euennes in numbering is no true note, no
sure argument, demand, or motive, any way to weigh down the matter. Nay
rather if we shall go to numbering the professors by tale, and not to pondring
the truth of professions, we shall make a fair hand in Gods matters.

In the cause of married priests Soz. lib. 1. c. 23
Paphnutius being but one, was against a whole council, and prevailed with them.

Against the heresy of Arianisme, while Liberius stood, he stood in a manner
alone, and he Theod. L. 2. c. 16
alone defended Athanasius, and where Constantius objected to Liberius that he
an od man, and only alone, the least part of the world (...) (as it were) upon
a singularity he by that means disturbed the quiet peace of the whole woorlde
(...), Liberius answered him well, and if he could have kept himself answerable
to his answer, it had been better, but he answered well, videlicet, (...).
that the word of faith was not of right to be diminished or lesned in
credit because of his alonens in the cause. For (says he) even of old, there
were but three alone, that withstood the kings edict, meaning Nabuchodonosors
commandment, which the three children would not yield unto.

In which story, I plainly not the Universality of error. Vide Pigg. Hier.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
universality of the error, without al controversy al-most all the Bishops not
only of the East, but also of the West whether by force or by fraud relented
and consented thereunto, yea even Liberius himself; was brought to that bent
as I have showed before. And I ask, first the faith was in Liberius alone, and
when he yielded, where and in whom was it then to see to? and now can you think
that it is good going ever with the most? And that the most must needs be best?
And that it cannot choose but be so, at the least under the new testament?

You see it far otherwise in this very ensample The Pope refuses the motive of
multitudes.
and that Liberius for answer to Constantius motive of multitudes replieth
that his lonenesse marred not the cause, and for comfort thereof he respects
the story of old of the three children who were left alone, not denying, but
comparing time with time said that if it might be with the church now, as it
has been with her of oulde time, (...).

But you call us to our text: the barren woman has mo children than she that
bare many. This text touches: does it not? If she have mo than many, belike,
she has very many.

Compare the number of believers that were in Iewry, and the numbers in
Christendom, and questionles the calling of the Gentiles surpasses
innumerably. Yet this makes nothing for set numbers in a visible form here
in this, or that place ever.

The greater part is not necesarily the better for goodness is not made of
quantities.
And compare the whole world and the church together, and as the Church is
better than the world, so worldly men are mo than are not only the true
members, but then the externe profession of christian faith. Shall I argu thus?
These are many, and being many, make a visible countenance, ergo they are
therefore the hest, and best to be trusted? No. But rather of the twain the
mayor part, ergo many times and most likely they are the worse part.

The Church of Christ is a little flock, a flock and therefore many, but a
little flock, and therefore a small many, and smally respected, and though many
are called unto, yet few are chosen, and the Church is a chosen company
effectually called, and even the outward calling and profession is not
embraced of the more part. For the way is narrow, and few take this way, but
the broad way is trodden of every foot, and it is a beaten path, and soon
discerned and seen of all, and followed of most.

See (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 1.26.
consider your (...).
calling, not many wise, not many mighty, not many welthy. If not many of
these, ergo surely not many at al. For the wise, the mighty, the noble, and the
wealthy carry long trains after them.

And as it fared thus in the first entrance of Christianity, and for sometime
after, yet it was somewhat better in process, and yet returning again to the
condition of the first beginning, the wayning will be like the wexing, and
when the son of man shall come, shall he find faith, but even scant and scant,
as it were an Olive or two in the outmost bows after the gathering, or as a
grape here and there after vintage, or as a slender gleaning after harvest?

True. But there are similitudes and parables much sounding to the contrary, as
that the Church should be woonderfully populous, and that not only in
comparison to the Jewish estate, but in it self it should be as 1
1. A Tabernacle in the sun. 2
2. As the city on the high hill, and 3
3. As the candle on the table al in sight, and 4
4. If any man would seek the Church in the wilderness out of sight, nolite
exire, it were sin to go after him.

Sirs, so you say, and huddle up places together at your pleasures, but with
little truth, and ever to least purpose in special for your Roman mart, and
visible monopoly, whither you inuit all the merchants of the world to come and
buy of you.

Whether the Church be a tabernacle in the sun, and how.
1 In order to answer these your fairest objections: you say god placed his
tabernacle in the sun. His tabernacle is the Church, the sun does signify a
visible clearnes, and therefore ever you require a clear aspect for the Church.
And that it may not he said, that you sucked all this out of your own fingers
ends, or as it was said of him: Solus enim hoc Ithacus nullo sub test canebat,
you allege Augustine, and that not in one place alone, but in s^ry, as in
Psalm. 18. and Epist. 166. and contra liter^. Petill. Lib. 2. Cap. 32.

We have heard you oppose, will you hear us answer? 1. First, a false
translation may corrupt a text, and does not make a text to fit a purpose in
commenting without a ground. Undeniably the Psalm treats of the wondrous
works of god, and namely that God made a tabernacle for the Sun in the
heavens, and not that he put his tabernacle in the Sun. 2. Secondly Austens so
using that translation which he had does but allegorize. And allegories
without other evidences are but convenient allusions, and no probatiue
allegations, and that by Austines own judgment, Epistola 48.3. 3
Thirdly Austen disputing against the Donatists, argues a visibility when it
was, and which might be, against the Donatists, who necessarily would drive
the Church to corners, and hide her under a cloak, and bury her in one hole of
the world. 4
4. Fourthly, I might observe that which Austen himself observes, that at the
most, the Church is called but a tabernacle, a moveable tent, and no fixed
permanent house, but a tent, a tabernacle, now placed in Silo, as it were in
the Sun, and sometimes in Mispa an obseurer place: which thing Austen
himself observed, and knew wel-enough. August in Psalm. 10.
5
5. Fifthly, metaphors and borrowed speeches, such as these are, when the Church
is likened to the Sun, to the City on the hill etc. They are true according
to the distinction of some happy times, and not at all times alike, come what
come shall, for an everlasting continuance. Yea occasions may happen, when the
Sun may change into darckenesse, and the Moon into blood, the one may blush,
and the other be ashamed.

In the Canticles Cant. 6.6.
the Church is compared to the Sun, to the Moon, and to the Stars, but
says Austen, when the Sun shall be darckened, and the Moon shall not give her
light, and the Stars shall fall from Heaven, Ecclesia non apparebit impijs
persecutoribus vltra modum saeuientibus, the church shall NOT Aug. Epist. 80
APPEAR by reason of the exceeding cruelty of her persecutors. And then
according to Austens judgment, where will be that visibility of a Tabernacle in
the Sun, when the very Sun in his tabernacle shall be darckened?

2 The The Church a city upon a hill.
second objection of the City upon the Hill, that cannot be hidden. Can-not,
in what sense.
CAN-NOT is here taken for Cannot in dewty ( Id possumus quod Iure possumus)
not for an absolute impossibility. For the highest hills may be sometimes hid
with mistes. And our Savior spoke those words to his Apostles, whom they most
concerned, and they prove a proportionable duty in others, but not a very
performance of such duties, when they who should dwell in the hills, either come
down and build in the valleys, or else are driven from the hills, and constrained
to fly into vauts and dens and secret places. Our savior that said they were
the city on the hill, said also they were the salt of the earth, but he puts
the case, that if the salt lost his saltness, then wherefore is it good? So if
things alter, and keep not their course, their duty is showed by these
terms, and not their doings. If Libanus turn into Carmel, or Carmel into
Libanus, they have altered their first nature. For Libanus was a wood, and
Carmel a fertile pasture. But in process of time, woods become pastures, and
by the just judgment of God, the best pastures are turned into barren heathes.
So hills are made vallyes, and vallyes may be exalted, and the very house of
God bu: It on mounr Sion, may be and was made a den of thieves.

The Church a candle on the table.
3 The third objection of the candell in the candle-sticke set on the table,
suffers the like answer. For if the clear burning candle become a snuf, as
if the white Nazareth should become a black Aethiop, the case is the same, that
was of the high City, that had cast hirselfe beadlong from the mountain.

And again, it is to be remembered, that the candle and light of the truth,
and true Church is not alike lightsome to cuery ey, and no man seeeth the light
of the house, but he that is in the house. Solemn non nisi sanus videt.
Augustine in Psalm. 47. The bleare ey cannot abide the light, the blind sees
not, no not in the sun.

Again the Apostles were as this candle thus placed, therefore are they also
who are nothing apostolic, are they the light of the woorld, the candle on the
table? I deny it.

If bees become drones, because they were bees, shall they brag of their first
being? And very waspes make combs as well as bees, but waspes make no hu^ny, and
therefore there is no sweetness, no savor, no taste in this bragging and show of
ancient progenitors and titles without answerable duties, and goodness
according.

Go not out into the wilderness. spoken in what meaning.
4 The fourth cauil is, that there is no going out into the wilderness to enquire
for the church. In the 17. of Luke our Savior being demanded concerning his
kingdom which is his church, he answers first generally that it comes not
with observation, which may be explicated not to be with sumptuous
preparation, and costly manner after the usage of earthly princes. Al which
strongly reprooueth the pomp and starely bravery of Rome. Then meu shall not
say of a certainty and of alocal necessity, Lo here, or lo there, as if gods
Church were necessarily either in the wilderness or any where esse. For the
kingdom is not hung as a painting vnpon walls, or builte upon the sand of
multitudes, or else conveyed into the wilderness whence it cannot com? fuorth
when God would, no we never said that Elias was always so in his cave, and
could not come forth, Nay the kingdom of God then when our Savior answered,
was offered them, and was amongst them, and should have been inwardely
received of them. For the throne of David belonging spiritually to our Savior,
was no earthly conceat, no local matter, no corporal respect with a necessary
respect, here or there, either in the desert, or in any place else, but may be
here, and may be there, but neither here or there of pure necessite. but as
God will without observation of cirtumstances, and therefore without a
plurality of numbers, or localities of places, or visibilities of set persons.
The kingdom of God comes now with observation.

And farther, as it came not so, when it first came, Shall Rebecca ride, and
Isaac go a foot? Genesis 24.64.
so shall it not end in such beuty as popery requires, and why should it? The
spouse is not better than the brideman, the members than the head.

When the child went into Egypt, Mary and Joseph went with it. And the woman
in the Revelation which is the Church (whereof there is a plain prophecy)
she was driven by name into the wilderness, and we ought as occasions shall be
offered by the providence of the Almighty with patience to suffer our selves to
be framed conformable to our Savior in the days of his flesh. Who being
looked on with a fleshly eye seemed contemptible, and to be depised, verily
without Esai. 53.3.
form or beutie to see to: that is, without al vistble estimation.

And as for our selves in the last times, we are plainly foretold that there
shall be a defection, and that religion shall be mystically defaced under
fair pretenses, and that when Christ shall come, he shall scant find faith on
the face of the earth, and what cares he for a painted visibility of
faithless hypocrites?

God might use the papacy to the benefit of his Church, though the papacy be
not the Church.
Where not with standing even in the mids of such, God may have and has had,
and has no doubt many secret ones, yea God can use such hypocrites to the
benefit of his Church, as a man may use a bussard to hatch him hawks, though
when the hawks be hatched, the bussard mislike and beat them most, that are
best of wing, and soar highest both for integrity of life, and soundnes of
doctrine, but the very hawk in experience tan tell in time that the bussard as
their natural dame never laid the eggs from whence they cante. So in popery
albeit we and others some-when externally receive the sacrament of baptisine
amongst them, or ought that good is else; yet inwardly being regenerated by
the spirit in the blood of Christ through the mercy of the Father, and coming
to riper years by true knowledge out of his holy word, we know, that we were
baptized though ministerially by them, yet by the providence of God, not into
the partiality of the Romish faction, but into the communion of the vnsuersal
church, and so made, no members of Rome, but of Christ's body, to serve him,
not in a seruility of Ie wish or apish rites, or in the visibility of a Church
pompt, or in the particularity of my place, but in the true liberty of a fre
people, and it the general lap of his chosen, which in this world is hated and
spited most, even of them that much pretend to love her most. But this love is
periert hatred. And this hate passes al hate that is begun in hypocrisy, and
continued in the greatest villame that ever was heard of since the beginning.

In consideration whereof, tuen as Naomi in the book of Ruth, Ruth. 1.19.
when it was bruted that she was returned out of Moab, the citizens of
Bethleem said, is not this Naomi? Who answered: tall me not Naomi, which by
interpretation is beuty, but call me mara, which is bitterness, call me bitterness,
call me not beuty.

When she went into Moab constrained by the famine in Canaan, she went out
full, with convenient wealth, but in her exile, her substance was spent, hit
husband deseased, her two sons died, and she was left a poor widdowe,
rather Mara, than Naomi.

Semblably while the church, or rather a part of the catholic church is in the
peregrination of this miserable world, as Naomi in Moab, what wroonges are
sustained on every side? And sometimes those that should play the husbands
part, deal worse with her, than ethers who yet deal not well.

She brings forth, as it is figured in the Revel. 12.
Revelation, with pain, and the fruit of her womb, yea the most part of her
children become an uncomfortable generation. Scant Ruth, even a few and those
many times most unlikely, as the daughter in Law, follows and accompanies
Naomi to the everlasting home and heavenly Canaan.

Does not this story suffer this application, and may not the Church, even in
places claiming by the name of the Church, the Church, cry forth and say, o
call me not Naomi, but call mec Mara: call me not beutie, but call me bitter: call
me not a visible Monarchy, a glorious multitude, a beutiful hierarchy, a
brave prelacie, and a Roman papacy, a galant tabernacle placed in the
clearest Sun, The true beuty of the Church what.
no call me as the tents of Cedar fair indeed within by spiritual comforts and
graces of the holy Ghost, accompanied and made un of the souls of the just and
righteous men, even of the sons of Sara, and the children of Jerusalem which
is from above, but this beuty is altogether inward, but outwardly these tents
are black, both which the imperfection of humane frailnes, and most by the
black reports, and bad dealings we are daily defaced with in the world, and
in opinion defamed. O call not this condition generally Naomi, specially to the
outward view, but call it bitrernes, for it is bitter in deed, if there were
not, as it were, some Elizeus meal to sweeten the pot withal. But hereof as
occasion shall serve, even as by occasion of the two mothers, thus much has
been spoken. Now look we upon their children.

28 Therefore, brethren, we are after the manner of Isaac children of the
promise.

29 But as then, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him, that [ was
borne] after the spirit, even so [ it is] now.

30 But what says the Scripture? Put out the servant and her son: for the
son of the servant shall not be heir with the son of the free woman.

31 Then, brethren, we are not children of the servant, but of the free woman.

The comparison betwixt Ismael and Isaac distinctlie considered.
The Church as it is likened by the Apostle to Abraham's wives, so also is it to
Abraham's children, and so in Gods Church appears also as plain a difference
as before viz. 1. In their birth. 2. In their affections. 3. In the right of
their inheritance.

1 Albeit Ismael, and Isaak both came from the loins of Abraham, yet as out of
one seed, the solid corn and stender chafe arise, so was in them two great
odds, much according to the ground wherein the seed was sown, according to
the diversities of the wombs, and according to the teperature of the regio^,
indeed, according to the blessing of God, and the grace of his promise. A dry
slip to take root, a dead womb to conceive was more than strange, and the
only work of the almighty. Whereof before.

2 Their contrary affection, is descried by the open persecution not obscurely
offered. And as it was in the letter of the story so once, so is it still. For
this enmity was not ended in their persons, neither was this a private case,
but a type of a farther matter. And in them was represented, in the one the
malignant Church, and in the other the Church of God.

Whether Ismaels mocking may be properly termed persecution.
Here it may be questioned whether Ismael indeed did persecute Isaake or no. In
the book of Genesis God visited Sara, as you have hard. Sara in her, and her
husbands old age conceaueth and bears a son. When the child was borne, he
is in convenient time circumcised, named and weaned, and the father makes a
great feast, which when Ismael saw, he much scorneth at his brother Isaak.

But was this such a matter? Or does every frump come within the compass and
nature of persecution? In cases, the virulency of an adders congue, the poison
of lips, and the contradiction of railers, and table-talkers, and bitter
speakers greeueth more than the wounds of a sword. But yet there was more in
this story than so.

He sees his father liberal, the mother joyful, the child made of, and the
promise performed, and yet he imagines he can defeat al: and therefore he
scorneth, and sets the promise at naught, and makes a May Game of the Lords
purpose: and this being rightly considered, and laid to heart there can be no
greater persecution whatsoever. This cutteth deep, and poisoneth as it
cutteth. A man were better be flead with Bartlemew, or sawed asunder as Isay,
or broyled on a gridiarn as Lawrence, than tolerate the reproaches of impiety.
Pharoes brick, or Phalaris bull, that is, the extremest persecution, is nothing
comparable.

In the book of Judges Judge. 16.23.
Sampson suffered the entisementes of Dalila even to the boring out of his own
eyes, but when the Philistines were not content therewith, but would needs
send for Sampson to make them merry, and in him sportingly to scorn the Lords
strength, you know what followed.

In the 2 of Kings 2 King. 2.
it may seem at first sight, but an unmannerly prancke of young untaught
things, to vpbraide the Prophet: Go up thou bald bate, go up thou balde
bate: but the greeuousnes of their punishment may easily inform us of the
weight of that transgression.

Wherefore the mocking of a Prophet, the illuding the promise, the vpbraiding
of the strength of the Lord, the scorneful out-brauing the saints of God, as
when they say, Come sing us one of your Sion songs, or, There is no help for
David in David's God, or as to our savior, If God will save him, or, let
himself come down from the cross and save himself. These are the sorest
persecutions, and the most insufferable sufferings that can be suffered.
Wherefore Ismaels open throat and unsavory breath, his scorning head, and
scoffing spirit was a very persecution, there is no question therein.

The motive of Succession.
Now for the extent of persecution, did it live and die in their persons? Our
adversaries would fain hold and maintain by succession the goodness of their
relligion. I know they know, that they cannot show neither orderly beginning,
nor unbroken continuance for the matters we charge them with. But could they
prove a prolonged race, what then? Hard. detect. Page 217. a.
Must we then seek our faith in the Romish comperts?

A scrole of names is a sorry proof to prove a truth in doctrine.
Cain killed Abell: so did he; so does he still. Ismael mocked Isaac: so does
he ever since till this day. Persecutors draw after them a long tail, and
descent of a continued line in evil. Wherefore succession is no firm argument
to infer their errors, or to infirm our truth. The wicked have it most, the
good may miss it many times. What did it profit Cham that he was the son of
Noe, or Absolon that holy David was his father? Learning, Wit, Eloquence,
muchlesse godliness, go not by descent in a right line.

Aristippus was a fine cunning Courting Philosopher, which may better beseem
Philosophy, than Divinity, but his son was a very loute. Demosthenes was most
eloquent in the grauest kind, but his Son was too too rude. Cicero was both
wise and eloquent, and yet his son was a very sot. Ely of himself, except in
cockering up of his children, was no evil man, but his Sons degenerated, and
were as the Sons of Belial.

Naturally man is naught, and therefore a natural succession in persons cannot
be good by nature: and which is to be noted, succession in the place, and in
the room of predecessors adds no sanctity and holiness. Numb. 32.
Numb. 32. Behold you are risen up an increase of sinful men insteede of
your Fathers. Behold likewise the pleasant valley of Sodom was changed into
Surphur, Salt, Pits of Brimstone, and the like stinking matter. Oye generation
of vipers, says our Savior to the Pharisees who sat in the place which God
had chose^, reproving them both because they were vipers, and because they were
a generation, even SVCCESSIVELY a venomous race.

The motive of Antiquity. Pa. Supra. 42.
Again our Adversaries claim by antiquity, but do you not see the elder
brother persecuting the younger, the elder brother killing Abel, the elder
brother selling young Joseph into the hands of strangers? And even so is it
now, as it was of old. But of this Motive more before.

And note also, that it is the lot of the best, both to be interrupted 1. in
their continuance, while the badde produce out whole generations, and then 2.
to be the youngest in their beginnings, and lastly 3. to be evil entreated even
of their brethren.

3 The third difference betwixt the children, which I observed, was the right
and the obtaining of their inheritance: wherein is set forth, that the bond
woman by name with her brat for their intolerable brables at the fast were shut
out of doors, and cast, as it were, out of the the Arc of Abraham's family.

Cain complains and finds fault that he was as a rough stone cast out of
the hand of God to be a vagabond upon the face of the earth.

Agar also and Ismael (of whom we speak) betoke them to their portions, but
such portions are Genesis 21.
soon spent, and in the anguish of soul they were a co^fortlesse couple, and
cried out for want, which was a pattern of farther distres. For though the
chafe for a time grow in the field, and rest in the mow, and lie in the
flower in greater quantity than the good grain; yet after fanning time the
chafe shall be cast out into the fire, and the corn shall be received into the
Lords everlasting garners.

While they were in prosperity, who but Agar against Sara, Ismael against his
brother, the Jews against the Gentiles? The chafe exceeds the corn, and the
corn seems to be but chafe. But that day is never entirely fair that
ends in a wette rain. Ismaels scoffing iollity comes to nothing. Isaac
obtains the promise, and tarieth with his father, and inioyeth the
inheritance, and Ismaels pleasureable waters of many frumpes, and sundry
delights run all into the salt Sea and receive a bitter end, and only Isaac
inioyeth that inheritance.

Now look ye to it (says the Apostles exhortation) of whether Testament, of
whether Jerusalem, of whether Mother, of whether Mountain, of Agar or Sara, of
Sinay or Sion, will ye be? Will ye be Ismaelites, or Isaackes? With Moses or
Christ alone will you Christians hold? Will you tarry in the house, and enjoy
the inheritance, or be cast out of doors?

CHAP. V.
1 STAND fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and
be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage.

2 Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing.

3 For I testify again to every man which is circumcised, that he is bound
to keep the whole Law.

4 Ye are abolished from Christ whosoever are justified by the Law, ye are
fallen from Grace.

5 For we through the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness through faith.

6 For in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith which works by Love.

The happy condition of a true Christian.
THE case of a christian man stands thus: The horror of death, the terror of
hell, the suttlety of sin, the frailty of the flesh, the might of the world,
the power of Satan have naught to do with him. For why? the favor of God, the
comfort of the spirit, the merit of the son, the force of faith, the nature of
hope do swallowe up all those former enemies, and terrible invasions.

For are we not a royal race, children of choice, sons of the promise,
wheritours with Isaac, a freed and a free people, manumitted from the Law, and
set at liberty by Christ? John. 8.36.
Whom the son freed, they are free without question.

The apostle has inculcated this heavenly doctrine both in plain words often,
and likewise by sundry parables, as also by certain special euentes in the
family of Abraham, and thereupon he wills the Galathians to be wise and
courageous to maintain their liberty, to stand to it, yea to die in the
quarrel. A million of lives were well lost in such a cause, and yet not lost,
but well and wisely laid forth.

This liberty is no humane freedom, as from the Turks Galleys, or Spaniards
Mines, or such like Egyptian Slavery, but a liberty of conscience from a
spiritual thrall and everlasting damnation.

Christianity is not made as Lincy-Wolsey, of diverse matters.
The purchase of this liberty, as we say, cost whot water: nay, my brethren, it
cost the shedding of the precious blood of the son of God, and of the Lord
of glory, and therefore stand to it (says Paul) quit your selves like men,
loose not this liberty, entangle not your selves with the yoke of bondage.
There is little reckoning made of me. But say that I Paul told you, that, if
you be circumcised since the date of that ceremony is expited, and with the
intent to join the Law with christ, which your false teachers bear you in
hand you ought to do, say that I said it, and you shall find it so, that
Christ cannot profitte you, and that thereby you are even abolished from
Christ, and fallen from Grace. For as the Oak and the Olive will not grow in
one hole, so he that leans (as John did) unto Christ, must rencunce Moses
Law, and only cleave to Christ, and to his grace alone: For as Sara and Agar
cannot dwell in one house, so the liberty of christ, and the seruility of Moses
cannot rest in one heart.

1 Samuel 5.
The Philistines by force may bring the ark of God into the Temple of their
god, but the arc and Dagon will never agree, and our patches and out-worne
rags are not suitable to his scarlet weed. His new wine will have new
bottles, and his wine will not be mixed, and as his sacred Ioh. 19.41.
body was laid in a monument, where never man was laid, so his person is
there received, where nothing is received but his person, and he that is a
Christian is nothing but a Christian: he is a not Jew and a Christian, but
he is a Christian.

Agrippa in the Acts Act. 26.29.
was induced to become almost a Christian, but (almost) contented not Paul, and
Paul wished, that all men were christians, not almost, but altogether so. For
he that is not altogether so, is in no part so. There is no 1 Cor. 1.13.
dividing with Christ, neither yet of the Law. For the Law requires all or
none.

Because Paul would not ouerbear them with his own name and authority, he
shows withal abundantly that the natures of the Gospel are contrary and
cannot agree. And that the rite of circumcision under the law, requires the
observation of the whole law, and so the false Apostels taught them but the
observation of the whole Law was impossible, yet upon a supposal. If it could
be observed, then farewell Christ, and farewell Grace.

But verse. 5. The spirit enstructeth our hope not to trust in our selves, but
teaches us to expect a righteousness thorough faieth in Christ. Which faith
verse 6. knows no difference between circumcision and uncircumcision, for
christ is the savior of all that believe in him thorough faith. And because
there were even then at that time false motives concerning names of things
aequiuoce and doubtfully termed, which indeed were not answerable to their
appellations, Paul describes for our better understanding, how we shall know
a true faith, to wit, by the operation thereof by love. Faith is a faith which
woorketh by charity.

De universe Iustificati. doct. lib. 8. cap. 29.
This Paraphrase is plain and sensible, and might suffice, but that Master
Stapleton and papists will not suffer the plainest scriptures to pass without
their obscure glozing and endless corruptions. Instead of [ which worketh] he
says which is wrought by charity. For he tells us upon his knowledge in the
greek, that the verb ( operatur) in graeco habet sensum passiuum, non
actiuum, has a passive sense in greek, and not an active. This passes. And
not an active?

Henry Steeuen incomparably better skilled in the tongue than master Stapleton,
in his greek Tom. 1. con. 12.31.
Lexicon says that in the new test^ment, (...) is found also in the active
signification, and in the Epistle of Saint James Iam. 5.16.
(...) is an effectual operative and active praying: is it not? And your Latin
translation is [ operatur] which is actiuely taken we guess. And date you
presume to for go the same, directly against your own trent decree, in that
respect? But you may do what you list, to maintain your fancies.

But let us fellow you, and see what reason may lead you to think that Paul
should require a faith wrought by charity. And by the way be it remembered
that your selves date not so translate it. For though your Rhemish men in their
notes iumble about that your meaning, yet their note is beside the text, and
they translate it, as we do, viz. That it is [ faith which works by
charitie] and not, which is wrought by charity.

But now consider if Paul would have charity work up faith, and faith to be
wrought up, and to be perfected by love, to what purpose were that speech but
to overthrow the whole tenor of his former endeavor? For he shows that we
are not justified by the Law, and namely therefore not by circumcision, least
by the admission of circumcision, we should become debtors of the whole Law,
both moral and ceremonial. And if you mark, love and charity by reason of
the large extent thereof reaching even to both the tables, is called the
perfection of the Law: so that in requiring Love, he should also exact the
whole Law, which he purposely labors to exclude in the case and action of
iustifiyng, and therefore verily Love is not the worker, or former of faith,
but faith alone justifies, and this justifying faith actiuely woorketh through
love, still I say, not in the act of justifying before God, but in the actions
of good living in the world. But thus Master Stapleton you can set men a
work to confute these childish babies of fro-warde wranglers.

7 Ye did run well: who did let you that you did not obey the truth?

8 It is not the persuasion of him that called you.

9 A little Leaven does Leaven the whole lump.

10 I have trust in you thorough the Lord, that ye will be none otherwise
minded: but he that troubles you shall bear his condemnation whosoever he be.

11 And brethren, if I preach circumcision, why do I yet suffer persecution?
Then is the slander of the cross abolished.

12 Would to God they were even cut off which do disquiet you.

In Leuiticus Leuit. 10.9.
Aaron abstained from wine for the time he sacrificed, whereby was insinuated
the great sobriety, and marvelous discretion is required in them who are to
deal in Gods affairs. And as discretion is requisite, so is diligence
necessary, and courage needeful. Al these virtues were in Paul in the highest
degree. We have found it so, and so have observed them not once, nor twice,
but sundry times as we have gone along.

The Galathians ran well, Paul cheerefullie encouraged them in that race.
There are stumbling blocks of offense laid in their way. Paul seeks to roll
them aside, or else helps them to ouer-stride them. And to that end he
reaches them his hand, nay his hope and hands (no doubt) held up to the Lord
most earnestly in their behalf.

Jacob never took the toil to obtain to wife either of Labans daughters,
that Paul takes to wedde and marry the Galathians firmly to Christ, to whom
they were espoused.

But there was, 1. some secret leaven to season them in a contrary doctrine, 2.
and likely there was one a more notable troubler of them, than the rest, though
they were 3. many, who much disquieted these Churches.

The least part of the leaven of quarrelers is over dangero^.
1 Of the leaven Paul wills to beware, even of the least part thereof. Men
make small reckoning of small sins, yet the least forfite, forfiteth the whole
lease. The little leaking may drown the ship: one little pint of vinegar marreth
a pipe of wine: a little leaven sowreth the whole lump, and causes it to
swell, and never leaves till it have brought the whole lump to be of his own
nature, viz. to be of a sour, poutting, and proud condition.

2 An example hereof may be even he whom Paul scriketh at, he who persuaded
them contrary to their callings, who was that notable turmoiler of them. Of
whom Paul says, who ever he be, there is a higher than he, there is a
judgment seat he cannot decline, but shall and must abide the verdict that
God will give upon all such.

3 Of this man and generally of the rest which purposely made a concision, and
a rent in the Church of God, like unruly fish breaking the net. and disordering
all, Paul wishes in respect of gods glory, and the Churches commodity, that
they were even cut off. A heavy wish. But a necessary, when privy lurckers, and
whispering corrupters are otherwise like to contaminate all.

Woe to them by whom offenses come. And yet there must come offenses, there must
be heresies, and there shall be enemies: heresies to try our faith, and enemies
to prove our patience.

Inward contention worse than outward persecution.
And while the wind bloeth but into the house, there may be means to keep it
forth: but when it is bred in the house, and while the contention is within the
womb of Rebecca, the contention and struggling is felt with a most sorrowful
feeling, and who can abide it?

And yet lo, herein is patience, and herein is great wisdom, patience in
praying to God, and wishing of him that he would take his own cause into his
own hand; wisdom in providing remedies convenient, according to our callings.

If any man be given to contend, we have no such custom in the Church of God:
if any man be like the Salamander that likes and lives best in the fire, I
say in the fire of unnecessary strife, which is not, certainly, which is not
taken from the Lords Altar, truly for mine own part I cannot but say, and
pray, o my soul enter not into such Councels.

Elias servant saw a little clowd, 1 King. 18.44.
as it were a man's hand at first, and afterward the heavens waxt thick and
black and clowdy, and a great storm ensued. I can not prognosticate what
storms may come (God be thanked ever who has granted so long a calm) but if
they must needs come, and cannot be diuerted, which I most wish, then I pray
God they fall upon that sea, and upon those troublesome waters, from whence
they rise.

Brown the schismatique.
I will not so speak in clouds, but that you may know whom I mean directly: In
deed I mean the man whose opprobrious pamphlets, I take, some of you have, or
have seen: I mean Brown, that shameless reuiler of our Sacraments, a railer at
our ministry, that saucy reprocher of the state and Parliament by name, and
the very diuider, as much as in him lies, of the body of Christ, which is his
Church.

The nature of schism where it enters, and what means it uses.
Mark what I tell you: the nature of schism is ever to hunt after, and to enter
the places where religion is most planted: and because the affections of weomen
are great where they take, the old Pharisie, the cunning Jesuit, the peevish
Schismatique always invade widows housen, and young wives companies,
specially of the richer sort: and when devotion has fore-possessed their
minds, either the one way or the other, then come they with their intemperate
heat, inflaming the air prepared alreaby so, that it may be incensed.

Gain by schisms.
And as these men feed these weomens humors, so these weomen fill these men's
purses, and they gain more by schism, than they could by unity, and to that
end in steed of true preaching, of sound doctrine, only certain debates
impetrinent, are handled among a sort of the infirmer sex, and the regiment and
ordering of every thing are demurred and decided privately in places, where some
one woman or other can find the husband inclineable, or else where the woman
is venterous and will and does give, give (for they call it giving) largely to
hear of these matters, and of these only. And within a while the open Church
is refused, and secret conuenticles taken up, charity is broken, and al is
turned to an eger sharpnes of speech sometimes against preaching at Paul's,
Reading in towns, or studieng in Universities, and generally against the whole
order of this Realm. This is a secret souring Leaven, this is not as Elizeus
meal to sweeten the bitter, but as gal added to the sweet, to make it most
bitter, and like a roasted Onnion cut and laid open, ready to take every evil
sent in the house, where it can find the least suspicion thereof.

If there be any imperfection amongst us, as I am sure there is none urged as
an additament to Christ, and the Articles agreeed upon etc. anno 1562. Artic.
20.
Scriptures which were a case to by in: but if there be any in other matters,
shall the corn say, I will not grow but in the field where no weeds grow? I
will not hear them, which teach well, and which teach all the truth in faith,
but not all the truth which I count truths in other respects? And therefore
brag and vaunt, I had rather defy al and live alone.

In the body there are wertes and deformities of diverse sorts, some may be cut
off with ease, or with no great pain: othersome seem to be deformities and
be not, but in the eyes of some, and ye if they were, I say not, better a
mischief than an inconvenience, but better an inconvenience, than an
intolerable mischief. And these schisms, these angry biles, these
insufferable plagues will grow to an intolerable mischief, if they be not cut
off (as Paul wishes) or some other way qualified and assuaged. But this much
by the way and upon just occasion.

13 For brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use it not as an
occasion unto the flesh, but by love serve one another.

14 For all the Law is fulfilled in one word, which is this, thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self.

15 If ye bite and devour one another, take heed least ye be consumed one
of another.

16 I say walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh.

17 For the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye cannot do the
same things, that ye would.

18 And if ye be led by the spirit, ye are not under the Law.

The Galathians as they were to recognize the state wherein they were placed,
and the condition whereunto they were called, and therein to live and die, and
to stand to that: so yet because licentious men may soon abuse the liberty of
the gospel, Paul delivers forth a caveat, and makes as it were a circle,
least men take an exorbitant, and a wandering course in the ways of their
salvation.

Grace has superabounded, but sin may not therefore abound. Abraham and
Abraham's race is justified and set at liberty by faith, by the promise in the
seed through favor and grace from our sins, as likewise also from the old
ceremonies, shall we therefore ad sin to sin, and live as we list, and
lust after the flesh, and offend every weak one, being called to lead a life
after the spirit, and that in perfect love and brotherly charity? Phy for shame.

The nature of man is prone to superstition, and bent to ceremonies, and ready
to take any other way to Heaven than God himself prescribes.

Of old, Spiridion bishop of Cypris, Sozo. lib. 1. c. 11.
a man most renouned and known by fame, when in a fasting time a stranger came
to him considering circumstances; he willed his daughter (for he was married) to
dres such provision as he had, to wit a piece of bacon: and when it was ready,
himself did eat and bad his ghest do the like and take part: the stranger
refused so to do, because he was a Christian, nay says Spiridion, (...), by
so much the rather thou should not refuse. All things are clean to the
clean.

The Scriptures are plain. And I ad, God is not the god of meats, he cares
not for fishers more than for butchers, for salt fish more than for powdered
beef, for meats too or fro. Touch not, taste not, were Jewish services, we
are free as Spiridion said, even because we are Christians, and so are we free
from the fleshely grosser yoke of the whole Law, even because we are
Christians, but yet not to live after the flesh without the rules of the Law,
and beside the orders of charitable and duetiful consideration.

A Christian is most free, and most bound.
In two words (I may seem to speak contraries, but mark what I say) yea, 1.
A Christian is the only freeman. 2. Again a Christian is as much bound, though
not seruilely bound, as any man else.

1 Concerning the curse of the Law, the degrees and wilfulnes of sinning, the
slavery of satan, the fear of death, the thrall of ceremonies, old or new,
and the bond of damnation, a christian man is a freeman.

2 On the otherside, not only to serve God, whose service is perfect freedom,
but also to serve one another, a Christian is most bound of al men. Which kind
of service is no slavery, but a willing service and dewty, and not a compelled
doing and servitude, because al is and should be in a lovely performance
labored and contended unto.

To induce men hereunto, the reasons are very forcible. 1. The commandment to
love. 2. The excellency of love. 3. The inconvenience in not loving.

1 If God command, what seek we farther? Ego, Dominus, I am the Lord, is the
conclusion which God ever makes either in his prohibitions or precents: and
Hely taught Samuel to say, that which we al must say, Speak on Lord, thy
servant hears, and by hearing is meant obedience in hearing.

Love and Charity.
2 The excellency of love appears herein: that love God, and love man also,
love God and man, and the perfection of the Law could require no more. Of so
large a compass is love, and of so excellent a quality.

But yet the Apostle does not dispute now whether a man can love in the
highest degree, but what he must endeavor to do being freed from his
imperfection, and wanting the perfectness, which is required.

If we could love in that measure we ought, in that sort we should, and in what
manner the Law commands, then might we fulfill the Law no doubt. But we have
a discharge from that perfection, for we are not under the Law, but yet not
without release from contending to perfection, for thereunto the spirit
leads, and lovingly conduct^h us al along.

By the spirit is meant the first fruits of the holy Ghost, the effects of
grace, and power of christ working in christians: which because some relickes
of the old man remain in us, which the Apostle calls the flesh, alas this
flesh lusts against the spirit, so that we cannot do what we would, and
therefore not what we should. For many times we wish to do less than we
ought, and yet let us ever endeavor to do the most. Herein the only way is to
go the ways of love, and charity. For love thinks nothing hard, though it
be never so hard.

In loving, as the heavens are placed above the earth, so the God of heaven is
to be beloved above al his creatures. And yet look what love we duly and
orderly show to our neighbor, he accepts as done to himself, so that in
him and for his sake, we perform it thoroughly, as usually we would to our
own selves.

Man has a natural Self-love forbidden.
philauty and self-love, but God requires not the evil kind of love, whereby
always and especially in the last days men shall be lovers of themselves, but
the high degree of hartines in loving others, even as our selves, the Law would
have.

Eat not thy bread alone by thy self, break it to the poor. Break it with
discretion, but break it. Judas the traitors voice was, what will ye give me?
Cain asked, am I the keeper of my brother? And why not the keeper? But God save
every innocent Abel from such keepers.

Yet indeed no man has greater charity than to give his life for his
brethren. I deny not the greatness, Magis aut minus non variant speciem,
greatness or litlenes does not alter the question, it is charity to love, and it
is the nature of true charity to lay down our lives for the good of our
neighbors, even as Christ Jesus did, all that he did, not for himself,
whether in his birth, Nobis natus, he was borne for us, or in his life, nobis
datus, he was given to us, or at his departure, Expedit vobis, it was expedient
for you that he should ascend. All the actions of our Savior were commodious
and profitable for us, and not behoouefull for himself. Let no man seek his
own, but the wealth of others, says the Apostle. Love loves our neighbors
all, yea and above our selves.

I need not resolve you who is your neighbor. The Samaritane in Saint Luke,
Luc. 10.
in compassion and true love spares neither his wine, nor his oil, nor his
personal pains, setting the wounded man on his own beast, and bringing him to
the Inn, and taking farther order for farther charges requisite, knowing that
there was a mutual neighborhood, not ever by neerenes of place, but for
necessity and extremity of pure need. And he that loves cannot lack the
understanding to discern who is a neighbor. Love is wise, and Love is ever
willing to do any good to any man to the uttermost.

The inconvenience of division.
3 If the excellency of loving be so great, the inconvenience of not loving
cannot be little. And in not loving is not meant a mere want of charity, but
which ever ensues, where charity wants, a present enducement of the
contrary quality.

And where the contrary affections reign, there is snarling and biting and
devouring, and a plain consuming one of the other. For the divided house cannot
endure. And it is an evil land that deuoureth their own inhabitants, and the
spirit of the lord does not lightly rest in these whirlewind-spirits, such as
troubled the Galathians, and turmoile impertinently every place where ever they
come without lawefull and necessary cause, as if they were made of wild-fier to
inflame and burn up the world. O Lord if it be thy will, take away al just
occasion of mislike, and quench all their furies, which seek occasions there,
where none are offered. The dew and grace of thy holy spirit can do all this,
may it please thy goodness to grant us this favor, in Christ Jesus. So be it,
Amen.

19 Moreover the works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness.

Albeit the root of sin be deep, and the corruption of fleshly hid and
lurk in the inward parts, yet the woorks thereof are not obscure, but evident
to the ey, big, gross, open and manifest, so that a man may soon know that the
tree is naught by the vicious fruits it bears. And if a man may judge of the
workman by his works, some of the works of the flesh, are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, wantonness.

Fornication Adultery.
Wantonness breeds uncleanness, uncleanness breaks forth into sinful
fornication, where the parts are single, and into abominable adultery where
either party offending is a married person. By the Law of God the adulterer and
the adulteress shall die: moriendo morientur: Leuit. 20.
there should be no remedy. There were Laws among the Gentiles to the same
effect. But Iuuenal complains, Lex Iulia dormis? May not we rather, Lex
Iehouae dormis?

Whether Adultery should be death.
There is a great deal of questioning about this matter, whether the penalty of
adultery must necessarily be death or no, for it may be, and that it deserves
there is no question.

Give me leave to say thus much, that if it were death, adulteries would be
fewer, quarrels of marrying again after adultery, the adultresse living, would
not be so rife, and love to the certain undoubtedly known and only children,
would be much increased between the Parents.

If a man steal xij. d, he shall be hanged, if a man abuse twelve men's
wives, yet he may live.

The peace is broken in my Ox, or Horse, is the peace kept when my wiue is
defiled, and my daughters deflored?

Other vices swarm, but this is a Noes flud. Young men are no niggards: Old
men are no wasters: countrymen are no ruffins, nor townsme^ quarrelers. But old
and young, town and country had need to look better to this vice.

There is no good giving place to a flattering sin. Nature is frail, and the
flesh lusts against the spirit, and there is no sirding at all for a man
that stands upon a Pinnacle. Wherefore all causes, yea al occasions of this
way sinning must be deuoyded.

Praeparatiues to uncleanness,
Shall I be plain? or why should I not? painting of faces: frisling of hair:
mo^sterous starcht supported rufs: pride upon pride in apparel: exces of diet:
minsing dances: wanton gestures: ribaldry talk: amorous ditties: vain
discourses: Venus court, and the Palace of pleasures, and the like wherein
there is no Pallas, no wit, verily no true wisdom: all these for the most
part, are nothing but the ministers many times of much uncleanness: and the
Apostle who cannot abide any wantonness, would he tolerate these enormities? Go
to the commandment, and study well the precept, Thou shall not commit adultery,
and these follies, these preparatiues to adultery will soon be forsaken.

As our Savior, John. 8.4.
when talk was about the woman that was taken (...).
in the act, he stooped down, and wrote on the ground, so I could desire to
speak as if it were under a vaut in most secret terms for the amendment of
this sin, but the works of darkness are become bold, and men are not ashamed
of their turpitude and shame, and they can look thorough a white sheet, and
never blush.

The Israelites made of the house of God the house of iniquity: the Jews of
the temple of God a den of Thieves: but these offenders make the Temples of
the holy Ghost, and the members of Christ that should be, the members of an
harlot and the Temples of the holy Ghost they make to be the cage of unclean
birds, a very sty for hogs, and a stable for horse, that neieth after that
which is none of his own. O Lord, were it not better, or is it not the nature
of marriage, and thine holy ordinance, that for the 1 Cor. 7.2.
avoiding of fornication, every man should have his wife, and every woman her
husband, and being in that honorable state, should keep themselves from
strange flesh, shrouding themselves from all inconveniences under the broad
vine leaf of thine own planting?

If any man or woman among us have offended herein, let neither him nor her
henceforth ad drunckennes to thirst, let him not walowe in this mire any more;
let him rise up by repentance, let him vomit out by confession this surfeiting:
and let him deeply consider that he is made after the image of God which he
should not deface: that he is the member of Christ, which he may not
prostitute, and that our bodies are as an holy place if we know so much, even
the Temples of the holy spirit: which how it is grieved with these
transgressions, it has been told you at sundry times.

20 Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, contentions,
seditions, heresies,

21 Envy, murders, drunckennes, gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you
before, as I also have told you before, that they which do such things, shall
not inherit the kingdom of God.

Paul entendeth not to make a just beadrol, and full computation of all sins
that either were in the Galathians, or might arise out of the flesh, or else to
marshal every vice and disorder in a precise order.

Certain manifest enormities are only touched, and in the end he adds [ and
such like] and of them al he denounces that they will weigh a man to hell, and
exclude us from heaven, if they be not seen unto, and therefore he
forewarneth, and redoubleth his warning. Careful forewarnings import an evident
foresight of imminent danger.
Wherein in is exemplified 1. The diligence of the minister, to foretell, and
foretell again, ever to cry and never cease: and 2. The imminent danger of
sinning, appears by the earnest warning. For what shooter would cry aware
aware, when the arrow comes nothing near the standers by? What workman
vndersetteth the house that stands sure? What Physicion carefully cures him,
that needs no cure, and is not sick? Paul's double care does evidently argue
their manifold peril.

It were ouer-long upon the only naming of many several faults to enter
long discourse in particular, because there are sundry proper textes in
Scripture more fit for such purposes.

Idolatry.
Notwithstanding in a word to go over every thing: the next work of the flesh
is Idolatry, whereof before. Page 156.
And therefore thereof I say no more, but blessed be the Almighty God, who has
removed al hill Altars, idol Priests, and such late Idolatry as was not heard
of, neither in Babylon, nor in Egypt it self.

Babylon thought that her Gods did eat, but Popery thought and taught that God
was eaten, chewed with teeth, swallowed with throat, and (I abhor to utter
it) conveyed into the bellies of worse than men.

Of old Egypt Israel learned to worship a calfe, and when Moses was but a
small while absent, and though he left be hind him a sufficient curat, yet the
people would needs have it so, and they contributed their very eare-rings to
make, and they made an idol. But that Idol-calfe was not comparable to the
Popish Idol-cake, which they fall down before, and adore the woorkmanship of
man's hands, and say, my Lord, and my God to a piece of bread, nay to round and
white, and they know not to what.

Witchcraft.
The next work of the flesh here specified is witchcraft. Which is a bad sorry
craft, and a sinful occupation. Yet whether any such thing be or no, some have
conceived some doubt. But they who say that there be no witches, consequently
say also that there is no witching. But if there be any witchcraft, there must
needs be witches. And if there could be no witching, why does our Apostle call
witchcraft a work, and a thing of importance, debarring us from the
inheritance of heaven.

As well may they say, that envy, enmity, hatred, adultery and murder, etc. are
not at al, as well as witchcraft. For all these offenses are jointly written in
like letters, and Paul says that these are things manifest, and as it were
Printed in Capital letters.

A wise Dscouerie of witchcraft. To make it a little more manifest to weak
eyes, that cannot discern much in this case, were not amiss, but unlearned
profane silly-folly fables shoot far wide of such a mark.

Not to go beyond my text: wichcraft is naught, ergo it is: witchcraft is
forbidden, ergo it is: for if it were not at al, why is it forbidden as being,
and being naught?

Saint Paul Gal. 3.1.
borrowing a similitude from a thing without controversy known to be, and
that could naturally lend the speech which he meant to borow, questioneth with
these Galathians, and asks who had [ spiritually] bewitched them and dealt
with them so in spiritual matters to distort, trouble and (...).
infect them, as there was no question but witches deal by Gods secret
sufferance in cases external of witching effections, yet no farther than God
permits, and most times nothing so far as every body upon private fancy many
times vainly imagines.

Most of the vices which follow, are hatred, and debate, emulations, wrath,
contentions, seditions, heresies, envy, murders etc.

Where a man hates, it is an easy matter to fall at variaunce both in common
weal matters and Church causes. And where sin enters, it forces to go
on, and never rests, in any mean degree.

The sanctified flesh, does not sanctify, but the polluted polluteth. Hagg.
2.13.
A little wormwood makes honny bitter, twice so much honny cannot sweete^ some
little juice of wormwood. Sins grow apace and go by heaps and thraues
together the broad way: hatred, debate, emulations, wrath, altogether etc.

Sin grows quickly and goes on forciblie.
In the book of Iosue Josh. 7.
Acam confessed that he saw, coueted, took and buried in his tents the
Babylonish weed and the sickles of silver, From seeing the cursed thing, he
proceeded incontinently to coveting, from coveting, to conueying it to
himself, and hiding it in his tents exprestie against the Lords commandment,
in so much that sin may say as Caesar said, Veni, vidi, vici, I come, I see, I
conquer, (as you may see in every particular sin.) In the turning of an hand,
I conquer where I come, and I consume where I conquer, and never rest, but as
the fire, till I have wasted all. I hate, and where I hate, I strive, and
strife, hatred, emulation, wrath, contention, sedition, envy proceed to open
murdering of souls by heresies, and of bodies by cruel hands, even like as
they report of some kind of horseleach that turns into a serpent, and that
serpent becomes a fiery Dragon.

But (my brethren) will you hate, and must you be angry? Behold I show you
matter to occupy these affections upon. Enter into thine own soul, summon
thine own conscience, control thine own doings, and be angry with thine
anger, hate all hatred, and if thou will murder, murder thy sins, and sit
in judgment against thy self, abhor all impiety, idolatry, heresies,
schisms, and sects, etc. God has spoken it, Paul has written it, that flesh
and blood, the works of the flesh, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

It is an inheritance, and therefore free, and a kingdom not prepared by man's
meriting, but yet wilful sinners shall not enter, much less inherit this
kingdom.

The unclean body, the polluted, the uncharitable and restles man, the irefull
sinner, and contentious humor, cannot inherit the rest of God, his kingdom is
but for fit subjects. This inheritance is only prepared for dutiful heirs, for
the generation of the chaste, for Godly minds, for peaceable children, for
haters of hatred, and lovers of peace.

Drunkenness. Gluttony.
The two last faults are drunkenness and gluttony, the one makes in the body a
sinck, the other a dung hill. For deuoiding of them both, he said well who
faide: Nature is contented with little, and Grace with less. The waterish,
marish, and plashy grounds breeds nothing but frogs, and toades, and such
like vermin: and the full belly brings forth only a fumy, smoky, foggy
sense. The kingdom of God which is above sense and reason, consists not
either in the superstitious refusing, or servile abusing of meats or drinks,
and lightly he who farceth the body, starueth the soul.

And this is a singular infirmity of sinful flesh, that is either caught up in
a whirle-poole, Touch not, taste not, or sunk in a quick sand, let us eat, and
drink like Epicures and belligods, for to morrow we shall die, and there is an
end. Nay not so: for as you who so offend, shall be excluded the inheritance
of everlasting life, so shall you also for such enormities be tormented for
ever in endless pains, without repentance.

The rich glutton in the Gospel goes gaily, fares deliciously every day, al
purple above, silcke within, diet most exquisite. He takes his rest in
idleness, eats in gluttony, quaffeth in drunckennes, passes the time in (...).
iocondnes. But Lazarus lies after another sort, being sick and could not
stand, but was feign to ly down at the gate, and lay in open sight even at the
gate, and was no counterfeit, but full of sores, and not able to drive away the
dogs, and a small alms would have served him, for he was but one person, and
he required no great matter, but a few crommes, and even such as fell from the
rich man's table, but this rich man releeueth him not: himself and his eat
all, drink all, or wastfully spill all. But was this all?

This proud greedy Hawk, or rather Rite, that was thus pruned and trimmed
every day, thus curiously fed, so carefully kept, thus gorgiously used, in fine
he dies soudenly, and strait he plumpeth down to hell, and there is detained
in everlasting torments, and so is storied to be for an ensample to all that so
egregiously delight to pamper the flesh, and cram the body.

22 But the fruit of the spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,

23 Meekenes, Temperance: against such there is no Law.

24 For they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the affections and
the lusts.

25 If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit.

26 Let us not be desirous of vain glory, provoking one an other, enuieng one
an other.

Contrary causes produce contrary effects. The flesh and the spirit are
contrary, and therefore the works of the one, and the fruits of the other are
contrary. And therefore also these fruits of the spirit, come not at all from
the contrary cause which is the flesh, but from the spirit alone, which does
incubate, fructifieth and woorketh in our nature, otherwise not only barren of
good works, but quite repugnant to all goodness. For in whom the flesh
rules, you heard how it works: but whom the spirit guides, you see what
fruits spring thence, and only thence: to wit: Love, Joy, Peace, and every
gracious virtue.

The caterpillars of the Orchard where these fruits should grow, were the above
named vices. Paul distinctly notes three in the end of this Chapter: 1.
Ambition. 2. Contention. 3. Envy.

1 Every thing hangs in the ambitious man's light. 2. The contentious man is
never content, 3. But the envying eye is not possibly quiet.

Ambition.
1 Ambition is a tree that grows in every ground, rooteth deep, and
spreads wide, especially being watered with folly, self-love, and pride.

For as humility, contentation, lowliness, are seldom found: so an aspiring
mind, as the catching bramble rests and proves in every man's breast.

The baits of pomp are sundry, the weak brain of man is fanciful, flesh is
soon puffed up, and there is leaven enough in the world to make it rise and
swell. And set but a beggar on horseback, and he will ride a gallope. Yea our
nature is as the untamed colt, except it be kept in and held short, and rained
hard, there will be no rule. The town, the country, the great City, generally
all flesh has an ouer-weening thought of it self.

When the Peacoch vieweth her fowl feet, she lays down her proud feathers,
and yet a little after forgetting all that, she pranketh up herself as before;
In like manner when God touches us somewhat near, doubtless the godly stoop
full low, and fall down flat as Paul from his horse, but being raised up
again, we do not ever consider thoroughly by what strength we were raised,
and when he remoueth his hand, we strait forget that it was ever laid upon
us, and to what end, to wit, to teach us humbleness, meekness, sobriety,
patience, and al goodness for evermore.

The last enemy that the Godly in Christ shall overcome, is death, but one of
the last, and that not the least, is a vain conceit, either of being vain, or
tending to vain glory.

And this is a general fault, yea the very heardman thinks as well of his
horn, as of the silver trumpet, the minoe in the fresh water is as proud as
the whale of the sea: the pricking fruitles * thistle is as high minded as the
profitable Cedar.

Austine in his Lib. 6. cap. 6.
confessions agnizeth plainly his imperfection in this behalf, in sense
confessing thus: I gaped full wide after promotion, honor, gain, a good
marriage and the like, and in seeking to satisfy these my lusts, I endured many
a hard brunt, much bitterness, and sundry dangers. On a day I was to make an
Oration before the Emperor or Governor, therein I took not a little pains to
depaint out his praises, thereby entending to purchase some favor and credit,
and opinion of credit with his honor.

But as I was in the way, and while my head was full, and my heart heavy, and I
as it were with child, til this wind were vented, and I delivered of that,
which I had conceived, I met a beggarly drunke^ rogue, that sang full merrily,
and was marvelous excessive pleasant. I stood and considered the man, and
compared his state. At last I began to reason with my companions, that it went
far better with this fellow, than it fared with me, by how much mirth is better
than sorrow, a gladsome heart, than a heavy soul: and albeit it might be said
that the joy I might conceive of my learning were to be preferred, verily I
must confess where that fault secretly wringeth, alas my learning, knowledge
and study, is more bent to please, than to profit, to speak to the ear, than
to the consciences of men. And this is a very vanity.

And though the drunken man's mirth may seem more vile than a fancy of vain
glory, yet it is not so. For to glory, but not in the Lord, is the greatest
shame. To seek to be great, but not in Christ, is the weightiest sin. To
strive for honor in the kingdom of humility, is worse than a drunkenness.

Again, the beggar gets a penny or two easily, and so a drunkenness of so
small a charge, is soon disgessed with one nights sleep: but the price of vain
glory is ouer-costly, and the giddines it brings, is not so soon concocted.
I go to bed many nights and rise many a morning, yet still my drunckennes is
the same it was etc.

Thus could Austen bethink himself, and such was his humble confession to God,
and sober conference with his companions. And this did he turn the sin of
another to the reformation of himself. And herein is true wisdom, and who
can so do, can do as much for the avoiding of this sin as I can say, if I
should pen all that was exemplified and debated more largely by the fall of
Adam, the confusion of Babel, Hamans gallows and Absolons tree, and the rest
of such like ambitious heads hung up in sight and view of al, to deter men
from this aspiring sin, whereby many get up hardly, and come down headlong, and
leave behind them a shameful remembrance in their ruins.

Contention.
2 The second principal bile in the body of the Church or common weal is
Contention. For though ambition be ever contending, yet every contention is not
ambition. For a contentious nature will strive for a straw, and except he
strive, he cannot live. Ismaels hand must needs be against every man, though
every man's hand be against him again even for that cause, because he is
contentious.

I never speak to rebate true zeal, and to make men as we term them, rebated
protestants, or to blunt the edge of good contending. For it is a good thing to
strive for good things.

If the cause be gods, if it be a clear case ruled by the Scripture, if it be
a matter of faith and truth that is oppugned, contend, but yet wisely,
according to the place of thy calling, and the ability of thy person in all
orderly proceeding.

If it be an oath matter, a statute of your town whereunto you are sworn, a
piece of your charter, a common vtility touching your hospital, and the
benefit of many, contend, and spare not, yet lawfully and warily, for
contention eue^ in a good cause is an edged tool, and must be warily dealt
withal. And the meek answer refracteth anger, and remedieth all many times,
as the soft woolpack or featherbed deadeth the gunshotte and breaks the
sword. But the froward nature enjoys nothing but unquietness. And happy are
they that bless him who curses them.

Again, if thou see a thief stealing, and thy neighbor spoiled, if thou be
over mannerly in making out the fresh pursuit, and so conceall the trespass,
thou art an abetter of evil, and a maintainer of theft, and guilty before God,
who ever thou be, and in this respect it is better to be reputed a busy
justice than a quiet gentleman.

Again, if thou know the haunt of practicing Recusantes, of perilous Jesuits,
and traitorous Priests, and say in thine heart let him that is a cold blow
the cole, I will be no buzy-body, nor contentious accuser, I am no officer, I am
no keeper of my brother, even so said Cain. But in attaching a traitor, every
man is an officer, and every man is bound to give in evidence. And art thou a
keeper of thine own life, and soul? Then care for thy neighbor, care for the
weale-publick, care for the mother of our Country, care for the Church of
Christ, as carefully as for thy self, and seek to tread upon those spiders
that would poison a whole Realm. If it were thy private case, thou would
bestir thee; and yet thy private case is infolded in the common: and therefore
strive and contend to the utmost. For the end of this strife is perfect peace.

Envy.
3 The third caterpiller was Envy. As charity is not suspicious, to mistrust the
worst, so envy misconstereth al, and controuleth every thing. If there be any
good thing in a man, it is an eyesore to the envious man. If there by any
fault, it is meat and drink to him, he has somewhat to allege, why he should
generally mislike.

Where this vice rooteth, it is the mother of murder, the co^fusio^ of nature,
the enemy of frindship, the banishment of virtue, the very ruin and
bestruction both of the envied, and the envious, and Satan who thrue Adam out
of Paradize, thrue himself first by envying out of heaven.

And yet such is the cecity and blindness of Adams children, that some who
would seem most perfect, think that perfection consists in this, that they
ca^ speak most bitterly against their betters, and if his or his nose driuell,
they see it, but their own ishues of blood pass from them without any sense.

There were in Austines time, that were pale with fasting, but blew with envy;
abstained from wine, but were drunken with poison.

Envy is compared to smoke, which goes upward, and yet not very high, but
skimming up and down, and so does envy. For no mean man enuieth the Prince,
or Pieres of the Realm. And as the smoke vanishes away when it rises to any
height, so if a man be past reach, envy many times turns into flattery, and
when a man is dead, envy enters not into the grave.

While men have the presence of an austere, sincere and godly wise men, O we
say he is too precise, he reproves our ways. When he is departed, then we can
say, we shall never have the like.

So that evidently Envy is a thing which is conceived by the eye, or the care:
as when Caine saw the Abels sacrifice was accepted, he envied his brother, and
proceeded to the slaughter of Abel. And even such was the rage of this fury,
that neither brotherly affection, nor the immanity of the fact, nor the fear
of God, nor the greeuousnes of the punishment could withhold him from
committing the trespass.

In the first of Samuel we read how the soul of Jonathan was knit to David, how
Micol loved David, as her beloved husband, how the people had David in deserved
admiration for his noble Acts, how the daughters of Israel received David
coming from the conquest with Music and instruments, singing, Saul has slain
his thousand, and David his ten thousand.

David indeed behaved himself valiantly, and wisely, the people and the weomen
gave him his due. But what follows upon this?

Saul looks awry upon David, and waxes exceeding wrath at the faburden of
the song, in so much, that the morrow after the evil spirit came upon Saul.

But David endeavoring to do good for evil, plaieth upon his harp, wherein
he was skilled, and seeks by all means to assuage his Masters maladies. But
what does Saul? He rises up, and throws his Iaueling with full purpose to
nail his faithful servant fast enough unto the wall.

In which story at large we see envy no doubt bred upon an inward corruption,
but stirred up greatly by the sight and commendation of the good things in
David, and therein we see how he chafed in mind and he changed his
countenance, and it cast him into a rave.

And albeit we read that David's playing did sometimes qualify his troubled
spirits, yet all that David could do, as the conquering of Goliath, his cunning
on the instrument, his valiantnes against Gods enemies, his familiarity with
Jonathan, his marriage with Micol, his favor with the people, his sparing Saul's
own person in the den, all these things could never scour out the rust, do
away this rancor, and make clean the glass of his conceat, whereby he might
have discerned a true subject, a faithful servant, an excellent, and an
innocent person.

Yea, the more David's gifts and graces were, and the more he was prospered of
God, and liked of the people, all these was more wood to the fire, and farther
matter for his envious imagination, to fret it self upon: even as in the fable
of the snake coming into the smithes forge, and finding a file there, and
seeing it had teeth, thought nothing should have teeth but it self, and began
to lick it, and licked so long til she had licked off her tongue: so Saul
could never be quiet, and David's good deeds successively following still one
upon another, increased Saul's grief and outrage continually so much the more
as the fire burns, and in burning consumes it self: so was it with Saul,
and so is it with all envious men.

One of the philosophers for a punishment, could wish to the envious person
nothing, but that he might have many eyes and ears to see and hear, the good
haps and prosperity in other men. For then is he lanced and cut, and pierced
with such euentes, as it were with knives and arrows, and sharp weapons on
every side, where he discerns any good.

Who ever he were that wrote those collations ad Sermon. 18. Aug. Tom. 10.
fratres in Eremo, among recital of sundry ensamples that Basil and Cyprian and
others had touched before him, as of Caius envying the sacrifice of ^el, which
was accepted, Esaus envying Jacob (...), when yet he had sold it, the
Patriarchs envying of Joseph, for their fathers liking, and Saul's envying of
good David etc. Amongst other parables he likeneth envy to the worm in the
green gourde, that shadowed the prophet, to the worms in Manna, that marred
the Angels food, to the frogs in Egypt in their fairest parlers.

Among the rest, he compares an envious man to the Phoenix, and they say,
there is but one bird of that kind. In deed it were to be wished that there
were never such a Phoenix at all as envy is.

The story or the conceived opinion of this bird is: that she gathers
together the driest and sweetest sticks of Synomom, and the like, and carries
them up to some high mountain and hot place near the sun, and with
flapping her wings up and down over the pile of sticks she incenseth them,
and enflameth her self withal, and both burn in one fire.

And this is right envy, which to burn another man's house sets his own
house on fire: and to put out both another man's eyes, will be desirous at least
to loose one of her own, yea and is content that her own bowels may be eaten
out, to bring forth a viperous effect.

Paul teaches us a fairer way that we provoke not one another, but that we
prevent one another in giving honor, and envying no man, and never contending,
but upon necessary, and butifull occasions, crucifieng the flesh, which
would otherwise rancle and fester; and the affections of the flesh which will
boil and sees, and the lusts of the flesh which against the true liberty of
the spirit.

And thus if we live in the spirit; the life of the spirit is the death of the
flesh, and backwarde, the life of the flesh, is the death of the spirit,
which makes a man as cold as a stone, and as stiff as a dead man, that we
cannot wagge, much-lesse walcke in the ways of Godliness. of righteousness
and temperate behavior in any good path. But the Lord loves a body, that is
dead to sin, and he altogether delights in the soul, that lives through
his spirit: For without his spirit, we cannot live.

CHAP. VI.
1 BRETHREN, if a man be suddenly taken in any offense, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least
thou also be tempted.

2 Bear ye one an others burden, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

3 For if any man seem to himself, that he is somewhat, when he is nothing, he
deceives himself in his imagination.

4 But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself only, and not in another.

5 For every man shall bear his own burden.

FOR a preservative against the vices last spoken of, viz. ambition, strife and
envy, the best treacle is to take a quite contrary diet. The ambitious, the
contentious, the envious man will keep a needelesse stur, and trouble every man
without all cause. But the contented Christian, desires to pacify al things,
and to help every where, where help is wanting.

Satan is a mighty enemy, and man is weak, and flesh is frail, and our ways
are slippery.

Now if a man, which is better than thy neighbors Ox, or Ass, whereof
notwithstanding in cases, thou stand charged, if a man, nay, if any man, thy
like in nature, and brother in Christ, if any man (for all may) not only of
thy friends, or thy kin, or some of thy family, but if any man be supprised
by Satan, prevented by suttlety, inueigled by sleights, intised by sinners,
taken and upon the sudden (...).
ouer-taken by infirmity, what is to be done?

He that is fallen may rise again, reach-forth thy hand and help him up. A
member dislocated, and out of joint may be set in again, restore such a
member, yea restore you such a man says the Apostle that is fallen out of the
order, and place, he should have kept himself in. (...).

Mutual help.
If one walk alone, and no man go with him, nor any man care for him, and
fall, then is his fall the more dangerous. Likewise the single thread is soon
snapt a sunder, but when men intertwist themselves in mutual love, to help one
the other, the double, the triple-folde work is like to hold out.

In like manner, if men could and would join in one, to the behoof of one
another, I see no reason why things may not be well restored and reformed
without any great a-do.

The Spirit of Lenity.
The manner of this restoring is not to play the rude Chirurgian, but to do all that may be, in the spirit of lenity. The good sheepehard lays the straied
sheep, that straid by simplicity, on his own shoulders: the tender mother
carries the sick child in her arms: the merciful Samaritan sets the
wounded man upon his own beast, and himself goes a foot.

Yet note, there is a difference between simplicity and wilfulness, between
fore and fore, leaper and leaper, plague and plague, fault and faults, sinners
and sinners.

But this is the property of a perverse zeal and perfect hypocrisy to stand
most upon trifles, mint and commin, and upon matters of less importance, to
stick at a straw, and stride over a block, to swallow an Ox, and strain a
Gnat, to hallow with hue and cry after a mote, as if the shepherd should
still trouble the weak sheep, and let the scabbed ram walk at will, and
spread his venom throughout the whole flock.

No, brethren. If any man be howsoever prevented in a fault, let him be
restored in the spirit of lenity, and with meek discretion in a
proportionable rate.

There is a public restoring, and there is a private restoring. You are
private men, and yet private men rather look into public orders than into
their private own doings. And in deed, as he said, nos quoque eruditos oculos
habemus, you see somewhat, and you say, as much as you see.

The execution of the Law is the life of the Law.
There is order taken for commuting of penance, and the open restoring of the
penitent. But (I grant) laws without execution are no laws. Quid leges sine
moribus? Vanae proficiunt. There is no profit by such laws: nay they are
lawless, and as if they were no laws at al. And therefore a latter law
coming after, with full meaning to put in execution the former law, is said to
revive such a law, thereby inferring plainly, that the law wants life, and is
dead, when it lacks execution.

In the most honorable audience of the high court of Parliament they were the
words of wise and right worthy Sir Nicolas Bacon, the Lord Keeper (whose
memory is as the memory of Josias, very sweet in every man's mouth) his words
were: that the best instruments and sharpest weeding tools did the garden no
good, though they were prepared, and if they were laid up in the store house,
and not put to use: and so forth to the same purpose much.

But I am beside my Text, pardon me: in one word, your selves have made, and
you have laws, and yet notwithstanding, as if you had none, you who can find
fault with others, why do you not execute your own laws and mulctes
appointed for the restoring of greater repair to the hearing of the holy word
of the Lord? Will you see men fall from god, and fall to vice and profaneness
even the Lecture time, and will ye not restore these members to their old
order? If you were spiritual, no doubt, these things would be better ordered.
For shame look to it.

The ground of the Apostles exhortation for the manner of restoring is, because
they be spiritual, and for that the Law of Christ requires that men deal
with men as meekely and lovely as they may, wherein I observe two notes, 1. The
cause of their standing, who stood when others fell, 2. Then the urgent duty to
endeavor to raise up them who are fallen.

1 The cause why we stand, is not in the strength of our selves ye that are
spiritual, it comes from Gods spirit, and verse 3. If any man seem to
himself to be [ but] somewhat, he is deceived. The spirit is ready, but the
flesh is weak, and all the readiness we have to stand to it in persecution, to
persist in all temptations, either outwardly assalting or inwardly molesting, is
from the spirit of God, because we are spiritual.

The Popish partition between spiritual and temporal, as if amongst them, and
their orders, every door keeper, Church sweeper, bell ringer, or taper bearer
etc. were necessarily spiritual men, and all men else were not spiritual, is a
toy, and well confuted of D. Bilson of Christian subjection. part. 1. Page 244.
late. Paul writing generally to the Galathians calls them by that which they
should be, spiritual, in the carriage of themselves mutually one to another.

Wherein my note is to that end we look upward to the spirit of Gods
assistaunce, and to his powerful hand that holds us up that are ready to
fall. There were 7000. that did not adore Baal, and not so much as bow their
knees to the Idol, but this came not of themselves, but they were kept up by
God. The candlesticks in the Revelation are held up by no other hand, but by
the hand of Christ. Wherefore (as it is in the song of Anna) it is God that
rules the woorlde, it is the Lord who guides and directs the feet of his
Saints, it is his word that teaches, and his spirit that conducteth his
chosen servants.

The Law of Christ.
2 The vrgentnes is also thereby enforced of a good duty toward the repairing of
a sinner, that the Law of Christ provoke us thereunto.

The Law of Moses is full of fear and terror, but the Law of Christ is full of
love, and as the body is a perfect body, that is sustained with meat and
drink inwardly, and kept warm externally with clothes, so the faithful man
is a right Christian, that feels within the food of life, the consolation of
the spirit, and the comfort of Christ: and in the exercise of good works and
brotherly kindness as it were, thorough clothes to warm and to foster his good
actions, and all this after the commandment, law and ensample of our Savior,
who did all that he did for others, and nothing for himself, even as the
sheep, both in fell and flesh, is for his owner and not for himself.

Wherefore, brethren, let us suffer one with an other, even for his sake that
suffered for us al. Let us bear one an others burden for his sake, who upon
the cross, bore al our burde^s. It is the law of christ that it should so, not
thereby that we become sauiors of our selves, but because he has saved us
already, and therefore may make a Law for his saved which most willingly they
must walk in.

He that considers well his own faults, will the better bear will the
imperfection of other men.
The hye-way thereunto is, if a man can descend into himself, and if that his
considerations be like Solomon's windows Skued to give light rather into the
house, tha^ that a man may stand at the window to look abroad: and if he judge
himself rather than others, and prove himself, and know and say, that if
such, or such a one be a sinner, in such or such a case by infirmity, well,
even I either have bin, or am perchance, and certainly by nature am, and
therefore may be, if now I am not as great an offender as that my brother, and
therefore I must and will do for him as I would wish to be done unto my self,
seeking to restore him, as well as I can, and that with all lenity.

For there is no insulting upon or vpbraiding of one another man in a fault.
The mariners of Tharsis fell to casting of lottes to know who was the sinner,
but that God had a purpose therein, the lots might have fallen rather upon any
of the mariners, than upon Jonas.

In Paradise there were but two, and they two being both faulty, began to post
off their sin the one to the other, but it went not by that: every man shall
bear his own burden. And a quiet conscience is a continual feast. And that
conscience which is blown up in pride, and goes for a time merrily like the
windmill with the gale of vain praise, or selfeliking, or that conscience,
that can digest iron like the Estrige, that is, al his own bad doings, and yet
square it out, and compare it with other men, one day shall it be called to his
proper account, and when the mowing time shall come, the proud blasted ear,
shall ly as low as the lowest, and shall seem no taller than his fellows, nor
better indeed than it is in it self.

6 Let him that is taught in the word make him that has taught him, partaker
of all his goods.

7 Be not deceived: God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap.

8 For he that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption but he
that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

The maintenance of the Ministry.
Paul is led in the spirit to direct the Galathians from point to point, as
they most needed, and where as the infirm sinner, was over hardly dealt withal
and no man would bear with his brother, and every man was partially affected,
yea and where as he who sought to reform them most, and to teach them best in
better ways, was least regarded amongst them, our apostle both for the former
matters, told them, and so for this last point shows what is their duty in
that respect, saying: Let him that is taught [ among other lessons] learn this
withal, to relieve his teacher.

In the one and twentieth of Iosue the principal fathers of the Leuits demanded
their due when they were not thought of, and passed over, in the division:
wherein certes appears a great over sight so little to regard the Lords
commandment but private care as then it did, so now also will mar al, if the
Lords portion be not looked unto.

And I note yet that in that injury, the younger Leuits deal not by heaps
disorderly, but the grauest and chiefest fathers take the matter in hand, and
they demand their due. For right is right, and may be demanded: and that which
the lord allows, is a very right, and it is no shame to ask our own, that
is full painfully deserved.

Who is he that goes to warfare upon his own charges? We fight the battles of
the Lord in your behalf.

Who planteth a vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof? One planteth,
another waters, an other diggeth, ditcheth, and hurleth outstones that may
hinder your growth in Christ.

Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milck? We lead you into the Lords
pastures, we watch day and night over your souls, we encounter with Wolves, we
endure the parching beat, and chilly cold of al inconveniences for your sakes.

Then if we be as the soldier in the camp, as the laborer in the vineyard, as
the careful sheepe-heard amongst his flock, should not these charges be
defraid? Our pains respected? Our persons rewarded?

It is enacted and ordered by God himself, that the Or mouth that treads out
the corn (as the fashion then was) should not be musted. Has God care of
Oren? I know he has, but much more of men, that sow the seed of life, that
labor in his spiritual harvest, that thresh the sheaues, that winnow, that
grind the corn, that bake the bread, and that break to you the bread of your
souls. They that served but at the Altar, lived of the offerings, and the
offerings were certain for the most part.

In the new Testament, why is the workman less worthy of his wages than
before? They taught in types, we teach in the evidence of truth. They
sacrificed beasts, we offer men's souls to God. They dealt out of the Law, we
deliver, and we preach the Gospel. We sow spiritual things unto you, is it
much, if we be partakers of your temporalities? We plow up the vallow grounds
of your hearts, we shed into every ear the seed of Gods word, we pray
incessantly for the increase of Gods grace amongst you all.

Popery fed her priests, shall the Gospel starve her ministers?
Popery crambd the bellies, and stuffed the barns and butteries and latheries of
a sort of sorry hinds, that could do nothing for the most part of them, but
turn and wind before a heap of stones, toss a wafer cake, rinse a challice,
and mumble up a service in a strange tongue. And can ye not affourd the
laborsome ministry, a convenient competency? Nay out of that co^petency, which
by the grace of god is yet left, the seruing-ma^ and the waiting-mayd many
times think to make up the recompense of their bodily services, by some
symonical leprosy, by flat bargaining with some of their own cote: and therein
verily is the greater grief.

Prolers for liuinges.
Wherefore as Pilat said to our Savior, thine own nation has betrayed thee,
and as it is in the Prophet, o Israel, thy destruction is of thy self: So, O
my brethren of the Elergy, will you betray your selves? Will you prostitute the
honor of your learning, the reputation of your good names, the quiet of your
consciences, and the patrimony of the Church to the covetous horseleech that
can say nothing, but GIVE, GIVE. Or as Judas said, What will ye give me?

Rather live and die at your scholerly pittance, which your honorable founders
bequeathed you, in your Colleges in the poor Universities, than thus scrape
and scamble, and flatter abroad, glozing with the woorld, and misreporting one
another, impouerishing your learning, and beggering your selves by borrowed
expenses, in your ordinary and endless prolings, yielding matter for
Satyr-writers, and mournful Chronicles of shameful reproach to al posterity.

If things go forward, or rather so backwarde as some stick not to say they
do, whereof in truth I must confess my self (I thank God) am no way
experienced; but if it be so, I fear least as Christ once drove these
Merchandizers out of the temple, so this chafering in church matters will drive
out Christ (which God forbid) out of our church.

In special you, O Patrons of benefices, remember the example of noble and
worthy David, who refused to drink of the water, that was brought unto him,
because it was fetched with the venture of blood. Remember you that in selling,
you more than venture your own souls, and that in buying is more than ventured
the soul of the buyer. And will any man buy, or dare you sell, or suffer to be
sold by your retinue the lords portion?

God will not be answered with prittle-prattle disputes.
I know the world is cunning, and can distinguish, and iangle of tithes and
church-liuings too and fro, till the cow come home, and that in some is borne
withal, which in some others is sacrilege without any alteration of other
circumstance, but that affection can wink when it will. When all is done, for
I purpose not to enter particular discourse thereof, the resolution of all in
all is, God will not be mocked.

A man may pull his better by the nose, and play with a man's beard: but if he
reason against God, God will not be out-reasoned. Ananias and Saphira could not
deceive the holy Ghost, and you read of their end. Acan hid his theft, but not
from God. Adam thought to cover himself in the shrubs, it could not be.
Saraes laughter, though it were stolen behind the door, was seen of God.
Elizeus may say, the Lord has hid or concealed this or that from me, but no
man can say, I can hide any thing from thee O lord, which searchest the reins,
and see the heart, and read the book of my conscience, though I would
clasp and shut it up never so fast. Thou art the God that wilt not be mocked,
and wilt mock them that shall seek to illude thy commandments, which thou
have so carefully provided for the provision of thy servants in their holy
travails.

Though the Parson be naught, yet the Parish must pay their tither.
Yea mary, say some, if they would travel, if our minister were such a
soldier, such an harvest man as you speak of, I could be content to have
given the benefice free at first, and still yet would I pay my tithes, and make
him partaker of al my goods, even by the tenth, which was an order, set down
before the Law, as a reasonable rate in nature, and under the Law of Moses
continued, and by the positive Law since, imitating the wisdom of God
constituted by great consent of all Christendom for the ministry, and the fry
thereof in Universities, and Schools, and Cathedral Churches, and collegeat
houses, and separate parishes.

Yea if their sponges were full of wholesome water, if their breasts of sincere
milk, that we might suck them, if we were taught by them, we who are taught,
would communicate of al our substance, very willingly to our teacher: but our
Parson never comes at us, we never saw him since he read his Articles, and as
we hear, he soiournieth in some Hall or College in one of the Universities,
and does nothing there neither, that we may conceive some hope that he will
come to us and do us some good heare-after.

I am sorry to hear these complaints, in part perhaps true, in part I hope
false: but suppose they be true, yet your benefices and tithes, by public Law
are laid forth, you must not privately alter a public order. And as the
Leuits and ministers (of whom I spoke before) when there was a hard division
made, and their part left out, yet were they not their own caruers, but the
ancient and chiefest amongst them brought their cause before Eleazar and Iosue,
and so order was taken. And I am sure you of the laity, as they speak, and yet
having in your hands the Church-liuings which were given to spiritual uses,
will not suffer that we enter upon our own, even therefore because you have by
hook or crook gotten and impropriated them against al reason in the time of
darckenesse into your hands.

Likewise no more may you deal evil with the evil, or refuse to render your
tithes and duties, thereby not agnising God to be the giver and the blesser of
your possessions, because some of Helies children play unruly pranckes, either
being present, or in their absence from their charge. No certes, and I am
persuaded if discreet complaint in this necessary matter were made to Eleazar
and Iosue in dutiful sort, some speedy remedy would have bin thought of, and
gone through with ere this.

Why? He that laboreth not, should not eat. True. But private men must not bar
men their commons at their discretion, no more than subjects may withdraw their
fealty and tribute from Caesar, if Caesar should deal otherwise than beseems
his imperial function. These reasons send to confusion and mutinies, and must
be represt.

And yet (dear brother) as God will not be mocked of the scholar that mocketh
him in his tithes, so will he not be mocked of thee, thou teacher, in thy
security. Catechizing.
He that sees the false-hood in tything, sees also thy not teaching, the
word is Catechizing, whereby a most religious, and a godly Echo, is heard in
the church of God, and the elements of religion are taught, and the evidences
of our salvation are thoroughly perused to the everlasting salvation of many a
soul.

And though thy Parish deal corruptly with thee, they in the end shall reap as
they sowed. But deal thou according to duty, tille thy land, cast thy seed
and that plentifully, cover it warily, and commit the success to God, and
possess thy soul in hope and patience, and in the end the Lord will be thy
sufficient reward, far exceeding all the commodities out hard and pinching
masters detain from us.

9 Let us not therefore be weary of well doing. For in due season we shall reap,
if we faint not.

10. While we have therefore time let us do good unto all, specially unto
them which are of the household of faith.

The last exhortation was proper for the maintenance of the ministry, and
this is inferent, and concluding the same, together with an enforcement of
doing good under hope of an answerable harvest in due season, if we tarry our
time, and expect his leisure, without wearines and fainting, being bountiful,
1. While we have time, 2. Generally to al: 3. But specially to the faithful.

Covetousness.
The extreme covetous man keeps his goods, and all is for himself. Auidis
auidis natura parum est. He would feign reap, but he dare not sow: and if
he sow, he so deals, as he supposes he may be sure to undo another, and
gain himself. But blessed is the rich-man that is found without blemish, that
knows how to do good, and is not weary of well doing. For it is good to ware
old in this service of well doing.

The Plato.
Heathen man said it was a harder thing (...): it was a harder matter to be good
still, than to be made good for a while. And for the special hindera^ce in this
well doing, our savior gives out this caveat: Take heed of covetousness. Luke 12.


Take heed, it assaulteth secretly, it enters like a friend, it has
pretenses many, and fair, and as men drink many times much at the first to
quench their thirst, yet in drincking too much, and too often, the dropsy is
engendered: so though at first a man take pains in the sweat of his brows. to
maintain himself and his, yet if he look not to it, this lawful pain at
first, may end in a covetous desire to gain over hastily, and to lay up to
purposes, he shall never enjoy, whereas a Penny well gotten, and well employed
is the grace of God, and wealth enough.

1 The first note was, that we do good in due season, and that while we have
time. For the life of man is a span long, and of small continuance, we see it
so, but where is he that considers thereof in such sort as he should?

The sudde^nes and the certainty of death is known, but that knowledge sleeps
in a man, and is not remembered to amend every man himself.
In the book of Genesis Genes. 5.
it is repeated and repeated again on this wise: all the days that Adam lived,
were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died: all the days of Seth, were
nine hundred and twelve years: and he died. All the days of Enos were nine
hundred and five years: and he died: and so forth of others, and still
though the days were never so many, yet, and he died, was the conclusion of al.

It is strange the Scripture should so curiously inculcate a matter, whereof no
man doubts: why does it tell us that we know? We know that they are dead. And
we see daily that men die before our face, and our life is a vapor, a buble, a
flash, a weauers shuttle etc.

In deed if in reading such like sentences to this effect, or going with a
corse to the grave, or hearing the preacher beat upon the immortality of man
we assent thereunto: but when the remembrance of death should be as it were
the sieve or searser to our own, and of our own actions, Omnis illa assensio
illabitur. Our former knowledge is quite forgotten. Yea even when we see other
men weak, sick or feeble and when we can think, and when we can say of them,
as they who ferrey on the tems, that the boat that goes hard on the other
side by us rides swiftly, yet we dream that our own barge stands still as
it were a ship at anchor, or that we pass very slowly.

O Lord, while we have time, and the time is short, while we yet live, and
have any being, which cannot be long, for the life of man is not a perpetual
light, but as the little candle, that is wasted with the wind, and blown out
with a puff, or consumed after a while, O while we have time, let every man
conform himself to some well doing. These (...).
after-wits were never good, that will be wise when it is too late, that would
enter when the door is shut, that come to the fair when market is don, the
Lord abhors the blind sacrifice, that cannot see the acceptable time, the
halting sacrifice that is soon turned out of the way, and never comes duly
in a timely season.

Too much curiosity in giving of an alms is not good.
2 My second note was for the generality of doing well. If thy right hand be
extended to many, thy left hand must not draw it in. If thy clouds be full, they
may power down both upon the habitable, and inhabitable places: better loose
an alms given to one that needs it not, than to withholde thy mercy upon
suspicion where the need is great, though for circumstances a man may be
persuaded to the contrary.

An alms given to one in the name of a Prophet, though he be a counterfeit,
yet given under that form, loses not the reward: so a relief bestowed as to
a man as thou art, and to thine own flesh, is accepted of God, that made you
both.

The times are not now that Israel must forsake the land for famine, and go
into Egypt. The times are not as they have been, that men have bin
constrained to buy Pigeons-doung at a dear rate: the times are not, as when
men have eaten their own ordure, yea the mother her own child: the times are
not, as when the Father, the Uncle, and the Son have strouen for a rotten
mouse, and when whole multitudes have been driven to fry out moisture out of
old leather. The times are not, as they have been in England, when bread was
made of fearn-rootes, and as of late in Queen Mary's time, commonly of
Ackornes.

Notwithstanding, this year is a dear year, the multitude are needy, and
their need is great. And therefore a large relief, and a general liberality
is most requisite, and he that hides his corn and will not give, nay will not
sell, is the curse of the people. But he that sells reasonably, and gives
cherefully, blessing be upon his head for evermore.

Good Zacheus when salvation came to his house, he began to think whether he
had dealt hardly by wrong cauillation with any man, and offered to make
quadriple recompense with the one half of his goods, and the other moity he
was content franckly should be for the poor.

Half your goods in constituted co^mon-weals under christian dealings is not
ever required, and the poor sort must be no proud beggars. Ruth was content
with peaze, Elias with a little meal, Lazarus wished but a few crommes, and
beggars must be no chusers. Yet in the book of Ruth I note to the great
commendation of Booz, that Booz servants when Ruth came at meale-time, Ruth. 2.
and stood not like a saucy beggar, but mannerly, beside the reapers, they gave
her plentifully, and she did eat, and was sufficed, and left. That the poor
may eat and be sufficed, it is liberality: but to be sufficed, and to eat, and
leave, is great liberality.

A wanton proverb amongst beggars.
The diet then was but parcht corn. Our age is over nice. And broun bread
breeds melancholy. But very need must teach us the parcymony and homelines
of elder years: and yet if we could spare our impertinent attire, and our
superfluous fare, our country dearth were yet but a cheapnes, and our
hospitality might be greater, our charity enlarged, our bodies more wholesome,
and our souls better accepted of God, that accepts them that live
temperately, and in their temperance consider the needy, and regard the poor.

In this story I note one note more, that Booz took order that Ruth should be
liberally used, and yet he would have her labor and gleane for that she had.
So (my brethren) if there were order taken that they who could work, and
take pains, and if their pains would not fully suffice, then there might be
some supply by letting fall some sheaues of our plenty, some lone of money, and
some way else to further the labors of numbers which now go up and down
idly, and of this idleness there now comes nothing, but innumerable
inconveniences: and thus much for the generality of relieuing.

2 It is the wise man's exhortation, cast thy bread upon the waters. Eccle. 11.
By bread may be meant the seed of bread, by casting may be meant sowing, and men
when they sow, they sparse not all in one place, but they sow with discretion:
by waters some think is meant moist places, which in whote countries are most
fruitful. Some, by waters think are signified the sea, that on the very Sea, a
man should not stick to venture his goods, and even to ship them over to far
countries, to do them good, and in the sight of God this trafique will be a
very acceptable trade, and in the end to thee very profitable. For though men
may think thy bread is cast away, and thy seed is lost, yet in the return
of time, thou shall reap of thy liberality thy bozom full. But I argue.

Must I cast my bread upon the waters? If by waters the fruitful ground be
meant, as the bozom of the poor, who ever is the fertile ground, so yet the
case of the poor faithful man is the most fertilest field of all others.

If it seem that by the waters, I must help even strangers that need my
help, that are far off and discluded by the Sea, then I reason; if I must do
good, which I deny not, even to strangers, what must I do to the man that
dwellech by me, and to the poor Christian which perishes under my nose, and
in my sight? Must I care for the lilly of the field, and not for the lilly in
my garden? Or must I feed the raven, and starve the innocent and simple Dove?
Or must I do good to all, and not most specially to the household of faith, who
most commonly needs most, and deserves best?

If garments must be variously cut out, according to the proportion, the
persons be of, that must wear them, then verily greatest respect must be
taken of them whom the world hates, and double care for the household of the
poor faithful.

But if I speak my conscience, I would it might affect, where I wish amendment.
Of all men the poor professor is least set by, even by them, whom yet I
persuade my self are of the same household of faith. It is strange, but the
common usage has made it no strange thing. This offensiuenes in entertaining
the bad, and excluding the good, if it be to win them it is well, but in the
sight of all men if it fode them up in their follies, it is more than a folly.
Thou can not eat thy bread alone, neither do: but let thy delight be in the
relief of them with whom thou shall meet, and rest with in the land of the
living.

11 Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand.

For reforming of the Galathians and for their perfect enstruction Paul deals
not by word of mouth, but he writes unto them and that a long letter even
with his own hand.

1 The length of his letter declares the largenes of his love 2. With his own
hand, shows the certainty whence the letter came.

1 The mencioning of this length was not with a lawier-like intent to be paid
by the lines which they lengthen of purpose, but as I say of love to affect
them with the more words, whom a few words could not move, he wills them
to consider: you see how large a letter I have drawn: as who would say, were the
matter of small weight, and not your souls health, I might spare my labor and
with more ease be utterly silent, or at the least, much more brief. But you
see I am long. Wherefore consider thereof accordingly.

2 Paul's Letters were not only long, but though they were long, and he
leasurelesse, yet he writes al with his own hand.

The Apostle was unlike many men in the world, who speak one thing and do
another: have one thing in their tongue, and another thing in their hand: but
as Sampson Judge. 14.9.
when he came to his father, he came with honny in his mouth, and honny in his
hands, so Paul has the same doctrine sweeter than honny and the comb, as at
first in his teaching, so now in his writing, and he puts all down under
his own hand.

In the second of Kings 2 King. 4.34.
we read of the manner which the Prophet Elizeus used in restoring to life the
Sunamits son. He sent his servant with his staff, and it would not be:
wherefore he comes himself, he spreads the child abroad, he puts his
mouth to the child's mouth, his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his
hands, and he stretched himself upon him, and the flesh of the child wareth
warm.

Paul in some resemblance takes the like course, he spares no pains, he
shows all tender affection, and what does he not to restore them to life,
whom the false Apostles had even wounded to death? He puts his mouth to
their mouth, he speaks in their ears, he spreads himself upon them, he
writes a large letter, he lays it before their eyes, and puts his
epistle into their hands, and he powers this wholesome Doctrine into their
sores: and because they should certainly know that the Physic came from
himself, he writes all out with his own hand.

The false Apostles even in Paul's time were grown to a wonderful impudency to
broch their errors under the names of the true Apostles, and al others follow
that devise, as Manichaei (says Austine) Contr. Faust. lib. 22. Cap. 8.
legunt Scripturas Apochryphas, etc. The Motive of Traditions and unwritten
verities.
The Manichees read secret hidden Scriptures: cobled up, I know not by whom,
under the name of the Apostles. But our adversaries at this day, as in part
they tread the paths of such their predecessors, so yet they have a trick
also over and above, when they want forged writings, they make up their claim
by unwritten verities, which they call Traditions.

You see this is an old practice to fetch about, and to wind in men into their
Aug. in Ioh. tract. 97.
coulorable errors. Wherefore in great wisdom and like goodness both in
special for this Epistle, and likewise for the rest of the Scriptures, the Lord
God providing for the Majesty of his own word, and entending the certain
salvation of the faithful, would not commit that the foundation of faith
should be grounded or depend only upon the toungs of men, but himself spoke
from Heaven openly in his son, and inspired his Prophets of old, and afterward
the Apostles to draw forth and write out his whole mind, to the end there might
be an undoubted Scripture, assuredly sufficient and able to make men perfect
and complet in all good works.

It is not denied but many things were done by our Savior in the days of his
flesh, many things by the ancient prophets in ample and particular manner not
laid forth, yet that which is written was therefore written, because God knew
what was sufficiently certain to the attainment of a good belief, and through
belief, to everlasting life. Secret Doctrines, unwritten Traditions and such
stolen waters are sweet only to corrupt tastes, and to men that will needs
either be spiritual witches, or else be bewitched.

12 As many as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to
be circumcised, only because they would not suffer persecution for the Cross
of Christ.

13 For they themselves, which are circumcised, keep not the Law, but desire to
have you circumcised, that they may rejoice in your flesh.

Paul having spoken of his own affection toward them, speaks now again of
their doing. As many as desire, etc. As many, ergo there were belike many. And
no marvel if ruble be rife where precious stones are refused. In the multitude
of these false teachers I mark, 1. Their vainglory, and then 2. Their vain
fear.

Vain glory.
1 Their vain glory was to make a fair show, that they, and who but they, were
the conuerters of so many, and so many prosilites. This is a shrewd affection,
and it sauoreth of an Antichristian pride to sit in the consciences of men, to
affect a Rabbinisme and a Masterdome in the Church of God, to desire to carry
Disciples personally after them, little caring if they set al on fire, so they
may gather the ashes of their fond conceat, and make a flash of a foolish
rejoicing. And in this vanity is always through hypocrisy interlaced a show
as if themselves would perform that which they require of other, which in
truth they neither Act. 15 10.
could nor Ioh. 7.19.
did perform.

Vain fear.
2 Again, mark it, and lightly you shall find that the ambitious head, has a
trembling heart there, where he should least fear.

If is a truth, he that looks into his duty through the running water of
an aspiring mind, or a timorous thought can never go upright.

What is the cause that the truth of Christ Jesus at this day amongst us is so
slowly embraced, and so coldly professed? What is the cause that in Gods
causes, there are found so many hares that run away, so many timorous hearts,
and so few Lions of courageous stoutnes in the Lord? He that watches the wind
will never sow, he that observes the clouds will never mow. There is the
cause, and this fear, I mean, the fear which is not of God, is always the
evil counselor.

But can you not choose but fear? Then fear THE FEAR OF JACOB, the Lord of
hosts and the God of heaven. If I be your Lord, where is my Fear? Says the
Lord in the Prophet. Why fear ye the frouning face of frail man? His life is
in his breath: and his breath is in his nostrils. Clauus clauum. Let the fear
of God as the stronger pron drive out the fear of man as the weaker nail. It is
a Proclamation in the book of Judges, Judge. 7.3.
that trembling minds and fearful hearts should depart from the Lords camp.

The fear that troubles many at this day, if we look upon things but with a
man's ey, and if my simplenes beguile me not, even that fear will beguile as
many as so fear. And he that fears a frost, shall be covered with snow. But
he who fears the Lord, is a fenced tower. And come what come can, the
momentany persecution in this mortal life is no way comparable to the life to
come. Vain hope and vain fear, are vain affections.

If the Machiuelian Pragmatique, the bold Jesuit, the busy priest could
consider thus much, if the silly reed, and the unstable soul, and the simple
subject could conceive this much, that there is no hope but in God, no fear
but in and for the Lord, no trust in a single thread, no hope by villainies, no
fear of trecheries, no harm from Amelec, no hurt from the proud Priest, I
doubt not, and I know by undoubted circumstaunces what I say; Recusantes which
now are in respect of the truth, would then as resolutely many of them refuse
many points of Popery, which now they embrace, with little ado.

When I behold the state of Christendom at this day, so far forth as a weak
ey can ken and discern, me seems, I see the sight that Abraham saw in the
mountain when he looked toward Sodom and Gomor, and saw nothing but smoke and
fire.

Wars and rumors of wars, anguish and tribulations, such as have not been
since the beginning, are the portion the end of the world must be prepared unto.

Hitherto above desert and against the innumerable instruments of Satan and
of the man of sin, God has defended us, and his truth, and shall we for a
little cloud of fear or flash of fire forsake the sincerity of his Gospel now?
Suppose they should: I trust they shall not: for though we be sinners, they
be devils, but suppose they should kill our bodies, our souls they cannot kill.
I hope they shall do neither if we faithfully fear and serve our God, and not
them: But suppose they should prevail against this temporal life of ours.

As in shooting sometimes, when the bow is cut shortest, yea when the bow and
bow-string break the arrow flies farthest, and wins at length: so when the
righteous is kept in the narrowest straits, when body and soul both break and
part asunder, then is our God most glorified, the righteous proved, their
patience tried, their faith experienced, and their hope extended unto, and
their fear occupied about better matters.

Solon an heathen, being demanded how he durst so boldly resist the tyrant
Pisistratus, answered, fretus senectute mea. His old age made him bold. And
shall old age encourage an heathen man, and what should the faieth of a
Christian man do, what should the divine providence, and fear of the Lord
effect in our hearts? Shall the corn fear the flaile, the goold the fire, the
grape the press? Et facere and pati fortia Christianum est. Shall any man be
strong and stout, and shall not a Christian? Let us consider Paul's example
herein.

13 But God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world.

15 For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

16 And as many as walcke according to this rule, peace [ shall be] upon them
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

The cross of Christ.
Paul makes an open detestation against their vain desire of rejoicing in the
flesh, and shows wherein true joy consists, not in a thwart cut of the
flesh, but in the cross of Christ, that is, in Christ crucified, and herein is
true joy. This is as Barnard speaks music to the ear, honnie to the taste,
and a most good jubilee, and perfect joy to the mournful heart.

When our Savior suffered, we read that the sun was darckned, the earth moved,
the powers of heaven and earth were shaken, the rock did riue asunder, the
veil was rent, and the graves were open, and al things felt a sympathy and a
compassion at the passion of Christ, and shall not man have a feeling of these
sufferings, for whom only he suffered them? Shall he not, should he not
mourn for these sins, that caused the son of God to take upon him the shape of
man, and the shame of the cross?

And yet because he has been crucified for our sins, and has cancelled the
handwriting that was against us, and has triumphed even on the cross,
wherein should Christians joy and rejoice, but in his conquest? And their
greatest comfort is even in the cross of their redeemer, whereby Paul adds
that the whole woorlde is unto him, and should be unto us, as a crucified
thing, and that we again are crucified to the world, that we may live in him,
who has died for us.

The effects of Christ's passion.
And this is the double effect of our Saviors passion. 1. First to redeem us
from sin, death, and the world, 2. Then to revive us in all goodness that we
may be new creatures in him.

The redemption is perfect and was paid by Christ, in his own person on the
cross, and rests upon his proper discharge, in whom we have redemption
through his blood, that is, the remission of our sins. Phil. 1.14.
The life we live in Christ through the virtue of his passion, and operation of
his spirit, whereby we are mortified to the world, has not these degrees of
perfection, because of the imperfection of the flesh, wherein we yet are
detained, the Law of our minds being hindered by the frowardness of our
members, and fettering us somewhat in the ways of our full delivery: but yet
of our full delivery we need not doubt. For as the prisoner being acquit at the
bar, feels the comfort of his release, and yet he must go back to the
prison, and then in expedient order of time his bolts shall be knocked off, and
he perfectly released: so we albeit we are pronounced quit by Christ, and
the enditement be cancelled, and the world, and al be crucified, and we in
heart find the joy thereof, yet in process of time the perfection of our joy is
finished, and not by and by perfected.

And as they which are ransomed from the Turk, though the price be all paid,
and they are sure it is so, and in part their bands are taken from them, yet
while they are in their journey homeward, in remembrance of this old
captivity, and for a submission al along as they go through the territories of
the Turk, they are not without some kind of bonds or fetters: even so while we
yet remain in the vale of sin, in the tabernacle of the body, and till we
can quite get out of the Turks dominions: till this corruption shall put on
incorruption in another woorlde, this present woorld is an hinderance, and an
hampering, and a fettering unto us, but the nearer we come to our own
country, the more we take our leave of the world, and in the end we
relinquish all, and enter the perfect perfection of all perfections in Jesus
Christ.

Verse 16. As many (without distinction) as walk, and are directed according
to this rule (which is) the Canon of the Gospel, and the scepter of Christ,
Paul wishes them mercy and peace, or signifies unto them that they have the
promises of peace and mercy, because they they are the Israel of God, for God
is not the God of Israel according to the flesh, as the false Apostles bear
them in hand, but according to the faith. For circumcision avails nothing,
neither yet is uncircumcision any thing, there is no difference in either. But
the new creature in Christ is the Israel that prevails with God.

Circumcision.
Circumcision was a covenant of righteousness and a seal of faith, and a bond to
do all that God should command his people to do, and so he that was circumcis^
was expressly afterward bound to the Law which God commanded. But as it was a
covenant of righteousness, and of faith, so was their faith of a righteousness
in christ to come, and therefore because Christ is come, that fashion of the
seal is dashed out, and the form of righteousness comes by Christ that is
to come, and to that end is come, that he might deliver us from the Law, and
be the accomplishment of al in himself, even to all that believe in him
thorough out all the woorld. But of this matter has been debated very often.
To draw to an end.

17 From henceforth let no man put me to business: for I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus.

There is no end of wrangling, if a man will follow them who make no
conscience what they say, or do. For the whole matter, as of the pretenses of
Moses Law, of Abraham's name, of the people of Israel etc. enough has been
debated, if any thing can be enough, and namely diverse times of circumcision,
a mark which they labored unfruitfully now under the Gospel to set in the
flesh, wherein Paul opposes the marks which were imprinted in himself, which
he calls significantly the marks of the Lord Jesus. Whereof a word or two.

Neither prosperity nor adversity are the proper and necessary marks to
discern the truth by.
Since the first beginning, when I consider generally the Church of God; floting
in the waters, turmoiled in Egypt, wandering in the wilderness, wasted with
wars, destroyed with corporal plagues, and led into sundry captiuities, I
began, as Ruth after the harvest of Booz, so I after the labors of many others
wiser than my self, to make these euentes, as certain marks to know the
Church by.

In special, when I looked upon the murdering of Abel, the sale of Joseph, the
lake of Jeremy, the den of Daniel, the desert of Elias, and the like.

Under the new testament, when I behold the poverty of Bethlehem, where our
Savior was borne, and therein the stable and manger wherein he was laid, and
so his exile ensuing, and likewise the race he ran, having not any where to
rest his head.

And since, til our time, for the first 300 years when I see the Church most
afflicted with tyranny: the next 300. most infested with heresies, for 800.
years following beseeged with apostacy: and the last 100, and od years
abounding with swarms of inconveniences, I began, as before, so again to make
no reckoning of a flourishing success, in the cause of truth, and I read it
the better mark of the two to measure doctrine by the hard lotte of the true
professor, than by the fair prosperity of the world affourded. Notwithstanding
I would be loath to repute that as a special mark of the sheep of Christ,
which may be common to a company of Gotes, and may be not incident to the
Church of Christ at some better seasons: Agar troubled Sara, but yet Sara
tombled Agar out of doors: Ismael persecuted Isaac, but the bond brat had no
part in the inheritance. And albeit there be a farther learning in these
ensamples of spiritual comfort, yet they were also literally true and for the
time trouble was upon the ungodly, and the godly for a season was not to be
discerned by the mark of adversity.

The adversity may be the same, but the cause being diverse, does distinguish
the adversity and makes it sometimes a taste of farther pumshment, sometimes a
monument of desert, and a recalling from sin, sometime a trial of faith, an
exercise of patience, an experience of hope, a duty of all men to endure al in
expectation of better things purchased by Christ's suffering, and laid up in
heaven whereinto a man must enter by many tribulations.

On the cross there were three who suffered, a damned thief, a saved soul,
and the Savior of us al. The penalty of the cross was one to them al. But yet
there was an incomparable difference in their persons.

The unquiet man may purchase a great deal of trouble to no purpose, but is
he therefore the wiser man?
The flagellant Friar may whip himself, the whipping Jesuit may scourge
himself, Baals Priests may cut themselves, and others may be whipped, cut and
scourged of others, and all these be no marks that can make the cause good,
but the good cause sanctifies those marks that men inflict upon us for
righteousness sake. Wherefore argue not of prosperity, for it is seldom found:
neither yet argue of the marks of adversity without discretion, except your
cause be as Paul's was, for though they be more common to most of the godly, yet
they are not ever necessary, nor always proper.

18 Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.

The entrance into this Epistle, was not hard, the end is easy, the middle
has been as you have heard, and al to set forth the Grace of God which is
almost the first and last word of the whole, wishing them, and even to their
spirits, a lively feeling of his Grace, which quickneth the soul.

And here, why should I dilate, or drive and sleek out that, which is without
pleats, and plain in it self, and which has been laid open, more than once
already? I know, the Lombar. Thomas Aqui. etc. Sarcerius in dict. scholasta.
Pelbartus in Rosareo aureo.
Schoolmen in steed of dividing the various significations of this word
(Grace) they break it into shiuers, and beat it into powder, and never make an
end.

In few and generally: Grace is no way Grace that is not every way graciously
granted and freely given: and it may be offered, where it may be refused. But
where God will bestow it, it shall be received.

Grace.
In special, first the Grace of God is the favor of the father. 2. The Grace of
the spirit is the operation of the holy Ghost. 3. The grace of Christ is the
merit of the son and the mystery of his passion. And these three go al
together, and are never asunder.

And these three, brethren, being thoroughlie known and believed and laid to
heart, in a full and certain assurance of the spirit, and not swimming in the
quick conceat of an imagining head, and gliding up and down in a slippery
tongue, but felt in the soul, and settled by faith, in the inward fruition of
the secret parts, what comfort work they not? They quiet the conscience, they
pacify the mind, they order the whole tenor of a Christian conversation in
every good way. The fear of the Law, has not these effects. And therefore
Paul especially wishes the Galathians the Grace of Christ.

Civil salutatio^.
It was an ancient custom among the Gentiles to subscribe their letters with an
ordinary wish: as of SAFETY and HEALTH etc. And we Dion. Nicaeus in vita
Tiberi^.
read, that when Tiberius the emperor had received letters from the
Magistrates of Rhodes, and by some negligence, the customary subscription was
omitted, he sent for them, and caused them to set unto their letters their
usual wishes (...), and to subscribe their letters, as the usage was.

Christian wishes.
I note, (as meaning not to note any farther matter of dict, culty in this
Epistle), that our Apostle, and so the rest of the Apostles (wisely admitting
the civil usage of salutations, yet with some amendment, reducing all to the
center and groundwork of all our doings, and deriuing all from the fiest head)
he and they also wish Grace, Mercy, and Peace; Health, and Salvation. Health of
Body, Salvation of Soul, and Safety of both, and that not at a-ventures they
know not from whom, but certainly from the right spirit of all Grace, even
from God thorough Christ our Jesus and only Savior.

And thus the Apostle ends. And now (I hope with your good leave) with this
end I may end and betake my self to a doubled charge nearer home and at home.
My dear friends, and good Brethren of Abington, Fare you well: I can but wish
unto you as to my self. O Lord and Gracious Father, let thine Apostle Paul's
wish and prayer take place among this people: The Grace of Christ Jesus be with
you al, and with your spirit for ever more. Amen.

NVMB. 6.24. The Lord bless you and keep you, the Lord make his face to
shine upon you, and be merciful unto you. The lord lift up his countenance
upon you, and give you his PEACE.


FINIS.

