THE CHVRCH OF ENGLANDS OLD ANTITHESIS TO NEW ARMINIANISME.

Where in 7. Anti-Arminian Orthodox Tenants, are evidently proved; their 7.
opposite Arminian (once Popish and Pelagian) Errors are manifestly disproued,
to be the ancient, established; and undoubted Doctrine of the Church of
England; by the concurrent testimony of the several Records and Writers of our
Church, from the beginning of her reformation, to this present. By WILLIAM
PRYNNE Gent. Hospitij Lincolniensis.

GALATIANS. 1. 9, 2. JOHN 10. If any man preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that you have received, let him be accursed.

If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither bid him, God speed.

Vincentius Lerinensis contra. Haereses. Cap. 39. Quicquid omnes, vel plures
vno eodemq, sensu, manifest, frequenter, perseueranter, velut quodam sibi
consentiente magistrorum Concilio, accipiendo, tenendo, tradendo firmauerint,
id pro indubitato, certo, ratoq, habeatur. London. 1629.

TO THE HIGH AND Honorable Court of Parliament now assembled.
RIght Christian, Honorable, and Religious Senators; that all-disposing
Providence of our euer-blessed GOD, which has lately Conuented, and since that
Centered you, with an unanimous and inflexible resolution, upon the examination
of the several Innouations, Restraints, and Pressures of our much endangered
Religion, to the great content and joy of all good Christians: has at this
time directed me to pen, and invited me to publish, this ANTI-ARMINIAN Index,
(which here lies prostrate at your feet, imploring your most gracious and free
Protection,) to further your religious and happy Proceedings, in the discovery
and suppression of those Heretical and Grace-destroying Arminian novelties,
which have of late invaded, affronted, and almost shouldred out of doors, the
ancient, established, and resolved Doctrines of our Church; to the intolerable
grief of all true Christian hearts; the exultation and triumph, of our Romish
Adversaries; the provocation of Gods heavy wrath and curse against us, (who
has blasted all our public Enterprises, since these Arminian Errous have
crept in among us:) and to the great endammagement and disturbance of our
Church, and State; which are like to sincke and perish under them, unless your
medicinal and helping hands forthwith support them. For me, or any other now
to question: (as I fear too many do) Whether Parliaments have any true, or
legal right, in the reformation, establishment, and rescue of Religion; in the
explanation of our Articles, or in Church affairs; were but to dispute; not
only our Non-Preaching, Plurality, Commenda, and Non-resident men, (the
chief Fomenters of Popery and Arminianise, and the only Cauellers at
Parliamentary proceedings in matters of Religion,) Pluralities, Nonresidents,
and Commendaes which are tolerated and admitted by the Statute of 25. H. 8.
cap. 16. 20. and 61. 1 and 2. Phil. and Mary cap. 8. 21 H. 8. c. 13. et 28. c
13. are dissalowed by the Common Law.
out of all their Benefices and Ecclesiastical Promotions, (a happy and much
desired work:) but even all our Bishops, our Ministers, our Sacraments, our
Consecration, our Articles of Religion, our Homilies, Common Prayer Book, yea,
and all Religion out of our Church, which are no other way publikly received,
supported, or established among us, but by Acts of Parliament, as I have more
largely proved in a Epistle Dedicatory to Mr. Cozens his cozening Devotions.
former Epistle. He who has seriously suruayed the Statutes of our Kingdom,
shall find Religion and Church-affaires, determined, ratified, declared, and
ordered by Act of Parliament, and no ways else; even then when Popery, and
Churchmen had the greatest sway, engrossing all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
to themselves alone: and shall we then doubt, whether Parliaments have any
Conusance of Religion now? It is the positive Resolution of all the Fathers, of
all Pro^estant, (and I think of most Popish) Divines: See Mr. John Northbrooke
his Po^re ma^s Garden. cap 48 BB I^wels Defense of the Apology part 2. c. 2.
Division 1. ^. 522. etc BB. Bilson of Christian subjection, and Antichristian
Rebellion part 3. near the the end, where this point is largely proved.
That Kings, and temporal Magistrates, ought to be the chief Defenders and
Patrons of Religion; the suppressors of Haeresies, Idolatries, and false
Doctrines: the principal Reformers of the Church: and they produce the
Examples of Moses, Joshua, David, Iehosaphat, Solomon, Hezechiah, Josiah,
Constantine, Charles the Great, Justinian, Theodosius, William the Conqueror,
Henry the first of England, Canutus, Edgar, Edmund, Richard the second, Henry
the fifth, King Iue, Alured, Ercombert, Ethelbaldus, and others: together with
the Prophecy of Isay, cap. 9. 13. Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and
Queens thy Nurses: the 17. of Deutr. 18. 19. Psalm. 2. 10. the 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2.
Romans 13. 1. 2. 3. Jude 1. 2. and other Scriptures for to prove it. Why then
may not our King, our Parliament, and Temporal Magistrates now, as well as
heretofore, intermedle with Religion, if all these examples, this conclusion
pass for current? Is it from any disability in their persons, because they are
but Laics? Why such were all these Kings and Magistrates: Such were all the
Ancient and Modern Reformers of the Church, that ever I could read of: Such
were all our Parliamentary men in former Ages, 2. H. 4. c. 15. 2. H. 5. cap. 7.
25. H. 8. c. 14. 31. H. 8. c. 8. 14. 32. H. 8. c. 15. 25 34. H. 8. c. 1. 1.
Mar^ae Sess. 2. c. 2. 1. and z. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8.
who established Popery, and since that 28. H. 8. c. 10 34. H. 8. cap. 1. 1.
Ed. 6. c. 1. 2. and 3. Ed 6. cap. 10. 11. 12. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 1. 3. 12.
1. Eliz. c. 1^ 2. 13. Eliz^ c. 12. 8. Eliz^ cap. 1.
abolished it, by public Acts of State, confirming that Orthodox and true
Religion in our Church which now we all profess: yet none finds fault with
them. Such a one was See the History of the Waldenses, Book 1. c. 1^^
Valdo, that Citizen of Lions, the Father of the renowned Waldenses, or
Protestans in France, and the original Author of the first open defection from
the Antichristian Church of Rome: yet all good Protestants applaud this Act of
his. Such are the Mayor part of our Ecclesiastical Commissioners, who yet
determine of Haeresies, false Doctrines, Scismes, and the sense and meaning of
our Articles, yet no man quarrels or excepts against them. Why then should they
deny this power unto Parliaments, because they are but Lay, which they
acknowledge, and admit in these? Especially, since all our Churchmen are
virtually included in our Parliament, and so suffragate to its Conclusions in
our Prelates (the unquestionable Judges of Points and Controversies in
Religion) who are chief Members of this mixed Assembly, compacted both of
Church and State, and so not wholly Lay or Civil, as some vainly fancy. Is it
because Parliaments want Conusance or power to deal in Church affairs, and
matters of Religion? How then was Popery heretofore implanted, since that
exiled, and our present Orthodoxe Religion, with all its several
circumstances, and adjuncts, estated, and lawfully settled in our Church by Act
of Parliament; if Parliaments have no Legal, but only an usurped Jurisdiction
in Matters, Articles, Rites, and Tenants of Religion, as some Papists have
auerred, and the BB. Jewel, BB. Bilson, and Mr. Northbrooke letter (C) and Mr.
Tyndall, Obedience of a Christian man page 137. 138.
fore-quoted learned Prelates and Writers of our Church refelled? Certainly if
our Parliaments have such a transcendent power, as to authorize 23. H. 8. c. 14.
Sheriffs in their Turns, and Stewards in their Leetes and Wapentakes, to
enquire of haeresie and haeretiques: as to enable 1 Eliz c. 2.
Justices of the Peace and Quorum, to indite and punish Scismatiques: as to 27.
H. 8. cap 15. 3 and 4. Ed. 6. cap. 11.
associate an equal number of the Temporalty with the Clergy, in collecting,
ordering, and composing Ecsiasticall Canons, Laws, and Constitutions, for the
regulating of Ecclesiastical Courts and persons, and the better ordering of
the Church: As to 1 Eliz. c. 1. 13. Eliz. c. 12. See ca. 32. H. 8. cap 15. 31
H. 8. c. 14.
authorize his Majesty's Commissioners in causes Ecclesiastical, though
Laymen (as many of them are) to exercise all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Superiorities, Preheminences and Authorities, as by
any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power or authority has heretofore been, or
may lawfully be exercised or used, for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical
State and persons, and for reformation, order, and correction of the same, and
of all manner of Haeresies, Errors, Scismes, and Ecclesiastical Abuses,
Offenses, and Enormities: much more have they Jurisdiction of these things
themselves; else they could not collate, or transfer such Jurisdiction unto
others. Is it then because the worthy, judicious members of our present
Parliament, want learning, judgment, or sufficiency, to discern of
Spiritual Truths? to understand the sense and meaning of our Articles which
themselves long since 13. Eliz. c. 12
confirmed? to distinguish Popish and Arminian Errors, from received, from
undoubted Orthodox conclusions? or because they are so barbarously illiterate,
or irreligiously ignorant, as not to know the obuious, professed, established,
and long continued Doctrines of our Church, which every catechized Country
Peasant, or Schoole-boy can repeat? Alas, what English, Spanish, Romish
spirit, can be so impudently absurd, so prodigiously intoxicated, as thus to
idio^ize, yea quite unchristian the Piety, and all-sufficiencie of our selected
Senate, the most judicious and supreme Counsel of our King and State? Can any
man who knows their most accomplished abilities; their dexterity and insight
in Religion, so much as once conceive, such a gross stupidity, or more then
damnable and unchristian ignorance in this very flower of our Church, and
Pillars of our State, as that the proper sense of our received Articles, or the
long-continued, plain, and oft-resolued Doctrines of our Church, are yet kept
sealed from them? What is this, but to brand them all for ignorants, or to
stitch the Colliers, or Papists blind implicit faith upon them See Doctor
Whites way to the Tr^e Church. Digress 2.
to believe only as our Church believes, and yet to know no distinct
particular Tenants which she does believe? What, but to advance our
Ecclesiastical Commissioners above our Parliament, in admitting them to be
competent and able Judges of Haeresie, Scisme, and of the sense and meaning of
our Articles, when as the Parliament which confirmed them are not such? and to
deny that privilege Acts 17. 11. John 7. 17. ca. 10. 4. 10. 15. 27 1 Cor. 12.
10. 1 These. 5. 21. 1 John 4. 1. 2. 3 2 John 6. 7. 10. Gal. 1. 7. to 11. Math.
7. 15. 2 Pet. 3. 17.
of judging Doctrines; trying spirits; proving all things, distinguishing the
voice of Christ, and of his Spirit, from the voice of Strangers, Thieves, and
false seducing Spirits, to the prime and choysest of Christ's Flock, which is
common to, inseparable from, the very meanest of his Lambs and Sheep? If then
Parliaments have always anciently intermedled with matters of Religion, by a
constant, just, and Legal right: If there be now no sufficient disability,
either in the Members, Jurisdiction, Skill, or requisite Abilities of our
present Parliament, to censure or examine the Violations of our established
Articles, and Religion, or to settle, protect, define, declare, and ratify the
proper sense and meaning of our Articles, and the undoubted Doctrines of our
Church: I see no cause why any Clergy men (unless they are guilty of
Sophisticating, or betraying the Truths, and Doctrines of our Church; and
therefore fear the doom of Parliaments, from which there is no evasion)
should quarrel, or except against your pious progress in matters of Religion,
(which most of all concern us) nor yet repine at Laics (as they do) for
writing in their just defense.

This stumbling-blocke of Parlimentary Jurisdiction in causes of Religion,
(which sticks and takes with many) being thus in brief removed; and your
present Honorable proceedings in the examination of the innouations, and
violations of the ancient Religion, and the resolved Doctrines of our Church,
absolved from the unjust exceptions of ignorant, obnoxious, or ill-affected
Spirits, who only censure and dislike them: It may be here demanded, what
Doctrines, what Religion are now to be established? Surely no other but those
Ancient, Orthodox, and Dogmaticall Conclusions, which the Church of England,
since her Reformation, has always constantly embraced, ratified, and defended
as her own; but those especially, which Popery and Arminianisme have of late
invaded. Yea, but how may Parliaments infallibly discern what Tenants are our
Churches genuine Doctrines, when as both sides lay equal claim, and title to
our Church? Arminians now appealing to Her, as well as their Opposers.

For resolution to this Quaere, I shall first of all take two things as
undoubted Theories.



Math. 11. 21. to 25. Luke 10. 12. to 16.
our condemnation shall be greater, then ever Sodomes or Gomorrahs were, who
never had such means, such light as we.

These two irrefragable Conclusions being thus praemised: This Quaere may be
thus resolved: The only infallible way to determine, to find out the ancient,
the undoubted Doctrines of our Church, is to compare them with the Rules of
trial: The original Touchstone by which all Theological Conclusions must
be examined, is the Scriptures: and these, (together with the Ancient Fathers,
and approved Councels) we dare to challenge as our own, if the naked truth of
our Assertions were the thing in Issue: But our present inquiry being of a
different nature, to discover the true Ancient Doctrines of our Church, and
distinguish them from pestilent vpstart Errors; we must here proceed by other
Triers; even the Articles, Homilies, Common Prayer Book; the public
Evidences, Records, and Declarations; with the concurrent Testimony of all the
learned Writers of our Church: the only Grand-Iury-men to try, the best
Evidences, the sole Witnesses to prove, the most impartial and able Judges to
determine the Doctrines of our Church. That which all these do jointly,
clearly, fully vote, confirm, approve, and testify, a Parliament may safely
declare, and ratify to be; that which they all, or most disclaim, a
Parliament may justly censure not to be; the undoubted and resolved Doctrine
of our Church.

If then all these give up their joint and several suffrages for our
Anti-Arminian Conclusions; If they all pass Sentence against their opposite
Arminian Errors, (as this present Treatise will vndenably prove them to have
done) you may confidently declare, resolve, re-establish the one, as being;
exile, yea damn the other, as not being, the Ancient, received, and undoubted
Doctrine of our English Church.

And why should you now make any doubt or scruple of passing such a sentence?
Never were there any truths more copiously confirmed; more constantly
defended; more posit^uely resolved; more abundantly propagated; more generally
Preached; more unanimously embraced; more vncontrolably published, more
peremptorily established in our Church, then these Anti-Arminian Tenants, which
I here present unto you: There is scarce one public (whether Ancient or
Modern) Act, Record, or Evidence of our Church, since her Reformation hitherto,
but does in terminis, at least in substance, guie judgment for them: Scarce a
learned or godly Martyr of note or eminency in our infant Church, but has
planted them with his hand, watered them with his blood. Scarce one Divinity
Professor in either of our Universities; hardly an Orthodox or renowned Writer
in our Church, from the beginning of King Edward the 6. his Reign till this
very present: but has subscribed them with his hand and feale, and transmitted
them to posterity in some public Work. Not one constant Preacher of a
thousand, who has not proclaimed them in the Pulpit. Scarce a Graduate in
Divinity, but has either in Lectures or Disputes, defended them in the
School. Scarce an Act, or Commencement has passed in either of our Famous
Academies, wherein all, or some of them, have not been publicly affirmed in
Divinity Exercises. Not one authorized or approved Writer of our Church (for I
count not Three of their books were not lycensed.
Barret, Thomson, Mountague, or Iackson such, the only opposites to them, that
I know off, and those generally opposed, by all our Orthodox Divines) who did
ever once oppugn them: Yea al such who have formerly but barked against them
in their inconsiderate Sermons, have been forced to sing a public Palinodie
for their pains: as the Recantations of Barret, Sympson, and others largely
testify: And shall we now begin to question, whether they are the Doctrines
of our Church or no? because some pur-blinde, squint-eyed, ideall Arminian
Nouellists, begin for to dispute it? What is this but to make a scruple,
whether the day be light, or no; because Buzzards, and blindmen cannot see it?
or sottishly to enquire, whether the Sun stands centred in one constant
climate, whiles the massy Earth wheels round; because one brainesicke
Copernicus out of the sublimitie of his quintessentiall, transcendentall
Speculations, has more senselesly, then Metaphysically, more ridiculously,
then singularly auerred it? Shall others wilful, gainefull, and aspiring
blindness, make us to doubt our eyesight? or shall the absurd and idle
Quaerees of some Romish or Temporizing Spirits, so unsettle us in our
long-professed faith, as to cause us now to question the most positive,
palpable, and resolved Principles of our reformed Religion? Yea so far to
besot us, as to put us to this irrational, this frantique scrutinie; Whether
that be the undoubted Doctrine of our Church, which she has always hitherto
believed, embraced, professed as a truth: or that rather which she has always
Diametrally opposed, yea censured as an Error? O let not us be so
unchristianly, so Atheistically wavering in the Fundament all Tenants of our
long-professed Faith, as that this Apostolical, Stigmaticall brand of an
admired subitane Galathian Apostasy; Gal. 1. 6. cap. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4.
(I marvel that you are so soon removed from him, that called you into the
grace of Christ unto another Gospel: O foolish Galatians who has bewitched
you, that ye should not obey the truth, etc.) With the disgraceful and
soule-pricking obloquies of our insulting Adversaries (who will be apt to
vaunt, that we now begin to doubt of our Religion, and fall back to them)
should now justly seize upon us, for our halting in these often, yea, The
Articles of Ireland composed 1615. and the Synod of Dort: 1619. 1620. have
resolved al these points in terminis.
late resolved points, in which both we and our Forefathers have been so long
instructed. Alas, why should Papists; why Turks, or Atheists thus reproach us:
Where now is your reformed Religion, in which you have thus long reposed your
Salvation, and imbarqued all your souls? Where is the Faith, the Doctrines of
your Church, which you have thus pertinatiously embraced since your revolt from
Rome? Where is the precious blood of all your glorious mocke-Martyrs, in which
you have so long gloried? Where the Orthodoxie, Learning, and Solidity of your
much renowned Academies? of your unparalleled Martyr, Bucer, Tyndall, Latimer,
Beacon, Cranmer, Jewel, Nowell, Veron, Fox, Fulke, Reinolds, Whitakers,
Hooker, Hutton, Cartwright, Hill, Babington, Willet, Perkins, Abbots, Field,
Crakenthorpe, Whites, Usher, Prideaux, Ward, Benefield, Sharp, Sybthorpe,
Ames, Featley, Wilson Carleton, Dauenat, Morton, Goad, Belcanckquall, Burtons,
your imcomparably learned King James, (the Phaenix of his Age, and eminentest
of his rank for solid learning) with all your other Centuries of Writers in
which you so much triumph? Where the Authority of your Church, you Parliaments,
or your Articles; that you now begin to doubt, yea, question and re-examine the
truth and verity of these dogmaticall Conclusions, which all these have
planted, watered, sealed, and settled thus among you? What a shame, a brand a
downfall will this be to our Religion? What an inexpiable blemish, and
intolerable disgrace to all our godly Martyrs; to these our famous Writers; to
our learned Sovereign of blessed memory; to his two unparalleled Predecessors
Queen Elizabeth, and King Edward: to our whole glorious, and flourishing
Church, since the beginning of her Reformation to this present? What a grief,
a heartbreaking to all faithful members of our Church and State? yea, what a
dangerous Praecipice, and fatal ouerture to all our souls: if we should now
begin to pluck those foundations up, on which we have thus long built, the
hopes, the structure of our eternal happiness: or to call that into question,
which we have so often resolved for the undoubted Orthodox belief and Tenent of
our own; yea, of the Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, from age to
age, which can never totally, nor finally err in Fundamental truths?

Memorable is the answer of that blessed ancient Eusebius Eccles. Hist. l. 4
cap. 15. Niceph: Calist Eccles. Histor. l. 3. c 34.
Martyr, Policarpus, when he was urged by the Pro-consul to blaspheme and
deny Christ, that so he might escape: Fourscore and six years (says he)
have I served him, neither has he offended me in any thing; and how can I now
revile or deny that King, which has thus kept me? Surely not to ascend to
Wickcliffe, Bradwardine, Bid, or Anselme (who all concurred with us in our
present Tenants) but to confine our selves unto the Ages of those later
Martyrs, and Writers of our Church, which I have here recorded: I can safely
say, (and I hope I have sufficiently euidenced it in the ensuing Catalogue:
that our Church has Mr. Tyndall with whom we begin our Catalogue was Martyred
in the year 1536. John Frith in the year, 1533. Dr. Barnes in the year 1541.
King Edward was crowned in the year 1546. So that these points have continued
in our Church well-nigh an 100. years.
this fourscore and six years, and more; even constantly embraced, and
defended these Anti-Arminian Theses, neither did they ever offend, or do her
harm in any thing: (yea, they have been so far from preiudicing, or
offending, that they have accumulated her with all varieties of blessings, of
contentments, making her Isay 51. 3.
as the very Eden, and Paradise of God, while they dwelt in peace within her,
whereas now she ebbs and sinckes together with them:) And shall she now prove
so ungrateful to her gracious God; so injurious to these blessed truths,
(wherein the very marrow of all true Christian comfort, yea the strength, the
ground and certainety of our Salvation rest, though some have ^leited them as
mere curious, and nice Disputes,) as now to question, yea silence and
restrain them, when they have thus long kept her in such peace and glory, as
Prisca pare^nescit, aequalem poster^ nullum Exhibitura dies: praeteritis m^li^r
ma^orque futuris. Ca^bdeni Brittan. page 160.
no former age has ever matched, nor subsequent days have hopes to parallel?
What, shall we thus requite the Lord for these his documents, wherein his
incomprehensible Wisdom, Freedom, Mercy, Justice, Power, Grace, and glory,
shine forth in greatest luster; as after all the good they have brought upon
us, to dis-inherit them of their ancient Freedom, and by certain Politic,
and insensible gradations to shoulder them out of our Church; that so Popery
and Arminianisme (the fertile mothers of all licentious dissoluteness) may
possess their throne? Shall we thus repay our blessed Martyrs for all their
glorious sufferings, as now for to dis-martyr, yea, vncrowne, and tread them
under foot, by disputing, or doubting these Theological positions, which they
have canonized, and sealed to us with their blood? Shall we thus retaliate the
very Pillars of our Church, and Patrons of our Faith, even all our learned
Writers, as to brand them for illiterate, erroneous, and seducing Nouellers, to
their eternal infamy, in rooting up these fundamental Truths which they have
planted; or re-implanting those Pelagian, Arminian, Popish Errors, which they
all have labored to extirpate? Shall we now prove so unnatural to our Mother
Church, as to rip up her womb that bare, or cut off her duggs that nourished
us, in offering violence to these her sacred Assertions, which did at first
begette us unto grace, and now cheerish and prepare us unto glory? Or shall we
be so injurious, so destructive to our own distressed souls, as to strippe
them naked of all celestial comforts? to vnbottome them of all their hope and
stay? or to leave them destitute of Salvation, in depriving them of all these
sweet and rauishing cordialls? in dis-lincking that Golden, that Adamantine
chain of Gods immutable and free Election; whereon their very happiness,
comfort, and Salvation are alone suspended? Let this, let this, be far from
all our thoughts; at leastwise from our practice. Far be it from any of us,
especially, from you right Christian Worthies, entrusted with the care and
safety of Religion, as to question or doubt of these Orthodox, these sweet
Conclusions, so long estated, so often resolved in our Church, without any
retractation, or control.

Your only care, your work is now, to defend, to settle them, not dispute
them; to damn, yea, quite extirpate their opposite Arminian Errors, (which
like Tares spring up apace among us, and ouergrow our Wheat,) not to honor,
countenance, or equalize them with them, by putting them both to trial: to
question, censure, and condemn, their audacious open Adversaries, their secret
dangerous Master-vnderminers, Sunt enim quidam qui sustissime damnatas
impietates, adhuc liberius defendendas putant: et surt qui occultius penetrant
domos, et quod in aperto non clamare metuunt, in secreto seminare non
quiescunt. Sunt autem qui omnino siluerunt magno timore compressi: sed adhuc
cord retinent, quod ore iam proferre non audent, qui tamen possent fratribus
ex ^rioreipsius dogmatis defensione esse notissim^^ Proinde alii seuerius^
coercendi, alii vigilantius vestigand^: alii tractandi guidem lenius, sed non
segnius sunt docend^, vt si non timentur ne perdant, non tamen negligantur, no
pereant. Aug. Epist. 105. Sixto. It was his speech of the old, I may as truly
apply it to our new Pelagians.
who are of different ranks, and must be dealt with in a various manner;) not
to discuss their verity, of which our Church was never yet suspicious, in the
least degree. Proceed, therefore as you (Gods name be blessed) have already
done: to inquire out the Heads, the Nurseries, roots, and grand Protectors of
our Popish, our Arminian mungrell rabble, (which swarm like Locusts in our
Church of late) combining both together (as is justly feared) to eat out our
Religion by degrees, to spoil us of these temporal immunities, of those
celestial treasures of Gods saving truth, which are far dearer to us, then
our dearest souls: and when you have once discovered them (as you may quickly
do, since practice, fame, and jealousy have made them so notorious,) it will
be worth your labor to hew them down with speed, both root and branch, at
once; else all your superficial hacking of some smaller Issues, will but
increase their growth, augment their strength, and multiply their fruit, their
branches, and al-daring practices, when the time, the fear of lopping are but
passed over. Trampling we know on Camomile stalks, does but make them grow the
thicker, spread the faster: it is the breaking, not the bruising of the root
that kills it. The mowing down of weeds, of grass; the lopping off of lesser
branches does never hinder, but advance their growth; not lessen, but augment
their number: The roots must first be stocked up, or else the blades, the
stalks, the branches will not, cannot wither, or give over budding. Strike
therefore at the roots, as well as at the branches of these prevailing
Factions, else all your lopping, will turn but into pruning: your launching
into festring; your medicine into poison, to kill our Church the Patient, but
strengthen her diseases, which have hitherto got ground upon us, by all those
former Parliamentary lenitiues and verbal purges, which your Medicinal skill
applied to them.

It is noted of Pelagianisme, (of which the doctrinall part of Popery, in the
points of Grace, and the whole body of Arminianisme are the revived ashes, and
new-raysed Goasts,) Illustris olim protulit Britannia dogma hoc super^^^^, etc.
Festus Hommius in Co^onidem Gulielmi^ Arnesij.
that it took its rise in England, Hierom. aduersus Pelagium ad C^isiphontem:
Argumentum: Prosperi Cronich^n. Bibliothecha Patru^: Tom. 5. pars 3. page 1^2.
Bid. Ecclesiast. Hist: Gentis Anglorum lib. 1. c. 10. Meredith Ha^mers
Chronograph p. ^89.
Pelagius the Father of it being himself a Britain, and a Monk of Bangor:
What a regained Honor were it to our Nation; What an inutterable benefit to
our Church; What a glory to this your Honorable and great Assembly, if you
could now at last eternally interre it in the soil that bare it; and make its
ancient (now its second) womb, its last, its endless Grave? It was said by
one of note, some few years past: (and I wish it may be Prophetically true at
least.)

Festus Ho^mius in Core^idem. Guliel^^i Amesi^^ 1618.
Tulit malum hoc and sustulit Brittania^: That England had both hatched and
destroyed this monster of old, of new Pelagianisme, which Arminius and his
followers had then newly raised from Hell, to which it was of old condemned:
But alas, we see its living, and springing up like Hydraes heads; Its former
Multae dum leuiter corriguntur saepius maiorae co^surgunt. Cabilonense Council.
1^ Can. 13.
ouer-indulgent decapitations both at Dort, at home, being but a bloodletting
to increase its future vigor, not a fatal blow to bring it to its final
period; because it cut not off those master-veines which gave greatest, though
but hidden life and growth unto it. O therefore give, and strike it, and its
Arminian Issue now at last, a final, fatal, and heart-killing blow, which
needs no iteration; and bury them this once so deep, so sure, that they may
never need a second Funeral.

But how you will say, may this be done? I will inform you in a word or two.

It is Storied of the Math. 27. 60 to the end.
chief Priests and Pharisees (who were ever the greatest and most imbittered
enemies to Christ and his Apostles, as their successors, who will needs be
styled Priests, have since been to his members,) that having crucified our
blessed Savior, because they would be sure to keep him from rising from his
grave again, according to his promise: they did not only suffer him to lie
intombed in a rocky Sepulcher, to the door of which there was a great stone
rolled: but they likewise went and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch, for fear lest his Disciples should come by night, and
steal him away, and say that he was risen. What these vile miscreants vainly
did in Antichristian, do you Right noble Christians, in true Christian
Policy: Pelagius with his late-born brat Arminius, has been often times buried
by sundry Concilium Palestinum^ Africanum. Arausicyaum:
Ancient, (some Synod of Dort, 1619. 1620. Convocation of Ireland, 1615. in
their Articles then composed
Modern) Councels, and Hierom. contra Pelagianos Augustine. 7. Tom-pars. 2.
Prosper. Fulgentius Bernard. Orosius. Bradwardine.
Fathers of the Church, but yet they have always risen from the dead again,
to the great disquiet of all true Christian Churches: If then you chance to
crucify them once again (as now we hope, we pray you may, for fear their
life prove all our deaths: they being the Archest Traitors to our Church, our
State, our souls, and saving Grace:) you must not only see them intombed for
the present, though it be in graves of stone: but likewise watch, and seal
their Sepulchers, making them sure for all succeding Ages, by some inexorable,
strict, and vigilant Acts of Parliament, which no Charm, no Wile, no Force, or
Policy may euade; Else their Disciples will come by night again, (as they
have often times done) and steal them quite away; and not only say, but to our
great disturbance, prove; that they are once more risen from the dead: So
shall their last resurrection be far worse, our second danger, your latter
Error, far greater then the first; which God forbid.

Now the GOD of grace, and wisdom, so aid, direct, and guide your Honors
with his Spirit, in this great weighty Work, (which needs an heavenly power
to accomplish it:) that we, to our unutterable joy and comfort, may now at
last behold, our drooping and declining Orthodox Religion (the only Center,
Pillar, Bulwark, Garrison, Honor, Treasure, and conseruer of our declining
State, which ebbes and flows together with it) revived, advanced, established,
and secured once again, against all Foreign, all Domestique hostile Forces,
all Stratagemes that oppugn it: and that all our eyes may see with tri^mph,
all Popery, all Old, all New Pelagianisme, with all the grand Fomentors, and
Master-springs that feed them, (in despite of all their new-erected and much
adored Altar-Idols,) arraigned at your dreadful Bar, condemned at your great
Tribunal; executed before your faces: laid dead and prostrate at your feet:
interred in some brazen Dungeon; yea sealed up, and strictly watched with such
enuironing, cautelous, ir-repealable, and adamantine Laws, as may so press
them down for all eternity, that they may never raise themselves, nor yet be
raised in our Church again.

Amen. Amen.
Your Honors in all humble service, whiles you stand for Christ, Religion,
Church, or Country. WILLIAM PRYNNE,
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHERS IN GOD, THE ARCHBISHOPS and Bishops of the
Church of ENGLAND.
RIGHT Reverend Fathers in God, In^egritas praesidentium, salus est subditotum.
Nam totius familiae Domini status et ordo nutabit, si quod requiritur in
corpore, non inveniatur in capite: Leo Epist: 87: cap: 1
in whose pious integrity, and industrious vigilancie, the chiefest safety; in
whose unfaithfulness, negligence, or insollidity, the greatest hazard, the
inevitablest danger of our Protestant Church, and long professed religion are
suspended: I here most humbly tender unto your fatherly and pious
considerations, an uninterrupted Antithesis of the Church of England, from her
very first reformation to this present, against that O^osius, De Liberate
Arbitrij Apolog: contra Pelagium, styles it: Nefaria haeresis: venatissimorum
dogmatum abominatio; serpens, suffocansque halitus;
most venomous Semi-pelagian heresy, and those Arminian Novelties, which have
of late invaded, yea much endangered her ancient, established, and professed
Doctrines, which your Ecclesiastical Beneficium datur propter officium,
Council: Lateran, sub Leone 10, Sess: 9, ^urius Council: Tom: 4. page: 635: B.
Dignities, and frequent Subscriptions to the Articles, Homilies, and Tenants
of our Church, engage you in a more special manner to protect.

It is not, yea it cannot be unknown to your grauities, that old Pelagius,
and Faustus, who have lain dead and rotten in their graves 1100 years, or
more, have by a kind of See Plutarch De his qui sero a Numine puniuntur.
Diogenes Laert lib 8. Pythagoras. Platonis Phaedon: Tertullian de Anima,
Hierom. Epist. 59. cap. 2.
Pythagorean Metempsy chosis, revived in Arminius and his followers now of
late, (as Haec venenatissimorum dogmatum abominatio habet etiam nunc viventes
mortuos, mortuosque viventes. Na^ Crigines, Priscillianus, et Iovinianus olim
apud se mortui in his vivunt; et non solum vivunt, verum etiam loquunt^r; nunc
vero Pelagius et Caelestius in his viventes mortui, ecce adversus Ecclesiam,
quod mi erum est; et quod multo m^erius est in Ecclesia palam sibilant, etc
Orosius de Liberate Arbitrii contr. Pelag. Bibl. Patrum, Tom 15 p 144.
Origin, Priscillian, and Iouinian did in them) and not only spoken openly
against the grace of God, and doctrines of our Church, which is miserable; but
even publicly preached and written against them in our Church, without any
Ecclesiastical censure or control; which is far worse: It was the complaint
of a Reverend and learned Prelate of our Church about some ten years since, in
an Epistle Dedicatorie unto his Majesty then Prince of Wales: Teterrimus
hal^tus nostras quoque parts nescio quo vento^^ impetu perflavit, et Theologos
nost^os nonnullos ita de nentarit, vt relicto fi lei trito, et proba^o tramite,
^n Arminii ansractas et praecipicia se commiserint, et dogmate etiamnum
destruant Articulos Religionis, quos prius propria subscriptione confirmarunt.
Robertus. Abbot Epise, Salisbuciensis, De Gratia et Persev, ^anctoru^, Epist.
Ded^
That the stinking vapors of Arminius (whose heresies he there learnedly
encounters) had been blown over from the Belgique shores upon our English
coast, and so infatuated some of our Divines, that leaving the beaten and
approved path of faith, they betook themselves unto the crooked ways and
praecipices of Arminius, destroying the Articles of our Religion with their
Tenants, which they had formerly confirmed by their own subscription. What he
lamented and condoled then, we have much more cause to complain of now; when
as these contagious vapors have not only dangerously infected many, but
likewise animated some Stat ergo Goliath, proh dolor, in Ecclesia, superbia
immanissimus, carnah potentia tumidus, omnia se per se posse confidens et non
solum stat; verum et provocat; simulque per dies plurimos sanctum Israel
manifesti timoris exprobrat: Orosius contra Pelag Apologia.
Goliahs, to bid professed defiance to the host of Israel in Arminius his
quarrel, and to take up arms in his defense, against the often resolved and
subscribed Doctrines of their Mother Church, who has enriched them with sundry
favors; and yet alas, Orosius Ib.
Ab Ecclesia siquidem haereseos impugnator expellitur, et nutriri in sinu
Ecclesiae haereticus inuenitur: the impugners of Arminius his Champions have
been questioned, and molested; when as they were never hitherto once publicly
conuented by any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, for these their dangerous
Innouations.

When these Arminian Errors were first broached by Barret, and Baro, in Queen
Elizabeth's happy Reign, the zeal of our See page 10. to 14. 120 to 123. 127,
128, 129.
Reverend Prelates, and See page 42. to 48. 120. to 1^5.
University heads was such; that they forthwith proceeded iudicially against
them, not suffering them to rest or harbor in our Church: But alas the Fugit
mercenarius a r^ctitudine iust^tiae, a defensione Ecclesiae, a liberatione
Patriae, vel amore blandientis, vel timore persequentis. Bernard ad Pastores
Sermo Col. 1730 D.
cowardice, indulgency, and luke warmness of our age is such, that Et quidem
isti sortiti sunt, ministerii locum, sed non zelum. Successores omnes cupiunt
esse, imitatores pauci Bernard Sermo ad Cle^um in Concilio Rhemensi Col. 1727,
1728. and sermo super Cantica Col. 802. D.
those who have succeeded them in their Episcopal Dignities, Operarii quanto
rariores in terris, tanto chariores in coelis habentur. Bernard ad Pastores
sermo. Col. 1729. E.
not their zeal, (some few only excepted, whose paucity indears the^ more to
God, to man; and Magna laus pa^corum inter malos inquinatos ^ugi virtutum
nitore immaculatis vestibus permanere. Primasius in Apocalip lib 1 fol. 5. B.
adds unto their praise) have scarce so much as once opened their mouths in
public, against those Arminian Fu^es sunt omnes haeretici: hi sunt Fures et
Latrones qui veniunt in vestimentis ovium, intrinsecus autem sunt Iupi rapaces
quotquot autem venerunt fures sunt et Latrones: Fures latenter nocendo,
latrones aperte saeviendo: Bernard ad Pastores Sermo, Col. 1730. D.
thieves, and robbers, who by their secret policies, and public writings,
have lately preyed upon the sheep and Doctrines of our Church.

But now, since our religious Sovereign has publicly professed in his late
page 42
Declaration to all his loving Subjects; to maintain the true Religion and
doctrine established in the Church of England, (of which the Anti Arminian
Tenants comprised in this Antithesis are the chiefest branch) without admitting
or conniuing at any backsliding, either to Popery, or Scisme: and page 21
has called God to record, that he will never give way to the authorizing of
any thing, whereby any innovation may steal or creep into the Church, but
preserve that unity of Doctrine and Discipline established in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, See here p: 10 to 14: 42: to 48. 120. to 130.
(In whose Reign Arminianisme was particularly exiled, ^ndour Anti-Arminian
Assertions settled in our Church:) whereby our Church of England has stood and
flourished ever since: Since King Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth, and King
James of blessed memory, (an See page: 58, 59.
implacable, professed Antagonist to Arminianisme, to Arminians, to his dying
day) with all our learned Prelates, Divinity Professors, authorized Writers in
their reigns; and our godly Martyrs in King Henry the 8. and Queen Mary's
days, whose names and works I have here particularly recorded in their order:
since the Fathers and Councels of the primative Church: the primitive and
modern Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with their several
established Articles, Homilies, Catechismes, Leiturgies, and Records: (as I
have here infallibly demonstrated:) together with the late dissolved
Parliament, have professedly oppugned, and solemnly condemned those
Semi-Pelagian and Arminian grace-annihilating Errors, which have lately crept
into our Church; embracing, authorizing, and establishing their Opposite
Positions as the Orthodox, Catholic, and undoubted truth. Let me now beseech
your Pieties, as you tender the honor of God, the glory of his grace, (which
should be dearer to you then your dearest souls,) as you would gain the love,
and discharge the trust of your blessed Savior and 2 Pet: 5. 4. Hebr: 13: 20.
Master-shepheard Jesus Christ, Hebr: 13. 17 1 Pet: 5. 2, ^, 4 2 Cor: 5-10
Frattes aliam Synodum pronuncio vobis vbi Dominus sedebit in judicio; et ibi
omnes nos oportet repraesentari; et ibi Deus just iudicabit orbem terrarum.
Ibi omnes nos oportet repraesentati (nisi quod dici nefas est, mentiatur
Apostolus) sieve sit Papa, sieve sit Cardinalis, sieve Archiepiscopus, sieve
Episcopus, sieve dives, sieve pauper, sieve doctus, sieve indoctus, vt referat
vnusquisque rationem de his quae gessit in corpore, sieve bonum, sieve malum, Et
si reddenda est ratio de his, quae quisque gessit in corpore suo; heu quid fiet
de his quae quisque gessit in corpore Christi, quod est Ecclesia? etc. Bernard:
ad Clorum in Council: Rhemensi Sermo, Col, 1725. E.
who will summon you ere long before his dreadful Tribunal, to render an
account of all the stewardships and souls committed by him to your charge,
(which we may justly fear, Messis quidem multa, et saccrdotes multi, et
mercenarii multi, sed operarii pauci: Isti voraciori ingluvie lucrorum,
infinitas exigunt pecunias: his insatiabili desiderio inhiant; pro his, ne
amittant, timent, et cum amittum, dolent^ harum in amore quiescunt. Animarum
nec casus reputatur, nec salus, Bernard Ibid: Col 1726. D. 1719. E
too many sloathfull Ministers who fish for tithes, not souls, do much
neglect, as being seldom resident at their charge, which they scarce ever saw;
but never resident in their pulpits, into which they seldom clime:) As you
respect the peace and happiness of our Church, in which you are advanced; the
safety and dignity of our long professed Religion to which you have subscribed;
in which you have been borne, bred, and nourished: the honor and Aman, coli,
diligi, maius imperio est: Symmachi Relatio: Ambr. Tom. 5. p. 96. E.
popularity of our Religious Sovereign, by whom you are now entrusted with
Religion, as See his Majesty's Declaration, p 20, 21.
with his chiefest treasure; Subditi minus meruunt iniurias ab eo Principe quem
religio um, et Deorum cultui deditum arbitrantur; cique velut commilitones Deos
et adiutores habenti minus infidiantur. Arist. Polit. l. 5 cap. 11. sect. 131.
Magna, praeclaraque res est, quum in aliis vniuersis, tum in Imperatore;
religiosum esse, et fidei servantem, talemque cognitum esse. Zenophon. Orat, de
Agisilao Rege. p 664. D.
the conservation of whose purity and freedom, will most ingratiate, indeare
his Majesty to all his faithful Subjects, Errat, si quis existimat tutum ibi
esse Regem, vbi nihila Rege tutum est. Securitas securitate mutua paciscenda
est. Vnum est inexpugnabile munimentum amor civium, etc. Sencca de Clementia l.
1. cap. 19.
whose love will prove his strongest guard, his richest mine and best supply.
As you would faithfully discharge that great Episcopal trust, and dignity,
which now rests upon your shoulders; not as a mere Castorinas quaerimus et
sericas vestes. Et ille inter Episcopos secredit altiorem, qui vestem induerit
clariorem. Ambr. De Dignitate sacerd c 5. Vbi proh dolor reperiemus Episcopos,
qui post adeptam dignitatem in humilitate se contineant Nempe superbia iis
occasio est vt ad tantam dignitatem aspirent, vt in ovile Christi impudenter
irrumpant; cum tamen per Psalmistam Dominus dicat: Non habitabit in medio domus
meae qui facit superbiam, etc. Ministri Christi sunt, et serviunt Antichristo:
honorati incedunt de bonis Domini, cui honorem non deferunt: un le hine est iis
quem quotidie videmus, meritricius nitor, histrionicus habitus, regius
apparatus. Inde aurum in fraenis, aurum in sellis et calcaribus. Plus nitent
calcaria, quam altaria. Inde mensae splendidae et cibis et scyphis. Inde
commessationes et ebrietates Inde cythara, et lyra, et tibia, redundantia
torcularia, et promptuaria plena, eructantia ex hoc in illud. Indedolia
pigmentaria, inde referta marsuria. Huiusmodi sunt et volunt esse Ecclesiarum
Praepositi, Decani, Episcopi, et Archiepiscopi, etc. Dicite ergo Archydiaconi,
dicite Presbyteri, dicant etiam Pontifices, in fraenis, in sellis quid facit
aurum? In vestimentis tantus ornatus? In cibis tam supersluus apparatus? Esca
ventri, et venture escis, Deus autem hunc et has destruct. Quis obsecro,
Laicorum avidius Clericis quaerit temporalia, et ineptius vtitur acquisitis?
Cum tantu^ fastum videant Laici in supellectile Clericorum, nonne per eos
potius imitantur ad mundum diligendum quam ad negligendum? Medice cura teipsum:
si mundum praedicas contemnendum, contemn tu prius, et ad ipsum essicacius
alios invitabis. Non sic profecto est, sed sicut populus sic et sacerdos: sicut
Laicus sic et Clericus. Vterque cupit, vterque diligit mundum et ea quae in
mundo sunt. Laicus tamen cum labor, sed Clerici sine labor volunt possidere
totum mundum. Communicate volunt cupiditati et superfluitati hominum sed non
labori: peecare volunt sed non flagellari cum hominibus: vnde timendum est,
quod flagellentur cum daemo^ibus, etc. Bernard^ ad Clerum et ad Pastores Sermo.
Col. 1726, 1627, 1732. be far more to this purpose, super Cantica. sermo.
77. De consideratione. lib. 3. and 4. Ad Gnilielmum Abbatem Apologia, et
Declamationes.
empty, pompous, Lordly, pleasurable, gainful, sloathfull, or voluptuous
honor: not as an Epicurean Euripus, See, or receptacle of delight, which calls
men from their former humility, frugality, and diligence in their ministerial
function, unto a voluptuous, sloathfull, secular, Pontifical, Lordly, proud,
unpreaching life; as most Prelates deemed it, made it in S. Bernards age: but
as a 2 Cor. 2 16 17. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2 c. 4 10. to the end c. 5. 17. 18. 2 Timothy 2.
1. to 16. Mat 9. 37 38. Luke 10 2. 7. John. 21. 15, 16, 17 Romans 16 12. 1 Cor.
15. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 23. 1 These 5. 12 Episcopatus nome^est operis non honoris.
August. De Civit Dei, l. 19 c. 19. Episcopi nomen, non Dominium, sed Officium:
Praesides non tam ad imperitandum, quam ad factitandum: sarculo tibi opus est
non sceptro: Dominatio interdicitur indicitur ministratio. Bernard. De Consid
l. 206. Si quis Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat: opusdixit, non
honorem: laborem, non dignitatem: Primasius, Hierom, Haymo, Chrysostom, and
Theophylact. in 1 Timothy 3. 1. Episcopatus nomen non est in honor, sed in onere:
Greg. Mag. Epist. l. 7. Epist, 117.
ponderous Office, a laborious Calling, a heavy, difficult, and perpetual
Work, which Acts 20. 28. ^ Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Very sacerdotes non
excellentiam suam cogitant provecti, sed sarcinam: nec gloriantur de Officij
dignitate, sed sudant potius constituti sub onere. Hos non inflammat honor
acceptus, sed exercet labor impositus. Prosper de Vita: Contempl: l. 2. c. 2.
Council Parisiens l 1. c: 4
summons you, to feed the purchased and redeemed flock of Christ, over which
the Lord has made you Overseers, with trible diligence, readiness, and
anxiety of heart and hand; because it both redoubles your wages, and augments
your work. As you desire to perpetuate the dignity, the respect of your
Episcopal Jurisdiction, which has grown distasteful unto many through the
defaults of some. As you tender your own personal credit and esteem with all
good Christians, Se amabiles praebeant, non verbo, sed opere: venerandos
exhibeant, sed actu non fascu, Bernard. De Consid l. 4 c. 4. Col. 687. M. Hoc
affectare, hoc imitari decet: maximum ita haberi, vt optimus simul habeatur.
Seneca De Clementia, l. 1. c. 19.
who will reverence you more for your piety and goodness, then your state or
greatness: As you long to satisfy the expectation, to forestall the secret
iealosies and censures of our Church and Kingdom here, whose eyes are now
intent upon you: or to avoid the irrepealable, the eternal doom of Christ
hereafter, Rev. 21 8.
when all fearful, Ier: 23. 1. E. zech. 34. 2, 3. Zech. 11. 17.
sloathfull, inuigilant, and lukewarm shepherds, who Ier. 9. 3.
want zeal, and valor for the truth on earth, shall have their portion in the
unquenchable, and fiery brimstone lake, which burns forever. As you desire to
anticipaete all future Parliamentary proceedings in matters of Religion, the
former, (which no doubt were legal, just, and honorable, though some repine
against them) being occasioned only (as most conjecture) by the remissness,
conniuancy, cowardice, or indulgence of some Ecclesiastical Courts, in
questioning, in controlling, the impudency, the treachery, and Errors of such
Non sunt omnes amici sponsi, qui hodie sunt sponsi Ecclesiae: Bernard: ad
Clerum Sermo, Col: 1727 K
Churchmen, whose Multi Catholici sunt praedicando, qui haeretici funt
operando: Quod haeretici fac^ebant per prava dogmata, hocfaciunt plures hodie
per mala exentpla: seducunt scilicet populum, et inducunt in errorem: et tanto
graviores sunt haereticis, quan to praevalent opera verbis Bernard ad Pastores
Sermo, Col: 1732. G.
heretical, scandalous, vnorthodox, and pernicious doctrines, Books, and
lives, have innouated, and blemished our Religion; embroyled and defiled our
Church: Let me now I pray (upon all these weighty considerations, and
ingagement^) if it may stand with my Iuvinility, and your venerable, your h^ary
gravity, to exhort you to that duty, which the Dan: 7. 9: 13 22.
ancient of days, (yea the verygrauest of our Church, and State require at
your hands) excite your Vere enim Episcopalem vitam sequeris, si per^zelum
linguam^; tuam, hos qui a fidei veritate dissentiunt, in Ecclesiae vnitatem
reduxeris: Greg: Mag: Epist lib. a. Ex Registro Indict. 11. Epist: 59.
Episcopal power, and providence; to extirpate, to exile all Semi-pelagian
Errors, and Arminian Novelties; all grace-defeating, all Church-molesting
Heresies, with their chief Fomenters: all late-erected Altars, Images, Tapers,
Crucifixes: all new revived Popish Doctrines, Ceremonies, Duckings,
Genuflexions, Eastern, yea Altar-adorations, (complained of not long since in
Parliament, as you may remember) with all those other corruptions and
superstitious relics, which have lately crept into our Church, (in despite of
all our 3. and 4 Ed. 6 cap. 11. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. cap. 1. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap.
1. 1. Eliz. cap. 2. 13. Eliz cap. 12
Statutes, Rubricks in the Communion.
Rubricks, Against the peril of Idolatry; of the time and place of prayer part
2. p. 131.
Homilies, Article. 22, 25, 28, 34.
Articles, Canon. 14. 20. 75.
Canons, and Queen Eliz. Injunctions, Iniunct. 3. 12, 23, 25, 31, 35, 49^ and
^5. ^er Tables in the Church.
Injunctions, which prohibit them) through the audacious practices of some
Pacem habet Ecclesia apud extraneos sed filii nequam, filii s^elcrati saeviunt
in eam, qui propriam matrem evisceraut, vt se par^a^t in honorem Bernard, ad
Pastores Sermo, Col. 1^33. A.
domestique crafty Mountebanks, who would slily Cozen us of our Religion under
the golden and holy pretense of Canonical Devotion: and withal to reestablish
these Anti-Arminian orthodox Tenets of our Church, (which here I humbly tender
to your best protections) in their ancient, and long enjoyed purity, peace, and
freedom: that so by these religious atchieuements, you may give some public,
Episcopum non aliud nisi Episcopalis opera designat; ex bono opere magis quam
professione noscatur; action po^ius quam nomine demonstramur. Fac taquei vt
nomen congruat actioni, actio respondea^ nomini; Ne sit nomen inane et crimen
immane; Ne sit honor sub imis et vita deformis: Ne sit de^fica professio et
illicita actio: Ne sit religiosus amictus, et irreligiosus provectus. Ne sit
gradus excelsus et deformis excessus. Ne habeatur in Ecclesia Cathedra
sublimor, et conscientia sacerdotis reperiatur humilier. Ne locutionem
simulemus columbinam, et mentem habeamus caninam. Ne professionem monstremus
ovinam, et ferocitatem habeamus lupinam, Ambrose de Dignitate Sacerdotali, cap.
3. Tom. 4. p. 179.
demonstratiue, actual testimony to the world, (which is Plerunque
suspicionibus laboramus, et illudit nobis illa quae conficere bellum solet,
fama: Seneca Epist. 13. suspiciones quas de aliquo con epimus animum nostrum ab
illo reddunt alieniorem. Quare qui cupit sibi fidem haberi, has prius a se
remoueat est necesse. Thucidides histor. lib: 6. p: 571.
often times jealous of your integrities upon small occasions) that you are all
cordial, sincere and faithful to our Religion, Church, and State: that you
are all valiant and zealous for the truth committed to your trust: and that you
are not only ti^ular, but real Bishops, well worthy Fuerunt ante vos qui se
totos ovibus pascendis exponerent, Pastoris opere et nomine gloriantes; nil
sibi reputantes indignum nisi quod saluti obvium obviare putarent: non
quaerentes quae sua sunt, sed impendentes. Impendere curam impendere
substantiam, impendere et seipsos. Vndevnus illorum: Et ego, ait, superimpendar
pro animabus vestris. Bernard. De Consid l. ^. c. 2. Col 884. K.
to succeed those pious and victorious Prelates, who have in graven those
Anti-Arminian Conclusions which I have here contracted, with their mellifluous
pens, and sealed them with their blood; a sufficient engagement for me, for
them to challenge the privilege of your Episcopal patronage, against the
malignancy of all Opposers.

But perchance your wisdoms will object, that by intermedling with these nice
Arminian Controversies, I have incurred the danger of his Majesty's Declaration
prefixed to the late reprinted Articles: therefore I must only expect an
High Commission Censure from your Lordships, not an Approbation, or friendly
enterteinment of this untimely Treatise; which may chance to prove distasteful
unto some.

To this I answer first, (and for the truth of it I appeal unto your
Lordships, by whose advice this Declaration was at first contrived:) that it
was never his Majesty's, (nor I think your Lordships) intention, to silence or
suppress; but rather to advance by this the ancient, positive, established,
and resolved Doctrines of the Church of England, (especially those which were
professed and ratified in the days of Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth, and King
James of happy memory, as these Anti-Arminian Positions were) as is clear by
the express words of his Page 20, 21 42.
Majesty's last Declaration to all his loving Subjects, which well explaines
the former. But all these dogmaticall Anti-Arminian Conclusions which I have
published, or justified in this Antithesis, are but the ancient, positive,
established and received Doctrine of the Church of England, as the Book it
self, (together with two Reverend Bp. Hall, and Bp. (...), in their ^etters
annexed to Bp. Hall's reconciler, p^^ 84, 85
Prelates of our Church, who have lately in two printed Letters, expressly
^uer^ed, That the Arminian Errors condemned in the Synod of Dort cannot stand
with the Doctrine of the Church of England. And that none can embrace
Arminianisme in the Doctrine of Predestination, and grace, but he must first
desert the Articles agreed upon by the Church of England; nor in the point of
Perseverance, but he must vary from the common Tenet, and received opinion of
our best approved Doctors in the English Church) will justify against all
Opposers: Therefore it is not within the intent or limitts, (and so not within
the Danger) of his Majesty's Declaration, which I would not wilfully, not
willingly oppose.

Secondly, I conceive, that this Declaration prohibits unnecessary and curious
Disputes upon bare conjectures on, or strained Collections from our Articles:
But in this Antithesis you have only abare historical recital, in nature of
a Catalogue, of those scattered Records and writers of our Church, which have
constantly oppugned these new Arminian Errors, from the beginning of
reformation to this present: It comes not therefore within the sphere of this
Declaration.

Thirdly, his Majesty's Declaration, was chiefly, to together with such
unnecessary Controuersi^es, as might disturb the Peace and settled Doctrines
of our Church: But this Antithesis serves only to suppress the Innouations in
Religion, and to allay all modern Arminian Controversies which interrupt our
Churches Peace and Doctrines; by disprouing Arminianisme to be the Doctrine of
our Church, in such an apparent manner, that none can contradict it. Therefore
it is wholly with this Declaration, not against it.

Lastly, his Majesty's Declaration, prohibits principally, unnecessary disputes
about curious, nice, and needless Schoole-points, of which men may be ignorant
without great danger: But I take it under correction, that our Anti-Arminian
Tenets, can which the whole fabric of our salvation, the whole Doctrine and
structure both of man's fall and corruption^ of grace and glory; of Election,
Reprobation, Predestination, Vocation, Justification, Sanctification,
Perseverance, and Glorification, are suspended) are no superfluous, nice, or
See Rom: 5 to 12. Ephesians. 1. and 2^2 ^im 19 c. 2 19 20, 21 1 Pet: 1 and 2 Pet 1.
See Article 17. Articles of Ireland: S. August De Corrept. and gratia, c: 14,
15, 16 and Tom 7: 2 part throughout. Calvin Instit. lib. 3 cap: 21. Peter
Martyr in Rom: 9. Sturmius De Proedestinatione; Thesis 1. Polanus de
Proedestinatione; with a lother Protestants who have written of these points,
who accord in this, and therefore all Protestant Churches in their several
Confessions have recorded, and defined these as fundamental truths, See the
harmony of Confessions, section 4. to 10.
curious speculations, unfit, unneedful to be taught or published; but most
necessary, essential, comfortable, and fundamental Truths, in which the
whole pith and marrow of Divinity, the whole Doctrine of grace, and man's
salvation are included. This all the ancient Councels, ana voluminous Treatises
of the Fathers in the p^imatiue Church; this all the modern Synods, Articles,
Confessions, Resolutions, and Writings, both of our own, and other Churches,
against Pelagius, Arminius, and their followers; as the professed enemies of
the grace, and Gospel of God; as Atheistical Sectaries; yea wicked,
pestilent, and blasphemous heretics, (as our late learned See page 59. 110^
Sovereign has rightly styled them) do abundantly testify: All which would
never questionless have waged such fierce, such perpetual, and implacable
wars against these Pelagian and Arminian Heresies, were they suchinnoxius, or
triuiall Differences; such unnecessary, such curious speculations, as some of
their Abetters, (who then me thinks should be ashamed conten^iously to foment
them, to the great disturbance of our Churches peace) would seem to make them,
Neglecta solent incendia sumere vires. Horace Epist: l. 1 Epist: 18.
because they would more easily induce men to neglect them till they had gotten
strength, and then to embrace them, to their eternal ruin. Since therefore
these Anti-Arminian Tenets (which I here only vindicate to be the ancient,
genuine, and undoubted Doctrine of the Church of England) are points of highest
consequence, of greatest weight and use; whence they have been more ab
undantly patronized, propagated, and propugned, (not only in the primitive
Church, but likewise in most modern Protestant Churches, and in the Church of
England) then any other substantial points of Divinity whatsoever; as is most
apparently evident. Since their opposite Arminian Errors, (which are in truth
mere See Bellar: De Iustif^ lib: 3 Dr. John White Way to the true Church
Digress: 0, 41, 42 Bryery his Reformed Protestant cap: 11. to the end; Bishop
Mortons Protestants Appeal, l: 2 c: 10. accordingly
Popery, and See Pelagius Redivivus: and here p 59.
Semi-Pelagianisme, at least See here p: 122, 123, 1^4.
a bridge, a way, and portall to them both) have been most constantly
oppugned, both in the Primative, our own, and other Reformed Churches, as a
dangerous, and grace-nullifying Heresy. And since Prosper himself has
expressly recorded it, long ago: Augustinus pia, constantique doctrina abundan:
e^ probavit, praedicandam esse Ecclesiae praedestinationem, in qua est gratiae
praeparatio; et gratiam in qua est praedestinationis effectus; et praescientiam
Dei, qua ante saecula aeterna quiae bus esset co laturus sua dona, praescivit^
Cuius predicationis quiquis est impugnator, apertissimus est ^ clagianae
elationis adjutor. Prosper. Responsio ad Excerpta Genuertsium: ^ub. 9. fol.
146, 147.
That St. Augustine has constantly, piously, and abundantly proved: that
predestination in which there is the preparation of grace; and grace in which
there is the effect of predestination; and the prescience of God, by which he
foreknew before all worlds on whom he would bestow his gifts of grace, ought to
be preached to the Church. Of the preaching of which, says he, (I pray observe
his words, and mark them well) whosoever is an impugner, he is a most apparent
furtherer of Pelagian pride: (which I dare presume is far from his Majesty's
royal thoughts to be:) I may safely (as I hope) conclude on all these
premises: That this my Antithesis, (which I have divulged only for the peace
and benefit of our English Church, and the stopping of all Arminians mouths,
who now must either hold their peace, and yield their cause, or else Verba
^piscoporum et Clericorum, qui Apostolorum sunt filii et haeredes, vim
iuratoriam in se habent, vt in iis iusiurandum sit, quod est verbum simplex in
aliis: et quod in aliis est simplex periurium, sacrilegium sit in illis, Petrus
Blesensis Epist. 51. Bibl. Patrum, Tom: 12. pars 2 p. 741. C.
periuriously, sacrilegiously renounce their Mother Church, and these her
Doctrines, which they have subscribed, if not sworn to) is clearly without the
verge and danger of his Majesty's Declaration; who never did intend so far to
countenance, to grace an heresy, so branded, censured and condemned by the
primitive Church; by foreign Protestant Churches; by the whole Church of
England, with all her learned writers, from her first reformation to this
present: and more particularly by his Royal Father, whose faith, whose steps
he means to follow: as for its sake, its growth, and greater safety, to put
these established and professed Anti-Arminian Doctrines of our Church to
silence: which is almost the highest dignity, the greatest conquest that
Arminianisme can, or would aspire to.

And now right Reverend Fathers, having cleared this objection, give me leave
to close up this Epistle with Hebr: 12. 22
a word of exhortation, which I beseech you for to suffer. Remember, I entreat
you in the name and fear of God, that you (together with the rest of our
reverend and learned ^lergie) are the Isay: 52, 8. c 62 6. Ezech. 3. 17. c. 33.
2, to 12
Watchmen, the Isay 4 5, 6. c. 26. 1. Psalm. 48. 13.
Garrisons and Bulwarks of our Israel; to give her warning of; to protect and
shield her against, those pernicious, subdolous, and seducing Custodia vt sit
sufficiens trifaria erit; a vi tyrannorum, a fraud haereticorum, a
tentationibus daemonum: Bernard: super Cant: Ser: 77. Col: 80^. B.
heretics; those Popish and Arminian Adversaries, which war against her
faith, her peace, Gods grace, our souls. If you then through Isay 56. 10, 11,
12. Ier: 23. 1, 2. Ezech: 34. 2. 12. Non est speculator qui in imo est,
speculator quippe semper in altitudine stat, vt quicquid venturu^ est long
prospiciat. Et quisquispopuli speculator ponitur, in altum debet stare per
vitam, vt possit prodesse per providentiam. Greg: Mag: Hom: 11. super Ezech
fol: 284. L.
worldliness, negligence, sloathfulnesse, Epicurisme; or the Romans 16 18.
Haeretici per dulces Semiones corda seducunt innocentium. Chrysostom Hom. 24. in
Mat.
sweet Syrenian songs of enchanting Mercuries, Isay 56. 10.
begin to sleep, to slumber; to remit, or else give ou^^ your spiritual
watch, and ward, against these Matthew. 7. 15. 2 Cor. 11. 14.
sheep like wolves friend-seeming Enemies, Isay 56. 9.
which come for to devour us: If you Isay 56. 10.
prove dumb dogs that will not, cannot bark, at their approach, or treacherous
Centinells, false posternes to be^ray us to their infernal malice; we must
then b^ Ezech 33. 2. to 12 and Greg. Mag. Hom 11 super Ezech. See Hierom and
Theodoret in Ezech. 33.
needs surprised, yea captivated and destroyed in a moment, through this your
negligence, and default; but yet Ezech. 33 6. 8. c. 34. 9, ^0 Heb. 13. 17.
Acts. 20. 26. 27. Sanguis ergo morientis de manu speculatoris requ^itur quia
peccatum subditi, culpa esse praepositi si tacuerit reputatur; quia ipse
buncoccidit, qui em^ tacendo morti prodidit. Greg. Mag. Hom 12. super Ezech.
our blood shall be required at your hands. O therefore rouse up your selves
with speed, and Isay 2^. 8. Hab. 2. 1.
stand upon your watch, your guard, for our security: Psalm. 121. 4, 5, 6.
close not your eyes, Isay 62. 6.
hold not your peace, Nehemiah 4. 21, 22, 23.
lay not down your arms day nor night: imitate Nehemiah his workmen; Nehem.
4. 17, 18.
build up the walls of our spiritual Jerusalem with one hand, and hold a
weapon always in the other hand, to keep off Nehem: 4. 7. 10 15.
Samballat, and Tobiah; those Arrabians, Ammonites, and Ashdodites, those
Jesuits, Papists, and Arminians, who have conspired together to ^ight against
our blessed Jerusalem; to break down her walls, and lay her waste, as they
have done her bordering Churches: Else that brand of holy Bernard, will justly
seize upon you. Super Cantica Sermo 77. Col: 802. D. Ad Clerum Sermo Col. 1728.
^.
Parum est nostris vigilibus quod non servant nos, nisi et perdant: and then
Ier: 23. ^. Ezech: 34. 2. See Bishop Jewels Exposition on the Thessalonians, p.
196.
woe be to you says the Lord your God; whose woe none can stand under.

You are Matthew: 6. 14 15, 16. Phil: 2^ 15.
the Lights, Math: 6 22, 23. 1 Cor: 12. 16. 21. Rev: 3. 8. c. 5 6.
the Eyes, 1 Samuel: 9. 9. 11. 18, 19. 2 King: 17 13. 2 Chro: 33. 18, 19 Isay 30
10.
the Seers, yea Acts 20, 28 Hebr. 13. 17. 1 Pet: 5 2.
Overseers of our Church; to Ezech: 33. 2 to 12.
see, foresee her dangers, Isay 58. 1.
discover her increasing corruptions, Isay 21. 8, 9.
detect her wily Adversaries, with all their overreaching, undermining
Policies, Math: 5, 14, 15, 16. c. 6. 22, 23.
inlighten her entire body, Luke 1. 79.
direct her in the way of truth, of life, of peace, and Mat: 15. 14.
keep her safe from falls and stumbles. If you then through Isay 56. 10.
ignorance, wilfulness, heresy, treachery, flattery, fear, earthlinesse,
or any other works of darkness, Micah. 3. 6. Matthew: 14 29.
lose your light, your eyesight: If you become either Lucerna quae in
semetipsam non ardet, eam rem cui supponitur non accendit Greg: Mag: Hom: 11.
super Ezech.
dark Lanthornes which can yield no light, or Isay 29. 10, 11. c. 56. 10.
starkblinde, purblinde, squinteyed Seers, which either can, or will not see;
or oversee at all; or very little; or quite awry, overthwart the sacred word of
truth, and Doctrines of our Church. Or if you prove such Pontifical 1 Pet. 5.
3. Ezech: 34. 4. 3 John: 10. Math: 20. 25, 26, 27. Luke. 22. 24, 25, 26.
haughty, Lordly, or domineering Overseers; as contemptuously to disdain and
over-looke; or tyrannically to insult or trample upon your fellow-brethren, and
the Lords inheritance, a sin of which the Quanti Presbytteri constituti
obliti sunt humilitatis; quasi ideitco fuerunt ordinati, vt humiles esse
desisterent. Quin potius humilitatem sequi debuerant, quia dignitatem fuerant
consequuti; dicente Scriptura: Quanto magnus fueris, tanto humilia teipsum
Origin in Ezech: Hom: 9. Tom: 2. fol: 188. H. Peccat autem in Deum quicunque
Episcopus, qui non quasi conservis servus ministrat, sed quasi dominus:
frequenter autem et quasi amarus dominus dominans per vim, similis constitutus
Egyptiis qui affligebant vitam filiorum Israel cum vi. Ergo memores esse debent
verborum Christi. Principes Gentium dominantur iis, et maiores eorum potestatem
exercent in eis; inter vos autem non sic erit, etc. Origin in Mat: Hom: 31.
Tom: 3. fol: 66. B. C. As hoc tantum potentes effecti sumus, vt nobis in
subiectos dominationem tyrannicam vindicemus, non vt afflictos contra potentium
violen^iam qui in eos ferarum more saeviunt defendamus. Prosper de Vita.
Contempl. l. 1. c. 21. Multi autem cum regiminis iura suscipiunt, ad lacerandos
subditos inardeseunt. Terrorem potestatis exhibent, and quibus prodesse
debuerant, nocent. Et quia charitatis viscera non habent, domini videriap
petunt, patres so esse minime recognoscunt: humilitatis locum in elationis
dominationem immutant Et si quando extrinsecus blandiuntur, intrinsecus
saeviunt. De quibus veritas dicit. Veniunt ad vos in vestimentis ovium,
intrinsecus autem sunt lupi rapaces. Greg Mag. Hom. 17. in Evangelia. fol. 320.
C. D
Fathers, and Chaucer his Plowmans tale. Mr. Tyndall. Practice of Popish
Prelates. Bishop Hooper. Declaration on the 8. Commandment. fol. 76, 77, 78.
Dr. Barnes his supplication to King Henry the 8. Our Homily against wilful
Rebellion. part. ^5. Bishop Latimer Sermon before the Convocation: and 4.
Sermon of the Plough.
some others of more punie days have much complained, as being incident to
diverse Prelates of their times, Nos praesentibus delectati dum in hac uita
commoda nostra et honores inquirimus; non vt meliores, sed vt ditiores; non vt
sanctiores, sed vt honoratiores simus ^aeteris festinamus: nec gregem Domini,
qui nobis pascendus, tuendusque commissus est, sed nostras voluptates,
dominationem, and caetera blandimenta carnaliter cogitamus. Pastores dici
volumus, nec tamen esse contendimus: officii nostri vitamus laborem, appetimus
dignitatem. Prosper de Vita Contempl: l. 1^ c. 21. Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum
zelum fer^ere sola pro dignitate tuenda? Honori totum datur, sanctitati nihil
aut parum. Nisi quod sublime est hoc salutare dicamus: et quod gloriam redolet,
id iustum. Ita omne humile probro ducitur, vt facilius qui esse, quam qui
appare humilis velit invenias Timor Domini simplicitas reputatur, ne dicam
fatuitas. Virum circumspectum et amicum propriae conscientiae calumniantur
hypocritam etc Bern, de Considerat. l. 4. c. 2. Col. 88 5. B.
who were more zealous to maintain the outward pomp and state, then to
discharge the Pastoral charge, and duty of their Episcopal function: Quia eo
ipso quod caeteris praelati sumus, ad agenda quaelibetmaiorem licentiam
habemus, susceptae benedictionis ministerium vertimus ad ambitionis argumentum.
Greg Mag Hom. 17. in Evangelia. F. 321. C. Sed plerumque rector eo ipso quo
caeteris praeeminet, elatione cogitationis intumescit. Subiectos despicit,
eosque sibi aequales naturae origin non agnoscit: and quos sortis potestate
excesserit, trancendisse se aetiam vitae meritis credit. Cunctis se existimat
amplius sapere, quibus se videt amplius posse. In quodam enim se constituit
culmincapud semetipsum; et qui aequa caeteris naturae condition constringitur,
ex equo respicere caeteros dedignatur. Omne sublim^ videt, et ipse est rex
super omnes silios superbiae. Apostatae quippe Angelo similis efficitur, dum
homo hominibus esse similis dedignatur, etc. ^x simulatione disciplinae,
ministerium regiminis verrit in vsum dominationis. Greg. Mag. Pastoral. part 2.
cap. 6. Rectores qui semetipsos diligunt pulvinos his exhibent, a quibus se
noceri posse in studio gloriae temporalis timent. Quos vero contra se nil
ualere conspiciunt, hos nimirum asperitate rigidae semper invectionis praemunt,
nunquam clementer admonent, sed pastoralis mansuetudinis obliti, iure
dominationis terrent, Quos recte per Prophetam divina vox increpat, dicens: Vos
autem cum austeritate imperabatis ^is, et cum potentia: Plus enim de suo
authore diligentes, iactanter erga subditos se erigunt, nec quid agere debeant,
sed quid valiant attendunt. Nil de subsequenti iudicio metuunt, qui improbe de
temporali potestate gloriantur Libet vt licenter et illicita faciant, et
subditorum nemo contradicat. lb cap. 8.
exalting themselves above their brethren, as if they were kneeded out of some
better clay then they; as if they were installed Bishops for no other purpose,
butto renounce humility and meekness, whose dangerous examples be it far
from any of your Lordships now to imitate, Ephesians. 4. 20.
who have not so learned Christ, as these have done. If you oversee our Church,
your stocks, either principal^y, or solely: for 1 Pet, 5 2, Parvi deiectique
est animi de subditis non profectum quaerere subditorum, sed quaestum proprium.
In summo praesertim omnium Pontifice nihil turpius. Bernard de Consid. l. 3. c.
3.. Col. 879. K.
filthy lucre, not of a ready mind, seeking not them, but theirs; contrary to
St. Paul's protestation to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12. 14, 15.
that he sought not theirs, but them: for the children ought not to lay up for
the parents, but the parents for the children. Or if you commonly reside so
far remote, so distant from your Bishoprics for your ease, your profit,
pleasure, or preferment sake, as that they are quite beyond the compass of
your ken, your view, much more your oversight: (a fault not tolerable in any
Overseers, as being diamitrally repugnant to their Office; but See Athanasius
Constant: Epise Epistolae 8. De Necessaria Episcoporum residentia: Bibl:
Patrum: Tom. 13. p. 487. to 491. Ambrose Ser: 7. 9. Greg. Pastoralium li.
August. de Pastoribus. Mr. Tyndall practice of Popish Prelates: Bishop Latimer
4. Sermon of the Plough Bishop Jewel on the Thessalonians, p. 406, 407
accordingly.
most odious, most insufferable, in the Master Overseers of Christ's most
precious flock, and men's most peerless souls:) Needs must our Church and we
poor Laymen being destitute of light, of Eyes, of Seers, and vigilant
Overseers, Hosea 4. 9. Isay 24. 2.
become exceeding dark and blind: Quidni peccet licentiusvagum et male
liberum vulgus, cum non sit qui arguat. Quidni licentius quoque spolietur et
depraedetur inermis religio, cum non est qui defendat. Quo enim refugium illis?
Bernard De Consid l. 3. c. 4.
be liable to a world of dangers, errors, heresies, falls, and deviations:
Needs must we Math: 15. 14. Luke 6. 33. Hosea 4. 5.
fall into a ditch of misery, and destruction at the last. O therefore Isay
60. 1. Math: 5. 14, 15, 16. Phil. 2. 15, 16.
arise, and shine forth before us, by Nulla alia doctrina sacerdotis debet esse
quam vita. Prosper de Vita Contempl. l. 1, c. 23.
humility, by purity of life, of doctrine, as the lamps, the splendour of our
Church: that so Math: 15. 16. Luke 12. 33. Acts 26. 18.
we from your light, may receive light, and John 12 38. Ephesians: 5. 8.
walk as children of the light: See, see, rea foresee we beseech you, as we
trust you do, and will do) those heretical precipices, bypathes, snares and
ditches, which are likely to endanger, misleade, entrap us, if they are not
prevented, yea speedily removed by your providence: and then lead, direct our
Church and us, in Ier. 6. 16.
that good, that old, Psalm: 119. 30.
that true, that Isay 30. 21. Ier. 31. 9.
strait, that Math. 7. 14.
narrow, and Psalm. 101. 2. 6.
perfect way Psalm: 119. 30.
of truth, of Isay 59. 8. Luke 1. 79.
peace, of Prove: 8. 20. c: 12. 28. c. 16. 31.
righteousness, Prove: 6. 23. c. 10. 17. Ier: ^1. 8.
life, and Isay 35. 8, 9.
holiness, Prove: 12. 28. Isay 35. 8, 9. Ier: 31. 9.
in which there is no error, danger, death, or stumbling. Remember, you are all
( Ministerium praedicationis relinquimus, et ad paenam nostram, vt video,
Episcopi vocamur, qui honoris nomen, non virtutis tenemus. Greg: Mag: Hom: 17.
in Evang: f. 321. B. Non omnes Episcopi, Episcopi sunt. Attendis Petrum, sed et
Iudam considera: Stephanum suspicis, sed et Nicholaum respice. Non facit
Ecclesiastica dignitas Christianum. Hierom. Epist. 1. cap. 8.
at least in name and reputation, and I hope in truth) the Bishops, Seers, and
Overseers of our Church: Acts 20. 28. See Chrysostom et Theophyilact. Ibid.
Terribilis Sermo, et qui possit etiam impavida quorumvis tyrannorum corda
concutere. Bernard super Cantica Sermo 76. Col. 801. A. B.
take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, over which the
holy Ghost has made you Overseers, to ^eed the Church (our Church) of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. Bernard Ibid
Civitas est, vigilate ad custodiam, concordiamque. Sponsa est, studete
ornatui. Oves sunt, intendite pastui. Dan. 12. 3. Math. 13. 43. 2. John 8.
So shall our safety, our happiness, and tranquillity; your glory, your
reward, your honor be exceeding great.

Lastly, You are the chief Ier: 3. 15. c. 17. 16, c. 23. 1. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors, and Isay 40. 11. Ier. 23. 4. c. 33. 12. c. 50. 6. ^zech. 34. 2, 3. 9.
10. 22.
Shepherds of our Church; 1 Sa. 17. 24, 25. Ezech. 34. 2. to 20. Ioh. 10. 10.
to 16.
to guard, to rescue her from those wolves, those thieves, and robbers which
seek for to devour her: Ier: 31. 9, 10. Ezech: 34. 4, 5, 6, 12.
to keep her from straying from the fold of Christ, and sacred pastures of his
word: Isay 40. 10. Ier. 3. 15. c. 23. 4. Ezech. 34. 2. to 24. Acts 20. 28. Ioh.
21. 15, 16, 17. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Petro terrio dictum est; Pasce: nec mulge, seu
tonde semel additum est. Bernard Declam. Col. 928. V.
to feed her with the word and bread of life: Ier. 23. 4. Ezech: 34. 16. 22.
Zech: 11. 16, 17. Ioh: 10. 12, 13.
to stick to her in all her dangers and distresses: and if occasion serve,
John 10. 11. 15. 17.
to lay down your lives for her security. If any of you then (which God
forbid either you to act, or us to suspect) should either degenerate into
Considerate ergo quid de gregibus agatur, quando pastores lup^ fiunt. Greg.
Mag. Hom. 17. in Evang. f. 321. C.
wolves, or join with wolves, to tear and spoil her dearest stocks, as Paul
prophesied long since: Acts 20. 29, 30.
that some Elders of the Church of Ephesus should do, and as Non sunt
pastores, sed traditores: dicimini pastores, cum sitis raptores. Et paucos
habemus, heu pastores, multos tamen excommunicatores. Etivtinam sufficeret
vobis lana et lac; sititis enim sanguinem: Bernard ad Clerum Sermo. Rectores
moderni, non pastores, sed raptores: ovium tonsores, non ad viridia pascua
ductores: non dispensatores bonorum crucifixi, sed voratores, etc. Rodericus
spec. vitae l. 2. c. 20. p. 316. see Bp. Whites Reply to Fisher p. 84, 85.
others since their times have done, in former ages: If you should turn Ioh:
10. 12, 13. See Bernard ad Pastores Sermo.
hirelings, or faint-hearted Shepherds, to flee away, give back, or hide your
selves in times of trial, when you see the wolves and thieves approaching to
assail her: and so leave her openly exposed to their malice, when as you
Gubernatorem in tempestate, in acie militem intelligas Avida est periculi
virtus, et quo tendat, non quid passura sit, cogitat: quoniam et quod passura
est, gloriae pars est; Seneca: Cur boniviri mali fiant cap: 4.
should especially march before her, taking up spiritual arms and courage for
her rescue. If you suffer her to deviate from the fold of Christ, and pastures
of his word; to stray unto the broad, the beaten rode of Popery, or by paths
of Arminianisme, which lead unto destruction, not laboring to reduce her. If
you sheere her fleece, and eat her milk, (as we all confess, you Gal: 6. 6.
1 Cor: 9. 7. to 15. 2 Thessalonians: 3. 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy: 1. 17, 18. Quanti mercenarii
in domo patris mei abundant panibus? Si panibus abundant mercenarii, nunquid
same peribunt operarii? Bernard ad Pastores Sermo, Col: 1729. E.
may, whiles you have care to keep, to feed, and cherish her) and yet neglect
to clothe, to feed her with that heavenly word, that spiritual daily bread of
life, which must nourish her up unto eternal life: a thing of which Lac et
lanas ovium Christi oblationibus quotidianis, et decimis fidelium gaudentes
accipimus, et curam pascendorum gregum et reficiendorum a quibus peruerso
ordine volumus pas^i, deponimus. de Vita Contempl: l. 1. c. 21.
Prosper, and Quid nos, (quod tamen sine dolor dicere no^ possumus) quid nos O
Pastores agimus, qui et mercede^ consequimur, et tame^ operarii nequaquam
sumus? Fructus quippe sanctae Ecclesiae in stipendio quotidiano accipimus, sed
tamen pro aeterna Ecclesia minime in praedicatione laboramus. Pensemus cuius
damnationis sit, sine labor, hic percipere mercedem laboris. Ecce ex oblatione
fidelium vivimus, sed nunquid pro animabus fidelium laboramus? Illa in
stipendium nostrum sumimus quae pro redimendis suis peccatis fideles
obtulerunt, nec tame^ contra eadem vel orationis studio, vel praedicationis, vt
dignum est insudamus, Hom: 17. in Evangelia fol. 320. G.
Gregory much complained in their ages. If you retreat or fall off from her in
times of need, and so prove her Praepositorum est, praeceptum tenere, et vel
properantes veligno rantes instruere^ne qui ovium pastores esse debent, lanii
fiant. Cyprian Epist. l. 3. Epist. 15. p. 145.
slaughter-men, or Quidemittit oves in pascuaabsque custode, Pastor est, non
ovium, sed Luporum: Bernard super Cant. Ser. 77. See Ier. 23. 2. 3. Ezech: 34.
2. to 16. 1 King 12. 17. Numb: 27. 17. Zech: 10. 2.
wolfe-feeding, not sheepe^preserving Pastors: as some Fathers phrase it:
Quidni peccet licentius vagum et male liberum vulgus, cum non sit qui arguat?
Quidni etiam licentius spolietur et depraedetur mermis religio, cum non est qui
defendat? Quo enim resugium illis? Bernard de Consid: l. 3. cap. 4. Col. 88 ^.
A.
Needs must her sheep and she be scattered, lost, destroyed, and made a
common prey to all revenous beasts that will invade them; or else exorbitate in
their course to their just perdition. O therefore for the glory of God the
Father, who has called; the honor of God the holy Ghost, who has
consecrated; the love of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has delegated you to the
Ministry; (whose Si diligis me, pasce oves meas. Si ergo dilectionis
testimonium est cura pastionis; quisquis virtutibus pollens, grege^ Dei pascere
renuit, pastorem summum convincitur non amare. Greg: Mag: Pastoral: l. 1. c. 5.
person you can never truly love, unless you love his sheep:) take courage,
zeal, and resolution to your selves, (as some of you to their Gloria recte
factorum p^erunque comes est. Cicero Tuse: Quaest: l. 3.
honor have already done) and now rescue us from those Jesuitical,
Romishravening wolves; those ^rminian thieves, and wily foxes, who seek to
make our Church their prey. Alas, why should any of you fly? why should you
now fear them, or give place unto them? Yea why should you not encounter, and
suppress them; since you have God himself, our gracious Sovereign (as his
late See page 20, 21, 22.
Declaration can sufficiently testify) together with the whole State and
Kingdom, for to back you: the ensamples of your worthy Predecessors, of some
few of your coetanian Brethren, to encourage you in this right Christian
action? You are our Pastors; you Ier: 23. 1, 2. Ezech: 34. 2, to 20.
tithe; we give our fleece: o therefore keep, o rescue, cloth us, and protect
us (together with our Church, and her received Doctrines) for it. You are our
Shepherds, you eat, we yield our milk: o feed us for it, with the wholesome
the soule-saving word, and bread of life: You Romans 15. 27. 1 Cor: 9. 11.
reap our temporal; o sow, o give unto us spiritual things. You are our
Master-heardsmen: your wages, yea your flocks are great: o then be vigilant,
diligent, careful and laborious for them, The Bishops assembled at. 4. rimin^
requested this of Constantius; that Bishops might be resident with their
flocks, and not be banished their Churches. Socrates Scholast l. 2 c. 2 9 p.
281.
resident, and present with them; that so Ioh: 10. 3, 4 14. 27.
you may know them all by name, John: 10. 3, 4
go in and out before them; become 1 Pet. 5. 3 1 Timothy: 4. 11. Ad amorem patriae
coelest is plus exempla, quam praedicamenta succendunt. Greg. Mag Dialog. l. 1.
fol. 231. D. Validiora sunt exempla quam verba, et before est opere docere
quam voce. Leo de S Laurent. Sermo. cap. 2. fol. 167. Facere maiorem vim habet
quam dicere. Doctor magis debet esse vitae Doctor, quam sermonis. Chrysostom Hom.
19 in Hebr. Tom. 4. Col 1608. and Hom. 5. in 2 Thessalonians. Tom. 4. Col. 1299. A.
even real, instructing ensamples to them, both in life, and Doctrine: that
they again may Ioh. 10. 3. 16. 27.
hear, may Ioh 10. 4. 5.
know your voice; and Ioh. 10. 4, 5, 9, 10, 28, 29.
follow you safe from earth to heaven, to your 1 Thests. 2 19, 20.
eternal joy, in that Pensemus ergo, qui vnquam per linguam nostram conversi,
quide perverso suo opere nostra increpatione correpti, poenitentiam egerunt;
quis luxuriam ex nostra institutione deseruit, quis avaritiam, quis superbiam
declinavit? Pensemus quod lucrum Deo fecimus nos, qui accepto talento, ab eo ad
negotium missi sumus. Etenim dicit: Negotiaminidum venio. Ecceiam venit, eccede
nostro negotio lucrum requirit. Quale ei animarum lucrum de nostra negotiatione
monstrabimus? Quot eius conspectui animarum manipulos de praedicationis nostrae
segite illaturi sumus? Ponamus ante oculos nostros illum tantae
districtionisdiem quo index veniet, et rationem cum servis suis quibus talenta
credidit, ponet: Ibi Petrus cum Iudaea conversa, quam post se traxit,
apparebit: Ibi Paulus conversum, vt ita dixerim, mundum ducens: Ibi et Andreas
post se Achaiam; ibi Johannes Asiam, Thomas Indiam in conspectum sui iudicis
conversam ducet. Ibi omnes Dominici gregis arietes cum animarum lucris
apparebunt, qui sanctis suis praedicationibus post se subditum gregem trahunt.
Cum igitur tot pastores cum gregibus suis ante aeterni Pastoris oculos
venerint, nos miseri quid dicturi sumus, qui ad Dominum nostrum post negotium
vacui redimus^ qui pastorum nomen habuimus, et oves quas ex nutrimento nostro
debemusostendere, non habemus? Hic Pastores vocati sumus, et ibi gregem non
ducimus, etc. Greg: Mag Hom in Evangelia. fol. 321. F.
great audit-day, when all the faithful and soule-winning shepherds shall
present their several regained flocks unto their 1 Pet: 5. 3, 4
Master-shepheard, Jesus Christ, who shall then reward them with a crown of
glory which fades not away: whereas he shall cloth all thieves, all wolves,
all hirelings, all invigilant, unfaithful, sloathfull and voluptuous
shepherds, who have no flocks of saved, of converted souls to follow them,
with eternal shame. I shall wind up all, in the words of Bernard. Ad Pastores
Sermo Col: 1728. L.
Ecce sacru^ Evangeliu^ sub numero triu^ personaru^, includit multitudinem
vniversam Praelatorum. Proposuit enim nobis bonu^ Pastorem, mercenarium, et
furem. Si boni Pastores estis, gaudete; quia merces vestra copiosa est in
coelis. Si mercenarii estis, timete; quia periculum vestrum grande est in
terris. Si fures estis, ingemescite; quia locus vester magnus est in paenis:
nisi properaveritis ad paenitentiam, et quae vovistis Domino Deo vestro, digne
reddideritis.

Now the Lord Jesus Christ, the Hebr. 13. 20
great shepherd of his sheep, inspire all your Lordships with zeal, and
courage, for the perennious defense, and propagation of those established
Doctrines of our Church, (which here I recommend unto your best protection) and
with all other graces, requisite for the complete discharge of your Episcopal
function: that so you may carefully keep, and indefatigably 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3, 4,
5.
feed the flock of God which is among you; taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind. Neither
as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being Praepositi vita, subditorum
regula: et quantum perniciosum est ad sequentium lapsum, ruinapraepositi, in
tantum contra vtile est, ac salutare, cum se Episcopus per firmamentum fidei
fratribus praebet imitandum Cyprian. Epist l^ 3. Epist. 23. Sacerdotis
praedicatio operibus confirmanda est, ita vt quod docet verbo, instruat
exemplo. Vera est illa doctrina quam vivendi sequitur forma. Tune vtiliter
praedicatio profertur, quando efficaciter adimpletur. Isiodor. Hisp de summo
Bono. l. 3. c. 36.
ensamples to the flock: the^ when the chief shepherd shall appear, you shall
receive a crown of glory which fades not away.

Your Lordships in all humble respect, as far as you stand for Christ, or for
his truth: WILLIAM PRYNNE.
To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I here present unto thy view, and prostrate to thy Censure,
a compendious Summary of those scattered Evidences; a concise Catalogue of
those eminent Writers, and illustrious Witnesses of our Mother Church, since
the beginning of her Reformation to this Instant; who have positiuely
maintained, and punctually defended those 7. Anti-Arminian Theses, which I
here prove: but diametrally oppugned, yea constantly condemned their 7.
opposite erroneous Arminian Tenants which I here disprooue, to be, the ancient,
established, and resolved Doctrines of our English Church. The multitude of my
other distractions, and inevitable interruptions, together with the narrow
scantling of those few Winter days, I had for to compose it in, have denied it
that exact mature Summer perfection, which others may expect, my self desire.
Accept it therefore as a Winter fruit, impatient of a tedious Summer ripening,
which might perchance add much unto its fullness, but derogate from its
seasonablenesse. The Wise man has informed: Eccl. 3. 1. ^^ 12.
That to every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
heaven: and that every thing is beautiful, (yea only beautiful and useful)
in its time. I have therefore chosen to thrust out this Antithesis more
incomplete and mutilated then I did desire; hoping that its seasonable and
timely birth (if the unexpected and unhappy dissolution of our present
Parliament has not made it now abortiue, or unseasonable) shall excuse, will
salve its hasty, its immature Nativity. This Treatise consists of two parts;
the one, the Records, the Acts, and Monuments of our Church; the other, the
Names and Testimonies of our Writers.

The special and more public Records and Evidences of our Church which tend
unto our purpose, I have here at large recited: The Authors and Authorities,
which are m^^y, I have only named, and so past over with a brief quotation of
their works, their Chapters, Pages, and those Editions which I fellow, (which
I thought good to specify, for the greater certainety and more speedy search:
Their words, their copious passages, and discourses touching our present
Conclusions, I have purposely omitted, not related, for sundry swaying reasons:
First, to avoid prolixitie, and to keep this petty Treatise from swelling into
an excessive Volume, which it must needs have done, had I transcribed the one
moity of the ensuing Quotations in their latitude. Secondly, because the most,
the chief of all these Books, and Authors, are obuious and common unto all
men's view; so that their bare Quotation is sufficient, their Transcript
needless. Thirdly, to encourage learned Readers, (especially, our young
ungrounded Scholars, and Divines) who desire satisfaction in these much
agitated and perplexed Controversies, to read, yea, studiously to peruse the
works, and writings of our unparalleled homebred Authors, See Bishop Halls Q^o
vadis? Sect. 10.
who are generally honored in all Foreign Churches, despised and neglected no
where but at home, and now lately more then ever. Strange it is to see, and
lamentable to consider, how the excellent, Orthodox, eminentest, and learned
Impressions of the most transplendent Lamps, and Ornaments of our Church
(whose very names strike terror into our Romish Adversaries, admiration into
our Foreign Friends,) are now so much Mat. 13. 57. Mark 5. 4. Luke 6. 24.
dishonored (as Prophets for the most part only are) in their own native
soil, and Fathers house, that many young pragmaticall Scholars, some grave,
more young Divines, who reverence and adore all Popish Schoolmen, (which often
impoyson, and corrupt their judgments,) as if they were some Saints or petty
Gods, disdain for to peruse, much less subscribe unto them: accounting it a
disparagement to their reading, so much a^ once to vouch them, unless it be
by way of censure or control. How venerable are the names and memoryes; how
sweet, how graceful, and delightful the poisonous Works of Aquinas,
Lombard, Scotus, Suarez, Bellarmine, and such like Popish Schoolmen (whom many
make the groundworke and foundation of their Divinity studies, Quo semel est
imbutae recens seruabit odorem, Testa di^.
whence they smell and stink of Popery and Neutrality ever after, to their
own perdition, and our Churches prejudice) unto some; who cannot brook the
Honorable names and pious Works of Calvin, Beza, Zanchie, Iunius, or other
Orthodox foreign Protestants: much less, reuolue, digest, approve, or
magnify the venerable Names, the unparalleled Writings of our own Martyr,
Bucer, Tyndall, Jewel, Fox, Whitakers, Fulke, Babington, Reinolds, Perkins,
Willet, Abbot, ^ield, White, Bilson, Morton, Carlton, Usher, Prideaux,
Benefield, Ames, and the like; who far transcend all Popish Writers, not only
in Orthodoxic of Matter, but in Art, Solidity, and depth of Learning. Alas, it
grieves me to consider (and I hope our vigilant Watchmen will lay it near to
heart, as being an ominous presage, a fatal preamble to our Religions
downfall, if it be not in time prevented:) that not only all kind of
Pseudo-Lutheran and Arminian; but even of Jesuitical Popish books (which have
arrived here of late in See Mr. Fetherstones Catalogues, and Mr. Gees Catalogue.
great variety and abundance, without the least restraint,) are now more
diligently inquired after, more speedily and greedily bought up and vented,
though at excessive rates; more studiously, more commonly read, more generally
quoted, more plausiblie vouched in Sermons, Schools, and Writings; more highly
magnified in the hearts and lips of many, then the best and learnedest of all
Foreign, or our own vn-matched protestant VVriters, whose Impressions almost
canker for want of use, and sometimes perish in the Printers hands, for want of
Chapmen for to vent them.

It is the policy of our Romish Achitophels, to train up their Scholars in
their own Popish Authors, and to inhibit the transportation, much more the
reading of any Protestant (yea of some Popish) VVriters, without a special
license, under pain of their Inquisition Slaughterhouse; for fear they
should convert their Readers, yea quite subvert their Antichristian Babell, and
shake the rotten Pillars of their Machiauillian state-Religion, (consarcinated
and made up of Heresy, Policy, Luxury, Pride, and Covetousness, the
greatest Opposites to Religion,) which cannot once withstand their strong
assaults: And shall we then give free allowance to their pernicious Books, who
thus exile our true soule-sauing Authors? Is it no blow, no danger, think we,
to our Religion, to suffer or persuade young Scholars to skip from Aristotle,
to some Popish Schoolmen; or to give open Hospitality, and free welcome to all
Popish, Arminian, and other seducing foreign VVriters, which have lately
turned our Faith, into mere doubting; See Agrippa De vanitate Scientiarum. ea
97. De Theologi^ Scholastica.
our Religion, into Quaerees; our Scriptures, into fancies: our Grace into
Free Will, or Nature: This was a late complaint in Parliament.
our Communion Tables, into Altars; our Cathedral Praying, into Piping, our
Substance, into Ceremony: our Devotion, into Superstition; our Zeal, into
Neutrality; our Perseu^rance, into Apostasy; and the certainety of our
Salvation, into a bare Contingency? Alas, these cursed fruits are sufficient
testimonies of those several dangers, of those varieties of mischiefs which
result from hence. O therefore let us now at last (especially before we are
thoroughly grounded, and settled in our own undoubted Religion:) reject these
pestilent, seducing, yea State-disturbinge VVriters, (which will prove our
combustion, our ruin at the last, unless they be in time suppressed or
restrained,) and cheerfully betake our selves unto the serious and delightful
study of our own incomparable Authors, (who are therefore undervalued by us,
because they are our own) who will re-establish, re-confirme us in our Ancient
Faith, reduce us to our true Religion: exile all Popish Ceremonies, and
Arminian Novelties; reconcile and comprimise our present Differences, and
settle such Peace, such Unity in our Church and State, as shall secure our
selves, and daunt our ^oes for future times.

^^othing is there that does more unsettle us in Religion, then the neglect,
contempt, and ignorance of the Scriptures, and our own approved Writers, with
our ouer-studious dotage upon Popish and Arminian forraigners; Let us therefore
quite abandon their poisonous Works, at leastwise read them as the Books of
Heretics; Legimus aliqua, ne legantur: legimus, ne ignoremus: legimus non vt
teneamus, sed vt retud^emus, and vt sciamus qualia sunt in quibus magnifice
isti cor exaltant suum. Ecclesia; cum quatuor Euangel^i libros habeat, per
vniuersum mund^m Euangeliis redundat: Haereses cum multa habeant vnum non
habent. Ambros. Comment in Luc. 1. c. 1. To^. 3. p 3 C.
to know, avoid, reject them, not retain them: to answer or refell them, not
admire them; to discover their Errors, not embrace them: and now at last betake
our selves unto our own approved Authors, especially those here quoted, who
will put a Period to all these new Arminian Controversies, which now disturb
our Peace. The Apostle informs us, 1. Cor. 14. 32
that the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: Let us therefore
submit our spirits to the spirits and doctrine of all those famous Martyrs,
Prophets, and Fathers of our Church, whose works I have here recited, and then
Popery and Arminianisme will prove odious to us, which have little in them for
to make them amiable. Not to speak of Popery which besots so many, what
beauty, what spiritual sweetness, what excellency, is there in Arminianisme,
that we should so much degenerate from all our famous Ancestors, our selves,
yea, all the Worthyes of our Church and Nation, as now to dote upon it? Its
Ezech. 16 33.
father was an Amorite, its mother an Hittite: corrupt Ambition, proud Nature
was the Father, Pelagius the Midwife; Popery the Nurse: Arminius and Socinus,
the modern^ Advocates, Champions, and Godfathers of this infernal Monster,
which Proclaims professed Hostility to the freedom, sovereignty, certainty,
and perpetuity of the grace of God, and breaks the golden chain of Salvation
into pieces, which only links us unto Christ. Certainly, Arminianisme
(whateuer some ^^en vainly dream) is but an See Pelagius Rediu^^^^
old condemned He^^sie, raised up from hell of late, by some Jesuits and
infernal spirits, to k^^dle a combustion in all Protestant States and
Churches; to trample under feet the sovereignty and kingdom of Gods grace,
and true Religion in all places where they reign or flourish; that so Romes
grand Impostors might possess their throne: to make way and passage for an
universal Spanish, Papal Monarchy, which have much enlarged their Dominions
by this Church firing, and State-disturbing Heresy: It is but a desperate, and
bloody Error, which cuts off all peace, all joy, all comfort, and salvation
from the souls of men: especially from broken hearts, and wounded consciences,
to which the Arminian Doctrines of Freewill; the Resistability of grace;
Conditional, yea mutable Election; with total and final Apostasy from the
State of grace, are but so many Lectures of despair. It is a cursed Error,
which has brought a curse, a plague, divisions, tumults, defeatments, shame,
consumption, innouations, pressures, and sundry other judgments, on all those
Protestant States and Churches where it has been harbored, which have never
thriuen since this contagious, blasting Heresy (which must needs be
accompanied, with the very wrath and curse of God, because it nullifies his
favor, and disauowes his grace,) has crept into them. It is but a bridge, an
usher unto Popery, and all Popish Ceremonies, which wind themselves into our
Church apace (if Parliament complaints prove true) by their Arminian Agents,
as some new erected Altars, Images, Tapers, and late usurped Altar-adorations,
with the revolt of sundry Arminians unto Popery, do experimentally testify. O
therefore as we tender the peace and safety of our Church and State, the
supportation, sovereignty, or advancement of Gods Grace: the peace, the
comfort, or salvation of our endeared souls: the perpetuity and perennious
preservation of our graces: or the prosperity and happiness of our declining
Nation: As we desire the subversion of the P^pall, or Spanish Monarchy: the
defeatment of all Jesuitical combinations against our Church or State: the
overthrow and extirpation of Popery: the continuance, safety, growth, and
flourishing of our precious Protestant Religion (which Arminianisme and Popery
undermine almost as fast at home, as Popish Policies or Spanish Forces do
abroad:) let us now at (...) lay down these gross Arminian Errors, which have
constantly, been brandid, censured, and condemned by all the Evidences, yea
Writers of our Church: embracing from, and with our hearts and judgments,
these Orthodox sweet, and gracious Anti-Arminian Dogmaticall Conclusions here
recorded, (wherein our happiness, comfort, and salvation rest,) as the
ancient, established, professed and undoubted Doctrines of our Church, (as this
whole Antithesis infallibly proves them:) that so our Church and Kingdom,
(which being Mark 3. 24. 25. 26.
divided against themselves by these distracting opinions, and other civil
dissentions, cannot stand,) may once more flourish in these declining,
turbulent, and perplexing days, and repossesse that former unity, safety,
honor, peace, and glory, which we all desire. We all know in what dangerous
and fickle times we live: We see the general desolations, and lamentable
ouertures of Gods Church abroad; We see Religion sincking, Grace decaying,
Popery triumphing, Arminianisme spreading, Heresies and new Errors springing,
and getting head in every corner: We see Nation rising up against Nation,
Kingdom against Kingdom, Church against Church: yea, we may behold one
Church, one state, one People, one House, (yea the Members of one and the self
same Body,) divided against it self. Look we upon all the Christian World
abroad, upon our selves at home, we can behold naught else but the fatal
Symptoms, and dismal Characters of an almost inevitable, and
neere-approaching confusion. O therefore let us now cast Anchor and take
Sanctuary in Heaven; Let us Psalm. 73. 28. Deuteronomy. 11. 22. 23
draw near and stick fast unto our God: let us cleave inseparably to these
Anti-Arminian Conclusions and Doctrines of our Church, which will be our only
cordialls, our all sufficient contentment, our best security, support, and
comfort in the midst of all the ruins, calamities, and miserable perplexities
which befall the World: If our Religion be but safe, our Church, our State, our
Goods, our Liberties, our very souls and bodies, all we have, are then secure:
if we hold but this, all else is sure; if we part with this, then farewell all;
let us never expect one halcion happy day or hour more,. Whiles Religion
flourished and grew great among us, we were then the head of Nations, the
dread, the honor, the mirror, and paradise of the World: since the Tares of
Popery and Arminianisme have sprung up within our Church, since we have halted
and declined in our Faith, we have been the very obloquie, scorn, derision,
and tail of all our neighbor nations: Plagues have devoured, Divisions
weakened, discontents, decay of Trade, with sundry other grieuances impouerished
us, at home: Enemies, tempests, unskillfulness, and ouer-reaching Policies,
consumed, defeated, and dishonored us, by Sea, by Land abroad: All our
counsels have been infatuated, our designs frustrated, our hopes dashed, our
prayers unanswered, our Parliaments broaken up in discontent: the curse and
vengeance of God has clinged close unto us to our great destruction: and for
all this, we see, we find, we feel, (and I pray God we may be truly
sensible of it ere it be too late,) Isay 9. 12. 17. 21.
Gods anger is not yet turned away, but his hand is stretched out still against
us, because Isay 1. 4. 5.
we revolt from him, and our long-professed, and established Religion more and
more. Let us therefore now at last Revel 2. 5.
remember whence we are fallen, and do our first works; Let us Heb. 4. 14 Tit.
1 9.
hold fast our first professed Religion, constant to the end: We were borne,
we were baptized, bred, and nursed in it; we have grown up safely, we have
prospered happily under it; we have hitherto lived in it, by it: Let us now die
in it, yea, with it, for it, if God calls us to it; lest we all suddenly
perish, consume, and die eternally without it, because we have thus
backe-slided from it.

Farewell. The true endeauourer of Religions safety, and our Churches Unity,
WILLIAM PRYNNE.
Anti-Arminianisme, OR THE CHVRCH OF Englands old Antithesis to new
ARMINIANISME.
IT is the advice and counsel of an Ancient Cum primu^ mali cuiuscunque
erroris putredo erumpere caeperit, and ad defensionem suiquaedam sacrae legis
verba furari, atque faellaciter and fraudulenter ponere: statim interpretaendo
canoni maiorum sententia congregaendae sunt: quibus illud qu^cunque exurget
nouitium, i^eoque prophanum, and absque vlla ambage prodatur, and sine vlla
retractatione damnetur. Sed eorum tantum Patrum sententiae congregandae sunt,
qui in side and communione catholica, sancte, sapienter, constanter viuentes,
docentes and permanentes, vel mori in Christo fideliter, velocciditro Christo
faliciter meruerunt. Vincentius Leri^ensis Contr. Haereses. cap. 39.
Father, for the suppression of such Haeresies, or vpstart Errors, which seek
to shrowde themselves under the fraudulent covert of wrested and mis-applied
Scriptures; to examine them by, to encounter them with, the opinions and
unanimous resolutions of those Ancient godly Fathers, who have either dyed in
Christ, or suffered for Christ: that so they may be manifestly discovered
without ambiguity, and finally condemned, without reuocation or reuiewe. This
Fatherly and grave Advice of his, I have made choice to follow, in the
discovery, both of the nouelty and falsenesse of those Arminian Tenants, which
would willingly harbor themselves, under the roof and Patronage of the Church
of England, whose Doctrines they of late praetend they are. The issue which the
Arminians, and Anti-Arminians (if I may so style them) are now come to join,
and on which they must receive their final doom, is only this: Whether the
Arminian or Anti-Arminian Positions, be the received and undoubted Doctrines of
the Church of England? The only Evidences, and Grand-Iury-men to try this
Issue; are the Articles, Homilies, Common Prayer Book, and the authorized
Writings of all the Learned Orthodox Writers of the Church of England, from the
beginning of Reformation to this present. If all these suffragate or pass
their Verdict for the Arminians, and their erroneous Assertions; let judgment
then be openly pronounced for them, we will forth with yield up to them
without any more dispute, both cause and right at once. But if all, or either
of these give evidence against them, as in truth they do: If they all yield up
a joint unanimous verdict for Anti-Arminians, and their authentic Positions;
I hope they shall then receive, not only a speedy and final judgment on their
side, which no subsequent Reuiew, nor writ of Error shall henceforth reuerse:
but likewise a Parliamentary Decree, to establish them in their ancient and
long-continued peaceable possession, without disturbance for all future times.
For trial of this weighty Issue, which will put a period to our praesent
Controversies, and stablish peace and unity both in Church and State; I have
here Epitomized into this compendious Brief, the several scattered
Evidences, and most material Witnesses that the Church of England has
affoorded me to this purpose, since her Reformation to this present; all which
give punctual testimony, and unanimous sentence against our new Arminian
Assertions: discovering them to be, not only novel, and erroneous; but
diametrally repugnant to the anciently established, and professed Doctrine of
our reformed Church, as the sequel will eftsoone demonstrate.

The Method which I shall observe in the legal deciding of this Issue, is
this: First, I shall set down at large, the several grand Charters (to wit,
The Articles of the Church of England: The Articles of Lambheth: The Articles
of Ireland: The Common Prayer Book: The Homilies Established in our Church:
The Chatechisme authorized by King Edward the 6. and Barrets Recantation,)
which entitle the Anti-Arminian Tenants to the Church of England, and the
Church of England unto them; and withal disprove the mere pretended title of
the Arminian Tenants to our English Church, which never yet gave color or
allowance to them. Secondly I shall propound the Anti-Arminian Orthodox
Assertions in their order, applying these several Charters to them, as
unanswerable evidences; and likewise quoting to them the works and names of
all such Orthodox and learned Writers of the Church of England, from the
beginning of Reformation to this present, that have hitherto come unto my
hands; who give direct and punctual testimony either on their side, or against
their opposites, or both; as irrefragable witnesses, to vindicate and prove
them, to be the ancient and undoubted; and the contrary Arminian Tenants, the
spurious and pretended Doctrines only, of the Church of England.

I shall begin with the first of these; and in that, with the established and
allowed Articles of the Church of England.

The Articles of the Church of England, agreed upon in the Convocation holden
at London, in the year 1552. in the reign of Edward the 6. afterward
confirmed and repromulgated in the year of our Lord 1562. in the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and since that ratified by King James 1604. and by our
gracious Sovereign King Charles, in the year 1628.
ARTICLE. 2.
THe Godhead and Manhood, were joined together in one person, never to be
divided, whereof is one Christ, very God, and very Man, who truly suffered,
was Crucified, dead, and buried, to reconcile his Father to 5
us, and to be a sacrifice, not only for Original guilt, but also for all
actual sins of men.

ARTIC. 9.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, (as the Pelagians do
vainly talk) but it is the 4
fault and corruption of the nature of every man, that naturally is engendered
of the offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original
Righteousness, and is of his nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh
lusts always contrary to the spirit, and therefore in every person borne
into this world, it deserves Gods wrath and damnation. And this infection of
nature does remain, yea in them that are regenerated, where by the lust of the
flesh, called in Greek (...), which some do expound the wisdom; some,
sensualty; some, the affection; some, the desire of the flesh, is not subject
to the Law of God. And although there is 7
no condemnation for them that believe and are Baptized, yet the Apostle does
confess that concupiscense and lust, has of it self the nature of sin.

ARTIC: 10.
THe 4
condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and
calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasant and
and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ 6
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us, when we
have that good will,

ARTIC. 13.
Works done 4
before the grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit, are not
pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring not of faith in Jesus Christ, 2
neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the Schoole-Authors
say) deserve grace of congruitie: yea rather for that they are not done as God
has willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
nature of sin.

ARTIC. 15.
CHrist in the truth of nature, was made like unto us in all things (sin
only excepted) from which he was clearly void, both in his flesh, and in
his Spirit. He came to be a Lamb without spot, 5
who by sacrifice of himself once made, should take away the sins of the
world: and sin (as Saint John says) was not in him, etc.

ARTIC. 16.
NOt every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism, is sin against
the holy Ghost, and unpardonable. Wherefore, the grant of Repentance is not to
be denied to such as fall into sin after Baptism. 7
After we have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given, See
the exposition of this Article, Hom. of Repentance 2. part. p. 261. 262.
and fall into sin, and by the grace of God (we may) arise again, and amend
our lives. And therefore they are to be condemned, which say they can no more
sin as long as they live here, or deny place of forgiveness to such as
truly repent.

From this Article, some Bertius Apostasia Sanctorum. Lugduni Batauorum. 1615.
Epist. Dedicatoriae 2. and page 107. 169. Coruinus Responsio ad Not as
Bogermanni, pars 2. cap. 24. Lugduni Batauorum 1614. p. 560. Brandius Collatio
Haghiensis, p. 364. Master Mountagues Appeal, p. 28. 29. 30. 31. etc.
Tho^psoni Diatriba de Interscisione and gratia cap. 27. p. 117.
Arminians have endeavored to justify their Doctrine, of the total and small
Apostasy of the Saints from grace: Yet the Conference at Hampton Court. page
24. together with learned Doctor Whitakers in his Cygnea Cantio October 9. An.
Dom. 1595 Cantabrigie ex Officina Iohannis Legate. 1599. page 20. Profound
Doctor Field in his answer to Theophylus Higgons, Part. 1. cap. 3. 2. Part.
Sectio 2. Edition 2. at Oxford by William Turner 1628. page 834. Reverend and
solid Doctor Robert Abbot, late Bishop of Sarum, in his Animaduersio in
Thompsoni Diatribam, cap. 27. Londini 1618 p. 218. Laborious Doctor Benefield.
De Perseuerantia Sanctorum. lib. 1. cap. 15. Francofurti 1618. page 162. to 167
Reverend and religious Doctor Carleton late Bishop of Chichester, in his
Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal. Edit. 2. p. 135. 136. 137. Acute
Doctor Daniel Featly, in his Second Parallel, London 1626. page 22. 23. 24.
Industrious Master Henry Burton, in his Plea to an Appeal, London, 1626. p.
13. 14. 15. Master Wotton in his Dangegerous Plot discovered, or his Answer to
Master Mountagues Appeal cap. 12. London. 1626. p. 42. 43. 44. 45. Studious
Master Francis Rouse, in his Doctrine of King James, etc. Edit. 1. London 1626.
p. 43. to 48. Facetious Master Yates, in his Ibis ad Caesare^. London 1626.
part. 4. c. 15. p. 134. 135. 136. To omit mine own Perpetuity of a Regenerate
man's Estate. Edit 2. London 1627. p. 309. to 319. All these, I say, together
with Master Thomas Rogers his authorized Analisis on this Article; confess and
prove the meaning of this Article to be sound and Orthodox: warranting no
total nor final Apostasy from the state of Grace, as Papists or Arminians
would from thence collect; but only a lapse into some criminal or scandalous
act of sin, which may, and does sometimes befall, the very best and dearest
of Gods Saints. Since then these several Orthodox members and learned Writers
of our Church have anciently, and lately made this authentic Exposition of
this Article, which none but Papists or Arminians have hitherto oppugned: and
since the Articles of Lambheth, Artic. 5. together with the Articles of
Ireland, Artic. 38. (which doubtless would never vary from the genuine and
native meaning of this Article) have well explaned and ratified it with these
two terms; yet neither finally nor totally; I hope all English Protestants
will subscribe to this Construction only, and reject all others as spurious
and unsound.

ARTIC. 17.
1
PRedestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the World were laid) he has constantly decreed by his
counsel, secret to us, 7
to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen in Christ out
of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels
made to honor. Wherefore they 4
which be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, 6
be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit working in due season: they 4
through grace obey the calling: they be justified 2
freely: they be made the Sons of God by adoption: they be made like the
Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ: 7
they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy, they
attain to everlasting felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such 6
as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their mind to
high and heavenly things, as well because it does greatly 7
establish and confirm their Faith of eternal Salvation to be enjoyed through
Christ, as because it does fervently kindle their Love toward God: So, for
curious and carnal persons, 4
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
Devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into rechlesnesse of most
unclean living, no less perilous then desperation, etc.

From this Article; solid and learned Doctor Whitakers in his Cygnea Cantio,
page 16. 17. Master Thomas Rogers, in his authorized Analisis on the 17.
Article, commonly sold and bound up together with the Articles: Reverend
Bishop Carlton, in his examination of Master Mountagues Appeal cap. 10. Edit.
2. Page 99. Master Yates in his Ibis ad Caesarem: Part. 1. cap. 1. 2. 3. part.
2. cap. 1. Sect. 5. page 35. etc. Master Henry Burton in his Answer to an
Appeal, page 28. 36. 37. 42. 44. 49. Master Francis Rouse in his Doctrine of
King James. page 43. to 48. Master Wotton in his Dangerous Plot Discovered.
cap. 19. 20. page 126. 127. Together with Doctor Thysius in his Comment or
Collation on the Articles of Lambheth. Hardrouici. 1613. etc. (who have
copiously analised, and explained this 17. Article) have raised these Orthodoxe
Anti-Arminian Conclusions, which are directly grounded on, and warranted, by
this Article as they there affirm.

1 That there is a Predestination of certain men unto aeternall life; and a
praeterition, or Reprobation of others unto death.

2 That this Praedestination both to life and death, are from aeternity.

3 That they are altogether immutable and unchangeable.

4 That not all men, but certain only, are Praedestinated to be saved.

5 That these who are Praedestinated unto Salvation can never perish; nor yet
fall finally or totally from the state of grace.

6 That in Christ Jesus some are Elected to Salvation, and not others; not of
any fores^ene ^aith, or Works, or Will, or Merit in themselves, but out of the
mere good will and pleasure of God himself.

7 That they who are Elected to Salvation, are in their due time called
according to Gods purpose, both outwardly by the Word, and inwardly by the
Spirit: which call they all obey and not resist.

8 That the Predestinate are both freely justified by Faith; and sanctified by
the holy Ghost here, and shall likewise be glorified in the life to come.

9 That the consideration of Praedestination, and its Doctrine, is to the godly
wise most comfortable an^ joyful; and dangerous to none but curious and
carnal persons.

All which Conclusions are Diametrally repugnant to the now Arminian Tenants.

ARTIC. 18.
THey also are to be had accursed, that presume to say, 5
that every man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so
that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law, and the light of
nature. For holy Scripture does set out unto us only the Name of Jesus Christ,
whereby men must be saved.

ARTIC. 29.
THe 5
wicked and such as be void of a lively faith, although they do ca^nally and
visibly press with their teeth (as St. Augustine says) the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ: yet in no wise are they partakers of Christ but
rather to their condemnation do eat and drink the sign or Sacrament of so
great a thing.

ARTIC. 31.
THe 5
Offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption^ proputation, and
satisfaction for all the sins of the whole World both original and actual,
and there is none other satisfaction for sin, but that alone.

The nine Assertions, or Articles of Lambheth composed and agreed upon at
Lambheth-House on the 20. day of November, in the year of our Lord, 1595. by
John Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of London, Richard elect Bishop
of Bangor, Doctor Tyndall Deane of Elie, Doctor Whitaker professor of Divinity
in Cambridge, and sundry other Reverend and learned Divines there present: with
the concurrent approbation of the right Reverend and learned Prelate, Matthew
Archbishop of ^ork^: for the determining of certain Arminian points of
Controversy that then arose in the University of Cambridge.
1 DEus ab Aeterno Praedestinauit quosdam ad vitam; quosdam Reprobauit ad
Mortem.

1 GOD from Eternity has Praedestinated certain men unto Life; Articles of
Ireland. 12. 14
certain men he has Reprobated unto Death,

2 Causa mouens aut efficiens Praedestinationis ad Vitam, non est praeuisio
Fidei, aut perseuerantiae, aut bonorum operum, aut ullius rei quae insit in
personis Praedestinatis, sed sola voluntas beneplaciti Dei.

2 The moving, Articles of Ireland. 14.
or efficient cause of Predestination unto Life, is not the foresight of Faith,
or of perseverance, or of good-workes, or of any thing that is in the persons
Predestined, but only the good will and pleasure of God

3 Praedestinatorum praefinitus and certus est numerus, qui nec augeri, nec
minui possit.

3 There is a pre-determined, Articles of Ireland. 12. 14.
and certain number of the Predestinate, which can neither be augmented nor
diminished.

4 Qui non sunt Praedestinati ad Salutem, necessario propter peccata sua
damnabuntur.

4 Those who are not Predestined to Salvation, Articles of Ireland. 15.
shall be necessarily Damned for their sins.

5 Vera, viva, and iustificans Fides, and Spiritus Dei iustificantis, non
extinguitur, non excidit, non euanescit in Electis, aut finaliter, aut
totaliter.

5 A true, Articles of Ireland. 38.
living, and justifying Faith, and the Spirit of God justifying, is not
extinguished, it falls not away, it vanishes not away in the Elect, either
finally, or totally.

6 Homo vere Fidelis, id est, Fide iustificante praeditus, certus est
plerophoria Fider, de Remissione peccatorum suorum, and salute sempiterna sua
per Christum.

6 A man truly Faithful, Articles of Ireland. 37.
that is, such ^one who is endued with a justifying Faith, is certain with the
full assurance of Faith, of the Remission of his Sins, and of his Everlasting
Salvation by Christ.

7 Gratia salutaris non tribuitur, non communicatur, non conceditur vniuersis
hominibus, qua seruari possint, si velint.

7 Saving grace is not given, Articles of Ireland. 32.
is not Communicated, is not granted to all men, by which they may be saved if
they will.

8 Nemo potest venire ad Christum, nisi datum ei fuerit, and nisi Pater eum
traxerit: and omnes homines non trahuntur a Patre vt veniant ad Filium.

8 No man can come unto Christ, Article of Ireland. Artic^. 32
unless it shall be given unto him, and unless the Father shall draw him: and
all men are not drawn by the Father, that they may come to the Son.

9 Non est po^itum in arbitrio, aut po^estate vniusc^iusque hominis, servari.

It is not in the Will, Articles of Ireland. A^tic. 25. 32.
or Power of every one, to be saved.

These Articles of Lambheth how ever Corninus Responsio ad Notas Bo^er manni
part 2. cap. 24 p. 5^1. to 5^6. who writ^s these Articles at large, and not
only slights them thus, but likewise m^^reports the ca^riage of them So does
Bertius too: De Aposia^^ Sanctar^^^^. F^^^t. D^^d. 2. Mr. Mounta^u^s. Apo^ale.
page 29. 36 71. 72.
some may chance to slight them as the Resolutions of some private m^n: yet
they were unanimously composed and approved by both our Right Reverend and
Learned Archbishops, Whitgift, and Hu^ton; by the Bishops of London, and
Bangor; and by sundry other of our most eminent Divines; and that not rashly or
unadvisedly, but upon serious debate and mature deliberation: and being
afterward sent to the University of Cambridge for the allaying of some
Arminian Controversies there raised by master Barret, (whose public
Recantation I have here inserted) and abetted by one Peter Baro a Frenchman,
Lady Margarets Professor in that University: S^^ Conferen^^^ Hampton Court.
page 40^ 41 Th^si^bre^^is and dilu^^^^ Explic^^^ etc. Ha^drenics. 16. 3 (...) D
dicatoria. Fratri^us Belois and Peti^ Baronis censura, etc. Ib. 1513. (...) l
Lect ^ Dr. Wa^d his ^oncio ad Clerum ^oudini 1627 p 45. and Master John Brown
in his Appendix to the life and Ra^g^ of Qu Elizabeth 1628. who a^^irme all this.
they were there received with such an unanimous approbation of the whole
University: that those Arminian Tenants were forthwith abandoned; and Baro
forced to forsake his place: since whose departure to this present, the
Divinity Professors of this our Famous University have constantly adhered to
these Conclusions, as the undoubted Doctrine of the Church of England. What
respect the Reformed Churches abroad have given to these Articles, or
Assertions, Let famous Thysius, who has twice published them Hardrouici 1613.
and quoted the Fathers to them; together with learned Bogerman President of the
late famous Synod of Dort, in his 107. and 108. Notes upon the second part of
Grotius. Fran^ke^^: 1614. p. 183. 184. testify: who both recite and repute
them, as the received and undoubted Doctrine of the Church of England. What
approbation they have had with us at home; their unanimous approbation by the
University of Cambridge at first; their insertion into the Articles of
Ireland, agreed upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops, and the rest of the
Clergy of Ireland, in their Convocation hol^en at Dublin 1615. where all, or
most of them, are recited verbatim, as any man may see that will compare them:
The mentioning of them in the Page 24. 39^ 40. 41.
Conference at Hampton Court: where his Majesty of blessed memory, was moved
to insert them into the Book^ of Articles; and understanding not what these
Assertions of Lambheth were, was informed: that by reason of some Controversies
arising in Cambridge about certain points of Divinity, my Lords Grace of
Canterbury assembled some Divines of especial note to set down their
opinions, which they drew into nine Assertions, and so sent them unto the
University for the appeasing of those quarrels. Their honorable recital by
the late Reverend and learned Bishop of Chichester, Doctor Carlton, in his
Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal, Edition 2. cap. 2. page 8. 9. 10. By
learned Doctor Benefield, De Per^euerantia Sanctorum: lib. 1. cap. 15. p. 162.
to 167. By Ma^^er Francis Rouse in his Doctrine of King James, p. (...) (...)
Mr. John Brown in his Appendix to the Life of Queen Elizabeth, where they are
likewise Printe^. By Mr. Thomas Vicars in his Pusillies Grex: Oxo^iae. 1627 p.
31. By Abdias Asheton, in Vita Gulielmi Whitakeri. Cantabrigiae 1599. p. 43.
who all repute and deem them, the Orthodox and undoubted Doctrine of the
Church of England. All these recited Evidences, I say, do abundantly confirm,
the truth, the honor, and Orthodox Authority of these Articles or Assertions;
which were never yet impeached by any Orthodox English Divine, as different
from o^^ 39. Articles, or varying from the received Doctrines of our Church.
And therefore (especially since the Articles of Ireland thus approve them) we
may safely embrace them, as the undoubted and anciently received Doctrines of
our English Church.

Articles of Religion agreed upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops, and the rest
of the Clergy of Ireland, in the Convocation holden at Dublin, in the year
of our Lord God. 1615.
11 GOd from all eternity did by his unchangeable counsel ordain whatsoever
in time should come to pass. Yet so, as thereby no violence is offered to the
wills of the reasonable creatures, and neither the liberty nor the
contingencie of the second causes is taken away, but established rather.

12 By the same eternal counsel God has predestined some unto life,
Articles of Lambheth. 1. 3.
and reprobated some unto death, of both which there is a certain number,
known only to God, which can neither be increased nor diminished.

13 Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby, before
the foundations of the world were laid, he has constantly decreed in his
secret counsel to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen
in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ unto everlasting
salvation, as vessels made to honor.

14 The cause moving God to predestinate unto life, Articles of Lambheth. 2.
is not the foreseeing of faith, or perseverance, or good works, or of any
thing which is in the person predestined, but only the good pleasure of God
himself. For all things being ordained for the manifestation of his glory, and
his glory being to appear both in the works of his Mercy and of his Justice:
It seemed good to his heavenly wisedomee to choose out a Articles of Lambheth.
1. ^
certain number toward whom he would extend his undeserved mercy, leaving the
rest to be spectacles of his justice.

15 Such as are predestined unto life, be called according unto Gods purpose
(his spirit working in due season) and through grace they obey the calling,
they be justified freely, they be made sons of God by adoption, they be made
like the image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk religiously
in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain to everlasting
felicity. Articles of Lambheth. ^
But such as are not predestined to salvation, shall finally be condemned for
their sins.

16 The godly consideration of Predestination and our election in Christ, is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such
as feel in themselves the working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their minds to
high and heavenly things: as well because it does greatly confirm and
establish their faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as
because it does fervently kindle their love toward God: and on the contrary
side, for curious and carnal persons, lacking the spirit of Christ, to have
continually before their eyes the sentence of Gods predestination, is very
dangerous.

22 By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
went over all men, for as much as all have sinned.

23 Original sin stands not in the imitation of Adam (as the Pelagians
dream) but is the fault and corruption of the nature of every person that
naturally is ingendered and propagated from Adam: whereby it comes to pass
that man is deprived of original righteousness, and by nature is bent unto
sin. And therefore in every person borne into the world, it deserves Gods
wrath and damnation.

25 The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such, Articles of Lambeth. 9.
that he cannot turn, and prepare himself by his own natural strength and
good works, to faith, and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do
good works, pleasing and acceptable unto God, without the grace of God
preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will.

26 Works done before the grace of Christ and the inspiration of his spirit
are not pleasing unto God, for as much as they spring not of faith in Jesus
Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive grace, or (as the School
Authors say) deserve grace of congruitie: yea rather, for that they are not
done in such sort as God has willed, and commanded them to be done, we doubt
not but they are sinful.

31 They are to be condemned, that presume to say, that every man shall be
saved by the Law, or Sect which he professes, so that he be diligent to frame
his life according to that Law, and the light of nature. For holy Scripture
does set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must be saved.

32 None can come unto Christ, Articles of Lambeth. 7. 8. 9.
unless it be given unto him, and unless the Father draw him. And all men
are not so drawn by the Father, that they may come unto the Son. Neither is
there such a sufficient measure of Grace vouchsafed unto every man, whereby he
is enabled to come unto everlasting life.

33 All Gods Elect, are in their time inseperably united unto Christ, by the
effect all, and vital influence of the holy Ghost, derived from him, as from
the head, unto every true member of his mystical body. And being thus made one
with Christ, they are truly regenerated, and made partal^ers of him, and a^
his benefits.

37 By justifying ^aith we understand not only the common belief of the
Articles of Christian Religion, and a persuasion of the truth of Gods word in
general: but also a particular application of the gracious promises of the
Gospel, to the comfort of our own Souls; whereby we lay hold on Christ, with
all his benefits, having an earnest trust and confidence in God, that he will
be merciful unto us for his only Sons sake. Articles of Lambheth. 6.
So that a true believer may be certain, by the assurance of faith, of the
forgiveness of his sins, and of his everlasting salvation by Christ.

38 Articles of Lambeth. 5.
A true lively justifying faith, and the sanctifying spirit of God is not
extinguished, nor vanishes away in the regenerate, either finally or totally.

THE BOOK OF Common Prayer.
IN this Book of Common prayer established by Act of Parliament in our Church,
there are sundry passages to prove these several Anti-Arminian Positions.

First, that God from eternity has freely of his own accord, chosen out of
mankind a certain select number of men, which can neither be augmented nor
diminished; whom he does effectually call, save, and bring to glory; so that
none of them can perish, or fall off from him: and that these only are the
true Church.

This Conclusion we shall see confirmed by these several passages, Answer
after the Creed.
And make thy 1
chosen people joyful. Collect on Al Saints day.
Almighty GOD, which have knit together the 1
Elect in one Communion and fellowship in the mystical body of thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord: grant us grace so to 7
follow thy holy Saints in all virtuous and godly living, etc. The Catechism
Answer 6.
Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, who 6
sanctifies me and all the 1
Elect people of God: Burial of the dead. Prayer 1.
Almighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them who depart hence in the
Lord, and in whom the souls of them that be elected, after they be delivered
from the burden of the flesh, 7
be in joy and felicity, etc. We beseech thee of thy gracious goodness,
shortly to 7
accomplish the 1
number of thine Elect, etc. A prayer for Sunday at the end of the reading
Psalm.
O Almighty and merciful Lord, which give unto thy Elect people the holy
Ghost, as a 7
sure pledge of thy heavenly kingdom: grant unto us this holy spirit, that he
may bear witness with our spirits, that we be thy children, and heirs of
thy Kingdom, and that by the 4
operation of this spirit, we may kill all carnal lusts, etc. A godly prayer
to be said at all times. sin. Psalm.
Honor and praise be given unto thee (O Lord God almighty) most dear Father
of heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us; in that it
has pleased thee 2
freely, and of thine own accord to 1
elect and choose us to salvation before the beginning of the world, etc.
Public Baptism.
Almighty God, etc. grant that all thy servants which shall be baptized in
this Water, may receive the fullness of thy grace, and ever remain in the 1
number of thy faithful and elect children, etc. See the Collect on good
Friday, on the first Sunday after the Epiphany, and one the 2. 15. and 22.
Sundaies after Trinity, to this purpose.

Secondly, that there is no such free will, or universal and sufficient grace
given unto all men, 2
by which they may convert, repent, believe, and be saved if they will: and
that it is Gods special preventing grace, which must change men's hearts, and
give repentance, faith, and all other graces to them.

This Orthodoxe position which ouerturnes Free Will and universal grace, the
very center and ground work of Arminianisme, is abundantly proved by these
ensuing S^ enim haec a Deo poscit Ecclesia, quae a se^pso sibi ^ari putat, non
veras sed perfunctorias orationes habet. Quis en^m veraciter gemat desidera^s
accipere quod orat a Domino, sihoc a seipso se sumere existimet, no^ ab illo.
Aug. De Bono P^seu. cap. 23.
Prayers, The Absolution: and Prayers before the Letanie.
Wherefore we beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his holy Spirit,
that those things may please him which we do at this present, etc, O God make
clean our hearts within us. O God from whom all holy desires, all good
counsels, and all good works do proceed, etc. The Lat^uie: and prayers after
it.
That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to walk after thy Commandments. That it may please thee to give us
true repentance, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy Spirit, to amend
our lives according to thy holy Word. Though we be tied and bound with the
chain of our sins, yet let the pittifulnesse of thy great mercy loose us, etc.
Collect on o^ the 1. and 4. Sunday in Aduent.
Almighty God, give us grace that we may cast off the works of darkness,
and put on the armor of light, etc. O Lord raise up thy power and come among
us, and with great might succor us, that whereas by our sins and wickedness
we be sore let and hindered, thy bountiful grace and mercy may speedily
deliver us, etc. See the Collects on the 1. 4. and 5. Sundays after the
Epiphany. Collect the first day of Lent.
O GOD create in us new and contrite hearts, etc. Collect the 2. Sunday in Lent.
Almighty God who do see that of our selves we have no power to help our
selves, keep thou us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls,
etc. Collect on Easter day.
Almighty God, we humbly beseech thee, that as by thy special grace
preventing us, thou do put into our hearts good desires: so by thy
continual help we may bring the same to good effect. Collect on the 1^ ^9.
17. and 19. Sunday after Trinity.
God the strength of all those that trust in thee, mercifully hear our
prayers, and because the weakness of our mortal nature can do no good thing
without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that so we may please thee both
in will and deed. Lord of all power and might which art the only author and
giver of all good things, grass in our hearts the love of thy name, increase
in us true Religion, nourish us with all goodness, and of thy mercy keep us
in the same. Grant us O Lord, we beseech thee the spirit to think, and to do
always those things as be righteous, that we which cannot be without thee,
may by thee be able to do according to thy will, etc. Lord we pray thee that
thy grace may always prevent and follow us, and make us continually given to
all good works. O God for as much as without thee we cannot please thee,
grant that thy mercy may always direct and rule our hearts. See the 2. 6. 13.
15. and 22. Sundaie after Trinity to the same effect. The Communion.
Lord have mercy upon us and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Prevent us,
O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and further us with
thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and ended in
thee, etc. Catechism.
My good child know that thou art not able to do these things of thy self,
nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him without his special
grace. Confirmation of Children 3. Prayer.
Almighty God who make us both to will and to do the things that be
acceptable unto thy Majesty, etc. A Commination the last Prayer.
Turn us O good God, and so shall we be turned.

Thirdly, that Christ Jesus dyed sufficiently for all mankind, but effectually
for none but the Elect, and true believers, who alone are saved by his death.

The sufficiency of Christ's death for all mankind, is expressed in these
several places. The Letanie
O God the Son redeemer of the World, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.
The Communion.
Above all we must give humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, etc. for
the redemption of the world, by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, etc.
Almighty God our heavenly Father which of thy tender mercy did give thine
only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the Cross for our Redemption,
who made there (by his own oblation once offered) a full, perfect, and Not
efficient
sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, etc. O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have
mercy upon us. thou that take away the sins of the world, receive our
prayers. The Catechism.
Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me and all mankind. Visitation
of the sick.
O Savior of the world save us, which by thy Cross and Passion have redeemed
us: All this must be understood only of the sufficiency and merit of Christ's
death, not of the efficacy, benefit, and application of it, which belongs to
none but to the true Church of Christ, even the Elect and true believers as
these passages ensuing will inform us. Te Deum.
When thou had overcome the sharpness of death, thou did open the
Kingdom of heaven to all believers. We pray thee help thy servants, whom thou
have redeemed with thy most precious blood. O Lord save thy people, and make
thy chosen people joyful. Benedictus.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and Redeemed his
people. To give knowledge of Salvation to his people, for the remission of
their sins. His mercy is on them that fear him throughout all generations. He
remembering his mercy has helped his servant Israel, etc. Letanie.
Spare thy people whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood. The
Communion.
This is the blood of the new Testament, which is shed for you, and for many
for the Remission of sin. Grant that by the merits and death of thy Son
Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we and all thy whole Church may
obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his passion. Now the
Church the mystical body of Christ, is the blessed company of all faithful
and elect people, and none else but they; as the next prayer, the Collect on
good Friday, and the places quoted in the first Position, prove. And whereas
the Minister in distributing the Bread and wine, says particularly to every
man: take this in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee: drink this in
remembrance that Christ's blood was shed for thee; it cannot imply that Christ
dyed effectually for all men; but the contrary, that he dyed only thus for the
Elect and faithful: because our Church The Exhortation before the Communion.
prohibites all such as want true faith and repentance, or live in any gross
and known sins, to come to the Sacrament, admitting none but true and
faithful penitents to it: so that the Minister and our Church do always
look upon all Communicants, as the elect and chosen Saints of God, endued with
true faith and repentance, and so they may well apply (at leastwise in the
judgment of Charity) the efficacy and merits of Christ's death unto them. I
will conclude this point with the passage of A Prayer necessary for all men.
Jesus Christ thy only Son has perfectly fulfilled thy Law, to justify all
men that believe and trust in him. And thus much for our Common Prayer Book.

Certain Homilies appointed to be read in Churches, in the time of the late
Queen ELIZABETH of famous memory. And since thought fit to be reprinted by
Authority from the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
SAint Paul in many places painteth us out in our colors, London. 1623. Part.
1. Fol. 8. Ephesians. 2.
calling us the children of the wrath of God, when we be borne: saying also 4
that we cannot think a good thought of our selves, much less can we say
well, Folio 9. Mark. 10. Luke 18. John 15.
or do well of our selves, etc. Our Savior Christ says, There is none good
but GOD: and that we can do nothing that is good without him, nor no man can
come to the Father but by him, etc.

4
For of our selves we are crabtrees, Folio 10.
that can bring forth no Apples. We be of our selves of such earth, as can
bring forth but weeds, Galat. 5.
nettles, brambles, briers, cockle, and darnell. We have neither Faith,
Charity, Hope, Patience, Chastity, nor any thing else that good is, but of
God, and therefore these virtues be called there the fruits of the holy
Ghost, and not the fruits of man. Let us therefore acknowledge our selves
before God (as we be indeed) miserable and wretched sinners.

4
Of our selves, and by our selves, we have no goodness, help, nor salvation,
but contrariwise sin, Part. 1. Fol. 11.
damnation, and death everlasting: which if we deeply weigh and consider, 2
Cor. 3.
we shall the better understand the great mercy of God, and how our salvation
comes only by Christ. Psalm. 50.
We are all become unclean, but we all are not able to cleanse our selves,
nor to make one another of us clean. Ephes^ 2.
We are by nature the Children of Gods wrath, but we are not able to make our
selves the children and inheritors of Gods glory. 1 Pet. 2.
We are sheep that run astray, but we cannot of our own power come again
to the sheepefold, so great is our imperfection and weakness. In our selves
therefore may we not glory, which (of our selves) are nothing but sinful.
To GOD therefore must we flee, or else shall we never find peace, 2 Cor. 1,
rest and quietness of Conscience in our hearts. Psalm. 130.
For he is the Father of mercies, and God of all consolation. He is the Lord,
with whom is plenteous redemption: 2
He is the God who of his own mercy saves us, and sets out his charity
and exceeding love toward us, in that of his own voluntary goodness, when we
were perished, he saved us, and provided an everlasting Kingdom for us. And
all these heavenly treasures are given us, not for our own deserts, merits, or
good deeds, (which of our selves we have none) but of his mere mercy freely.
5
He is the high and everlasting Priest, John 8.
which has offered himself once for all upon the altar of the Cross, Hebr. 7.
and with that one oblation has made perfect for evermore them that are
sanctified. 1 John 2.
He is the alone mediator between GOD and man, which paid our ransom to GOD
with his own blood, and with that has he cleansed us all from sin. Part.
1. Fol. 12 Ma^th. 1.
He is the Physician which heals all our diseases; He is that Savior which
saves his people from all their sins: he is that flowing and most plenteous
fountain, Folio 13.
of whose fullness all we have received.

5
A Sermon of the salvation of mankind, by only Christ our Savior from sin
and death everlasting.

5
(All the world being wrapped in sin by breaking of the Law) GOD sent his
only son our Savior Christ into this world, to fulfill the Law for us, and
by shedding of his most precious blood, to make a sacrifice and satisfaction,
or (as it may be called) amends to his Father for our sins, Folio 15.
to assuage his wrath and indignation conceived against us for the same. 5
But our justification does come freely by the mere mercy of GOD, and of so
great and free mercy, that whereas all the world was not able of their selves
to pay any part toward their ransom, it pleased our heavenly Father of his
infinite mercy, without any our desert or deserving, to prepare for us the most
precious jewels of Christ's body and blood, whereby our ransom might be fully
paid, the law fulfilled, and his justice fully satisfied. So that Christ is now
the righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him. He for them
paid their ransom by his death. He for them fulfilled the Law in his life. So
that now in him, and by him, every true Christian man may be called a fulfiller
of the Law, forasmuch as that which their infirmity lacked, Christ's justice
has supplied.

7
For the very sure and lively Christian faith is not only to believe all
things of GOD, Folio 23.
which are contained in holy Scripture, but also is an earnest trust, and
confidence in God, that he does regard us, and that he is careful over us,
as the Father is over the Child whom he does love, and that he will be
merciful unto us for his only sons sake, and that we have our Savior
Christ our perpetual advocate, and Priest, in whose only merits, oblation and
suffering, we do trust that our offenses be continually washed and purged,
Part. 1. Fol 23
whenever we (repenting truly) do return to him, with our whole heart,
steadfastly determining with our selves, through his grace, to obey and serve
him in keeping his Commandments, and never turn back again to sin. Such
is the true faith, that the Scripture does so much commend, the which when it
sees and con^idereth what GOD has done for us, is also moved through
continual assistance of the Spirit of GOD, to serve and please him, to keep
his favor, to fear his displeasure, to continue his obedient children,
showing thankfulness again by obserui^g or keeping his commandments, and
that freely, for true love chiefly, and not for dread of punishment, or love of
temporal reward, considering how clearly, without deseruings we have
received his mercy and pardon freely. Folio. 25. 26.


4
For as the holy Ghost does teach us to trust in GOD, and to call upon him as
our Father: so did he teach them to say, as it is written, Esaias 43.
Thou Lord art our Father and Redeemer, and thy Name is without beginning and
everlasting. GOD gave them then grace to be his children, as he does us now. 7
It is evident, that the true, lively, and Christian faith, is no dead, vain,
or unfruitful thing, but thing of a perfect virtue, of wonderful operation or
working, and strength, bringing forth al good motions and good works, 7
Of faith, he says, He that believes in the Son, has everlasting life, John
3.
but he that believes not in the Son, shall not see that life, but the wrath
of GOD remains upon him. John 6.
And the same he confirms with a double oath, saying, Verily, verily, I say
unto you, He that believes in me, 1 John. 5.
has everlasting life. Now forasmuch as he that believes in Christ, has
everlasting life: it must needs consequently follow, that he that has this
faith, must have also good works, and be studious to observe Gods
commandments obediently. For to them that have evil works, and lead their
life in disobedience, and transgression or breaking of Gods commandments,
without repentance^ pertains not everlasting life, Part. 1. Folio 28. 29.
but everlasting death?

7
Therefore let us set our whole faith and trust in GOD, and neither the world,
the devil, nor all the power of them shall prevail against us. 1
Let us by such virtues as ought to spring out of faith, show our election to
be sure and stable, as S. Peter 2 Peter 1.
teaches, Endeavor your selves to make your calling and election certain by
good works. 7
If you feel and perceive such a faith in you, rejoice in it: and be diligent
to maintain it, and keep it still in you, let it be daily increasing, and
more and more by well working, and so shall you be sure that you shall please
GOD by this faith, and at the length (as other faithful men have done before)
so shall you (when his will is) come to him, and receive the end and final
reward of your faith (as. S. Peter 1 Peter 1.
names it) the salvation of our souls: 7
But (euerlasting^ thanks be to Almighty GOD for ever) there is never a one
of all these causes, Folio. 60.
no nor yet them altogether, 1 Cor. 3.
that can make a true Christian man afraid to die (who is the very member of
Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost, the Son of God, and the very inheritour
of the everlasting kingdom of heaven:) but plainly contrary, he concieueth
great and many causes undoubtedly grounded upon the infallible and everlasting
truth of the word of GOD which moves him not only to put away the fear of
bodily death, but also for the manifold benefits and singular commodities which
ensue unto every faithful person by reason of the same, to wish, desire, and
long heartily for it. For death shall be to him no death at all, but a very
deliverance from death, from all pains, cares, and sorrows, miseries, and
wretchedness of this world, and the very entry into rest. 7
Why then shall we f^ere to die, considering the manifold and comfortable
promises of the Gospel, and of holy Scriptures? GOD the Father has given us
everlasting life (says. S. John) 1 John 5.
and this life is in his Son. He that has Son, has life, and he that
has not the Son, has not life. Part 1. Fol. 16
And this I write (says S. John) 1 John. 5.
to you that believe in the Name of the Son of GOD, 1 John 5.
that you may know that you have everlasting life, and that you do believe
upon the Name of the Son of GOD. And our Savior Christ says, He that
believes in me has life everlasting, and I will raise him from death to life
at the last day. Folio 62.


7
All those therefore have great cause to be full of joy that be joined to
Christ with true Faith, steadfast Hope, and perfect Charity, and not to fear
death nor everlasting damnation. For death cannot deprive them of Jesus Christ,
nor any sin can condemn them that are graffed surely in him, which is their
only joy, treasure and life. Let us repent our sins, amend our lives, trust
in his mercy and satisfaction, and death can neither take him from us, nor us
from him.

2
For it is of the free grace and mercy of GOD, Part. 2. Folio 81.
by the mediation of the blood of his Son Jesus Christ, without merit or
deserving on our part, that our sins are forgiven us; that we are reconciled
and brought again into his favor, and are made heirs of his heavenly
kingdom. Grace (says S. Augustine) August. de diuers^quaestio. ad Simpl. lib.
1. Q^aest. 28.
belonging to GOD, who does call us, and then has he good works, whosoever
received grace: Good works then bring not forth grace, but are brought forth
by grace. The wheel (says he) turns round, not to the end that it may be
made round: but because it is first made round, therefore it turns round. So,
no man does good works, to receive grace by his good works: but because he^
has first received grace, therefore consequently he does good works.

For 1
the Scripture does acknowledge but two places after this life. Folio (...).
Luke 16.
The one proper to the elect and blessed of GOD; the other to the reprobate and
damned souls. Folio. 1^^.
The only Purgatory wherein we must trust to be saved, is the death and blood
of Christ, which if we apprehend with a true and steadfast faith, it purges
and cleanses us from all our sins, even as well as if he were now hanging
upon the Cross. Part. 2. Fol. 122
The blood of Christ says Saint John, 1 John 1.
has cleansed us from all sin. The blood of Christ, Hebr. 9.
says Saint Paul, has purged our consciences from dead works, Hebr. 10.
to serve the living GOD, Also in another place he says, We be sanctified
and made holy by the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ done once for all.
Yea he adds more, saying, With the one oblation of his blessed body and
precious blood, he has made perfect for ever and ever all them that are
sanctified. Folio 148.


7
Noe in his drunkenness offended GOD highly. Lot lying with his daughters,
committed horrible incest. We ought then to learn by them this profitable
lesson, that if so godly men as they were, which otherwise felt inwarldly GOD
sholy Spirit inflaming in their hearts, with the fear and love of GOD, could
not by their own strength keep themselves from committing horrible sin, but
did so grievously fall, that without GODS great mercy they had perished
everlastingly: How much more ought we then, miserable wretches, which have no
feeling of GOD within us at all, continually to fear, not only that we may
fall as they did, but also be overcome and drowned in sin, which they were
not? though through infirmity w^e chance at any time to fall, yet we may by
hearty repentance, and true faith, speedily rise again, and not sleep and
continue in sin, Fol. 151. 152.
as the wicked does 1
All men have not faith. This therefore shall not satisfy and content all men's
minds: but as some are carnal, so they will still continue, and abuse the
Scriptures carnally, to their greater damnation. 2 Peter 3. 1 Cor. 1^
The vnl^arned and unstable (says Saint Peter) pervert the holy Scriptures to
their own destruction. Jesus Christ (as S. Paul says) is to the Jews an
offense, to the Gentiles foolishness: 6
But to Gods children, as well of the Jews as of the Gentiles he is the power
and wisdom of GOD. 5
The holy man Simeon says, that he is set forth for the fall and rising
again of many in Israel. Part. 2. Folio 152. Luke 2.
As Christ Jesus is a fall to the reprobate, which yet perish through their
own default: so is his word, yea the whole book of GOD, a cause of damnation
unto them, through their incredulity. And as he is a rising up to none other
then those which are GODS children by adoption: so is his word, yea the whole
Scripture, the power of GOD to salvation to them only that do believe it.
Christ himself, the Prophets before him, the Apostles after him, all the true
Ministers of GODS holy word, yea every word in GODS Book, is unto the
reprobate, the 3
favor of death unto death,

Christ Jesus, the Prophets, the Apostles, and all the true Ministers of his
word, yea every jot and tittle in the holy Scripture, have been, is, and shall
be for evermore, the favor of life unto eternal life, Folio 160.
unto all those whose hearts GOD has purified by true faith. 2
GOD of his mercy and special favor toward them whom he has appointed to
everlasting salvation, has so offered his grace 4
especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that although by reason
of their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before to have been the
children of wrath and perdition, yet now the 6
Spirit of GOD mightily working in them, unto obedience to GODS will and
commandments, they declare by their outward deeds and life, Folio 161.
in the showing of mercy, and charity (which 4
cannot come but of the Spirit of GOD, and his especial grace that they are
the undoubted children of GOD, appointed to everlasting life. And so as by
their wickedness and ungodly living, they showed themselves according to the
judgment of men, which follow the outward appearance, to be reprobates and
castawayes: So now by their obedience unto GODS holy will, and by their
mercifulness and tender pity (wherein they show themselves to be like unto
GOD, who is the fountain and spring of all mercy) they declare openly and
manifestly unto the sight of men, Part. 2. Folio 161.
that they are the sons of GOD, and elect of him unto salvation. 2
For as the good fruit is not the cause that the tree is good, but the tree
must first be good before it can bring forth good fruit: so the good deeds
of men are not the cause that makes men good, but he is first made good, by
the spirit and grace of GOD that 6
effectually works in him, and afterward he brings forth good fruits.

2
The reasonable and godly, as they most certainly know and persuade
themselves, that all goodness, all bounty, all mercy, all benefits, all
forgiveness of sins, and whatsoever can be named good and profitable,
either for the body or for the soul, do come only of GODS mercy and mere
favor, Folio 172.
and not of themselves: 7
Moreover, he came in flesh and in the self same flesh ascended into heaven,
to declare and testify unto us, that 5
all faithful people which steadfastly believe in him, shall likewise come unto
the same mansion place, Folio 177.
whereunto he being our chief Captain is gone before. 5
Christ openly declared his obedience to his Father, which (as Saint Paul
writes) was obedient even to the very death, the death of the Cross. Philip.
2.
And this he did for us all that believe in him. 5
So pleasant was this facrifice and oblation of his Sons death, which he so
obediently and innocently suffered, that we should take it for the only and
full amends for all the sins of the world. And such favor did he purchase by
his death, of his heavenly Father for us, that for the merit thereof (if we be
true Christians indeed, and not in word only) we be now fully in GODS grace
again, and clearly discharged from our sin. Folio 187.
The only mean and instrument of salvation required of our parts, is faith,
that is to say a sure trust and confidence 2
in the mercies of God: whereby we persuade our selves, that God, hoth has,
and will forgive our sins, that he has accepted us again into his favor,
that he has released us from the bonds of damnation, Part. 2. Folio. 187. 191.
and received us again into the 1
number of his elect people, 2
not for our merits or deserts, but only and solely for the merits of Christ's
death and passion. 5
Christ died for our sins, and rose again for our justification: Why may not
we, that be his members by true faith, rejoice and boldly say with the Prophet
Osee, and the Apostle Paul, Where is thy dart, O death? where is thy victory, O
hell? 7
Thanks be unto God, say they, which has given us the victory by our Lord
Christ Jesus.

7
Apply your selves (good friends) to live in Christ, Folio 195.
that Christ may still live in you, whose favor and assistance if ye have,
then have ye everlasting life already within you, then can nothing hurt you.
Folio 209. 219.
Whatsoever is hitherto done and committed. 4
It is the holy Ghost, and no other thing, that does quicken the minds of
men, stirring up good and godly motions in their hearts, which are agreeable to
the will and commandment of God, such as otherwise of their own crooked and
perverse nature they should never have. That which is borne of the Spirit, is
Spirit. As who should say: Man of his own nature is fleshly and carnal,
corrupt and naught, sinful and disobedient to God, without any spark of
goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly motion, only given to evil
thoughts and wicked deeds. As for the works of the Spirit, the fruits of
Faith, charitable and godly motions, if he have any at all in him, they proceed
only of the holy Ghost, who is the only worker of our Sanctification, and
makes us new men in Christ Jesus.

6
His power and wisdom, compels us to take him for God omnipotent,
invisible, having rule in heaven and earth, having all things in his
subjection, and will have none in counsel with him, nor any to ask the reason
of his doing. Dan. 11.
For he may do what likes him, and none can resist him. 2
For he works all things in his secret judgment to his own pleasure, Prou.
16.
yea even the 3
wicked to damnation says Solomon. Part. 2. Foli. 228.
All spiritual gifts and graces come specially from God: he sp^^ed not from
any pain and travail that might do us good. To this our Saniour and
Mediator, has God the Father given the power of heaven and earth, and the
whole jurisdiction and authority, to distribute his goods and gifts committed
to him: for so writes the Apostle. Folio 229. Ephesians. 4.
To every one of us is grace given, according to the measure of Christ's giving.
This knowledge and feeling is not in our self, by our self it is not possible
to come by it, a great pity it were that we should lose so profitable
knowledge. Let us therefore meekely call upon that bountiful spirit the holy
Ghost, which proceeds from our Father of mercy, and from our Mediator Christ,
that he would assist us, and inspire us with his presence, that in him we may
be able to hear the goodness of God declared unto us to our salvation. 1
Cor. 12.
For without his lively and secret inspiration, can we not once so much as
speak the Name of our Mediator, as Saint Paul plainly testifies: No man can
once name our Lord Jesus Christ, but in the holy Ghost. Much less should we
be able to believe and know these great mysteries that be opened to us by
Christ. 1 Cor. 2.
Saint Paul says, that no man can know what is of God, but the Spirit of God.
As for us (says he) we have received not the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God, for this purpose: that in that holy spirit we might
know the things that be given us by Christ. The wise man says, that in the
power and virtue of the holy Ghost, rests all wisdom, and all ability to
know God, Folio 263.
and to please him.

4
We must beware and take heed, that we do in no wise think in our hearts,
imagine, What we must beware of.
or believe that we are able to repent aright, or to turn effectually unto
the Lord by our own might and strength. For this must be verified in all men.
John. 15.
Without me ye can do nothing. Again, 2 Cor. 3.
Of our selves we are not able as much as to think a good thought. And in
another place, It is God that works in us both the will and the deed. Part.
2. Foli. 263. lerem. 6.
For this cause, although Hieremie had said before, If thou return, O Israel,
return unto me, says the Lord: Yet afterward he says, Turn thou me, O
Lord, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. And therefore that
holy writer and ancient father Ambrose Ambros. De Vocatione Gentium. lib^ 2.
cap. 9.
does plainly affirm, that the turning of the heart unto God, is of God, as
the Lord himself does testify by his Prophet, saying, And I will give thee
an heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they shall be my people, and I
will be their God, for they shall return unto me with their whole heart.

Both the Priesthood and the Law being changed we ought to acknowledge none
other Priest for deliverance from our sins, Folio 267.
but our Savior Jesus Christ, who being sovereign Bishop, does with the
Sacrifice of his Body and Blood, offered once for ever upon the Altar of the
Cross, most 5
effectually cleanse the spiritual leprosy, and wash away the sins of all
those that with true confession of the same do flee unto him.

These several passages quoted out of our Homilies do aboundanty testify:
that there is an eternal and immutable Praedestination of certain men unto
eternal life, out of mere grace and mercy; and likewise a praetermission or
reprobation of others to eternal death, out of Gods mere pleasure. That there
is no Free Will, or sufficient grace communicated unto all men, whereby they
may convert, and save themselves if they will. And that man without the
special assistance of Gods grace and Spirit, is so weak and impotent, that
he can neither do nor think any thing that is good, or prepare his heart to
seek for grace: That Christ Jesus has dyed sufficiently for all men, but
effectually for none but the Elect, and such who are enabled through faith to
apply his merits to their souls. That Gods grace and Spirit do always work
effectually in the hearts of his Elect, in the act of their conversion, which
they can never finally nor totally resist. And that the Elect and truly
regenerate can neither fall finally nor totally from the state of grace which
is firm and stable. If any man desire to know more of man's imbecility, and
misery since the fall, which is such; that he can neither will nor do any
thing that is good, without Gods special preventing and assisting grace: (a
point which overthrows the whole Fabric of Arminianisme, which is founded
upon man's Free Will.) Let him read the Part. 1. page 7. to 13.
first and second part of the Homily of the Misery of man. The Homilies of
Part. 2. Page 167. to 234.
Christ's Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection: The first Homily on Whitsonday:
The first, second, and third part of the Homily on Rogation week: And the
first part of the Homily of Repentance, where this point is so copiously
handled, and abundantly confirmed, that it needs no more dispute. He that
would further satisfy himself in the freeness of our Election, Vocation,
Justification, Sanctification, and Salvation, out of mere grace and mercy,
without any desire, merits, will, or works of our own, or any thing foreseen
in us; Let him read the foresaid Homilies: together with Part. 1. page 13. to
29.
the first, second, and third parts of the Homilies of Salvation and Faith: He
that would be further and more fully instructed in the point of the
sufficiency, value, worth, and merit of Christ's death, which was able and
sufficient of it self to redeem, not some, but all mankind, though the
effect and application of it belong not to all, but only to the Elect who
alone have Faith for to apply it: let him read all these forementioned
Homilies. For the point of Perseverance, if any desire more copious evidences
for to clear it: let him peruse the second part of those Homilies, Page 148.
209. 261. 262. 263. and there he shall find it proved: That the Spirit of
God does always dwell in the hearts of the Regenerate: (and that David,
Solomon, Noah, Lot, and Peter though they fell into gross and (...) sinn^^,
yet they did not fall finally, nor totally from the state of Grace. The cauils
which have been raised against this point upon some passages in the Homilies,
of falling from God. Perpetuitic of a Regenerate man's estate. Edit. 2. p. 322.
to 329.
I my self, Mr. Wottons Dangerous plot discovered c. 11. sect. 8. 9. p. 45. to
49. Mr. Yates Ibis ad C^^sarem. 2. Part. p. 133. to 140.
with others, have formerly answered them in other books; I therefore spare for
to repeat them, since the now recited passages are sufficient for to clear
this point, and to evidence it to the world: that the Arminian Tenants are
manifestly oppugned, yea, condemned; not warranted by our Homilies.

These Homilies were most of them penned and composed by the Learned Archbishop
of Canterbury, Doctor Cranmer afterward a Martyr.

A short Catechism set forth by King Edward the 6. his Authority, for all
Schoolemasters to teach, Printed at London in Latin per Reginaldum Woolfium
1553. and the same year in English, Cum Priuilegio, by John Day, out of which
I have transcribed it verbatim, from Folio 37. to 41.
Scholar. AFter that the Lord 1
God had made the Heaven and Earth, he determined to have for himself a most
beautiful Kingdom, and holy Commonwealth. The Apostles and Ancient Fathers
that wrote in Greek, called it Ecclesia, in English a Congregation or
Assembly; into the which he has admitted an infinite number of men, that
should be subject to one King, as their Sovereign and only Head: him we call
Christ, which is as much as to say Anointed, etc. To the furnishing of this
Commonweal belong all they, as many as do truly fear, honor, and call
upon God, daily applying their minds to holy and godly living, and all those
that putting all their hope and trust in him do 7
assuredly look for the bliss of everlasting life. But as many as are in this
Faith steadfast, 1
were fore-chosen, Praedestinat, and appointed to everlasting life before the
world was made. Witness hereof, they have within their hearts the spirit of
Christ, the Author, earnest, 7
and vnfailable pledge of their faith. Which faith only is able to perceive
the mysteries of God: only brings peace unto the heart: only takes hold on
the righteousness that is in Christ Jesus.

Master. Does then the Spirit alone, and faith, (sleep we never so securely,
or stand we never so rechlesse or slothful) so work all things for us, as
without any help of our own to carry us idle up heaven?

Schol: I use Master (as you have taught me) to make a difference between the
cause and the effect. The 2
first principal and most proper cause of our Justification and Salvation, is
the goodness and love of God, whereby he chose us for his 1
before he made the world. After that, God grants us to 6
be called by the Preaching of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, when the spirit of
the Lord is powered into us: by whose garding and governance we be led to
settle our trust in God, and hope for the performance of his promise. With this
choice is joined as companion, the mortifying of the old man, that is of our
affection and last. From the same spirit also comes our Sanctification, the
love of God, and of our neighbor, justice, and uprightness of life. Finally,
to say all in sum, 4
Whateuer is in us, or may be done of us, honest, pure, true, and good, that
altogether springs out of this most pleasant Rock, from this most plentiful
Fountain, the 2
goodness, love, choice, and 1
unchangeable purpose of God, he is the cause, the rest are the fruits, and
effects. Yet are also the goodness, choice, and spirit of God, and Christ
himself, causes, conjoined and coupled each with other: which may be reckoned
among the principal causes of salvation. As often therefore as we use to say,
that we are made righteous and saved by says only; it is meant thereby, that
faith, or rather trust alone, does lay hand upon, understand, and perceive our
righteous making to be 2
given us of God freely; that is to say, by no deserts of our own, but by the
free grace of the Almighty Father. Moreover Faith does engender in us love of
our neighbor, and such works as God is pleased withal. For if it be a
lively and true faith, quickened by the holy Ghost, she is the mother of all
good saying and doing. By this short tale it is evident, whence and by what
means we attain to be righteous. For 2
not by the worthiness of our deseruings, were we either heretofore chosen,
or long ago saved, but by the only mercy of God, and pure grace of Christ our
Lord: whereby we were 6
in him made to do these good works, that God had appointed for us to walk
in. And although good works cannot deserve to make us righteous before God,
yet do they so clean unto Faith, that neither Faith can be found without
them, nor good Works be any where found without Faith. And Fol. 68. 7
Immortality and blessed life God has provided for his chosen 1
before the foundations of the World were laid.

This Catechism was published by King Edward the 6. his Authority, in the
year 1553. being the next year after the composure and publishing of the
Articles of our Church, which were first of all concluded upon, in the year
1552. being only reui^ed, not framed or new composed in the year 1562. From
whence I collect, that this Catechism is fully agreeable to the true sense and
meaning of our Articles, and may well be taken, as a Comment or Explanation on
our 16. and 17. Articles: so that whatsoever is affirmed in this Catechism, is
likewise affirmed by those Articles. And if so, then it is more then evident,
that our Articles do point-blanke oppugn the Arminian mutabilitie of
Predestination: Election from Faith, or Works, or any thing else foreseen in
us, Free Will, and universal or sufficient grace, the total and final
resisting of the work of grace, and Apostasy from the state of grace;
together with the truth of grace in reprobates, or castawayes: all which are
evidently refuted and condemned by this Catechism as the figured passages will
demonstrate.

Certain questions and answers touching the doctrine of Predestination:
Printed by ROBERT BARKER Anno 1607. and bound up, and sold with our English
Bibles.
Question. WHy do men so much vary in matters of Religion?

Answer. Because all have not the like measure of knowledge, neither do all
believe the Gospel of Christ.

Qu. What is the reason thereof?

An. 7
Because they only believe the Gospel and doctrine of Christ, which are 1
ordained unto eternal life.

Qu. Are not all ordained to eternal life?

An. 1
Some are 3
vessels of wrath ordained unto destruction, as others are vessels of mercy
prepared to glory.

Qu. How stands it with Gods Justice, that some are appointed to damnation?

An. 3
Very well: because all men have in themselves sin, which deserves no less:
and therefore 2
the mercy of God is wonderful in that he vouchsafes to save some of that
sinful race, and to bring them to the knowledge of the truth.

Qu. If Gods ordinance and determination must of necessity take effect, then
what need any man to care? for he that lives well, must needs be damned, if
he be thereunto ordained: and he that lives ill must needs be saved, if he
be thereunto appointed.

Ans. Not so: 6
for it is not possible, that either the elect should always be without care
to do well, 4
or that the reprobate should have any will thereunto. For to have either good
will or good work, is a testimony of the Spirit of God, 7
which is given to the Elect only, whereby faith is so wrought in them, that
being graft into Christ, they grow in holiness to that glory, whereunto they
are appointed. Neither are they so vain as once to think that they may do as
they list themselves, because they are predestinate unto salvation: but rather
they endeavor to walk in such good works as God in Christ Jesus has
ordained them unto, and prepared for them to be occupied in, to their own
comfort, stay and assurance, and to his glory.

Qu. But how shall I know my self to be one of those whom God has ordained
to life aeternall.

Ans. By the motions of spiritual life, which belongs 7
only to the children of God: by the which that life is perceived, even as the
life of this body is discerned by the sense and motions thereof.

Qu. What mean you by the motions of spiritual life?

Ans. I mean remorse of conscience, joined with the loathing of sin, and
love of righteousness: the hand of Faith reaching unto life eternal in
Christ, the Conscience comforted in distress, and raised up to confidence in
God by the work of his Spirit: a thankful remembrance of Gods benefits
received, and the using of all adversities as occasion of amendment sent from
GOD.

Qu. Cannot such perish as at some time or other feel these motions within
themselves?

Ans. 7
It is not possible that they should: for as Gods purpose is not changeable, so
he repents not of the gifts and graces of his adoption: neither does he
cast off those whom he has once received.

Qu. Why then should we pray by the example of David, that he cast us not from
his Face, and that he take not his holy Spirit from us?

Ans. In so praying, we make protestation of the weakness of flesh, which
moves us to doubt: yet should not we have courage to ask, if we were not
assured that God will give according to his purpose and promise, that which we
require.

Qu. Do the Children of God feel the motions aforesaid always alike?

Ans. No truly: for God sometime to prove his, seems to leave them in such
sort, that the flesh ouermatcheth the Spirit, whereof arises trouble of
conscience for the time: yet the spirit of adoption is 7
never taken from them, that have once received it: else might they perish. But
as in many diseases of the body, the powers of the bodily life are let: So
in some assaults the motions of spiritual life are not perceived, because they
lie hidden in our manifold infirmities, as the fire covered with ashes. Yet as
after sickness comes health, and after clouds the Sun shi^eth clear: so
the powers of spiritual life will more or less be felt and percieued in the
children of God.

Qu. What if I never feel these motions in my self, shall I despair, and
think my self a castaway?

An. God forbid: 6
for God calls his, at what time he sees good: and the instruments whereby
he usually calls, have not the like effect at all times: yet is it not good
to neglect the means whereby God has determined to work the Salvation of
his. For as wax is not melted without heat, nor clay hardened but by means
thereof; so God uses means both to draw those unto himself, whom he has
appointed unto Salvation, and also to bewray the wickedness of them whom he
justly condemns.

Qu. By what means uses God to draw men to himself, that they may be saved?

Ans. By the preaching of his word, and the ministering of his Sacraments
thereunto annexed, etc.

These Questions and Answers concerning Predestination, which are full and
punctual to our purpose, were always Printed at the end of the old
Testament, and bound up and sold Cum Priuilegio, with this Authorized
Translation of the Bible, till the year 1614. since which no Bibles of this
sort were printed. We may therefore use it as a pregnant testimony, and
punctual declaration of the Doctrine of our Church, in the particular points
of Controversy hereafter mentioned.

The Synod of Dort held in the years of our Lord, 1618. 1619. at Dort in the
Netherlands.

I mean not to recite the several Articles and Conclusions of this late
famous Synod, conuented by the pious care and providence of our late Sovereign
King James, at which the eminentest Protestant Divines of most Reformed
Churches were assembled, and among the rest sieve selected English Divines; to
wit, Dr. Carlton, late Bishop of Chichester; Dr. Dauenat, now Bishop of
Salisbury; Dr. Belcanquell, Deane of Rochester; Dr. Samuel Ward, public
Divinity Professor in the University of Cambridge; and Doctor Thomas Goade; who
not only as Private men, but as representative persons of the Church of
England, subscribed the several Articles and Conclusions there resolved:
witness Theologorum magnae Britanniae Sententia, in the Acts of the Synod at
large: The little English Synod of Dort, and Dr. Ward his Suffragium
Britannorum, to which I shall refer you with a bare quotation, they being
obuious to men's hands, and tedious to transcribe.

A COPPYE OF A RECANTATION OF certain Errors, raked out of the dunghill of
Popery, and Pelagianisme, publicly made by Master Barret of Kayes College
in Cambridge the tenth day of May, in this present year of our Lord, 1595. in
the University Church, called Saint Mary's in Cambridge: which Errors he
(together with Master Ha^rsnet of Penbrooke Hall) did rashly hold, and
maintain: Translated ^ut of Latin into English.
Anno. 37. Elizabeth.
PReaching in Latin not long since in the University Church, (Right
Worshipful,) many things slipped from me, both falsely, and rashly spoken,
whereby I understand the minds of many have been grieved; to the end therefore
that I may satisfy the Church and the Truth which I have publicly hurt, I
do make this public Confession, both repeating, and reuoking my Errors.

Faith, that is, unless (as I afterward expounded it,) by Revelation, that
he ought to be assured of his own Salvation. But now I protest before God,
and acknowledge in my Conscience, that they which are justified by Faith, have
peace toward God, that is, have reconciliation with God, and do stand in that
Grace by Faith: therefore that they ought to be certain, and assured of their
own Salvation, even by the certainty of Faith it self.

Secondly, I affirmed that the Faith of Peter could not John 17. 20. I pray not
for these alone, (that is, the Apostles,) but for them also which shall believe
in me, through their word.) I acknowledge that Christ did pray for the Faith of
every particular Believer: and that by the virtue of that Prayer of Christ,
every true Believer is so stayed up that his Faith cannot fail.

Thirdly, touching perseverance unto the end, I said

Fourthly, I affirmed that there was no distinction in Faith, but in the
persons believing. In which I confess that I did Err: Now I freely
acknowledge, that temporary Faith, (which as Bernard witnesses, is therefore
fained, because it is temporary,) is distinguished, and differs from that
saving Faith, whereby sinners apprehending Christ, are justified before God for
ever; not in measure, and degrees, but in the very thing it self. Moreover I
add, that James does make mention of a dead Faith, and Paul of a Faith that
works by love.

forgive us our Trespasses,) is needless; for in that Petition, we ask not
only the guist, but also the increase of Faith.

viz. As for those that are not saved, I do most strongly believe, and do
freely protest that I am so persuaded against Calvin, Peter Martyr, and the
rest, that sin is the true, proper, and first cause of Reprobation. But now
being better instructed; I say that the Reprobation of the wicked, is from
Everlasting, and that that saying of Augustine to Simplician is most true, viz.
If sin were the cause of Reprobation, then no man should be elected, because
God does foreknow all men to be de^iled with it. And (that I may speak
freely,) I am of the sam^ mind; and do believe concerning the Doctrine of
Election, The Heads therefore of the University of Cambridge, who composed this
Recantation, were of this opinion, that the 17. Article does make the will of
God, not sin, the true and primary cause of Reprobation, and therefore they
recited it at large in the Latin Copy.
and Reprobation, as the Church of England believes, and teaches in the book
of the Articles of Faith in the Article of Predestination.

Last of all, I uttered these words rashly against Calvin They were undoubtedly
of their opinion in these points now controuersed
Peter Martyr, Theodore Beza, Jerome Zanchius, Francis Iunius, and the rest of
the same Religion, being the Lights and Ornaments of our Church: calling them
by the odious names of Caluinists, and other slanderous terms; branding them
with a most grievous Therefore of their op^nion in our present Tenants
mark of reproach: whom because our Church does worthyly reverence, it was not
meet, that I should take away their good name from them, or any way impair
their credit, or d^hort others of our Cuntrey-men, from reading their most
learned works. I am therefore very sorry, and grieved for this most grievous
offense, which I have publicly given to this most famous University, which is
the Temple of true Religion, and sacred receptacle of Piety; And I do promise,
that (by Gods help,) I will never hereafter offend in the like sort: and I do
earnestly beseech you (Right worshipful,) and all others to whom I have given
this offense, either in the former Articles, or in any part of my said Sermon,
that you would of your courtesy pardon me, upon this my repentance.

That the authority, and consequence of this precedent Recantation may be
more fully manifested; I will briefly relate, both the occasion, and the
carriage of it. One Master Barret of Kayes College, Preaching a Concio ad
Clerum in Saint Mary's Church in Cambridge, on the 29. day of April 1595. made
bold to vent these then Pelagian, and Popish, but now both Popish, and Arminian
Tenants, which are here recanted: which gave such general offense unto all the
Auditors, that on the 5. of May next following, about nine of the clock in the
fore-noone, he was conuented for the publishing of these Erroneous Tenants,
and his reuiling of Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Luther, Iunius, Zanchius and
others, before all the Heads of the University of Cambridge: to wit, Master
Doctor Some, Doctor Duport, Doctor Goade, Doctor Tindall, Doctor Whitaker,
Doctor Barwell, Doctor Iegon, Doctor Preston, Master Chaderton, and Master
Clayton, Thomas Smith, the public Notary of the University being there
present; who appointed him to appear again before them, at three of the
clock in the afternoon, at which time Dr. Duport being then Vicechanceller,
read openly certain Articles containing the positions which Master Barret had
broached in his foresaid Sermon, alleging these his assertions to be
Allegauit dictas posi^^onessa^sas, erroneas, and repugnantesesse religioni in
regno Angliae publica and leg^tima authoritate receptae and stabilitae. These
are the words of the Articles exhibited against him by the Vice Chancellor.
Erroneous, false, and opposite, to the Religion received, and established in
the Kingdom of England, by public and lawful Authority: to which Articles
he required Master Barret to give an answer: who confessed, that he had
published in his Sermon, the-Positions comprised in the said Articles, but with
all, denied them to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England.
Whereupon the Vicechancellor and the forenamed heads, Habita matura
deliberatione, necnon visis et diligenter examinatis positionibus praedictis,
quia manifesto constabat positiones^ praedictas errorem et falsitatem in se
continere, necnon aperte repugnare Religion^ in Ecclesia Anglicana receptae ac
stabilitae; ideo iudicaberunt, etc. These are the express words of the Order
entered in the University Register.
entering into a mature deliberation, and diligently weighing and examining
these Positions; because it did manifestly appear that the said Positions Were
false, erroneous, and likewise manifestly repugnant to the Religion received
and established in the Church of England; adjudged and declared, that the said
Barret had incurred the penalty of the 45. Statute of that University, De
Concionibus: and by virtue and tenor of that Statute they decreed and adjudged
the said Barret to make a public Recantation, in such words and form as
should be prescribed unto him by the Vice Chancellor, and the said Heads, or
any three, or two of them; or ese upon his refusal to recant in this manner,
to be perpetually expelled, both from his College, and the University;
binding him likewise in an assumpsit of forty pounds to appear personally upon
two days warning, before the said Vice Chancellor, or his Deputy, at what time
and place they should require. Afterward this Barret was re-summoned before
the Vice Chancellor, Doctor Goade, Dr Tindall, Dr. Barwell, and Doctor Preston,
his assistants, who delivered him this praecedent Recantation in writing;
admonishing and peremptorily enioyning him on Saturday following, being the 10.
of May, immediately after the Clerum ended, to go up in person into the Pulpit
of Saint Mary's, where he had published these errors, and there openly in the
face of the University, to read and make this Recantation, which he did
accordingly. Not long after this Palinodium, Master Barret, (to show that these
positions are but a bridge to Popery) departs the University, and gets beyond
Sea; where he (as Bertius, and some other Arminians since have done) turns a
professed Papist: After this he returned into England, where he lives a Laymans
life, being still an open, dangerous, violent, and most pernicious and seducing
Papist, as some men of credit in these very terms have informed me, who both
know, and will auerre him to be such a one.

This is the true Relation and carriage of this Recantation, which I have taken
verbatim out of a Transcript of the University Register of Cambridge, under
the Registers own hand; wherein all the passages of it are entered and
recorded, for the benefit of posterity. For the recantation it self, (of
which Thysius, and BB Carlton his Examination of Mr. Mountagues Appeal. cap. 2
others make some mention) it was fairly Printed and Published in Queen
Elizabeth's days, (some Copies of it being yet extant) in the very selfsame
words, and form as here you see it. And that none may suspect it to be forged,
or corrupted: I have a transcript of it in Latin, taken out of an Original
Copy under Master Barets own hand: which agrees verbatim with this English
one, only in this they differ: that our 17. Article is at large recited in the
Latin Copy in the end of the 6. Section, whereas as it is only named in the
English.

From this Recantation, and the carriage of it; it is clearly evident; That
the University of Cambridge in those days, did undoubtedly believe and
mainetaine the now Arminian Heresies of the final and total Apostasy of the
Saints: Of uncertainty of Salvation; of Election from faith, and Reprobation
from sin foreseen. Of a personal, not a real difference, between
temporary and true saving Faith: (the Points which Barret recanted) to be not
only false and erroneous; but likewise manifestly repugnant to the Religion
and Doctrine, established and settled in the Church of England, and to the 17.
Article: For so are the express words of the Order, and Articles recorded in
the University Register: If they were thus evidently repugnant to them then; I
doubt not but they are so now: at leastwise in all Cambridge men's repute, who
will not (at leastwise should not) so far dishonor their renowned Mother, as
to degenerate from her ancient Orthodoxe and Dogmaticall Resolutions.

These are the more ancient public Monuments, and Evidences of our Church, by
which the subsequent Conclusions now in Issue must be judged. The several
figures inserted into them, and likewise placed in the Margent, have reference
to the 7. Anti-Arminian Positions following: the figure of (1) noting out such
passages, as punctually confirm the first: the figure of (2) such clauses as
evidently back and prove the second of these Assertions, and so every figure
successively, answers to its proper Position. If then all these Records which
do either Really contain, or at leastwise, evidently declare, the ancient,
established, and received Doctrine of the Church of England, give punctual
Evidence for these Conclusions, oppugning the contrary Arminian Theses in
terminis, or substance, as they do; this question will be then resolved: and
our succeeding Anti-Arminian Conclusions acknowledged the undoubted Doctrines
of our Church, without any more debate.

Having thus at large recited the several Grand-charters^ and more eminent
Records and evidences which our Church affords for trial of this weighty
cause, I come now to apply them to the points in issue, which I shall
distinctely lay down in this ensuing Antithesis.

Anti-Arminianisme.
THe Anti-Arminian orthodox Assertions, now incontrouersie (which I shall prove
to be the ancient and undoubted Doctrine of the Church of England) contracte
themselves into these 7. dogmaticall conclusions.

1 That God from all Ephesians. 1. 4. 2. Tim. 1. 9. ler. 1. 5. c. 31. 3
eternity, has by his Psalm. 33. 11. Psa. ^9. 28, 33, 34. Esa. 14. 24. 27. Mal.
3. 6. Romans 9. 11. 2. Tim. 1. 9. c. 2. 19. Ephe. 1. 9. 11.
immutable purpose and Decree, praedestinated unto life; Mat. 20. 16. c. 24,
40, 41. Luke. 17. 36. To. 9. 27. c. 11. 5
not all, but only a selected number of particular men, which Ephe. 4. 13.
Romans 8. 30. 2. Tim. 2. 19. John ^. 19. Reu. 21. 27.
can be neither augmented nor diminished (commonly called the Heb. 11. 23. and
all Protestant (...) that write of the Church.
elect, invisible, and true Church of Christ) others has he Ro^ 9. 11, 17.
Jude 4. Mat. 24. 40. 41.
eternally reprobated unto death.

2 That the only mo^uing and efficient cause of Election and Praedestination
unto life is, Exodus 33. 19. John 5. 11. Mat. 8. 2, 3. c. 11. 27. Luke 10. 21.
Deuteronomy 7. 8. Hosea. 14. 4. 1. Sam 12. 22. James 1. 18. To 9 11 to 27. c. 1^. 5.
Ephesians 1 5, 9, 11. c. 2. 5, 8. 2. Tim 1 9.
the mere good pleasure and grace of God, not the consideration of any Deu. 7.
6, 7, 8 Eze. 16 6. To. 9. 11. 16. Mat. 24. 40. 41. Mal. 1. 2, 3.
^oreseene faith, perseverance, good wor^s, good will, good endeauours, or any
other quality or condition whatsoever in the persons elected.

3 That though sin be the Cor 1. 26. 27 28. To. 11. 5, 6, Mat. 25. 41 42.
Romans 2. 9.
only cause of damnation, yet the sole and primarie cause of Reprobation or
Nonelection (that is, why God does pass by this man rather then another, why
he rejected Esau, when he elected Jacob:) is Mat. 11. 25. c. 24. 40. 41. Luke.
17. 38. To. 9. 11. 13. 17. to 33. Mal 1, 2, 3.
the mere freewill and pleasure of God: not the confideration or foresight of
any actual sin, infidelity, or final impenitency in the persons rejected.

4 That there is not any such Ier 10. 2^. Pro. 16. 1. 9. Isay. 26. 12. John
1^5. 5. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Psalm. 2. 1^. John 6. 44
Free Will, or universal, or sufficient grace communicated unto all men,
whereby they may repent, believe, or be saved if they will themselves.

5 That Christ Jesus died 1. Ioh. 2, 1, 2
sufficiently for all men: (his death being of sufficient merit to redeem and
save them) but primarily, and Mat 1. 21. Ioh, 10^ 11, 15 17. Ephesians. 1. 4, 7, c.
5. 25, 26. 27. Reu. 5. 1. c 5. 9. 10 see my Perpetuity. ^ p. 29.
effectually for the Elect alone, for whom alone he has actually and
effectually obtained remission of sins, and life aeternall.

6 That the Elect do Cant. 1. 4. To 8. 30. c. 9. 19 Rom 3. 7 Acts 16. 1. c,
^6. 1. 9 Ephesians 1. 10, 19 John 6. 37, 1. These. 1. 4, 5, 6, 9. Job 9. 4, 12. Psal^
115. 3. Psalm. 135 6. Pro. 21. 1. 30. ^say 54. 21. c. 43. 13 see God no Imposter.
always constantly obey, neither 7.
can they finally or totally resist the powerful and effectual call and
working of Gods Spirit in the very act of their Conversion: neither is it in
their own power, to convert, or not convert themselves, at that very time and
instant when they are converted.

7 That the Elect and truly regenerate (who Titus 1. ^, Acts 13. 48. Romans 11,
7.
alone are i^^ued with true justifying and saving faith) do constantly
persevere unto the end; and though they sometimes fall into grievous sins,
yet they Psalm. 37, 24, Psalm. 145, 14, see my Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's
estate.
never fall finally nor totally from the habits, seeds, and state of grace.

Arminianisme.
THe whole erroneous doctrine of Arminianisme, (which has always been
oppugned by the Church of England from the beginning of reformation to this
present) may be reduced to these, 7. general Propositions.

1 That there is no absolute, nor irreuocable, but only a conditiona^ and
mutable Decree of Praedestination unto life and death: and that, not of
particular persons, but generally of all believers, and unbelievers; so that
the number of the Elect and Reprobate is not so certain, but that it may be
diminished or augmented.

2 That the consideration and foresight of faith, perseverance, good works, and
the right use of grace received, are praerequited conditions, and efficient
causes of Election or Praedestination unto life: not Gods free grace, and mercy
only without respect to these, as to a cause.

3 That the original, and proper cause of Reprobation (that is of its Decree,
not of its execution) is the consideration and foresight of infidelity, sin,
and final impenitency in the persons rejected; not the mere Free Will and
pleasure of God.

4 That there is ^an universal or sufficient grace derived upon all m^n since
the fall of Adam, by virtue of which they may repent, believe, and be saved if
they will themselves.

5 That Christ Jesus died alike primarily and effectually for all men
whatsoever, without any intent to save any particular persons more then others,
be they reprobates or elect: with a purpose to save all men alike, upon
condition of believing, which is suspended on their own actual power, not on
Christ's actual application of it to them by his Spirit.

6 That it is in the power of men, either finally or totally to resist the
inward call, and effectual working of Gods Spirit in their hearts, in the very
act of their conversion, so that they may either withstand o^ embrace their
conversion at their pleasure.

7 That true justifying faith is neither a fruit of election, nor yet proper
unto the Elect alone, it being oft-times found in reprobates: and that the very
Elect by falling into sin, both may, and do fall finally and totally from
the habits, seeds, and state of Grace.

These are the fundamental, and maine points of difference that are now in
question and dispute among us: whether of these have best right and title to
the Church of England; which of them are her anciently received, approved,
established, professed, and undoubted Doctrine, is the only issue that we are
now to try, For the full and final resolution of which grand, yet doubtless
Quaere; I shall lay down these three Conclusions which every man must
subscribe to.

First, That those of these contradictorie Arminian and Anti-Arminian
Assertions, which are most consonant to, least variant from, and best
warranted, or confirmed by, the Articles of England, Lambheht, and Ireland; the
Common Prayer Book, and Homelies, of our Church: and the Cathechismes,
and-Recantation fote-recited; must needs be the received, established, and
professed Doctrine of our English Church.

2 Secondly, that those, and those only, of the here-recorded iarring
Positions, which were are at first commended and transmitted to our infant
Church, Quicquid vel omnes, vel plures v^o ^odemque sensu, manifest,
frequenter, perseueranter velut quodam sibi con (...) Magistrorum Concilio,
acci^^^ndo, tene^d^ trade^do firmauerint; id pr^ indubitato, certo, ratoque
habeatur. Quicquid ^ero qua^uis ille sanctus and doctus, qua^^uis Episcopus,
quarauis Confessor and Martyr, praeter omnes, autetiam contra omnes senserit,
id inter propri^s, and occultas, and priuatas op^^^^^culas, a communis,
publicae, and generalis sententiae autheritate secretu^ sit, ne cum ^umo
salutis aeternae-pericu^o iuxta sacrilega^ haereticorum and scismaticoru^
co^^uetudinem vniuersalis dogmatis veritate di^^issa, vnius ho^inis no^itium
sectemur errorem: Vin^e^tius Lerine^^is, Co^tra hereses, cap. 39.
by our religious and learned Martyrs in the days of Henry the VIII who then
subscribed them with their hands, and Sealed them with their own blood: which
were afterward taught and planted in the grouth and reformation of our Church,
by our learned and eminent Divinity Professors in the flourishing and religious
Reign of King Edward the VI. which were watered with the fruitful showers of
our blessed Martyrs blood in the fire and fagot-regiment of Queene^ Mary,
through the malice and cruelty of blood-sucking, soule-staruing, and
non-preaching Prelates: and have ever since grown up and flourished in our
spredding Church, in the peaceable and happy Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and
King James of blessed memory; being always publicly, constantly,
unanimously, professedly, and vncontrolablie entertained in both our famous
Vniuersittes; taught in our Divinity Schools; justified in our Academicall
Disputes: preached in our Pulpits; maintained, propagated, and recorded to
posterity, as the undoubted Doctrine of our Church ( not by some one or two
vnorthodox ambitious, time-seruing, nouellizing, Sycophanticall, or romanized
Divines, who know no other passage to their own secure vp-rising but by
religions downfall, which they enterprise) but by the stream and current, of
all our Classical, orthodox, eminent and approved Writers from the beginning
of Reformation to this present; must needs be the hereditarie, legitimate,
authorized, established, and professed Doctrine of the Church of England, and
the undoubted truth.

3 Thirdly, that such of those Tenants now in issue, which have been
constantly oppugned, refelled, and disclaimed, yea, positiuely condemned^ by
all the fore-alledged Articles; Common Prayer Book, Homelies, Cathechismes,
Recantation: and by all the learned and approved orthodox Authors which our
Church has nourished and produced from her first reformation to this instant:
cannot be deemed or adjudged the ancient, embraced, resolved, or undoubted
Doctrine of our English Church.

These three infallible rules of trial being thus praemised; if I can now but
prove, that the Articles of England, Lambheth, and Ireland: the Common Prayer
Book and Homely of our Church: the authorized Cathechisme of Edward the VI.
the recantation of Barret, etc. together with our renowned Martyrs,
Universities, Divinity Schools, and Professors, and the whole succession and
series of all our orthodox and approved Writers from the inchoation of
reformation to this present; have always constantly, professedly, and in
direct and positive terms, maintained, justified, and patronized these seven
Anti-Arminian Positions here recorded; oppugning, rejecting, and manifestly
condemning the seven opposite Arminian Tenants as Pelagian, Popish, erroneous,
and evidently repugnant to the Scriptures and dogmaticall Resolutions of out
Church; it m^st then be forthwith yielded to me, and adjudged for me: That
these Anti-Arminian, (not their ad, uerse Arminian) Assertions, are the
ancient, approved, resolved, established, and professed Doctrine of the Church
of England. And this by the help of God I come The probate of the first
Anti-Arminian position to be the undoubted doctrine of the Church of England.


For the first of these Anti-Arminian Positions concerning the aeternity and
immutability of Election and Reprobation; the unalterable, praecise and
certain number both of the Elect (the only true Church of Christ) and
Reprobate, in regard of Gods foreknowledge and Decree: and the Election of
certain particular persons; not of all believers, nor yet generally of all
men, in the gross: It is directly, positiuely, and plainly taught, confirmed,
and warranted; by the fore-aledged 17. Article of our Church: by the Articles
of Lambheth Article 1. 3. by the Articles of Ireland, Articles 12. 13. 14. 15.
by the Book of Common prayer, established by 2. and 3. Edw. 6 cap 1. 19. 3.
and 4. Ed. 6. cap. 10. 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 1. 1. Eliza. c. 1. 13. Eliz. cap.
12.
Act of Parliament in our Church: Proposition first; figure (1.) (signifying
the first of these Anti-Arminian Propositions to which it has relation) by the
approved and See Article. 35.
settled Homelies of our Church, figures (1.) throughout their several passages
here recorded: by the Cathechismes of King Edward the VI. figures (1.) by
Barrets Recantation, and the synod of Dort. Arti. 1. 2. which are punctual in
it.

Add we to these public irrefragable and binding Records, Henry the 8.
the express concurrent suffrages of three of our eminent and learned Martyrs,
(whom laborious and studious Master Fox in his Praeface to their works,
printed together at London 1563. by John Day, which Edition I here follow: has
truly styled; the chief Ringleaders of the Church of England: to wit, Master
William Tyndale, in his Paraeble of the wicked Mommon, page 70. 77. 80. In his
Answer to Master Moors Dialogue: page 250. 257. 268. 290. 292. In his Answer
to Master Moors second Book, cap. 3. 4. pa. 293. 294. Answer to his third
Book page 306. 307. Answer to his fourth Book, cap. 10. page 329. and in his
Pathway into the holy Scriptures page 380. Master John Frith, in his Answer
unto Rastals Dialogue, page 10. in his Declaration of Baptism, page 92. 93.
and Master Doctor Barnes, what the Church is, page 248. That Freewill of her
own strength can do nothing but sin, page 227. 278. 279. Who maintained
this Assertion in these works of theirs, and confirmed it with their blood in
the days of Henry the VIII. oppugning and condemning the contrary.

Descend we unto Edward the VI. Edward the 6.
his pious Raig^e, here we shall find, See the Oration of his life and death
before his Loci communes.
that learned Doctor Peter Martyr, a man so eminent and famous in his age, that
he was chosen and settled Divinity P^ofessor in the famous University of
Oxford, my much honored, Mother: both by the King and State, who sent for him
from beyond the seas to this very purpose) abundantly confirming this truth,
and for all its fellow Positions, and copiously refuting the opposite
Assertions, in his laborious and learned Commentary on the Romans, cap. 9.
(being nothing, else as himself professes in his Epistle Dedicatorie, but the
p^blicke Lectures which he read in the University of Oxford, whiles he was
there Professor) Tiguri 1559. page, 682. to 740. and in his Loci Communes
Classis 3. cap. 1. sect. 10. to 40. Peter Mart^^ Epistola nuncu^patoria in
Romanos, and Oration de ^ita and morte Petri Martiris: prefixed to his Loci
Commune^ accordingly.
Here we may meet with his learned and entire Friend and fellow- Professor of
Divinity in the University of Cambridge, by the States especial appointment,
Master Martin Bucer (who concurred in all points of Doctrine with him without
the least dissent) maintaining this, and ^ts associated Positions; repugning
all the contrary, in his Commentary on Romans 8. 30. cap. 9. 11. to 23. cap. 11.
2. to 6. Dedicated to our Religious Martyr Archbishop Cranmer; and in sundry
other of his works: both of them planting this first, and all its subsequent
Anti-Arminian Conclusions in both our famous Universities; who together with
the whole Church of England, (as our learned Cignea Cantio Cantabrigiar Octo.
9. 1595. p. 15. 16.
Doctor Whitakers heretofore, and our judicious Doctor Ward of late, have
jointly testified) have ever since, from the very first restitution of the
Gospel to this praesent, even constantly embraced, and defended them as the
undoubted truth and Doctrine of our Church. Concio ad Clerum, Cantabrigiae.
Ianu. 12. 1625. p. 45.
Here we may meet with the constant and godly Martyr Master Hugh Latimer.
Bishop of Worcester, ( who so admired Peter Martyrs worth and labors, First
sermon before King Edward. Fol. 58.
that he openly requested King Edward the VI. to give him a thousand pounds,
instead of his hundred marks by the year) concurring with him, and us, in
this our Anti-Arminian Conclusion in his Sermons. London 1584. fol. 311. 312.
325. 326. 327. Here learned and pious Master Thomas Beacon, Divinity Professor
in the University, in his Sick Man's salve, London 1680. page 271. to 275.
424. to 430. Here godly and learned Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, in our
forementioned. Homelies, which were most of them penned and composed by him.
Here Master John Bradford, in his Defense of Praedestination; in his Treatise
of Praedestination and Freewill: and in his Brief sum of the doctrine of
Praedestination and Election, Printed by Rowland Hall 1562. (being the
selfsame year wherein our Articles were composed: together with Stephen
Garret, in his Sum of the holy Scripture, London 1547. cap. 4. 6. and 7. do
fully iumpe with us in this Conclusion, which most of them confirmed with their
blood.

Descend we lower to Queen Elizabeth's Queen Eliz.
Reign: here we shall not only meet with our 17. Article, (composed by Peter
Martyr, and Martin Bucer their Scholars, as Cignea Cantio. p. 16.
Doctor Whitakers informs us: and therefore more likely to concur with us in
all things, as their Tutors did:) but likewise with learned John Veron his
Books, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth about the beginning of her Reign;
entitled, A sru^full Treatise of Praedestination, with An Apology or defense
of the doctrine of Praedestination, Printed by John Tisdale, London: where all
our several Anti-Arminian points are largely, learnedly, and punctually
discussed and defended: with Reverend Master Nowell his authorized Cathechisme,
Creed, third part, The holy Catholic Church, The Communion of Saints, and the
Forgiveness of sins: with the quaestions and answers upon it: with laborious
and charitable Master John Fox, in his renowned Book of Martyrs Edition 7.
London 1596. page 1505. 1506. With Robert Hutton in his Sum of Divinity,
London 1565. cap of Praedestination, and of the Church: with John Daniel his
Excellent Comfort to all Christians, against all kind of Calamities, London
1576. cap. 27. of Praedestination, and of glorification thereby: with Master
Thomas Palfryman one of her Majesty's Chapel, in his Treatise of heavenly
Philosophy, London 1578. lib. 1. cap. 7. of the Free Election of God etc. page
74 to 103. With Master James Price, his Fan of the Faithful, London 1578.
Epistle to the Reader, cap. 1. That Election is not general, but particular
and several, cap. 2. That the Elect were elected before the foundation of the
world, and cannot finally perish, cap. 3. and 4. that the Kingdom of heaven is
not prepared, generally for all: That Christ profitteth not the Reprobate and
unbelieving for which his Kingdom is not praepared^ all punctual to our
purpose: with Master Edward Dering Lecture 9. on the Hebrews 2. ver. 9.
Lecture 10. on ver. 13. and Lecture 27. Master John Northbrooke, in his Poor
man's Garden, cap. 1. of Praedestination, and Reprobation: with Master Spark,
in his Comfortable Treatise for a troubled Conscience, London 1580. Master
Keilway, in his Sermon of Sure Comfort, London 1581. page 23. to 27. With
Master Gurney in his Fruitful Treatise, between Reason and Religion, London
1581. page 38. to 47. With Master John Anwicke his Meditations upon Gods
Monarchy, and the Devils Kingdom, London 1587. cap. 6. 7. 10. 11. With
Bartimeus Andreas, Sermon 2. on Canticles 5. London 1595 page 64. 65. 66. With
Master John Smith, in the Doctrine of Prayer in general for all men, London
1595. page 79. to 91. Learned and ready Doctor Fulke, together with Master
Cartwright: Notes on the Rhemish Testament, on Acts 27. sect. 3. on Romans 8.
sect. 8. and 9. sect. 2. 3. 4. 5. on Math. 3. sect. 7. cap. 13. sect. 3. cap.
22. sect. 2. and on John 15. sect. 3. Learned Master Doctor William Whitakers
De Ecclesia Controuersia 2. Quaest. 1. and Cygnea Cantio, Cantabrigiae Octobris
9. 1595. page 6. to 20. Reverend and learned Doctor Matthew Hutton, Archbishop
of York, and formerly Professor of Divinity in Cambridge, De Electione and
Reprobatione Commentatio, Hardrouici 1613. To whom I might add Doctor Whitgift
Archbishop of Canterbury, with the rest of our Divines, who composed the
Articles of Lambheth, and Barrets Recantation formerly mentioned. Robertus
Somus De Tribus Quaestionibus, Quaest. 1. and 3. Doctor Esteius Oration, De
certitudine salutis, Hardrouici per Thysium 1613. Doctor Chaderton De
iustificationis and fider perseuerantia non in^erscisa. Doctor Willet De
Praedestinatione, Quaest. 1. 2. Synopsis Papism^, page 904. to 922. Commentary
on Romans 8. Controversy 16. to 21. cap. 9. Contr. 7. to 12. cap. 11. contr. 1.
2. 3. Master Greenham Grave Council and godly observations, in his works,
London 1612. page 36. 45. 122. Treatlse of Blessedness, page 207. his 14.
Sermon page 255. Godly Instructions, cap. 53. page 764. A Letter consolatorie
page 878. 879. Master William Perkins his Order of causes of Salvation and
Damnation, in his works, London 1612. Tom. 1. page 76. to 114. An Exposition
on the Creed, page 276. to 297. Of Gods Free grace and man's Free Will, page
723. A Treatise of Praedestination, Tom. 2. page 606. to 641. An Exposition on
Jude, Tom. 3. page 316. Master John Hill, in his Life everlasting, Cambridge
1601. Book 5. page 522. to 653. Where all our Arminians Tenants are in
terminis confuted. Reverend Bishop Babington, in his Sermon at Paul's Cross on
John 6. 37. the 2. Sunday on Michaelmas Term, 1590. part 1. and 3.

All these religious, eminent, authorized and learned wri^ers of our Church
have unanimously, successively, and vninterruptedly (yea, most of them
professedly, and in terminis,) maintained and justified this our first
Anti-Arminian Thesis, with all its following Conclusions, as the orthodox truth
and undoubted doctrine of our Church; oppugning and copiously refelling its
contrary Arminian Tenent as Popish, Romish, and Pelagian; during the whole
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, not one authorized writer of our Church so much as
once dissenting from them for ought that I can find: and shall we now begin
to quaestion, whether it be the doctrine of our Church, or no?

Descend we lower to king James King James.
his Reign. And here with whom may we more fitly begin then with this our
learned King himself, who in the first year of his Reign, in the praesence
of sundry Nobles Praelates and Deanes, See his Meditation on the Lords Prayer,
and his Paraphrase on the Revelation. c. 13. 8. c. 17. 8.
in the Conference at Hampton Court, page 30. and 43. makes mention both of
aeternall Praedestination and Reprobation: expressly aucrring, That
Praedestination and El^ction depend not upon any qualities, actions, or works
of man which be mutable, but upon God his aeternall and immutable Decree and
purpose: then which determination of his (approved and applauded by all there
present) nothing can be more full and punctual to our present Conclusion:
Moreover, he likewise brands Arminianisme, with the name of (HERESY)
Arminians with the style of Atheistical sestaries, and (PESTILENT HERETICS)
who dare take upon them that licentious liberty to fetch again from hell the
Meaning Pelagianisme.
ancient haeresies long since condemned: or else to invent new of their own
brain, contrary to the belief of the true Catholic Church: (a stigmaticall
Impresse which our Arminians shall never be able to claw off again,) in his
Declaration against Vorstius, London 1612. page 15. 19. 22. near the midst
of his peaceable Reign: And as if all this were not sufficient, in a private
Conference with two learned Divines not long before his death, now published by
his special command, he christened our Armini^ans, with the name of See
Pelagi^^ Rediuitius. Epistle to the Reader, and King James his Cygnea Cantio,
newly printed. L^n 1619. p. 32.
new Pelagians: being thus, as you see, a professed enemy to them, and their
Opinions, both in the beginning, middle, and end of his most peaceable Reign:
as his special care in conuenting the famous Synod of Dort, and his
approbation of all their dogmaticall Resolutions, super-added to these three
former evidences, will at large declare. As this our learned King, and King of
learning, thus constantly displayed himself against Arminianisme in general,
and this our Arminian Error in particular: so all our learned Writers of his
age, Quicquid ciuitatis princept in honor habucrit, necesse est i^sdem rebu^
consentaneam reliquorum ciuium sententiam esse. Aristotle. Polit. l. 2. c. 9.
p. 140. Nemo suos (haet est aulae natura potentis) sed Domini mores Caesaria
nus hab^t Martial Epigram. l. 9. Epigr. 61.
( as men do commonly conform their judgments to their Princes Tenants) did
Honestissimum ^st maiorum v^^ stigiasequi recte si praecesserim. Pliny, Epist.
lib. 5. Epist 8.
worth^ly suffragate to his, and these our Anti-Arminian Conclusions: witnesse^
our famous Doctor Reinolds: who alone was a well furnished Library full of all
faculties, of all studies, of all learning: whose memory, whose reading were
near to a miracle, as Bishop Hall. Epist. Decad 1. Epist ^.
one well observes: in his Thesis 4. in Schola Theologica tractata: November 2.
1579. sect. 23. to 27. and Apologia Thesium: sect. 12. to 23. Londini 1602.
being the first year of King lames his Reign: witness learned and
scolasticall Doctor Field: of the Church, Book 1, cap. 3. 4. 7. 8. 10. Book
3. Appendix, cap. 14. Edit. 2. Oxford. 1628. p. 33. Master Thomas Draxe in his
Worlds Resurrection, London 1609. page 2. 3. 23. 78. Master Trendall his Arc
against the Dragons flood, London 1608. page 4. 6. Master Thomas Rogers
Chaplein to Archbishop Bancroft in his Analysis on the 39. Articles, entitled,
The faith, doctrine, and religion, professed and protected in the Realm of
England and Dominions of the same: perused, and by the lawful Authority of
the Church of England, allowed to be public: Proposition, 1. 2. 3. 4. on
Article 17. Master Turnball, Sermon 1. on Jude 1. 2. Godly and painful Master
Samuel Heiron in his Spiritual Sonneship 1. part of his works, London 1620.
page 365. to 372. Learned Doctor John White, in his Way to the true Church,
London 1610, Digression 40. sect. 49. page 270. in his Defense of the way, cap.
25. sect. 10. to the end, London 1624. page 128. to 138. Sermon at Paul's
Cross, March 20. 1615. sect. 8. Learned Doctor Robert Abbot Bishop of
Salisbury, and Regius Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford: in
his Divinity Lecture in the University Schools Oxoniae, July 10. 1613. sect.
1. 2. 3. 4. in his other three Lectures, 1614. and 1615. London 1618.
Animaduersio in Thompsoni Diatribam, cap. 5. Master Brightman on the
Revelation, cap. 3. ve. 8. cap. 17. ver. 8. cap. 21. 27. Master Richard Stock:
in his Doctrine and use of Repentance, London, 1610. page 167. to 172. Learned
Doctor Benefield, late Lady Margarets Professor in the University of Oxford,
De Sanctorum perseuerantia, lib. 2. cap. 18. 20. Francofurti, 1618. page. 260.
261. Learned Doctor Crackenthorpe, in his Sermon of Praedestination, preached
at Saint Mary's in Oxford, London 1620. Master Thomas Wilson, in his Exposition
upon the Romans, cap. 9. ver. 11. 12. to 29. and cap. 11. ver. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Edition 2. London 1627. page 348. 380. 444. to 460. Doctor John Boys, late
Deane of Canterbury, in his Exposition of the Epistle on Innocents day, and on
Psalm, 104. on Whitsunday Evening, in his works; London 1622. page 613. 614.
625. 941. Master Samuel Crook in his Guide, Edition 4. London 1625. section 4.
9. and 17. Learned Doctor Ames in his Coronis ad collationem Hagiensem, Lugduni
Batauorum, 1618. Articulus 1. and 2. Eminent and renowned Doctor Prideaux in
his Lecture, 1. July 6. in the University Schools at Oxford, where he then
was, and now is, Regius Professor of Divinity: Learned Sir Christopher
Sybthorpe in his Friendly Advertisement, to the Catholics of Ireland, Dublin
1623. cap. 7. 8. page 153. to 214. Master Adams in his Churches Glory, on
Hebr. 12. 23. page 65. to 90. Master Elnathan Parre in his Grounds of
Divinity, Edit. 4. London 1622. page 281. to 309. Master Robert Yarrow; in his
Sovereign comfort for a troubled conscience, London 1619 cap. 38. 29. page
352. etc. Godly and learned Master Paul Bayne, in his Commentary on Ephesians
1. London 1618. page 64. to 256. Doctor Griffith Williams, in his Delights of
the Saints, London 1622. page 7. to 70. Master John Downame, in his Sum of
sacred Divinity, lib. 2. cap. 1. page 283. to 310. cap. 6. page 399. Master
Humphery Sydenham, in his Jacob and Esau, or Election and Reprobation, preached
at Paul's Cross, March 4. 1622. London 1627. Master John Frewen, in his Grounds
of Religion, London 1621. Quaest. 13. page 278. 279. 280. Learned Doctor
Francis White, now Bishop of Norwitch, in his Orthodox, London 1624. page 105.
108. and in his Conference with Fisher, page 49. to 55. Godly and painful
Master Byfield, in his Treatise of the Pr^mises, cap. 13. page 386. 387. and in
his Exposition on the Collossians cap. 3. ver. 12. page 75. Doctor Sclater
Sermon at Paul's Cross, 1609. on Hebr. 6. 4. 5. Exposition on I. Epistle of the
Thessalonians, cap. 1. ver. 5. page 39. 40. cap. 5. ver. 9. 10. page 438. to
455. ver. 24. page 556. 557. Exposition on Epistle 2. cap. 1. ver. 10. p. 53.
54. Add we as a Corrollarie and Conclusion to all these, the Resolution of our
eminent Dort Divines: to wit, Doctor Carlton late Bishop of Chichester: Doctor
Dauenat, now Bshop of Salisbury, Doctor Goade, Doctor Ward, Lady Margarets
Professor in Cambridge, and Doctor Belcankwell Deane of Rochester, which
concurres with this our Position in terminis, condemning the contrary as
crronious and haereticall, as the English Synod of Dort approved of by King
James, Article 1. and 2. throughout. Doctor Wards Suffragium Brittanorum,
London 1627. Articulus 1. and 2. together with the Synod it self, Printed in
folio, Article 1. 2. Theologorum magnae Brittanniae Sententia, do at large
declare. Thus has this our present Position been constantly maintained as the
undoubted truth and doctrine of our Church, by all the fore-quoted Authors,
from the beginning of Reformation to the present Reign of our gracious King
Charles, not one approved Author of our Church (to my knowledge) so much as
once oppugning it. King Charles.
How this Assertion has been justified as the received Doctrine of out Church
since his Majesty's happy Reign: the Examination of Master Montagues Appeal
by Reverend Bishop Carlton, cap. 3. 4. with the joint Attestation of him and
all our forenamed Dort Divines, thereto annexed under all their hands, page
26. Doctor Ward his S^ffragium Brittanorum, and Concio ad Clerum London 1627.
Bishop Dauenate his Expositio Epistolae Pauli ad Collossenses, Cantabrigiae,
1627. page 117. 118. 119. 171. 173. 390. 391. Doctor Goade, and Doctor Daniel
Featly, in their Pelagius Rediuiuus parallel. 1. sect. 3. 5. Parallel 2. sect.
cap. 2. 1. Doctor Featly in his 2. Parallel, London 1626. page 1. to 20. Master
Henry Burton, in his Plen to an Appeal, page 39. to 60. and in his Truth
triumphing over Trent. London 1629. cap. 17. Master Yates, in his Ibicad
Caesarem, cap. 8. 9. 10. Master Wotton in his Dangerous Plot Discovered, cap.
20. Master Francis Rouse, in his Doctrine of King James. page 1. to 25. And my
own Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate, Edit. 2. page 6. to 23. can See
the Authors quoted in the 2. and 3. Thesis next ensuing, as punctual to this
purpose.
abundantly testify since therefore this first Anti-Arminian Position has
been always thus constantly, unanimously, and vncontrolably maintained by all
those several Martyrs, Praelates, Doctors, and approved Writers; in all the
successiue Reigns of these 6. English Monarchs, from the beginning of
Reformation to this present, oppugning its opposite Arminian Thesis, as
erroneous, and repugnant to the received Doctrine of our English Church, we may
safely embrace it, yeaestablish it as the undoubted Doctrine of the Church of
England.

For the second of these Anti-Arminian Positions, touching the freeness of
Gods Election, and its in-dependancy on faith, or will, or works, or
perseverance, or endeavors, or any other condition, or praeuious disposition in
the persons elected: it is undoubtedly and manifestly warranted, by the
express words of our 13. and 17. Articles. Of the 2. Article of Lambheth: of
the 14. Article of Ireland: of our Common Prayer Book, and Homelies: of the
forecited Cathechisme and Quaestions, figures Anti-Arminian Assertion, 2. the
constant proved to be and received Doctrine of the Church of England.
which have all relation to it: of the Synod of Dort. Article 1. and of Barrets
Recantation in the Latin coppie, section 6. where our 17. Article is verbatim
recited.

To these I shall add the concurrent, plenary and copious attestation Henry
the 8.
of Master William Tyndall Martyr, in his Parable of the wicked Mammon, page
70. 75. 78. 80. 88. 90. in his Answer to Master Moors Dialogue p. 259.
Answer to his 2. Book, cap. 3. page 293. Answer to his 4. Book, cap. 10.
page 329. cap. 11. page 331. 332. 337, in his Pathway into the holy Scriptures,
page 380. and in his Exposition on the first Epistle of John, cap. 3. page 410.
412. cap. 4. page 416. 417. 419. Of Master John Frith Martyr, in his Mirror to
know thy self, page 84. 85. in his Declaration of Baptism, page 92. 93. Of
Doctor Barnes a learned Martyr, in his Treatise, What the Church is, page 246.
and that Free Will of her own strength can do nothing but sin, page 274.
277. 278. 279. Of Master John Harrison in his Yet about at the Romish Fox,
Zuricke 1543. In the days of King Henry the VIII. Edwa. the 6.
Of learned Peter Martyr once Professor of Divinity in the University of
Oxford, Commentary on the Romans 8. page 532. 533. 534. c. 9. page 700. to
714. in cap. 11. page 869. and Loci Communes Classis 3. cap. 1. sect. 11. and
16. to 27. Of famous Martin Bucer once Divinity Reader in the University of
Cambridge, Commentary on Romans 9. ver. 11. to 27. and on Romans 11. 4. 5. 6. Of
Master Hugh Latimer Martyr, Bishop of Worcester, in his Sermon on the third
Sunday after Epiphanie, fol. 312. and on the Sunday called Septuagesima fol.
325. 326. 327. Of a Book entitled the Sum of holy Scriptures, by Stephen
Garret (as most suppose) Printed 1547. in the 2. year of King Edward the VI.
cap. 6. Of Thomas Beacon a Divinity Professor, afterward a Martyr, in his
Sickmans Salve, London 1580. page 412. 413. 414. Of learned Master John Hooper
Bishop and Martyr, in his Declaration of the 10. Commandments, Epistle to the
Reader, written November 5. 1549. London 1588. Of Master John Bradford Martyr,
in his Brief Sum of the doctrine of Election and Praedestination, a
punctual Treatise to our praesent purpose, and in this Letter recorded by
Master John Fox in his Book of Martyrs, page 1505. Col. 1. Queen Mary
Of John Careless, and Master Woodman godly Martyrs, Master Fox in his
Martyriologe, London 1596. page 1742. Col. 2. l. 40. 60. and page 1809. 1810.
Col. 1. in the days of persecuting Queen Mary. Queen Elizabeth.
Of Master John Veron, in his Fruitful Treatise of Praedestination, and his
Apology for the same, dedicated to Queen Elizabeth. Of Master John Fox in his
Martyriologe, page 1505. 1506. Of Reverend Deane Nowel, in his Cathechisme on
the Creed, Why we call God Father, and of the holy Catholic Church. Of Master
Thomas Palfryman Treatise of heavenly Philosophy, lib. 1. cap. 7. Of Master
Robert Caundish, in The Image of Nature, and Grace, fol. 8. fol. 45. to 57.
cap. 9. fol. 100. to 110. Of Master James Price his Fan of the Faithful,
Epistle to the Reader, and cap. 1. 2. 14. Of Master Robert Hutton Sum of
Divinity, Lond^n 1565. cap. Of Grace and of Praedestination. Of godly Master
Edward Deering Lecture 9. and 27. on the Hebrews. Of Master John North-brooke,
The ^^ore man's Garden, cap. 1. and 18. Of Master Arthur G^rney, A fruitful
Dialogue between Reason and Religion, fol. 39. to 47. Of Master A^wicke his
Meditations upon Gods Monarchy, and the Devils Kingdom, cap. 6. 7. of
incomparable M Hooker Discourse of Justification. sect 29^ Of Master Anthony
Anderson. A goldly Seemon of Sure Comfort, page 23. to 27. Of Master Thomas
Sparks, his Confortable Treatise, How a man may be assured in his own
Conscience of his ^lection. Of Reverend Bishop Babington Sermon at Paul's Cross
1590. part 1. and 3. Of profound and rea^^ Doctor Fulke, So is he styled by ^.
Hall. Epist. decad^ 1. Epist. 7.
that Hammer of Haer tickes and Ch^mpion of truth: Together with Master Thomas
Carth w^^ght Notes on Romans 9. sect. 2. 3. 5. and on 2. Peter ^. sect. 2. Of
Bartim us Andreas Sermon 2. on (...) 5. page 64. 65. 66. Of learned Doctor
Matthew Ha^^on (...) ^^shop of York, De Electione and Rep^obatione Commentatio:
to whom I might add Reverend Doctor Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury, and
all those other learned Praelates, Doctors, and grave Dr^ines, who composed the
Articles of Lambet^, an^ Barrets Recantation, fore-ci^ed. O solid Doctor
Whitakers B. B. Hall Epist Decad 1. Epist. 7.
whom no man ever (...) rence, or heard without wonder. C^gnea Cantio page 2 to
18. Of profound Master William Perkins. Of the Order and causes of Election and
Reprobati^n^ cap. ^ (...) 51. Tom 1. page 16. 95. to 114. ^xpositio^ (...)
Creed, page 277. to 299. A Treatise of (...) Tom. 2. page 606. to 641.
Exposition on lude, (...) page 516. 517. Of Master Greenham. A Treatise of
(...) sednesse, page 207. Of Doctor Robert Some (...) of Praedestination, and
Tractatus De Tribus Qua^t^on^bu^ Quaest. 1. and 3. Of Master John Hill Life
euerla^^^^^ (...) page 526. 527. 528. in the Reign of blessed Elizabeth (...)
our late learned Sovereign K. James. Conference at Ha^to^ Court, page 43.
Where his Majesty expressly delivers his Royal Resolution of this point in
these puctuall ^earmes: Praedestination and Election, depends not upon any
qualities, actions, or works of man, which be mutable, but of Gods eternal
and immutable Decree and purpose: in which Resolution he constantly continued
till his death; as his Commentary on the Lords Prayer, and the Revelation: his
Declaration against Vorstius, his Approbation of the Synodicall Resolutions,
and Conclusions at Dort, and his Conference with two of our English Divines,
about a month before his death, newly published by Doctor Daniel Featly, page
31. 32. will fully evidence. Of laborious and learned Doctor Willet Commentary
on Romans 8. Controversy, 16. 17. 18. cap. 9. Controversy 7. 8. 10. cap. 11.
Controversy 3. Synopsis papismi, page 881. 904. to 908. 918. to 922. Of
eminent and incomparable Doctor Reinolds Thesis, 4. and Apologia Thesium, sect.
14. to 23. of Master Thomas Bell in his Downfall of Popery, London 1608.
Article 5. page 61. in his Catholic Triumph, London 1610. cap. 9. page 244.
to 448. Of learned Doctor Robert Abbos, late Bishop of Salisburie, Lectura 1.
De Gratia and Perseuerantia Sanctorum, sect. 3. De Veritate Gratia Christi,
July 8. 1615. sect. 12. to the end. Octobris, 15. 1615. sect. 5. 6. 7. 8.
Oration 4. eodem Anno Octobris 29. sect. 6. Animaduersio in Thampsoni Diatribam,
cap. 4. 5. Of Master Thomas Rogers Analysis on the 17. Article Proposition 5.
Of Doctor Field, Of the the Church, lib 1. cap. 1. to 7. Of Master Samuel
Hieron Abridgement of the Gospel in his works, part 1. page 104. 105. The
worth of the water of life, page 203. 204. The spiritual Sonship, page 370
371. Of Doctor John White Way to the true Church Digressio 41. sect. 43. 44.
45. 49 Defense of the way, cap. 21. 25. 38. sect. 6. 10. to 16. Sermon at Paul's
Cross, sect. 8. Of Doctor Francis White, now Bishop of Norwitch in his
Orthodox, cap. 8. Of Doctor Crakenthorpe in his Sermon of Praedestination. Of
Doctor Ames Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem Artic. 1. and 2. Of Doctor
Griffith Williams Delights of the Saints, part 1. page 68. 69. 70. 93. Or
Doctor Sclater Sermon at Paul's Cross 1^09. An Exposition on the Thessalonians
lately published, cap. 5. v. 9. 10. page 438. to 455. on Epistle 2. cap. 1.
ver. 11. page 67 cap. 2. verse 13. page 178. to 190. Of Master Elnathan Parre
Grounds of Divinity, Edit. 4. page 285. to 341. Of Master Draxe, in his Wolds
Resurrection, page 3. 78. 110. Of Master Samuel Crook Guide to Godliness,
sect. 4. and 17. Of Mast 1 John Downame Sum of Divinity lib. 2. cap 1. and
6. Of Master Paul Baine Commentary on Ephesians 1. page 71. to 150. where this
point is largely handled. Of Master Elton and Master Randall in their Sermons
on Romans 8. 29. 30. Of Doctor Boys Whit^unday Evening prayer page 940. to
944. in his works. Of Master Robert Yarrow Sovereign Comfort for a troubled
Conscience, cap. 28. to the end of cap. 36. Of Doctor Benefield De Sanctorum
perseuerantia, lib. 2. cap. 18. 20. Of Master Humfry Sydenham, his Jacob and
Esan^ preached at Paul's Cross 1622. part 1. Of Sir Christopher Sybthorpe, in
his friendly Advertisement to the praetended Catholi^kes of Ireland, cap. 7. 8.
Of eminent and acute Doctor Prideaux Lecture Oxontae in Comitijs, Anno 1616. De
absoluto Decreto. Of Master Nathaniel Bifield in his Treatise of the Promises,
cap. 11. 13. Exposition on the Colossians, cap. 3. ver. 12. page 74. 75. Of
Master Thomas Wilson Exposition on Romans 9. ver. 11. 12. Of incomparable
Doctor See his Religion professed by the ancient luth, p. 8. 9. accordingly.
Usher, now Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, his Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge of Free Will, page 464. to 492. With all our famous Dort
Divines, Synod of Dort Arcicle 1. i^ the Reign of famous King James. ^ O^
Reverend and learned Bishop Carlton Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal,
cap. 3. 4. Of learned Doctor Dauenat Bishop of Salisburie, Expositie Epistolae
^aul^ ad Colossenses, cap. 3. ver. 12. page 390. 391. Of solid Doctor Ward,
Concio ad Clerum Cantabrigiae, Ian. 12. 1625. page 30. to 33. Of acute Doctor
Featly, his 2. Parallel, page 1. to 14. and in his and Doctor Thomas Goads
joint Pelaguos Rediuiuu^. Of Master Henry Burton Plea to an Appeal, page 39.
to 71. Truth triumphing over Trent, cap. 17. Of Doctor John Bastwicke, Elenchus
Religionis Papisticae, cap. 8. 9. and 11. Of Master Yates Ibis ad Caesarem,
part 1. cap. 6. 7. 8. 10. 18. part 2. cap. 1. 2. 3. Of Master Wotton, A
Dangerous plot Discovered, cap. 19. 20. Of Master Francis Rouse. The Doctrine
of King James, page 1. to 25. Of Master Richard Scudder The Christians daily
walk, Edit. 2. London 1628. page 431. 439. 613. 615. Master William Pemble in
his Vindiciae gratiae, page 38. to 44. Of Master Thomas Vicars in his Pusillus
Grex, Oxoniae 1627. Of M. Richard Bernard Rheemes against Rome, p. 311. 312. Of
Master John Barlow Exposition on the 2. Tim. 1. 9. and cap. 2. 19. 20. 21. Of
Doctor Sclater Exposition on the Epistles to the Thessalonians sore-cited. All
these most Reverend, eminent and learned Martyrs, Praelates, Doctors, Divines,
and Writers of our Church, in these their several works and ages, have
punctually and copiously concurred in the unanimous defense and confirmation of
this our second Anti-Arminian Conclusion, oppugni^g, refuting, the contrary
Arminian Position, as Pelagian, Semi-Pelagian, Popish, Arminian, erroneous, and
opposite to the received Doctrine of our Church, not one authorized Author, or
Orthodox Writer of our Church, so much as one dissenting from them: therefore
we may undoubtedly receive it, declare it, and adiudge it, as the established;
resolved, and professed Doctrine of our English Church.

The third Anti-Arminian position proved.
touching the absoluteness, immutabili^ie, and impulsive or primarie cause of
the Decr^e (not of the Act or execution) of Reprobation or Non-election, is
necessarily implied and raised from our 17. Article, as See page 8. 9.
Doctor Whitakers and others have observed: it is fully warranted and proved by
the 1. and 4. Articles of Lambeth, which well explain our 17. Article in this
point, as learned Lect^ra. 1. De Absoluto Decreto. sect. 10 p. 25.
Doctor Prideaux has observed; by the 11. 12. and 14. Articles of Ireland: by
our forenamed Homelies, figures (3) by the Cathechisme of Praedestination
figures (3) by the Synod of Dort, Articles 1. 2. and by the express wor^s of
Barrets Recantation, composed by the University He^ds of Cambridge, section 6.
where our 17. Article is likewise quoted for to warrant it. Henry the 8.
Our learned godly Martyrs in the Regiment of King Henry the VIII. have
suffraged to this Tenent, witness Master William Tyndalls Parable of the
Wicked Mammon, page 80. Col. 2. Answer to Master Moors fourth Book, cap. 10.
page 329. Master John Frith, A Mirror to know thy self, page 84. and learned
Doctor Barnes, That Freewill of her own strenth can do nothing else but sin,
page 270. 271. 274. 276. to 283. where this point is largely handled.

Edw, the 6^.
Our learned Divinity Professors in King Edwards days are full and copious in
this point, witness Peter Martyr in his Comment. in Epist. ad Romanos, cap. 9.
Tiguri 1559. page 697. 718. and Locorum communiuns Classis, 3. cap. 1. sect.
15. 28. to 32. 36. ( Certe Regis auspicijs^ a quae hic ^eges, O^onij
postremoeius tempore docui^ cumque a menon peteretur tantum, ^edessagita^^tur,
vtopu^ extar^t, acquie. i.
being Lectures read in the University of Oxford by King Edwards appointment,
and earnestly desired by diverse of the University for the press, as himself
records in his Epistle Dedicatorie) together with Master Martin Bucer in his
Commentary on the selfsame Chapter, ver. 11 to 24. Whence eminent Doctor
VVhitakers in his Cygnea Cantio, pa. 15. informs us: That Peter Martyr, and
Martin Bucer, of honorable memory, did profess this Doctrine of absolute and
irresp^ctiue Reprobation, in both our famous Universities, and that our Church,
which was most abundantly watered with the fountains of these two eminent
Divines, in the days of King Edward the VI ^^d always hold it since the
restitution of the Gospel to her. This then was the received Doctrine of our
Church in King Edwards days; as our 17. Article which was then composed;
together with our Homelies forequoted will euince; there being no approved
Writer of our Church now extant, that did oppugn it in that age: and should we
begin to doubt it now? If any object that Master John Bradford in his Sum of
the Doctrine of Praedestination and Reprobation; affirms, that our own
wilfulness, sin, and contemning of Christ, are the cause of Reprobation,
therefore this doctrine was not then so generally received: I answer, First,
that Master Bradfords explanation of himself in the subsequent li^es will take
off this objection: For he informs us, that he speaks only of the second
cause of Reprobation (that is of the execution, not of the Decree of
Reprobation) which is only sin, not of the first cause of it, (the thing we
have now in quaestion) which we cannot comprehend, it being the unsearchable
will of God, which we should not search into, further then God does give us
leave in his Word. Secondly, that Master Bradford speaks this only to
silence Reprobates and damned men, aduising them to look first upon their own
sins which bring damnation and Gods hatred on them, not upon Gods secret
Decree of Reprobation, which as it does not impose a necessity of sining upon
men, so it never brings da^^ation on them but for sin: M. Bradford then
speaking only of the actual execution of Reprobation, not of the Decree it
self: of the secondary cause of it, not of the first, which is only the
unsearchable will of God, makes wholly for our present Tenent, not against it.
The selfsame answer may be given to that of Bishop Hooper in his Epistle to
the Christian Reader. praefixed before his Declaration of the Commandments,
where he writes thus: The cause of reiection or damnation is sin in man,
which will neither receive the promise of the Gospel, etc. Where reiection, is
put, for the execution of Reprobation, or actual damnation, (as this
disjunctive or explanatorie conjunction or the cause of reiection or damnation)
and this marginall note: The cause of damnation in man; annexed to it, due
infalliblie demonstrate: of which every man does readily acknowledge sin to
be the only cause: not for the Decree of Reprobation, which has no other
primarie moving or impulsive cause, but Gods mere will and pleasure: these
writers then make wholly for us, not against us, if rightly understood.

This was the constant Tenent and resolution of our eminent Divines in Queen
Elizabeth's Queen Eliz.
days, witness John Veron his Fruitful Treatise of Praedestination, and the
Apology for the same: where it is largely proved, all objections and cauils
against it, being there fully answered: witness Master John Fox his
Martiriologe, page 1506. line 50. Master Thomas Palfryman Treatise of heavenly
Philosophy, cap. 7. Master James Price his Fan of the Faithful, cap. 1. 3.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. Master John North-brooke his Poor man's Garden, cap. 1.
Master Arthur Gurney his Fruitful Dialogue between Reason and Religion, fol.
38. to 42. Master Anwicke his Meditations of Gods Monarchy and the Devils
Kingdom, cap. 6. 7. Learned Doctor Fulke, and Master Cartwright Answer to the
Rhemish Testament Notes, on Romans 9. sect. 2. 3. 5. Master Edward Deering on the
Hebrews, Lecture 9. Reverend and godly Bishop Babington Sermon at Paul's Cross
1590. part 1. and learned Matthew Hutton Archbishop of York, De Electione and
Reprobatione Commentatio: together with Archbishop Whitguift, and all those
learned Praelates, Doctors, and Divines, who composed the Assertions of
Lambheth and Barrets Recantation. Judicious and solid Doctor VVhitakers, in his
Cygnea Cantio, page 3. to 18. Master William Perkins his Treatise of the Order
of causes of Election and Reprobation, cap. 7. 50. 51. Tom. 1. page 16. 95.
114. his Exposition on the Creed^ p. 277. to 299. and Treatise of
Predestination. Tom. 2. page 608. to 641. his Exposition on the Epistle of
Jude, ver. 4. Tom. 3. page 516. 517. and Master John Hills Life everlasting,
lib. 5. p. 599. to 612. where this our praesent Assertion is punctually
maintained.

King James.
Of learned King James himself, Meditation on the Lords Prayer, and Conference
at Hampt^n Court, page 30. 43. Of Doctor Robert Abbot late Bishop of Salisbury,
and Divinity Professor in Oxford, Oration quarta, De Veritate gratiae Christi,
October 1615. sect. 6. Of Doctor John VVhites Way to the Church, Digression 41.
sect. 44. 45. 49. and Defense of the way, cap. 25. sect. 10. to the end, where
this point is learnedly handled. Of Doctor Francis White, now Bishop of
Norwitch, in his Orthodox, cap. 8. paragraph, 1. 2. Of Doctor Crackenthorpe, in
his Sermon of Praedestination. Of Doctor Willet in his Commentary on Romans 8.
Controversy, 16. cap. 9. Controversy, 7. 9. 10. 11. and Synosis Papismi page
881. 882. 913. 920. Of Doctor Field Of the Church-Booke 1. cap. 4. Of Doctor
Ames Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem, Articulus 1. and 2. Of Doctor Benefield
De Perseuerantia Sanctorum, lib. 2. cap. 18. 20. Of Doctor Prideaux De Absolut,
Decreto Lectura 1. Of Master Thomas Wilson Exposition on Romans cap. 9. v. 11.
12. to 27. and cap. 11. ver. 7. Of Master Thomas Rogers Analysis on the 17.
Article, Proposition 4. and 5. Of master Samuel Crook in his Guide ^ect. 4.
and 9 Of Master Elnathan. Parre Gro^^ds of Diuini^^ page 211. to 309. Of Master
Paul ^ayne Commentary on Ephesians 1. page 20. 118. Of Master Thomas D^axe in
hi^ Worlds Resurrection page 3. 78. Of Master Downame in his Sum of
Divinity, Book (...) cap. 1. page 283. to 311. Of Master Christopher
Sybthorp^ his Friendly Admonition to the praetended Catholics of Ireland, cap.
7. 8. where this point is excellently handled. Of Doctor Griffith VVillams his
delights of the Saints page 7. 8. 9. 92. 93. Of Master Humfrey Sydenham in his
Jacob and Esau, or Election and Reprobation^ preached at Paul's Cross: and of
our eminent Dort Divines Synod of Dort. Article 1. and 2. in the days of our
late King James. King Charles.
Of Doctor William Sclater his Exposition upon the first Epistle to the
Thessalonians, cap. 5. ver. 9. 10. page 447. 448. on Epistle 2. cap. 1. ver.
11. page 68. 69. cap. 2. ver. 13. page 183. Of Master Henry Scudder in his
Christians daily Walk, cap. 15. sect. 3. page 432. to 438. Of Doctor John
Bastwicke, Elenchus Religionis Papisticae, cap. 9. page 194. to 198. Of
Reverend Bishop Carlton Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal, cap. 2. 3. Of
Master Henry Burton his Plea to an Appeal, page 46. to 65. and his Truth
triumphing over Trent, cap. 17. Of Bishop Dauenate, Expositio in Epist. Pauli
ad Coloss. page 171. Of Master Francis Rouse, his Doctrine of King James. p. 1.
to 20 Of Doctor Ward, in his Concio ad Clerum, page 37. 38. Of Master John
Yates Ihis ad Caesarem. cap. 1. 2. 7. In the Reign of our now Sovereign King
Charles. The 4th. Ant^ Arminian Conclusion ratified.
All these I say, do fully suffragate to this our Peter Martyr Coment in To.
11. p. 96^. etc. 5. p. 321.
therefore we may embrace it, as the undoubted truth and doctrine of our
Church. He that desires to see more of this point; let him reflect upon all
the Books and Authors fore-quoted in the first and second praecedent
Positions, Romans 11. 5^. 7. c 9. 11. 13 1. 21. 23. 27 29. Mat. 11. 13 15. 16.
Deuteronomy. 10. 15. c. 26. 18. Psalm. 147. 19. 20.
which will plentifully instruct and satisfy him in it.

For the fourth of the recited Anti-Arminian dogmaticall Propositions, against
Universal and sufficient grace; or in plain tearines, against natural
Free Will it self (for this prae^ented grace in truth and substance, is no
other since grace is proper and peculiar unto some, and nature only alike
indifferent and common unto all men, Quicquid natura tradit, and aequale est
omnibus, and statim. Incertum est and inequale quicquid ars tradit, ex aequo
venit quod natura distribuit. Seneca. Epist.
as this universal grace is) It is directly justified and backed by our 9. 10.
13. and 17. Articles, by the express words of the 7. 8. and 9. Articles of
Lambheth, by the 15. 25. 26. and 32. Articles of Ireland: by our Common Prayer
Book passages here recited p. 18. 19. 20. Position 2. which are full and
punctual to this purpose, by our fore-registred Homelies, and Cathechismes
figures (4) By the Synod of Dort Article 3. 4. Add we to these Master William
Tyndal Prologue on Numbers page 16. Prologue on the Romans, p. 41. Parable of
the wicked Mammon, page 65. 70. 74. 90. The Obedience of a Christian man, page
162. An Answer to Master Moors third Book, page 306. Answer to his fourth
Book, cap. 2. page 321. cap. 10. page 328. 329. 337. A Pathway into the holy
Scriptures page 380. 381. 382. 384. Exposition on the first Epistle of John.
cap. 2. page 401. cap. 4. page 416. 417. Master John Prith, A Mirror to know
thy self, page 83. 84. 45. Doctor Barnes, That Free Will of her own strength
can do nothing but sin, page 266. to 280. Master John Harrison, Yet a cause
at the Romish Fox, fol. 61. 62. 63. In King Henry the VIII. his Reign Edward 6.
Stephen Garret, The sum of the Scripture, cap. 7. Printed 1547. Peter
Martyr, Loci Communes, Classis 3. cap. 1. sect. 29. 38. to 48. Commentarius in
Romanos, 5. p. 323. 328. 329. 330. in cap. 9. page 720. to 730. in cap. 11.
page 797. 965. 966. Martin B^^er Commentary upon John 5. ver. 44. On Romans 5.
the latter end of the Chapter, and on Romans 9. Master Hugh Latimer Bishop of
Worcester, Sermon 3. on the Lords Prayer, fol. 134. b. Master John Bradford
Treatise of Election and Free Will: Bishop Hooper a Martyr, Epistle to the
Reader before his Declaration of the ten Commandments, which place makes
wholly for us if rightly understood. Master Beacon his sick man's salve, page
290. Master Richard Caundish his Image of Nature and Grace, cap. 1. 5. 8. 10.
where this point is largely handled. Master Nowels Catechism on the Creed,
part 1. Master John Veron his Fruitful Treatise of Praedestination, fol. 66.
to 85. 110. 111. 112. his Apology for the same, fol. 25. to the end. Master
Thomas Palfryman Treatise of heavenly Philosophy, cap. 7. 8. Master James
Price his Fan of the Faithful, Epistle to the Reader, and cap. 1. 3. Master
Edward Deering on the Hebrews Lecture 10. 14. Master Robert Hutton his Sum
of Divinity, of Free Will. Master John North-brooke his Poor man's Garden,
cap. 1. 4. 5. 6. Doctor Sparks against Albines, cap. 17. page 165. and his
Comfortable Treatise for a troubled Conscience the 4. first leaves. Bartimeus
Andreas Sermon 2. on the Canticles, page 64. to 70. Master John Daniel his
Excellent comfort to all Christians, cap. 2. 3. 4. 5. 7. Master John Anwicke
his Meditations upon Gods Monarchy, and the Devils Kingdom, cap. 6. 7. 10.
11. Master Arthur Gurney his fruitful Dialogue between Reason and Religion,
fol. 13. to 45. Learned Doctor William Whitakers, Aduersus Vniuersalis Gratia
assertores praelectio habitae, Februarij 27. Anno Domini 1594. c^ram
honoratissimis Comitibus Essexio, Salopiensi, Rutlandiensi: illustrissimis
Baronibus DD. Montioy, Burrowes, Compton, Sheafield, Rich: ornatissimis
Equitibus Guil. Bows, Carolus Candish, Robertus Sydney, Georgio Sauil, and
multos generosos, on 2. Tim. 2. 4. Hardouic^ per Thysium 1613. Reuetend Bishop
Babingtons Sermon at Paul's Cross 1591. on John 6. 37. part 1. Doctor Fulke and
Master Cartwright, Answer to the Rhemish Testament, Notes on 1. Tim. 2. sect.
3. on Romans 7. sect. 7. 8. on Romans 9. sect. 3. 7. and sundry other places:
Doctor Fulkes Defense of the English Translations against Martin, cap. 10.
Matthew Hutton Archbishop of York, De Electione and Reprobatione Commentatio.
Doctor Some Tractatus de Tribus Quaestionibus, Quaest. 1. 2. Master Greenham
his 14. Sermon page 355. Godly Instructions, cap. 50. sect. 16. page 757.
Master William Burton his David's Evidence Sermon 4. on Psalm. 4. 12. London
1596. page 83. to 88. Master John Smith his Doctrine of general prayer for all
men. Master William Perkins Of the Order of causes of salvation and damnation,
cap. 54. Tom. 1. page 107. 112. An Exposition on the Creed, page 293. to 299.
Of Gods Free grace, and man's Free Will, page 728. to 743. Babylon the praesent
Church of Rome, point 1. page 558. to 561. Commentary on Galathians 3. Tom. 2.
page 249. 250. Tom 2. 3. p. 249. 250.
cap. 5. page 327. 338. A Treatise of Praedestination, page 621. to 642.
Exposition of Christ's Sermon on the Mount, Tom. 3. page 117. 118. 187. 219.
230. 242. 243. Commentary on Hebr. 11. Tom. 2. 3. page 165. 166. Exposition on
the Revelation, c. 2. ver. 7. page 280. 281. on cap. 3. ver. 4. page 333. 334.
where this point is fully and excellently discussed. Doctor John Hill Life
everlasting, Book 4. Quaest. 4. 5. page 348. 349. 350. In the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. King Iemes.
Doctor Reinolds Apologia Thesium, sect. 12. to 23. Doctor Andrew Willet in his
Excellent Treatise De gratia Universally, where this point is purposely debated:
in his Synosis papismi page 881. to 918. Commentary on Romans 5. Quaest. 38. 39.
and Controversy 23. Master Francis Trigge his true Catholic, cap. 1. page
27. to 44. Doctor Abbot Bishop of Salisbury in his several Lectures De
veritate gratia Christ^, against Arminius and his followers, read in the
Divinity Schools of Oxford, whiles he was there Regius Professor, London
1618. page 15. to 82. Master Thomas Rogers Analysis on Article 10. Proposition
1. 2. 3. Master Samuel Heirons Abridgement of the Gospel page 157. 158. Master
Stock, The Doctrine and use of Repentance, page 169. to 171. Master Paul
Baynes Commentary on Ephesians. 1. page 352. to 380. Doctor John Whites Way to the
Church, Digressio 41. 42. Defense of his way, cap. 25. sect. 10. 15. 16. 17.
Sermon at Paul's Cross, section 8. Doctor Francis White Bishop of Norwitch in
his Orthodox, cap. 9. page 106. 107. 108. Doctor Field of the Church, Book 1.
cap. 4. Doctor Ames Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem Article 2. 3. Doctor
Crakenthorpe in his Sermon of Praedestination. Doctor Dove Bishop of
Peterburrow in his Sermon against Universal grace, on 1. Tim. 2. 4. where he
confutes Huberus. Doctor Prideaux Lectura 3. and 4. De gratia Universally.
Doctor Benefield De Sanctorum Perseuerantia, cap. 18. 20. Doctor Griffith
Williams, his Delights of the Saints page 30. to 42. Master Elton, on
Colossians 1. Edit. 2. p. 87. 88. and on To 8. v. 30. M. Samuel Crook, his
Guide, sect, 8. 9. 10. 12. 18. 19. Doctor Thomas Tailor, on the 32. Psalm,
Epistle to the Reader. M. El^atha^ Parre Grounds of Divinity, page 240. 241.
Master Thomas Wilson, on Romans 3. ver. 10. on cap. 5. ver. 15. 16. 17. on cap.
8. ver. 33. on cap. 9. ver. 16. Master Thomas Draxe, in his Worlds
Resurrection, page 110. 111. Master Sweeper, in his Sermon against Universal
grace. Master Humphrie Sydenham his Jacob and Esau, part 1. 2. 3. Doctor Boys
his Postills 4. Sunday after Easter, page 317. to 320. on Saint Marks Day,
page 685. 686. Master John D^wnams Sum of Divinity, lib 1. cap. 17. lib. 2.
cap. 1. 2. 3. Sir Christopher Syhthorpe, his Friendly Advertisement, etc. cap.
7. 8. together with all our Dort Divines, Article 2. 3. 4. of that Synod, in
the Reign of King James. King Charles.
D. Dauenat Bishop of Salisbury his Expositio ad Epist. Coloss. cap. 1. ver. 5.
page 45. verse 12. page 78. 80. ver. 27. page 171. 172. 173. cap. 2. ver. 3.
page 266. 267. Bishop Carltons Examination of Master Montagues Appeal, cap. 2.
3. 4. Doctor Goade his Pelagius Rediuinus. Doctor Ward, his Concio ad Clerum.
Doctor Featly his 2. Parallel, page 14. to 20. Learned Bishop Vsh^rs Answer to
the Jesuits Challenge, page 464. to 492. Of the Religion professed by the
ancient Irish, page 7. 8. Master Richard Bernard, his Rheemes against Rome,
Proposition 29. page 247. 248. Master Francis Rouse, his Doctrine of King
James, page 25. to 39. Doctor Sclaters Exposition on the first of the
Thessa-Ionians page 300. 301. 438. to 455. on Epistle 2. cap. 1. ver. 3. page
5. 6. ver. 10. page 53. 54. cap. 2. ver. 13. page 180. to 191. Master Anthony
Woottons Defense of Master Perkins, cap. of Free Will, and A Dangerous plot
discovered, etc. cap. 7. 8. 20. Master Vicars, in his Pusillus Grex. Master
Yates in his Ibis ad Caesarem, part. 2. cap. 7 page 157, etc. Master William
Pemble, in his Vinditiae Gratiae. page 54. to 112. where this point is largely
and excellently discussed. Master Henry Burton his Plea to an Appeal, page 65.
to 90. and Truth triumphing over Trent, cap. 17. to which I might add all
those learned Authors of our Church, who have copiously discussed the point of
Free Will, with all the Authors in the three former Positions, and my own
Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate, page 9. to 38. All these, I say, do
fully testify, that there is no such Free Will, or universal and sufficient
grace derived unto all men, by which they may repent, believe, and be saved if
they will themselves.

Now because this universal Grace, or Free Will in man, is the only center
upon which the whole fabric of Arminianisme is erected; by the undermining of
which alone, the whole superstruction, both of Pelagianisme, Popery,
Arminianisme, and Libertinisme, are utterly subverted, I will briefly oppugn
it with these several atheistical, blasphemous, absurd, and dangerous
consequences, which will necessarily result and issue from it; and those
conditional and secondary Decrees of Praedestination which are built upon it.

See Romans 8. 29. 30. c. 11. 5. 6. 7. Ephesians. 1. 3. to 13. 2. Tim. 1. 9. c. 2. 19.
1. These. 5. 9. 2 These. 2. 13. 14.
no vocation, no justification, no faith, no salvation; Praedestination being
the original fountain of all these, and the maine foundation both of grace
and glory, as the Scriptures, and all Writers teach us.

Ephesians 1. 9. 11.
works and orders all things, (as the Scriptures certify us) according to the
counsel of his own will, not according to the bent and inclination of our
wills: by which it subordinates God to man, and subjects his aeternall purposes
and unalterable Decrees, to sundry mutabilities, to his dishonor and our great
discomfort.

Thirdly, it makes man an independent creature, and Rom 11. 36. Col. 1. 16.
Reu. 4. 11. Pro. 16 4. 4.
whose only will and pleasure he was at first created,) as if God were made
for man, not man for God.

Fourthly, it constitutes an absolute and independent

Fifthly, it dethrones and pulls God out of heaven, in Job. 9. 5. to 13. Psalm.
115. 3. Psalm. 135. 6. Dan. 2. 21. c. 4. 25. 35. c. 5. 2^. 23. Pro. 22 1. Jonah
1. 14. Isay 46. 10. Reu. 4. 11.
to dispose of them at his own free will. Had man a freedom or universal
grace implanted in him, to convert, to save, or damn himself at his pleasure:
Gods absolute supremacy over him, ^his liberty to save, or not to save him,
would then be quite abolished: then men might save themselves when God would
damn them, yea, damn themselves when God would save them: an atheistical and
blasphemous consequent, which defeates Gods power and supremacy in the
ordering and disposal of his creatures, both at once.

Haback 1. 16 Mal. 1. 2. Psa. 44. 3. Isa. 63. 5
thank himself, not God, who does no further save him then he saues himself.

Deu. 7. 6. c. 14. 1. c. 28. 16. Psalm. ^. 5. 4. Psa. 1. 7. 19. 20 2. Sam 7. 8.
to 29. 1. Chr. 17. 21. 22. 23. Ester 6. c. 6. 7 8. 9. Mat. 13 11 c. 24. 40. 41.
To 9 11. to 28. c. 11. 4. to 13. c. 8. 28. 29. 30 John 6. 37 c. 10. 4. to 18.
26. 27. c 17. 6 to 13. Ephesians. 1. 2. to 1^ 2. These. 2. ^. 13. Titus^ 1. 2. Tim. 1.
9 c. 2. 19.
grace is such a special favor as is peculiar to some few: hence Election,
Vocation, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, Love, Faith, Hope,
Repentance, Conversion; hence worldly honors, favors, and praeferments, are
styled grace, because they are conferred upon few, not cast promiscuously upon
all: Secondly, in that it makes grace, yea, heaven and salvation, a mere
purchase of our own, not an absolute To. 2. 24. c. 6. 23.
free gift of God, without any relation to, or dependancie on our selves; and
To. 11. c. 6. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. Titus 3. 5. De. gratia, non erit gratia vll^ ^odo
nisi gra^^ ita fuerit omni (...) A^gus^, De peccato. Originis cap. 2^.
so no grace at all. Thirdly, it makes it subordinate and subseruient to our
wills, which are wholly subject to it^ Scepter; and so accounts it for a slave,
where as it is, Mat. 6. 10. Romans 5. 21. Col. 3. 15. See my Perpetuity. p. 203.
204.
a Lord a King, and Monarch for to sway our hearts. Fourthly, in confining the
taking or rejecting of it to times and seasons of our own, when as it John 3.
8. Acts 1. 6. 7, 8.
breaths when and where it lists. Fifthly, in subiecting it to alterations
and changes at our pleasure, where as it is See my Petpetuity.
immouable, and immutable in it self.

Eighthly, it susspends the efficacy, fruit and application Psalm. 31. 15. Dan.
5. 31. Acts 17. 20. 2. Cro. 20. 6. Psa. 44. 3. Deu 9. 4. to 9. Psa. 115. 1. To.
16 39. 2. Cor. 3. 5
all to God, leaving nothing in, or to our selves.

Ninethly, It falsifies and overthrows the whole contents Ephesians. 2. 1. to 7
dead in sins and trespasses, and so unable for to move or help our selves,
unless God quicken us by his grace: that without Christ's special assistance
we are, John 15. 5.
we can do nothing: that Psa. 2. 13.
God must work in us both the will and the deed of his good pleasure: that he
Isay 26. 12.
must work all our works both in us and for us: that 2. Cor. 3. 5.
all our sufficiency proceeds from him: that John 6. 44.
we cannot come unto Christ, except his Father who has sent him draw us: that
he 1. Cor. 4. 7.
only makes us to differ from others: that by 1. Cor. 15. 10.
his grace only we are what we are: and that Pro. 21. 1. Job 9. 12. Dan. 5.
23.
all our hearts and ways are in his hands, to turn them which way soever it
pleases him: and See M. Bernard Rheemes against Rome. p. 247. 10 252
a thousand such like places to this purpose.

Tenthly, it puts all mankind into as good (if not a better) Adam had before
it: since Adam only had a possibility given unto him, August. De Corrept and
gratia. cap. 10. 11. 12.
( posse non peccare) not to sin or fall, unless he listed; and we (if this
prove truth) have all a possibility or power given us, to be saved, not
damned, if we will our selves: and then what great, what real difference
between Adams first estate and ours now? and if no difference, what hurt, what
loss by Adams fall?

Eleuenthly, it makes both faith, repentance, vocation, free power, and so not
the mere donations or Mat. 10. 8. c. 13. 11. Acts. 5. 31. To. 5. 15. 16, 17,
c. ^. 29. 1. Cor. 12. 8. 9 10. Ephesians. 2. 8. c 3. 8. c. 4, 7. Iam. 1. 17. 1. Pet.
5. 10.
free gifts of God, or Gal. 5. 22. 23. Romans 8. 23.
issues of his Spirit, as the Scriptures style them.

Frustra sem. per oramus, si in nostro arbitrio est faccre, quod volumus Heir.
Aduers Pelagianos l. 2. c. 6. 3. See August De Bono Perseu. c. 2. 23.
in vain do we implore that from another, which issues from ourselves: in
vain do we give thanks unto another, for that we have received from our
selves alone, without his special favor or assistance. If then conversion,
faith, repentance, and salvation, are at our our own devotion or command, our
thanks, our prayers for them are but vain.

Thirteenthly, it gives men cause, tobost and glory in themselves alone, (
which overthrows Romans 3. 27. Ephesians. 2. 9.
the end and freedom of Gods grace:) and not to give the praise, and glory of
their whole conversion, and salvation unto God, to whom alone it does belong.

Psalm. 115. 1. Romans 2^ 9. Ephesians. 1. 5, 6, 12. 14. Phil. 1. 11.
Secondly, to all desperate atchieuements and audacious vilanies whatsouer: he
that has yet no truth of grace within him, to restrain him from forecasting
sin, will quickly run into any desperate attempt, or action whatsoever,
upon this false praesumption; that he may praesently of himself repent, and
so be saved after all his sins: Thirdly, to prochrastinate repentance to the
last, and wholly to neglect the means of grace, and all true Christian duties
for the praesent. What is the chief and primarie ground of the common neglect
of means and works of grace, of most men's delaying amendment to their latter
ends, but only this unhappy delusion: that they may undoubtedly believe,
repent, convert, and be saved when they will themselves: he therefore that
maintains this Doctrine of Free Will, or universal and sufficient grace, lets
loose the raines to all profaneness, wickedness, securiti^, and
licenciousnesse, that the hearts of men can harbor.

Fifteenthly, it places all men in an equal balance and Canti. 4. 12.
enclosures of his more special love? to lay them common unto all without
distinction? and so to place the salvation, estates, and spiritual conditions
of all men in an aequipage, which God himself and all Divines, have rancked
into See Mar. 13. the whole chapter. cap. 3. 12. c. 25. 32. to the end. John
11. and 17. 8. 9. 11. chapters. Ephesians. 1. 6.
different orders.

Sixteenthly, it not only takes away repentance and Adam in his first and
purest state, to keep himself from falling, or his soul from ruin, though
he had a power not to sin: needs then must it be impossible for any of the
weak depraved progeny of Adam (who have a Romans 3. c. 5. l 7.
necessity of sinning since his fall) by any general grace or power of their
own, to raise, convert, to keep, or save themselves from endless
condemnation, into which they could not choose but fall had they no supporter
but themselves. Were our graces, portions, salvation, and inheritances in the
tu^^lage or wardship of our wills alone, what flesh, what person could be
saved? Her then that thinks himself secure in his own possession, let him
embrace this Free Will Doctrine, and so perish with it: but let all who would
See Rom 4. 16. John to 27 28. 2. Tim. ^. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 5. 1. Cor. 2. 5. Tunc
nostra cogitatio consirmatur, quando omne quod agimus, quasi supra stabilene
and solid^ ssima^^ petram Domini adiutorio deuolu^mus, eique cuncta, reputamus.
Heirom Aduers. Pelagianos. l. 3. c. 3.
be sure of their own salvation (as it is only, always sure in Gods
custody) quite renounce it, since the undoubted ship wrack and damnation of
mankind, is the inevitable consequence, the only benefit that attends it.



18 See Hierom and Orosius contra Pelagianos. August. De Bono perseuerantiae.
cap. 2. and throughout his 7. Tom. part 2.
that a man may live, and keep himself without sin: For if men have such an
ability of will, or grace, as to convert or change their hearts, whiles they
are held captives under sin and Satan's bondage, which is the greater: See.
To. 5. 8. 9. 10. c. 8. 32. where this argumentation is used.
much more being thus rescued from the power of sin, may they keep
themselves unspotted from it, which is in truth the less: if men may master
sin in its greatest strength, much more may they totally suppress it being
wounded.

1. Sam. 2. 25 Prou. 16 4. Mal. 1. 2. Isay 6. 9. 10. Mat. 13. 11. to 18 c. 7.
13. 14. c. 20. 16. Luke 16. 23. 24. Acts 14 16. To. 9. 11, to 30. c. 11. 2. to
11. John 17. 12. Jude 4.
this Scripture, this experience witness; and if it were not so, I see no
reason but all men should be saved, all converted, since Isay 14. 24. 27. Number.
23. 19. 20. Psalm. 33. 11. To 9 11. 1. Tim. 2, 19.
Gods Decrees are true, and never fall to ground for want of execution: Either
therefore we must admit an universal Election of all men unto life, (a
dream, an haeresie long since exploded by all reformed Churches,) or disclaim
this strange Chymera of universal grace, a monster in Divinity: else we must
make grace more ample then Gods Decree of grace, and so the Effectus ^onest
Latior sua causa.
effect more general then its cause, which were a gross absurdity.

toto genere from it; as an unnatural and strange production, as Mat 7. 16.
togather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles: Ezen. 16. 44.
Such as the mother is, such is the daughter, such as the cause is, such is the
effect; Mat. 7. 17. 18.
such as the tree is, such is the fruit; that John 3. 6.
which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that only is spirit which is borne
of the spirit: Either then this universal grace is saving grace, (which cannot
be, for then all men should be saved by it, yea, grace it self Non ^^^tingit
idem per idem, and esse simul and fieri, nihil est ergo sua ipsius causa.
Cleme^, Alexandrinus. Strom. lib. 7. p. 161.
against all rules of reason, should be the cause and author of it self), or
else it cannot be the author or procurer of true saving grace which so far
differs from it both in kind, and eminency.

Furthermore, it baptizeth man's natural freedom with the name of grace: For
what else is universal grace, but the Quaere. Whether this universal
sufficient grace, (which I take to be nothing else, but a power or faculty in
the will to regenerate and transform the soul, or to embrace Christ Jesus,
and apply his merits when the Gospel offers them) be a native and inherent
faculty of the will? or only an aduentitious, acquisite, or infused quality,
not borne, not produced with it? If the former only; it is verily then no
grace but nature: if the latter, then it must either be an acquisite,
deriuatiue, or an infused quality. If acquisite either by art, or industry of
our own; then it can be neither universal, nor sufficient, it being
proportionably, originally on none; acquisitely in few, since few men seek it,
fewer purchase it: If deriuatiue: not from our Parents, not from Adam; for then
it were not grace, but nature: not from Christ or from his Spirit, for they
derive John 15. 4. 6. c 17. 2. c. 6. 53. 57, 58, c. 11. 25, c. 14. 19. To. 6,
8. Gal, 2, 20, c. 5, 25. 1. Pet. 2, 4. 5. 1 John 5. 11. 12. 13. De spirit^
Christi non. viuit nisi corpus Christi, quod est ecclesia. August. Tract. 26.
in Johan. and Epist. 50.
grace only to their living and believing members, not generally unto all: and
that by means, which are neither common nor effectual unto all: not
immediately: If by infusion only without means, I pray what Scripture proves
it? if any, then show it: if none, let none believe it; But if it be thus
generally infused, then tell me how or when: whether with the soul, or after
it? whether in the embrio, infancy, childhood, youth, or riper age of men? If
with it, then certainly as a native faculty conjoined with the soul,
vndistinct from that whereby it wills all common civil things: and so a
natural power, not a grace: If after it, I dare presume no prying Arminian can
tell me, how, or when. If in riper years, in youth, or in childhood only:
then infants want it who depart this life, and so it is not universal: If in
the very womb or infancy of all men, then God bestows it when and where it is
but vselesse, and so does things in vain: since infants (especially those that
dye before discretion) cannot tell how to act it, or to embrace salvation by
it: If in neither of all these seasons, then not at all, and so there is no
such grace; all which being laid together, will evidently discover this
Pelagian, Popish, and Arminian grace, to be in truth mere nature, and so
unable of it self to change men's hearts, to engender saving grace, or
purchase, or embrace salvation, as our Arminians, Papists, and Pelagians dream.

(...) 21.
and then Christ is dead in vain, yea Faith and Scriptures are mere
superfluous trifles, since men may well be save though they want them: a most
atheistical and blasphemous consequent.

Moreover, It fathames the very bottomless depths, Paul unto his To 9. 19. to
26.
Nonplus, and struck him with such an amazing admiration, as forced him to
cry out: Romans 11. 33, O altitudo! Petrus negat, Latrocredit! O altitudo!
Quaeris rationem? ego expauescam altitudinem: It Is ratiocinare, ego mirer: Tu
disputa, ego credam. Altitudine^ video, ad pro funditatem non peruenio Paulus
dicit inscrutabilia sunt indicia eius, and tu scrutarivenisti? Hic dicit,
Inuestiga biles su^t viae eius; and tu inuestigare venisti? si inscrutabilia
scrutari, and inuestigabilia vestigare venisti, creed, iam perijsti. August De
Verbis Apost. Ser. 20. Vid. lb.
O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. It renders an
apparent cause besides the absolute and disposing will of God, why one man is
praedestinated to salvation, not another: and so vnvailes and nullifies the
sublimest, the supremest mystery of Divinity which all ages have hitherto
adored with higest, tacit and dreadful admira^ion, since no man can too
curiously, diue into it, without the hazard of a fatal praecipice.

Lastly, it would make the most of all our Arminian sticklers, (who are
generally the very proudest, the sloathfullest, the most ambitious, envious,
lascivious, voluptuous and prophanest of our Clergy, making no conscience for
to feed their flocks, with which they are seldom resident, but when some
tithes or gains come in) exceeding obstinate and graceless sinners: For if
they have this power to convert, repent, and leave their sins (as they
praetend they have:) why are their actions and their lives so vicious? Tu ipse
qui perfectam and Deo aequalem in hominibus iustitiam iactitas, and peccatorem
te esse confiteris, responde mi^i; velis, an nolis carere peccato? sivis, quare
iuxta sententiam tua^ non imples quod desideras? sin autem non vis,
conte^ptorem to praeceptorum Dei esse demonstras. Si contemptor, vtique and
peccator, and peccatori dixit Deus, quare tu enarras iustitias meas etc.
Heirom. Aduers. Pelag. Ad Ctesiphontem. cap. 4.
Is it for want of power to reform? that contradicts their Doctrine, and traps
them in a lie: Is it for want of will alone, (as certainly it must be, if
their position prove but true?) this makes them desperate, and contemptuous
sinners, yea, open rebels against God, unfit to take his word or name within
their lips, in that they hate to be reformed when they have strength and power
to reform themselves: either therefore let them now reform their lives, or
proclaim themselves professed rebels to their God, or else renounce this
Free Will Error, which will ineuitablie make them such.

To Wind up all in brief, if there be such a freedom of will, or sufficiency
of grace imparted unto all men, whereby they may be saved if they will, why
then were not the means of grace and salvation from the very Creation to this
present, Acts 13. 16. Psa. 147. 19. 20
alike imparted unto all, without which it was impossible for them to be saved?
yea, why then are not all, or most men saved? Is it because they will not; or
because they cannot save, convert, or help themselves? If the latter of these
two, you then yield up the cause; if the former only, because they will not: I
answer, Potest, inquit, esse sine peccato, potest esse perfectus si voluerit:
quis enim Christianorum non vult esse sine peccato? aut quis perfectione^
accusat, sisufficit ^i velle; and statim sequitur posse, si velle praecesserit?
nullusque Christianorum est qui nolit esse sine peccato: omnes ergo sine
peccato erunt, quia vtique omnes cupiunt esse sine peccato. Heiro^. Aduers.
Pelagianos. Ad Ctesiphontem. cap. 4.
there is no man whatsoever, so desperately prodigal of his own soul, or so
desirous of damnation, but he unfeignedly desires to be saved, and would
certainly save himself at last, if his power to effect it, were aequall to
his will: therefore it is not want of will, but power, that berieues them of
salvation: If you believe not this, believe the truth him self, who speaks
it: Luke 13. 2^.
many (says he) shall strive to enter and shall not be able: But admit it
rests thus merely in men's wills: from whence then springs this inaequalitie in
their wills, that one man is thus unwilling to be saved, when as another wills
it? Is it because one man's will is naturally more corrupted and depraved then
another? this were to deny either the universality or the aequality of
original corruption, which is aequally derived unto all men in the selfsame
measure, without any difference of degrees. Is it because there is an
insufficiency or inaequality in the grace you speak of, to check and conquer
the obstinacy, the perverseness of men's wills? then there is no such sufficient
universal grace as you praetend, since it is not sufficient or alike in all:
Natura non suscipit mag^^ and minus.
Certainly if men's wills were aequall, and their graces aequall, their desire,
their accomplishment of aeternall happiness and salvation, (which is
essential and connatural to the wills of men) would be proportionable, since
Idem qua ide^ semper facit idem. Kecker. System. Log. lib. 1. c. 14. p. ^ 24.
the selfsame things in the same degrees, admit no aequalitie in their
genuine and native operations: And if so, then all men by this doctrine should
be saved, and so Gods aeternall Justice, Hell, and Devils were in vain. But of
this point enough if not too much, since I intend not here to argue it, but to
prove it, the undoubted Doctrine of our English Church, which I have already
done.

The fifth of our Anti-Arminian Theses, The fifth Anti-Arminian Position proved
touching the Articles: by the 1. 3. 4. 7. and 8. Articles of Lambheth: by the
13. 14. 15. 16. 31. and 32. Articles of Ireland: by the Book of Common prayer:
Position 3. see here page 20. 21. by the Homelies: by the Cathechisme of Edward
the sixth, by the Quaestions and Answers concerning Praedestination: figures
(5) and by the Synod of Dort, Article 2. 3.

The several witnesses which auerre it under their hands and seals are Master
William Tyndall, Henry the 8.
Parable of the wicked Mammon, page 70. 72. 73. 79. 80. Col. 2. The Obedience
of a Christian man, page 130. 131. Prologue to the Exposition upon the 5. 6.
and 7. of Matthew, page 185. Col. 1. An Answer to sir Thomas Moors Dialogue,
page 257. 292. An Answer to Master Moors 3. book, page 307. Answer to his
4. book, cap. 11. page 333. A Pathway into the holy Scriptures, page 380. 382.
Exposition on the first Epistle of John, cap. 2. page 394. 401. A Treatise upon
Signs and Sacraments, page 443. Master John Friths Answer unto Rastals
Dialogue, page 10. 14. 22. An Answer unto sir Thomas Moore, page 48. 49.
Answer to Rastals 3. chapter, page 71. A Declaration of Baptism, page 93. The
mind of Saint Paul on the 10. chapter of the 1. of the Corinthians, page 161.
Doctor Barnos What the Church is, page 243. to 247. That Free Will of her own
strength can do nothing but sin, page 278. in the days of King Henry the
VIII. Edw. the 6.
Master Hugh Latimer Bishop of Worcester in his Sermons, fol. 125. 126. 164.
165. 178. 208. 215. 224. 270. 288. 295. 297. b. (a pertinent and full place)
299. 308. 323. 326. 327. Stephen Garret, The Sum of the holy Scripture, cap.
7. Peter Matyr, Locorum Communium Classis 3. cap. 1. sect. 44. 45. 46. 47.
Commentar. in Romanos cap. 5. page 266. to 274. 328. 329. cap. 9. page 708.
726. to 730. cap. 11. page 866. Master Martin Bucer, Comment. on Romans 5. and
11. and on John 10. page 17. Bishop Hooper Epistle to the Reader before this
Declaration on the 10. Commandments, a place which some do wrest to the
contrary conclusion: but let all Episcopal mistakers of this godly Bishop,
read his Declaration on the 8. Commandment fol. 75. 76. and then they must
either disclaim this Author, or subscribe to our Conclusion. Master Thomas
Beacon, his Sick man's salve page 235. to 259. 273. 274. to 279. 413. 414. 425.
426. See the Epistle to Bishop Latimer his Sermons.
John Careless Martyr, a dear friend of Bishop Latimers, Book of Marryrs,
page 1742. Col. 2. number, 50. Queen Eli.
Master John Fox, his first Sermon at Paul's Cross, fol. 12. Master Richard
Caundish his Image of Nature and grace, cap. 7. 8. 10. Reverend Deane Nowels
Cathechisme on the Creed, part 1. 2. 3. Master John Veron his Treatise of
Praedestination, fol. 60. to 112. and his Apology for the same, fol. 25. to
the end. Master Palfryman Treatise of heavenly Philophie, Epistle Dedicatorie,
and lib. 1. cap. 7. 8. Master James Price his Fan of the faithful, cap. 1.
to 10. where this point is largely debated. Master Edward Deering Lecture 9.
and 27. on the Hebrews. Master Robert Hutton his Sum of Divinity, of the
Church, and of life everlasting. Master Thomas Sparks his Comfortable Treatise
for a troubled Conscience, the 4. first leaves. Master John Daniel his
Excellent Comfort against Calamity, cap. 5. 6. 7. 8. Doctor Fulke and Master
Cartwright, Notes on the Rhemish Testament, on 1. Tim. 2. 4. sect. 3. 4. on
cap. 3. sect. 10. and in the places fore-quoted in the former Conclusion.
Master John Anwicke, Meditation on Gods Monarchy and the Devils Kingdom, cap.
6. 7. 10. 11. Master William Burton in his Sermon of of the Churches love.
Master Arthur Gurney his Fruitful Dialogue between Reason and Religion, page
40. 45. Godly Bishop Babington, An Exposition of the Catholic Faith, page
232. 239. Sermon at Paul's Cross 1591. on John 6. 37. D. Whitakers Aduersus
Gratiam vniuersalem. Lectura 1594. and Cygnea Cantio, page 14. Doctor Robert
Some, Tractatus De tribus Quaest. Quae. 1. Master William Perkins, Of the Order
of causes of salvation and damnation, cap. 54. Tom. 1. page 108. to 112. An
Exposition on the Creed, page 293. to 299. A declaration of spiritual
Disertions, page 415. Commentary on Galathians 3. 8. 22. Tom. 2. page 249. 250.
A Treatise of Praedestination, page 621. to 642. with all the places quoted in
the former point of universal and sufficient grace, where this point is
largely handled. Master John Hills Life everlasting, lib. 4. Quaest. 3. 4. 5.
of the Grace of God, p. 347. to 352. Quaest. 3. 4. 5. of the love God, page
365. to 382. Master Greenham in his Treatise of Blessedness, page 207. his 14.
Sermon, page 355. his 17. Sermon, page 377. King James.
Doctor Reinolds Apologia Thesium, sect. 12. to 23. Doctor Willet, in his
Excellent Treatise De gratia universally, in his Synopsis Papismi, page 881. to
918. Commentary on Romans 5. Quaest. 38. 39. and Controversy 26. See
Animaduersio in T^o^psoni Diatr. bam^ cap. 4.
Doctor Abbot Bishop of Salisbury, in his several Lectures, De veritate
gratiae Christi, page 15. to 82. Master Draxe his Worlds Resurrection, page
110. 111. Master Brightman on Apocalipse 1. 5. and cap. 5. 9. 10. Doctor John
Whites Way to the true Church, sect. 3. Number 3. page 6. Number 6. Page 50.
51. Defense of the Way, cap. 25. sect. 1. to the end, Sermon at Paul's Cross,
sect. 8. Doctor Francis White Bishop of Norwitch, his Orthodox, cap. 8.
Paragraph 2. Doctor Field of the Church Book 1. cap. 4. Master Samuel Hieron
Abridgement of the Gospel page 100. to 110. 121. 123. 124. Doctor Dove Bishop
of Peter-burrow, in his Sermon on 1. Tim. 2. 4. where he discusseth this point
largely and confutes Huberus. Master Thomas Rogers Analysis on Article 17.
Proposition 4. 5. 9. Master Stokes Doctrine of Repentance, page. 167. to 173.
Master Yarrow Sovereign Comfort for a troubled conscience, cap. 36. Doctor
Crakentborpe. Sermon of Praedestination, page 14. to 20. Master Elton on Romans
8. 30. and on Colossians 1. page 87. 88. Doctor Ames Coronis ad Collationem
Hagiensem Articulus 2. Master Wilson Exposition on Romans 5. ver. 18. 19. on
Romans 6. ver. 3. 4. on cap. 9. ver. 29. 33. Doctor John Boys Postils on
Christmas day, page 800. Exposition on the Creed, page 23. 24. 25. Postil. on
the fourth Sunday in Lent, page 268. 269. 270. On Innocents day, page 614. to
618. Master Bifields Exposition on the Coloss. cap. 1. ver 6. page 55. ver 12.
page 98. 99. ver. 14. page 108. 109. Master Samuel Crook in his Guide sect. 4.
9. 10. 12. 18. 19. Doctor Prideaux Lectura. 3. De gratia universally, Oxoniae in
Comitijs Iulij 11. 1618. Doctor Benefield, De Sanctorum perseuenantia, lib 2.
cap. 18. 20. Master Sweeper in his Sermon on Proverbs 12. 16. 1622. Master
Humphrey Sidenham in his Jacob and Esau. Master John Downames Sum of
Divinity, lib. 2. cap. 1. 2. 6. Master Elnathan Parre Grounds of Divinity,
page 275. to 280. Sir Christopher Sibthorpe his Friendly admonition to the
Catholics of Ireland, cap. 7. 8. Doctor Thomas Tailors Praeface to the Reader
in his Treatise on Psalm. 32. Master Paul Baines Commentary on Ephesians 1.
page 114. 115. Doctor Griffith Willams his Delights of the Saints, page 30. to
42. to whom I might add all our Dort Divines, in the Reign of our learned
King James. King Charles.
Reverend Bishop Carltons Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal, cap. 3. 4.
9. Learned Doctor Dauenate Bishop of Salisbury, Expositio in Epist. Pauli ad
Colossenses, cap. 1. ver. 12. page 78. 79. ver. 14. page 89. to 93. ver. 18.
page 116. to 120. ver. 27. page 172. 173. ver. 28. page 182. 183. D. Ward his
Suffragium Brittannorum, Artic. 2. and Concio ad Clerum. Doctor Goade, and D.
Feately, in their Pelagius Rediuinus D. William Sclater Exposition, on the
first Epistle of the Thessalonians, cap. 1. ver. 10. page 92. to 97. cap. 5.
ver. 9. 10. page 447. to 454. ver. 24. page 566. to 570. On Epistle 2. cap. 1.
ver. 10. page 53. 54. Master Vicars in his Pusillus Grex. Master Henry Scudder
his Christians daily Walk, cap. 15. Master William Pemble his Vindiciae
gratiae, page 53. to 158. Master Henry Burtons Answer to an Appeal, page 64
etc. Truth triumphing over Trent, cap. 17. and in his Viols, page 117. to 129.
Master Wotton in his Dangerous Plot Discovered, cap. 20. Master Yates in his
Ibis ad Caesarem, part. 1. cap. 3. 4. 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. part. 2. cap. 1. page
34. etc. cap. 2. 7. With mine own Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate,
page 28. 29. All these concurrent witnesses unanimously suffragate to this our
Anti-Arminian Conclusion, approving, justifying, and defending it as the
undoubted truth, and the resolved Doctrine of our Church, against which no
Orthoxe Writer of our own has hitherto concluded.

Now where as the Pelagians and Semipelagians, in St. Augustines, Hilaries,
Prospers, and Orosius days, and our Papists, Pseudo-Lutherans, Anabaptists,
Socinians, and Arminians since, object against this Conclusion: Hebr. 2, 9. 2.
Cor. 5. 14. 15. 1. John 2, 2. 1. Tim. 2. 4. 6.
that Christ tasted death for all men, and the like. These Authors (who reply
again, that Christ John 10. 11. 15. 17. c. 15. 1^.
dyed, John 17. 9.
and prayed only for his Sheep, Acts 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
his Church, Ephesians. 1. 4. 6. 7. To. 8. 33. 34. 1. Pet. 1. 2. 18.
his Elect, Isay 53. 10. 11. c. 10. 22. 23. To. 9. 27. 29. c. 11. 26.
his seed, his re^nant, Mat. 1. 21. Luke^, 54, 68. Isay 46. 13. Psalm. 46. 13.
his people, his Israel, Isay 1, 27, c. 28, 16, c. 46. 13, c. 50. 20. Rom 11,
26.
his Sion, John 11. 52.
his children, Ephesians. 5. 25. to 30.
his members, Romans 9, 33. Ioh 3, 14, 15, 16.
Believers, those Heb. 5, 9, c. 7. 15.
that obey and fear him, and for Isay 53, 10. 11. Mat. 20, 28, c. 26, 28.
August. Resp^nsio ad Articulos sibi salso impositon. Articul. 1.
many,) do shape these general Answers to those Scriptures: First that Christ
dyed for all men sufficiently, that is, in regard of the infinite merit of his
death, considered absolutely in itself alone, which might if God had pleased,
sufficiently have redeemed all men: not actually, effectually, or
meritoriously, in regard of the real intention, benefit, and application of
his death, which pertaines not unto all: Secondly, indefinitly; that is, for
all sorts, all Nations, sexes, ages, qualities, callings and conditions of men
whatsoever: for some of all kinds; not for all of every kind: Thirdly, Pr
August. Enchir^deo c. 103. Fulget^^ De Incarnat. and Gratia Jesus Christi. c. 31
Peter Lu^bard. Distincti. 46.
omnibus electis and dilectis; August. De Correct. and Gratie. cap. 14.
Fulgentius. De Incarnat. and Gratia Dom. Jesus Christi. c. 31.
for all, and every of his Elect, his Sheep, his Church, of all ages, Nations,
and conditions; not for the whole latitude of all mankind, whom he never
actually Praedestinated to salvation: Fourthly, Sec. 1.
for all true believers, who by the work and power of the Spirit, are really
enabled to lay hold on Christ, by a true and lively faith; which faith is
incommunicable unto Reprobates; peculiar to the Elect, who only do enjoy it.
Fifthly, Fulgentius De Incarnat. and Gratia Dom. Jesus Christi. c. 31. August. De
Natura and Gratia. cap. 41. De Nuptijs and concupiscentia. l. 2. c. 27. Contra.
Iulianum. l. 6. c. 12. De Praedest^^^al one Sa^^clorum cap. 8.
for all who are saved; or whom God will have saved: there being no other
means, no other name, by which men may or can be saved, but Jesus Christ
alone, Sixthly, for all, Mar. 16, 15, 16. Titus. 2. 11. 12. 1, Tim. 2. 4. Col.
1. 6. 23.
voluntate signi, in respect of the external tender of the benefits of Christ's
passion in the Gospel unto all: not voluntate beneplaciti, in regard of his
aeternall purpose, designing, or the inward efficacy of his Spirit, applying,
the merits of his death to all.

Add we to these replies, some other of our own. First, that Christ Jesus
truly dyed for all men, in regard of Phil. 2, 7, 8. He. 2, 14. 16^ 17
that assumed common humanity in which he suffered, which extends it self
indifferently unto all: not in respect of the essicacious Redemption which he
merited, by his suffering, which is impropriated to the Elect alone: Secondly,
Christ dyed indefinitely for all men, in as much as 2. Tim. 2. 25 To. 11. 1, to
8 ^. Tim 2. 4.
no particular men whiles they live on earth can truly say, that they are
actually excluded from the benefits of his death: not because they are all
particularly redeemed by his death. Thirdly, that he dyed for all men, that is,
To. 8, 29, to 35. lam. 1, 18. Hebr. 12. 22, 23. 24.
for his firstborne, Heb. 2. 16. 17.
for the Seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. 22. 24. 89. cap. 4. 4. to 8.
the Children of the promise, and See Mat. 13. Gal. 1, 2. Reu. 2, 3.
the better part of men, who often times denominate the whole, especially in the
visible Church, where all are frequently styled Saints, believers, and the
like, because some are such: not for Mat. 13, 24, to 33.
the tares, Mat. 3. 12.
the chafe, Mat. 25. 32. 33.
the goats, the Mat. 13. 7. He. 6. 4.
thorns, the Mat. 13. 5.
stones, the Ps. 1 19. 119.
dross, the 2. Sa. 23. 6.
sons of Belial, and John 17. 12.
perdition, the Mat. 7. 6. Phil. 3, 2. 2. Pet 2. 22. Reu. 22. 15.
dogs, the 2. Pet. 2. 22. Psa. 49. 12. 10.
swine, the 2. Pet. 2. 22. Psa. 49. 12. 10.
beasts, or the Reu. 21. 27.
unclean, or worser part, whom God accounts no members of the mystical body
of the Catholic Church, for which Christ only dyed, and so reputes them as
beasts, as the most infamous, and vilest creatures, not as men. Fourthly, that
he dyed corporally for all, in regard of the enlargement of some external
privileges; See God no Imposter.
as the universal preaching of the Gospel, the outward administration of the
Sacraments, with the participation of those ordinary blessings of peace and
plenty, the common endouments of the Spirit, restraining grace, some competent
knowledge of God, of Christ, and of the mysteries of godliness: probability
and good hopes of salvation, some relish of the Word of life, and of the powers
of the world to come, which usually accompany them; before peculiar to the
Jews alone, but since Christ's death, made common unto all men, (to which I may
add 1. Cor. 15. 21. 22.
the general resurrection of al, both good and bad, a real fruit and
co^sequent of Christ's death,) not spiritually, in regard of those peculiar and
aeternal favors of Redemption, Justification, Sanctification and Salvation,
the portion, the inheritance of the Elect alone, which no reprobate either can,
or shall enjoy. Fifthly, that he dyed for almen, in that Phil. 2. 7. to 11. Romans
14. 9. 10. 11.
by his death he has purchased an absolute sovereignty and dominion over all,
to order, rule, and guide them at his pleasure, and to pass sentence on them
all at last according to their works: not because he has procured an absolute
enfranchisement from hell and death, or praepared an aeternall Crown of glory
for them all; which belongs to none but 2. Tim. 4. 8. James 1. 12.
those who love him, and long for his appearance. These several answers
warranted by Scriptures, Fathers, and the fore-quoted Authors, will reconcile
all seeming repugnancies of Scripture, and answer all objections against this
fifth Conclusion.

Before I pass over this Conclusion, I must needs take off one principal
daring objection, Objection,
with which our Arminians do encounter, it in this Syllogisticall dispute.

That which every man is peremptorily bound to believe, must needs be true; for
God binds no man to believe a lie, because he is truth itself.

But every man, as well the reprobate as the elect, is peremptorily bound to
believe, that Christ Jesus dyed effectually for his sins; since every man is
obliged to believe in Christ, under pain of aeternall damnation. John, 6. 29.
1. John 3. 23. Mark 16. 16. John 3. 16. 17. 18.

Therefore that Christ dyed effectually for all, and every man's sins, must
needs be true.

To this I answer, Answer.
first, that the Mayor is not infallible, unless it be with this limitation:
every thing which men are commanded to believe, is true; not absolutely in any
sense, but only in that relative, qualified, and peculiar sense in which it is
to be believed: for one and the selfsame proposition may be both true, and
false in different respects: For instance. These two propositions 1. Tim. 2. 4.
( God will have all men to be saved: Heb. 2. 9.
Christ Jesus tasted death for all men; are true, sensu divise: in an
abstracted; not sensu composite, in a relative or compounded sense: true in the
proposition, false in the application, unless we qualify, or restrain their
generality, with the forementioned modifications, or their inseparably annexed
conditions of faith and repentance, without which God will Romans 2. 12. 14. 15.
John 9. 41. c. 15. 22. Acts 14. 16. 17. c. 17. 30. 31.
neither is infidelity a damnable sin in them, (Arminians themselves
confessing it, who desperately affirm, that Pagans, or Infidels may be saved)
because there was an absolute impossibility in them to believe, by reason of
the incapability of the means in the one, and the inevitable want of means in
the other. Secondly, because all those to whom the Gospel is preached (who are
scarce the tithe of all the world) are not bound to believe, that Christ dyed
effectually for their sins in an absolute sense, as is objected: but only in
a qualified, limited and restrained, to wit, Mar 16. 16. John 3, ^, 16. 18. 6.
if God enable them by his grace, to repent and believe: else they are
absolutely to believe, Gal. 5, ^, 4. John 3. 18. 36 Mat. 16. 16. Ephesians. 2, ^. 2,
12.
that Christ Jesus died not thus for them, and that they shall be damned, if
they are not thus qualified: The only absolute proposition then to be believed
and rested upon by all men, is not this general or irrestrained Conclusion:
Christ Jesus died actually or absolutely for all and every man whatsoever, (the
ground of libertinisme, prochrastination, and all profaneness among
Christians,) but this; Christ Jesus dyed effectually for all true paenitent and
believing sinners, who lay hold upon his merits: (which cuts off all hopes of
heaven from prochrastinating and vnrepenting sinners: who obstinaly proceed in
sinful curses,) and then this Conclusion: Ergo, he died effectually for all
and every man's sins whatsoever, is but a mere inconsequent. Thirdly, Acts 2.
37. 8. c, 3^ 19, c. 16. 30. 21. c. 22. 16. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
to repent and believe in Christ, that so his sins may be done away: The
Scriptures indeed do bind all faithful and relenting siners to believe, e
that their sins are actually forgiven, and effectually purged by the death of
Christ: but for those who are yet out of Christ, there is no such precept; they
must first be really ingraffed into Christ, and then believe it: not first
believe it: and then be i^graffed, else they should believe a lie, in believing
their sins are actually purged, ere they are, because a man must be first in
Christ before his iniquities can be washed away by his soule-clensing blood.
Fourthly, admit that every man no good consequent to say, that every man must
paticularly believe that he is elected: Therefore he must of necessity beleeu
that every man is elected: or that every man must believe that he shall be
saved, therefore, that all and every man shall be saved. It follows not: that
because every man is bound to believe that himself, or any other particular
man (whose case he cannot know nor yet determine) are no reprobates; therefore
there are no reprobates in the world. This kind of argument from every
individual to the speecies will not hold: This then is but a mere
nonsequitur, every particular man must believe that Christ died effectually for
himself: Ergo he dyed thus for all men: this is the only force of the
praesent argument in which our Arminians vaunt and triumph; therefore it is but
vain, absurd Abraham was bound to believe ( yea Genesis 22, 1, to 19. Heb. 11 17.
18. 19.
and he did believe it) that God did really intend the sacrificing of his
dearest Isaac, because he actually enjoined him to do it, yet God intended
not the unnatural shedding of Isaacks blood, but Genesis 22, 16. 17.
the admirable probate of Abraham's faith: The Ninevites were bound to believe,
and they did believe, that peremptory Praediction of the Prophet Jonah: Jonah.
3. 4. 5.
yet forty days and Niniue shall be destroyed: yet God intended their
repentance only, not their ruin. Our Arminians (if their Doctrine be true,
and their prayers faithful,) are necessarily obliged to believe, that God will
have mercy on all men whatsoever, because they pray to God, to have mercy upon
all men, in the distributive and largest sense; yet God intends not Exo. 33.
19. To. 9. 15. 17.
to have mercy, neither has he mercy upon all without exception: So we may
be bound to believe, that Christ Jesus died effectually for all men
whatsoever, if there be any one such text of Scripture which commands us to
believe it: (as there is not,) because the Scripture does record it: yet God may
not intend the effectual application of his death to all men, no more then in
those parallel cases: Neither will this consequence necessarily follow: that
we then believe a lie; or that Gods secret will, is contradictory to his
revealed: First, because 2. Cron. 20. 20. Iuke 24. 25. Gal. 6. 16. John 10. 21.
2. Pet. 1. 19.
the revealed, not the vayled will of God, which we cannot diue particularly
into;) is the sole rule of our obedience, and the only object of our faith, so
that in believing it, we neither falsefy Gods open, nor cross his secret will,
nor yet deceive our selves in believing of a lie. Secondly, because

The 6. Anti-Arminian position proved
in the very Act of their Conversion, is fully ratified and confirmed by our
10. and 17. Articles: by the 8. Article of Lambheth: by the 13. 14. 15. 16. 32.
and 33. Articles of Ireland: by the Book of Common prayer: Position 1. and 2.
by the Homelies, the Chatechisme of Edward the 6. with the Questions and
Answers of Praedestination. Figures, (6) and the Synod of Dort, Article 3. 4.

The particular and punctual witnesses of this truth, Henry the 8.
now follow, to wit, Master William Tindall, Prologue on the Romans: page 48.
Col. 2. 8. 0. Col. 2. Preface to the obedience of a Christian man: page 99. An
Answer to Master Moors Dialogue. page 259. 260. 266. A pathway into the holy
Scriptures. page 382. Prologue to the Exposition of the first Epistle of Saint
John. page 389. An Exposition on the 6. of John. page 460. Master John Frith, A
Declaration of Baptism, page 90. Doctor Barnes, That Freewill of her own
strength can do nothing but sin. page 283. 274. 276. Master Robert Legate in
his Chatechisme between Man and Wife: what the holy Catholic Church is: and
between truth and the unlearned man, Wesel 1545. in the days of King Henry
the 8. Edward 6.
Learned Peter Martyr Commentary in Romans, cap. 5. page 327. 328. cap. 9. p.
690. 694. 728. 729. 732. 733. Master Martyn Bucer, Commentary on Math. 23. 37.
on John 6. 37. 44. on Romans 8. 30. and on cap. 4. 5. 6. Master John Bradford
his Doctrine of Praedestination. Master Thomas Beacon his Sick man's salve,
page. 426. in King Edwards Reign. Queen Eli.
Master John Veron his Treatise of Praedestination, and Apology for the same.
Master Thomas Palfryman, Treatise of heavenly Philosophy, cap. 7. 8. Master
James Price his Fan of the Faithful, cap. 12. Master Edward Deering on the
Heb. Lect. 9. 10. 14. Master Anthony Anderson, Sermon of sure comfort. p. 23.
to 27. Master Thomas Sparks Comfortable Treatise for a troubled conscience,
the 4. first leaves. Bartimeus Andreas Sermon 2. on the Canticles, p. 64. to
70. Master John Daniel his excellent comfort to all Christians, cap. 4. 5. 7.
Master John Anwicke Meditations on Gods Monarchy and the Devils Kingdom, cap.
6. 7. 10. 11. Master William Burton, Sermon of the Churches love. Master Arthur
Gurney his fruitful Dialogue between Reason and Religion, page 45. Bishop
Babington Exposition on the Lords prayer, Petition 6. page 194. 195. Sermon at
Paul's Cross, on John 6. 37. part 1. and 2. Matthew Hutton Archbishop of York.
De Electione and Reprobatione Commentatio, p. 22. 23. 24. 36. Doctor Fulke, and
Master Cartwright, Notes on Romans 8. sect. 8. Master William Perkins, of Gods
grace and man's freewill, Tom. 1. page 720. etc. Commentary on Galathians 1.
Tom. 2. p. 178. 179. and on cap. 6. page 374. Master John Hell his Life
everlasting, Book 3. Quaest. 9. p. 273. to 277. in Queen Elizabeth's Annals:
King James.
Doctor Reinolds Apologia Thesium. sect. 13. 14. 15. Doctor Willet Comment on
Romans 8. Controversy 18. and on cap. 9. ver. 19. 20. Reverend Doctor Robert
Abbot Bishop of Salisbury. De veritate Gratiae Christi. Oration. 2. Iulij 8.
1615. sect. 2. Learned Doctor Thomas Morton Bishop of Couentry and Litchfield,
his Protestants Appeal. Londini 1610. lib. 2. cap. 10. sect. 4. 5. 10. 11.
where he proves this to be the Doctrine not only of Protestants, but of the
Learnedest Papists. Doctor Field of the Church Appendix to the 3. book, cap.
10. of Freewill. Doctor John White, Way to the Church, Digression, 41. 42.
Defense of the Way, cap. 25. sect. 21. 22. Master Thomas Rogers Analysis on the
17. Article, Proposition 6. 7. Master Heiron, The Backward parts of Jehovah.
Sermon 2. p. 173. Doctor Ames, Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem. Artic. 3.
where this point is well discussed, and excellently proved. Doctor Pri^eaux, De
Conuersionis modo Lectura 4. Master Paul Bayne Commentary on Ephesians 1. 19.
p. 352. to 371. where this point is pithily proved. Master Elton on Romans 8. v.
30. Master Thomas Wilson Exposition on Romans 8. ve. 30. on Romans 9. ver. 19. 20.
Doctor Crakenthorpe Sermon Predestination, Doctor Boys, Postil on Saint
Stephens day, page 304. on the Epistle on Simon and Iudes day, page 767. Sir
Christopher Sybthorpe his Friendly admonition to the praetended Catholics of
Ireland, cap. 8. Master Samuel Crook his Guide. sect. 18. Master John Downame
Sum of Divinity. lib. 2. cap. 1. Incomparable and learned Doctor Visher,
Archbishop of Ardmagh, Answer to the Jesuits challenge. Of Freewill page 464.
etc. Master Humphsrey Sydenha^ in his Jacob and Esau, with all our eminent Dort
Deuines, in the reign of famous King James. King Charles.
Reverend Bishop Carlton Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal. cap. 3. 9.
14. Learned Doctor Dauenate Bishop of Salisbury, Expositio in Epist. Pauli ad
Colossenses. c. 1. ver. 12. p. 78. ver. 28. p. 182. Doctor Sclater Exposition
on the 1. Epistle of the Thessalonians, cap. 4. v. 9. p. 300. 301^ cap. 5. v.
9. 10. p. 437. to 454. on Epistle 2. c. 1. ver. 13. p. 180. 187. 188. v. 14. p.
199. Doctor Ward, Suffragium Brittanorum. Artic. 3. 4. and Conci^ ad Clerum,
1625. where this point is solidly proved. Doctor Goade, and Doctor Featly in
their Pelagius Rediuiuus: and Doctor Featly his second Parallel of Freewill, p.
14. to 21. where this position is featly handled. Master Rouse his Doctrine of
King James. p. 25. to 48. Master Wotton his Dangerous Plot discovered, cap. 7.
8. Master Williams Pemble his Vindiciae Gratiae. p. 140. to 157. where this
controversy is neatly discided. Master Yates his Ibis ad Caesarem, part 2.
cap. 7. p. 157. to 168. M. Henry Burton his Plea to an Appeal, p. 63. to 77.
and Truth triumphing over Trent. c. 17. M. Weemse his Portraiture of the image
of God in man. c. 16. with my own Perpetuity. p. 100. 101. 621. in the reign
of our gracious King Charles, who all give full, particular and copious
testimony to this conclusion.

Certainly he who shall but seriously suruay these several Scriptures, Genesis
17. 1. I am the Almighty God. Genesis 18. 14. Is any thing to hard for the Lord?
1. Chron. 29. 11. 12. Thine O Lord is the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, and the victory, and the majesty, thine is the kingdom O Lord, and
thou art exalted as head over all; Both riches and honor come of thee, and
thou raignest over all, and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all: 2. Cron. 20. 6. Art not
thou God in Heaven, and rulest not thou over all the Kingdoms of the Heathen?
and in thine hand is there not power and might, so that none is able to
withstand thee? Job 9. 4. 12. 19. He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength,
who has hardened himself against him and bath prospered? Behold he takes
away^ who can hinder him? who will say unto him, what do thou? If I speak of
strength, lo, he is strong. cap. 12. 13. to 25. With him is wisdom and
strength, he has counsel and understanding. Behold he breaks down and it
cannot be built: he shuteth up a man, and there can be no opening: he leads
away Counselors spoiled, and makes the Judges fools: he loses the bond of
Kings, and girdeth their loyues with a girdle: he leads Princes away spoiled,
and overthrows the mighty: he powers contempt upon Princes, and weakneth
the strength of the mighty: he increases the Nations and destroys them: he
inlargeth the Nations and straitneth them again: he takes away the hearts of
the chief of the people of the earth, etc. cap. 23. 13. 14. But he is in one
mind, who can turn him? and what his soul desires, even that he does: for
he performs the thing that is appointed. cap. 33. 11. 12. 13. 16. 17. He
puts my feet in the stocks, etc. I will answer thee, that God is greater
then man: why do thou strive against him, for he gives not account of any of
his matters: he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction, that
he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man: he keeps
back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword: cap.
37. 7. 12. He seals up the hand of every man that all men may know his work:
It is turned round about by his counsels, that they may do whatsoever he
commands (...) upon the face of the world, in the earth. cap. 40. 8. 9. Will thou also disanul my judgments? have thou an arm like God? or can thou
thunder with a voice like him. c. 42. 2. I know that thou can do every
thing, and that no thought can be withheld from thee. Psalm. 33. 9. 11. He
spoke and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast. The counsel of the
Lord stands for ever, the thought of his heart, to all generations. Psalm. 47.
2. 3. The Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King over all the earth.
He shall subdue the people under us, and the Nations under our feet. Psalm.
115. 3. But our God is in Heaven, he has done whatsoever he pleased. Psalm.
135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that aid ^e in Heaven and in Earth. etc.
Prou. 21. 1. 30. The Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord as the Rivers of
water, he turns it whether soever he will. There is no wisdom, no
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. Eccle. 9. 1. The righteous, and
the wise, and their work, are in the hand of God. Isay 14 27. The Lord of
Hoasts has purposed, and who shall disanul it? surely as I have thought, so
shall it come to pas; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand. Isayah 41. 10.
to 29. Behold the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule
for him: he shall feed his flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather his Lambs
with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that
are with young. Behold the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted
as the small dust of the balance: behold he takes up the lles as a very
little thing. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to
him less then nothing and vanity It is he that sits on the circle of the
earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as Grasshoppers, that stretches out the
Heavens as a Curtain. That brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the
Judges of the earth as vanity: yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall
not be sown; yea, their stock shall not take root on the earth, and he shall
also blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlewind shall take them
away as stubble: To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be compared says
the holy one. Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who has created those
things. That brings out their Hoasts by number, he calls them all by their
names, by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power, not one
fails. cap. 43. 12. 13. I am God, I am he, and there is none that can deliver
out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it? Jeremiah 18. 6. O house of
Israel; cannot I do with you as this Potter, says the Lord? behold as the
clay is in the Potters hand, so are ye in my hand, says the Lord, etc. cap.
32. 27. Behold, I am the Lord the God of all flesh, is there any thing too hard
for me? cap. 49. 19. He shall come up like a Lion from the swelling of Jordan,
against the habitation of the strong: but I will suddenly make him run away
from her: and who is a chosen man that I may appoint over her, for who is like
me? and who will appoint me the time? Ezechi. 22. 14. Can thine heart endure,
or can thine hands be strong in the days that I shall deals with thee? I the
Lord have spoken it and will do it. cap. 36. 24. 25. 26. 27. I will take you
from among the heathen, and gather you out of all Countries, and will bring you
again to your own Land. Then will I sprincle clean water upon you, and you
shall be clean from all your filthynesse, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh: and I will put my Laws within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do then. Dan.
2. 20. 21. Blessed be the name of God for ever and ever for wisdom and
strength are his: And he changes the times and seasons: he remoueth Kings,
and sets up Kings, etc. cap. 4. 34. 35. And I blessed the most High. and
praised him that lives for ever, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion,
and his Kingdom is from generation to generation. And all the inhabitants of
the earth are reputed as nothing: and he does according to his will in the
army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his
hand, or say unto him; what do thou? cap. 5. 23. The God in whose hand thy
breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified. Acts 5. 38.
39. But if this counsel be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, least happily ye
be found even to fight against God. cap 6. 10. And they were not able to resist
the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke. cap. 11. 17. For as much then as
God gave them the like gift as he did unto us, who believed on the Lord Jesus
Christ, who was I that I could withstand God? Ioh. 5. 21. For as the father
raises up the dead and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom he
will. John 6. 37. 44. All that the Father gives me shall come unto me. No man
can come unto me except my Father who has sent me draw him. Romans 8. 28. 30. To
them that are called according to his purpose. Moreover, whom he did
praedestinate, them he also called: whom he called, them he justified: whom he
justified, them he glorified. cap. 9. 19. 20. 21. Thou will say then unto me,
why does he yet complain? for who has resisted his will? Nay but O Man, who
art thou that disputest against God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? has not the Potter power over the clay,
of the same lump, to make one Vessel to honor, and an other to dishonor,
etc. cap. 11. 7. 36. The election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded:
For of him, and for him, and to him are all things. 2. Tim. 1. 9. who has
saved us, and called us with an holy calling, according to his own purpose and
grace which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. 2. Cor. 10.
4. 5. For the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds: casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and brings into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ. 1. Cor. 10. 22. Do we provoke the
Lord to jealousy? are we stronger then he? Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our
vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to
the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things to himself. He that
shall unfeignedly meditate on all these several texts of Scripture, together
with: Ephe. 1. 19. 20. That you may know, what is the exceeding greatness of
his power to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power:
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his
own right hand in the heavenly places. cap. 2. 1. 5. 6. And you has he
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, and has raised us up
together, and made us to sit together in heavenly places with Christ. John 5.
25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that the hour is coming and now is, that
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it
shall live. Romans 4. 17. God who quickneth the dead, and calls those things
that be not, as though they were. Phil. 2. 13. It is God that works in you
both the will and the deed of his good pleasure: can never once conceit, that
any of the Elect can either finally or totally resist the inward regenerating
and renewing grace of Gods spirit in the work and Act of their conversion, in
which they are merely passive. The conversion of a soul to God, is a Psalm.
51. 10. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
new creation: it is wrought, not by bare alluring objects, or reasons
praesented to the understanding, as Arminians dream: but by the Romans 1. 16. 1.
Cor. 1. 18. c. 4. 5. 2 Cor. 4. 7. Ephesians. 1. 19. 20
Almighty power of God: by Ephesians. 1. 19. 20. cap. 2. 1. 5. 6. Romans 6. 4. 5.
the self same power that raised Christ Jesus from the dead: by To 15. 13. 19
Ep. 3. 20. 1 The. i. 5. 2. The. 1. 11 2. Tim. 1. 7. 8.
the effectual and mighty power of the holy Ghost: and by 2 Cor. 12. 9. Ephesians.
6. 10. 2. Pet. 1. 3. 16.
the sovereign power and authority of Christ himself: and can any elected
persons heart be found so stupendiously obdurate, as to withstand the whole
shocke and power of the Trinity, when they come with a resolution to convert
Facit vo^ente^ ex nolentibus Deus: Inclinat. little corda vt hoc velint, habe^s
sine dubis hu^anorum cordium quo placeret inclinandoruns omnipotentissimam
potestate August. De Praedest. Sanct. lib. c. 8. 20. De Corrept. and Gra. tia
cap. 14.
and change it, not to force it? Certainly that God, who made the hearts and
wills of men at first, 2. Cor. 3. 18. Pro. 21. 1.
can change them at his pleasuro: that blessed Savior of ours, John 17. 2.
Mat. 28. 18. Ps. 19.
who has power over all flesh to rule and order them at his will: who when he
was here on earth, had so much sovereignty and Divinity in him as to Mat. 11.
5. John 11. 44.
raise the dead: to Lu. 5. 13. 24-25. Mat. 10. 5.
heal the sick, the blind, and lame: to Mat. 8. 26. 27 Mar 7. 37.
allay the raging storms, the waves, and winds, at pleasure: Lu. 4. 35. 36
to command the very Devils, yea, Mar. 5. 8. to 13.
legions of Devils with authority and power, and to eiect and dispossess them,
by his mere command; he that can control the 2. Chapter 20. 6. Phi. 2. 10-11.
very world it self, and all the creatures, both in Heaven, Earth, or Hell:
can easily convert and turn the hearts of all his children in a moment ( as he
has done always hitherto, there being not one of the Elect that did ever yet
withstand his inward call) without any difficulty or resistance. See Master
Carpenters Achithephel. London 1629. p. 25. to 35. Object.


If any object that of Acts 7. 51. Ye stifnecked and of uncircumcised hearts
and ears, you have always resisted the holy Ghost: with that of Mat. 23. 37.
How often would I have gathered thy children, as the Hen gathers her chicken
under her wings and ye would not, which ^eeme for to oppugn this Conclusion.

Answer.
First, that this text speaks only of the reprobate and stiffenecked Jews: of
uncircumcised hearts and ears, who cannot but resist the external profers of
Gods grace: not of the elect and chosen of God among the Jews, Acts 2. 37. to
42.
three thousand of which were converted at one Sermon. Secondly, the spirit
which these Jews did here resist, was the spirit of prophecy, not of
regeneration: it was the word of the holy Ghost uttered by those prophets which
they slew and stoned. ver. 52. which sounded only in their ears: not the
renewing and regenerating operation of Gods spirit which wrought effectually in
their hearts. Thirdly, this was only an external resistance of the v. 52. and
Mat 23. 34. 35. 1. These. 2. 16.
holy Ghost in others: not an intrinsecall opposition of him, or of his
operations in themselves: therefore its nothing to the point in quaestion.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them
that are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered, etc. with verse 34.
35. do infallibly prove:) not by the internal regenerating operation of his
spirit, the only thing in quaestion which they could not resist. Secondly, I
answer, with Enchirideon. cap. 97.
Saint Augustine and Lib. 1. Distinacio. 46.
Peter Lumbard: That the meaning of these words is not: that those whom Christ
would gather did resist or disobay his call: but that Heirusalems Rulers, with
the Scribes and Phareses were utterly unwilling that Christ should gather those
whom he did call: The sum and drift of these words is only this: I by
ministry would have gathered Jerusalem, and her Sons unto me; but you
Scribes and Phareses (for to them alone, not to Jerusalem was this speech
directed, as the whole series of the chapter, from the 2. verse to the end,
does irrefragably witness) would not permit me: t Sec John 7. 1. 8.
for you withstood my ministry: yea, those that I did convert and call, it was
against your wills: John 9. 22.
who agreed, that of any man did confess that I was Christ, he should be
thrust out of the Synagouge: This is the whole scope and substance of the place
which concludes but this against us. The Scribes and Phareses did resist
Christ's ministry, in hindering him from preaching to the people: Or Christ did
convert men against the Phareses wills: therefore the Elect may finally and
totally resist the inward working power of the Spirit in the very Act of their
conversion: a gross Non-sequitur: which hurts not this conclusion. All whom
Christ effectually called, when he was on earth: Mat, 4. 18. to 23. c. 9. 9.
Mar. 1. 16. to 21. c. 2. 14.
as Andrew, Peter, Matthew, Luke, and the rest of his Disciples, did readily
leave all to follow him without the least resistance or delay: therefore all
who are thus inwardly called by his grace and spirit, do so now.

For the seventh of these our Anti-Arminian conclusions, The 7th. Anti-Arminian
proposition confirmed.
touching the total and final perseverance of the Saints, and that true
saving faith and grace, are proper yea peculiar to the Elect alone, and not
communicable unto Reprobates. It is evidently warrented and proved, by our 17.
Article; figure (7) by the 5. Article of Lambheth, and the 12. 13. 15. 33. and
38. Articles of Ireland: which are express and punctual in it: by the common
prayer Book; the Homelies, and the Chatechismes fore-recorded, figures, (7) by
Barrets Recantation. section 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and by the Synod of Dorts
Resolution: Article 5.

Add we to these by way of Testimony, Henry the 8
the copious, unanimous, and concurrent attestation, of Master William Tyndall:
Prologue on the Epistle to the Romans^ page 42. Parable of the wicked Mammon.
page 69. 70. 74. 75. 78. Praeface to the Obedience of a Christian man. p. 99.
In the Treatise it self. p. 169. An Answer to Sir Thomas Moors Dialogue. page
257. 258. 259. 260. 261. 266. Answer to Master Moors 2. Book. cap. 3. 4. page
293 294. Answer to his 3. Book. page 307. Answer to his 4. Book. cap. 10.
page 329. cap. 11. p. 330. 331. 334. to 338. A Pathway into the holy Scripture.
page 384. An Exposition on the first Epistle of John. cap. 2. p. 402. c. 3.
page 410. 412. cap. 5. page 423. An Exposition on the 6. of John. page 460 462.
Of Master John Frith Martyr. An Answer to my Lord of Rochester. page 55. An
Answer to Rastals: 3. chapter, page 71. 72. 73. A Myrrour to know thy self.
page 84. Of Doctor Barnes, That Faith only justifies before God. page 235.
242. Of Master Robert Legate, his Catechism between the Husband and Wife:
what the Catholic Church is: And between the unlearned man and truth, in the
reign of Henry the 8. Edward 6.
Of Peter Martyr, Commentary in Romans 5. p. 233. 234. in cap. 8. page 533. to
558. Locorum Commu. Classis. 3. cap. 3. sect. 46. 47. Of Martin Bucer,
Commentary on Mat. 7. ver. 13. cap. 16. ver. 18. cap. 24. ver. 24. in Iohannem.
cap. 4. 14. cap. 6. ver. 30. to 64. cap. 10. ver. 27. 28. cap. 14. 16. 17. In
Romanos 8. c. 30. to the end. Of Bishop Latimer, in his Sermons fol. 141. 142.
180. 226. 258. 312. 326. 327. 328. Of Master John Bradford, his defense of
Praedestination, where this point is pithily and particularly discussed: and
his Letter in the book of Martyrs. page 1505. Col. 1. Of John Careless
Martyr. Ibid. p. 1742. Of Master Thomas Beacon, the Sick man's salve. p. 271.
272. 273. 274. 424. 425. 426. 427. Of Stephen Garret, The sum of the holy
Scriptures. printed, 1547. cap. 4. 7. 8. 13. in the days of King Edward the 6.
Queen Eli.
Of Reverend Master Nowel in his authorized Catechism on the 3. petition of
the Creed: the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the
forgiveness of sins. Of Master John Fox, his Book of Martyrs. London, 1597.
p. 1506. Col. 1. l. 74. 80. In his sermon at Paul's Cross, printed, Cum
priuilegio, London. 1570. fol. 19. 20. Of Master John Veron, in his Fruitful
Treatise of Praedestination. fol. 40. to 63. 79. 106. to 110. Where this our
conclusion is largely proved. Of Master John Daniell, his Excellent comfort to
all Christians. cap. 3. 4. 5. 6. 27. Of Master Thomas Palfryman, in his
Treatise of heavenly Philosophy. lib. 1. cap. 7. 8. Of Master Edward Deering,
in his 7. 10. 14. 16. 18. 24. and 27. Lectures on the Hebrews. Of Master James
Price, his Fan of the Faithful. cap. 1. 2. 3. 4. Of Learned Doctor Fulke,
and Master Cartwright, Notes on the Rhemish Testament. Notes on Luke 8. sect.
1. on Romans 11. sect. 2. on 1. Tim. 1. sect. 2. on Apocalipse 2. sect. ^2. Of
Learned and Godly Bishop Babington, Exposition on the 12. Article of the Creed.
Life everlasting. page 259. 260. in his works at large. In his profitable
Exposition on the Lords prayer. page 127. 128. 194. to 203. 222. with his
Sermon at Paul's Cross. 1591. part 1. and 3. p. 273. etc. Of Solid Doctor
Whitakers: Responsio ad 8. Rations Campiani. De Paradoxis. lib. 18. De
Ecclesia. Controuersia. 2. Quaest. 3. cap. 2. p. 146. and Gygnea Cantio. p. 17.
to 25. Of Doctor Sparks, Answer to John De Albines Discourse against
Haeresies. cap. 34. page 281. to 285. and in his comfortable Treatise for a
troubled Conscience. London, 1580. of Master Robert Keilway, Sermon of sure
Comfort. 1580. page 22. to 27. and 46. to 85. Of Master John Vdall, his Peter's
Fall. London, 1589. Sermon 2. Of Master Arthur Gurney, his Fruitful Dialogue
between Reason and Religion. fol. 45. 46. 47. Of Master John Anwicke,
Meditations upon Gods Monarchy, and the Devils Kingdom. cap. 6. 7. 10. 11.
Bartimeus Andreas, Sermon, 2. on Canticles 5. page 64. to 70. Of Master John
Northbrooke, his poor man's spiritual Garden. cap. 1. and 18. Of Learned.
Matthew Hutton Archbishop of York: All these are collected and set out by
Thysius Hardrouici. 1613.
De Electione and Reprobatione Commentatio. page 41. 42. 43. Of Doctor Esteius
De Certudine salutis and persevere antiae Sanctorum non interrupta Oration
Cantabrigiae habita. page 45. to 64. Of Doctor Robert Some, Tractatus de tribus
Quaestionibus. Quaestio. 3. p. 85. to 93. Of Doctor Chaderton, De
Iustificationis coram Deo, and fidei iustificantis Perseuerantia non intercisa
page 94. to 112. (to whom I might add those several Bishops, Doctors and
Deuines, which composed Barrets Recantation, and the Articles of Lambheth,
which conclude in terminis for us.) Of Godly and experimental Master Greenham,
Grave Counsels and Aphorisms, Addition. 2. and 3. in his works at large,
London. 1612. p. 46. 51. 63. sect. 24. p. 68. His first Sermon. Quench not the
Spirit. p. 246. to 250. His 14. Sermon p. 341. Exposition on Psalm. 119. page
382. 495. 496. Godly Instructions. cap. 32. page 694. cap. 53. page 764. A
Letter against hardness of heart. p. 864. A Letter consolatorie. p. 876. Of
Edwin Archbishop of York, Sermon on Luke. 1. page 74. 75. sect. 14. Of Solid
and Scholasticall Master William Perkins, Exposition on the Creed. Tom. 1. of
his works p. 254. 282. 283. Treatise of Disertions. p. 417. Reformed
Catholic. point. 3. page 562. 563. etc. Of Gods Free Grace, and man's Free
Will. page 738. 739. A Treatise of Praedestination. Tom. 2. page 636. 637. 638.
Exposition on Jude, verse 1. Tom. 3. page 487. 488. Of incomparable Hooker,
Discourse of Justification. sect. 26. Sermon of the Perpetuity and certainty of
faith in the Elect. Sermon 1. on Jude. sect. 10. to 15. Of Master William
Burton, in his David's Evidence. 1596. Sermon 5. p. 102. to 115. Of Master John
Hill in his Life everlasting. lib. 5. cap. 2. Quaest. 4. 5. 6. cap. 3. Quaest
21. and of Reverend Master Phillips, Sermon on Romans 8. ver. 15. 16. in the
reign of blessed Queen Elizabeth. King James.
Of Learned King James of happy memory, in his Declaration against Vorstius.
page 15. 18. 19. 26. 35. where he styles the Arminian Assertion of the
Apostasy of the Saints, a wicked Doctrine, a blasphemous Haeresie, directly
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England: and Bertius his Book of the
Apostasy of the Saints, a blasphemous Book, the very Title whereof were
enough to make it worthy the fire, branding Bertius, with the name of an
Haretique and Atheistical sectorie. Of eminent, learned and renowned Doctor
Reinolds, Thesis. 4. sect. 23. 24. Defensio Thesium, sect. 17. 20. Censura
Librorum Apochryph. Praelectio. 207. and conference at Hampton Court. page 41.
42. 43. Of Reverend and learned Doctor Robert Abbot, late Bishop of Salisbury,
once Regius Professor of Divinity in Oxford. in his Answer to Bishop part 1.
cap. 12. part 2. cap. 3. De perse^erantia Sanctorum Lectura 1. read publickely
in the Divinity Schools of Oxford, July 10. 1613. in the Act time, and
Animaduersio in Thompsoni Diatribam. Of profound Doctor Field, of the Church,
book 1. cap. 3. 6. 7. 8. Answer to Theophylus Higgons 1. part. cap. 3. 2.
part. sect. 2. page 832. 833. 834. Of judicious Doctor Bulckley, in his
Apology for the Religion established in the Church of England. London, 1608.
page 62. 64. 196. Of Acute Doctor William Sclater, in his Sermon preached at
Paul's Cross, September, 17. 1609. on Hebr. 6. 3. 4. 5. 6. London, 1610. and in
his Exposition on the 1. Epistle of the Thessalonians, cap. 1. ver. 4. page 30.
ver. 5. page 39. 40. 44. cap. 3. ver. 13. page. 251. c. 5. ver. 9. 10. p. 436.
to 455. ver. 19. p. 596. ver. 20. p. 535. 536. v. 24. p. 524. 571. Exposition
on Epistle 2. cap. 1. ver. 3. p. 7. v. 10. p. 53. 54. v. 11. p. 66. to 71. c.
2. v. 13. p. 178. to 190. c, 3. v. 3. p. 229. to 234. Of Laborious and learned
Doctor Willet, Commentary on Romans 5. Controversy 3. on cap. 6. Controu. 7.
on cap. 8. Con. 17. 19. on cap 9. Cont. 16. on c. 11. Con. 21. and Synopsis
Papismi. page 64. 65. 448. 923. 924. 925. Of Godly Master Richard Rogers, in
his 7. Treatises. Treatise. 2. cap. 20. Treatise 6. cap. 2. 3. 4. 5. Of Master
Thomas Rogers, Analysis on the 17. Article. Proposition 3. Of Master Francis
Trigge true Catholic. cap. 5. London 1602. p. 150. to 187. Of Master Wotton,
Trial of the Rhomish Clergies, title of the Church. London, 1608. page 212.
and in his Dangerous Plot discovered, London, 1626. cap. 11. 12. page 37. to
81. Of Master John Tr^ndall His Arc Against the Dragons flood. London, 1608.
page 4. 5. 22. Of Master Stock in his Doctrine of Repentance, London, 1610. p.
167. 168. 169. 170. Of Master Brightman on the Revelation. cap. 3. v. 5. 11.
12. cap. 13. 8. cap. 17. 8. c. 20. 6. 15. and cap. 22. 11. Of Godly M. Heiron
in his Abridgment of the Gospel. Sermon 1. in his works at large. London,
1620. part 1. page 102. 109. The worth of the water of Life. p. 205. 206. The
spiritual Sonship. page 308. 365. to 374. A caveat and comfort for believers.
page 623. to 627. and Penance for sin. part 2. p. 64. 65. Of Learned and
Solid Doctor John White in his way to the true Church. Digression. 42. 43. and
his Defense of the way. cap. 16. sect. 4. Of Master Thomas Wilson Sermon of
Perseverance. 1608. In his Exposition on Romans 8. v. 30. c. 5. v. 2. c. 11. v.
29. Of Master Wilcocks Exposition on Psalm. 1. 3. on Psalm. 37. 23. 24. on Psalm.
125. Of Master Draxe his Worlds resurrection. p. 42. 56. 57. 66. 67. 77. 78. Of
Acute Doctor Ames, Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem. Article 5. Of Learned
Doctor Crakenthorpe, Sermon of Praedestination, London, 1620. p. 26. 30. 31.
32. and Defensio Ecclesiae Anglicanae contra Archiepiscopum Spalatensem. cap.
78. Master Richard Web in his Sermon entitled The Lot and partion of the
Righteous, London 1616. Master Paul Bayne, in his trial of a Christians
Estate, on Heb. 10. 39. London 1618. and in his Commentary on Ephesians 1. p.
109. 110. 302. 306. 307. 393. 402. 403. Master William Cowper, his ^ight way to
Eternal glory, on Romans 8. p. 342. 355. 356. 362. 363. 370. and in his
Glorification of a Christian p. 448. 449. 455. 456. 457. Master William
Harrison in his Sermon of Deaths advantage little regarded, London, 1602. p.
14. 15. Master Nathaniel Byfield Discourse of the Promises. cap. 13. and
Exposition on Colossians. 1. p. 93. 144. 145. Master Randall in his Sermons on
Romans 8. Master Elton his Sermons on Romans 8. 30. entitled the Triumph of a
Christian. Master Elnathan Parre his Grounds of Divinity. Edit. 3. page 220. D.
John Bays, late Deane of Caunterbury in his works, London 1622. p. 189. 483.
768. 928. Master Bradshaw Commentary on 2 Thessalonians. 3. 3. 4. 5. Sir John Haywood
in his David's Tears, on Psalm. 32. v. 4. sect. 12. 15. 16. Of Learned Doctor
Benefield, De Perseuerantia Sanctorum. Libri. 2. Of Master Robert Yarrow. A
Sovereign Comfort for a troubled Conscience. cap. 38. to the end of the Book.
p. 352. to 439. Of Doctor Thomas Tailor in his Parable of the Sower. London,
1623. p. 413 to 452. Of Master John Downam, Sum of Divinity. lib. 2. cap. 1.
6. and 7. and his Christian Warfare. lib. 2. c. 13. to 22. Of Master Timothy
Rogers, his Righteous man's evidence for Heaven. London, 1621. p. 236. 237. 246.
Of Caleb Dilechampius, Vindictiae Solomonis, Cantabrigiae. 1622. Of Reverend
Bishop. Hall, Contemplation. Volume. 6. lib. 17. Solomon's Defection. p. 1274.
in his works at large. Of Eminent Doctor Prideaux, in his Ephesus Backsliding:
and Lectura 6. De perseuerantia Sanctorum. Oxomae. 1621. Iulij 7. in Vesperijs
Comitiorum. Of Master Samuei Crook in his Guide to true Blessedresse. Edit. 3.
p. 44. 45. 60. 68. 78. Of Master Samuel Smith his David's blessed man. London.
1623. Edit. 7. page 222. to 227. and his Chief Shepherd. p. 96. 97. 98. 486.
487. Of Master Thomas Couper, Growing in Grace. London, 1622. p. 15. 346. to
379. Of Master John Frewen Grounds of Religion. London, 1621. Quaest. 13. and
23. Of Doctor Griffith Williams in his Delights of the Saints. London, 1622.
page 157. to 186. Of D. Thomas Iackson, the raging Tempest stilled. p. 319. to
345. Of Doctor William Gouge, his whole Armor of God. p. 256. 286. Of Master
Ezechtel Culuerwell, Treatise of Faith. p. 489. to 506. Of Master Cleauer,
Sermon on John 6. v. 26. 27. Doctr. 4. Of Doctor Francis White now Bishop of
Norwich, Reply to Fisher. page 49. to 55. 80. 82. 84. 87. 102. 167. 168. 200.
Of Learned Master Thomas Gaetiker, his Gain of Godliness, David's remembrance,
the lust man's Joy, and signs of Sincerity. Of Doctor Carlton the late Reverend
Bishop of Chichester. Doctor Dauenat Bishop of Salesbury. Doctor Goade, Doctor
Balcanquel, and Doctor Ward, See Suffragium Brittanorum; and the Synod of Dort,
Article. 5. to which they have all subscribed their names; in the reign of our
late Sovereign King James. King Charles
Of Learned Master Richard Bernard, his Rheemes against Rome. page 303. to the
end. Of Reverend Bishop Dauenat, Expositio Epistolae Pauliad Collossenses. cap.
1. v. 23. p. 144. 145. c. 3. v. 8. p. 364. 365. v. 8. p. 368. c. 4. v. 14. p.
519. Of Master John Rogers; Doctrine of Faith. p. 319. to 345. Of Master
Scudder in his Christians daily walk. Edit. 2. cap. 15. sect. 7. Of Master
William Pemble his Vindiciae Gratiae. p. 34. 35. 36. Of Master Robert Bolton
General Directions for the Comfortable walking with God. p. 22. 23. 24. Of
Master John Barlow, Exposition on 2. Tim. 1. p. 135. 278. 279. 367. 368. 369.
374. Of Doctor Ward Concio ad Cleru^. and suffr. Bri. Arti. 5. Of M. William
Sparks, his Mystery of godliness, Oxoniae, 1629. c. 2. Of Doctor Thomas
Goade, Pelagius Rediuiuus. Of Acute and learned Doctor Featly 2. Parallel.
page. 21. to 95. Of Master Henry Burton of Christ-Church in Oxford, in his
Melancholy. Edit. 3. p. 641. Of Master Samuel Ward in his Balm from Gilead to
recover Conscience. p. 56. 78. Of Master Henry Burton of St. Martins in Friday
street, his Plea to an Appeal. p. 6. to 40. and his Truth triumphing over
Trent. cap. 17. Of Master, John Weemse his Portraiture of Gods image in man.
London, 1627. c. 16. where this point is pithily handled. Of Sir Christopher
Sybthorpe his friendly Advertisement to the Catholics of Ireland. cap. 7. 8.
Of Master Francis Rouse in his Doctrine of King James. p. 39. to 98. Of Master
Yates his Ibis ad Caesarem. p. 104. to 157. Of Reverend Bishop Carlton,
Examination of Master Mountagues Appeal. cap. 5. 6. 7. 8. with the joint
affections of all our Dort Divines, being men of note and eminency in our
Church: and of my own Perpetuity of A Regenerate man's estate: to omit the late
printed works of some other modern Authors, formerly quoted. All these
recited Writers of our Church, being one hundred and more in number; have all
of them in substance, most of them in terminis, even purposely, copiously,
unanimously, constantly, and professedly defended, the total, and final
perseverance of the Saints, as the undoubted Doctrine of our Church: oppugning
and largely reselling, the Pelagian Popish and Arminian Haeresie, of the Saints
Apostacy, and of true grace in Reprobates, which is peculiar to the Elect
alone. Never was there any one point of Doctrine which our Church embraces, so
copiously maintained, so abundantly seconded and backed with a constant and
uninterrupted stream and series of Authorites, and printed Records as this; no
orthodox member of our Church so much as once impeaching it: no spurious or
rotten member since Barrets public K^cantation, so much as once oppugning it
in any authorized work, Master Mountagues, and Doctor lacksons only excepted,
which, all men generally dislike: Therefore we may now without all Quaestion or
dispute, declare, resolve, and finally adiudge it, to be the ancient
established, and undoubted Doctrine of our Church: taking all such for
Pelagians, Papists, Arminians, yea pestilent Haeretickes, atheistical
Sectaries, and dangerous Innouators, (as Declaration against Vorstius, p. 15.
18. 19. 16. 35.
King James has long since doomed and adjudged them to our hands) who have
been, are, or shalb^ so audaciously praesumptuous, as either publickely in
words or wrighting to oppugn it.

You have seen now Christian Readers these 7, Anti-Arminian Positions
infallibly, irrefragably proved to be the ancient, established, professed, and
resolved Doctrine of the Church of England, by the several, yet unanimous
Articles of England, Lambheth, and Ireland: by the Common prayer Book, and
Homelies authorized in our Church: the Catechism allowed by King Edward the 6.
the Quaestions and Answ. of Praedestination, bound up and printed with our
ancient Bibles: the famous Synod of Dort; the Recantation of Barret, and by the
unanimous punctual, full and copious testimony of all the eminent, learned,
godly, and renouned Writers, Martyrs, Pillars. and Fathers of our Church from
the very infancy of her reformation to this praesent; not one of them so much
as as once oppugning the truth or orthodoxie of all or any of them; and shall
we, may me, can we now be so ridiculously absurd, so audaciously irreligious,
as once to question; whether they are the received Doctrines of our Church or
no? Doutlesse if the Church of England has any Truths or Doctrines in her,
these must, these cannot but be they; since I dare boldly auerre, because I
doubt not but to prove it; that no points of Doctrine whatsoever, (no not the
points of Justification by faith alone, of Transubstantiation, or of the
Sacrament in both kinds,) have been more punctually, frequently, unanimously,
and copiously defended, then all, or most of these, who have all the learned of
our Church their open and professed Advocates.

If any man now be so strangly obdurated, so wilfully blinded with Popish and
Arminian Errors, that he will not yet subscribe unto these evident and most
apparent orthodox conclusions, not yet acknowledge them for the ancient, the
undoubted England, let him give me leave to vouch some other Praecedents and
Records which shall force him to confess it. The entire Church of England
consists of three grand members: The Church of Ireland, The Church of Ireland.
the Church of Scotland, and the Church of England, the mother or mistres of
the other two: If then I can uncontrollable evidence, that these three several
Churches did constantly heretofore, and do as yet unanimously acknowledge,
defend, and justify these our Anti-Arminian Conclusions, the victory, trial,
and points in praesent issue must be yielded to me.

For the Church of Ireland; its out of quaestion, that she has always both in
ancient and modern ages concluded with us. For in ancient times, in the points
of the immutabisity, aeternity, and freeness of Gods Election; the
praedetermined number of Gods Elect; the infallible certainety of their
effectual calling and salvation: Reprobation, Freewill, and universal grace,
we shall find Elegit nos in Christo ante constitutione^ musde praedestinatione
seilicet aeterna, non creatione temporaria, sed vocatione gratuita vel indebita
gratia: etc. Sermo. Sa^cti Galli habitus Constantiae: Bibliobeeca patruns. Tom.
6. part 2 p. 714. A. B.
Saint Gallus, Sedulius in Romanos. 9. in Ephesians. 1. and 2.
Sedulius, and Claudius. lib. 1. in Matthew.
Claudius, three ancient Irish Fathers, and with them the ancient Irish Church;
concurring fully with us, and with St. Augustine, in these our orthodox
positions, as that Reverend, learned, and incomparable Irishman, Doctor Usher,
Archbishop of Ardmagh, the honor of our Church, and glory of his Nation, has
evidently, and largely proved, in his Epistle of the Religion professed by the
ancient Irish, bound up at the end of Sir Christopher Sybthorpes works. page
7. 8. 9. to which I will refer you. What the modern Doctrine of the Church
of Ireland is, the fore-recorded Articles of Ireland, composed in the
Convocation at Dublin: in the year 1615. which conclude in terminis for us,
together with Bishop Vshers Answer to the Jesuits Challenge, his now recited
Epistle, and Sir Christopher Sybthorpes Advertisement. cap. 7. 8. sufficiently
evidence: so that both the Primative, and praesent Irish Church are wholly,
fully for us, point-blancke against our Opposites.

That the ancient and modern Church of Scotland The Church of Scotland.
has This is bound up at the end of the Harmony of Confessions.
general Confession of the true Christian faith and religion, subscribed by
King James himself, his household, with sundry others at Edenborough the 28. of
January, in the year 1581. being the 14. year of his Majesty's reign.
Articles: Of Original sin: Of Election, of Faith in the holy Ghost: Of the
cause of good works: Of the Church, of the immortality of the soul, by M.
Knox in his Answ. against the Adversaries of Gods. Praedestination: by Master
Rollocke, Rector of the University of Edinburgh, his Commentary on the
Ephesians. cap. 1. 2. 3. and 5. and on Psalm 51. By Master William Cowper
Bishop of Galloway in Scotland, once Minister of Perth, in his Heaven opened,
on Romans 8. v. ^9. 28. to the end, and in sundry other of his works. By Master
John Weenise his Portraiture of the Image of God in man. cap. 16. of Freewill,
where all, or most of these Arminian point^ are pithily discussed. By Sharpius
a learned Scot, Professor of Divinity now in Dyon: Tractatus De Iustificatione.
cap. 5. and Syntag^^a Theologiae, who all concur unanimously with us in these
our praesent conclusions, which they professedly and pertinaciously maintain
and justify.

England The Church of England.
has suscribed to our praesent Assertions; her ancient For which read Bid
Ecclesia. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 10. 17. 21.
public opposition to Pelagianisme, her Expositio in Romanos, 5 and 8. and 9.
11. in Ephesians. 1. and 2. in 2. Tim. 1. 9. etc. 2. 19. in 1. Pet. 1.
Bid, her Expositio in Romans 5. c. 8. 19. to 3^. in Ephesians. 1. 1. to 11. in 2. Tim
1. 9. and 2. 19.
Anselme, her De Causa. Dei l. 1. ^. 3. where our points are learnedly
discussed.
Bradwardine, and See Surius. Council. Tom. 3. p. 91^. 919.
Wickliffe testify; in that they constantly adhaered to St. Augustines, and so
to our Assertions, as the undoubted truth, oppugning these now Arminian, then
Pelagian. Tenants, as dangerous and grace-opposing errors, as their places
quoted in the margent, and in part recited in my Perpetuity. p. 257. 261. etc.
will more at large declare. The ancient Church of England, and these her famous
writers, were professed Anti-Pelagians, therefore Anti-Arminians. What this our
Church has been of latter times, the fore-recited evidences, and Authors do
abundantly testify: I need not here repeat it: I will therefore only add some
further evidences, to prove, our Anti-Arminian positions to be; our Arminian
noualties not, to be, the ancient received and undoubted Doctrine of our Church.

My first, of these more full and puctuall evidences, is the ingeminated
confession and reiterated protestation of of the Heads of the University of
Cambridge, in a memorable Letter of theirs purposely written about the
suppression of these new Arminian errors to their honored Chancellor, and
subscribed with their several hands. March 8. 1595. which Letter I have truly
transcribed out of the original Copy, (remaining in the hands of Doct. G: who
can produce it if occasion serve,) in sor^e as follows.

RIght Honorable, our bounden duty remembered; We are right sorry to have
such occasion to trouble your Lordship; but the peace of this University and
Church (which is dear unto us) being brought into peril, by the late reviving
of new oppinions, and troublesome Controversies amongst us, has urged us (in
regard of the places we here sustain) not only to be careful for the
suppressing the same to our powers, but also to give your Lordship further
information hereof as our Honorable head, and careful Chancellor.

About a year past (amongst diverse others who here attempted publicly to
teach new and strange opinions in Religion,) one Here Barrets fore-recited
Recantation is justified.
Master Barret more boldly then the rest, did preach diverse Popish Errors in
Saint Mary's, to the just offense of many, which he was enjoined to retract,
but has refused so to do in such sort as has been praescribed him: with
whose fact and opinions your Lordship was made acquainted by Doctor Some the
deputis Vice Chancellor. Hereby offense and division growing, as after by
Doctor Baroes public Lectures and doterminations in the Schools, contrary (as
his Auditors have informed) to Doctor Whitakers, and the The Doctrine of the
Church of England then was against Arminians and Baroe Ergo. now.
sound received truth ever since her Majesty's reign, The Arti. of Lambheth
then were composed by the common consent of the University of Cambridge.
We sent up to London by Common consent in November last, Doctor Tyndall, and
Doctor Whitakers, (men especially chosen for that purpose) for conference with
my Lord of Canterbury, and other principal Divines there, that the
controversies being examined, and the truth by their consents confirmed, the
contrary Errors, and the contentions thereabout might the rather cease: By
whose good travel with sound consent in truth, such advice and care was taken
by To wit: The Articles of Lambheth.
certain propositions (containing The Arti. of La^bheth therefore in the
judgment of these Heads contain in them the ancient received and undoubted
Doctrine of the Church of England: not any nouel, or singular opinions.
certain substantial points of Religion, taught and received in this
University and Church during the time of her Majesty's reign and consented
unto, and published by the best approved Divines both at home and abroad) for
the maintaining of the same truth and peace of the Church, as The Arti. of
Lambheth were then received and approved by the University of Cambridge, where
they then likewise printed,
thereby we inioy^ed here great and comfortable quiet, until Doctor Baroe (
in January last, in his Sermon Ad Clerum, in Saint Mary's The University,
Vice Chancellor, and Heads of Cambridge, upon their receite of the Artic. of
Lambheth, restrained men from preaching Arminianisme, therefore they were
enforce and credit with them.
contrary to restraint and commandment from the Vice Chancellor and the Heads)
by renewing again these Opinions, disturbed our peace, whereby his Adhaerents
and Disciples were and are much emboldened to maintain false Doctrine, to the
Arminianisme was then reputed corruption.
corrupting and disturbing of this University and Church, if it be not in time
effectually praeuented.

For remedy hereof, we have with joint consent and care (upon complaint
praeferred Arminianisme the^ was not only displeasin^ to the heads, but
likewise to the whole University.
by diverse Batchellors in Divinity,) proceeded in the examination of the cause
according to our Statutes and usual manner of proceeding in such causes:
whereby it appears by sufficient testimonies, that Doctor Baroe has offended
in such things, as his Articles had charged him withal.

There is also since the former, another complaint praeferred against him by
certain Batchellors in Divinity, that he has not only in that Sermon, but
also for the space of these 14. or 15. years, taught in his Lectures, preached
in Sermons, determined in the Schools, and printed in several Books diverse
points of Doctrine, not only contrary to himself, but also Arminianisme is
then contrary t^ the Doctrine of the Church of England, and agre^able to Popery.
contrary to that which has been taught and received ever since her Majesty's
reign; yet agreeable to the Errors of Popery, which we know your Lordship has
always disliked and hated: So that we (who for the space of many years past,
have yielded him sundry benefits and favors here in the University being a
stranger, and forborne him when he has often himself, busy and curious
inalienarepublica, broached new and strange questions in Religion,) now unless
I would our heads in our Universities out Bishops and Clergy were as careful
and zealous in this nature now, as these were then.
we should be careless of maintaining the truth of religion established, and
of our duties in our places, cannot These heads were no Arminians.
( being resolved and confirmed in the Anti-Arminianisme the^ is the truth, yea
the ancient and pr^fessed Doctrine of our Church.
Truth of the long professed and received Doctrine,) but continue to use all
good means, and seek at your Lordships hands some effectual remedy hereof,
least by permitting Arminianisme is then but a Bridge or Usher unto Popery, and
a means to draw Subjects from the Kings allegiance.
passage to these Errors, the whole body of Popery should by little and little
break in upon us, to the overthrow of our Religion, and consequently the
withdrawing of many here and elsewhere from true obedience to her Majesty.

May it therefore please your good Lordship to have an honorable consideration
of the premises, and (for the better maintaining of peace, Anti-Arminianismei
the ancient, received Religion of the University of Cambridge, and the Church
of England, and shall we now reject or quaestion it?
and the truth of Religion so long and quietly received in this University and
Church,) to vouchsafe your Lordships good aid and advice, both to the comfort
of us, Anti-Arminianisme was th^n made no Quaere among the heads of Cambridge
as it is now.
(wholly consenting and agreeing in judgment,) and all others of the University
soundly affected, and to the suppression in time, not only Arminianisme was
then an Error; it was then, it is now the forerunner, nurse, and mother of
Popery: this their, now our experience witness
of these Errors, but even of gross Popery like by such means in time, easily
to creep in among us (as we find by late experience it has dangerously
begun:) Thus craving pardon for troubling your Lordship and commending the same
in prayer to the Almighty God, we humbly take our leave,

From Cambridge the 8. of March. 1595. Your Lordships humble and bounden to be
commanded, Roger Goade, Procan, R. Some, Thomas Leg, John Iegon, Thomas
Neuill, Thomas Preston, Humphry Tyndall, James Mountague, Edmund Barwell, James
Chaderton.


THe several observations from this Letter I have briefly touched in the
margent: yet give me leave to trauerse them once again, since repetition will
make them more obseruable. First, it is evident by this Letter, that the
Articles of Lambheth are no fained, no private Articles or private spirits, as
some repute them: since not only our Cambridge concurred in their composition
in their two famous Doctors, Tyndall and Whitakers, men specially chosen by
them for this purpose. Secondly, that the Articles of Lambheth (which were
afterward Cambridge, by themselves, and since that with the last Lectures of
Doctor Hardrouici. 1613.
Whitakers,) were after their constitution approved, and received by the
University? of Cambridge, who inioyed much peace and quiet by them: which
disproues that forged story of Responsio ad Notas Bogerm^mi. pars. 2. c. 24.
p. 566. to 570.
Coruinus, touching the reuocation of the Articles by Queen Elizabeth, and of
Bishop Whitgifts incurring a Praemunire, and the Queens displeasure by them
Thirdly, that the Articles of Lambheth contain in them, no noualties, but only
the substantial points of Religion taught and received in the University of
Cambridge, and the Church of England, and consented unto by the best approved
Divines, both at home and abroad, during the whole reign of Queen Elizabeth:
Therefore we may safely embrace them, as a full declaration of the professed
and undoubted Doctrines of our Church. Fourthly, that our Anti-Arminian
Conclusions (directly opposite to Barrets and Baroes Errors, which this Letter
mentions) are the resolved and confirmed truth, yea the received, established,
and long professed Doctrines of the Chuch of England, and the University of
Cambridge. Fifthly, that the Arminian Errors (for these only were Barrets and
Baroes Errors of which this Letter speaks) are agreeable to Popery, and quite
contrary to the Religion taught and received in the Church of England, ever
since Queen Elizabeth's reign. Sixthly, that Arminianisme is but a And do we
not find it so?
Bridge or Usher unto gross Popery, yea a means to And is it not then
dangerous for our King and State to tolerate it?
draw away Subjects from their obedience to his Majesty, and to bring in the
whole body of Popery into our Church by little and little: then all which
obseruacions, there can be nothing more punctual or aduantagious for our
Anti-Arminian positions, more opposite or disaduantagious to these Arminian
Errors.

Compare this Letter and its several passages, with the Recantation of Barre^,
with the Sea page 42 to 48.
University Order formerly quoted; and then it will be vndeuiably evident, that
our praesent Assertions were formerly held the undoubted and resolved Doctrines
of the Church of England by the whole University of Cambridge; and dare any of
her Heads or members disclaim, or disauow them now?

My second Evidence, is the authority and resolution of my much honored Mother,
the University of Oxford: who from her Learned Divinity Professor, Peter
Martyrs time, (who planted and propagated our Anti-Arminian Assertions in her,
in King Edwards days, by his excellent Lectures on the Sea p. 54. 55 69. 126.
127.
Epistle to the Romans,) has constantly to this very praesent embraced,
professed, and publicly defended our present positions in her Divinity
Schools, as the undoubted truth and Doctrine of our Church: Witness the 4th.
Thesis of her incomparable Reinolds: (Sancta Catholica Ecclesia quam credimus,
est ^aetus Vniuersus Electorum Dei.) Tractata in Schola Theologica: Nouem. 3.
1579. The solemn Anti-Arminian Lectures, of her Reverend and learned Regius
Divinity Professor, Doctor Robert Abbot, late Bishop of Salisbury: De Gratia
and perseuerantia Sanctorum: and These Lectures are dedicated to our Kings
Majesty then Prince of Wales, and so are Doctor Prideaux his Lectures
following.
De Veritate Gratiae Christi: read publicly in her Divinity Schools, in her
Act time, in the years 1613. 1614. 1615. the professed Anti-Arminian Lectures,
of her vnparalled praesent Regius Divinity Professor, Doctor John Prideaux, De
Absoluto Reprobationis Decreto: De scientia media: De Gratia Vniuersal^ De
Conuersionis modo: De Perseuerantia Sanctorum: De salutis Certudine. and De
salute Ethnicorum: all which were solemnly read in her Divinity Schools at
her public Acts, in the years 1616. 1617. 1618. 1619. 1621. 1622. 1623. the
public Anti-Arminian Lectures of her judicious and learned late Lady Margaret
Professor, D. Sebastian Benefield, De Sanctorum perseuerantia: lib. 2. read
solemnly in her Schools in the year 1617. and since that printed at
Franckfort for their better dispersion into the parts of Germany, in the year
1618. together with the late Act Questions, of her proceeding Doctors of
Divinity in the year 1627. which I shall here set down in brief as I find
them printed.

QVESTIONES IN SACRA THEOLOGIA DISCVTIENDAE OXON^^IN VESPER^S SEPTIMO DIE IVLH
AN. DO. 1627.

Quaestiones inceptoris Accepti Frewen. An
Praedestinatio ad salute^ sit propter praeuisam fidem? Neg.
Praedestinatio ad salutem sit mutabilis? Neg.
Gratia ad salutem sufficiens concedatur omnibus? Neg.



Quaestiones inceptoris Cornelij Burges. An
Very fideles possint esse certi de sua salute? Aff.
Fides sem^l habita possit amitti? Neg.
Vera sides caedat in Reprobum? Neg.



Quaestiones inceptoris Christophori Potter. An
E^^icatia gratiae pendeat a libero influxu Arbitrij? Neg.
Christus Diuinae iustitiae, vice nostra propri^ and integre satiffecerit? Aff.
Ipse actus fidei, (...) credere, imputetur nobis in institiam, sensu proprio?
Neg.



All these recited testimonies of this my famous Mother University, who has
constantly bent her self against Arminius and his Followers: together with the
late conuinction of one Brooks, (a young ungrounded Divine,) before her Heads,
for broaching some Arminian Tenants in a Sermon at Saint Mary's; do
undoubtedly prove our Anti-Arminian Assertions, thus constantly defended,
professed, and resolved by her chief Professors, the vnquae^tionable and
received Doctrines of our Church. That which both our Universities have
constantly embraced, professed and patronized since the reformation to this
present, must needs be the ancient received, and undoubted Doctrine of our
Church: But both our Universities have ever from the beginning of Reformation
to this present, even constantly embraced, professed, and protected our
Anti-Arminian positions, but oppugned their Arminian opposites: (this the
present, with the praecedent and subsequent evidences will infallibly
demonstrate.) Therefore they must needs be the ancient received, and undoubted
doctrine of our Church.

My 3. Evidence is the express confession of three reverend Divines of
special note and credit in our Church: The first of them is famous Doctor
Whitakers, who informs us in his last Cygnea Cantio. Octobris. 9. 1595 P 15.
16.
Sermon: That the Church of England ever since the Gospel was restored to
(...), has always held and embraced this opinion of Election and Reprobation
which he there ( and we here) maintains. This Bucer (says he) in our
University; this Peter Martyr at Oxford, have professed: two eminent Divines,
who have most abundantly watered our Church with their streams in the days of
King Edward; whose memories shall be always honorable among us, unless we
will be most ungrateful: Mark this passage well See Bishop Abbot in Tho^psoni
Diatribam. Praefatio Lectori, and cap. 1. accordingly.
This opinion their Auditors in both our Universities; the Bishops, Deanes, and
other Divines, who upon the advancement of our famous Queen Elizabeth to the
Crown, returned either from exile, or were released from the prisons into
which they had been thrust for the profession of the Gospel: or saved from
the hands of persecuting Bishops: those by whom our Church was reformed, our
Religion established, Popery thrust out and quite destroyed, Doctor Whitakers
therefore speaks upon his own knowledge, and shall we not then believe him?
all which we may remember, though few of this kind be yet living. This
therefore was and is the Doctrine of our Church.
This opinion (I say) they themselves have held, and commended unto us: in this
faith have they lived, in this they dyed, in this they always wished that we
should constantly continue: And shall we then renounce this Opinion, or
quaestion whether it be the Doctrine of our Church or no? Lastly, I appeal
(says he) to our confession; in which I am persuaded the same Doctrine which I
have this day handled is not obscurely delivered: not only because all our
Articles were composed by the Disciples of Bucer and Martyr, but even out of
the very words and meaning of the Confession: and so he proceeds to prove his
Doctrine to be warranted by our 17. Article by 5. several Arguments.

The second Witness is Reverend Bishop Carlton in his Examination of Master
Mountagues Appeal cap. 2. where he writes thus.

The Church of England was reformed by the help of our learned and Reverend
Bishops, in the days of King Edward the sixth, and in the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth. They who then gave that form of reformation to our
Church, held consent in Doctrine with Peter Martyr, and Martin Bucer, being by
authority appointed Readers in the two Universities: and with other then
living, whom they Judged to be of best learning and soundness in the reformed
Churches: and of the Ancients especially with St. Augustine, and were careful
to hold this Unity amongst themselves, and with the reformed Churches. For that
these worthy Bishops who were in the first reformation, had this respect unto
P. Martyr, and M. Bucer, it is apparent, both because the Doctrine of our
Church does not differ from the Doctrine that these taught, and because that
worthy Archbishop Cranmer caused our Leiturgy to be Translated into Latin,
and craved the consent and judgment of M. Bucer, who gave a full consent
thereto, as it appears in his works, Inter opera Anglicana. And P. Martyr
being likewise requested, writes in his Epistles touching that matter, his
judgment and consent of the government and discipline of our Church.

This uniformity of Doctrine was held in our Church without disturbance, as
long as those worthy Bishops lived, who were employed in the reformation.

For albeit the Puritanes disquieted out Church about their conceived
Discipline, yet they never moved any quarrel against the Doctrine of our
Church, which is well to be observed. For if they had embraced any Doctrine
which the Church of England denied, they would assuredly have quarrelled about
that as well, as they did about the Discipline. But it was then the open
confession both of the Bishops and of the Puritanes, that both parts embraced a
mutual consent in Doctrine, only the difference was in matter of
inconformity: Then hitherto there was no Puritan Doctrine known.

The first disturbers of this uniformity in Doctrine, were Barret and Baroe in
Cambridge, and after them Thompson. ^arret and Baroe began this breach in the
time of that most Reverend Prelate, Archbishop Whitgift.

Notwithstanding that these had attempted to disturb the Doctrine of our
Church, yet was the uniformity of Doctrine still maintained.

For when our Church was disquieted by Barret and Baro, the Bishops that then
were in our Church, examined the new Doctrine of these men, and utterly
disliked and rejected it: And in the point of Predestination confirmed that
which they understood to be the Doctrine of the Church of England against
Barret and Baro, who oppugned that Doctrine.

This was fully declared by If this were the Doctrine of both our Archbishops
and Bishops then, I doubt not but it is their Doctrine now, or else they are
much degenerated from these their worthy Praedecessors.
both the Archbishops, Whitgift of Canterbury, and Hutton of York, with the
other Bishops and learned men of both Provinces, who repressed Barret and Baro,
refuted their Doctrine, and justified the contrary, as appears by that Book,
which both the Archbishops then compiled.

The same Doctrine which the Bishops then maintained, was at diverse times after
approved, as in the Conference at Hampton Court, as will be hereafter
confirmed. And again it was confirmed in Ireland, in the Articles of Religion
in the time of our late Sovereign, Articulo 38.

The Author of the Appeal pleads against the Articles of Lambheth, and
justifies the Doctrine of Barret, Baro and Thomson, auerring the same to be
the Doctrine of the Church of England.

This he does not by naming of those men, whose names he knew would bring no
honor to this cause: but by laying down and justifying their doctrines, and
suggesting that they who maintained the doctrines contained in the Articles of
Lambheth, are Caluinists and Puritanes: So that those Reverend Archbishops,
Whitgift and Hutton, with the Bishops of our Church, who then lived, are in his
judgment to be rejected as Puritans.

The question is, Whether of these two positions we must now receive for the
doctrines of our Church: that which Barret, Baro, and Thompson would have
brought in, which doctrines were then refuted and rejected by our Church; Or
that doctrine which the Bishops of our Church maintained against these men,
which doctrine has been since upon diverse occasions approved? If there were no
more to be said, I dare put it to the Issue before any indifferent Judges. Thus
far this reverend Bp. whose testimony alone might sufficiently determine our
present Controversy.

The third witness is Doctor Samuel Ward in his Concio ad Clerum, preached in
St. Mary's in Cambridge, January 12. 1625. page 45. This also (says he) I can
truly add for a conclusion; that the Universal Church has always adhaered
to St. Augustine in these points, (speaking before of some Anti-Arminian
conclusions, all which are fully related in his Suffragium Brittanorum, annexed
to this Clerum,) ever since his time till now: the Church of England also from
the beginning of reformation, and this our famous Academie, with all those who
from thence till now, have with us enjoyed the Divinity Chaires, if we except
one foreign. French man, (to wit, Peter Baro,) one, I say, who by the
vigilance of our Ancestors, and the large authority of the most Reverend
Archbishop Whitgist was compelled to renounce his chair, have likewise
constantly adhaered to him: And if to him, then certainly to us, as the 2. part
of his 7. To me which makes wholly for us, will infallibly evidence: By these
three several testimonies it is abundantly evident, that our Divinity
Professors and first reformers of Religion in King Edward the 6. his days: our
Reverend and learned orthodox Divines that either suffered, or escaped
Martyrdom in Queen Mary's days: our Bishops, Divines, and learned Clergy,
who composed our Articles in Queen Elizabeth's days: our famous Universities
of Oxford, and Cambridge, with all their Divinity Professors from the beginning
of reformation to this present; (excepting Baro, who was conuented, and in a
manner expelled for his erroneous Tenants,) together with the whole Church of
England from her first reformation to this instant, have constantly approved,
unanimously embraced,

Not to speak of Balm from Gilead to recover Conscience p. 56. 78.
Master Samuel Ward, or Achithophel. p. 13. 25. to 35.
Master Carpenter, or Abstrucenesse of Divine Mysteries.
M. Deubtie, or other of our late vnrecited writers, who condemn Arminianisme
in the gross: not yet to mention any of the fore-quoted Authors: my 4th.
Evidence to prove our Anti-Arminian Tenants the undoubted Doctrines of our
Church; is the authorized translating and printing in our English dialect, not
only of St. Augustines chief works against the Pelagians; but even of Calvin,
Beza, Zanchius, Bucani^^, Trelcatius, Bastingius, Vrsin, Kimedoncius, Piscator,
Fayus, Olenian, Iunius, Reniger, and Moulins, works against the
Pseudo-Lutherans, and Arminians, who pass for orthodox and approved Authors in
our Church, whom some style a Caluinist.

Certainly if the Doctrine of our English Church, were various from these
Authors Tenants, they being the greatest Anti-Arminians this day exstant; their
names would never be so venerable, their works not so highly esteemed in our
Church, as to be thus englished, authorized, sold, and printed here among us
(as we know they are) without control: Since then our Church has thus
indenized and adopted these foreign Authors with their Anti-Arminian
Writings; since she thus claims them for, and ranks them with her own, her
Doctrines questionless are the same with theirs; and so wholly ours, not our
Arminian Opposites, whom all these pointblancke oppugn.

You have seen now, pious Readers, what plentiful numerous, punctual, full
and fair Evidences, Records and witnesses, of all sorts, and ages our
Anti-Arminian Tenants have produced, to vindicate and prove themselves the
ancient, established, professed, resolved, and undoubted Doctrines of the
Church of England: Let us now examine on the other side what evidences, what
testimonies these Arminian Errors can rake up together, to entitle themselves
unto our Church.

First of all, they have none of the fore-quoted Article^, no public record or
monument of our reformed Church to justify them; Yea all these (as our Church
has always hitherto expounded them) do positiuely condemn them for
insufferable and branded Errors.

Baro, a spurious Frenchman excepted,) never an orthodox or approved English
Writer that I know off from the beginning of Reformation to this instant, that
can give in any evidence in one particular point, (much less in all points) on
their side, being rightly understood; where as we have produced a whole Century
of Authors, if not more, against there. The only Authors that they can produce,
and those but partial maimed, and obscure witnesses, not entire, or
perspicuous; are Book of Gods providence, and Lectures upon Jonas.
Peter Baro in Queen Elizabeth's: De Interscisione iustificationis and Gratiae
Diatriba.
Thompson in King James, and Gagge, and Appeal.
M. Mountague, and Of the Divine Essence and Attributes.
Iackson in King Charles his reign: men branded and condemned in our Church.
The first of these being an exortique Frenchman, was solemnly conuented and
censured for his erroneous Books and Tenants; first at Lambeth, by the
composers of the Lambheth Articles, and afterward in the Sea page. 121. 222.
See Doctor
University of Cambridge by all the heads of Houses, upon the complaint of
diverse Batchellors of Divinity: upon which Wards Concio ^d Clerum p. 45. Thysij
praefatio Fratribus Belgis Hardro^ici. 1613, B. Carltons Examination of M.
Mountagues Appeal. c. 2. accordingly.
he^ was forced to forsake that University, and our Kingdom too, This branded
and illegal witness then, being at the very best a forraigner, does only
mar, not help their cause: The second was but an Anglo-Belgicus, a
dissolute, ebrious and luxurious English-Dutchman: See Bishop Abbot
Animaduersio in Thompsoni Diatribam: Praefatio ad Lectorem, and cap. 1.
his Book was denied Licens here, as being contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England; and being printed at Leyden after his death for want of
licens here; it was presently refelled by a reverend and learned Prelate of our
Church, Doctor Robert Abbot, Bishop of Salisbury, whose Book now extant, was
imprinted by authority; and dedicated to our royal Sovereign, then Prince of
Wales. If then the life, or posthumus Book of this second Witness be
examined, his testimony will but cast, not further, not advance their right:
The third of these Witnesses (who was lately rumored to disclaim his
testimony, and will either euade, or else withdraw, and retract his evidence
when he comes to trial,) as he is a principal in the present controversy, and
so no competent Judge or Witness; so he has been 4. several times impeached
by the high Court of Parliament, for giving false testimony in the points in
Issue: besides, his testimony is wavering, dubious, and repugnant to it self,
and it has been counterpleaded by diverse of our Church, and generally
disclaimed by most, as false and spurious: Therefore it does but weaken, yea,
betray their cause, and strengthen ours. The last of these being transported
beyond himself with metaphisicall Contemplations, to his own infamy, and his
renowned Mothers shame, (I mean the famous University of Oxford, who grieves
for his defection, from whose duggs he never sucked his poisonous Doctrines,) as
his evidence is intricate and obscure beyond the reach or discovery of ordinary
capacities; so it has been blanched and blasted by a Parliament examination;
excepted against by the Convocation house; answered by some, disanowed by most
of our Divines; his single testimony therefore, (especially in his own
particular case where he cannot be both a party and a witness too;) makes
nothing for their title to our Church. These are the only evidences and Authors
to my knowledge that our Arminian Tenants can produce to interest them in our
Church; and these, (all circumstances, being well confidered,) make flat
against them: since our Chuch has utterly disauowed and distasted them,
rejecting, yea condemning these their writings, as diametrally opposite to her
established Doctrines. If any Arminian can produce any other English Writers
whom our Church approues, to patronize these errors, I shall be willing to be
informed of them; for my own part I never met with any but with these. I
confess, that some would wrest Bishop Hooper to the contrary in the point of
Reprobation, and universal redemption: but in truth he is for us, not against
us, in these very points, if rightly apprehended: howeuer he is evidently for
us in the rest: But admit he were not, yet he is but one: See the marginall
Notes. p. 52. Quid ergo, si Episcopus, si Diaconus, sividua, si virgo, si
Doctor, si etiam Martyr lapsus a regula fuerit, ideo Haereses videbuntur
veritate^ obtinere? Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex side personas? Tertul. De
praescript aduers. Haereticos.
his singular opinion therefore will not prejudice us; since we have an whole
Century of better and more punctual witnesses for to back us.

Barret, Baro, and others, in the year 1595. Bish. Carltons Examination of M.
Mountagues Appeal. cap. 2.
they being the first that broached them in our Church: witness the
Recantation of Master Sympson in Cambridge in King James his latter time, and
the late conuention of one Brooks in Oxford, for broaching these Arminian
Tenants: witness the proceedings in Parliament against Master Mountagues and
Iacksons Arminian Books, which are generally distasted throughout the
Kingdom: and can any then be so shamelesly audacious, as now for to auerre
them, to be the undoubted, established, or received Doctrines of our Church?

England; as stigmatical, damnable and old-conde^ned Errors, first hatched by
Pelagius, the^ nursed by his Followers, fomented by Demi-Pelagians; revived and
propagated by Popish Schoolmen; and since that abetted by Pseudo-Lutherans,
Socinians, See the Description of what God has Praedest nated concerning Man.
written by the Anabaptists, and published in their names, Anno. 1^20. where all
these Arminian Tenants are in terminis maintained.
Anabaptists, and Arminians: sects branded and condemned in our Church: and can
we then be so stupendiously, so damnably absurd, as to affirm or judge them,
the undoubted, the embraced Doctrines of our Church? Certainly, that which
has no Records, no Evidences, no authorized Writers of our Church to patronize
it, all of them to oppugn it: that which our Martyrs never sealed, but
cancelled with their blood; our first reformers never planted, but displanted
in our Church: our Divinity Professors never justified, but condemned in our
University Schools: that which all our Authors never patronized, but
constantly refelled as a branded Error, in their writings: that which both our
Church and Universities have never constantly affirmed, but solemnly enjoined
men to recant, as expressly contrary to the professed and resolved Doctrine of
our Church; cannot be the Doctrine of the Church of England. But this is the
case of all the forementioned Arminian Errors, witness all the praemises.
Therefore they cannot be the professed and resolved Doctrine of the Church of
England, let Arminians vainly boast and babble to the contrary what they will.

Lastly, that which sundry ancient Councels, Fathers, and modern Synods, have
positiuely censured and condemned as a pestilent, dangerous, and
grace-destroying Error: and not so much as one ancient Orthodox Council,
Father, or modern Synod ever ratified: as the ancient, Catholic and
undoubted truth, can never be reputed the professed, established, and undoubted
Doctrine of the Church of England: But sundry ancient Orthodox Concilium
Palestinum often mentioned in S. Augustin^s, 7. Tom. part 2. Council affected
caenum. Can. 76. to 84. Council. Antasicanum. 2 Can. 1 to the end of 25. Council.
Valent^num. Anno. 815. Can. 1. 3. 4. 5. 6.
Councels, August Enchirideon. Epist. 100. to 106 and Tom 7 part 2 throughout
Heirom. Contr. Pelagianos libri. and Comm. in Ephesians. cap. 1. Prosper Responsio ad
Quaesti. Vincensia^n as: ad Excerpta Genuensium. Contra Collatorem. and De
vocatione Gentium. F^^gentius De Praedestinatione ad Mo^mum. Primasius.
Comment. in Romans c. 8. 9. and 11. in Ephesians. 1. in 2. Tim. 2. 19. Orosius
Apologia aduers. Pelagianos de Liberate Arbitrij. Petrus Diaconus De
Incarnatione and Gratia Dom. Jesus Christi. Beda and Anselmus in Romans 9. and 11.
in Ephesians. 1. in 2. Tim. 2. 19. and Bradwardme de Causa Dei.
Fathers, and Synod of Dort. 1619. 1620. Synod of Ireland. 1615. with the
several Confessions of the Reformed Churches, Harmony of Confessions. sect. 4.
5. 6. 8. 9.
modern Synods, have positiuely censured and condemned these very Arminian
Tenants, as a pestilent, dangerous, and grace-destroying Error: and not so much
as one ancient Council, Orthodox, Father, or modern Synod ever ratified them,
as the ancient Catholic, and undoubted truth: Therefore they can never be
reputed, the professed, established, and undoubted Doctrine of the Church of
England: The affirmative part of my Assumption, the Councels, Fathers, and
Synods, quoted in the margent, with sundry others which I have at large recited
in my Perpetuity of a Regenerate man's estate, page 213. to 270. (to which I
shall refer you,) do fully warrant: For the negative part, let our Arminians
disprove it if they can, since I must needs affirm; that I know not so much as
one ancient Council, or modern Synod, no nor yet one orthodox Father of the
Primative Church, (unless De libero Arbitrio. lib. 2. Bibl. patrum. Tom. 5.
part 3. page 523.
Faustus an absolute Semi-Pelagian, though in show a professed Anti-Pelagian,
may be reputed orthodox, when as both Protestants and Papists have hitherto
branded him as unsound and Haeterodox in his Tenants:) that did ever yet
maintain or justify, these Semi-Pelagian or Arminian Errors; If then they were
never the received or approved Doctrines, but the branded Haeresies, of the
Primitive Church; if they were never yet confirmed and settled in any Christian
Church, by any one national or general Council, whether ancient or modern,
though they have been censured and condemned by diverse; they cannot be the
established, the undoubted Doctrines of the Church of England.

You have he^re good Christian Readers, both heard, and seen, the several
Evidences and Witnesses which Anti-Arminianisme, and Arminianisme can produce,
to entitle themselves unto the Church of England, to which they both of late
l^y claim: You have seen the Articles of England, Lambheth, and Ireland: the
Common prayer Book, and Homelies established in our Church: The authorized
Catechism of King Edward the 6. The Questions and Answers of Predestination:
The Synod of Dort: The Recantation of Barret: The Concurrent consent of all our
Godly, Learned, Eminent, and most admired Martyrs, Writers, and Divinity
Professors, from the beginning of reformation to this present: The Resolution
and judgment of both our famous Universities, Oxford, and Cambridge; yea the
ancient and modern Churches of Ireland, Scotland, and England, with all their
orthodox and learned members, giving testimony too, and judgment for the one;
but disintitelling, disauowing and sentencing the other, which can find no
full, no punctual Evidence, no competent, indifferent, orthodox, complete, or
absolute, but only branded, censured, and recanting Witnesses, ( Nemo inde
strui potest vnde destruitur. Nemoah eo inluminatur, a quo contenebratur.
Tertul De Praescript aduers. Haere^ie. cap. 4.
which cut the very nerves and heart strings of their cause) to give them any
colorable title to, any seeming right or interest in our Church: Which then of
these irreconcilable, incompliable Assertions, are the ancient, received,
established, and resolved Doctrines of our Church, be ye the Judges.
Certainly that which has no full, no pregnant Evidences, no legal or
unattained Witnesses, to justify or clear its right, or claim: that which
was altogether unknown, and never heard off in our Church till now of late;
Fides in regula posita est: Cedat curiositas fidei, cedat gloria saluti. Nihil
scire, scire omnia est. Vt no^ inimici essent veritatis Haeretici, vt de
fugiendis ijs non praemoneremur, quale est confer cum hominibus, qui and ips^
adhuc se quaerere confitentur? Si enim ver^ adhuc quaerunt, nihil adhuc certi
depraehenderunt: and ideo quodcunque videntur interim tenere, dubitationem suam
oste^dunt quandi^^ quaerunt, Itaque tu qui proinde quaeris, spectans ad eos qui
and ipsi quaerunt, dubious a dubijs, incertus ab incertis, caecus a caecis in
fouta^ deducaris necesse est. Sed cum decipiendi gratia praetendunt se adhoc
quaerere, vt nobis per sollicitudinis iniectionem tractatus suos insinuent;
denique vbi adierunt ad nos, statim quae dicebant quaerenda esse defendunt: iam
illos sie debemus refutare, vt sciant nos non Christo, sed sibi negatores esse.
Cum enim quaerunt abhuc, nondum tenent; cum autem nondum tenent, nondum
crediderunt: Cum autem nondum crediderunt, non sunt Christiani. At cum tenent
quidem and credunt, quaerendum tamen dicunt vt defendant: antequ^m defendant
negant quod credunt, confitentes si nondum credidisse, dum q^aerunt. Qui ergo
nec sibi sunt Christiani, quanto magis nobis? Qui per fallaciam ven^unt, qualem
fidem disputant? eui veritati patrocinantur, qui ^am a mendacio inducunt?
Te^tul. De Prae scrip. aduers. Hereticos. cap. 5.
that which is yet in Quaere, in further search, and discovery, (and so not yet
believed by its own best studied Advocates, the case of rotten Pelagian
Arminianisme:) can never be: that which has all these fore alleged Charters
and testimonies to strengthen, and confirm its right, (the case and happy
condition of Anti-Arminianisme,) must of necessity be, the true, the genuine
and undoubted Doctrine of our Church. Let us therefore now at last without any
further scrutinie of debate, exile this spurious and cursed Arminianisme (which
has lately drawn the very curse and wrath of God, with sundry fatal
judgments on us) out of our Church and state: let us once more adiudge and
sink it to the very depths of Hell, to which it was of old condemned; as a
most pernicious, turbulent, discomfortable, desperate, blasphemous, and
grace-oppugning Heresy: and since England (I mean See the latter end of the
Epistle Dedicatorie to the Parliament. Quid nobis Patriam?
Pelagius a Britain, and a Monk of Bangor) was the first that bred it, let
her be now the first to ruin it. As for our Anti-Arminian Conclusions, the
ancient, hereditarie, and unquestionable Doctrines of the Church of England,
and the chiefest treasure, joy and comfort of our souls, Quid charareuisere
tandem Pignora, delectosque inuatco^^isse senates? To sine dulce nihil.
Claudian in Rufinum. lib. 2. p. 57.
without which all other comforts and contentments are unpleasant: let us lodge
them in our hearts, in throne them in our souls, settle them in our
judgments, claspe them in our affections, and so perpetuate and establish them
in our Church, that all the pollices and powers of Hell, all the stratagems and
powder-plots of Rome, all the combinations and complotments of foreign
Enemies, or domestique Traitors, (for See 23 Eliz. cap. 1. 27. Eliz. c. 2.
such are all those Iesuited and Popish factors, who go about to innouate
Religion, or to withdraw us from the doctrines now established in the Church of
England, as these Tenants are:) may never be able to unsettle, or draw them
into question any more.

These Anti-Arminian Tenants, they are the very joy of our hearts, the life of
our souls, the foundation of our eternal bliss; the only Evidences and
Assurances that we have to entitle us to salvation: if these once faulter, or
prove false, our joy, our spiritual comfort, the very grace and glory of God,
and our salvation are endangered: if we come once to lose but these, the whole
joy, the treasure, comfort, crown, and happiness of all true Christians, yea
the whole frame and structure of Gods grace, and the mysteries of our salvation
are utterly subverted, and brought quite to ruin. And shall we then forgo
these truths, which are far more near and dear unto us then our dearest
souls, when we have thus long, thus constantly, thus abundantly professed them?

These, these are the orthodox and sweet dogmaticall Resolutions, which our
Martyrs blood have sealed, our first Reformers of Religion settled; our
Ancestors embraced, our Artic^es confirmed; our Universities professed; our
Church believed; our Ministers subscribed; our Protestant Kings, and Queens
defended: our Preachers published; our Laity received; our Parliament
particularly voted, owned, and protected: our Writers propagated, and
professedly maintained against all Heretical oppugners whatsoever: (which they
would never have done, had they been mere curious scoole-points, nicities, or
needless speculations only, as some repute them:) and we our selves long
since acknowledged, yea readily entertained as our own undoubted and professed
Doctrines: and shall we then disclaim, or doubt them now? These are those
blessed, gracious, and tutelary Doctrines, which have thus long guarded and
secured both our Church and State: These are the Bulwarks which have a long
time kept out Popery and Romish tyranny from; that have preserned peace and
unity in our Church, which now is almost overrun with Popery and
Arminianisme, with sundry Errors and Divisions, since these have fallen to
decay, and lost their credit with us. These were the truths that secured us
from the Spanish Armado in 88^ See 3. Iacobi. cap 1. Quid tale im^anes vnquam
gessisse feruntur vel Sinis Isthmiaca pinu, vel r^, o profunda Sciron, vel
Phaleris tauro, vel carcere Sulla? O mites Diomedis equi: Busiridis arae
Clementes, ia^ Cinna pi^^ iam Sparthace leuis, Papicolis collalus eris.
Claudian. in Rufinum. l. 1. p. 47.
from the barbarous, unnatural, and infernal Powder Treason, in 1605. the
very memory of which should make al Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, with their
bloody Antichristian Religion which now creepes in upon us, for ever execrable
to all English hearts. These were the procurers of our ancient glory, and
renown: of our prosperity and welfare, our victories and triumphs both by Sea
and Land: these made us honorable, wealthy happy, and victorious for 60. years
and upward; (and we had yet no doubt continued such, had we not of late
revolted from them, and given harbor to those Popish, those pestilent Arminian
errors, which have wasted both our Church and state, and plunged them into such
a gulf of sundry miseries, as is like to swallow them up at once, unless the
power of heaven prove their rescue:) and shall we then begin to waiue them, or
forsake them now? These are the 1. Pet. 1. 2 3. 25.
immortal seed which did beget us at first; these, 1. Pet. 2. 2.
the sincere milk that nourished us: these Heb. 5. 12. 14.
the strong meat that must corroborate us: these the Isay 40. 1. 2.
celestial cordialls which must comfort us in all our deiections: these the
Hebr. 6. 17. 18. 19.
Ancre which must secure, and hold us up from sinking, in the midst of all
our troubles: these the Ephe. 6. 11. to 19
Armor that must shield us in all our spiritual combats: yea these are the
Doctrines which 1. Pet. 1. 3. 23. Iam. 1. 18.
must beget, and perfect grace within us: Psalm. 19. 7. lames 1. 21. 1. Cor. 1.
16. 21.
which must convert and save our souls: In these were we and ours borne; in
these have we lived; (and if we ever hope for any grace or glory, peace or
safety, any present or future happiness o^ prosperity for our selves, or our
posterities after us, in these let us, and ours live, and dye.

FINIS.
Leo Epistolarum Decreta^^^um Epist. 75. cap. 1. Nullus vltra sin^tur impet^re
qu^ non tamhumanis quam diuinis s^nt statuta decretis: ne vere digni sint Dei
munus amittere, qui de veritate ^ipsi^s ausi fuerint dubitare.


Gentle Reader, I shall desire thee to correct these few material Errataes,
which by the improuidence of the Printer, and Corrector, have escaped the
Press: for other litterall scapes which do not vitiate the ^ence, I hope thou will pardon them of course.
Errata.
page 13. l. 22. p. 46. l. 2. p. 49. l. 34. p. 51. l. 4. p. 54. l. 34. p. 80.
l. 2. p. 81. s. p. 111. l. 34. p. 121. l. 30. p. 136. l. 6. for p. 43. to 48.
convinced words of for all this Psalm. 2. Este^^ enjoined Err^s read page 54.
conuented. works. or. all. his. Phil. Esteius. enjoyed. Errors.


