SCOTLANDS COMPLAINT.

Upon the death of our late Sovereign KING JAMES of most happy memory.

BY Mr. D. PRYMEROSE.

-- Quis talia fando, Temperet a lachrymis -- IN DEFENSE


EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun, Anno Dom. 1625.

TO THE VERY NOBLE, and ILLUSTRIOUS LORD, JOHN EARL OF MAR, LORD ERSKEINE,
GARIOCH, AND ALLOWAY, etc. HIGH THESAVRER OF SCOTLAND. Knight of the most noble
order of the Garter, and one of his M. most honorable, privy Counsel in both
Kingdoms.
MY LORD,
IN this common calamity of our late Soverainges death, (of whom it stands in
doubt, whether his Life was more laudable and admired, or his Death more
deplorable and regrated) out of a respectfull and reverent duty to his
Majesty's blessed memory, in this time of universal mourning, I have drawn up,
in a measured and footed style, some Elegies, and Panegyric verses; to rouse
and stir up, by an examplarie Imitation, some more refyned wits, (which owe
their abilities and best endeavors to this Princely, and lamentable subject)
to go forward with me in the course of public sorrow; and to devote their
Hearts and Art, to the serious condoling this universal loss; the grief
whereof, is not bounded by the Sea-bordering limits of his M. dominions, but is
streatched out and spread abroad, as far as the trumpet of Fame, (which has
borrowed all men's mouths to sound the Heroic virtues most perspicuouslie
eminent in our late Sovereign) is heard: and chieslie, his M. vnparalelled
Piety, and Goodness. And for the first, was it not clear by the whole
progress of his blessed Life, that He was ever most anxious, and careful to
maintain the Profession, (whereof Himself was a Princely, and practical
example) of the true and catholic Religion. The use and practice whereof,
Grace from above, and industrious Learning had so refyned in him, and turned to
so excellent a temper; that all the good Kings of the World, (of whom it is
said Omnes bonos Principes in vno annulo posse perscribi,) were but as small
stars compared to this raying Planet. And all those properties, which Holy
write does attribute to the few good Kings of Israel, and Judah; and dispersed
among them, did all concur (as Prophetical epithets) in one symbolizing
harmony, to make up the perfect pattern and model of a most excellent King
in the person of his Majesty. And to his Goodness (a virtue answerable to
Theological charity) it was of a splendor so transparent in his M. as the
forgetful silence of future times should never have the power to smoother, or
extinguish. And therefore should He not justly be called (...), who always
affected the weal, and good of his subjects; yea, of all men; His Justice was
ever mixed with mercy; and His wrath, though justly conceived, was tempred,
and mitigated with the smooth oil of his natural clemency; so that the Poets
speech may be turned over to Him;

He did but hate the fault, and not the faulty one. Compare him also with
Ethnicke, and Paynim Princes, whose radiant and splendide vices were busked up
with the false ornaments of virtue; and you shall find that there the best of
them, as their Titus, their Trajane, etc. were but obscure glimpses, and as it
were a twilight, in respect of that All-refreshing Sun, which is risen in our
age to this Northern World: For their supposed moral virtues were but
enforced sparks, and flashes of fire, glancing from the recounter of pride,
and natural magnanimity; and in this kind a Beast tamed by industry, as
they were by precepts and imitation, may be called generous. But our
SOVEREIGNS moral parts, were true flames of sacred fire, (still burning upon
the altar of Faith, offering up the sweet smelling sacrifice of prayers, and
contrition; (nature and grace concluding and consummating in Him, what is most
excellent both in practical Theology, and moral Philosophy. It is said by a
learned Man, Pulchra haec laudatio, O virum doctum! sed illa melior, O virum
sapientem! and ista optima, O virum bonum! But all the three have met together
in this Wonder of Time, not a Man only, but a King; so that we are obliged with
admiration to cry out; O Regem doctum, sapientem, bonum! and that by
excellence; and in a superlative degree. To explain by induction these His M.
heroic parts deserves whole Volumes, long tract of time, pens of the most
approved, and tongues of the most admired Spirits, wherein to be summar and by
an vmbragious veil to lessen the native splendor of so excellent a Light,
were impiety, and a crime almost of La ese-Majestie; Therefore being of a
mean stature, for fear of drowning, I will not wade too far in this Ocean.
But knowing that as your L. by nature and education, by common duty of a
subject, and many special obligements; was tied in the most strict and
forcible bond of sincere love, to your deceased Prince: and that the threnes,
and grips of sorrow at this time possesses your Heart; So I am sure, that
these doleances, and complaints (abruptly bursted forth when first mine cares
sucked in the never-enough deplored news of His M. decease, as Symboles and
tokens of my love, and allegiance) will be favoourablie accepted, and
graciously protected by Your authority. That fountain of Your L. excellent
and eminent qualities, apparent to all, has streamed to me some effects of
Your gracious favor, which in Will, wishes and performance of all duties, and
service that may fall under the compass of my power, and ability, I shall
endeavor to acquyte, Remaining

Your L. most duetifull, and addicted servitour Mr. D. PRYMEROSE.

SCOTLANDS COMPLAINT.
WHAT pressing pangs be those? what waves of woe return?
It seem'th each fatal Day does teach, another day to mourn:
Grief following grief; and Sorrow tracing sorrow,
This day too flowing and too deep, are shallow found to morrow.
For while in Silence sad, all Solace forced to shun,
Mine Agonies were fresh and green, my Plaintes but new begun.
Behold, the worst Assault, O pitti-lesse Excess!
Now am I forced to bear the great, that scarce could bear the less.
Was it not more than much? within short space to find,
Three Burgeons of the Royal Blood in Coffins sad inshrin'd.
But that mine Ears should hear, or dazled-Eyes should see,
Mine homebred Dear, thryse-sacred SIRE, O Sorrow! breathless lie
Light Cares are cured by Speech, and vented get relief,
But secreit Silence does bemone, a Soul surcharged with Grief.
So should a chilling cold, have lul'd my Vital part,
Into a dull Lethargicke Sleep, and sopped down mine heart.
Like wretched Niobe, or Bibles frightfull Fears.
The one was turned into a Stone; the other into Tears.
But that a rising Sun, in State and Majesty,
With golden Beams enlightened has, my Neighbor Coasts and me.
That blessed and Royal Plant sprung of His Sacred SIRE,
Has breathed new Comfort to my Soul, and Hope to my Desire.
So then I need not doubt, but Heaven shall make me prove,
From Father glyding to the Son, refreshing streams of Love.
For signs of future Hap, my calmed Mind assure,
As blessed JAMES did, Great CHARLES shall, my Weal and Peace procure
Yet can I not but mourn, and Sorrows thesaurize,
While here to my deceased LORD, my Love I sacrifize.
Unto your Glorious Ghost, my Princely Saint I vow,
Engraven on mine Heart to keep, fresh memory of You.
That day shall never dawne, that shaddowing night shall never
Spread sable courtaines over my Coast, and this Horizon cover,
But consecrate I shall, my long-acquainted SIRE,
To You, the praises of my lips, my thoughts, and my desire.
And though my orphane fields, His wonted splendour want,
Yet daily service shall be done to my adored Saint.
All times and ages shall; while measured time does last,
And till the Angels trumpet sound, to tell that time is past,
Unfold to wondering Earth, this work of nature chief,
Which pondered right, will move in men, more marvel nor belief.
Since Heavens did never grant, to any mortal King,
So soon, so well, so sure, so long, and in such peace to reign.
For since his Royal grace, to three more Crowns was called,
And by a free applause of all, most gloriously installed;
Me thought my darkened Name did then include my Fate,
And with an everlasting Night had threatened mine estate;
But O! the gracious beams of His transcending Face,
Were ever present to procure, my health, my wealth, my peace.
And though His absence seemed, a woeful want to be,
Yet proved His present power, and love, a sure relief to me.
His Princely self retired, did he not leave behind
A seat of Justice filled by men, agreeing to His mind,
And when pale Death by times had pruned that fruitful Tree,
An Impe of proof is quickelie dressed, that want for to supply.
Great Alexanders Speech by dying Voice expressed,
Wil'd His Monarchick Crown and Reign be granted to the best:
Such was our SOVEREIGNS choice, such was His constant Will.
That Places void, the wisest, and the worthiest men should fill.
Witness that Noble Peer, chief Statesman of this Land,
Whom all do love, whom all obey, who does in love command:
Of Nerva made by fate Sole-Monarch of the Earth
Was said, to have been fortunate in Life, but more in Death.
That left to bear the sway of Romes farre-spred Impyre,
Great Trajane whose Heroicke Parts all Ages did admyre.
So let my modest Muse account Him happy twyse,
Who blessed in Life, has by His Death made this bright Star to rise.
But O! it was not He, and if it was by chance,
His end gave place, and was not cause, which did this Peer advance*
O! No, it was my SIRE, whose Heauen-inspyred Heart,
Knew when, to whom, and how He should, His Honors all impart
He found that generous Spirit first Statesman fit to be,
Then for Himself, and now unto, His Royal Son and me.
O! if it were my choice, no Time, no Power, nor Fate,
Should have the force to change or move these Minions of my state.
Strong Pillars meet for me; by choice not chance erected,
Are for their Knowledge, Love and Skill, so worthily respected
Of me and mine, that now I feel no present cross,
Save that too sharp and public grief of my late Sovereigns loss.
The thought of which Distress, and agonizing woe,
I fear no Tract, no change of Time, shall make me to for-goe.
That Macedonian PRINCE, who vnacquaint with Fears,
Did never bow to foreign Force, perforce must yield much Tears,
For when His favorite arrested was by Death,
He could not Sorrow's passion daunt, that had subdued the Earth,
But was so plunged in woe, for his dear Minions sake,
That Maugre all His Princes toil, no comfort He would take,
Till Amons Jupiter, enforced Him to for-beare,
And fray'd the superstitious King from shedding of a Tear,
Suggesting falsely that His Minion best beloved,
Was rank't in Heaven, a Deity by all the gods approved.
That flamming fires of Joy, and Sacrifices must
Cherish the teare-provoked wrath of God Ephestions Ghost.
More cause have I to mourn, no private loss is mine,
That Majesty is now unseen, that over all did shine.
Those Beams of Beauty are shrunk underneath the Earth,
That Tongue divine is silenced now, and by this only Death,
Ten thousand die at once, since life to grief annexed,
Is but a living Death, or then a dying Life perplexed.
Yet since that Paynim Prince by cunning slight was eased,
And through believing what was false, had all his woes appeased.
Why? should not I and mine, lift up our weeping eyes,
And find King JAMES in Majesty, above the azur'd Skies.
Where Angels Songs are heard, such as his Sacred Grace,
By His Lepanto shows to be in that excelling place,
O then! why should we mourn, and shed such storms of Tears?
Or fright our Souls with agonies, or fill our Hearts with Fears.
Since what he now enjoyes, the smallest grain is more,
Than all the Pleasures summed in one, which He enjoyed before.
Here, here, by Faith we trust, times period last compleete,
Saints glorified; with glories Crown our Sovereign crowned to meet.
Soft then my plaining Muse, and though in homely Phraise,
Not what is His due, but what thou can sob forth unto His praise.
Behold Him first a Man, survey his private ways,
And then confess Him to have been, the Glory of our Days.
Bright Mirror set on high, most glorious to detect
The inward beauty of Himself, and others frail defect.
His Mind a Magazin, of Heauen-infused Grace,
Still yielding fruits of Faith to God, and breathing Love and Peace
To mortal men on Earth, with such a fragrant smell,
This large Theater has indew'd, that after Ages shall
Complain of posting Time, which robbed them of the sight
Of Natures Darling, Earths triumph, GODS Minion, Man's delight
Then turn with gazing Eyes, behold His Kingly parts,
A PRINCE of Peace, a KING of Men, a Conqueror of Hearts,
For underneath His Wings, which all the World admires,
I breathed have the air of Peace now near thrice twenty years.
What foreign Force or Power, what Death menacing bands,
Adventure durst t'approach the Coast of my Sea-bordring Lands.
What civil Broyle did stain, in those Halcyons days,
My back with blood, or fill my breast with fear, or ears with frayes.
For some celestial Power so circuled Him about,
That to approach His Sacred Shryne, all Furies stood in doubt.
And armed at strongest proof, Christ's Champion, did repel
All charms, and thundering Powder-plots, hatched in the depth of hell.
Yea, from His Cradle forth, The Eternal Him prepared,
Emplumed Squadrons set a part, to be His surest Guarde.
His Throne a Center was approaching near the Deity.
Whereon two Pillars were erect'd of Justice and of Piety.
IEHOVA'S divine Will, first modeled in the Heaven,
With Gold Charecters on the two, by curious Air engraven,
Tell that in power, and will, our Monarch still was able,
As Gods great Viceroy to defend the one and other Table.
Who could or durst presume, to call this power in doubt,
Since Iuda's Lion to the World, our Lion did send out.
And to ennoble his strength the more and Name for to advance,
Did Englands Leopards adjoyne, and Golden Flowers of France.
So His religious Will was published to the Earth,
By sound of Fame in Word and Work, in Life and sealed in death.
But of this Hero's life the progress to receipt,
Not Man's abortiue birth of speech, but Angels Tongues are meit.
Come then You learned Band that on my Coasts do dwell.
And tasted have the crystal streams of Aganippe's Well.
But His Monarchicke Muse, l first of all adjourne,
Who wont about fresh Dovan's Banks, old Monarch's fate to mourn.
Thy griefe-surcharged Spirit, rouse up with Sacred Fire,
And solemnize the obsequies, of thine anointed SIRE.
In measured Accents rear, whole Iliad's to His praise,
And our Pelidas deifie, by thine immortal Lays.
Or then in stately Prose, (for well thou can) pen forth,
New Xenophon, thy Cyrus life, and vmbrage of his worth.
Next Thou dear Minion, whose sweet Nectar-flowing Tongue,
In Hymns divine, Moeliades, and feasting-Forth have song.
Come Darling mine take part, shed forth some precious tears,
With sopping sorrow fill all hearts, with plaining charm all Ears.
Dress Trophies new to woe, vnceasing sighs among,
Let Fastirg-Forth not Feasting be, the subject of Thy Song,
Let all his Streams be black, which erst have Crystal been,
And let his Banks be turned in jette, his curled Meadows green
Assume Chameleon-like a Pitchie-coloured hew,
And all those rare eye-pleasing Flowers, which in his Garden grew.
Be changed in Prophyrie, or in that polished Stone,
Which to thy stately Pyramide, Paros did yield alone.
Scarce was the golden Sun thrice hidden from mine Eyes,
Scarce thrice had plunged his purple Beams in the Hesperian Seas.
After my Sacred LORD had yielded up above
His glorious Ghost, into the hands of His eternal Love.
And ere these fatal news were come unto mine Ears,
The boistrous Wind did tempests sigh; the Heaven did melt in tears.
And Forth in such a rage, as was not seen before,
His wonted Limits far ou'r-reach'd, and channel'd up the Shore.
Peace foaming Forth, I know thine Eastward flowing Streams,
Rancountred have some swelling Tide, which wafting from the Thames.
Sough't forth Thy SOVEREIGNS fate, as then unknown to me,
So spytefull Thou vpbraid'st all those that would not mourn with Thee.
Peace Forth, that Day will come, and perchance is at hand,
When thy best Hope, Great CHARLES shall upon the Sea-banks stand.
When shoutes of Joy shall cheer, thy now-deserted Shore,
And make Thy Nymphs, and Tritons feast, as they have done before.
When Thy sweet Poet shall employ yet once again,
To point the presence of his PRINCE, his Muse-inspyred Pen.
And last, Ye choicest Spirits, whose pains and well-spent Toil,
Did my late SOVEREIGN welcome Home to His true native Soil.
Though dissonant in parts, in Harmony accord.
To eternize the divine Acts, of my triumphing LORD.
So many Healthes as then, You did to Him bequeath,
As many Fare-welles bid His Ghost, which now has left the Earth.
And when the Tragic sound, of those Farevvells are done,
As many Wel-comes bid again, to His thryse-Sacred SON.
EPILOGVS.
OF ENGLANDS Virgin Queen, what was and justly said?
She was on Earth the first, and is in Heaven the second Maid.
Is turned to Heauen-blest JAMES, and Angels all do sing,
He was on Earth the first, and is, in Heaven the second King.
FINIS

