THE RIGHTEOUS MAN'S WAY. WHEREIN ARE GIVEN CERTAIN Directions, how men may
profitably meditate upon the Commandments of God: that so through such manner
of meditation, the Lords Commandments may find place in men's hearts, to
serve in them as guides unto all their Actions and Thoughts. DIRECTIONS MOST
NEEDFVLL FOR THESE times, seeing most men laying the Commandments of God
aside, do lead their lives in disobedience to Gods Commandments; and this,
not only to the scandal of Christian Religion, but also to the extreme
hazard of their own salvation.

1. These. 4. 1. We beseech you, brethren, and exhort you in the Lord Jesus,
that ye increase more and more, as ye have received of us, how ye ought to
walk and to please God. Printed in the year 1621.

THE EPISTLE to the Reader.
MAny of Gods servants (beloved Reader) having written at large upon the ten
commandments, opening them so, as that men may in a great measure see how far
they branch themselves, into every action, speech, and thought of Man, I
thought it might be profitable to add unto their labors, this my direction
unto Meditation upon the Commandments. For, I observe in most Men a kind of
disposition, willingly to hear or read of the Commandments, that so their
knowledge might be increased; but there is little evidence of any who meditate
also of them in private, that by such meditation upon them, they may sink into
their hearts, there to remain as directors unto them, in all things wherein
they may have use of them. The very Notion only of Gods Commandments is
surely profitable, as serving to inform Men of the way they should walk in,
but meditation upon them roots them within us; because, what our Spirit once
labors upon, it will not easily forgo again, but will retain and make use
of the same, and this also to the end, wherefore the pains to meditate upon it
was taken. For if any man purpose with himself, and set his heart to seek
Gods Commandments, that they may serve to guide and rule him in his ways, he
joining private meditation, or selfe-questioning and self examining with the
same, his heart will then affect and endeavor to come to the end of its
purpose. For this cause have I chosen to direct men unto a manner of meditation
upon the Lords Commandments that so through meditation, the Commandments of
God may not rest in the bare Notion, but may branch themselves out in the
actions, speeches, yea and private thoughts of men. But because the stream of
this worlds disposition, runns violently against the man that would keep Gods
Commandments: (for such is in most men the custom to err from the ways of
Gods commandments, that he that walks in them, shall hardly find any man,
that is not either against him, or at leastwise not addicted to that way he
walks in) And because our own corrupt nature is hardly brought in obedience,
to yield to walk in the ways of righteousness, Therefore I have purposely set
my self to show, (in the first place, and in several chapters a part)
certain motives or inducements, by which men may be brought on, to take upon
them, as for a light burden, and easy yoke, the holy Commandments of God,
which are as his burden and yoke which he for Man's good has put upon us. I am
not ignorant, that the world threatens me to labor herein in vain; for such
rooting in Men has the pleasure of sin taken, that it is almost
unexpectable, that they should leave to sin those, sins, by which their
laughter, hearts joy, and firmest bond of fellowship is commonly occasioned;
but my trust is in God, that there are thousand thousands in the world, who,
not being of the world, will not go the way of the world, but, as aymers at
another world, will give diligent heed to all good directions how to come to
the glorious world which is to come, Yea, seeing there is a turning of many
unto Righteousness, Daniel, 12, 3, who walked in the ways of unrighteousness,
I cannot but hope, that many, even in the unrighteous multitude, may yet be
wonn, to bethink themselves ere it be too late, of the evil way wherein they
walk, and of the good way of Gods holy Commandments. Many indeed are the
inducements unto sin, and they are also very powerful, to move young, and
lusty, and covetous persons, to walk rather in the way of sins, then in the
way of Gods Commandments; but alas, as the pleasure of a whore ends often
times in a miserable and loathsome disease, when yet during the pleasure there
will be no ear given to any warning of danger, so men that are overcome of the
inducements unto sin, do but gather more and more matter for their own grief
and destruction. The way of God is peace, health, and Glory; but the way of
Satan (the miss-leader of the miss-led,) is, trouble of conscience, disease of
body, and eternal Infamy. In hope therefore that all will not be so evil minded
as to neglect the way of God, rejecting also all Meditation upon the
Commandments of God, but that some will be wonn to exercise themselves in such
Meditation, that so they may reap the glorious fruit of righteousness, I will
now conclude this epistle, and send my Reader to the Treatise its self, where
directions how to meditate are given.

Yours in the Lord THOMAS PROCTO^

The Righteous Man's way.
WHEREIN ARE GIVEN CERTAIN DIRECTIONS how men may profitably meditate upon the
Commandments of God: That so through such Manner of Meditation, the Lords
Commandments may find place in Men's hearts, to serve in them as Guides, unto
all their Actions and Thoughts.
WHen God had created this glorious frame of heaven and earth, and had made the
wonderful and beauteous creatures therein, then we read, Genesis 2. 16. that
unto man God gave a commandment, saying: thou shall eat freely of every tree
of the garden; but of the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not
eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death,
which first commandment of the Lord, seems to me as the sign of his Lordship
over Men: the Lord showing herein his Lordship, in that he gave a Law unto
Man, exacting also from him, even upon pain of punishment, subjection unto him
herein. which sign of the Lordship of God remains in the Church even unto
this day; for unto this day we Christians though we be under the liberty of
the Gospel, yet are not freed from being in subjection to a Law of
Commandments and Ordinances. Therefore also ought we to be sensible of the
Law of God, as of a yoke and burden, even as a mark, sign, or evidence of a
Lordship, which God has over us. And indeed our Lord, saying, Math. 11. 30.
My yoke is easy and my burden light, shows, that he has put a yoke and
burden upon his Disciples, though indeed, it is an easy yoke and a light
burden. Again, our Lord, saying, Luke 6. 46: But why call ye me, Master,
master, and do not the things that I speak, this shows, that his
Commandments are so a sign of his mastery over us, as that not to do his
Commandments is little less, then to deny and put off from us his Mastery or
Lordship. Wherefore also those, who as at liberty to do or not do, do go
far in observing the Commandments of God, when yet their heart and soul
has no sense of the Commandments as of a yoke and burden, or as a sign and
evidence of a Lordship which God and Christ has over them, they for all this
are not truly Subjects, but Libertines rather, doing the Commandments but
because they will do them, not because they have in them any sense of the
Lordship of God and of Christ over them. And surely, what through men's desire of
Conformity with Christians with whom they live: and through fear of the
punishment of their Christian Princes, if they do such or such evil things
contrary to Christian Religion: and what through a superficial apprehension of
the goodness of the things commanded of God, many go far in doing as God
commands, and yet without any true subjection to the Lord, as having sense of
his Lordship over them. Yea, Men may liberally acknowledge with their lips,
yea superficially in their hearts also, the Lordship which God ought to have
over themselves, when yet their hearts never had any the least sense, of the
Lordship of God in his Commandments. We ought rather to put on a resolution of
mind, both to receive the Commandments of God as a yoke or burden put upon
us, or as a sign or evidence of a Lordship in him over us: and also to do
them, as in testimony of our subjection to a Lordship in God. The like ought
even Christian States as well as private persons to do, not contenting
themselves to give good Laws to their people, but to give them as branches of
the Law received from God, and as in subjection to a Law of Commandments, in
which God has and exercises even over them also a Lordship and Dominion. With
this advertisement I thought good to begin this Treatise upon the
Commandments, that so I might prepare Men, to have in them a kind of
apprehension and sense, of the yoke and burden of the Lordship of God upon
them. But because (as above) our Lord the Son of God has said: My yoke is
easy and my burden light, therefore having given this Advertisement next above,
now I will proceed, endeavoring to show unto men, by what convenient means
they may receive upon them this yoke and burden, not as a pinching yoke, and
heavy burden, but as an Easy yoke, and a light burden. And truly as on the
one hand our hearts sense and feeling of the Commandments, as of a yoke or
burden, is right needful, that so through such sense there may be a hearty
acknowledgement of the Lordship of God over us, so on the other hand it is also
profitable for us to be instructed, how we may receive this yoke and burden
upon us, as an easy yoke, and a burden light to be borne of us.

Chap. 1.
COmmon experience proves unto every one, that when any thing is done
unwillingly by any, then not only that done is done with heaviness and grief
of heart, but also the very commandment its self seems unto such, a heavy
load, too heavy to be borne, yea or to be required of them. This considered,
there cannot be (in my judgment) any better Means, to make men receive the
Commandments of the Lord, as an easy yoke, and light burden, then by showing
them how they may make themselves willing to bear upon them such a yoke or
burden. But we finding it also true in common experience, that unless men's
Passions and Affections be stirred up, as either their Admiration, Fear,
Reverence, Love, or delight, both toward and in the Commander, and also
toward the thing Commanded, they seldom (if at all) do any thing commanded
willingly, therefore it must needs be needful to instruct men, how their
Passions and Affections, may be stirred up in them, both toward God
commanding, and toward the thing commanded. Are not the children of Parents,
and the favorites of Princes, drawn on first, to Reverence, Fear, and love,
before commandments are given unto them? even so the very Children also of
God, must first be instructed to admire the Lord, to fear him, and to fall in
Love of him, before there can be expected from them, a willingness to receive
upon them the yoke or burden of Gods commandments. Let therefore the mighty
works of God in his Salvations and judgments, be discreetly opened unto Gods
people by the Lords ministers, that so Gods people discerning them, they may
both be brought on to fall into an Admiration of him that could do such
things, and also ^o fear him in whose power it is, so and so fearfully to
punish them which obey not: Let also the glorious Apparitions of God, his
Son, and Angels, be opened unto them, that so of such heavenly and fair
Glories, their hearts being wonn of such Glories, they may be brought on, both
to an Awe, and yet also to a Love of God: Let also the Virtue, Goodness, and
Gratiousness of God, be opened unto their apprehensions, that so even for such
things sake also, they may be subdued to yield to fall in Love of God who
dwells in Glory. Lastly, let the Righteousness of the commandment it self be
opened unto them, declaring the invaluable good which comes to man's society,
by the observation of such a commandment, and the odious wickedness and hurt
which comes to man's society, by doing things forbidden, and this, to make
the^ love the commandment it self also for its Righteousness, hating also the
thing forbidden, for its odiousness and hurt. Let these things I say be more
frequently, and intentiuely done by the Lords ministers, and then there may be
good hope of reaping from Gods people, a very plentious harvest of good and
pious works, done in obedience to the law and commandment of God.

And indeed, besides the bare iniunction of keeping the Commandments, we find
in the Scriptures many motives also or inducements set before men, both for the
stirring up their passions and affections, and also to draw them to a willing
obedience. what therefore were motives, or inducements unto others, the same
(if we with them would attain to a willing obedience) must be made use of by
us also; for, as we cannot expect the effects, where we are negligent of the
causes, so we can hardly expect to attain with the Saints before us, a
diligent, joyful, and willing observation of Gods Law, whilst we are
negligent to make use of those motives or inducements by which they were drawn
hereunto. Suffer me therefore patiently (I pray you) collect out of the
Scriptures to your hands, first some good evidence, how David (and in him other
saints) received the commandments of God (that so by this testimony you may
perceive what your duty also is, and how far short herein you come of that
Affection which you ought to have toward the commandments of God): Secondly,
some special motives or inducements, which may serve to move or induce us to
obey Gods commandments. Lastly, some special means whereby we may attain to
keep them, as the saints before have kept them.

For the first, we, Psalm. 119. 14. read thus, I have had as great delight in
the way of thy testimonies as in all riches. Again Psalm. 119. 24. also thy
testimonies are my delight and my counselors. Again Psalm. 119. 47. and my
delight shall be in thy commandments, which I have loved. Again, Psalm. 119.
54. Thy statutes have been my song in the house of my pilgrimage. Again, verse.
72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and
silver. Again verse. 111. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever:
for they are the joy of my heart. Again verse. 127. therefore love I thy
commandments above gold, yea above fine gold. Lastly, v. 162. I rejoice at thy
word as one that finds a great spoil. Thus you see how this man's Passions
or affections, were stirred up in him; now see in the next place what came also
thereof. Psalm. 119. 23. he says thus. Princes also did sit and speak against
me, but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes. Again verse 31. I have
cleaved to thy testimonies o Lord Again, verse 46 I will speak also of thy
testimonies before Kings and will not be ashamed. again verse, 51. the proud
have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not declined from thy law.
Again verse 60. I made have and delaied not to keep thy commandments. again;
verse, 79. let such as fear thee turn unto me, and they that know thy
testimonies. again, verse, 112. I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy
statutes always, even unto the end. Again, verse, 115. Away from me ye
wicked: for I will keep the commandments of my God. Lastly, verse, 136. min^
eyes gush out with rivers of waters because they keep not thy law. When we
read these things, suffering also our selves to pawse also a li^le upon each of
them, considering it advisedly, it may then well seem unto us even incredible,
that so excellently a disposed mind toward the commandments of God, should
ever at all be found truly in a man. I for my part should be very much
deceived, if each man comparing himself with this declaration, will not then
from the greatness of the difference, acknowledge in himself a seeming
incredibility hereof. For so many are the other things, and specially things of
this world, which steal unto them our delight, love, joy, and song, as that
most rarely (if at all) we shall find a man, whose delight, love, joy, yea
and song, shall be of the commandments of the Lord. And indeed it will be
found in common experience, that it is far easier to live in a good, yea a
great measure, conformable in our actions to that commanded, then to have a
delight also in the commandments, to love them, rejoice of them, and to make
them our song; for such passions or affections of our soul are not usually,
nor indeed easily moved in us by such things. Neither need I any greater proof
by which to make this evident unto men, then if they but enter into an
examination of themselves, each man taking some time when between God and his
own soul, he ask of his own self, saying* Wherein truly do I delight? what
is my hearts love fixed upon? whereof do I commonly joy? let but each man take a
time wherein to ask even himself this question, and then let it thereby be
tried, if his heart answer him, that he ever at all had delight in Gods
commandments: if ever he bare love to them or ever had any joy in or of them.
The heart will not, nor indeed cann dissemble to a man's self, therefore let
but men ask themselves, what they do, and it will readily appear unto them
what they do, but if any man's own heart can answer him, that it has
delighted, loved, and rejoiced in the commandments of God, happy man be he:
yea he is surely a man that excels among men; for, even among the most
religious, who commonly in these things excel others, there is commonly (of
all things in religion) least delight found in the commandments, least love
toward them, least joy of them. For, the commandments discovering guiltines,
and thereby making men ordinarily sigh, and mourn, are also ordinarily heard
with grief when they are pressed near to the consciences of men; therefore
also of all things in Religion, the commandments commonly are least delighted
in, loved, ioyed in. Therefore (I say) a rare, and well near singular thing it
is, for any man to say truly of the commandments of God, that his delight is
in them, he loves them, they are his hearts joy, and even his song is of them.
One man may truly say, that he delights indeed in the increase of his
riches, an other may truly say, that his love is fixed upon honor, promotion,
and the favor of some Prince: a third may as truly say, that his heart
exceedingly joyeth in his prosperity, and in the affluence of desirable things
which it draws unto it: a fourth may truly say, that his Loves are the occasion
and subject of his songs; but where is the man whose delight is also in Gods
commandments, whose love is toward them, they are his hearts joy, yea and his
song? Surely the passions and affections may be moderately spent upon every of
these things above mentioned, but that those should so ingross unto them all
our passions and affections, as that there is no delight, no love, no joy left
for Gods commandments, this is clean contrary to that disposition of mind
which we see in this holy man. But indeed because our passions and affections
are never moved in us, being drawn unto the commandments of God, therefore
it is that we come far short of doing by the commandments as this man did.
He, though Princes sat and spoke against him, yet he meditated in the
statutes of the Lord: he claue unto the testimonies of God: he would speak
of them even before kings: he would not be ashamed to speak of them before
any: he declined not from the Law of God, no though he was had in great
dirision by the proud: he made have and delayed not to keep the Commandments
of the Lord: he would receive them who make conscience of the Lords
Commandments: he applied himself always, ever to the end, to fulfill the
Commandments of the Lord: he cried unto the wicked, away from me, for I will
keep the commandments of my God: yea his eyes gushed out with tears because
men kept not the law of the Lord. Here we see rare and precious effects of the
passions and affections of a man, overcome and drawn of the Commandments of
God. Consider each of these things advisedly, and then think with your self
where we may find a man in these days which thus does. But what should we
seek after others, let each man descend into his own conscience examining his
own self in private meditation saying, do I this? is this my custom? and if
need be, let men examine themselves upon each particular, saying, spend I a^
any time any meditation in the commandments? do I cleave unto them? am not I
ashamed to speak of them in company? if I be afflicted, have I then any mind
at all of the commandments? when I see others deride, and scoff at that
restreint from wickedness, which the observation of Gods commandments causes
in the observer, am not I then ashamed? do I then hold me to the restraint as
not ashamed of Gods commandments? let I then not loose the reins with them
for company sake, especially if they be my superiors? if obedience cross any
present benefit, do I not then delay or put off the keeping of Gods
commandments therein, or at leastwise for that time? Desire I to make up my
family with such as I see pronest to keep God^ laws? have I forborne the
company of the wicked, or, have I said in my heart away from me ye that will
be wied for I am set to keep the commandments of my God? Have I (...) any
time mourned to see, that men are so negligent, as they are in keeping the
commandments of the Lord? Do I these things customablie? yea which of all
these have I ever at all done? But alas, common experience shows, that men for
the most part, do the clean contrary to all this done of this blessed Man.
Surely it is the more pity, yea the more hurt unto themselves; for thousand
thousands plunge themselves, if not into Gods eternal wrath, yet frequently
into his punishments temporary, by their respecting more to please men even in
their wickedness, then to honor the Lord with the observation of his holy
Commandments in all Companies. It is indeed the miserable and fearful
condition of our times that there is hardly any Joy or mirth but must be in
sin: some or other of Gods Commandments, must be presumptuously broken that
men may be merry. But it is but the corruption of the times: for there may be a
separation of Joy and hearty Mirth from sin, if Men would but take care, that
they make not a sport of sin. Yet as here is not the place of a Christians
true Liberty, and Rejoicing (for there is still a Devil in the world) so
indeed it is not commonly to be expected, that we can here be merry and not
sin. Now whilst all companies affect mirth and a liberty to be pleasant: and
hardly a man can keep Gods co^mandeme^ts and yet be merry with me^, (as men are
now for the most part disposed) this causes, if not a casting aside wholly the
keeping of the Lords commandments, yet surely a restreynt in the Saints, such
also as is somewhat distasteful to Society. But seeing there shall be a
judgment, there shall be an eternal burning, why should we not bethink our
selves of it before hand, that we cast not our selves foolishly therein by
taking an unlawful liberty to our selves in our mirth and sporting. Therefore
if it must needs be so, that a man cannot be heartily merry but he must sin,
let us then choose a solemn sobriety, before a hurtful laughter. Though we
may not be Lawgivers to others, yet we our selves may be abstenious: thongh we
intrude not our authority among others with an insulting or masterfull humor,
yet we may keep our selves. And truly as I have many times in my heart,
blessed our Princes for their admirable restreint of wicked Actions, so I have
many times mourned to see, that none of their Laws stretch unto a brideling
also of wickedness in Communication. In Communication men may (well near)
blasphemously swear without any danger of Law: In communication they may laugh
at adultery committed: In communication they may make sport well near of any
sin, and yet be without danger of law. But whilst Communication has this
Liberty, the corrupt nature of Man has too great advantage, to spread abroad
the poison of all ungodliness and sin. Communication is as the seed, evil
actions the fruit; suffer the seed, and you shall never be without evil
actions. Whereas communication being a publishing of things; even corrupt,
profane, or wicked communication, may as well have penal Laws for it, as
Actions. Therefore as even communication of Treason is deservedly punishable,
so the breaking of Gods Commandments even in communication might profitably be
punishable. Thus having given you some good evidence, how David is manifested
to have received the Commandments of God, I will now proceed to note unto you
some of the special motives or inducements which I find in holy scripture, by
making a careful use whereof, you also may attain to a willing observation of
the Commandments, and even (well near) to the like mind toward them, as
her^ we read that this holy Prophet of God had.

2. Chap.
THe first Motive or Inducement which I will note unto you is, the Injunction
it self, by which we Christians also are Commanded or Enjoined, that we also
bring forth fruits answerable to Gods Commandments. For this purpose is that
which Math. 6. 46, we read in these words: But why call ye me master, master,
and do not the things that I speak? And which, Ephesians. 2. 10. we read in
these words: we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. Again, Ephe. 4, 1, where
we thus read: I therefore being prisoner in the Lord, pray ye, that ye would
walk worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called, with all humbleness of
mind, and meekness, with long suffering, supporting one an other through love.
Again, Ephesians. 5. 8: ye were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord:
walk as the children of light. Again, Titus, 3, 8: This is a true saying, and
these things I will thou should affirm, That they which have believed in
God, might be careful to show forth good works. Lastly, Titus, 3, 14: And let
ours also learn to show forth good works, for necessary uses, that they be not
unprofitable. Thus when the Gentiles had believed, they were not then left
after faith, to do like Liber^^nes after the motion of their corrupt flesh, as
before their conversion they did, but they came withal under a yoke, or burden
of Commandments. There was a Change required of them even in the outward
Show, as well in Communication as Action, and this to the end that by the light
of Righteousness wherein now they must walk, not only the world might more
and more be enlightened, but also the darkness of that Liberty under
Ge^tilisme, might more and more be thrust out from among (...) Nations. And
indeed Righteousness is no less truly light then is the day, and wickedness is
no less truly darkness then is the night, therefore by Righteousness as well in
communication as action, the world is even enlightened. For God who himself is
light, 1* John, 1. 3, sends from himself light into the world, and therefore
also even the Communication and good works of the children of Light, being the
fruit of the Commandments come from God, are a light shining there where ever
the Gospel prevails. This considered I cannot but mervaile, that the very
Obedience to this injunction concerning Gods Commandments, begin among the
common people (wel-neere) of all Nations, to receive a nick name of
Puritanisme. But let that be spoken against which truly and deservedly is to
be spoken against, (even the laying upon men a restreint in things, wherein God
has given no such Commandment of restreint, as some for singularities sake
would impose) when yet that which truly is Obedience may receive praise. But
men begin through the sides of those over-abstenious ones, to give a wound
even unto true obedience its self, accounting all restreint from wickedness
(which is customary in Communication), Puritanisme. If this be suffered to go
on, look then for an over spreading again of wickedness, little (if any thing
at all) less, then under Gentilisme. But shall we of the reformed Churches, who
have exceeded other Churches in receiving blessings and manifold testimonies
from God, suffer the darkness of wickedness to overspread again, yea and to
prevail also against the true light, by suffering true obedience, true
restreinte, to become nicknamed, or traduced? Let not this be, but rather let
those Congregations where most true restreinte from things truly evil is
found, be accoumpted as the special Lights of our Nations, and cherished of
our Magistrates as for such. To conclude, seeing our Nations in the Churches
reformed, have received by the Gospel so blessed a change, as from Darkness
unto Light, well might we be moved to the keeping of the Commandments, by the
bare Iniunction or Commandment received from them who minister unto us the
Gospel. For commonly they who receive good by any, will be willing to do some
things at their bare Commandment or Injunction. But the Lord has not left us
to the bare Iniunction only, but has mercifully found out many powerful
Motives or Inducements besides it, that of them our passions and affections
might so be moved in us, as that a willing undergoing of the burden of the
Commandments might be begotten in us. Proceed we therefore now to consider
also the other motives or inducements, learning withal to make such a manner
use of them, as whereby their working upon us their profitable effects may be
furthered.

3. Chap.
THe next Motive, then, or Inducement, which I will note unto you, is, The
observation of the great works of God in signs and mervailous Acts done of
him. To this end Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. says: Take heed to thy self, and keep
thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things which thine eyes have
seen, and that they depart not out of thine heart all the days of thy life:
but teach them thy sons and thy sons sons. Forget not the day that thou
stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather
me the people together, and I will cause them to hear my words, that they may
learn (...) fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and
th^^ they may teach their children. Again he says, Deuteronomy. 1^ (...) Consider
this day the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his mighty hand,
and his streatched out arm, and his signs, and his acts which he did. And
what he did unto you in the wilderness until ye came unto this place. For your
eyes have seen all the great Acts of the Lord which he did. Therefore shall
ye keep all the Commandments. Again, Joshua 24* 16, we read thus: Then the
people answered, and said, God forbid that ^e should forsake the Lord to serve
other Gods. For the Lord our God, he brought us and our fathers out of the land
of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and he did those great miracles in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way that we went, and among all the people
through whom we came. And the Lord did cast out before us all the people, even
the Amorites which dwelt in the land^ Therefore will we also serve the Lord. As
here the great wonders which God did, are set forth as the Inducement to serve
the Lord in keeping his Commandments, so let us for ever expect, both that the
ignorance, yea or neglect only, of the great wonders which God heretofore has
done, will occasion a negligent observation of the Commandments: and also that
the often recording them in our mind, and respeaking of them to our children
and family, will occasion the more willing serving of God in keeping of his
Commandments. For the works done are of themselves so wonderful, as that
even the very thought of them, joined with a present advised considering of
them, will move the spirit of a man to fall into an admiration, both of the
thing done, and of him that did it. And Admiration being once stirred up, then
hardly can it be but that the soul will be the proaner, thenceforth to be
obedient to his Commandments who did such things as these. Commonly we find
one thing to draw on another, Power Admiration, Admiration Awe, Awe Attention,
and Attention Observation; therefore needful must it needs be, to exercise the
stirring up the Admiration of our Spirits, by often recording, re-speaking of,
re-marking, and re-opening to our selves, our children, and family, the great
Acts of God, each aparte, as they are described unto us in the holy Scriptures.
Is it not the common experience of the world, that a man receiving a
Commandment, (yea though of a good thing,) from one in whom he knows no
power, no authority, he will be very backward to obey to do according to such
Commandment, when yet let the same man receive the like commandment from a
King* (whose power and authority is manifest unto him) we shall find him to
rejoice that he has received even a commandment from such a one? So is it
with men in the Kingdom of heaven. For whilst they only hear of the Law,
the Law, and of God named unto them a thousand times and a thousand, they not
apprehending well, and distinctly, the great Acts and mervailous wonders done
of God, receive the Commandments with such an unsubjected soul, as that they
can have no heart to apply themselves to the fulfilling of them. For it is the
apprehension of the mighty Power of God in his works, that subjects the spirit
and heart of a man, to yield to obey him in his Commandments who was able to
do such things. Therefore let men more frequently then in these times they
usually do, each one in his family aparte, exercise themselves to speak now
of one, two, or three, an other time of as many, of the great Acts of God and
of Christ: accustoming also themselves, and those of their family, to consider,
what a thing it is to have such a thing as that done in this world. For if
this they use themselves unto, then as on the one hand, this will cause the
ancient works of God to be still in the memory of Gods people, so on the other
hand the works will work from the heart, first a Confession of the power of
God, and secondly an Awe, an^ thirdly, an inclination to keep his
Commandments. Fear not neither doubt the producing these effects, if thus you
use your selves to speak of the ancient wonders done of God; for assure your
selves, that these works were done, and appointed to be told unto the sons
and sons sons, purposely to produce these effects. Neither are the works
of God so slight, Neither is the Ordinance of God concerning telling them in
family after family so vain, as that the relation of such works of God will
be fruitless, as concerning the appointed effects.

4. Chap.
THe third Motive or inducement which I would note unto you, is, the
observation of the Mighty works of God in his great and fearful Judgments,
inflicted heretofore upon those who have been disobedient. To this end Moses,
Deuteronomy. 11, 2. says: Consider this day the chastisement of the Lord your God,
which he did in the mids of Egypt unto Pharaoh the King of Egypt, and unto all
his land. And what he did unto the host of the Egyptians, unto their horses,
and to their charets, when he caused the waters of the red sea to overflowe
them, as they pursued you, and the Lord destroyed them unto this day. And what
he did to Dathan and Ab^am the sons of Eliab, when the earth opened her mouth
and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and all their
substance that they had, in the mids of all Israel. Therefore shall ye keep
all the Commandments which I command you this day. And the Prophet David,
Psalm. 119, 30, says: Thy judgments have I laid before me. Again, verse 118:
Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy Statutes, Thou have taken
away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy testimonies.
Again, verse 120. My flesh trembles for ^eare of thee, and I am afraid of thy
Judgments. Lastly, verse 115: Salvation is far from the wicked, because they
seek not thy Statutes. By these scriptures it may appear, that it were an
error of no small importance to conceive, that a fear brought upon us by the
judgments of God, is not a filial but rather a slavish fear; therefore also
if any should so persuade men, I hope these scriptures may serve to convince
such of false doctrine. But now, seeing we have this testimony from Scripture,
that to consider Gods judgments even upon others, is a Motive or Inducement to
the keeping of the Commandments, ought not we so much the more diligently to
set always before the eye of our mind, those ancient fearful Judgments
which God has inflicted upon others? Therefore also have I chosen this motive
among others, as a special Motive or Inducement, advising Men also to the
making a very careful and customary use of the same. Which that you may the
more profitably also do, choose out unto your self some convenient time,
wherein thinking with your self of some one or two of the special Judgments of
God, you may withal say thus, or to like effect with your self: This was, (or
seems to me to be) as if here at this present I should before mine eyes see:
this or this, as the story relates unto you. Thus if you do, this will then
help your perceiving or discerning well of that which once was done: and the
discerning furthers much the working of that upon our hearts which is
discerned. But if hereunto you add further, saying: Had I been in his or their
steads to who^ this was done, how had it been with me? how fearful had been
then my condition? This would help to bring the fear of God upon your heart.
For, you making their case your own, supposing how it would be now with your
self, if now the like should befall your self, the fearfulness of the
judgment would so appear unto you, as that a fear of the Lord that did it
would fall withal upon your heart. Now fear is such a passion or affection
of the mind, as which taking hold of the heart and spirit of a man, it will
incline the heart to a care to do that, for the not doing whereof such
punishments ^s it now fears has fallen upon others. Yea from fear ^prings
also Delight, for we commonly delight in doing that, ^y which we avoid or
escape such Judgments as which our heart now fears God for. Be careful
therefore that you learn not only to say, God is to be feared, or, we must
fear God, but to feel the passion of fear of the Lord in your heart. For
there is great hypocrisy lurking in a free confession, whilst what we confess
should be done, our selves never do. Therefore to be sure to season your heart
of this passion of fear, do by the judgments of God inflicted upon others as
I have above instructed you. But it may be some will say, this is very
dangerous for men, for men thus supposing themselves as in their steads, will
be ready to be deluded with a fancy that the same is done now unto themselves
in deed; I answer, I direct men but to apprehend what was done, therefore
they must not fancy that now it is done. And if any be so foolish, yet a good
thing must not be left undone by the wise, for the foolish use which some may
make thereof. Neither in deed hurt you your self, either by supposing what
you should see, if here in this place before your own eyes, you should see
such a fearful judgment as that whereof you read: or by supposing your
self as in their stead, considering with your self if the like judgment
should befall your self now at the present; for the judgment its self is
nothing hereby the nearer you, but rather the further off from you, because you
thus endeavor to teach your heart to apprehend, what was done many hundred
years since unto others, for which you now (through faith of the report) would
fear God that did it. Whilst therefore this so good an intent or end of your
meditation is in your soul, you have the less need to fear any the like
judgment to be inflicted now of God upon you. Wherefore be not carried away by
any man's persuasion, from the practicing of that which above I have directed
you unto. But indeed the Devil by his instruments, will he ready to make
opposition here against, and this to the end that you may to your own hurt,
rest still in a saying only, God must be feared, or, we must fear God,
without ever feeling in your heart the passion its self of ^eare. And in deed
all the while that you but thus do, the Divill knows that you are still his,
in his bonds, because so long as your passions and affections are not moved in
you, the kingdom of heaven is not in you with power to your salvation. An
other fallacy there is, when some would move men's fear by their own zeal or
earnestness in preaching of damnation damnation; so putting more trust to
prevail more by their own manner of preaching, then all the power of God in
his great works can prevail. But the faithfullest course is, to open well unto
people the fearefulness of any judgments already inflicted upon some, and the
fearfulness of that last judgment of eternal damnation, trusting that by an
apt opening unto the people the particulars of those judgments, the judgments
of the Lord will then work the fear of God in their hearts: And surely it is
more honor to God, when his own work prevail over men to beget a fear of
him in their hearts, then when men's fear is begotten in them by the
earnestness or zeal only of a preacher. A third fallacy there is, when some
put trust in preaching the Law, as if the word Law, Law, only sounded out
in their earnest manner, should make men fear to break the Law; whereas it
were better aptly to open unto them, the manner of Gods Apparition when he gave
the Law, that as then, so for ever (upon the apt description* the fearful
manner of Gods giving the Law, may beget a fear of God in men's hearts, and
consequently a fear to break his Law so given to men. And truly it is a
very great darkness, yea also damnable, which will be found in men at the last
day, by their not being possessed with the Acts and Judgments of God, for
them, and through them fearing God, but resting only with a seeming fear
brought on them, by hearing some over-zealous preacher. Zeal is good, yea it
must be, when the people are dull and slow of hearing, and therefore I would
not have men think that I reprove all zealous preachers; but I would have men
rather to know, that I would not have any to make a false aim, or end of their
zeal. They must not think to bear Men more down with their zeal, then all
the power of God in his works declared can do; for this is to the great
dishonor of the Lord. To conclude, Let no man hurt his own soul by saying,
what should I fear God for any thing done by him to others heretofore? for, to
fear God for the judgments inflicted upon others, is the ready way to remove
Gods judgments from your self. And surely he that thus honors God by
fearing him for that done by him to others, shall never feel judgments, but
gentle corrections rather. Therefore at any hand take heed of so evil a
disposition, as when you hear what God has inflicted upon others, you say,
What is that to me? I am well enough: I will go on in my pleasure though it be
sinful. Nay rather learn (by this manner practice which I have taught you) to
be able truly to say with the Prophet David: Thy Judgments have I laid before
me. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.
For surely the Judgments laid before us, will beget fear in us, and fear in
us will incline us to the keeping of the Commandments. Yea, as I have said
before, our heart will even delight in the escaping such Judgments, by the
keeping of Gods Commandments. Therefore apply your self hereunto, as you
tender your own profit. Yea when you hear the Comm^ndements* receive them
then as if you heard them out of the fietry flame, Deuteronomy 3. 11. for so they were
at first given; and you^ eye must (by faith) ascend to the first giving those
thing which now you often read or hear.

5. Chap.
A Fourth Motive, or inducement which I would remember unto you, is, The love
of God. To this end, Deuteronomy. 11. 1, we read t^us: Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, an^ shall keep that which he commanded to be kept: that is, his
Ordinances and his Laws, and Commandments always. And ou^ Lord says, John,
14, verse. 15. and 23: If ye love me, keep my Commandments. If any man love
me, he will keep my word; he that loves me not, keeps not my word. Love
is the most assured bond of any other, binding men faster to a keeping of
Commandments, then any other thing whatsoever can do. Love knows no rewards
for disobedience, but abides faithful unto that which is beloved; therefore
the Apostle Paul, 1. Cor. 13, 7, says: Love does never fall away. If any man
therefore would be a constant observer of Gods Commandments, let him then
endeavor to attain to Love God. But how should a man Love God whom he never
saw? I answer, this may be, though it is indeed difficult, because this
cannot be done without faith, and every man attayneth not unto faith. And
indeed to love God and Christ whom we have not seen, is reckoned for a
special part of that wherein the Saints excel others; as the Apostle Peter,
1. Pet. 1. 8. says: whom ye have not seen and yet Love him, in whom now
though ye see him not yet do ye believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakeable and
glorious. And yet, though we see not God nor Christ with our bodily eye, yet
we* must have a sight both of God and of Christ, or else we can not love either
of them; but this sight in deed is the sight of the soul through faith. We
cannot possibly love any thing whereof we have no knowledge, neither do men
now know God, but through faith; therefore as our knowledge of God is now
through faith, so also is our Love of God through Faith. Would you therefore
attain to Love God, you must then first believe the report of these things,
whereby the Lord has reveiled himself to his Church. If you believe those
things, then is the eye of your soul opened, and thenceforth you have a
soule-fight of God and of Christ, because through faith of the report, you now
have knowledge of those Apparitions or Reveilings of God and of Christ, which
they have made of themselves to the Church. Wherefore present your self with
those Declarations: set them before your self in Meditation, and then (unless
your heart be in you wholly unbeleeving) you cannot but have thenceforth a
knowledge of God. Accustom your self therefore to hear the Ministers of Gods
Word: accustom your self to believe them also in that they say out of the
word of God: accustom your self to hear the word of God in Scripture read
unto you; or, if your self can read, then accustom your self to read the
Scriptures: Accustom your self ever likewise to believe what you read in the
Scriptures. If thus you do, then by this means, you shall present your self
with these things in the Scriptures, by which God and Christ have made
themselves both known and beloved of Men. And verily, the next way to attain
to a love of God, is, the presenting our soul and heart with these things, by
which God drew other men to fall in love of him. Do but therefore present unto
your self, these powerful Attractions, Motives, or Inducements of Love,
whereby others were drawn to the love of God, and hardly then it can be but
that your self also will of them be drawn to the love of God. Now the special
Motives or Inducements which we find in holy Scriptures, I reckon to be these.
First, The Apparitions: secondly. The heavenly Glory which has been shown to
the Church: thirdly, The mighty power in Signs and wonders done: fourthly, the
evidence of virtue and goodness in God toward others: fi^tly, the rich and
glorious worship of the ancient Church: Lastly, The benefits which you your
self (believing in God) receive in this life, and by promise are to receive in
the life to come. Every of these is a very powerful Motive or Inducement of
the love of man toward God, therefore these things ought you to set before
your soul in Meditation, that of them you (with others) may be drawn to fall
in love of God. These things (for that it were too much to write of them here
at large) I think fit to write of in several Treatises by themselves, hoping
that Gods people will be desirous of these Treatises also, for their further
instruction what to do therein. In the mean time, I will here endeavor to
move you unto this Love, by some of these things above mentioned, briefly here
touched at in this Treatise. And indeed, most men come short of that love which
they ought to bear to God, by reason of the neglect they have to set before
themselves in Meditation, some of those special things whereby God draws the
love of man unto himself. Eueryman says, who should not love God; yea, they
will be bold to say, who is there among Christians that loves not God? But as I
have said before concerning Fear, so I say here concerning Love, Many say that
we must love God, when yet their own heart never felt the Affection it self of
love unto God. Let the^ but consider, what the Affection of Love is unto
anything which they feel themselves to love, whether it be wife or child,
riches, orreputatio^, honor, Princes favors, employments of Power and
Commands, Glory, or the like, and then let them consider with themselves
whether the like Affection be in them toward God, yea or no. But that men may
attain to have like affection toward God also, it is needful that they make
use of such soul-objects as G^d has provided for the winning of the souls
love unto himself. Among the which I wish you to make afrequent and special use
of the Apparitions, and heavenly Glories, shown of God to his Church. For, as
the soul of Man being delighted with fair objects, yields readily to fall also
in love of such, so the presenting it with the apparitions of God, and with the
beauteous and heavenly shining Glories shown of God to the Church, is the ready
way to win it to fall also in love of God. Accustom your self therefore to
read, or hear read unto you, now one, the^ another of the Apparitions made of
God, whether visibly to the eye, or only in vision (for both are true
Apparitions, though diverse in kind) and then use your self to say thus, or to
like effect: This was (or seems to me to be) as if here I should see before
me, this or this, as the story reports unto you that others saw. Which having
(for the help of your Discerning) done, then use your self to say further also
thus, or to like effect: My heart, what a sight was this? What a kind of Glory
was this? Is not this wonderful? Thus God showed himself to others. And now
(my soul) here is a glimpse of the Glory of God: consider now therefore, (this
being once truly seen) whom should not this move unto love of him, who i^ so
mavelous in his Apparition, so glorious? Certainly the heavenly Glories shown
by God to his Church upon earth, are not idle, but operative obj^cts, and
therefore there lacks but men's presenting their souls with them. For, did
each Man by himself thus present or set before his foul, the merv^llous
Apparations, and shining Glories, which God has shown to his Church, then
this, of the Power in the^, (which they receive from the wise composition of
God) would overcome the foul, both to confess that this was mervailous and
glorious indeed, and also to love God who so gloriously made show of himself.
Do went see in common experience, how Me^ soon rejoice to be favored of them
who most partake of this worlds glory? And if there be any hope given of a
gracious acceptance, how easily then inclines the heart to love all such?
Whilst therefore God has been pleased to manifest his gracious acceptance of
their love to him who believe, there lacks but our setting before our souls
and hearts in private meditation, the fair glories and shining which God (for
the honor of himself and comfort of the Church) has caused to appear. Be
not therefore dissuaded by any, as if your self informing, and
selfe-questioning about the Apparitions of God, and about the fair and shining
Glories, which the Church of God has in former times seen, and to this day
believes, were to little purpose to win the love of your heart to the Lord;
but rather be frequent in the exercise hereof. Spare not to speak thus unto
your own self in Meditation, that so you may find the precious fruit, which
certainly your so doing will produce. I know that the benefits which we
receive, by the exceeding virtue, and goodness of God toward us in Christ, are
also very powerful Inducements unto Love; but let us not therefore neglect
the other, depriving our selves of the precious fruit which certainly will come
of them also Nay, suffer me to tell yo^^ further, that true Love is never for
the Good only which we receive, but rather for the true Desert of that (in its
self) to be Beloved, which requires our love; therefore also that man's love is
truest and soundest, who loves God even for the evidence made of himself unto
others, by which he has declared himself to be worthy to be beloved. And
certainly, there were never more worthy causes of Love given to man, then the
Lord God of Israel, his Son, and Spirit, have given. Never such Apparitions
seen but in the Churh: never such true and shining Glories: never such works
of Power: never such virtue and Goodness: never so rich and glorious a
worship: never such Gifts given, as in the Church. Let there be faith that
those reported in ^^ripture were indeed done: Let there be a considering al^^
of the speciallest of them advisedly: Let the Church of God still to this day
continuing be considered in its rich Gifts, and then let comparison be made
betwixt the Lord our God, and the gods of any other Nations whatsoever, and
whenever. But if upon comparison, there be a manifest evidence of excellency
in the Lord, then even this also is a very powerful Attraction, and worthy
cause of our love toward God. To this we may add the incessant causes, which
are given us of God why to love him, and this in our continual enjoying the
use of life, in this so fair a creation of his as this world wherein we are.
For, we believing in the Lord God of Israel, that he indeed it was, and he
only, that made this world, we are thenceforth bound to love him for our very
breathing, for our food, raiment, and for being encompassed with so fair and
pleasing Objects and Ornaments, as are the spangled heavens, the flowery earth,
and the fair living creatures which we see. Certainly, as it is our hearts
grief to be deprived of the use, yea, or sight only, of any of these things;
so every portion of breath, every morsel we eat, every thing we wear, and
every fair thing we behold without eye, ought to teach us the dear love of
him whose work all these lovely things are. The world is in truth aright fair
and glorious creature, full also of such goodness of the Lord, as that the
wickedest that is cannot but joy in the use of it, as for a Good which he
accounts good, and without which he will not be if he can choose. Therefore
sometimes put your sel^ in mind hereof, saving; Now I breathe the breath of my
life, but love I the Lord God of Israel that gives me this breath, and power to
breathe it? Here I now eat this morsel of meat, for the continuance of my
life and lustiness of this my body, but love I the Lord God of Israel who
has made, and continues these things whereon I feed? I now put on this my
raiment according to my estate, but love I the Lord God of Israel who made and
continues in the world the things whereof they are made? Here I see these
fiery glorious stars, this fair heaven, these flowers, fruits, this earth,
and these fair living creatures, how would it grieve me to be deprived of the
sight of them? How love I the very sight of them, and the benefit I have by
them? But, do I love the Lord God of Irael, whose mavelous power made all
these things for my comfort and use? Thus put your self in mind of these
Causes also, which the Lord God of Isreal gives you why to love him, and this
will be an incessant occasion, moving you to the love of God. We are too
negligent to stir up our Affections to the glory of God* we are not (for the
most part) faithful i^ heart of his creating these things, therefore we are the
bolder to be negligent in giving him our love, for these his good gifts even of
this world. True it is, these we have in common with the wicked, with the
unfaithful, and this cooles the affection of many: But we must not do as they
do, though they enjoy with us what we enjoy; for else, how should we escape
that damnation, whereinto they (partly for this very wickedness, of not loving
God whose creatures they have the use of) are cast of God. To conclude, if you
would attain to the love of God, then do not only read, or hear what I
have written, but do what I hid you do: so shall you find an inclining of
your heart, willingly, and with delight to keep the commandments of God. For
love ingenders a willingness in obedience, yea a delight that a man has
occasion wherein to show obedience. And indeed, joy of obeying is an
inseparable companion, of doing any thing at his commandment who has won
our hearts love unto himself. Therefore get love, and then out of all doubt,
the yoke and but then of the Commandments, will be so easy and light, as that
easily, and with delight you will bear it upon you in your life and in your
conversation.

6. CHAP.
A Fifth Motive or Inducement, is, The Promises made us by God; Therefore
David, Ps. 119. 11. says, I have hid thy promises in my heart, that I might
not sin against thee. And the Apostle Peter 2. Pet. 3. 13. says: But we look
for new heavens, and a new earth, according to his Promise, wherein dwells
righteousness. Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless.
We see in common experience, that a Man looking for some great and desirable
Gifts from a Prince, he is thenceforth very careful not to displease him, by
breaking any commandment received from him. This being so among men, how is it
that the Promises of God made of him unto us, make not us like minded toward
him? Are any Gifts promised by Princes, comparable to the Gifts promised of
God? If no, why then are their commandments more tendered, more carefully
fulfilled? I think the fail be, partly in our not trusting God; partly, in
our not so much as minding the Promises of God; partly, in our not esteeming
them though we know them; partly, for that we commonly think, that all Gods
Promises are for another, not for this life. But every of these are great
errors of our mind, therefore we must clear our mind of these errors, if
ever we will for the Promises sake keep the Lords Commandments.

A maine and chief remedy against our not trusting of God, that such things as
these promised of him shall ever at all be performed unto any, may be our
considering the great Acts and wonders of his power heretofore shown. For the
evidence of his Power in other things, may make us trust him for things
promised of him; therefore be not negligent to inform your self of the great
works of his power* and then you will the more readily believe him in the great
things promised; for he that heretofore has raised the dead, well we may
believe him that he will raise the dead as he has promised. And truly through
men's negligence to lay to heart, the great wonders which the Lord has
heretofore done, their hearts know not reason to believe, that ever at all such
things shall be done as God has promised. Wherefore I pray you inform your
self one by one, of the great wonders which the Lord and his Son have done,
and then let the evidence of Gods power in them, persuade your hearts
concerning the things that are promised. This I take to be a convenient remedy
against the first error; suffer me to show you a remedy also against the
second.

Is it so, that the cares of this life, the covetousness of increase of this
worlds riches, the incessant employments in the Commonwealth, or the
continual pleasures of Court, will not suffer you so much as to mind the
Promises of God; yet, consider with your self that there is a God to whom
accounts of this life must be given: for as we made not our selves, nor these
things of this world, so surely the Maker will have an account of all.
Therefore though these things may somewhat, yet let them not wholly transport
you; say with your self in some breathing time, Shall I wholly neglect God my
Creator? Shall he make rich and inestimable Promises, and shall I not so much
as once mind them? Thus stirring your self up but even to mind the Promises
of God, then allow your self some leisure time, wherein now one then another of
the special promises of God, may be thought of by you. Verily, the very but
thinking now of one, then of another of Gods Promises, will be a Means of our
minds and hearts deep conception in time, of all the special promises of the
Lord. But, if minding them, your heart then esteem them not, then help also
your estimation by saying thus, or to the like effect with your self: My
heart, what think thou of this thing? What if I may attain it, shall I be
the better? is this a thing to be desired? have I need of it? Thus teach your
self by selfe-questioning, to open to your self the riches of the Promises,
and the need which you your self (rightly considering your mortal condition)
have of it, and then I doubt not, but that the thing promised will appear
such, as that you cannot but both esteem it, and desire also to attain unto
it. This may be a convenient remedy against the third error, consider we
therefore in the next place a remedy against the fourth and last error.

If you think that all that God does for you is put off to another life, so
that in this life you have no benefit of any of his Promises, then teach your
self to know better, by informing your self of the many and inestimably rich
Promises of God, (which being in the Church) you enjoy even in this life.
Verily, as many men enjoying the light of the day, never think of it as of a
precious gift of God: so many enjoy the rich blessings of the Church, never
perceiving the gift of God unto them therein; but let such negligence be with
fools, not with wise men.

Thus have I showen you briefly some convenient remedies against these common
and also potent errors; but there remains yet another thing of so great
importance, as that unless a man be also therein satisfied, hardly can he have
the heart ever thus to do by the Promises. Which other thing is this, That a
man know whether these things belong to himself or no: whether these Promises
are made to him; yes, or no.

To assure your self therefore hereof, you must observe, whither you be
without or within the Church; for no man out of the Church, so long as he
remains out of the Church, has right unto any of the Promises. He that is out
of the Church has no right unless he be called, but being called, and upon
the Call obeying, and believing, the Promises are made unto him, Act. 2. 38.
And if you be born within the Church, then, unless you prove an Esau in
Isreal's house, vilipending in time the riches of faith, refusing also in your
heart (though not in outward profession) to believe, you may not doubt, but
that the Promises belong unto you. For not an vnmanifested Election, but the
Promise made, must be the guide of their faith who are in the Church; therefore
where there is not a reprobation manifested, we may not presume to doubt of the
general Promise to be effectual to any person: but the general Promise is
made to them and their children who are in the Church, Act. 2. 38. therefore to
the children of those in the Church the Promises ought of duty to be applied,
unless there be any manifested rejection of a party. Therefore, are you born
within the Church, then observe whether coming to years of understanding, you
then vilipend not the grace of God in his Word unto you, but rather embrace and
believe it; for, you then believing, you may not doubt of the belonging of Gods
promises unto you. Yea, being borne in the Church you have moreover this
benefit, that though (transported of the temptations of Satan, or of the
sinful pleasures of this world) you run a race for a long time clean
against the grace of God, yet in time, repenting from the bottom of your
heart, and then yet believing the Gospel, you may be most assured that all the
precious Promises of God belong, and shall certainly be performed unto you. To
conclude, labor first to have a knowledge of the promises of God, and then
labor to get an estimation of them, and desire of heart after them; for if
this be once attained, then your heart will keep the Lords commandments, yea,
though but because it would not loose those so rich things whereof now it has a
desire. But to beget an estimation, you must consider well the thing promised,
you must compare it with the other things of this world, you must consider the
need you have of it, and the bettering your self by it. For as these things
are more or less apprehended by your heart and soul; so is your heart and
souls more or less esteem of the Promises. But as the hearts esteem is,
such also is its affection; for if it first esteem not of a thing, it will
have no Desire of it though it might have it.

Therefore some times, and that in your most serious and private meditation, set
before your soul now one, then another of the Promises, questioning your own
self, What you think of this, and whether it be a precious thing or no, if it
may be had. But this be sure of, that if none of the Promises of God, prevail
over your Esteem and Desire, drawing them unto it, then you will never have
care of keeping the Commandments, even for the Promise sake made of God unto
you. One Promise well and seriously considered, well opened unto our selves by
discourse in private meditation, discovering so unto our selves the riches and
good of the Promise, is more powerful over our Affections to draw them to
esteem and desire it, then if all our life time we hear never so much of all
the promises of God, resting in a superficial Notion and bare knowledge only
of them all. Wherefore at any hand rest not in a bare Notion of Gods Promises,
but consider each one, and lay it to heart, teaching your self to prise well
of it, and to have a Desire of heart after it, so shall you certainly come in
time to say with the Prophet David: I have hid thy Promises in my heart, that I
might not sinn^ against thee.

7. Chap.
THe sixth Motive or Inducement unto the keeping of the commandments willingly,
and with delight is, The Righteousness of the Commandment. To this end,
Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 8. says: And what Nation is so great, that has Ordinances and
Laws so Righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day? And the
Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 86. says; All thy Commandments are true. Again,
verse. 128. Therefore I esteem all thy precepts most Just. Again, verse. 142.
Thy Righteousness is an everlasting Righteousness, and thy Law is Truth. The
righteousness of Gods commandments, manifests both the Justice of God, and
also his Love unto his creatures: his Justice, because as he is in himself
upright or righteous toward all; so he would have Men also do right one to
another: his Love, in that he tendereth the good of his people, giving such
laws as which being of every one observed, every man shall have good by it.
And indeed as common experience shows us, that that Nation where Right is most
preserved, abounds most with Goodness; so Gods giving a Law by which Right
might be preserved, proves that he loves the Good, not the Ruin of man. True it
is indeed, that some men use to set a false Good before their eyes, their
Desire also being drawn wholly after it, and not after the Good of
Righteousness which God would have. But such men manifest themselves to be no
fit Judges of Good, in that if their particular Good should spread over all,
their could be nothing more hurtful to the society of man; nothing that sooner
would produce the dishonor, yea, and the Ruin of Man. Wherefore as in the best
Commonwealths, the very sense of Good which Men receive by Laws, makes them
not only love the Laws, but also to stick together with their Princes for the
maintenance of the^: so the very best means to make you fall in love of Gods
Laws, and to stick together for the maintenance of them, is, your opening to
your self by discourse in Meditation, the Good which Man's society would
receive by the observation of them. And indeed in that God giving Laws gives
such, as which the farther they spread in observation, the better it is for Man
and Man's society, this declares him most truly to tender that which is the
true Good of man. I speak of those Laws which are general, not of those which
were but peculiar to the Nation of the Israelites: for there were Laws which
served but peculiarly for that Conquest made of Canaan by that people; even as
every prevailing power or conquest has power to make right or wrong of
possession, as best serves for the Good of that Dominion in particular. For in
that God confirmed the Powers of this world in the hands of the Heathen
Princes, declaring them to be his Ordinance, Romans 13. 1. this shows that he
allows of the peculiar laws for possession, made under each Dominion for the
better maintenance of the same. We must therefore put difference betwixt the
General Laws of God, which must universally spread with the spreading of the
Kingdom of heaven, and those which either were temporary, or peculiar to some
people and their peculiar conquest. But now for the general Law of God, seeing
we ought to embrace and love it, therefore I would advise you to discover to
your self the righteousness of the same, that so you loving the
righteousness may then love the Commandment even for the Righteousness sake.
To this end then use your self some times to meditate now upon one, then upon
another of Gods commandments, considering then with your self, both what a
Good every man should have if every one kept that commandment, and also what
insufferable Hurt every man's doing the contrary would produce unto every man.
The Prophet David said unto God, Psalm. 119. 18. Open mine eyes, that I may see
the wonders of thy Law. And verse. 119. he says further: Thy testimonies are
wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them. Now, what think you made this
Man say this? Surely his penetrating, and desire to penetrate more, into the
Mystery of the Righteousness and Good of that which God commands, and the
unrighteousness and hurt of the contrary. True it is, that Gods Laws had in
his time another wonderful Mystery, in that his appointed Divine Service
figured out things, most wonderful to them that could discover them. But I
think not that for this only he accounts the law of God wonderful, seeing
those Laws also are wonderful, for the composition of Righteousness in them,
which yet prefigured not any thing, but only taught right and wrong. And
indeed it is a Speculation fit for a Prince and a Magistrate, to penetrate into
the mystery of the Composition of a general Law, discovering the justice
contained therein, and the good of every man by observing it, and the hurt of
every man's transgressing it. Yea, a Prince that loves the Good of his people,
has not only great delight in the speculation and discovery of the
Righteousness and good of his Laws, but also has in admiration (and this also
with delight) the wonderfulnesse of the wisdom by which the Composition was
made. Even so if every man in particular, would but enter into the
consideration of the Good which would come to every man, if every man kept the
general commandments given us of God, then would each man both discern with
delight and joy of heart the Righteousness of Gods Commandments, and also
account the wise composition of them wonderful in God. There are none of us
all (no not of the most wicked) but loves his own particular Good; yea, and
will complain of hurt as wrong; why then should we not teach our hearts to love
such a Law, as which the general observation of, would produce the Good of
every one in particular? Surely those whose supposed Good stands not with
this, are worthy to be punished, as those whose supposed Good is the hurt of
others. Therefore also if at any time we have procured our own supposed Good by
some unrighteousness, then let us learn to grow in hatred of that
unrighteousness and false Good, by considering advisedly what a Hurt it would
be to our selves, if other Men that we have to deal with, should for their
Good deal with us as unrighteously, as we for some supposed Good to our selves
have dealt with others. Verily, there could be no greater punishment of the
wicked, then if every man that they deal with were as wicked as they. Wherefore
also that is not a good which is evil come by, because not only the
punishment of God and man awaites it upon discovery; but also, if other Men do
the like to us we shall then with ^orrow feel and acknowledge, that it is not
Good to have one man's Good another Hurt. Therefore I say, learn from the Good
which would befall your self in particular, by every Neighbors observing a
Commandment given, to fall in Love of such a Commandment, as whose
Righteousness is not one but every man's Good. Which that you may the better
do, allow to your self some time of serious and private meditation, wherein
thinking of some or other of the Commandments of God, you may also say thus,
or to the like effect with your self: How Good were this to be observed by
every Man? If this were kept by ^^ry man, what a blessed life should we live
ever upon earth? from how many fears should I be freed? from how many dangers,
yea, wrongs, and hurts which now assail me should I be freed? were it not
better for me and for my household, that this Lan were kept by every of my
Neighbors? were it not Good for them also, if I and my household observe this
Law toward every of them? Thus if you use to question and discourse with your
self, some time of one, an other time of another of the commandments of God,
then will not only the Righteousness of the commandment appear unto you,
but also your heart will inclyne within you to love the commandment, even for
love it bears to its own particular Good, which would arise by every man's
observing that Commandment. But if once your heart be possessed of love to the
commandment, then will love not only make the observation of the commandment
easy, but also it will breed even a delight in you to keep that commandment
in your Actions and Conversation with men. Learn therefore to love the
Righteousness which is in a commandment, and then assure your self that you
will be the readier of inclination; both to love and also to observe the
commandment its self. At any hand therefore be not negligent of your Passion
or Affection, but rather carefully endeavor that you fall in love of the
Commandment: For unless one Passion or Affection be moved, there will not any
other be moved for the easing of the observation: I mean, unless your love
unto the commandment be won, there will be no delight in the observing of the
commandment: and where there is not delight in the observation, there no
willingness is to keep the commandment. Surely it is the Affection of love,
that moves the Passion also of Deligh^ in the observing that loved, and this
moving of the Passion and Affections, makes the observation of a Commandment
easy. Wherefore, as you open unto your self by discourse in meditation, the
Righteousness, and the Good which would come to every man, were this of this
commandment observed by every man, be then also careful of your hearts
affection, observing whether it yield in you to love and delight in such a
Righteousness, or such a Good: for if the Good, do upon evidence thereof unto
your self, prevail over your heart to move it to like or love such Good, then
for love of the Good, the Commandment also will thenceforth be beloved and
delighted in. But every Commandment tending to show us our duty, either to
God, or to our Neighbors, we must not rest in considering the Righteousness
and Good of those Commandments only which concern our duty toward Man, but
we must consider the Righteousness and Good of those Commandments also, which
show us our duty toward God. Now to make our selves discern the
Righteousness of these commandments which show us our duty toward God, it
will be needful that we consider him, even God that gives the Commandment*
endeavoring for his excellency, and for the invaluable Good he does us, to
confess unto him freely, saying: Lord, tho^ art worthy that I do this or this
in thy worship and service. For, do we not see in daily experience, that the
greatness of a Commander, and the Good we receive by him, make us even to love
his very service? Therefore we shall be the proaner to acknowledge, and love
the Righteousness of those Commandments, which show us our duty toward God,
if we use our selves sometimes to lay to heart, the excellency of God, and the
Good which we receive of his hand. This do therefore; but do it not with that
superficial generality of Confession which commonly men use; they confessing
Gods Greatness and Excellency, and that all Good is of him, but without evaer
laying to heart any one particular of either; for they never consider the
excellency or greatness of God in any one particular thing, neither do they
in particular consider any one Good, confessing it to be Good, and then
believing withal in their heart, that it is of God indeed, and not of Nature,
or of Man only. But now, if you do sometime by one, another time by another
of Gods commandments, as I have above directed you, then will the
Righteousness and Goodness of Gods Commandments so appear unto your Spirit
and Heart, as that even for love unto such Righteousness, and such Good, your
heart and spirit will yield in you to love the Commandment it self also. And
a Commandment loved, is with delight of heart also observed, therefore get to
love any commandment, and then be assured, that the observation of that
Commandment will be, not only easy, but even a Delight also unto you. I
could willingly here (for a furtherance both of your Apprehension of the
Righteousness and Good of Gods commandments: and also of your dislike or hatred
of those false Goods which wicked men do flatter themselves of) have written
particularly, of each of the Lords commandments, showing both the
Righteousness and Good thereof, and also the unrighteousness and Hurt of the
seeming Good, which the transgressors of those Commandments sooth themselves
up in. But the Commandments being many, as branching themselves not only into
all our outward actions, but also unto the inward Actions of the mind, and
this also both toward God, and toward Man, I found that I could not
conveniently in this place write in that manner of them; for if I should, it
would too too inconveniently increase this present Treatise. Therefore I think
fit to leave you here, to the directions in brief which before I have given
you: knowing, that if you do as I have taught you, then you will do this even
of your selves: and your own souls discourse, does commonly cause things to
sink deeper into your heart, then another man's telling or unfolding them unto
you. But now to conclude this chapter, get to know and have in mind, not the
ten commandments only, but also the other commandments which branch
themselves out of those ten, and then rest not in the knowing them only, but
exercise your self to think now upon one or two, another time upon other,
opening then also unto your self, by your own discourse thereupon with your
self, both the Righteousness of the Commandment, and also the invaluable
Good which would come to Mankind, if every man toward other did according to
that Commandment.

8. CHAP.
THe seventh Motive, or Inducement, to the keeping willingly and with delight
Gods Commandments, is, Their profiting them that observe them. For besides the
profit of those blessings which Gods Promises, Deuteronomy. 11. 8. Deuteronomy. 11. 2^.
Deuteronomy. 26. 16. Deuteronomy. 28. 1. comfort us of, there are other profits which the
commandments themselves bring with the^ to the observers of them. As David
says, Ps. 119. 24. Thy Testimonies are my Counselors. And Ps. 119. 22. Except
thy Law had been my delight, I should have perished in mine affliction: I will
never forget thy Precepts for by them thou have quickened me. Again, Ps. 119.
104. By thy Precepts, I have gotten understanding. And Ps. 119. 100. I
understood more then the Ancients, because I kept thy Precepts. Again, Ps.
119. 129. The entrance into thy Word shows light, and gives understanding to
the simple. Lastly, Ps. 119. 98. By thy commandments thou have made me wiser
then mine enemies: for they are ever with me. I have had more understanding
then all my Teachers: for thy Testimonies are my meditation. Thus by this holy
man's experience we find, that the co^mandeme^ts of the Lord show a Light, and
give understanding; they quicken one, they are as Counselors, they make us
wi^er then our enemies; yea, they prevent our perishing in Affliction. Precious
benefits truly are these, and such will appear to be unto him, who duly
considers each of these things what it is. There is not one of these things but
we would be delighted to have it fulfilled in our selves: for who desires not
every of these things, if there be any possibility of attaining thereto? Would
you then attain to these things, do as did this holy man, exercise your
selves in the commandments to do them. For certainly as the commandments,
issued in the original from God who dwells in glorious light, so they
themselves partake of the nature of light, giving light also unto him that
receives them into him by Meditation, setting himself to do them in his life
and conversation. A worldly minded man enjoying the light of this world, can
hardly be persuaded that darkness is in himself: but, as a blind man though
he be in the light of this world yet is himself dark, so is a worldly minded
man, though he enjoy the light of this world. Let the simple or ignorant
therefore, or the worldly minded, (for there is no worse simplicity and
ignorance then worldly mindedness) take unto them the commandments of God:
let them learn them by heart: let them think or meditate on them one by one:
let them set themselves to put them in execution in their actions, and in their
conversation, and they shall find a mervailous change in themselves: a change,
I say, nothing less mervailous, then if a blind man ever blind, should receive
sight, or darkness should be changed into light. Surely, as is the morning
light after the dark shadow of the night, so will the simple, the ignorant, or
worldly mineded, by receiving the commandments be enlightened, becoming of
dark, light, and of ignorant, to be men of understanding. A worldly minded man
would hardly think that his wisdom can be foolishness; for finding himself
wise, and wiser then many, either in contriving to increase his gain, or in
dexterity of apprehension and invention in matters of State or Policy, though
he know not, or care not for to walk in the commandments of God, yet he
thinks himself wise, and sufficiently wise for his part; but, as the Apostle,
1. Cor. 1. 20. says: Has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishness?
So there is nothing truer, then that a man wholly worldly minded, nothing
minding the commandments of God to do them, or observe them in all his
Actions and Thoughts, is not wise as he thinks, but contrariwise is even
filled with foolishness. Let such therefore, if there be any heart in them to
do themselves good, learn also the commandments of God, endeavoring that
they, as Guides, go with all their plots and devises, to the ruling them when
they tend unto straying from the way of Righteousness, and then they shall
change their wisdom, from foolishness to wisdom indeed. If their gain, if
their promotion will not stand with the observation of Gods commandments, and
therefore they think that it were not wisdom for them, by observing the
commandments, to deprive themselves of such gain or promotion, let them know,
that when they have reared up their state unto the uttermost, then they are but
as men who are foolishly under some old Ruins, which are ready to fall upon
them to their destruction, if wisely they hasten not themselves from under
them. As for the poor of the world, the simple (I mean) or unlearned, let them
also know, that if unto this poverty of theirs they join also
worldly-mindednesse, nothing caring to know the commandments of God, and to be
ruled by them in their poor plots and contrivings for means of living, or for
gain, then they are of all men the most miserable and truly base, as being
both poor and wicked, and in the wrath of God. But if they will resort to
their Teacher, and pray him to acquaint them with the Commandments of the
Lord, setting themselves also to rule their Acts, and their Thoughts by them,
then shall they feel a wisdom to grow in themselves, changing them in their
minds within, making them of simple or ignorant, to be of good understanding,
and truly wise. Therefore also the commandments which most import us are such,
as which the simplest may understand, that so none may plead for his ignorance,
but every one of what condition soever he be, low as well as high, poor as
rich, shallow as deep of judgment, may better both his understanding and also
his condition. And verily a worthy work is it in a Pastor, to have an eye to
his Auditories knowledge or ignorance, observation or neglect of the
commandments of the Lord, bending his Instructions and Exhortations, his
giving consolation or denouncing of judgment accordingly. For certainly it is
one of the chiefest parts of his office, to have a watchful eye over the
manners and conversation of his people, observing their change or not changing,
from wickedness unto Righteousness, from profaneness unto Holiness. I cannot
therefore but much commend them, who insist much upon instruction and
exhortation concerning Manners, observing in their Auditories the defects or
unrighteousness, and sharply reproving the same, and that plainly: Teaching
them withal, and that frequently, the way of Righteousness, being careful to
impresse in them, now some, then others of the commandments of God, and
showing them how they should make use of them in their common Actions and
Conversation. I cannot like that superficial and too general kind of
touching at wickedness, which the teachers of these our time too much (for the
most part) now affect; for hereby they speak, not as to their own people; but
as of things which concerns not them as guilty, save only to hear of them as
the text gives occasion, and this but as for a warning. For the Teachers of
these times seem to be loath to exasperate any by a just reproof of
wickedness evident in them, speaking always so generally rather, that men may
take or leave the reproof at their own pleasure. For my part I think this to
be a fault, whilst a Pastor, though wickedness be even manifest in any of his
Auditorie, yet he dares not reprove any one plainly thereof, but must ever
speak in general manner, leaving the party to take or leave the reproof at
his pleasure. Indeed without certainty and evidence, none ought to be
publicly reproved, for public reproof is a kind of punishment, and not
being surely grounded may be rather a scandal then a just reproof; but where
the wickedness is manifest, as being a thing generally noted of the
neighbors, I think that Pastor fails of his duty, who reproves not the same
openly and plainly in his hearer, that so a just reproof may touch the
conscience, and peradventure lead his hearer to repentance. If these things
were done both by people and Pastor, it would certainly appear by present
experience also in every Age, that the Commandments of the Lord show light,
and give understanding to the simple. And it is this sense in our selves of so
blessed a change of our minds within, that is a kind of Quickening, which they
certainly will with comfort of heart feel, who set themselves to the Lords
commandments to observe them, as for Guides of their Action and Communication.
For as he that walks in trespasses and sins, is said of the Apostle Ephesians.
2. 1. to be dead even while he is alive: So certainly, the change from so
walking in trespasses and sins, unto an obedience or guiding our deeds or
speech by the Commandments of God, is ever accompanied with a kind of
Quickening (as feeling peace with God) which the soul in a man that so does
will certainly have a sense of Therefore profitable is it that a man use
himself to know the commandments of God, learning them more and more in time;
but with this resolution of mind withal, to do as they direct him, as
occasion is offered for making use at any time of any of them. Let men
therefore with this holy man use them as Counselors, consulting ever with them
before any thing be done or said, or thought; for assuredly he that so does
shall find that they will be unto him faithful Counselors, and deep a^o in
wisdom, showing him the true and happy way of a most excellent and
blameless life. Which that a man may the better and with the more ease do, it
is convenient that he get a ready knowledge of the commandments, least else
for want of a ready knowledge, the commandment be to see^ when any thing is to
be done or said. But it will greatly further a readiness of remembrance, if
the commandments be by some skillful hand digested into such an order, as that
the most usual Actions of life, and the most usual speech, may have annexed
to them severally the commandments which most aptly serve as Guides in them.
For men more easily apprehending variety of common or usual actions or life,
or speech, then they do a variety of commandments, they will both then more
easily apprehend a variety of commandments, they being joined with the usual
actions of life, or commonnesse and most usual speech and conversation, and
also they will have the commandment the more ready at hand, as they have
occasion of such Action or Speech, unto which they find the commandments
annexed* It is good to further good things by all good means, and people have
need of such furthering, because they are commonly dull of apprehension, and
careless of Remembrance as concerning duties.

Another benefit which the Prophet David found by Gods commandments, was,
that he was by them made wiser then his enemies: for surely some enemies of his
laying wait for his falling, endeavored either to bring him by some or other
snare, or else oppression or distress, into some or other evil Action, that
so Advantage might be taken thereof, to ruin him even by public justice; but
he having his eye to the Commandments of God, shunning the evil which they
discovered and forbad, deceived them in their expectation concerning the end of
their plots Even so, full many are they who industriously plot, to bring the
Saints into some open scandal, by getting them, either by smooth flattery, or
colored violence, to do some evil thing or other, that thereupon they may
have opportunity to shame them, if they cannot also ruin them. Therefore a happy
man shall he assuredly prove, who consulteth frequently with the commandments
of God; for, making them to go commonly with his Actions and Speech as Guides
unto them, he shall prevent his falling into the snares, which it may be
unknown enemies lay for him. Much like as when some desiring the fall of some
one, will close with him by some that have familiarity with him, to get him,
either by way of conference of State matters to speak evil of some in
Authority; or by way of Society to become a drunkard with drunkards for company
or good fellowships sake, (as they use to speak): or by way of pleasure to
become a haunter of harlots: or by way of questioning and disputation, to
become a holder of some punishable error. These, and many other traps do
wicked persons and politic lay, to entrap them unto shame at leastwise, if
not unto perdition also, who let not loose the raines to run with them in the
full speed of that ungodliness wherein themselves delight; but he that has an
eye upon the commandments of the Lord, eschewing by their direction the evil,
will (unawares peradvent^^^^ at the present to himself) prove wiser then his
enemies, (...) unknown to him at the present, laid such snares for his
fa^^^ling. Yea, the Prophet shows by his experience further, that he that does
set his eye upon the commandments, shall not only find a wise prevention of
the drift of his foes, but also shall find a sustaining him by them in his
Afflictions. And indeed sometimes when Afflictions happens upon a man, he is
then more ready to run into further and further evil, through discontent of
not being kept of God from affliction when he sets himself to his
commandments, then he is to turn in his heart to the Lord with prayer,
remaining withal constant in obedience. But when once a man has gotten such a
victory over the evil inclynation of his flesh, as that with a resolute heart
he has made Gods commandments his delight, then even under the heavy pressure
of Afflictions, he shunnes the running the high way of Discontent unto
perdition, staying himself by the Law of his God, from doing or thinking those
evil things which Discontent would easily take hold of, and so saves himself
from perishing in his Afflictions. To conclude, as you desire to have the
darkness of this world expelled out of you, and the Light of God to inlighten
you to salvation: as you desire, of simple or ignorant, to become men of good
understanding: as you of dead, even while you are alive, would be quickened with
the life of Righteousness through the Spirit: as you would, in stead of the
false and pernicious incytements of the flesh, have faithful counsel: as you
would prevent the traps of your foes, becoming wiser in preventing, then they
in plotting: Lastly, as you would eschew shipwreck in the storm of Afliction,
so have a resolute courage and mind in you, to set the Commandments before
you, in all your Deeds, Communi^ation; yea, and Thoughts, (...) that you be
ruled (...) them, to do in all things as they instruct and teach you. Thus
having shown unto you some of the special Mo^^ues, or Inducements, by which
men may be brought on to willing obedience unto the Commandments, I will now
proceed to show also some of the special Means, whereby to attain to keep the
Commandments as the Saints have kept them.

9. CHAP.
THe Means I account to be specially three: First, Gods assistance invocated
by prayer: Secondly, Gods corrections or afflictions: Lastly, our own
industrious Meditation. For the first, the Prophet David, Psalm. 119. 10. says:
Let me not wander from thy Commandments. Again, verse. 12. O Lord teach me thy
Statutes. Again, verse 18. Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy
Law. Again, verse. 27. Make me to understand the way of thy Precepts. Again,
verse. 33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy Statutes. Lastly, verse. 36. Incline
mine heart unto thy Testimonies. For the second, the same Prophet, Psalm. 119.
67. says: Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now I keep thy Word. For
the third, he, Psalm. 110. 10. says, With my whole heart have I sought thee.
Again, verse. 23. Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant
did Meditate in thy Statutes. Again, verse. 48. I will Meditate in thy Statutes.

Though the Prophet said, (as in the third Means) With my whole heart have I
sought thee: And again, I will meditate in thy Satutes: yet you see how he
invotateth of God also, that He Let him not wander: that He Teach him: That He
Open his eyes: That He make him to understand: that He inclyne his heart. And
truly it is in some measure a Mystery, that our Act is attributed to God as
being his Act: for so here though David bent his will to meditate in the Law of
the Lord, yet he prays to God that he incline his heart unto his Testimonies:
so likewise Exodus 18. 15. though Pharaoh hardened his own heart, yet chap. 10.
1. God says: I have hardened his heart. Indeed I observe that Exodus 8. 15. it
is said, But when Pharaoh saw that he had rest given him, he hardened his heart
and hearkened not unto them: from whence I think I may gather, that this
hardening was not an evil quality infused by its self of God, but was only the
permission of that Good unto this wicked one, which he enjoying or feeling, he
would surely abuse, hardening his heart unto unbeleefe and disobedience. The
man entreated Moses and Aaron to pray for him, that the plague of frogs might
be taken from him: God heard Moses and Aaron praying him to take away the
plague: and yet even Gods Goodness in hearing his servants, and taking away
the plague, was the occasion that this man feeling rest again, hardened his
heart. Therefore though we set our hearts very industriously to be obedient to
Gods commandments, yet it is needful that we pray to the Lord also to incline
our hearts to his laws; for God by Means (as by Corrections when we have gone
astray, or by Gifts when we have applied our selves to his service) inclines
our hearts to the keeping of his Commandments. And truly, let our Endeavors
be what they will, yet such are the baits of Satan, such the crosses we find
in obedience, as that we have exceeding need to pray with this holy man, that
God suffer us not to wander: that He teach us his Statutes; that He open our
eyes; that He make us understand; that He incline our hearts. The wicked will
peradventure be ready to say: Must we pray to God that He incline our hearts
unto his Laws? Then let us take our fill in the pleasures of sin until God
incline our hearts unto his Law; for if we never incline our hearts, it is
because He himself inclines not our hearts: but contrariwise does this ^^ly
Man of God do; for, though he prayed unto God, ^^ying; Let me not wander; and,
Inclyne my heart unto thy Testimonies: yet he also said; With my whole heart
have I sought thee; and, I will meditate in thy Statutes. And certainly it is
(...) true sign of a child of God, when he sets his heart unto all godliness,
and yet prays unto God that he inclyne his heart. For as our breathing is not
of our selves, but it is Gods good Gift in us that as yet we can breathe the
breath of life; so every good thing in Religion which we do, is yet the good
Gift of God in us, and as for such to be asked of God our Father in prayer. Yea
verily, every particular thing in Religion, which God requires of us that we
do, may yet be asked of God that he work the same in us; for though he has
sent the Means, and such Means as which will work such effects in those that
resist not the Means; yet such are the snares of the devil, such the enticing
withdrawing of the world, such the opposition or persecution of all those who
resist not but embrace the word of Grace, that it behooveth us that we ask of
God that he inclyne our hearts to his words, that he open our hearts to
Belief, and that he himself work that He requires of us. Therefore, do you
find that you shall go, as it were, contrary to all men if you live after
the Rule of Gods Commandments? Do you find that you shall loose much gain
if you restrain your self to this Law? Do you find that you shall deprive
your self of pleasing imbracements, pleasing delights in wantonness, if you
take not liberty to cover other men's beauties, other men's wives? then yet
consider that there will be an end; no man's life lasts ever; and there is a God
who will take account of his creatures: therefore say rather with your self:
Live I in such an age wherein to be righteons is contrary to all men's custom
with whom I have to do? Surely so much the more miserable are my times, but
yet, shall I leave such Goodness as this Law teaches, to make my self so
wicked for companies sake as I see these men? I will not do it. Is there no
possibility to gain, unless I be also unrighteous in getting it? God forbid;
yea, I may Gain, and yet without coveting, without stealing, without
oppression, without swelling against God by Gains gotten; therefore for the
Gains of unrighteousness let it not come into my possession: Let who will
follow after that, I will have mine eye to the Law of God in getting it. Why
should I love the unlawful embracements? Why should I love the unlawful
liberty of a lustful eye? Will not God judge for these things? If I do this,
shall I not be as he that has stolen, for whom the execution of hanging
waits? If mine own wife should be so coveted of another: or if when I shall
have a wife I shall be so used, will that please me? If no, then let me content
my self with her whom I shall link my self unto, and though I may be
conversant with other women, and delighted of Gods gifts, of beauty,
proportion, wisdom, and the like in them, yet for Gods Laws sake let me
abstain from sin. Let there not be Adultery, let there not be
uncleanenesse, let there not be secret coveting. Surely, s^ many are the baits
of sin, as that it is so difficult a thing not to wander in this world from
the Law of God, that we may well pray, and pray earnestly and frequently with
this Prophet unto God, saying, Let me not wander from thy Commandments. But
though you pray that God let you not wander, yet you must not take hold of
every occasion of wandering, leaving it to God to keep you that you wander not;
for if with such a heart you pray to God, you may assure your self that God
will not hear the prayer of such a one; but if you put on a resolution of
mind, to seek God with your whole heart, and bend your will to the Law of God,
putting from you the occasions of unrighteous Gains, and drawing your eye from
an evil or lustful looking, then God will second you, as he did David, that
the baits of this life shall not intise you to your perdition. A man's own
resolution of mind, as it is a precious thing and acceptable of God, so it is
very powerful against those things, against which it is settled. Therefore do
but put on this resolution, that with your whole heart you will seek God and
his righteous ways: that you, notwithstanding the foolish occasions of sin,
which daily will offer themselves unto you in this life, will yet keep your
self to do as Gods Commandments direct you, and you shall feel that it is
not so difficult a thing to withstand sin, as at the first apprehension a man
would think. True it is that the heat of youth, as it tends to Lust, and to
Ambition, and to oppression, and to wantonness, so it is a warfare to restrain
it; but consider with your self that there is a continual warrfare in the
world, which even by Men's Laws is occasioned, and yet who condemns not him
that will not restreine his Appetite or Inclination but will expose himself
for the satisfying of it, unto Carting, unto loosing of ears, of nose, or the
like, unto hanging, and unto quartering? how hardly does a strong man restrain
the use of his strength, that he wounds not this man, and kills not that man
upon every displeasure? And yet for the Laws sake of his Prince he restraines
the disposition of his strength; and shall we do less for Gods Laws sake?
How difficult a thing is it for young and lustful men, to keep themselves from
deflowring of Virgins, from abusing every man's wife? and yet partly for the
fear of men whose displeasure should be moved thereby; partly for fear of the
Law of the Land, they do restrain their heat, and do not all that youth
would easily incite and enable them unto: and shall we not then endure the same
warfare of restraint for the Laws sake of God? How many are able to steal,
and yet endure want rather then they will steal, and is not this a warfare:
Surely yes. But if for fear of Princes punishments men endure this warfare,
why should they not for Gods punishments endure the same? But indeed the
Princes punishment is Gods punishment, though God can and will punish them so,
who will not be restrained for the punishment of their Princes, as no Prince
can possibly punish any. God can punish in this world, with blinding of the
mind, hardening of the heart, and with ^ending into swinish or wicked Men
evil spirits, to lead them into further and further evil; this cannot
Princes do, and yet they are most fearful judgments and plagues of God even
in this life. Besides this, he can even in this life punish with a final
casting away or Reprobation, and in the life to come with a keeping men in an
eternal living in pains, in torments, gnashing of teeth, word, and never
quenchable burning. Therefore though occasions unto sin may offer themselves
daily unto you, yet put on a settling of your mind to keep Gods Law, animating
your self thereto by the invaluable benefits of Obedience, and frighting your
self from sin, by setting before your self, with faith, the fearful
punishments of Disobedience, and join herewithall an invocating of Gods
assistance, and then you shall surely much the more easily, yea not without
delight, feel this a very powerful Means of keeping the commandments of God.

To which, if you join a desire of heart, and prayer unto God, that you may
discover the Goodness and Utilitie of his Laws, praying with the Prophet that
God teach you his Statutes, that He open your eyes that you may see the
wonders of his Law, that He make you understand the way of his Precepts, you
shall surely greatly further your keeping of the commandments God. For it is
no small provocation to the keeping of a Law, when our understanding is opened
to discern the goodness, utility, and righteousness of a Law. Wherefore
though you set your self industriously to the keeping of the Law of God, as
^^ling or guiding, and restraining, in all your Actions, Communications, yea
and Thinkings, brideling them in, when they would take liberty to wander from
the commandment, yet use your self withal to pray with this holy Prophet unto
God, that God assist you also, keeping you that you wander not from his
Commandments, teaching you, opening your understanding, and inclyning your
heart unto his Testimonies.

For the second Means, which was, Affliction, we have also very great need
thereof; therefore if after we have been loose in any thing, following after
some sin, casting the Lords holy commandment behind our backs for that time,
the Lord then send upon us some Affliction, let us consider, that this
Affliction as it may be a gentle Correction sent us of the Lord; so it may be
also a Means that we stray not still from his Commandments. And indeed we are
commonly so apt, if God but bless us with such a portion of this world wealth,
as that we can with credit and boldness hold society with the rich, and those
of good place in Authority, then to take liberty, either to neglect all
dependence on God, or to do violence to some whom we malign, or to entise the
fair or beautiful women in our company to be dishonest with us, as that there
is need that God send upon us, either dejection of estate, or else infirmity of
body, that so even of Disability to be any longer bold to commit such sins,
we may both turn in our hearts from doing such evil, and also turn again to
the Lord yielding obedience to his words. Surely, if this holy Prophet could
say, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy words, much more
have other men need of this restraint from evi^^ by affliction. Wherefore learn
you also when you feele^^^ to make this godly use of them, that they not only
stay you from further straying, but also work you to a keeping (now yet) the
word of your God. Say with yourselfe: I am now in adversity, shall I also be
disobedient to my God? shall I also be wicked? What were this but to double my
misery? therefore I will rather set my self now to the Word of the Lord, that
yet my estate to Godwards may mend, even under this declining of my estate to
the worldwards. And indeed, who will not condemn him who adds wickedness to
his poverty? or him who when the Law has punished for some wickedness, he
will yet then increase his wickedness? Are not men's hearts even set against
such a man? Do they not commonly account the utter perishing of a man of such
a disposition just? Therefore learn from this holy Prophet, that if ever
Afflictions come upon you, you make this use of them, that now yet you will
turn you to the Law of your God to keep it.

For the third Means, which was, Meditation, we have also great need thereof;
for such are the incessant withdrawings from minding the things of God, as that
unless we purposely set our selves to mind the Commandments, either the
continual care of getting Gain, or the continual laying hold of all means
of aspiring, or the continual delight of advantage unto lustful pleasures, is
such, that we shall hardly ever so much as once mind the Commandments of God.
Wherefore it is surely necessary that you sometime say thus, or to like effect
with your self: Shall I never think of Gods commandments? Shall I be always
carried away of my Cares, of my Employments, of my Pleasures? Shall these
wholly ^^uffe my mind? Shall I never once Meditate on any Commandment of the
Lord? What will become of me if I thus go on? For if thus you say some time
with your self, this will touch your heart, this will startle you, this will
move you to break off sometimes your cares, employments, or pleasures, taking
some fit time wherein purposely to read, or hear read the commandments of
the Lord; at which time, you suffering your self to discourse upon each one,
unvayling its Rightenesse, Goodness, and utility to man's Society, this will
greatly further your keeping the commandments of God. The discourse of the
soul upon a Commandment, fastens a Commandment in our Memory, whereby ever
after it shall not come after, but go before every Action, Speech, or Thought
of ours. And truly we fall into much evil, even for want of having a ready,
and impressed knowledge of that Commandment which concerns the Action,
Speech, or Thought we are at present about. Therefore I commend in a man a
dividing of the Gospel into parts, taking the commandments apart, and then
taking him to study, either in bed or in solitariness, now of one part, then
of another. For this same general Notion only of the Gospel, whilst we know
all, but study not advisedly any special particular part of the same, comes
far short of that use which we ought to make of the Gospel. And indeed all
is best comprehended, by dividing all into parts, and then studying well the
parts, one at one time, another at another time.

10. CHAP.
THus having shown you (as for an excellent example) how David received the
Commandments of God: and next having shown you, some special Motives tending
to make a man the more willing and delightfully to keep the Commandments: and
lastly, having shown you, three very special Means by which may be furthered
your keeping the commandments of the Lord, I think it fit in the next place to
show you two things whereof I would warn you. The first is, that you in an
eager disposition to keep the commandments, begin not to fall into that old
^rrour of trusting unto justification by works, rather then by faith only: the
second is, that you be not discouraged from observation of the Commandments,
neither by the impossibility perfectly to fulfill them, nor by the manifest
evidence that other Men mind them not, to observe them toward you, in that
wherein you have to do with them.

Men desire much to be justified for their obedience, and therefore to do works
commanded that they make themselves righteous by their obedience; now unto
obedience indeed righteousness is imputed; but men consider not that the
obedience in believing, is that whereunto truly righteousness is imputed.
They would feign be righteous by their works, but God that knows how
imperfectly men fulfill the righteousness of works, has imputed
Righteousness to Belief, not to Works. As it is said in the Scriptures of
the old Testament, Genesis 15. 6. And Abraham believed the Lord, and He counted
that to him for Righteousness: which thing is made use of in the new Testament
by S. Paul, to draw us to seek Justification, not in our works but in our
faith in Christ, Romans 9. 4. Therefore let no man be discouraged for that he
cannot perfectly fulfill the Lords Commandments concerning works, but rather
let him be sure, that he fulfill that great Commandment concerning Belief,
that so he with Abram believing God, may have by God Righteousness imputed
unto him for that. Few men in our times consider as they ought, what an
excellency it is to Believe in God and in Christ, manifesting themselves so
veiled as they have done; but God knowing how rich a thing it is, for man to
believe that which he says, as abram not only heard, but also indeed believed
the Lord, vouchsafed to account Belief unto man for Righteousness. Verily men
heed not this in these times as they ought, therefore also they accounting of
Belief but as of a light inclination of the mind only, trust rather to works
then to belief for Justification; but they ought to inform themselves, that
though the faithful must endeavor to fulfill also the righteousness of
works, yet God has chosen to justify Believers for their believing, not for
their works, because they believe in him who (only) fulfild the Righteousness
of works commanded. To believe the Lord is a work of works, as we may
perceive by that which our Lord answered the Jews, John 6. 29. saying: This is
the work of God* that ye believe in him whom He has sent. And truly all the
Scripture shows, that the Lord has ever more freely accepted of men's
believing in him, then of any the best works that they have done; therefore
though Abraham performed that great work, of offering up to God his son
Isaak, yet there we read not that God counted that to him for Righteousness,
but when he believed God, God counted that indeed unto him for Righteousness.
Blessed therefore ^e the memory of those first Angels of the Reformation, who
perceiving how Popery lead people to trust to works for their Justification
before God, drew them back again to consider Belief more advisedly. Which
thing though at that time they had more reason to do, then we now of the
Reformed Churches have (because at that time works were taught people as for
works meritorious, which indeed merited rather punishment, yea damnation, such
as was the doing worship, not before only, but even to the very Image,
directly contrary to the commandment of God, who said: Thou shall not make
thee no graven Image, and thou shall not bow down to them, neither worship
them:) yet even now also, when no works are allowed, but those which are
consonant to the Commandments of God, there is need to put people in mind of
the same, even of their making sure that they trust believe, as also that they
(...), Belief, above works, for Justification. Surely people (for the most
part) not believing, know not what it is to believe, therefore also they come
far too short of that esteem o^ Belief, which not only they should have
thereof, but also which God declares himself to have thereof. As we see when
Abraham believed God in that which he said unto him, presently God counts That
unto him for righteousness. And so our Lord when Nathaniel so soon believed in
him, Ioh. 1. 50 readily answers, saying, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee
under the Fig Tree, beleevest thou? thou shall see greater things then these.
Let us therefore learn to prise aright of Belief, that so we may not do
works, trusting to have Righteousness imputed unto us for them, but rather
may make sure to Believe, that so God may count that to us for Righteousness.

As for the second thing where-against I would warn you, I would have you to
know first, that seeing Righteousness is not imputed to our works, but to our
Belief, therefore no man should be troubled if he cannot perfectly keep the
Commandments. Secondly, that though it may trouble a Man indeed, that he is
careful to keep Gods commandments toward others, when yet others are
careless to keep Gods commandments toward him, yet seeing we keep not Gods
commandments for the pleasing of Men, but for the pleasing of our God,
therefore we ought to rejoice of our pleasing God, though others be careless of
the Commandments. Let not such things therefore discourage us, but rather let
the rich Gifts and Promises of God encourage us to the keeping of the
commandments: yea, let each of us say with our selves; Shall I hazard the
loosing of this and this good thing promised me of the Lord, for the doing new
upon a sudden this or this against the Lords Commandment? Which kind of
encouragement that it may the rather prevail with you, you are to proceed from
a superficial notion only of the rich things promised us of God, unto a
serious consideration of each thing promised, discoursing with your self
thereupon in your mind, examining your esteem thereof, and considering also how
much need this poor estate in this life has of such things, and what the
Benefiting us by such things is and will be. For thus to study upon each the
most special of the Promises, is the way to make a Promise sink into our
hearts, and to abide in our memories ready for our encouragement against every
discouragement which this world is apt to trouble us with, in our attending to
put in execution the Commandments of the Lord.

To this, if we add a looking upon every sin wistly, as looking it in the
face unmasked, unvailed, that so it may appear unto us in its own true
hideousness, and vileness, before we intertaine a liking it, this would
greatly further our discouragement from committing sins. As, if you think
on, or be about Murder, consider in your mind advisedely what a dead man is,
consider the patience, the want of motion, the grieslinesse of wounds, and
indeed the horror of the sight of Death in a Man: think then with your self
how wicked a thing it were for you, that a Man by your hand should (not in a
just war, or defensive) be brought into such a condition. Use your self some
times in private Meditation, or upon the sight of any one dead, to inform your
mind well what a dead body is, that so the mind being possessed of the
fearfulness of the condition, may also beforehand be possessed with a
loathsomeness and detesting by it own hand to bring any man into such a
fearful estate. And use your self withal to set this against those things
which draw on Murder, or wherein Murder comes commonly so veiled or masked,
as that it prevails over us to give it entertainment into our hearts and
Resolutions: se^ this, I say, against the Occasions of Murder, whether it be
injurious words, or some blow, or some disgrace, or the lustiness of youth,
proane and even desirous of fighting, or skill of weapon, or fond reputation or
imputation of cowardlinesse or dastardie, which some foolish and wicked men,
careless both of Gods Laws and men's, are apt to discredit him, who will not
rather kill a man then put up such or such a thing. It is a wisdom and
righteousness in all well ordered Kingdoms, to give less punishment to less
offenses: and why then should any man in a private quarrel be so violent or
unwise, as for a word to kill a man, so doing the greatest mischief for the
least offense? Of two evils it were better to require eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, or to give blow for blow, then for a word only, or for some blow, to
deprive a man presently of life: but the best is to hearken to what the Laws
both of God and man inform us of, and to possess our minds therewith,
resolute also, what ever occasions fall out, to do as they direct us: for this
is not only a wisdom, both also a safety, both among men, and before God. In
like manner, if you think on, or be but about committing of Adultery, consider
advisedly the Act it self sundred from the Inducements, which as a veil cover
it from being perceived in its own true filthiness and danger: consider
therefore with your self, the filthiness of the Act; the injury you shall
thereby do unto another, and the danger you draw upon your self thereby, both
from the man whom you shall offend, and from God the Lord. And set this against
the oc^asions or allurements which commonly draw a man on hereunto; as against
the eye, the pleasing language, the form, the beauty; against the wit, the
toying of pleasures, the heat of lust, yea against the enjoying the liking and
love of a strange woman.

Thus if you would use your self, to look the sin wisely in the face which is
forbidden you of God, this would greatly further a withholding you from
yielding unto it (through the alluring occasions wherewithal it would come
unto you as in a veil) and would stay the soul from a too too sudden
admitting of those occasions, whereby the liking of the sin is drawn on.
Indeed, sometimes the Acting of a sin, springs from occasion which is so
sudden, as that it prevents all thought of what it is that is to be done;
therefore so much the more need have we, to be ever in our selves resolved
against the sin, and to let fall all occasions which would induce us thereto:
better it is for us to let fall an occasion or opportunity, then to plunge our
selves into further mischief. And truly, we finding in common experience,
that men living under Governments, do usually inform themselves before every
Act of Importance, whether the Law permit it or no: so that they will not so
much as cut a tree, break open a hedge, or the like, but they will inform
themselves first, saying: May I lawfully do this? Why should we not be as
careful of the Law of God, consulting with it also before any Act, Speech, or
Thought, informing our selves whether we may do such or such a thing, or no?
If men do not thus consult with the Law of God beforehand, unvailing by its
help the sins which they are about, it is their fault, and such a fault as
gives advantage to sin, so that it is committed before a man is aware of what
it is he is about. But the child of God, that looks for the rich Gifts of God
in Christ, may not be so negligent of the Law of God, but rather with the
Prophet David to make it his study to think on the Commandments, meditating
also on them, some now, some another time; for thus doing, not only the sins
will appear to the soul in their own vileness: but also the soul will be
fore-possessed with a dislike and loathing of them: and this to the abating of
the force of all occassion, which shall be offered to commit, or fulfill them

Thus, if you would use your self to look every sin, a in the face umasked
wistly, that so you may be discouraged from committing the same, then would the
encouragements or exhortations unto Righteousness and Godliness, given us by
the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, the more prevail over us to divert us
from sinning. And truly we ought never to be unmindefull of our deliverance
from the bondage of sin, by the conversion of us unto Christianity: we ought
never to forget the blessed benefit we received, by our forefathers
conversion from Heathenisme to Christianity. Wherefore that you may as a fresh
be put in mind hereof, and the exhortations of the Apostles hearkened unto by
you, I think fit in this place to set before you some of them, that so they
may work upon you to dispose you, to a willing keeping of the commandments of
God. Ephesiaus 2. 1. the Apostle says thus: And you has he quickened, that
were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked, according
to the course of this world, and after the Prince that rules in the air, even
the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience. Among whom also we
had our conversation in time past, in the lusts of our flesh, in fulfilling the
will of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature the children of wrath as
well as others. But God, who is rich in mercy, through his great love wherewith
he loved us, even when we were dead by sins has quickened us together in
Christ, by whose grace ye are saved. And chap. 4. 1. I therefore being
prisoner in the Lord, pray you that you walk worthy of the vocation whereunto
ye are called, with humbleness of mind and meekness, with long suffering,
supporting one another through love: endeavoring to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace. And chap. 5. 8. Ye were ^nce darkness, but are
now light in the Lord: walk as children of light: approving that which is
pleasing to the Lord. And having no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but even reprove them rather: For it is a shame even to speak the
things which are done of them in secret. But all things when they are reproved
of the light, are manifest: for it is light that makes all things manifest.
Wherefore he says. Awake thou that sleep and stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light. Take heed therefore that ye walk
circumspec^tly, not as fools, but as wise: Redeeming the season, for the days
are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understand what the will of the
Lord is. These exhortations, are exhortations which ought ever to be sounding
in the ears of them of those Nations, which in ancient time were heathens:
therefore remember still that you are Nations, whose forefathers were carried
away after dumb Images, and false Gods, yea, devils, and knew not the true
Lord God of Israel, Creator of all things, and the giver of life and all
blessedness. Forget not therefore this Grace of your conversion shown unto you,
but rather apply your hearts to his Commandments who has shown you this
invaluable Mercy. Put on a Resolution of heart, that neither for pleasure not
for profit, nor for fellowship sake, nor for Custom; no, nor for Displeasure
o^ Loss, you will leave the good ways of Gods Commandments, to walk in the
wickedness which is contrary to the same, and too too usual in the world.

In which Resolution two things may strengthen you, the one Good Education, the
other, the Spirits Assistance.

Good or truly Christian education in children, is truly a most needful help
unto righteousness: therefore where Parents are negligent, there the
Magistracy should help, to discern what customs corrupt the youth, leading it
into things evil, and then to suppress, and to allienate the youth (...)
these things; for verily Magistrates are also Parents unto youth, little less
then they by whose generation they come into the world. Therefore if the
Parents care not what company their children keep; or care not what evil they
commit there in their jollity, nor what wickedness and profaneness their
conversation or communication be corrupted with; yet Magistrates owe to God a
duty, to take account of those houses or places where youth take liberty to be
bold in such evil things. Some fondly think, that unless youth be suffered in
evil conversation, and evil actions, they will never be bold and manly, or
valiant: but we may see in the children of some Princes and Nobles, that
children become manly and valiant, and yet without such liberty; so that these
evils do but steal upon such, to corrupt them and weaken them, nothing
furthering their Manliness or Valor. I note this the rather, because it is the
error of some minds, to think that a godly restraint of youth, is the
depression of the spirits, and the cause of pusillanimity: but whilst all
exercises stirring the body, and refreshing the mind and spirit, may even by
Gods laws be practiced, the use of such things will increase the strength and
magnanimity of youth, and yet without admitting also the abuse. And indeed the
abuse of such exercises, brings upon men first a mischieving and ruining one
another: and secondly, a taking away the hearts of men, by Gods not prospering
the wars of such. Though indeed sometimes as (for punishments) God lets out
evil spirits, giving way to their prevailing also; so wicked Powers, composed
of wicked men, are let loose of the Lord, and suffered to prevail in the
world. But the Kingdom of heaven, even the victorious Church, has not its
fortitude in wickedness, but in Righteousness: and what Power did ever so
truly prevail, endure so long, or was so glorious? Therefore let us
Christians, vigilantly watch over our youths, abusing those exercises of
fellowship, and Activity, by which the strength of a Land is nourished, and ^he
spirits refreshed: maintayning the use, but punishing the abuse of things.
Therefore if any youth grow profane or wicked in its usual communication, or
bold to do this or that injury to men, let Parents in their houses, and
Magistrates in their jurisdictions, have an eye betimes upon this, and
restrain wickedness betimes in youth, that so God be not moved to plague us,
for suffering our youth to practice nothing more, nor nothing more to take
pleasure in, then in breaking continually the Commandments of God.

If we be careful herein, then let us nothing doubt of the Assistance also of
the Spirit of God, disposi^^ our youth unto Godliness and Righteousness And
truly Christians have through the Spirit, a kind of inclination unto
Righteousness, so that not so much of a forced observation, as of a mind and
heart even disposed, or inclyned of the Spirit, they are keepers and observers
of the commandments of the Lord. Yea, the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 9. says: For the
fruits of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth: so
accounting these things the fruits of the Spirit in us, rather then our works,
or our industry. Wherefore Righteousness is not in the Saints, or their
children, a bondage, but rather they are inclyned by the Spirit of God
thereunto. Therefore so much the rather we ought to watch, that wicked customs
bring not us and our children into such a bondage, as that to be righteous,
they must struggle against the common customs of the time: for if this be
suffered, then indeed wickedness brings our youth into a bondage, yea, and the
Spirit of the Lord forsakes them. Let us look upon any Nation, where the
Church is, or has been, and see their condition what it was, whilst they made
conscience of the commandments of God: observe their prevailing against their
enemies: their multiplying, their enriching: and their matchless valor and
magnanimity. Again, let us look upon them after they had suffered the breakings
of Gods commandments to sway among them, and observe then their miseries and
calamities. Let us take them for our example; for it is a sure Rule unto us,
Do as they did, and have as they had. Wickedness grows more and more in time
of prosperity, and creeps upon a Nation under very fair and plausible
pretexts; but it is bitterness in the end, and the subversion of States and
Thrones. St^p it therefore betimes, and be vigilant against its growing into
Custom among your people and Officers, as you desire the growing or
stablishing, of the welfare and glory of your Nations or Dominions.

Verily, it is lamentable to observe, that if Gain come in, or the wars be
managed by any, such seem as free to be godless, and to break frequently in
their life and conversation the commandments of God. They seem as the wheels
whereon the prosperity of a Land runs, or as the cause thereof; or if not
causes, yet then as the pillars of the same, and therefore they are suffered to
live disorderly, without any requiring of them to live as beseems Christians.
The Gifts which God has given them, by which they excel many, and are very
serviceable to a Nation, seem to bear th^^ out, in living in disobedience to
the commandments of God. Yea, when a people being in some bondage, has in
time of that bondage cried unto God to be delivered, and in the time of such
cryi^g* has been diligent in resorting to Church, reading Gods word, as also
in Prayer, and in using religious duties in their families, then, God in his
Goodness delivering them, and granting them the blessings of Prosperity, even
within a few years after, wickedness abounds in that people, and nothing is
done less, then that which was done before, and some little time after the
deliverance. Then, even sin against God, ^eemes as the evidence of Gods
blessings upon the land: for the most part of the people, do not otherwise
express or show, their liberty, wealth and prosperity, then by words or
actions ^ont^ary to Christian Religion. If prosperity increase, evil houses
increase withal, where as ^n ^afe cast^ls, men take libe^ty in all
ungodliness. But what will be the end of this? What will be the issue of this
forgetting the deliverances which God has sent us? Surely a new plunging us
into adversities. Were it not that God has a more graeious eye upon the good
Laws of Nations, and the intention and endeavor of Governors to rule the
people according to them; then he has a revengefull hand to avenge upon
Nations the frequent breach of his Commandments, it were not possible that we
should thus continue as hitherto we do* without great and fearful
Visitations? But now if the wicked be accounted as the enemies of the Lands
prosperity (inas much as through them God is moved to anger against the land)
and as for such ey^d with some measure of indignation by Governors: And if
they that fear God, and wa^k in the ways of his commandments be accounted as
the safety of the Land: and as for such be eyed with f^uour by Governors, and
encouraged in their obedience; th^n surely we shall both r^moue from us the
judgments which hang over our heads, and also bring upon ou^ I and manifold
blessings* Therefore the Lord give hearts to them that are in Authority, that
every Pastor in his Pa^ish, every Officer in his allotted portion, every King
in his Kingdom, may in this endeavor to serve God, even in being a disliker
and discourager of the wicked, and a lik^r and incourager of them who walk in
the ways of Gods commandem^nts. I grant, that any gift given to (...) wicked
man, whereby he may be serviceable to the Church and Commonwealth; is not
therefore not to be made use of because the party is wicked (for this were to
suppress the gift of God) but, that ^or the wickedness which such a one
commits, he may perceive that he has some disgrace or dishonor, which but
for that he should not have. For this would surely turn many from
ungodliness, because most men seeking the favor and good liking of those that
are in Authority in every Land, they will in the greater measure forbear those
things which they find to disgrace them in their presence. As for those places
where the chiefest Officers of Rule are themselves vicious, and to please them
many become vicious, they truly have a fearful judgment from God therein
upon them; and therefore by prayer to God, Gods people there should seek of God
his inclyning the hearts of those in Authority unto his Commandments. Many are
the shining and profitable virtues of many very vicious Princes, neither may
they be suppressed, or the Princes disobeyed in the exercise of them, (for God
has given them these Gifts, fitting them thereby more then others for the
Offices they hold) but rather by prayer to God, and all meet and convenient
means, their turning from such wickedness as whereto they are inclyned, is to
be sought. These things I thought fit here to touch at, that so Christian
Kingdoms and Churches may be put in mind of those things, which very nearly
concern them: For verily, the breaking of Gods commandments will ever be
found the secret cause of all the troubles of the whole world. Therefore though
we cannot think, to turn the unrighteous world in an instant to become
Righteous; (for wicked men will ever be in the world) yet, let Governors make
it their aim, to disgrace the disobedient, and to grace the obedient: and
surely the Lords commandments will then take much the more effect in every
Nation. But now having thus written of these things, I think good to close up
this writing with this Exhortation and Advise following.

To conclude, I having thus shown you, how to make the commandments of God
easy, and even a delight unto you, it remains on your part to study the
commandments of the Lord, that so you may inform your self of them, least
else they be to seek, when in your Conversation or Actions you have need of
their Direction; which that you may with the mo^e ease do, it is good that you
have the commandments culled out, or collected together by themselves in a
book, that so you may use to read them often by themselves, as some have the
book of the Psalms for like purpose. This I advise unto, because by the ten
commandments only, (as they are usually proposed unto us to learn by heart)
we cannot easily discover how they streatch to direct us, in most of the
ordinary things of this life. Whereas if all, or the special of those things,
which in the Scriptures we find, either approved of by the Lord, or reproved,
be gathered out of the Scriptures, then we shall find, that there is hardly
any thing for which we shall not find a direction* Therefore I wish that such a
collection may be made, and this for the peoples sooner knowing the will of God
in these diverse particulars: and such collection being made, I exhort Gods
people to allow unto themselves some times of purpose wherein to read them, or
hear them read, and then to meditate also upon them, that so they may be the
better taken to heart to be observed, with which Exhortation and Avise, I close
up this Treatise, least I should by further enlarging it make it tedious unto
you.

Errata.
IN the Epistle to the Reader, second page, line 16, for, sins, reed, sin.
Page, 2, line, 22. for, as having s^nse, read^, as having a sense. Page, 6.
line, 1 for. coll^ct, read, to coll^ct. Page 23. lin^ 7, (...), th^se* read
those: so, line, 29. and line 31. Page 31. line, 1. for o (...) of. Page 37.
line 4. for are, read is, and line 6, for wrong, read of wrong. Page 39. line
18. for these, read those. Page 46. line 11, for, aso, read^ also. Page 46. l.
23. for, or, read of. Page 56. lin^ 10. for who, read (...). Page 59. line
29. for, thou shall not make thee ^o graven Image, read, Thou shall make thee
no graven Image. Page 61. l. 20. for, patience, read palenesse. Page 62. l. 8.
for, discredit him, read discredit him withal. Page 6^ l. 2^ for, both read
but. Page 63. l. 1. for, wisely, read, wistly.

Other (...) faults we pass by, d^suing the discrete Reader to help himself
(...) them.


