LORD BISHOPS, NONE OF THE LORDS BISHOPS. OR A SHORT DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS
PROVED THAT PRELATICALL JURISDICTION, IS NOT OF DIVINE Institution, but
forbidden by Christ himself, as Heathenish, and branded by his Apostles for
Antichristian; wherein also sundry notable passages of the Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury in his late Book, Entitled, A Relation of a Conference, etc. are
by the way met withal.

MATH. 20. 25, 26. Jesus said to his Disciples, ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
Authority upon them: But it shall not be so among you: But whosoever will be
Great among you, let him be your Servant. 1 John 2. 18, 19. Even as there are
many Antichrists: They went out from us, but they were not of us. BERN.
Praelati Pilati: non Pastores, sed Impostores. Printed in the Month of
November, 1640.

TO THE HIGH AND HONORABLE COURT OF PARLIAMENT, THE NOBILITY AND GENTRY NOW
Assembled in both the Houses, Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied.
MOST Noble Senare, and right worthy Pattiots, who both fear your GOD, and
honor your King; He who truly honors you, and daily prays for a blessed
success of this your Meeting, humbly presents you here with a Cause, which
well weighed in your maturest judgments, may prove one of those greatest
Parliament Businesses, which your most pious and prudent thoughts and
Consultations are taken up withal. When you have perused this short Discourse
concerning Prelaticall Authority, whence it is, and if it shall appear by
clear evidence of Scripture, justly compared with their Prelaticall
properties, and practices, that they are the Seed of Antichrist, the Mystery of
Iniquity; a more then Heathenish Tyranny over Souls, bodies, and estates; a
mere enmity (but under the veil of Hypoerisie) against Christ, against his
Word, against his Ministers, against his People, and the Salvation of their
Soulee; yea against the peace and prosperity of Civil States, by their Factious
and Seditious practices, and the like: Your Wisdom, your Piety, your Zeal for
GOD, your Love to Christ, your Loyalty to your King, your tender compassion
toward your poor Country, your Christian care of your own Souls, and of your
Posterities, will all of them call and cry for a serious Consultation, and a
speedy resolution what is to be done herein, as you shall apprehend the
Prosperity, or Calamity of this whole Church and State, and the happy or
miserable issues of Parlliaments to depend upon it. A word to the wise. What I
would further say, I will turn into continual Supplication to the Great
President of Councels JESUS CHRIST, that he will send his Spirit of Wisdom and
Understanding, the Spirit of Council and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and
the Fear of the Lord: that Antichrists throne being quite cast out, and
Christ's alone set up, the King may be established in perpetual Peace and
Prosperity to himself and Royal Posterity, 'till the coming of Him, who shall
put an end to Times and Kingdoms; and with whom all that truly serve him here,
shall reign for evermore.

Your Honors and Worships faithful Orator till death.

LORD BISHOPS, NONE OF THE LORDS BISHOPS.
CHAPTER 1.
Of the State of the Question: Whether Bishops be de jure divino, of divine
Authority?
OF Bishops, or Episkopoi, Episcopi, so called, so commended in Scripture, we
doubt not, but they are de jure divino. But what are those Bishops? Not
Diocesan Lord Bishops, so commonly called. For of such we no where read of in
Scripture; as we shall fully prove anon. But those, whom the Scripture calls
Episcopos, are Presbyters, or Ministers of the Word, lawfully Called, and set
over their several Congregations respectively. Such only are Bishops jure
divino. But as for such, as are Katagrestikoes, abusively styled Bishops, to
wit, Diocesan or Lord Bishops, there is not so much as any one footstep of them
in the Scripture. And therefore as these have not the true Nature and Calling of
a Scripture-Bishop: So neither ought they to usurp the Name and Title of
Bishop. But as they are of humane invention and institution only, yea of
humane presumption (as old Father Hierome says) and not of divine Institution:
So let them be known by such Titles only, as man has given them, as namely
Prelates etc. Prelati, or Prelates are so called, because they are preferred,
or rather prefer them selves before and above others, that are GODS
Ministers. And thus they participate of the Prelacie of the Great Antichrist,
who is that 2 These. 2. 4.
supereiromenos (as the Apostle styles him) he that exalts himself, above all
that is called God. He is also called in the same place 'o a'ntikeimenos, that
Adversary, called by John, 'o Antikristos, that Antichrist, to wit, that
Adversary against Christ. And agreeable hereunto is that other Title of
Prelates, namely Antistes in the Latin, which they interpret a witness: but
it may rather be derived from the Greek; Anti is not a Latin Preposition, but
Greek, and signifies against. So as Antistes, is one that stands against; and
it may answer to Antistasiastes, one of the adverse Faction, or on the
contrary side, as all Prelates are Antistasiastai, adversaries against Christ,
or Antichrists, which you will; as will further appear. But we will content
our selves with the Title of Prelate in this our whole ensuing discourse, as
being none of the Scripture-Bishops.

Now concerning Prelates, the learned Papists themselves are not, cannot be
resolved, that they are jure divino, of divine institution immediately, but
only at the most mediately, deriving their Prelacie from the Pope, as all his
Canonized Saints do their Saint-ship; saying, that the Pope has his
Supremacy jure divino, both as Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor: but all
Prelates derive their Prelacie from no further a Fountain, then the Pope, as
from the wellhead, or the Head of the Hierarchicall body, which gives them
their lively motion, as the Head to the natural members. This very point of
Prelaticall Jurisdiction was canvased and controverted in the Council of Trent,
and held by some learned there, to be but jure Pontificio, by Pontifician
Authority resident in the Pope: Histor. Concilii Trident.
whom therefore they call Patrem Patrum, the Father of Fathers, as being the
Father of the whole Paternity of Prelates. And our Prelates of England may
remember, that till Hen. 8. cast the Pope out of England, the Prelates held all
their Jurisdiction from the Pope, and their Authority was but translated from
the Pope, to the King, So as passing from one man to another, it was merely
humane still. And the great Primate, the now Champion of the Church of England
as he bears himself in his ^a^e Book (his Relation of the Conference)
confesses thus much, That among these (to wit, Conference page 176, 177.
Bishops in their several Dioces, as there he names them) there was effectual
subjection respectively grounded upon Canon and Positive Law in their several
Quarters. Where by effectual subjection he means subjection of the Prelates
in every Province to the Arch-Prelate, or Primate: then he confesses, that
Archiprelaticall Jurisdiction is grounded upon Canon and Positive Law, and so
consequently not upon the Holy Scriptures, as being jure divino. And thus much
he confessed in open Court at the High Commission at Doctor BASTVVICKS Censure,
that no one of the Apostles had Jurisdiction one over another; and so
consequently not an Arch-Prelate over other Prelates, jure divino, but only
jure Canonico, and Positivo, by Canon and Positive Law. Arch-Prelates therefore
have no Jurisdiction by divine Institution. Or if he mean it of subjection of
Ministers in every Diocese to their Prelates respectively, that this also is
grounded upon Canon and Positive Law: though so he should say truly, yet in so
saying, he should contradict himself, as where he says elsewhere, That Christ
thought it fitter to govern the Church (universal) Aristocratically by
diverse, rather then by one Viceroy. As much to say, rather by many Popes,
then by one. Confe. page 200.
And this (says he I believe to be true. So as he makes it an Article of his
Faith, That Prelates are jure divino. Yet but a little before in the same page,
it is not certain that the whole Militant Church is a Kingdom: for there are
no mean ones (says he) which think our Savior Christ left the Church
Militant in the hands of the Apostles, and their Successors, in an
Aristocraticall, or rather mixed government, etc. So as what others, and those
no mean ones Think, the Prelate believes. And the Government, which some
think, and he believes to be Aristocraticall, he understands to be
Prelaticall, which (says he) is Aristocraticall, or rather a mixed Government.
What means he by a mixed Government? Namely, partly Aristocraticall and partly
Monarchical, for of those two he there speaks. His meaning then is, that a
Prelate is in part in Monarch. But where do we find that Christ thought it
fittest to Govern his Church by Prelates, that the Prelate is so confident to
believe it? It seems he is one of Christ's Cabinet Counselors, that he is so
intimately privy to his thoughts. For surely Christ has no where left the
impression of any such thought of his in his written word. But I suppose the
Prelate does but presume so, or charitably believe Christ thought so. Me thinks
he should not so believe it, as to write upon it, I believe this is true. But
thus (I say) this faith of his overthrows the credit of his former Saying, That
Prelates with their effectual Subjection, are grounded upon Canon, Confer. page
or Positive Law, and so have no Authority from Christ (as the Prelate a little
before affirms) of what force is his Canon? For there speaking of the Pope he
says, Nay out of all doubt, 't is not the least reason, why de facto, he has
so little success, because de jure he has no power given. But how then is it,
that some few Confer page 183.
pages before he says, that some one must be Ordine Primus, to avoid
confusion^ and he speaks there of the Rom^e Prelate. It is then of necessity,
that there must be one Ordine Primus to avoid confusion in the Catholic Church
Militant (which elsewhere he makes to be visible, and Hierarchicall, or
Prelaticall) then did not Christ leave so much expressed in writing, but to Canon
and Positive Law? But perhaps Christ thought it best: and the Prelate so
believes. Thus we see here is nothing, but Ridd^es, Ambiguities, and
Contradictions, or Enterfeerings with our Prelate. What course then shall we
take for a clear resolution of the Question, That Prelates (as themselves
affirm) are jure divino? Certainly, if they be jure divino, they must show
good proof for it in the written word of God. And to this Rule we must hold
them, and to this only. For it were to tread an endless maze, to go about to
prove a Divine Title, or Authority out of the Volumes of humane writings, or
Ecclesias^icall Histories. They can tell us de facto what has been: but that
Prelates are de jure divine, that we must search for in the Sacred Records of
Divine writ. If there we find it, well and good: but if there it be not, but
the contrary: then all humane writings are in this point to be rejected, as of
no credit, or value. Come we therefore to the Scripture, which will clearly
tell us what Christ thought of this matter.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is proved, That CHRIST expressly condemns all Prelacie, or
Hierarchy, as flatly forbidding it to his Apostles and Disciples.
MATH. 20. 29, etc. Then came to him the Mother of Zebedees children, with her
Sons worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him. And he said unto
her, what will thou? She says unto him, G^ant that these my two Sons may sit
the one on thy right hand, and the other on thy lest in thy Kingdom. But Jesus
answered and said. Ye know not that ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the Cup,
that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the Baptism, that I am
baptized with? They say unto him, we are able. And he says unto them, ye shall
drink indeed of my Cup, and be baptized with the Baptism, that I am baptized
with: but to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine to give, but it
shall be given to them, for whom it is prepared of my Father. And when the ten
heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two brethren. But Jesus
called them unto him, and said, Ye know, that the Princes of the ^entiles
exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon
them. But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be chief among you,
let him be your Servant. Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto,
but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

In these words, as we see the mind of these, as yet carnal Disciples: So on
the other side we see the mind of Christ, and what he thought of Prelacy. For
Prelacy is that, which they make such a solemn suit for. They ambitiously
affect Cathedram, a Prelates Chair, or Throne: they make suit to sit, and that
in the most prime Seat, on the right, and left hand of Christ. And these two
suitors were Christ's Kinsmen, James and John. A fair motive for promotion to a
Prelacy. For as the Saying is, Dic^re vis, Praest^? De sanguine Praesulis esto.
Would thou have Church Dignitee?
The Prelates Kinsman thou must be.
Or according to those old Verses: Quatuor, Ecclesias, his Portis, itur ad
omnes:
Sanguinis, and Simonis, Praesulis, atque Dei.
Prima patet Claris: nummatis altera: Charis
Tertia, sed raris janua quarta patet.
Through these four Gates all Churches ways are trod
Of Birth: of Simon: Prelate: and of God.
The first for Nobles: next for golden worth.
For Prelates Kin, the third: for few the fourth.


These two brethren would enter into the chief Cathedralls by the gate of
Nobility, as they are Christ's near Kinsmen, and so descending of the blood
Royal. And in hope the better to speed, they get their Mother to speak, who
with Christ was not a little gracious. But besides the absurdity of this their
suit (for Christ told them, ye know not what ye ask) they come in as unfit a
season, and upon as unsuitable an occasion for such a suit, as possibly could
be. For in the very next words going before, Christ had but newly told them of
his Death at Jerusalem, saying, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of
man shall be betrayed unto the Chief Priests and Scribes, and they shall condemn
him to death: and shall deliver him to the Gentiles to Mock, and to Scourge,
and to Crucify him, etc. And in the next words they come to make their suit.
Nor only here, but in other places of the Evangelists this is constantly noted
of the Disciples, that when Christ was telling them of his suffering, and
death, they were still harping upon this string, which of them should be the
greatest. As we may read, Mark 9. ver. 30. to 34. and Luke 9. ver. 43. to 46.
Yea ( Luke 22.) when they were at the Last Supper, and Christ had newly told
them, that one of them should betray him, they were instantly again at their
philoneikia, a hotly contending about Prelacy: as ver. 21. to 24. As if they
would contend, which of them should betray him. So as still they took as bad a
Season for their suit, as might be. But in Matthew (Chap. 20. 19.) Christ told
them also of his Resurrection, which might give him a fair hint for their
suit. But alas, poor Souls; they as yet Mark 9. 32. Luke 9. 45.
understood nothing at all, either of his Crucif^ing, or of his Rising again.
And again it is to be noted, that after the Lord was risen again, and they
had received the Holy Ghost, they never made any such suit, or had any such
contention, or ambition among themselves. Then they were become other men,
never so much as thinking of any such vanity, as a Prelacy; they now saw, that
Christ's Kindome in its military condition admitted not of Prelaticall Chaires
to sit at their ease, and to enjoy their pomp, pleasure, and riches of the
world. Their contention was then, which should be the greatest in pains taking
in his Ministry, and in undergoing greatest afflictions for Christ, and the
Gospel, and in winning most Souls to Christ, and the like. But (I say) before
Christ was risen again, they were carnal, carnally minded, they dreamed of a
temporal, and worldly Kingdom, wherein they would be chief. And such a
Kingdom indeed is that, which has Chaires of Prelacy, and Preeminence, such
as they blindly aimed at. And yet as blind as they were, their Mark. 9. 33, 34.
Conscience made them ashamed to confess to Christ what it was, that they
reasoned of by the way; for they had been at it, which of them should be the
greatest.

Well, we have heard of their suit: now for Christ's Answer Ye know not ( says
he) what ye ask. You know not the nature of that Kingdom of mine, which in
this world is not a Kingdom of external pomp, glory, and greatness, but a
Kingdom of grace, humility, patience, and wholly Spiritual, a Kingdom not of
ease and pleasure, as to sit in Chaires of State, but of paines-taking, of
labor and travel in your Ministry, of contempt of the world, and of suffering
manifold afflictions, and even death it self, for my Names sake. And therefore
Christ adds here: Are ye able to drink of the Cup, that I drink of? etc.
And they answering: We are: he adds; Ye shall indeed drink of the Cup, and be
baptized with the Baptism, that I am baptized with: that is, you must think
of other matters, when you come into my Kingdom, then of any such worldly
greatness as you dream of; you must prepare your feet for the fetters, your
backs for the whip, your bellies for hunger and thirst, your bodies for
nakedness, your stomachs to drink and digest the bitter Cup of death, and to
be dipped over head and ears in floods and Seas of afflictions. Are ye able to
do this? Alas, poor Souls, as yet they were novices in Christ's School, they
would be of the highest form, before they had learned the very first
Principles of the Catechism, or the A, B, C. of the Cross of Christ.

But, says Christ, Ye shall drink of my Cup, etc. that is, after ye have
fullfilled your Ministerial Course, and suffered afflictions, and drunk
deaths Cup, and therewith have been baptized, then a place shall be proved for
you in my Kingdom of glory, such as my Father has appointed for you, and for
all my Disciples, so as in whom the greater improvement of the Luke 19. 16, 17,
18, 19. Math. 25. 16, 17, 18, etc.
Talents of Grace, committed to your trust, is found, the greater preferment in
Glory he shall have, each according to his proportion yet so, as every good and
faithful Servant, shall enter into his Masters joy, in Psalm. 16. 11.
whose presence is the fulness of joy, and at whose right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. But for any such thing as you ask, it is not mine to
give, I have no such Commission from my Father to bestow upon you any such
thing, as worldly Prelacy; that is no part of my Kingdom, nor of the
administration thereof. But all that are found faithful in the Kingdom of
Grace, shall in the Kingdom of Glory sit with me at my Fathers right hand for
evermore. Whereas on the contrary, such as turn my Kingdom of Grace into a
Kingdom of Pleasure, pride and ease, as they due which hunt after, and enjoy
the preferments of the world, to those I say, Luke 6. 24, 25, 26.
Woe to you that are rich for you have received your Consolation. Woe to you
that are full: for you shall hunger. Woe to you that laugh now: for ye shall
mourn, and weep: Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you: for so
did their Fathers to the false Prophets. Hence we may note by the way, that
Christ applies this his whole Speech to such especially as are false Prophets;
that wallow in ease and pleasure, as we know all Prelates do; who therefore
shall be ranked among the voluptuous and salacious goats at Christ's left hand
when he shall say unto them, Go ye cursed, etc. For as one said, Qui Praelatum
quaerit in terris, inve^^t confusionem in Coelis. He that seeks Prelacy on
earth, shall find confusion in heaven. And we see here, that Christ has no
such Prelacie to give; he convinces his Disciples of great blindness, in such
their ambition. Christ then to be the Author and giver of any such Prelacie.
Prelacie therefore is not jure divino, as from Christ's Ordinance. For Prelacie
always is attended with a long Silken Train, goodly Palaces, rich revenews,
great Grace in Princes Courts, and what not that the world can afford? Quo jure
then? From what Title do Prelates hold? Namely, from him who said Luke 46, 7.
All these things are mine, and to those that will fall down and worship me, I
give them: that is, All that will be Prelates, and so will be my Servants in
oppressing Gods Word, in persecuting Christ's Saints and Ministers, in
exercising their Lordly Jurisdiction over the Consciences of Gods people,
captiving them with manyfold ceremonies of will worship, to ^h^ destruction of
Christ's Kingdom, of Man's Salvation, and of that liberty from all Spiritual
bondage, the redemption from which cost Christ his best blood: to those I will
give rich Prelacies, goodly houses and Palaces, a Princely Train and Retinue,
a Lordly Revenew, and all the pleasures and contentments, which the world can
afford. And thus we have found out the very Source of this Egyptian Nilus, the
prime Author, and Patron of all such Prelacie, as falsely pretends its Title to
be de jure divino, yea even from Christ himself.

It follows in the Text ver. 24. And when the ten heard it, they were moved
with indignation against the two brethren. Observe here of these Disciples, as
yet carnal, some are ambitious, and the rest envious. For all of them before
Christ's Resurrection, were ambitious of Prelacie; as we read in the place
forecited. So as hence we may note, that such as affect, and are ambitious of
Prelacie, they are carnal men, which savor the things of the flesh, worldly
minded, such as the Apostle speaks of, that Phil. 3. 18, 19.
are enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God is
their belly, whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things. They have
a wisdom indeed, but lam. 3. 15.
such as is not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and develish, as James
speaks. And whereupon speaks he it? In the former verse he had said, If ye
have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against
the truth. And this was the wisdom of these carnal Disciples, they were
ambitious, and envious one against another; yea they did a'ganaktein, stomach
and malign one another in the point of Prelacy. For ambition and envy are two
inseparable twins, like those of Hypocrates, they are borne together, live
together, and dye together. And as lames in the former place adds, For where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, kai pan phaulon pragma, and every
evil work. Now to apply this to our Prelates: what men in the world more
ambitious of Prelacie, and more envious one against another? In those Primitive
times, at the first Council of Nice, what bundles and fardles of complaints did
those Prelates bring one against another? and all this arose from their
ambition and (...), each seeking precedence of his Sea before another. And the
fire was so kindled, that had not Constantine the Emperor caused all the Bills
of complaints to be cast into the fire together, it had been enough to have set
all the world in a combustion. And the Prelate of Canterbury in his said Book
confesses, Confer. page 176.
that the only difficulty was to accommodate the places and precedencies of
Bishops among themselves. And afterward, what a hot stir was between John of
Constantinople, and GREGORY of Rome, for the precedencie of their Seas, and for
the Supreme Headship it self? And heretofore between the Prelates of
Canterbury and York for the universal Metropolitanship over all England?

But let us further hearken to what Christ says: But Jesus called them unto
him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over
them, and they that are great exercise authority over them. But it shall not be
so among you. And Luke expresses it thus: The Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon them, are called
Benefactors. But ye shall not be so. All is to one effect. Which is, Christ
here forbids his Disciples to exercise any such Dominion, or Auhortity, or
Lordship, either over one another, or upon his Church, as Heathen Princes do
use over their People. And this he applies to their ambition of Prelacie, which
Prelacie he samples and parallells with the Dominion, Authority, and Lordship,
which Heathen Princes exercise over their people. These words of Christ are so
express and full, that Bellarmine has no other Shift to ward off the blow,
but to say, that Christ here forbids his Disciples the exercise of all
Temporal Authority and jurisdiction, such as Heathen Princes used, but not of
spiritual Dominion and Lordship, Authority, and jurisdiction over the Church.
But it is more clear then the Sun, that Christ forbids here to his Disciples
all manner of Dominion and Lordship either over one another, or over the Church
of God, as over Gods Ministers and People. First, for Lordship over one
another, the said Archprelate of Canterbury confesses Christ gave them none.
And secondly, for Lordship over Gods heritage, the Apostles themselves
afterward both disclaimed in themselves, and condemned in others; as we shall
see hereafter. And by the way, by Bellarmines own confession, all Temporal
Lordship, or Government is condemned in Prelates.

But now for our Prelates: Quo jure do they de facto exercise such Authority
and Dominion, such Lordship and Jurisdiction over Gods Ministers and People, as
differs nothing at all from the State of Heathen Princes? This Christ
expressly forbids to his Disciples: and therefore such as do it, are none of
his Disciples, nor yet any of their Successors. But they will say, They are
Spiritual Lords, and exercise a Spiritual Lordship over the Church. But this
bare Title of Spiritual, is too short a cloak to cover the nakedness of so
poor a shift. They call themselves Spiritual, when they are the most carnal
men in the world. Thus did those false 2 Cor. 11. 13.
Apostles, deceitful workers, transform themselves into the Apostles of
Christ. Thus Antichrist himself, whom the Scripture intitles 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
the Man of sin, and the Son of perdition, will salve all, by Styling
himself, Holy Father, yea Holiness it self. But to come a little more close
and home to our Prelates, those Spiritual Lords: wherein does their Spiritual
Dominion and Lordship differ from that of Heathen Princes? For first, they
assume the Title of Prince to themselves, as the Arch-prelate in High
Commission most bravely and boldly alleged Psalm. 45. 16. for which he borrows
Bellarmines Gloss. Princes then they must be. But what Princes? Spiritual.
Nay by their Lordships favor, they are Temporal Lords; For how else come they
to sit in Parliament cheek by jowle with the Princes and Peers of the Realm?
And do they not in all points bear the Image, and represent Heathen Princes in
their State and Dominion? Have they not their Stately Palaces, as they? Have
they not their Attendants and Officers of their House, as they? Do they not
go in Purple, and Scarlet, Silks and Velvets, and fine linen, and fair
deliciously every day, as they? Have they not their Courts, and Officers, their
Tipstaves, Lictors, and Prisons, as they? And do they not exercise their
Authority without subjection to any humane Law, and in their own Names, as
absolute, and independent Lords, as those Heathen Princes did? Thus have they
not with the Beast (their Sire) in the Rev. 13. 14.
Revelation, made a perfect Image of the first Beast, to wit, of the Heathen
Empire, from top to toe, whose whole form and State of Dominion they set up in
their Prelaticall Hierarchy? Does not the ver. 12.
Beast, which comes out of the earth, having two horns like a Lamb, but
speaks as a Dragon (which is the Papal Hierarchy) exercise all the power of
the first Beast before him (namely of the Roman Emperor there described) yea
and cause the Earth, with all that dwell therein to worship the first Beast,
that is, to subject themselves to the Throne and Authority of the Hierarchy,
which is now invested with an absolute, Imperial, independent power, which yet
they blush not to affirm to be jure divino, and from Christ himself? How can
any thing be more diametrically contrary to Christ's words here, It shall not be
so among you? Yes (says this Shameless Beast, it shall be so with us, and this
Imperial jurisdiction) we do, and will exercise over the People. As they do
indeed.

Yea these Spiritual Lords do not only exercise all the power of the first
Beast, as of Heathen Princes over the bodies and goods of men, by imprisoning,
fyning, undoing of Men and their whole Families; yea and faggotting also the
dear Saints and Servants of God, only by a pretty conveyance, making the
Civil Magistrate to be their executioner, as the High Priests having condemned
Christ, delivered him over to the Secular Power, to Pilate the Roman Governor:
but they also usurp and exercise a most transcendent and Tyrannical Dominion
over the Souls and Consciences of Gods people, as whose Canons and
Constitutions (even their whole Canon Law, written in blood, signified by their
red Ink, like to Draco his Laws, which for their cruelty were said to be
written in blood^ are most cruelly pressed upon the peoples souls for a full
conformity to all those humane Rites and Ceremonies of their will worship in
their Divine Service, as they call it. A bondage infinitely more bloody and
cruel, then that of Gods people of old under the Egiptian Taskmasters. And yet,
not withstanding all these things, is this their Lordly and Princely
Jurisdiction jure Divino, from Christ? Or are Prelates herein the Apostles
Successors? Were the Apostles ever such Princes? Lived they in such Palaces?
Kept they such Courts? Did they imprison, persecute, and undo Gods Saints? Did
they make any Canons, or Laws for will worship? Did they press so much as any
one ragge of a Ceremony of their own devising upon the Conscience of any of
Gods people? Nay did they not expressly forbid, and condemn it? Not as Lords
over Gods Heritage, says 1 Pet. 5.
Peter to the Presbyters. Not as having dominion over your Faith, says 2 Cor.
1. 24.
Paul to Gods Ministers and People. Yea this was also one branch of that
Dominion, which the Heathen Emperors exercised over the people, namely to
force their Conscienses in matters of Religion. Dan. 6. 7.
Darius made a Decree, that none should make any request to God or Man for 30.
days, save to the King alone: Dan. 3.
Nebuchadnezzar proclaims his Commandment, that all should fall down and
worship his golden Image. And Julian the Apostata would force the Christians to
offer sacrifice to his Idols, or at least to cast but a little incense upon the
fire before them. And such as refused, were sorely persecuted, punished, yea
put to death. And do not the Prelates exercise the like Dominion over men's
Souls (I say) even to the utter undoing and exterminating of all those, that
refuse to submit their necks to such an Antichristian yoke? Nay do they not
fast Chain to their Tyranny all Ministers, that take their Oath of Canonical
obedience, even as Temporal Princes take an Oath of Allegiance of their
Subjects^ Only here is the difference, the Subjects are by their Oath bound to
the Prince, to obey him according to Gods Law, and the Laws of the Land: but
Prelates by imposing the Oath of Canonical obedience, do exact of all
Ministers absolute and unlimited obedience, to all their Canons, not only
those in being (although they be both contrary to Christ's Law, and are not
authorized by the Law of the Land) but to whatsoever other Canons they should
in time frame and compose. Which was one great Coal, that has caused the
Smoking out of all the Prelates out of our neighbor Country. Thus we see,
that the Prelates, exercising the like, yea even the same Authority and
Dominion, which the Heathen Princes used in all points over their People, are
here flatly and expressly forbidden by Christ himself: So as their Pr^lacie is
so far from being sure divino, of divine Authority, as that it is an open
rebellion against Christ and his Kingdom, and a very trampling of his words
under their feet: But it shall not be so among you.

Again for the words in Luke, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over
them, and they that exercise Authority upon them, are called Benefactors. But
ye shall not be so. Ye shall not be called e'uergetai, Benefactors, or Gracious
Lords, as some Translations render it. In which word or Title Christ forbids
all such Titles to be assumed by his Apostles, as are Heathenish, or such as
did, set forth the magnificence, pomp and State of Heathen Princes, or such
Titles, as the Scripture does not give to Gods Ministers. Now it was not
unusual with the Heathen to call their Kings, who were the greatest tyrants,
and oppressors of the People, Euergetal, Horat.
Benefactors, or the like, in flattery of them. Thus they did incrustare vitia,
parget, or roughcast their vices; as the Poet speaks. And it seems the Popes
learned of the Heathen this fashion of changing of their Names: as, if he were
deformed, to call him, Formosus: if cruel, Clemens, etc. But for Prelates, are
they not called Euergetae, Benefactors, your Grace, your Honor, Right
reverend, most Reverend Father in God, My Lord, My Reverend Discesan, My Patron
and Benefactor, Our Metropolitan, Primate, My Ordinary, and many such like
devised Titles, no where to be found in Scripture, but serving to bolster out
their Pontificiall pride? All such Titles Christ forbids to his Disciples here;
as elsewhere also, Mat. 23. 8. 9, 10.
Be ye not called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are
brethren. And call no man Father upon Earth (such Fathers as Prelates are
called) for one is your Father which is in heaven. Neither be ye called
Masters: for one it your Master, even Christ.

But the Prelates will say, Distingue tempora, Distinguish the times: the
Apostles were poor, the Church was then but in the Infancy, Swaddling clouts
might serve the Turn: but now we that are the Successors of the Apostles, are
men grown, and know how to use the honors, pleasures and preferments of the
world, being cast upon us; and being now promoted to be Princes, those titles,
riches, and honors that we have, are but suitable to our dignity, and
serviceable to our Principality: Then was then: and now is now. These things
some great Pontificians and Popes themselves have alleged. Bernard. De
Consider. ad Eugen. 4. lib. 4. c. 2.
But Bernard, who was one of their own, writing to Pope Eugenius, and telling
him plainly and freely of all his Pontificiall Pomp, and how unlike therein he
was to Christ and his Apostles: says, Scilicet sic factitabat Petrus? sic
paulus ludebat? Did Peter I pray you do thus? Did Paul play such play? Si
anderem dicere, Daemonum magis, quam ovium pascua haec: If I durst speak it,
these are the pastrues of Devils, rather then of the Sheep. Honori totum datum
datur, Sanctitati nihil aut parum: All is given to honor, but little, or
nothing to holiness. But he puts their allegation as I said before) Absit;
inquiunt, tempori non convenit: What should holiness do, say they? It is not
suitable for our times. Thus Bernard.

But we need go no further, then to the Painter, whom the Pope set a work in
his Gallery to draw the pictures of Peter and Paul: who having painted their
faces blushing read, and the Pope coming in to see his work, and asking him,
If Peter and Paul had such read faces, because he had so painted them: No,
puoth he, but if they were here now, and did behold what a glorious, rich and
magnificent Successor they have, they would blush as read, as now you see
their pictures do. And his Holiness was very well pleased with the Painters
Conceit, to see himself a braver man, then ever poor Peter and Paul were,
whose Successor notwithstanding he boasts himself to be. For what else, but a
Sweet Fable, does the Pope make of the Gospel, as himself said? And surely we
cannot think, that Prelates, who are the limbs of this great Beast, are of any
other Spirit, then Atheistical, such as the Head himself is of, and which he
has derived to his Members.

Well, hitherto we have heard Christ's Sentence concerning Prelacy in the
Church, and that negatively, denied to his Apostles, as a thing heathenish and
carnal; and so which turns Christ's Spiritual Kingdom into a mere carnal
and temporal, yea profane and heathenish Kingdom. But it shall not be so
among you. Ergo Prelates (as before is noted) are none of Christ's Disciples,
and their Prelacie, or Hierarchy none of his Institution or Ordinance, but
flatly forbidden and condemned by hm. Now a word of the affirmative part of his
Answer, wherein the shows what manner of men his true Disciples must be.

Verse 27. etc. But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister:
and whosever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant: The Sum is:
Christ's Apostles and Disciples must be humble men, and Servants to their
brethren, not Lords over them. For these two are opposed one to the other:
Prelacy is for proud men: humility for Christ's Disciples. Christ's Disciples
then, and Prelates cannot stand together. And pride is not the way to come to
sit the next to Christ's right hand, but humility. He that is most humble,
shall be exalted to the greatest honor. As Christ says here, whosoever will be
chief among you, let him be your Minister, or Servant. That Is the way to be
the chief.

Lastly, in the next words, Christ sets himself for an example: Even as,
(says he) the Son of man came not be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give his life a ransom for many. And the Servant is not above his Lord. And as
Christ humbled himself below all men: So for that cause God has highly
exalted him, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 1.
and given him a Name, above every Name, that in the Name of Jesus every knee
should bow, etc. that is as Christ made himself the Servant of all, So God
has made him now the Lord of all: this is that Name above every Name: So as In
this Name to bow, is not an hypocritical and Superstitious bowing of the knee
of the body, when ever the bare Name Jesus is named, when the Name Christ is
nothing regarded: but it is an acknowledgement that Jesus Christ is the Lord
and Judge of all, to the glory of God the Father; as there the Apostle speaks.
So as he there says, ver. 5.
Let the same mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus. Thus true humility is
the way to honor in Christ's Kingdom: he that fits lowest at Christ's
footstool here, shall sit highest at his right hand in heaven. So as this is
not such an humility, as was in the Monk, that always went hanging down his
head, until at length he came to be Prior, and then being asked, why now he
held up his head: he answered, I have now found the Keys of the Covent. Nor as
of another, that being a Friar, would cover his Table with a piece of an old
Fisher-net, in token of his humility: but coming to be Abbat, he cast away his
Net; and being asked why, he said, I have now taken the Fish. Neither are
Christ's words so to be taken, as the Pope styles himself, Servus Servorum Dei,
Servant of the Servants of God: under which Title he has made himself Dominus
Dominantium, Lord of Lords. Nor because Pope Gregory was the first, that styled
himself Servus Servorum Dei, and his next Successor but one, Boniface 3. got
the Title of Vniversalis Episcopus, universal Bishop: therefore Christ requires
such an humility; as aims at temporal promotion. But he is truly humble, that
denies himself; and tramples on the worlds preferments, preferring Christ's
rebukes before the treasures of Egypt, and to suffer afflictions with the
people of God, rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. This
is that humility, which brings us to that Recompense of Reward, to sit at
Christ's right hand. And thus much of Christ's words, wherein he declares his
mind touching Prelacy, so as he never thought it fittest to govern his Church
by Prelates, as the said Archprelate is not ashamed to belly him, and so to
blaspheme him. Therefore the Hierarchy is no Institution of Christ, and so not
jure devino, of divine Authority.

CHAP. III.
Wherein sundry passages of the Prelate in his said Book, for the mainteynance
of his Hierarchy, and so for the disabling of the Authority and Evidence of the
Holy Scripture, are met withal.
FOr concerning the Scripture, he has writ a large Treatise or Sect. 16.
Section of his Relation, of almost 15 Sheets of paper, wherein he extremely
abuses the clearenesse and Sufficiency of Scripture, as wanting light enough
of it self to show it to be the word of God; until the Authority and
Tradition of the present Church do light it. And for proof hereof he says,
that God in his Providence has kindled in it no light for that. Thus belying
and blaspeming Gods Providence. It shall be sufficient to name and note this
only, for the present, the confutation thereof requiring a larger discourse,
then this of mine will admit. Again, he says, Confer. page ^57.
If there be a jealousy or doubt of the Sense of the Scripture, we must
repair to the Exposition of the Primitive Church, and submit to that: or call,
and submit to a General Council, etc. Now, if he shall quarrel this
Scripture, and those words of Christ forementioned, as being either jealous or
doubtful of the sense thereof: and so send me to the Primitive Church, or call
me to a General Council, for the determination of this point: what shall we
say? For in no case can he yield the Scripture the honor to be sole Judge of
controversies in faith. And for the Primitive Church, which he means, namely
that which came after Christ and his Apostles, that (he will say) had Bishops,
or Prelates. And for a General Council, that by his own verdict, must consist
of Prelates, and so then shall be Judges in their own cause. Therefore herein I
must tell him plainly: that, first, for the Primitive Church, which was that of
the Apostles, never any one of them was a Prelate or Diocesan Bishop, as we
shall see more anon. Secondly, the next ages of the Church succeeding that of
the Apostles, knew no such Lord Bishops, or Prelates, as are now adays, with
their Trains and Courts. And when they began to get Prelacies, old Hierome
reprooved them; and so did others. Thirdly, never any General Council yet
concluded, that Prelates were jure divino. Fourthly, For a General Council now
to be called for the determining of this controversy, which must consist only
of Prelates: I deny them to be competent Judges in this Case. For by the
Prelates own Confession page 157.
No man ought to be both party and Judge in his own Cause. And again, the page
220. 226.
Prelate is too strict and Canonical, in tying all men to the decision of a
General Council, and to yield obedience unto it, yea although it determine a
matter erroneous in the Faith. Now then if a General Council of Prelates
should determine, that Prelates are jure divino, although it be erroneous, yet
according to the Prelates Rule, all must yield obedience, and submit thereunto.
And then we are gone, if we commit this matter to a General Council.

But we will pass by these, and come to some other of his passages for his
Prelacy. He says, page 200.
I believe, Christ thought it fitter to govern the Church Aristocratically by
Diverse, rather then by one Viceroy. And those Diverse, he makes to be
Prelates, or Hierarchs, or rather Archprelates. Now except he verily believe
that Prelates are the best men in the world, how can he believe, that Christ
thought is fittest to govern his Church by them? For Aristocracie is a
Government of the best men. Aristoi, Optimi, and therefore called Optimates,
most honorable for their virtues But are Prelates so? Does their extreme
pride, ambition covetousness, voluptuousness, idleness, hatred and
suppressing of Gods word, persecution of Gods Ministers, oppression of Gods
people, even all that profess godliness, and extreme both injustice and
cruelty without all Law or Conscience in Censuring poor innocent souls that
come before them: do these their virtues make them to be the best men for
Christ to think the fittest, by whom to govern his Church? unless in this
respect Christ might think it fittest: that seeing he thought it fittest, to
keep his true Church, his little sto^ke, always under manifold trials of
afflictions and persecutions, as being the exercises of all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, and the way, through which they must go into the
Kingdom of God: therefore for this very cause, he might think it fittest to
suffer Satan to set up Anticr^ist in the Temple of God, with his Train of
Prelates, who should prove the most vengable Instruments of persecuting and
oppressing Gods true children, of all other men in the world. And this I
believe to be true. And again, I believe this to be true also, that Christ
thought it fittest to govern his true Church Aristocratically, that is, by the
best men, because he has so expressed himself in his word. Why? Where? and
who be those best men? Let my Lord Prelate have patience, and I will show him a
clear ground of this my faith, such as he can never show for his blind faith.
Those best men, that Christ thought is fittest to govern his Church by: are
the several Ministerss rightly qualified, and lawfully placed over their
Several Congregations respectively. And they are called both Presbyteri, and
Episcopi, Presbyters or Elders, and Overseers, or (as Prelates falsely style
themselves) Bishops. But how are these o i aristoi, the best men? Because
Christ requires such to have the qualities of the best men. What be those? ^
Tim. 3^ 2.
First, such a Bishop, or Overseer must be blameless: the husband of one wife
(not therefore one tied from Marriage, which is for Antichrists Priests)
vigilant, sober, of good behavior given to hospitality apt to teach, not given
to wine, no strik^r, not greedy of filthy l^^re: but patient, not a brawler,
not covetous, etc. And in Titus: Tit. 1, 7.
Not selfe-willed: not soon angry: a lover of good men^ sober, just, holy,
temperate, holding fast the faithful word that he may be able by sound
doctrine, both to exhort, and to convince the gainesayers. Such therefore, as
call themselves the only Bishops, to exercise Lordship over many Ministers and
Congregations, and are proud, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more
then lovers of God, cruel strikers with their High-Commission-weapons, soon
angry; and never appeased again, not lovers, but persecuters of good men; not
such as hold fast the wholesome word, but suppress it all they can, forbidding
others to convince the gainesayers, as those of the Arminian party, and the
like; and cutting off the Ears of those Ministers, that should dare to reprove
the Prelates notorious practices and attempts, in setting up a false,
Idolatrous, and Anchristian Religion for Christ's Religion, and such like: such
(I say) how can the Prelate believe to be of those diverse, whom Christ thought
it fittest to govern his Church by.

Again; another passage of his, is this: page 210, 21.
She (the Church of England) believes, That our Savior Christ has left in his
Church, besides his Law-booke, the Scripture, visible Magistrates and Judges,
that is Archbishops, and Bishops, under a gracious King, to govern both for
Truth and Peace according to the Scripture, and her own Canons and
Constitutions; as also chose of the Catholic Church, which cross not the
Scripture, and the just Laws of the Realm. So the Prelate.

In the next passage before, the Prelate makes profession of his own Faith
concerning Christ's thought for Prelaticall Government: and here he tells us
what is the Faith of the Church of England about the same new Article of his
beliefe^^ And not unlikely it is ^ that the Prelaticall Church of England is of
the saine belief with her learned Champion, and great Metropolitan. But the
faith both of the Prelate and his Church, in this point, is notoriously
erroneous, as both is proved before, and which the Prelates own words here will
sufficiently convince of fashood. For first, Christ left none (when he went
into heaven) but his Apostles and Disciples, such as he inspired with his
Spirit, to instruct and govern his Church. But the Prelate a lbid.
little after confesses, that one of these visible Judges, Archbishops and
Bishops, are infallible. Therefore Christ left no such Judges; and when he went
into heaven, there were no Prelates extant, nor yet hatched; and therefore Christ
cannot be so much as thought; much less believed, to have left any such
visible Judges, as the Prelate mentions. Secondly, it cannot be safe to
believe, that Christ left visible Judges in matters of faith and Religion, who
are in their judgment not only erroneous, but in their affections malicious
against Christ and his word, and his trile Church. For the universal and
constant practice of Prelates (and especially ever since Antichrist has been
exalted in his Throne) in persecuting the Professors of the Gospel, does
proclaim them to be of the malignant Church, and of Gal. 4. 29.
the bendwoman, that where of Babylon, whose ^eed does persecute the true
Church and Children of God: and therefore Christ would never appoint such to be
visible Judges in matters of Faith and Religion in his Church. Thirdly, the
Prelate in making such visible Judges besides Christ's the Scripture (as he
says) does hereby deny and exclude the Scripture from being the Sole Judge in
all matters of Faith and Religion. And the Church of England formerly before
this her Metropolitan started up) was of this belief, that the Scripture was
the Sole Judge and Rule of Faith, and admitted of no other Judges to sit on the
same Bench with it. This the many learned works of our English Divines, yet
extant, can abundantly testify. Therefore except the Church of England has
lost her wits, and has no more grace left her, then the grace and faith of
Canterbury: she cannot be so mad as to believe Christ left any such visible
Judges, as her Prelate speaks of. Fourthly, it believed of any sensible man,
much less of any even common Christian, that Christ would leave notorious
hypocrites to be Judges in matters of Religion, who under a fair pretense of
Truth and Peace, do labor utterly to destroy both Truth and Peace in his
Church. As here, the Prelate names Truth and Peace, as the end of his
Hierarchicall Government: but his practices do prove him to be the greatest
enemy both of Truth and Peace, that ever Sat in the Chair of Canterbury. For
first, for Truth (as the Truth of the Doctrines of Grace, laid down in the
Articles of Religion of the Church of England has he not in the Declaracion
before those 39 Articles (but set forth in the Kings Name: for all must be,
under a gracious King) baffled it, making the Articles to speak nonsense, or
in the language of the Delphick Oracle, ambiguous, that may be taken either
way, as favoring the Arminian, as well as the Orthodox; so as by this means,
his Arminian Crew may prove their Heresies out of those Articles, as well as the
Orthodox, can the Truth. Is this visible Judge then for Truth? Again, how does
he suppress all preaching of the Doctrines of Grace, by terrifying Ministers
in all the Visitations of these visible Judges? So clear it is, that he
governes for Truth.

Peace. What Peace, I pray you, has either the Church, or State of England
had, since this Polypragmatick began to stir and stickle both in Church and
State? Nay what Peace has the Neighbour-Kingdome had, since his Arm has been
imped out, to put his hot coal under the Eves of that Church also. So as now,
when Scotland burns, is it not time for England to look out, and to cast on
water, and to quench the fire, not with more fire, to consume all, but by
quenching the coal, that both first kindled, and still fomenteth the flame?
Thus we see what a Governor here is under a Gracious King, For Truth and But,
fifthly, he adds, According to the Scripture. This is something. And yet as
good as nothing: for he immediately annexeth, And her own Canons and
Constitutions Canons, enough to batter the Scripture: and Constitutions to
undermine and blow it up. For what Scripture can stand in any force, where his
Canons come? And much more, where these Canons of his Church of England are
seconded by his Catholic Church: Wherein his Church of England, and that of
Rome, are become (according to his Confe. Epist. Dedicatory, and page 376.
own words) one and the Same Church, of one and the Same Faith and Religion.
And thus indeed, the Church of England may enter Common with Rome in her
Canons, as namely in her Canon Law, and so make Corpus Cononicum the Rule
whereby to govern this new Corporation of the Two Churches now become one
again. So as let but the Canons of the Church of England be seconded with
those of her Prelates Catholic Church, and then all Scripture is gone in
Common Law. So vain is it, that with Scripture he names and yoakes his Canons
of England and Rome, by which his Figures of value, he conjures the Scripture
within the circle of a mere Cipher But, Sixthly, he concludes with this
qualification: which cross not the Scripture, and the just Laws of the Realm.
But first, for the Scripture, who shall be Judge whether the Canons do cross
it? Who but the Canon-makers, and Canon-masters, the Prelates? And will they
trow you turn the mouth of their own Canons against themselves? Nay their
Canons, though never so cross to Scripture, yet are like to Darius his Decree,
which though against the Scripture, yet rather then it shall be broken, Daniel
must to the Lions den, to try whether the Lions, or the Kings Decree be more
cruel. So the Prelates Church Catholic Canons are like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians, all the Daniels in the world shall rather to the Lions den,
then the Canons be reversed. To give but one instance for many: That Canon De
Haeretibus comburendis, Of Burning the Heretics (which is one of those
special Canons of his Catholic Church, and a most damnable Canon, as any in
all the pack, and such, as if Christ and his Apostles were now upon the earth,
and did Preach as once they did, they should by virtue of that Canon be brought
to the Stake, as Christ was by the High Priests Ioh. 19. ^
Law to his Cross) that Canon (I say) though it cross the Scripture (as being
against all true Chistians, whom this Canon calls Heretics, and burns for the
Scripture-sake) yet shall it not be for ever in force, so long as there is one
Heretic remaining upon the face of the earth, and one Pope, or Prelate to
discharge the Canon?

But the Prelate adds, And the just Laws of the Realm: If the said Canons
cross not the just Laws of the Realm. This is as good, as the former, and no
better. For what Laws of the Realm does he account just? Those, that cross
any Prelaticall practices, and Antichristian lawless courses of his Spiritual
Courts? Surely those are not to be ranked among the just Laws of the Realm
those must needs be unjust Laws, which are made to restrain; the Infolencie
and Lawless proceedings of Prelaticall Courts. Which is the reason, that now
of late, under this Archprelate, Prohibitions out of the Kings bench to the
High Commission are so gueason, so well Schooled are both Lawyers to move, and
Judges to grant any such thing. Thus the Prelates practices are a sufficient
Commentary of his own words. So as the Sum of this his whole passage is,
That his Church of England must submit her belief to her Arch Bishops and
Bishops, as visible Judges left by Christ to govern, and to determine all
matters of difference in point of Faith and Religion, and that according to
Scripture too, so far as they cross not her own Canons, and those of the
Catholic Church, wherein England and Rome are one and the Same, one Church,
of one Faith, of one Religion. And all this (if we may believe her
Metropolitan) the Church of England believes. O miserable Church!

CHAP. IIII.
Wherein some other Passages of the Prelate in his Book, touching the
Authority of his Hierarchy, are met withal, and confuted by evidence of
Scripture.
IN his page 15.
Epistle Dedicatory he has these words: She the Church of England) practices
Church Government, as it has been in use in all Ages, and all Places, where
the Church of Christ has taken any rooting, both in, and ever since the
Apostles times; and yet the Seperatist condemns her for Antichristianisme in
her Discipline. So he. A bold Speech, and the more bold, because most false,
and has nothing but his bare Ipse dixit, his naked affirmation, as Authority
sufficient. Whence I note sundry Hierarchy, or Ecclesiastical Government
thereof, the Church of England. A thing familiar with Prelates to make
themselves the Church. And such a Church as that of Rome, the Pope and his
Priests, or Prelates, are the Church, as themselves affirm. Whereas indeed (as
Iunius has well distinguished) ^ they are not the Body it self of the Church,
but ^^ennes, or swellings grown up, and so incorporated into the Body, as
overspreading it like a Leprosy, it assumes the denomination of the Body. And
such are Prelates, who in the Church of England are Strumae great swellings
like the Kings Evil, which are commonly next the Head, or about the neck, in
the most principal parts of the Body. Only in this they will not be called
the Kings Evil, because they claim their Original from Christ (as before is
noted) and therefore though they be but certain Abscessus, or Apostemes (and so
indeed Apostat^s from the true Church of Christ) which not only deforme the
Body, but greatly in danger the life thereof, yet the name of Church they
challenge in peculiar to themselves. But surely the true Church of Christ in
England disclaimes communion with such a false Church, as the Hierarchy calls
it self.

Church, or Prelaticall Government has been in all Times and Places, where the
Church of Christ has taken any rooting. Here he finely excludes all the
Protestant Reformed Churches, as no Churches of Christ, because they have
weeded out those. Heb. 12. 15.
bittet roots, whereby many are defiled, and rooted up those plants, Mat. 15.
13.
which our heavenly Father has not planted, to wit; all Prelates with their
Hierar^hicall Government, which being rooted out of those Churches, the Gospel
(blessed be God) and so the true Church of Christ has taken the deeper and
firmer rooting, and brought forth the more abundant Romans ^^^.
fruits of holin^sse. But the Prelate in thus unchurching all true Reformists,
is as good as his word, which he openly spoke at Dr. Bastwicks Censure, in
High Commission, saying, The Protestant Churches beyond the Seas were no
Churches, as having no Bishops, calling Calvin a plain Rascal. But so long as
those Churches have the true Bishops namely Orthodox and Sound Pastors to seed
their several ^locks, it is not the Arch-prelate, that can so easily degrade
them from being Christ's true Churches, as he can deprive those Ministers both
of Ministry and Means, who are obnoxious to his Church-Go^ernment.

Thirdly, where he says, that his Church Government has although this be most
false, yet were it true, it would not thereupon follow, that this his
Church Government is either Apostolical, or jure divino, or from Christ. For
first, every thing that Apostles times, and in the true Church of Christ, is
not therefore Apostolic, or such, as the true Church of Christ allows of.
For we read, that the Mystery of Iniquity began to work in the Apostles times,
and even then there were 2 Thessalonians. 2.
many Antichrists, and that in the very midst of the Church in those days. 1
John 2.
And if Prelates shall prove to be those Antichrists, which the Apostles
detected, and described by their qualities (as will appear anon^) then because
such Antichrists were extant, and their Church Government in use in the
Apostles times, will the Prelate therefore conclude, such were Apostolic, and
had their Original jure divino? Secondly, neither can the Prelate Prelaticall
Government (as now of later, and of long time it has been) is any thing like
to the Church Government exercised by those, who took upon them to be the first
Diocesan, or Provincial Bishops in those ages succeeding the Apostles. He that
shall read the Centuries; Cat^lagus Testiun^ veritatis, and other true Church
Stories, shall find as vast a difference between those poor ancient Bishops,
both in their manner of life, and Church Government, and the modern Prelotes,
since Antichrist mounted aloft in his Pontificalibus: as the Ovid. Meta.
Poet makes between the Silver Age, and the Iron Age: or as the Dan. 2.
Prophet shows between the brazen breast of the Image of the Babylonish Empire,
and the feet mixed of iron and clay. And that Image may well resemble the State
of the Spiritual Babylon, or Hierarchy, which had its rise of simple and small
beginnings, but by degrees Successively, it grew and got strength, and both
height and breadth, and so became at length of a blind Brook, a goodly
navigable River, so as the Church turned a City of Traffic and Trade in all
worldly pleasures and riches (as Babylon is described Revel. 18.) and so the
more worldly it grew, the more wicked, proud, tyrannical, lordly, and
imperious, and of a Militant Church turned Triumphant as the Prelate himself
says of Rome so as now the Church Government of the Prelates in regard of
their great Courts, and Consistories, and doing all things without the
Presbytery^ is as much unlike that ancient Church Government of those Bishops
of old, as our modern Prelates themselves are unlike them in manner of life;
for these are persecuters of the Gospel: those were persecuted, and suffered
Martyrdom for Christ. Thus it is false, that he says, that the
Church Government now in England was in us^ in the Primitive Church. For to
instance in one thing: In those ancient Times Excommunication was not used for
every trifle, nor done in a blind Court, nor denounced by a dumb Priest. But
enough of this.

Fourthly, whereas he says: And yet the Seperatist condemns her for
Antichristianisme in her Discipline. First, as for the Seperatist (as he calls
him) I think the Prelate with this his Book, and other his Prelaticall
practices has made more Separatists from his Prelaticall Church of England,
then ever any that has sit in the Chair of Canterbury ever since his
Predecessor Augustine first sat in it. Nor do I see, how any Christian living
in England can with a safe Conscience have communion with that Church, which
professes (as the Prelate does in her Name) to be one and the Same Church with
Rome, of one and the Same Faith and Religion. Yea were it no more, but that the
Church of England professes to be a Hierarchicall or Prelaticall Church, which
in that very respect is no true Church of Christ, it were argument and cause
sufficient to Separate from her. And that because,

Secondly, he that is a true Seperatist from her, for the former respects, may
justly condemn her for Antichristianisme in her Discipline, For first, She
exercises, She professes no Discipline, but that which Antichrist, the Pope
and the whole Antichristian Romish Church exercises and professes, and that
in all points Cap a pied, from top to toe. And this her Discipline is
Antichristian, as being of Antichrist, and so against Christ, and exercised in
the maintenance of Antichrist. For instance: The Prelaticall Church of England
has lately found out a Discipline, to censure, punish, imprison, fine,
excommunicate, degrade deprive, and all these together, him that shall dare to
deny the Pope and Prelates to be jure divino. Dr. Bastwicke did thus: and so
the High Commission served him, as aforesaid. What Discipline then in the world
can be more Antichirstian, or more forcible to drive Christians from having any
more communion with that Church; which exercising such an Antichristian
Discipline, how can She shift off the just condemnation of Antichristianisme,
which they shall cast upon her? Again, Secondly, Discipline of the Church of
England, as it is the Discipline, which Antichrist and his Church exercises,
and therefore Antichristian: So it is that, which has no footing, but is
expressly forbidden in the word of God, as Antichristian and Tyrannical. For
the Church of Englands Discipline stands most upon the imposition of sundry
Ceremonies of humane invention, and Antichristian observation, which She
presses upon all men's Consciences, and for default of Conformity, lays
grievous Censures upon them, as Excommunication, and the like. Now all such
Ceremonies, so imposed, both Christ himself condemns, M^t. 15. 9.
In vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men: and
the Apostle also throughout that whole Chapter of the Epistle to the
Collossians does charge Christians not to put their necks under any such yoke,
as whereby they are deprived of the benefit of Christ's death, and beguiled of
their reward, and spoiled of their Christian liberty, and the like. Again, the
Prelates in imposing their Ceremonies are Antichristian, because in so doing,
they usurp Christ's throne, and therein fitting, do exercise a Tyranny over
men's Consciences, intolerable to be borne; which if men will not yield unto,
they do in as much as in them lies, make them Anathemaes, shut them out of
the Church, by Excommunication, etc. And lastly, their Excommunication, not
only in regard of the matter and cause, for which it is, namely, because men
will not renounce Christ's service, to take the Tyrannical yoke of Antichrists
Ceremonies upon the shoulders of their Consciences, but for the very manner of
it, as it is used in the Church of England, is a Discipline Antichristian, as
being against that form of Excommunication, which is prescribed in the word of
God, and was practiced in the Apostolical Churches. It was Christ's rule, Tell
it to the Church, that is, to the Congregation; and if the Offender will not
hear the Congregation, he is Excommunicate by and out of the Congregation. And
the Apostles rule is, for such Offenders as deserve Excommunication: 1 Cor. 5.
3, 4, 5.
I verily (says he) as absent in body, but present in Spirit, have judged
already, as though I were present, concerning him, that has so done this deed:
In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my
Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one unto
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the
day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Whence I note, that Excommunication is a Solemn
business, not to be inflicted for every trifling matter, much less as the
Pharisees did, who excommunicated all those, that confessed Christ; nor to be
done in a blind Court, and by a single soled Priest, nor the Offender to be
released for the payment of his fees, or by way of committing, or the like: all
which are practiced in the Discipline of the Church of England. But
Excommunication must not be, but for a great offense; nor done, but by the
whole Congregation, nor released, but upon the public repentance, confession,
and promise of reformation before the said Congregation, where the offense was
given, and by whom the penalty is taken off. Therefore the Discipline of the
Church of England in this case is wholly Antichristian.

Lastly, forasmuch as Prelates do necessarily draw after them a Train of
Ceremonies, as a Chain of so many links, wherewith they captivate, ensnare, and
enslave the Consciences of men (as their Motto is, No Ceremony, no Bishop: for
they go inseperably together, like Tobie, and his Dog) and the Church of
England in her Discipline, and Church Service, is wholly captivated by the
Masters of such Ceremonies, the Prelates: and some Ceremonies are such, as even
do deny the Lord that bought them, as namely, Altars, and their Service: and
all the Ceremonies imposed upon the Conscience, deny Christ to be the only
King of his Church: all these taken together, what between the Prelates, and
between their Ceremonies, the Church of England, and her Discipline is become
Antichristian; and therefore no marvail, if for this cause, good Christians,
that have knowledge, and make Conscience, do Separate from communion with any
such Church.

CHAP. V.
Wherein some other Passages of the Prelate are taken tripping, though he would
run away with it, That his Hierarchy is Jure Divino.
HE says, Confer, page 175, 176.
For the Calling and Authority of Bishops over the inferior Clergy, that was
a thing of known use, and benefit for preservation of unity and Peace in the
Church. And so much St. Jerome tells us. Though being none himself, he was no
great friend to Bishops. And this was so sei^ed in the minds of men from the
very Infancy of the Christian Church, as that it had not been to that time
contradicted by any. So that then there was no Controversy about the Calling.
The difficulty, was to accommodate their Precedencies^ And the page 183.
Ordine Primus (whereof there was a necessity) falling to the Roman Prelate, by
reason of the Imperial Seat, this was the very fountain of Papal Greatness,
the Pope having his Residence in the Imperial City. So he.

Now for Answer hereunto: First, for the Authority of Bishops or Prelates over
the Inferior Clergy (as he calls it) first he must prove their Calling,
before he can make good their Authority. Now Prelates have no such Calling from
God. And the Apostle says, Heb. 5. 4, 5.
No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as
Aaron. So Christ glorified not himself, to be made an High Priest: but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee: Thou art a Priest
for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. But that the Prelates have no such
Calling from God, the Prelate himself (as before is noted) does as good as
confess, saying, Confer. page 177.
Among Bishops there was effectual Subjection respectively grounded upon
Canon, and Posuive Law in their Several Quarters Ergo this was not jure
divino. And if not, where is their Authority then? And therefore, as the Prelate
says of the Popes Supremacy, in being the Sole Living Judge in and over the
universal Church. page 198, 199.
Neither (says he) has he power from Christ over the whole Church to do it;
nay out of all doubt, it is not the least Reason, why De Facto he has so little
Success, because De Jure he has no Power given: So I may say as truly of all
Prelates (who challenge to be the living visible Judges (as before is showed)
which is one maine part of their usurped Authority over the Ministry) that they
have no such Power from Christ over their several Diocese, Provinces, or
Quarters to do it; nay out of all doubt it is not the least Reason, why De
Facto they have so little Success, because De Jure they have no Power given.
According to that in the Prophet. ler. 23. 30, 31, 32.
Behold (says the Lord) I am against the Prophets, that steal my word every
one from his Neighbor. Behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that
use their tongues, and say, He Says. Behold I am against them that prophecy
false dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err
by their lies, and by their lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them
therefore they shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord. And this:
is the very case of the Prelates; they are faise Prophets, they steal Gods
word from the people of God, and instead thereof use their own word,
prophesying false dreams, saying, The Lord says, the Lord has sent us, we
have our Calling and Authority from God over all Ministers, we are the sole
living visible Judges in matters of Faith and Religion, so as all must rest in
our Judgment, according to our own Canons and Constitutions, etc. thus causing
simple people to err by their lies, and by their lightness: yet the Lord has
not sent them, nor commanded them, they have no Calling, and so no Power and
Authority from God: and therefore the Lord is against these false Prophets: and
because he has not commanded them, nor sent them, therefore they shall not
profit the people at all.

But Secondly, the Prelate says, that his Prelaticall Jurisdiction over the
inferior Clergy, was a thing of known use and benefit for preservation of
unity and Peace in the Church. Now first, for his Inferior Clergy. Clergy
being appropriated to the Ministry is an abusive Monopoly, and usurpation; for
all Gods people redeemed by Christ, are his kleros, his Lot, or ^nheritance,
whereof the word Clergy is derived. As Peter says, writing to the Presbyters,
1 Pet. 5.
Not as Lording over t^n kleron, Gods heritage, but as ensamples to the flock.
So that the flock of God, are his kleros, his heritage. But to pass over
this: Secondly, he tells us of an Inferior Clergy: he means his Priests, and
the rest, as Archdeacons, and so forth, to the number of 7 Orders, as they call
them. A rabble of Orders not unsuitable to the Subjects of a Lord Prelate, as
being all of them of humane devise and institution; of which their Hierarc^ie
is made up; another word of man's invention, which some call rather Hist.
Council. T^id.
Hierodoulia; but what holy Orders Christ has left in his Church, we shall see
anon. Thirdly, this was (says he) a thing of known use and benefit. Of the
known use we have formerly spoken. But now, what is the benefit? Namely, for the
preservation of unity and peace in the Church. How proves he this? From S.
Jerome, who said, That one was chosen over the rest in Sckismatis remedium, to
remedy Schism in the Church. But by the way, these very words of Jerome do
argue, that Prelates were of humane Institution: for unus electus est, one was
chosen, I ^rgo of men. But lerome speaks more expressly, which the Prelate
wisely passes over dry foot, where he says, that Prelacy was set up humana
praesumptione, non Institutione Divina, by humane Presumption, and not by
Divine Institution. Well: but had it that success, the Prelate speaks of? Did
it produce the fruitful benefit of unity and Pea^e? Or what unity? Or what
peace? Indeed we find by woeful proof, that this Hierarchy was the very egg,
of which the Cockatrice, Antichrist was hatched, so as the Hierarchy consisting
of so many Prelates, grew at length co^lescere, to grow together into one
Antichrists ^n body, whereof the Ordine Primus came to be the head. And herein
unity and Peace are so conjoined, as they have made up one entire new
Catholic Church, that, whereof the Prelate professes himself, with the
Church of England, and of Rome, and all other Prelaticall Churches in the
world, (all other not Prelaticall, as the Reformed Protestants beyond the Seas,
excluded, as before is noted) to be, in all which this his Catholic Church (as
Confer. page 370.
elsewhere he says, has its existence. Which Prelaticall Catholic Church is
the ver^ head and body of Antichrist. Even as the Prelate tells us, that the
Ordine Primus, the Roman Prelate having his Throne in Rome. This (says he) was
the very fountain of Papal Greatness: So I may say, The Prelacie, or
Hierarchy was the very fountaine^, when^e has issued the maine Ocean of th^se
Revel. 17. 15.
many waters over which the Whore sits, which though it be distinguished
into many several Seas of so many Prelates, yes all make up but one Maine Sea
(as it were) one Catholic Church. And this is that unity and Peace, the
benefit of both the constitution, and preservation whereof is to be ascribed to
the Hierarchy of Prelates over their inferior Clergy.

Thirdly where he says, Though S. Jerome, being no Prelate himself, he was no
great friend to Bishops. Hence I note only the Prelate, that he thinks none
can speak against Prelates, but such as are none themselves, as if it were
only a matter of envy. But as the Poet said, Dic mibi, si fi^l it is L^^,
qualis eris^ Tell me, if thou thy self were a Lion, what manner of man would
thou be? So the Prelate imagines, that if any of those, that speak against the
Authority of Prelates, were themselves Lions that is, Lord Prelates, they would
be of another mind, they would then say, We Prelates have Authority over all
Inferior Priests, Jure Divino; we are the Sole visible living Judges to
determine and resolve all doubts in matters of Faith and Religion; we are the
Sole Masters of Ceremonies, to bind all men to Canonical obedience to all our
Canons and Constitutions: we enjoy honors, pleasures, riches, ease, delights
of the world, favors in Court, and what not? Thus the Prelate thinks all men
would be of his mind, were they in his Place. And I think so too, thus far,
that they who take upon them the Prelacy, they no sooner sit in that Chair,
but it proves a Chair of Pestilence unto them, infecting and corrupting man's
very reason and judgment so far, as to make him believe all is gold that
glistereth. Only few come to that Chair, but such as are selfe-infected with
their own imbred Plagues, as pride, Ambition, Covetousness, and that in a high
Degree. So as King James being once asked, why he had made so many Bishops, in
Scotland, and not one honest man amongst them all: he replied, saying, By his
Saul there was never an Honest Man wad tack a Bishopric. And Histories tell
us of many holy men, that utterly refused Bishoprics, And there is never a
true Reformed Protestant Minister, Vid Espencaeum in Tim.
but hates a Bishopric, as he does the Throne of the Beast. But

Prelate) This (to wit Anthority of Bishops) was so settled in the minds of men
from the very Infancy of the Christian Church, as that it had not been to that
time (in the 4th Age or Century) contradicted by any. No doubt but such a brave
and bonny thing, as a Prelacy; would find Grace enough in the world, and
quickly sink down, and settle in men's minds and affections. But what is this to
the purpose, as to prove it a Calling from God^ But this was (says he) from
the very Infancy of the Christian Church. Surely the Prelacy, in the very
Infancy of the Christian Church, either had no being at all i^rerum natura, or
was but a misshapen Embrio, or infant in the Mothers belly, as Es^^ was at the
same time in his Mothers belly with Isaac, yea and would have claimed the
blessing of the birthright too from Isaac, because of his antiquity. And did
not this young Babe wrestle with (...) in the womb, when the Apostle says,
The Mystery of iniquity does already works, and this young Prelate wanted but
time and opportunity to grow up to be a Genesis 10. 8, 9.
Nimrod, even the great Antichrist, as we shall see further anon. So as to
plead Antiquity of the Prelacy even from the very Infancy of the Christian
Church, is yet no good Argument to confirm their Authority to be jure divino.
For even Satan's Kingdom had existence in the world, before Christ was
Promised. And the Kingdom of heaven, to wit of (...) here, is described to be
such as no sooner was the wheat of the Gospel sown, but that wicked one had
his Supersemination of Tares of manifold ^rrors, such as sprung up even in the
Apostles times, the very Infancy of the Church. But had not been till that time
which the Prelate speaks of) contradicted by any. That I must now contradict.
For first (as before is showed) Christ forbad it upon the first motion of it.
Secondly, the Apostles of which we shall speak by and by) mightily
contradicted it, and cried it down, as being that monstrous mystery of
Iniquity. And thirdly, it was contradicted by sundry; as by (...). But you will
presently say, that Epiphanius ranks him (even for that very opinion only, that
he held Prelates not to be de jure divino, or that the Degree of a Bishop was
no greater, then that of a Priest) in the Catalogue of Heretics. And so am I
also content, upon the same terms, to be by the Prelates, counted for an
Heretic. But Secondly, himself confesses S. Jerome to have contradicted
their Authority; as we noted before; saying, that their Institution was merely
of humane Presumption. Yea and thirdly Augustine (that Famous light) was of the
same mind with Jerome: So as some of the Learned in the Hist. Council. Trid.
Council of Trent alleged both of them in this point. So that contradicted it
was, and had been, and that by many, and some of them (as Christ and his
Apostles) of Divine and Infallible Authority. So as without all Controversy,
Prelaticall Authority over other Ministers is no Calling of God at all; which
we now come more fully to show, by the Testimony of the Apostles, both in their
Doctrine and Practice.

CHAP. VI.
Wherein is showed, that according to the Scripture, Preshyters and Bishops are
all one, without difference, so as he which is a Presbyter, is called
Episcopus, a Bishop, and a Bishop a Presbyter.
THe first place of Scripture that proves this, is in Acts 20. where the
Apostles called together the Presbyters, or Elders of the Church of Ephesus, as
ver. 17. which Elders, or Presbyters in v. 28. he calls Episcopus, saying, Take
heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the Flock, over the which the Holy
Gh^st has made you Episcopous, (that is, Overseers, as our English renders the
word, or) Bishops, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. From which words it is manifest, First, that Presbyters and Bishops
are all one and the same Order, Calling and Office. Secondly, that in the
Church of Ephesus there were many Bishops, or Presbyters. Thirdly, that they
had their Calling from the Holy Ghost. Fourthly, that their Office was to feed
the Flock of God, over the which the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers. And
for this Cause such are called elsewhere Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastors, and Teachers, right Shepherds indeed, that feed the Flock of God.
Now will our Prelates say, First, that they are those Episcopi? What more
contrary to their Canons, and practice: For First, they do not allow, that
every Presbyter be called a Bishop, nor to be of the same Order, Calling, and
Office. For they say, that the Order, Calling, and Office of a Bishop or
Prelate is distinct and different from that of the Presbytery. Secondly, the
Prelates have an old Canon, that there must be but one Bishop in one City, or
Diocese. But here we see the Church of Ephesus, that one City had many Bishops
in it, even as many as there were Presbyters. Thirdly, our Prelates can never
prove their Authority and Office to be from the Holy Ghost either from any
inward calling, or outward. Not from an inward calling, because, first, it is
not any zeal of Gods glory, or desire to win souls to God, but it is the
strong bias of ambition and covetousness, pride, and vain glory, and love of
the world, that draws them to a Bishopric. Nor Secondly, is it an outward
calling from men. For as in respect of God, they have run; before they be sent:
So in respect of Man, they come before they be called. Yea they provide and
prepare a long time before for such a Purchase. For they heap up by hook or
crock 3 or 4 Fat Livings, they seldom Preach at any of them, nor keep
Residence, or Hospitality, but hoord up full Bags, Sculke at the Court,
^gratiate themselves with those in greatest Grace, and when the Chair is void,
they bring out their Bags, and so they are the only qualified men for such a
Dignity. They are well known to be no Puritans. So as neither according to
their own ancient Canons (which were framed according to the practice held in
the Apostles days, when the People had a voice in the election of their
Pastors) have the Prelates an outward calling to their dignities. For instance;
when Mr. Moutague was to be installed (or I wot not what they call it) in Bow
Church, and the Tipstaffe (according to the Ancient custom in that Case) with
his Mace proclaims open liberty for any, that can come and except against the
worthiness of that Man; one stood forth, and made his exception; which though
it was both legal, and very material, yet he was borne down, and the matter
never came to trial, but was carried with a strong hand for the new Prelate.
Thus (I say) they have no lawful, nor truly formal, or yet Canonical outward
Calling. Yea, besides that they are notorious Simonists, either purchasing that
dignity with a great Sum of money, or procuring it, obsequio, by
obsequiousness, or Court-Service, and attendance, or by a wager, or the like
(all which are branches of Simonie they do also play the egregious hypocrites.
For when the Question is asked them, Vis Episcopare, Will thou be a Bishop? he
answers, Nolo, No forsooth. And this is done three times. A mere mock-holiday.
For if the wretch were taken at his word, he were undone. Fourthly, neither do
our Prelates affect the Bishopric for that end, that those Bishops of the
Church of Ephesus were exhorted unto by the Apostle: namely, to feed the Fock
of God. Yea, besides that their aim and desire is not for the Office and work
of a true Bishop (as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3. 1.
He that desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a worthy work) which is
principally to feed the Flock of God, as also 1. Pet. 5. 2.
Peter exhorts; for they look not to the duty, but after the dignity, as
Chrysostom and Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum zelum fervere, sola pro dignitate
tuenda. Ber.
Bernard have noted of old. Thou see (says Bernard) all Ecclesiastical
zeal to boil and pant aft^r their Dignities only, etc. as we noted before:
besides this, I say, it is a thing impossible for them to feed the Flock of
God. For some of them have four or five hundred Flocks within their Diocese,
some more^ some less, which they never once in all their life bestow one
fothering upon; only the Prelate in his Trienniall Visitation, that is once in
3. years, visites perhaps half a dozen Churches, where he comes not to feed
the Flock^ with one Scrap of a Sermon, but to fill his pouch with his poor
Ministers double Procurations, and his paunch with their good Cheer. But our
Prelates will answer (as our Non-residents do in that case) that though
themselves do not feed the Flock, yet their Curates do^ it for them. For (say
our Prelates, and that according to their Collect for Bishops and Curates) all
the Ministers in their several Diocese are their Curates, to feed so many
Flocks. Thus by this reckoning, the Prelates are the most egregious
Non-residents, of all other. And thus we see, how not only unlike, but
directly contrary all Prelates are to those Bishops of the Church of Ephesus,
and that in all and every of those particular and remarkable respects
forespecified out of the Apostles own words. And therefore by that place of
Scripture, Prelates, though they have usurped most unjustly the Title of
Bishops, yet they have nothing in them of true Bishops indeed, and therefore are
never able to prove, that they are Bishops jure divino. For they which are
Bishops jure divino, are lawful Pastors set over their particular Flock, to
feed the same with the wholesome food of the word: but Prelates call themselves
Diocesan Bishops, having so many Flocks, as they neither do, nor ever are
able, nor ever intend to feed them. Nay instead of feeding them, they restrain
and inhibit all Ministers to feed their Flock at all in the Afternoon on the
Lords days, nor at any time to feed them with sound and wholesome, and
comfortable f^od of the Doctrines of Grace, and Gods free love to his Elect in
giving Christ for them, effectually to Redeem them, and certainly to bring
them to that eternal glory in heaven, which God from all Eternity had
Predestined them unto. So as without this sound preaching of Grace no Flock
can be Savingly fed. Prelates therefore are Wolves to destroy, not Shepherds
to feed the Flock of Christ.

A Second place of Scripture, proveing a Presbyter and a Bishop to be all one,
in Order, Calling and Office, is in Tit. 1. 5. etc. For this Cause (says the
Apostle to Titus) I left thee in Creete, that thou should set in order the
things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed
thee. If any be blameless, etc. For a Bishop must be bl^melesse, as the
Steward of God; not Selfe-willed^ etc. Here again we plainly see, that those,
who are the Presbyters, or Pastors set over the Flock of God, are here called
Bishops by the Apostle. Whence in is evident that in the Infancy of the
Christian Church, in the time of the Apostles themselves, and that by Order
from Christ, and from the Holy Ghost, all Presbyters, or true Pastors of
several^ Congregations (as aforesaid) were called Bishops, or Overseers, as the
Greek word signifies. And this was k^ta po^n, in every City, and Town in
Creete, especially where there was a Congregation of Christians, Titus was
appointed by the Apostle to ordain such Elders or Bishops, And in Centuries we
read, ^ow in some Countries, there was never a Town, or Village, but it had a
Bishop in it, which Bishop was the Pastor there. And the several qualities
required in those Presbyters or Bishops are in the same Chapter set down by the
Apostle, which because we touched before upon occasion, I will not here insist
upon. But those qualities are such, as our Prelates willingly leave to those
poor Presbyters or Bishops, as most suitable for those Apostolic Times and
Persons, Content they are to take the Name of Bishop upon them, but for the
qualities there required, they are not Prelaticall enough, such as will ^uit
with a Lord-Bishop. For those were poor Bishops, or Overseers, and Feeders of
one Flock in this or that City: but these are Lord-bishops over a whole
Di^^^se, as before is noted.

To these places, we might add others; as Phil. 1. 1. With the Bishops and
Deacons. Where the Apostle, nameing no more Orders, but of Bishops and Deacons^
(the same which he names and describes in the forecited places, 1 Timothy 3. and
Tit. 1.) makes it clear unto us, that by those Pishops in Philippi he means
the same in kind, that were in Ephesus, and Creete, to wit, so many Presbyters,
as were also called Bishops, or Overseers. And naming Bishops. which were at
Philippi, it argues, there were many Bishops of that one Church, as we noted
before of the Church of Ephesus. And in other places also, they are called
Elders. For 1 Timothy 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule will, be counted worthy of
double honor, mali^ta o^ kopiontes, especially th^se, that take greatest
pains in the Word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 3. ^.
Now those Elders (Chap. 3.) he calls Bishops. Implying they are both o^e, as
also, that there were many of those Bishops in the Church of Ephesus, where
Timethy then was. And those Presbyters or Bishops, some were more industrious
in the word and Doctrine, did kopian, labor more hard therein (as the word
signifies) then ordinary: and therefore such the Apostle would have to be
counted worthy of double honor. Now is it thus with our Lord-Bishops? First,
do they kopian, ^oyle hard at Gods Plough (to use La^imers Comparison) do they
desire no more honor, but such as is proportionable to their pains in
Preaching Gods word? Tussi, their honor is according to the honor of the City
whereof they are Lord-Bishops (as the Prelate himself Confer. page 176.
tells us, The Honors of the Church should follow the Honors of the State) or
according to the greatness of their reven^^s, or according to their great
favor and place in Kings Courts, and not according to their years, or
virtues, or good deserts, which are neither required in them, nor respected of
them. Thus still all along quantum abludunt, how much distance is there, and
what infinite disparity between our Lord Bishops, and Scripture-bishops? And
lastly, these Bishops, so called by Paul, are called also by Peter Praesbyteri,
Presbyters, or Elders: where he says, 1 Pet. 1, 2, 3, 4.
The Elders which are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a witness
of the sufferings of Christ, and a partaker of the glory that shall be reveald:
Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight thereof
(Episcopountes) not by constra^nt, but willingly: not for filthy luore, but of
a ready mind: neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage, but being Ensamples to
the Flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
Crown that fades not away. Where First, he notes the Ministers and Pastors by
the Title of Presbyters, or Elders, as also he styles himself. He says not My
Lords, or Right Reverend Fathers, or the like. Secondly, he uses no imperious
language unto them, but says, parakalo, I exhort, or beseech you. Not as the
Prelates to their Priests. These are to will and require you, upon pai^^e of
Episcopal Censure, etc. Thirdly, the thing he exhorts them unto, is to ^eed
the flock of God committed to their Charge. But our Lord- Prelates command
their inferior Ministers to feed their flock, as sparingly as may be, as, at
the most to preach but once upon the Lords day, or once a month will serve,
and for Catechizing in the afternoon, altogether to forbear expounding, and
for the sound food of the Doctrins of Gods free Grace, which is the very Sum
of the Gosp^l, never to preach of them at all, as being too Puritanicall, and
the like. Fourthly, He exhorts them to feed, each his own Flock, Feed the
Flock of God, which depends on you. He says not Flocks, as if one Presbyter
or Bishop were set over many Flocks or Congregations as our Lord Bishops are;
as is noted before. Fifthly, he exhorts them to oversee their Flock^, not for
filthy lucre, but of a free and ready mind. But our Lord Prelates, and their
Curate Priests are of another mind, as being hirelings, and noe true
Shepherds, so as it is with them, No penny, no Pater noster; they look more
to their tithes, then to their task, and more after the sleece, then for the
good of the flock. Sixthly, Not as Lords over Gods Heritage; yea Mud' o^s
katakurie^ontes, nor as Lording it ever Gods Heritage. The same word is used in
Mat. 20. 25. Mark. 10. 42. Where such Heathen-like Lording, is by Christ
himself forbidden his Disciples, as Chap. 2.
before is she^ed. But the Pontificians, and so our Lordly Prelates say, that
this word katakurieuein signifies only a tyrannical Lordship, which they do
not use. I answer, that in Luke kurieu^in, to Lord it at all, is forbidden.
And being put for katakurieuin, it notes, that all manner of Lordship over the
Flock of God is forbidden to Christ's true Ministers. Nor can the Prelates
(whether Pontifician, or Protestant in Name) so easily clear their Lordly
Dominion over Gods people from Tyranny. For even our great Prelate himself
sticks not to charge the Church of Rome with Confer page 298.
Tyranny. And can he discharge himself of it? Wherein comes the Primate of the
Church of England short of the Papal Tyranny, but in this, that the Pope
tyrannizeth over the universal Church of the great world, and the Metropolitan
or Metropolitician of all En^land tyrannizeth over that whole Church, which the
Pope called the other world? The difference (I say) is only in the Magi^ and
Minus, which alter not the nature of the thing. For, for the Popes Inquisition,
the Prelate has his High Commission; by the Law whereof though he cannot bring
his Heretic Puritans to the Stake, attended with fire and faggot, as the Popes
Inquisition does, yet he can make their life more miserable, then death it
self, by his pecpetuall close Imprisonments, and the like. Nor wants he either
Canons and Ceremonies, as snares to catch, nor Pursuivants, as Beagles to hunt
out the poor Sheep, and to hale them to his Shambles, for refusing to be fed
with such hemlocke, instead of Gods wholesome word. Yea where his
High Commission cannot reach to suck the blood, and crucify the bodies of
Christ's Servants, as upon the Pillory: he can easily remove the Cause into
another Court, where himself sitting a grand and Powerful Swaying Judge, will
satisfy his blood-thirsty longing. And as in Confer. page 204.
another place of his Book he twitteth the Church of Rome for being a
Tryumphant Church: Saying, Now She must be a Triumphant Church here; Militant
no longer: So no less Triumphant has the Prelate made his present Prelaticall
Church of England. Oh, how does he triumph in his Chair, as in his Charet?
Yea, more specially, how did he triumph over those. Three his Remarkable men,
whom he (looking out at the Court-window beheld standing on the Pillory, and
loosing their Ears and Blood; how did he then applaud his politic pate, and
potent credit in Court, that he could thus anekesta, without rememedy (as the
Socrat. Hist. Eccle. lib. 1. c, 2.
Story says of the Tyrant Licinius, a persecuter of the Christians) overthrow
the most innocent Cause, and therein the most innocent Persons (and without all
color of contradiction, the Minister) that ever was Judged in any Christian
Court. Thus he triumphed over them: though their triumph over him, and all his
Antichristian lawless cruelty, in that their most constant courageous, and
invincible cheerfullnes in suffering, was as much more glorious, and noble, as
his was most Ignoble, and Base. But thus (I say) the Prelate, with his
Prelaticall Church, must be Triumphant: Militant no longer, but in warring
against the Lamb, and his poor followers. So as this Prelate, with his
Confederates, are the Successors of the Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees,
and of Edmund Bonner, and Stephen Gardener, those bloody Butchers and Wolves,
which devoured and destroyed Christ's Sheep in Queen Mary's days; and therein
were the Church-Triumphant in England. But this by the way. Return we now,
whence we have a little (as it were) digressed, though not impertinent to our
Purpose in hand, which is to show the true difference between the true
Ministers of Christ, and those of Antichrist.

Seventhly, therefore, Not as Lording it ^ver Gods Heritage, but being
Ensamples to the Flock. Now wherein are our Lord Prelates Ensamples to the
Flock? In their humble carriage? In their meekness of spirit? In the
moderation of their government? In their continency, and contempt of Riches,
Honors, Pleasures, Ease, and the like? Nay are they not Examples to the world
(far be it from Gods Flock) of extreme Pride, Ambition, Covetousness,
Voluptuousness, Idleness, Profanesse, Lawlessenesse, extreme Cruelty,
barbarous Injustice, implacable Malice, and intolerable Tyranny, palpable
Hypocrisy, and such like Prelaticall virtues and graces, the most proper and
peculiar indowments, inseparable qualities of their Hierarchy? Eighthly, and
lastly, true Elders, or Bishops, that with a good Conscience feed Gods Flock,
both with the wholesome food of sound Doctrine, and with the holy Example of a
good life, shall, when the chief Shepherd shall appear, receive a Crown of
glory, that fades not away. Where I observe two particulars: that Jesus Christ
is the only Chief or Arch-Shepheard. OF A' rkipoimen. So as here is no place,
either for Pope, over the universal Church, or Metropolitan over a whole
Kingdom, or for Archprelate over the Provincial, or yet Prelate over all the
Shepherds in his Diocese^ for then such should be A' rkipoimenes, the Chief
Shepherds: but this Title and Office is peculiar to Christ alone, and
incommunicable to any other. Nor did Peter himself, arrogate to himself any
such Title, but was content with ^ Pet. 5. 1.
o^ tumpresbuteros, a Fellow-Elder, as if an equal to those Elders, or
Presbyters, to whom he writ. The second particular I note is, that all such
Presbyters, or true Bishops (as aforesaid) may and do most certainly expect,
and shall most surely receive, at the appearing of the Chief Shepherd, an
immarcescible Crown of Glory-Behold, here is such a Reward, as no Lord Prelate
can expect, or hope for. For these are rightly resembled by ^ Luke 16.
Dives, to whom (being in hell torments, and desiring one drop of water to
cool his tongue) Abraham answered, Son remember, that thou in thy life time
receivedst thy good things, etc. For he had gone in his purple and fine linen,
and fared deliciously every day, while mercilessy he suffered poor Lazarus to
lie at his gate full of sores, yielding him no relief, or comfort at all;
saving that his dogs came, and licked his Sores. And do not our Diveses, our
rich Lord Prelates (and which of them is poor) go in their Purple, Satin,
Velvet, and the finest lynnen, as their Lawn sleeves and Rochet, and fair
deliciously every day, not enduring once in their lives, with their good wills,
to keep one extraordinary Fast day, so zealous are they of the observation of
Lent, and other Embers; wherein they can fair deliciously with the choycest
Fish, and Fruits, and Wines, and other Cates. So as with Dives they have their
good things here. Only these come short of, and outstrip Dives in some things:
For First, Dives yet suffered Lazarus to be laid at his doors: but these beat
away the true Lazars from their doors, 2. Dives suffered his dogs to show so
much compassion, as to lick Lazarus his sores: but our Lord Prelates do set
their dogs at the true Lazarusses, to tear them in pieces; 3. Lazarus brought
his sores with him, Dives did not cause them: but our Lord Prelates do fill
Gods Lazarusses full of wounds, which they carry away with them, not scaping
from their Gates with a whole Skin; 4. Lazarus was willingly laid at Dives his
gates: but Gods Lazarusses never come to the Lord-Bishops Gates, but with an
ill will, when they are hayld and pulled; 5. Dives denied his Crummes, to
Lazarus, because they were of his bread to feed his dogs: but the Prelates do
not only deny any one Crumme of mercy, when they are offended, or to do right
when the Lazarusses are injured: but they do also rob, pill and poll them,
stripping them of all they have, and so do not relieve, but make Lazars.

Again, on the other side, Lazarus in some sort may be an Emblem of Gods true
Ministers: For Lazarus had all his evil things in this world: So the good and
faithful Ministers of God must undergo manifold afflictions, tribulations,
and persecutions in the world, as our Savior Luk 21. 12.
Christ forewarned his Disciples, and so their true Successors, Mat. 24. 9.
to wit, Godly and painful Ministers of the Word; who find their Masters words
verified in themselves, by manifold experince of tributations and persecutions,
which they mainly and chiefly suffer at the hands of Antichrist, and his
Antichristian Prelates; as the world it self is able to bear witness. In the
Kingdom of England at this day, who are the great persecuters, yea and the
only oppressors of Gods faithful and painful Ministers, and of all true
Professors, but these Lordly Prelates, who will not suffer any one, Minister,
or other, to burrow within their Diocese (if he do but smell of a Puritan, as
they call them) but do ferrit them out, and hunt them to the death? Where by
the way it is clear to all men, that have but common sense, that the Prelates
(which are, and ever have been ^at least since Antichrist has been aloft) the
most furious and fiery Persecuters of Gods good Ministers and people, even for
Religion sake) are false Bishops, falsely pretending their Jurisdiction from
Christ, and their Succession from the Apostles. They might as well say, that
they have Authority from Christ, and his Apostles to afflict, persecute, and
oppress all true Religion, with all the true Preachers, and Professors thereof,
and so prove themselves to be of those of whom Christ foretold his Disciples,
saying, Job. 16. 2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that be does God Service. And surely the Prelates,
grounding their usurped Authority upon Christ, which they so exercise in
afflicting and oppressiing Christ's Ministers and people, must needs
consequently conclude, that this their persecution is a special part of Gods
service. to conclude, then the Parable; as these Prelates have their good
things here, and nothing is left them, but a Heb. 10. 27.
fearful expectation of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour
the Adversaries, so as they shall not find a drop of mercy in Hell, who would
not show a crumme of mercy here, but contrariwise shall be tormented with more
scorching flames, then Dives, by how much their wickedness here exceeded his:
So Gods faithful Ministers, as they receive their evil things here (and
especially at the hands of Antichristian Prelates, whose malice and cruelty
against them exceeds all other in the world) so they shall be sure to receive a
most glorious and unfading 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Crown of Glory, which the Lord, the Chief Shepherd, the righteous Judge
shall give unto them, at that day, nor to them only, but to all those that
love his Appearing.

CHAP. VII.
Wherein is showed, that the Prelates are no less contrary to the Practice of
the Apostles (whose Successors notwithstanding they pretend to be) then they
are to their Doctrines; as has been proved.
FOr the more clear demonstration hereof, we will consider the Practice of the
Apostles in a twofold notion: 1. the Practice of their Ministry: 2. the
Practice of their life and conversation. First, for their Ministry: that also
we consider in a double respect: 1. of Doctrine. 2. of Discipline. Of these
being to speak, we will first consider the Apostles two ways: 1. as they were
Apostles: and 2. as they were Ministers. First, as they were Apostles, to
speak in a strict and proper sense, they left no Successors behind them. For
as Apostles, 1. they had their immediate Calling from Christ: 2. they did 1
Cor. 9. 1.
see Christ with their bodily eyes: 3. they were inspired immediately from
Christ with Apostolical Gifts and Graces of the Holy Ghost, John 16. 13.
which led them into all truth, so as their judgment was infallible, they
could not err: 4. they were made the Penmen of the Scripture: 5. They had a
power given them to appoint Evangelists to attend their Apostleship in the
Gospel, to settle and water, where the Apostles had planted, and where they
appointed them: 6. They had Act. 8. 26. and 16. 6.
immediate direction from the Holy Ghost where to preach at such, or such a
time: 7 They had their Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Commision immediately from Ch^^st, which was to preach the Gospel throughout
the world, though the Act. 13. 2^
Holy Ghost did more particularly dispose of them to several Countries. Now in
all these respects the Apostles, as Apostles left no Successors behind them.
For after the decease of Apostles, and so also of the Evangelists (some whereof
writ the Gospel, and some preached the Gospel, and did other things at the
Apostles appointment; whereof we shall have occasion to speak more anon) their
Office of Apostles and Evangelists, ceased. So as, never since they lived, have
there been any Apostles or Evangelists, properly so called. Though in a
general notion all true Preachers of the Gospel, in as much as they have a
Calling from God, being sent of him, though mediately by the Church, may be
called Apostoli, that is, sent, (as the Apostle called Epaphroditus Phil. 2. 25.
A'postolon, the Philippians Apostle, which our English translates a Messenger,
because they had sent him to him) as they are called in the self same respect
Aggeloi, Revel. 1. 20.
Angels, or Messengers: and they may be called also for the same reason
Evangelists, because they are Preachers of the Gospel. But I say, strictly and
properly the Apostles only were called Apostles, and the Evangelists
Evangelists, for the reasons aforesaid. So as after their decease, the ordinary
Ministers of the Word which God appointed to succeed them in their Ministry,
were called Pastors and Teachers, as Ephesians. 4. 11. and sometimes Presbyters or
Elders, and Overseers, or Episcopi, set over their several Congregations
respectively as aforesaid) and sometimes An. 26. 1^. Col. 1. 23.
u^pereta, or diakoni, Ministers of the Word; as the Apostle often styles
himself.

So as in the Second place we come to speak of the practice of the Apostles,
as they were Ministers of the Gospel, whose examample all true Ministers
imitating, are said to be their true Successors. But before we speak thereof,
one Objection crosses us in our way, which is this. We noted before, that one
peculiar privilege and badge of an Apostle^ properly so called, was, that he
had the Holy Ghost immediately inspired into him by Christ, so as it led him
into all truth, that he could not err in his preaching, or writing of the word
of God. Now it is Objected, that the promise of Mat. 28. 20. Objection.
Christ's Spiritual presence, and so of the Holy Ghost, is made to the
Apostles, but to all the succeeding generations of all their true Successors to
the end of the world. Upon which promise (but most falsely applied) the Pope
does build his Imaginary Infallibility, of a power of not erring in the faith.

For Answer Answer.
hereunto briefly. First, neither the Pope, nor any Prelate, have any thing to
do with this promise. For they have no Calling from Christ, as has been
proved; and they are Antichrists, and so led by another spirit, to wit, of him,
of whom they have their Calling, and tha^ is, of the great red Dragon; as
remains yet further to be cleared Secondly, concerning this promise made
immediately by Christ to his Apostles, that he would be with them to the end of
the world, and that the Holy Ghost should lead them into all truth: we must
distinguish between the Apos^les, and all Succeeding true Ministers. First,
this promise was actua^ly fullfilled to the Apostles, so as they neither erred
in their preaching, nor in their writing of the word of God; and the substance
of all their preaching (so far as it is necessary for the salvation of Gods
Chruch to the end of the world) is by them left in writing to be a rule of our
faith, and the ground of all holy and saving knowledge. Now then all true
Ministers, succeeding the Apostles in all ages, and also all true Believers,
though they neither receive the Holy Ghost inmiediately from Christ as the
Apostles did, nor are any to expect to receive it in that extraordinary way:
yet all true believing both Ministers and People do receive the Holy Ghost.
But how? By what means? The Apostle tells us, Gal 3. 2.
By the hearing of Faith preached; that is, by hearing the Gospel (which is
the ground of Faith) preached, Act. 10. 44.
we receive both faith, and the Holy Ghost. Now as we received the Holy Ghost
by hearing of Faith preached: So this Spirit of God does guide us into all
truth, by and according unto the Scripture. And as the Holy Ghost is (as I may
so say) Gal. 4. 19^
begotten in us by the Seed of Gods word Sown in our hearts (though properly we
are begotten again by the Holy Ghost) so this Holy Ghost is as it were,
nourished and preserved in us by and through the word of God, even as the light
of the Lamp is nourished by the Oil, or as the breath goes with the voice or
word spoken; or as the blood has its course in the veins, or the vital
Spirits have their S^at in the heart; or as the Animal Spirits in the brain,
when they are derived into all the parts of the body in the Arteries and
veins, so as all the members are thereby actuated and moved. And as the
Philosopher says of natural bodies, Aristot. D^ Ortu. and in teritu. lib. 2.
A'panta trephetas tois a^utois, e'x o`per e`isi: All things are nourished by
self same Substance, whereof they are begotten, or have their beginning or
being: So in a sort it may truly be said, that as we begin Spiritually to live
by the Holy Ghost through Faith by the Preaching of the word of God: So this
Holy Ghost in the several graces and operations there of is preserved, and as
it were nourished in us by the continual ministration of the food of the same
word in our Souls: Or in a word, the Holy Ghost has no operation in us,
either for instruction, or illumination, or consolation, or corroboration of
any Grace in our Souls, but in and by, or according to the word of God. So as
besides Gods written word, there are no revelations of the Spirit to be
expected in Gods true Church. Secondly therefore, the promise of the Holy Ghost
to Christ's true Church and Children, succeeding the Apostles even to the end of
the world, is made good to all and every particular member of Christ's Mystical
body, whether Ministers or People: so as in the matter of their faith, and
whatsoever appertains to their salvation, they are by Christ's Spirit guided
into all truth, being led by the rule and light of Gods word, which to those
that are in Christ never goes unaccompanied with the Holy Ghost. For, even as
Romans 8. 14^
so many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God^ So as, If
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his: So none are led
by the Spirit of God, but those that are led by the word of God. And therefore
as Christ's Spirit dwells in all his, so his Ioh. 15. 7.
Word also. For these two are inseparable; the Holy Ghost teaching us no other
things, but what we find written in the word of Christ. To which purpose Christ
says, When Job. 16. 13.
the Spirit of Truth is come, be will guide you into all truth: for he shall
not speak of himself: but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak.
Now the whole Scripture is Christ's word: this the Holy Ghost receiving from
Christ revealed to his Apostles, or (as Christ says) Ioh, 14. 26.
brought to their remembrance: and the Apostles committed those things to
writing (as the Holy Ghost directed them) for our both instruction, and
remembrance. So as if Isa. 8. 20.
any Speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. Whatever Spirit men brag of, not indurcing the Law and Testimony of the
Scripture, it is without light, a counterfeit Spirit, a lying spirit. And this
is that very Spirit of Antichrist, and of his Prelates, who to advance their
own Canons and Decrees, and to cry up their usurped Antichristian Authority, in
taking upon them to be the only visible Judges in matters of faith (as Cap. 3.
before we have noted of our Prelate of Cant^) as if they had the Spirit of
Infallibility, and were the only men of Gods Privy Counsel, and the only
Privilegiats not to err: do so much depresse, vi^ifie and cry down the
Authority and Sufficiency of the Scripture, as if it were a See the Prelates
Relation. Sect. 16. throughout.
dumb, dead, and blind Iu^ge, having not so much light in it, as is sufficient
to demonstrate it to be the word of God, but what it must be beholden to the
Authority and Tradition of the present Prelaticall Church ^or. But ^ ye blind
Guides, Esa. 8. 20.
To the Law, and to the Testimony: for while ye Speak not accordiag to this
word, but contrariwise blaspheme the same: it is a manifest sign, that there
is neither light, nor Ioh. 6. 53.
life in you,

Come we now to prosecute the remainder of the former particulars propounded:
the second general whereof is, the Practice of the Apostles, as they were
Ministers of the Gospel, whose example all true Ministers imitating, are said
to be their true Successors. And first of this Practice in regard of Doctrine,
to wit, in their Ministy of the Word, and Sacraments. First for their Doctrine,
it was sound and sincere, the very word of God, which they preached with all
diligence, and good Conscience; exhorting other Ministers also to the like
diligence and faithfulness in preaching: as 2 Tim^ 4. 1, 2. I charge thee
therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Preach the word, be
instant, in season, out of season, etc. Thus did the Apostles. But do our
Prelates thus? First, do they preach diligently? Are their Sermons, any more,
then 2 or 3 Festivalls in the year? And do they preach sound Doctrine? Nay as
the Apostle there says, They will not endure sound doctrine; they neither
preach it themselves, nor permit others. And instead of exhorting Ministers to
be diligent in preaching, and teaching the people, they flatly forbid them to
preach so often, as twice on the Sabbath, or to expound the Catechisine, for
instructing the People. Thus they are enemies of Gods word, and so of the
salvation of Gods people. Are these men then Successors of the Apostles?
Again, for the two Sacraments, the Apostles administered them duly according to
1 Cor. 11. 23
Christ's institution, not varying one title from it; they neither detracted any
thing from i^, nor added ought of their own inventions. Now does the
Prelaticall Catholic Church, (wherein that of England, and of Rome are both
one and the same, and do profess one and the same faith and Religion, as our
great Prelate says; noted before) thus? Now Romes detractions and additions,
we all know. But what has the Prelaticall Church of England done in this kind?
1. Do they not detract both from Christ's institution, and from the dignity of
the Sacraments, while they set dumb Priests, no better then Mass Priests, to
administer? Do they not detract from Baptism, while they do as much debase
it in comparison of the Lords Supper, as they do exalt this (which they
Relation of the Conf. p. 136.
call the Great Eucharist) in comparison of that? Do they not administer that,
near the Belfrey, or Church-door, the lowest part of the Church, as they
estimate it: and this at the end of the Chancel, their highest part of the
Church? Secondly, do they not alter Christ's institution by adding to the
Sacraments of their own superstitious inventions? Do they not add an empty
and (...) figne of the Cross to Baptism, the o mission whereof is no less
heinous, then of Baptism it self? And have they not added a long Form of
Liturgy to the administration of both the Sacraments? Have they not altered
the Table for the Lords Supper, into an Altar for a sacrifice, which is also as
great a derogation from the sufficiency of Christ's only sacrifice on the
Cross, as it is an alteration, yea and an annihilation of this Sacrament,
which is to be administered as a supper, on a Table, not as a sacrifice, on an
Altar. And this they do also, in imposing a necessity of kne^eling at the
receiving of the Sacrament, whereby they overthrow the nature of a Supper. To
omit their necessity of private Baptism, and of carrying their Host to a man
on his death bed: would they not also of As in Dr. Coosins Book of Private
Devotions, or Canonical, Hours.
late years have brought again into the Church of England the other 5
Sacraments of the Romish Church, that so the Church of England and of Rome
might in nothing be unlike in their practice, as they are not in profession, as
our said Prelate says: Thus are our Prelates herein Successors of the Apostles?

Secondly, for the Apostles practice in point of Discipline. And this is either
in Ordination of Ministers, or Reformation and correction of manners, or
imposition of Ceremonies. For the first, Ordination of Ministers, we read, of
Timothies ordination no less by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery,
then of Paul himself. Titus indeed was appointed by Paul to ordain Elders in
every City in Creet (as was noted before) but if he did this alone, without the
Presbytery, 2 necessity must needs be supposed, which is neither Rule nor Law
in ordinary Cases. And by the way, whether Titus and Tim^thy were Diocesan
Bishops, as the Prelates pretend, we shall see in a more fit place. And for
Ordination this we are sure of, that whoever have the charge of it, Prelates
have nothing at all to do with it, because (as is already proved) they are no
lawful Ministers of Christ, much less Successors of the Apostles. Again,
whom did the Apostles, and Presbytery ordain Ministers of the word, but such,
as were every way qualified with gifts and graces for preaching, and the like;
as we see prescribed in 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1? They were not like to Ierobeams
Priests, nor any of those, whom the Prelates do make Priests, which are Esa.
56. 10, 11, 12.
dumb dogs (as the Prophet calls them) blind watchmen, that love to s^^ep, to
take their ease, greedy dogs, that are never satisfied with heaping up Living
upon Living, they fill themselves with strong drink, and are good Fellows, not
good Ministers. Yea such as are truly qualified, either Prelates do not
ordain them: or they do afterward, seeing how they prove painful in their
Ministry, put them to silence, or suspend and persecute them, as before is
noted. And again Thirdly, The Apostles, and Presbyters in their time, Ordained
none for money; for offering whereof Act. 8.
Simon Magus was accursed; but our Prelates Ordain tag and rag for money, so
as the ordinary Fees come to 3, 4, 5, or 6 pounds. So as in point of Ordination
how do our Prelates prove themselves to be Successors of the Apostles? And
lastly, the Apostles and their lawful successors Ordained none, but lawful
Ministers of the Gospel: but our Prelates do ordain a new Order of Priests,
bringing in, and setting up a new Priesthood, which is Antichristian, not
having any foundation in the Sccripture. Prelates therefore in Ordrnation are
no Successors of the Apostles.

Secondly, for matter of Censure, or for Reformation and correction of Manners,
as for instance, in the Censure of Excommunication, the Apostles, though as
Apostles, they might do of themselves, yet as Ministers they did it not, but
with the whole Congregation; or else the Congregation with the Presbyters; as
we see 1 Cor. 5 3. 4. 5. Insomuch, as even Prelates themselves, after they
first had taken footing, as being the time of their Innocence (as I may say)
observed this Order. So as Cyprian, who lived about 250. years after Christ's
nativity, would do nothing in this kind, without the consent both of the
Presbytery and people. This lasted during the 10. Persecutions: but Peace and
Prosperity Succeding, it degenerated into that height of Tyranny by degrees^ to
which we see it arrived at this day. Secondly, Excommunication was for weighty
Causes, as in the same place; and 1 Timothy 1. 20. The Apostles had no Prelates
Courts, or Consistories, where they did Privately by themselves, or by a dumb
Priest Excommunicatt for every trifle, and especially for the least breach of a
Canon, and the like (as we noted before) but the Consistory was the whole
Congregation solemnly assembled, where no Censure was imposed, but for great
offenses, and those breaches of Gods Laws, and of Christ's Ordinance. Nor were
those Censures remitted, but in and by the whole Congregation, after public
satisfaction given by the offender to the offended. Whereas our Prelates, in
all, do quite contrary, absolving also great offenders for a fee, without any
signs of Repentance, much less fruits of Reformation, and satisfaction made
to the Congregation offended. Whereas the Apostles absolved none, before the
Congregation was first satisfied by, and so pacified toward the offender; as 2 Timothy 2. 10. Do our Prelates thus? No such thing. Therefore no Successor of the
Apostles.

Thirdly, for Imposition of Ceremonies in the worship of God, the Apostles were
so far from laying any such yoke, upon Christians necks, or any such snares
for their feet, as they did utterly condemn all humane Rites and Ordinances
whatsoever in Gods service, laying also a special charge upon Christians not
to put their necks under such yoakes, unless thereby they would renounce Jesus
Christ for their only King, and Lord over their Consciences and Souls in all
matters of faith, and the worship of God. In one Chapter ( Colloss. 2.) the
Apostle beats them all down, whether they be old Jewish Ordinances (now
abolished under the Gospel) or of man's devising, and imposing. First, for
Jewish Ceremonies, he says, they are Verse 16, 17.
Shadows, which now upon the death of Christ are all vanished, and abolished.
Secondly, all other Rites and Ceremonies, which are of man's devising, he calls
them verse 8.
Philosophy, and vain deceit, traditions of men, rudiments of the world; not
after Christ: a v. 18.
voluntary humility, as worshipping of Angels, and so Idolatry; an intrusion
into things not seen in Scripture; of a fleshly mind vainly puffed up; which
separate from the v. 19.
head, Christ; they v. 20.
evacuate Christ's death, wherein he did v. 14.
blot out the handwriting of all such Ordinan^es, nayling it to his Cross,
etc. So as now to be subject to such, is to renounce Christ's death, and make it
of none effect: and they v. 22.
perish with the using, are good for nothing, being after the Commandments and
D^ctrines of men: they have but a mere show of wisdom in will worship and
humility, and hypocrisy in not sparing the body, and only serve to satisfy
the flesh. Arguments Sufficient to any one, that fears God, and hopes to be
saved by Jesus Christ, to v. 8.
Beware of being Spoiled, and made a prey (as the word signifies) of being v.
18.
heguiled of their reward by such a bondage and Slavery. Thus the Apostle so
damning all manner of Rites and Ceremonies imposed on the Conscience in the
worship of God, so as he shows it to be a very Apostasy from Christ, of such as
hold not the Head: with what face can our Lord Prelates (the great Masters of
all manner of Superstitious and Idolatrous, both Jewish, and Heathenish, Romish
and Antichristian Ceremonies) bear themselves to be the Successors of the
Apostles, while not only they erect such Superstitions, but with all rigor
impose them upon men's Consciences as a most insupportable burden, and
intolerable bondage, and with all severity and cruelty inflict terrible
punishments upon those, that refuse to perform the Tasks of such Egyptian
Taskmasters? Or how dare they affirm, that they have such their Jurisdiction
from Christ, while in so doing, usurping such a Power over men's Consciences,
they thrust Jesus Christ out of his Throne? But we shall have occasion to
speak more of this hereafter. Thus we see in the mean time what kind of
Viceroys of Christ, and Successors of his Apostles, the Prelates prove
themselves to be, in Lording over the Consciences of Gods people by their
Superstitious Ceremonies, and Romish Rites.

But perhaps they will object the Apostles determination ( Act. 15.) concerning
the Gentiles newly converted to Christianity, that they should abstain from
eating of blood, and things strangled, which was a Mosaicall Rite. To which I
answer: First, that the Apostles in the v. 10.
same place do show, that that burden of Legal Ceremonies was removed by the
death of Christ, and buried in his Grave. Secondly, they did this, in regard of
the Jews, which dwelt among those Christians, for the time being for
peace-sake, until the v. 21.
Christian Jews were better confirmed in the faith and knowledge of Christ.
Thirdly, they did it by the special direction of the v. 2^.
Holy Ghost, for the reason alleged. So as that example being extraordinary,
and for the time of the Infancy of the Gospel, it is no rule for us to follow
now, after so long a shining forth of the Gospel. And I might add this
moreover, that the Apostles did not this alone, but with the whole
Congregation, the Presbyters, or Elders, and Brethren being ^oyned with them.
Whereas our Prelates, though they confess that a Con. page 261.
General Council has no immediate Institution from Christ to determine
Controversies; but that it was prudently taken up in the Church, from the
Apostles example, Act. 15. yet for all their prudence in taking up that, which
belongs not unto them, they show themselves very unfaithful, while they follow
not the example of the Apostles in determining alone, and not with the whole
Congregation; and therefore Christians have the less reason to captivate their
faith to Prelaticall Decrees, either in a General Council, where the Pope of
Rome, and of Canterbury are the rulers of the roast, or in a Convocation, where
the Pope of Canterbury is Prime, Primate, Metropolitan, and All, who without
the Holy Ghost (which is never given to any such Antichristian Assemblies)
whatever they decree in point of faith, or otherwise, be it never so erroneous,
yet they enjoyne obedience thereunto by all men; as our Confer page 226. 227.
Prelate affirms.

But he will not be so easily beaten off from his Ceremonies: For in his Epist.
Dedi^ page 19. 20.
Epistle Dedicatory he tells the King, That Ceremonies are ne^essary for the
setting out of Gods worship His Great Witness to the world that our hear
stands right in that Service of God, to wit, the inward worship. Take this away
or b^ing it into contempt, and what light is there left to shine before men,
that they may see our Devotion, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. And
to deal clearly with your Majesty, these thoughts are they, and no other,
which have made me labor so much as I have done, for Decency, and an Orderly
Settlement of the external worship of God in the Church; which cannot be
without some Ceremonies, etc. For Ceremonies are the hedge, that fear the
Substance of Religion, etc. And a great weakness it is, not to see the
strength, which Ceremonies add even to Religion itself, etc. So and much more
the Prelate^ Whence it appears, that had he not Ceremonies to garnish his
worship of God (as he calls it the world could not see how right his heart
stands, nor yet see his good works; because instead of good works perverting
Christ's word) he puts his Devotion, and his Devotion stands in his Ceremonies;
which he says must not be too few, for then they leave his Service naked, and
therefore to avoid that he must have both a Surplice, and Hood, and Cope, to
cover that nakedness. So as all his light is in his External worship shining
forth in his brave Garb of Ceremonies; as that of the Pharisees in their broad
Philacteries. So as without this, men (in truth) could not so easily see the
pride, vanity, Superstition, and hyprcrisie, which lurketh in the Prelates
^^re, and bewrays it self in his many inventions of Superstitious
Ceremonies, the very Ideas and Idols of his profane heart. And Antiquity was
the Mystery of Iniquity; if that will do them any pleasure. This we generally
touched before in the Third Chapter.

But for the Second, That the Prelacie is this Mystery of Iniquity, let us a
little examine what is meant by this Mystery of Iniquity. This Mystery of
Iniquity is opposed to the Mystery of Godliness, of which the Apostle speaks,
1 Timothy 3. 16. Iniquity is opposite to Godliness: but both Godliness and
Iniquity are called a Mystery. Yet in a different respect. The Mystery of
Godliness is so called, because of its deepnesse, and difficulty to be
understood, but by Gods 1 Cor. 2. 9. 10.
Spirit revealing the same: but the Mystery of Iniquity is so called, because
Iniquity is veiled under a pretense and show of Godliness, by which Rev. 13.
8. 2 These. 2. 10.
many are deceived, Mat. 24. 5.
whose names are not written in the book of life. As Christ says, Many shall
come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. And thus do all
Prelates come in Christ's Name, while they pretend Christ's Authority, and usurp
Christ's throne over his People. And the great Antichrist is so called, because
though he be against Christ, yet he says, he is for Christ, as being Christ's
Vicar; even as Antichristus in the Greek is a compound word, the Preposition
Anti signifying both for, or instead, and against. And so is Antichrist, in
pretense for Christ, but in practice against Christ: and so are all our
Prelates; as shall yet further appear. And this is truly and properly the
Mystery of Iniquity. In which respect the Turk, and other professed Enemies of
Christ, and Christian Religion cannot come within the compass of this Mystery
of Iniquity, and so cannot be full Antichrists, because they do gum kephale,
openly, without any veil, profess this Iniquity, of being Adversaries to
Christ.

And for the further application of this Mystery of Iniquity to the Prelates,
we come to the third Proposition: That, What is spoken of the great Antichrist
himself, is spoken of all Prelates, as members of the same Head, or as so many
inferior antichrists, though in themselves great enough. Let us therefore see
the properties of Antichrist here described by the Apostle. First he is called,
That man of Sin: And this is Antichrist in two respects: 1. in respect of
himself, as being carnal, proud, covetous, ambitious, voluptuous, and a most
malicious hater, and most cruel persecuter of the Saints and Servants of
Christ, a proper Sin of Antichrist^ These Sins and Lusts are the proper
Sins of a Prelate, and common to every Prelate, and especially those of the
latter Stamp, since Antichrist mounted aloft, now for above 600. years, yea a
1000. years from Boniface 3. Secondly, Antichrist is that man of Sin, in
respect of others, as being a prime instrument of causing others to Sin: as by
giving Indulgence, Dispensation, and Liberty to men to Sin, and by suppressing
the means whereby they should be kept from Sin. The Pope is notorious for this.
And our Prelates come not far behind him. For they allow profane sports on
the Lords day, by which the 4th Commandment is broken: and that to Servants
and Ch^ldren so as their Parents and Masters may not restrain them; which is a
manifest breach of the Fifth Commandment: so as by this means many other
Commandments are broken in committing many Sins. Thus they both Math^
break the greatest Commandments, and teach men so. Again instead of
suppessing of sports, they restrain and Suppress the Preaching of Gods word,
whereby men should be kept from Sin, and learn to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts.
Thus Antichrist is that man of Sin.

Secondly, Antichrist is called the Son of Perdition For as he is that man of
Sin: so by consequence he is that Son of Perdition' and that in both the
foresaid respects, as of Sinning, so of Perishing: for as he both Sins
himself, and causes others to Sin: so he both perishes himself, and causes
others to perish, as 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10. And this is proper to the Pope in the
first place, whose necessity of perishing is such, that himself confesses an
impossibility of amendment. As is noted of Adrian 6. who said, Hist. Council.
Trid. lib. 1.
That the condition of Popes was miserable, seeing it was evident, that they
could not do good, though they desired and endeavored it never so much. And
Pope In Platina, of the lives of the Popes.
Marcell flapping his hand on the Table, said, It was impossible, that any one
Sitting in that Chair could be Saved. And his own Decretalls say, That if the
Pope carry with him millions of Souls to be tormented with the great Devil, no
man may reprove him. So incorrigible he is. And this is according to Christ's
saying, Mat. 19. 24.
That it is easier for a Camel to go through the ^ye of a needle, then for a
Rich man to go into the Kingdom of heaven. And are Prelates in any better
condition? Is there any more hope of them, then of the Pope, that ever they can
or will repent? If they will repen^ indeed, that they may not be the Sons of
perdition, either in themselves, or also in others, they must get them out of
the Chair of Pestilence, they must in one word, abandon their Prelacie, and
Prelaticall practices. Will they do this, and so cease both to Sin
themselves, and to cause others ^o Sin? This were happy for them. And this were
the only way to free them from being the Sons of Perdition, namely by ceaseing
to be those men of Sin. But if Chrysostom said of Prelates in his days, that
he wondered, if any of them could be saved: then what would he have said of the
Prelates in our days?

Thirdly, Antichrist is called o `antikeimenos, that Adversary. But still under
a pretext of being a friend; as before is noted. Thus Antichrist is the grand
Adversary, ^ a'ntikeimenos, opposite, or set against. But against whom? Against
Christ, against his word, against his Ministers, against his people, even all
true professors of the Gospel, against all true Religion. Such is the Pope,
and such are the Prelates, as their practices do plainly prove, and openly
proclaim them to be.

And Fourthly, here is added by a Copulative, kai u`prairomenos, and He that
exalts himself (as our English renders it) Over whom? Over all that is called
God, or that is worshipped. Epipanta, Over all, or against all (as some
Translation has it) that is called God. For the Preposition e'pi may signify
both. But for Against we have a'ntikeimenos, opposite, and so this we may take
for lifting himself up over all that is called God, or that is worshipped;
which we may understand two ways, either over all Religion (as before we
noted) or over all Policy, and Civil Government, over Kings, and Princes and
Magistrates, who are Psalm. 82.
called Gods, and over the Emperor himself, who is called s^bastos, which is
venerable, or worshipful; and the honor of Caesar which is called sebasma (as
in the Text) over which this Antichrist exalts himself. Now that this is
verified of the Pope, it needs no proof, as being as clear as the Sun at
noone day, and which Impudency it self has not the face to deny. But now for
our Prelates, how is this verified of them? For they would seem to be friends
to Kings and Princes, insomuch as they are by Princes themselves openly
proclaimed to be a holy Order most Christian in it self, most peaceable in
Civil States, and most consonant to Minarchie, or the like. For answer
whereunto: First, if the Pope their Sire be such an Adversary, and so exalted,
how can the Prelates be excused, seeing they are of the same Spirit, as the
members actuated by the Head? Secondly, if Prelates be (as their ordinary
practices do show) Adversaries and opposits to Christ, and to his word, as well
as the Pope is (as before is noted) how can their Hierarchy be said to be
either most Christian in itself, or most peaceable to Civil States, or most
consonant to Monarchy? Can such an Hierarchy be most Christian, which is most
Antichristian? Or can it be peaceable for a Civil State, that professes
Christianity, yea and the true Religion, to uphold and maintain such as are
most notorious Adversaries to Christ, and to the Gospel? Or can that be most
Copsonant to a Monarchy (professing to be under Christ the only Monarch, on
whom all others depend, and to be governed by good and just Laws, and not by a
Lawless Tyranny, which it self is an Hierarchicall Tyranny, and such as
Tyranniseth over souls, bodies, and estates? Or can Prelates be true Friends
to Princes, who under a false vizard of Friendship labor to corrupt them by
their flattery, to make them forget they are men, to make them disaffected with
their good Subjects, to make them the Authors of Innovation in Religion, by
suppressing the Truth by their public Edicts, which tends to fill the People
with discontents, and to stir up Sedition, and the like? Can this be safe for
Monarchy, or peaceable for the Civil State, or a thing in it self most
Christian? Nor is it so only with our present Prelates. Revolve all Histories
since Antichrists exaltation, and ye shall find that never any great Treasons
have been, either against the persons of Princes, or their Civil States (if
they were but suspected of disaffection to the Papacy, or Romish Religion) but
either a Prelate, or some of his faction had his finger in it. But there it may
suffice, that our eyes have been witnesses of the effects of Prelaticall pranks
and practices, in being so busy and bold to bring in again the Romish
Religion, and after the Gospel had taken such deep rooting. So as if our Kings
wisdom had not been the greater in composing things in a peaceable way (as
foreseeing the dangerous Consequences that might have ensued, in case he should
have by a strong hand gone about to have reduced that Antic bristian Government
into that Kingdom, which it had now cast out) God knows what woeful calamities
such a War might have produced. But blessed be God, for preventing it.

Again. As the Pope lifts up himself above and against all Emperious Kings,
and Princes; yea setting his feet on their necks, causing them to hold his
stirrup, to lead his palfrey, and do such like Offices (as his Holiness Book
of Ceremonies, and other Histories show) to hold their Kingdoms in Fee from
him, and the like: and as his Cardinals take place of Kings, his Archprelates
of Dukes, his Prelates of Lords: So our Prelates (which come from them, and
pro^esse still to be of one and the same Church with them, of one and the same
Hierarchicall Catholic Church, of one and the same Faith and Religion, as
before is noted) do they not the like, according to their proportion, and
degree? Do not Archprelates take place of Dukes, and Prelates of Lords? Nay,
do they not set their feet upon the neck of the Kings Laws, while they (though
as yet de jure they cannot, yet de facto they do) exempt themselves from them,
in that they by their power in Court, and threatenings in their own Courts, so
terrify all Prohibitions, that they dare not peep, or show their Faces in the
High Commission; as the Author of the Sea the Apology. His Epistle to the
Judges. His Sermons.
Apology, and Two Sermons, For God and the King, has observed, though he has
paid dearly for his truth telling? Thus do they not u`prairethai, highly
exalt themselves above all that is called God (as above Kings and Civil States)
while they dare thus withdraw their necks from under the obedience of their
good and just Laws (the benefit whereof the Kings good Subjects should enjoy in
relieving themselves, and their innocent Cause from the Prelates unjust and
tyrannical oppressions in the lawless proceeding in their Courts) and so set
their proud feet upon the Kings both Laws, which are the sinews, and loyal
People, which are the members of the same Body Politic, whereof the King is
the Head? Do they not herein come near their Father Pope, who trampleth upon
Emperors necks, when they dare tread upon the Kings feet, as Genesis 3. 15.
the Serpent did upon Christ's heel? And for this Cause is the Hierarchy, or
Antichristianisme, called by the Apostle, the Mystery of Iniquity. Yea the
Mystery tes a'nomias, of Lawlessenesse; for which cause the Head of this
Mystery, to wit, the Grand Antichrist, or the Pope, is called o`anomos, that
Lawless one, which our English turns, That wi^ked.

So as here may fitly come in Antichrists Fifth Title o` a'nomos, that Lawless
one. This the Pope proves himself to be, as being subject to no Laws, either
of God, or man. So as (he says) he has all Laws folded up in the Cabinet of
his own breast, as being the great Oracle of the world, and the only infallible
Judge in matters of Faith; at least, when he Sits in Peter's Chair; and that he
can dispense with the Apos^^^, and the like. But how does his agree with our
Prelates? Are they also such a'nomi, such Lawless ones, as to merit the next
place to the Pope, for the Title of Antichrist? Yes surely, they hold a
correspondence with their Sire, so as in all things they do patrifare, show
themselves to be his Sons. Of their Lawlessenesse, in regard of Subjection to
Princes Laws, we spoke but now. And now remains to show how they are Lawless,
in regard of Gods Laws. First, their Hierarch^e is (...) at all, nor in any
thing (as neither g^o^^ded; so) regulated by the Law of God, and of C^^ist, but
merely by their own Lawless Canons, which are the Laws of their Lawless
Kingdom. Yea, and when they list, they have a Prerogative to go either
beyond, or against their Canons, in case their lust find not scope enough.
Secondly, (as is noted before) they not only can dispense with Gods Law, but
dare and do annihilate it, and make it of no authority. For they do
unmoralize the 4th Commandment, as concerning the Sabbath day for Christians:
they allow profane Sports thereon, which Gods Law has altogether forbidden:
they forbid preaching on that day, which Gods word commands to be both in
season, and out of season: they altogether forbid preaching of the Doctrines of
Grace, which Gods word commends unto us, and commands to be preached: they
Suspend the sense of the Articles of Religion touching. Gods free Grace,
thereby giving way to the contrary Errors, which they forbid Preachers to
confute, flatly against Tit. 1. 9.
Gods Commandment: they dispense with the fifth Commandment, dissolving the
bond of obedience in Children and Servants to the Parents and Masters, and
stripping those Governors of their Authority over them, while they give them
liberty to Sport, and run riot on the Lords day, and threaten all that shall
dare to control them. And herein also, they destroy Man's Law: for the Law of
the Land no where, either allows any such profane Sports on the Lords days,
but flatly forbids them: or forbids Parents and Masters to restrain their
youth from such profanati^ns, or to correct them, if they offend, and will not
obey then Lawful Commands: nor much less has the Law of the Land given any
such power and authority to any Civil Magistrate, or other, to punish those,
that shall be brought before them, for exercising their lawful authority over
those under their charge. And we all know, that the Prelates had the chief
hand, not only in penning, but in publishing that Book for Sports on the
Lords day, which is an open proclaiming of War against God, against Christ,
against his holy Laws, against all holiness, against our Christian vow in
Baptism, against the good Laws of the Land, and Acts of Parliament, and
against the very bonds of all Civil and Natural Societies. And thus our
Prelates are the most notorious Lawless men (only excepting the Grand
Antichrist, the Pope, unless in some things they do outstrip him) that ever
were in any Age of the world.

Further, two ways more do the Prelates prove themselves to be o`i a'nomei,
those Lawless men. As first, in hanging the Keys of Scripture at their Girdle,
saying, that the Credit and belie^^ of Scripture to be the word of God, does
necessarily depend upon the Authority and Tradition of the present Church, as
the prime inducing cause to that bel^^f. This our great Prelate in his said
Book boldly affirmeth^ and often repeateth, saying withal, that the Scripture
has not light enough in it self, is not sufficient to show and prove it self
to be the word of God. So as the whole Authority of Scripture^ depending upon
Church-Tradition, and Authority, is necessarily made subject to Episcopal
Power, and so consequently the Law of God contained therein, shall not be
Divine, unless it please their good Lordships to give their good word for it,
and to make it of so much credit, by the vote of their Authority and Tradition,
as that men may believe it to be Gods Law. And upon this ground it is, that if
the Prelates shall pronounce the 4th Commandment not to be Moral for the
sanctifying of a Seventh day, yea the first day of the week, for Sabbath, and
that Servants, and Children are not bound to yield obedience to their Masters
and Parents on that day, in Case Civil or Ecclesiastical Authority shall
dispense with them to be free that day for their Sports. then all men must be
of their opinion, that those Commandments are none of Gods Commandments. The
second way, whereby Prelates do show themselves Lawless men, is by denying
the Scripture to be Judge in Controversus of Faith. For the said Prelate
pe^emptorily says, page 378.
I absolutely make a lawful and free General Council Judge of Controversies,
by and according to Scriptures. Which [ By and according to the Scriptures]
come in by the By, and are mere Ciphers. For by these words he either means,
That By and according to the Scriptures he absolutely makes, etc. which is
most false: for by and according to the Scripture no General Council is Judge
of Coneroversies; Neither by and according to the Scriptures has the Prelate
power absolutely to make a General Council Judge of Controversies: or else, by
these words he does but cast a ^yst before his Readers eyes to make him believe
upon the first rebound of his words, that he makes Scripture the Rule, for
General Councels to determine Controversies by. Whereas he means no such
thing. For elsewhere he has sundry speeches to the contrary: as page 31.
The Churches Declaration can bind us to peace, and external obedience, where
there is not express letter of Scripture, and since agreed upon. And again,
If there be a a^eal^usie or doubt of the sense of Scripture, a General Council
must judge the Difference: only Scripture must be the Rule. Now if Scripture
be doubtful, and not clear, how can it be a rule to others, to judge by? But
if Scripture be sufficiently and abundantly clear in it self in resolving of
matters of faith for salvation, how come men to take upon them to be Judges?
But that the Scripture it self should be Judge, the Prelate in no case, in no
place of his Book will allow of that: Only he confesses, that the Scripture
is a page 80. and 194.
Judge, but without light Sufficient: visible, but not living, not speaking but
by the Church. So as the Judge he makes upon the matter both blind, and dead,
and dumb. As the Lighius. Hosius. de expresso Dei Verbo.
Papists make it a dead letter, and Leaden or Lesbian Rule, that so they may
set the Church above it, to be Supreme Judge. Thus our Prelates (if they will
allow their Primate to speak for them) have made the Scripture, and so Gods
word of no Authority in and of it self, when it must depend both for its
Authority, and Sense upon the Church and that the Prelaticall Church, or that
Catholic, wherein the Church Prelaticall of England, and of Rome, are one and
the Same. Are not the Prelates then, next after the Pope, those Lawless men,
branded here by the Apostle, under the name of that Lawless one?

We come now to the Sixth note of Antichrist in the Text: which is^ that he at
God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself, that he is God. Now the 1
Cor. 3. 10. 17. and 6. 19. 2 Cor. 6. 16.
Temple of God, properly, according to the New Testament (the ancient Temple of
the Jews being abolished) is the Soul and Conscience of every believer: or
true Christian, namely a Spirttuall Temple. Now all that bear but the bear
name of Christians, as Papists do, do also participate of the bare Name of
such, as are the true Temples: and so in that respect, Antichrist is said to
sit in, or upon or over the Temple of God. For sitting, argues a Seat, Chair,
or Throne, which Antichrist sets up in the Souls and Consciences of all
Papists, Sitting and reigning as King over them in all matters of faith. So as
thus he makes himself a Spiritual Lord, or King over them. And thus by
Antichrists sitting is understood his raingning, as the Scripture does often
use this Term: as Revel. 17. 1. 3. 15. and 18. 7. And so in other places of
Scripture, by sitting, is understood reigning, as Heb. 1. 13. 1. Rev. 1. 13.
Now that the Pope does thus set up his throne, and sit and reign in the
Consciences of men, who are the Subjects and vassalls of his Spiritual
Kingdom, himself cannot, will not deny. And he sits, as God, that is, assumes
and exercises that power and authority over the Conscience, which appertains
to God, to Christ alone. And thus he makes show, that he is God, as to whom God
has committed all his Power and authority unto. As the Pope calls himself
Vice-God, Christ's Vicar, and the like, usurping whatsoever Titles of Power
Christ has in the Scripture: as we read of Leo 10, in the Council of Lateran,
calling himself the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and the like. And Bellarmine
blusheth not to say, and therein to Blas-Pheme, that what soever is attributed
to Christ in the Scripture, is communicated to his Vicar, the Pope. And thus is
fullfilled that, which Christ, foretold, Mat. 24. 5.
Many shall come in my Name, saying, I am, or I am Christ, and shall deceive
many. Thus for the Pope, that man of Sin, Mark 13. 6.
that Son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts himself, ab^ve all that is
called God, Luke 21. 8.
or that is worshipped, that Lawless one, that as God sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself, that he is God^ Now for our Prelates, are they not
herein also, as in all the rest, at least petty Gods Sitting in the Temple of
God, showing themselves to be so many Gods? As for their material Princely
Thrones in material Temples, they have them set up in great State. But this is
nothing to that Throne, which they have set up, and wherein they sit and
reign, over the Consciences and Souls of Gods people; their multitude of
Canons and Ceremonies being so many Laws by which they rule over them, and so
many bonds or Chains, whereby they hold them in Spiritual bondage. And thus
they sit also as God, in the Timple of God, showing themselves to be God, in
saying they are Christ's Viceroys, and the Apostles Successors, having
Authority from Christ to exercise that their Jurisdiction and Power over Gods
People, who are the living Temples of the living God. Thus we see all along,
how this Army of Priests (as G^egory and others call them) the Prelates, do
follow their Captain and King Antichrist step by step, in all his properties
here described by the Apostle.

The last thing we propounded here to speak of, is, That Apostacy must go
before to strew the way, to the full revealation of the Mystery of Iniquity,
and so of Antichrist, which Apostacy was partly and primarily the Prelacie. I
say, partly and primarily. For partly the removal of the Imperial Seat, from
Rome to Constan^inople by Constantine, and partly the decaying and declyning of
the Empire, and partly the defection of sundry Kingdoms from the Empire, made
way for Antichrists greatness, to which he grew not but by degrees, and that
through many Ages. Yet the prime foundation of his Babylonian Tower was laid in
the Apostles own times, they laboring to hinder it all they could, but not
prevailing herein, they preached and writ against it, and so forewarned Gods
people to beware of it. And this foundation so long ago begun to be laid, was
the Prelacie, or rather the Spirit of Prelacie, which had a time of working
even while the Apostles lived, and became to be as it were an Embrio or little
Mass, but did not receice the form of a body, till afterward, and was long a
growing up, until it came to the full stature. Now (I say) the spirit of
Prelacie was the very beginning of the Apostacy, which was Antichrists
way-maker.

But how does it appear, that this spirit of the Prelacie began to work in
the Apostles days? And then secondly, how will it appear, that this spirit of
the Prelacy was and is an Apostacy? For answer: First, that the Prelacie
began to get life in the Aposiles time, it is manifest by sundry places of
Scripture. As 2. Cor. 11. 20. Ye suffer (says the Apostle to the Corinthians)
if a man bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if
a man exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. Now the Apostle means
here of those immediately mentioned before, to wit, false Ministers, whom he
calls false Apostles, deceitful work^rs is transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ, v. 13. 15. These (as young Prelates) would be Apostolic^ll
men; and they have the qualities of Prelates, they Captivate Gods people (as
before) they devour, take, exalt themselves, smite^ just Prelate-like. And for
brevity (to omit sundry other places) we find one pretty brisk Prelaticall man
in 3. Job. 9. 10. his Name was Diotrephes, and he did bear himself according
to his Name, as one of Jupiters nurslings: his qualities are these: 1. He
loves to have the preeminence. 2. he receives not the Apostles, and brethren:
3. he prateth against them with malicious words: 4. he neither receives the
brethren, and forbids them that would: 5. he casts them out of the Church.
Lo here a pretty well grown Prelaticall Child, a pregnant Spark to make a
Lord Prelate of. For all his Properties are proper to a Prelate: for a Prelate,
first, loves the preeminence: 2. though he pretend to Succeed the Apostles, yet
his deeds show, that he hates both their Doctrine, and Example, persecuting
them in their true Successors: 3. he receives not the brethren: yea 4. he so
hates the very name of holy brethren, that he forbids all men to receive them:
and 5. he casts them out of the Church, he plays fie gib with his thunderbolt
of Excommunication. I might insist more, and enlarge all these particulars: but
this may suffice to show, that the Spirit of the Prelacie was stirring in the
womb of the Church, even while the Apostles lived.

Now for the Second, it is no less true, that the Spirit of the Prelacy was
and is an Apostasy from Christ. This first appears by the Apostles former
words of falling away first, which made way for Antichrist. And this began in
the Prelacie: for the Prelacy is the setting up of a new Church, a new
Kingdom, turning Christ's heavenly Kingdom into an earthly, and the Spiritual
into a carnal, and the Kingdom of Grace, into a Kingdom of terrene glory,
and the Church militant into a Church malignant and triumphant (as before is
noted) and the true Catholic Church which we believe to consist of all the
Elect only, Christ's living members) into a new Catholic visible Church of
all nominall Christians, tagge and ragge, Papists and others: and in a word,
the Church of Christ into the Church and Synogogue of Antichrist. Is not here
then a fearful Apostacy, and falling from Christ? Time calls me off, and
therefore I must be very brief. I will add therefore but one place more for
the proof of this, That Prelacy is Apostasy from Christ. It is in 1 Io. 2. 18.
Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the
last time. They went out from us; but they were not of us: for if they had been
of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Lo, here is an
Apostacy, and it is of certain Antichrists, that were then sprung up, even
many Antichrists. But how does this concern our Prelates? Let us look but a
little lower, and as before we found them wrapped in the Swaddling Clouts of the
Mystery of Iniquity: So here we shall behold them in the very robes of
Antichrist. For v. 22. Who is a liar, but he that denies, that Jesus is the
Christ: He is Antichrist, etc. Now what is it to deny Jesus to be the Christ?
Surely we must so take these words, as we hold the Analogy of faith, and so,
as they cross not the Mystery of Iniquity, which we showed before to be a
denying of Christ, under a color of confessing him. Now then there is a
twofold denial of Christ: one in words, another in works. So the Apostle says
of such, Tit. 2. 16.
They porfesse that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. So as there is a denial
of Christ in deeds. But what it is to deny, that Jesus is the Christ? This is a
point indeed very considerable. To deny that Jesus is the Christ, is to deny,
that Jesus is the Auointed King Priest and Prophet; So, as never any were
anointed, to all these 3 Offices. And therefore Christ was said to be Psalm. 45.
anointed above his fellows. And for that cause he is called here, of Kristos,
The Anointed. Now then to deny that Jesus is the Christ, is to deny, that Jesus
is the only King, the only High Priest, and the only Prophet of his Church.
But ( to apply this) does the Pope, and so our Prelates, deny that Jesus is
thus the Chirst? Yes, they do. First, for the Pope, it is manifest, that he
denies Jesus to be the only King of his Church: because himself takes upon him
to be King over the Church, sitting as God in the Temple of God, showing
himself, that he is God; as before is showed. Secondly, he not only sets up
other Highpriests in heaven, as whom he makes Mediators of Interc^ssion: and
so he denies Christ's High priesthood in heaven, whose Office alone it is to
make Intercession within the v^ile, as was typed by the High Priest, Heb. 9.
but the Pope also makes himself the High Priest on Earth, in forgiving of
Sins, and in Sacrificing and offering up a Breaden Christ for a propitiatory
Sacrifice, wherein also every Mass Priest usurps Christ's Priesthood on the
Cross. And Thirdly, he denies Jesus to be the only Prophet to teach his
Church, taking upon him to be the Sole Oracle, and unerring Judge in matters of
Faith. These might be enlarged, but I hasten. And a word in things so clear,
is sufficient. Now for our Prelates: Do not they too deny, that Jesus is the
Christ? Do not they deny him to be the only King of his Church, by their
usurping of his throne and dominion over the Consciences of Gods people in
matters of faith and Religion, by imposing their manifold Canons, and
Ceremonies, as before is showed? And Secondly, do they not deny, that Jesus is
the only High Priest, while themselves with the Pope, and their false
Priesthood, take upon them to forgive Sins? Yea and do they not labor to come
home to Rome, in setting up their Altars, with their Priests, which must needs
have a suitable Sacrifice, some Host: so as thereby Christ is denied to be the
only High Priest, who offered up himself on the Cross once for all? Thirdly,
and Lastly, do they not deny Jesus to be the only Prophet of his Church,
while themselves usurp the Office of being Judges of the S^ripture, and of the
Controversies of Faith, making their Dictates to be received for Doctrines, and
their determinations (though in things erroneous in the Faith) to bind all men
to peace and obedience? Which being so: the Conclusion is, that as the Pope is
the grand Antichrist, so Prelates are so many Antichrists. For (says the
Apostle) Who is a liar, but he that denies, that Jesus is the Christ? He is
Antichrist. And thus we see, how these hypocrites, who are so Superstitiously
and Idolatrously devout in their worshipping of the Name JESUS, prove themselves
notorions. Antichrists, in denying Jesus to be the Christ, to be the only King,
Priest and Prophet of his Church.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein the Prelates usual Allegations out of the Scriptures, by them
perverted, or other by them pretended, are answered.
AS there has been no Heresy, nor Heretic, so gross, but he could allege
some Scripture or other for the maintenance of his Heresy, if his own carnal
sense might be the Intepreter and Judge: So our Prelates, though their
pretended Title of Jurisdiction be in some clear Scriptures so expressly
condemned both by Christ and his Apostles (as has been showed) as were
sufficient to confound them, and put them to perpetual silence: yet they leave
no Stone unturned, under which they might find but some worm for a bait to
deceive the Simple Fish. And therefore where they find but the least shadow, or
appearance or resemblance, which may present to their fancy and imagination
some aerie Image of their Hierarchy, that they set up for all men to adore. Now
let us see what starting holes they find out for themselves in the holy
Scripture. First, they allege those Postscripts in the end of Paul's Second
Epistle to Timothy, and of that to Titus: where in the one, Timothy is said to
be first Bishop of Ephesus: and in the other, Titus first Bishop of the Church
of the Cretians. These (say they) were Diocesan Bishops, ordained by the
Apostle. And here (say they) we have Scripture for it. Ergo we Bishops have our
Authority Iure Divine To both which places, I answer: First, That those two
Postscripts are no part of Canonical Scripture, or of the holy Text. For (as
the learned Beza has well observed) they were not found in the most ancient
Greek Copies: nor yet in the vulgar Latin Translation, no not to this day.
These were additions of some Monks, that were made some hundred years after
the Apostles. So as in Ieromes time they were not extant, as the Translation
that goes in his Name can testify, which has no such Postscrips. Secondy, our
former and ancienter English Translations, though they have those Postscripts,
yet they are put in a small character, different from that of the Text, that
all men may take notice they are no part of the Text. Although our All-
Innovating Prelates of late, have in the newer Impressions enlarged their
Phylacteries, in putting those Postscripts in the same full character with that
of the Text, that the Simple might believe they are Canonical Scripture.
Thirdly, Timothy and Titus, are no where in Scripture called Bishops. Fourthly,
Suppose they were such Bishops, as the Scriptures approve of, as before is
showed: does it therefore follow, that they were Diocesan Bishops, Lording over
the Presbyters, as our Lord Prelates do? Let them show us that. But fifthly, it
is clear by Scripture, that Timothy and Titus were neither Dioce^an Bishops;
nor yet Bishops of a particular Congregation, such as the Scripture commends
unto us. Not Diocesan Bishops: for first, as yet there was no distribution of
Diocese; that came in afterward. And secondly, they were not tied to any
Residence either Diocesan, or Parochial. And neither as yet was the Church
divided into Parishes. Now the reason why Timothy and Titus were no such
Bishops, is, because they were 2 Timothy 4. 5.
Evangelists, whose Office was to attend upon the Apostles, and to be sent by
them now to one Church, now to another, and that in remote Countries, and far
distant one from another, where they stayed no longer, then the Apostles
thought expedient, having occasion to employ them in other places; as we may
read Tit. 1. 5. and 3. 12. Phil. 2. 19. 23. 2 Cor. 8. 16. 18, 19. and 12. 17,
18. Col. 4. 7, 8: 1 Thessalonians. 3. 2. 5 and in sundry other places. So as Timothy
and Titus, and other Evangelists, their Office was to water those Churches,
which the Apostles had planted, to comfort, confirm, establish the hearts of
Christians newly converted to the faith of Christ. So as if Timothy and Titus
had been Bishops, either Diocesan, or Parochial, then the Apostle in sending
them to this and that Country, to this and that Church in far distant
Countries, should have been an Author of Non-residence, a thing much
controverted in the Hist. Council.
Council of Trent, and the best learned did maintain, that Residence of
Bishops was de jure divino. They were no Bishops therefore, but Evangelists.
And thus the Scripture it self shows plainly, that those foresaid Postscripts
are mere forgeries, and counterfeit stuff; though our Prelates are glad of
any shred to patch up their Pyde Motley Coat withal.

But they allege again for themselves, that Titus was left in Creet to
ordain Bishops in every City. Ergo, Ordination of Ministers belongs properly
and solely to Bishops. For Answer: Is this a good Argument: Titus Ordained
Ministers in Creet: Ergo Ordination of Ministers pertaines to the Office of
every Diocesan Bishop? But they must bring better proof, that Titus was a
Diocesan Bishop: otherwise, I deny their Argument. Secondly, Suppose, that
Titus did alone ordain: yet this being a case of necessity, and in the infancy
of the Church, is it therefore to be made a General Rule? Thirdly, if they were
Diocesan Bishops, whom Titus ordained in every City in Creta, then Titus was an
Archbishop at least, and no small one neither, for there being an hundred
Cities in Creet, called therefore e katompolis, the hundred-City-Ile. But for
Archbishops our Arch-prelate confesses they are not Iure Divino. Or else, for
Titus to ordain such Bishops, as the Prelate means he could according to
ancient Canons of Councels, have had 2 or 3 other Bishops joined with him. But
if they had been Bishops, whom he is said to Ordain, the word should rather
have been teleiosai, or so to Consecrate, then katastesai, to ordain: because
a Diocesan Bishop is not ordained, but consecrated, as they call it; so as such
a Bishop is not an Order, or Calling, as before is showed. But to shut up this:
Titus was no Bishop, and therefore our Prelates Argument from Titus his
Ordaining of Ministers, is too weak a foundation, to build their high Towering
Hierarchy upon.

Again, they allege the power that Timothy and Titus had to Censure
delinquents: Ergo Prelates Courts are Iure Divino. This Argument is like the
former, and concluds nothing for them. Nor had Timothy and Titus their Courts
and Consistories, their Apparitors, and Pursuivants, their dumb Priests to sit
in Court to Excommunicate, and the like. Nor were their Censures like to those
of our Prelates; as before we have showed about Excommunication, either for the
matter, or manner, or end.

But Titus had a Commission ta leiponta, epidiorthosai, to set in order the
things that are wanting. What then? Ergo it is an Office of Prelates to set the
Church in Order, by adding such Ceremenies or Canons, as are wanting. As the
Prelate says in his said Book, that he had Epist. Dedi. page 20.
taken all that pains for an Orderly Settlement in the Church. But besides the
reasons aforesaid, that Titus was no Diocesan Bishop, for our Prelates to make
their pattern by: they must consider, that the full latitude of the sense of
epidiorthosa^ (which our English turns, to set in Order,) is, to set those
things in Order, or in integrum restituere, to restore and reduce them to their
former estate, wherein at the first they were ordered. Now Titus had received
his rule from the Apostle for whatsoever he was to set in Order, which rule
comprehended such things as were wanting. The Apostle left it not to Titus to
do what he would, but o'^ ego soi dietaxamen, as I had appointed thee. Thus
nothing will frame well, the Scripture will not speak one good word for our
Prelates.

But they take their wings, and fly to the Revelation, where the Bishops are
called Angels, as Rev. 1. 20. and 2. 1, etc. The Angel of the Church of Ephesus
(say they) was the Bishop, to wit, the Diocesan Bishop. But first they must
prove that Ephesus had a Diocesan Bishop. before they can conclude he was that
Angel. For every Angel is not a Diocesan Bishop. For then All Ministers being
called Angels, because Gods Messengers, should be Diocesan Bishops, which our
Prelates cry out against: but if they be false Ministers, or counterfeit
Bishops, though they be Angels, yet they are of those Angels of darkness,
which transform themselves into Angels of light, 2 Cor. 11. 13. 14.
as the Apostle speaks, and which we mentioned before. But has Ephesus now
gotten a Dioces^n Bishop? What Is then become of all those Bishops of Eph^sus,
whom the Apostle called together, (...). 20. 17. 28? Of which we spoke before.
How come they now all to be molded up into one Angel, one Diocesan Bishop? But
our Prelates must bring us better proof from Scripture, then so, for their
Diocesan Bishop, unless they will have him some Angel dropped from the Clouds.
Gal. 1.
And (says the Apostle) if an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, then what
the Scripture teaches, let him be accursed.

But they imagine this Angel is the Diocesan Lord Bishop, because he stands
single, and alone, To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, not To the Angels, as
many. But do the^ no^ know, that it is familiar with the Scripture to use the
singular number for the plural? Does not every one of the ten Commandments run
thus, Thou shall not, etc. when every Mothers Son is meant? And why not so
here? Nay it is so here: for though he write as to one, v. 1. yet v. 7. he
concludes the Epistle thus, He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. And such is the style and manner of every one of those
7. Epistles to the seven Churches: so as under one is meant every one, yea all
the Churches. Now will our Prelates hence conclude, that because an Angel herd
is named, and that which is written particularly to one, concerns all the
Churches: that therefore this Angel was the Diocesan Bishop? Surely then, he
must be an Archbishop, as comprehending all the Churches. And so also must
every one of the other Angels of the Churches: which would make a confusion.
But if the Prelates were not selfe-blinded, they might discern the reason, why
the Holy Ghost puts an Angel for many. For thus it holds proportion with the
Vision showed to John, Chap. 1. 12. 20. This Vision of the Seven Stars, and
Seven Candlesticks, and Seven Angels, and Seven Churches, is called a Mystery.
And a Mystery is a Secret, which comprehends more, then is expressed. And so
here, when one Angel is named, we are to understand all the Angels of that
Church, to whom, in the name of one, the Epistle is written: nor ^onely to all
the Angels, but to the Churches, under the name of one Angel. So as in one are
comprehended many, for it is a Mystery: yet one is mentioned (Chap. 2. 1.)
because (I say) it holds proportion with the vision. Again, if by the Angel
here, they would have to be understood a Diocesan Bishop, then they must prove,
that this Diocesan has a lawful Calling, as Sent of God. Otherwise he is no
Angel, that is, no Messenger, no Angel sent of God. Or if they say, This Angel
was sent of God, let them prove him to be a Diocesan Bishop. And thus they are
brought into a Circle, and cannot find the way out.

But they allege again, That one here notes unity, which cannot be without a
Diocesan Bishop. And therefore a Diocesan Bishop was set up for that end, to be
a Head of unity, for the conservation of Order and Peace, in Schismatis
remedium, for a remedy of Schism. Insomuch as our Arch-prelate (as is before
noted) holds a necessity of one Ordine Primus, for the unity and peace of his
Catholic Church. Now for answer briefly (this being partly touched before)
true it is, that one here is a mystical note of unity, so as in the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus, is comprehended the whole Church of Ephesus, both
Ministers and People. But one here does not signify one Diocesan Bishop.
Neither is one Diocesan Bishop in a Diocese, nor one Metropolitan in a Province
or Kingdom, nor one Ordine Primus in the whole Catholic Church, of necessity
to preserve unity in the Church. It Is true indeed, that the Prelates new
Catholicke-Church, which is Prelaticall, may need such a Head as one Ordine
Primus, to preserve it in unity and peace: this being also very useful for the
enlarging of the Tower of Babel, for which the Prelate has so labored for
Peace in the Church of England under the Headship of his Primacy: so as had he
none to oppose or contradict his wicked practices, for the setting up of
Popery, but all did quietly submit and conform to his Canon, his Babylon would
go up apace, and prosper: even as Genesis 11.
when the old world was all of one language, the Tower of Babel went up a
maine, till God confounded their work in the division of tongues: but the true
Catholic Church of Jesus Christ has one Bishop of there Souls, which is
Christ, who is that Ordine Primus, that Ephesians. ^. 15, 16.
unites the whole body, every joint, and every member, that is, not only every
particular believer, but every particular Christian Congregation is knit to the
whole, in and under that one Head And so this Body grows, and this building
goes up, notwithstanding all the mouths of contradiction, and of malicious
Sandballets, that seek to hinder it. Whereas it is not so with the building of
Babel. For one small breath of the mouth of God in his word, breathed by one
poor Minister, is able to blast the building; and therefore the builders cry
out against such Fellows, as troublers of the State, and movers of Sedition.
And they cannot be in quiet, nor their building go up, until such make-bates
be silenced, or made our of the way. And therefore they labor with the Prince
(when themselves want power and Law) to d^e with such as Constantine did with
Athanasius. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. lib. 1. c. 35.
Athanasius was the only man, that refused to hold Communion with a sort of
Arian Bishops; which caused a great gappe in that unity and peace in the
Church, which Constantine so much desired. Well, what is the remedy? He
thereupon was easily moved to send Athanasius away into banishment, and then he
thought all would be quiet and in peace. But by the way, Truth must be looked
unto in the first place: otherwise what peace? For that a false peace, and the
moeher of farther discord, for the which truth is lost. And even our Prelate
himself in his said Book does often harp upon these two strings together,
Truth and Peace: a good harmony, were they rightly meant, and that his Truth
were not made of a Wolfes gut, which will never agree with a string made of a
Sheeps gut, as he pretends his Peace to be. But this by the way. And whereas
they allege the Prelacie to be a remedy of Schism (Hear o heavens, and
hearken o earth) is not the Prelacy the grand Schismaticke? I mean, not only
in being the most busy and usual makebate in all Civil States, dividing
Prince and People, but in setting up a new and false Catholic Church,
altogether separate from, and holding no communion with, yea excluding all
Reformed Churches not Prelaticall, as no members of the Catholic (as indeed
they be not of the false Catholic) all Prelacie drawing to one Head of the
Papacy, and that by a necessity of one Ordine Primus; as before is noted.

But to draw to a Conclusion. The last Allegation which I note they make, is,
that S. Mark was Bishop of Alexandria. Ergo Episcopal Jurisdiction, is an
Apostolical Tradition, and so jure divino. And for this they allege the
Testimony of Jerome where he says, Confer pa. 176.
At Alexandria from Mark the Evangelist, the Presbyters always choosing one
from among them, and placing him in a more eminent degree, called him Bishop.
Whereupon the Prelate thus inferres. So even according to S. Jerome, Bishops
had a very ancient and honorable Descent in the Church from St. Mark the
Evangelist: and this (says Jerome,) was a Tradition Apostolic. So the
Prelate. But first for Jerome, we noted his words before of such Bishops,
saying, They were set up by humane presumption, and not by divine Institution,
and consequently not by Apostolic Tradition. For Apostolic Tradition is
far from ^um^ne presumption; So as it is humane presumption to make that
Apostolic Tradition. And for S. Mark, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. c. 15
Ecclesiastical Story tells us, that Mark was the first, that preached the
Gospel (which also he writ) at Alexandria. But the Story says not, that Mark
was Bishop of Alexandria. And the Prelate must mark, that he was an Evangelist
(as also Iereme says) for he wrote the Gospel. And the History says, he was
Ibid, c. 14.
a follower of Peter the Apostle. Which if true, it makes it more probable,
that it was that Babylon in Egypt, whence Peter wrote his Epistle, where he
says, The Church that is at Babylon saluteth you, and so does Marcus my Son:
then that Peter was then at Rome, which the Papists (to make Peter to have been
at Rome) are content should be that Babylon, from whence he writ. And if they
will needs have it so, let them have it, with the whore of Babylon to boot. But
this by the way. But be it, that Mark was at Alexandria, he was there only as
an Evangelist, and to do the Office of an Evangelist, of which we have Spoken
before: Bishop he was not, as the Prelates would have him; for that we have
already proved to be in their sense condemned both by Christ, and by his
Apostles, and therefore is neither an Institution of Christ, nor a Tradition
Apostolic. And therefore what ever the Presbyters at Alexandria began to
practice after Mark the Evangelist, in choosing and exalting one over them,
whom they called a Bishop, whence our Prelates derive their Ancieut and
Honorable descent: sure we are, they can never prove, that ever either any
Apostle delivered this to Mark, or Mark from the Apostles to the Presbyters,
to make it a Tradition Apostolic. Yea this is a sure and infallible Rule in
Divinity, That whatever the Apostles expressly set down in their Sacred writing,
they never delivered the contrary by word of mouth. As the Apostle writes to
the Corinthians, saying Ibid, c. 14.
As God is true, our word toward you, was not yea and any. Now (as we have
sufficiently proved before) the Apostles, as Christ their Masters forbad them)
forbid Prelacy to others, they exercised it not themselves, they disclaimed
dominion over the says of Christians, they brand it for Antichristian:
therefore Prelaticall Jurisdiction is no Apostolic Tradition: and so no w^y of
divine Institution. And thus the Truth and Title agreeing together, I end, as I
began, Lord Bishops, are none of the LORDS Bishops.

FINIS.
GOOD COUNCEL FOR THE PRESENT STATE OF ENGLAND.
I Call that Counsel only good, which God himself gives in his Word: and
such is this Counsel, which is here given, as being taken from the mouth of God
speaking in his Word. It Is a dangerous thing, and impious too, for Men to
neglect Gods Council, and follow their own. This is a sign of a People given
up of God: As the Lord says, Psalm. 81. 1^. 12.
My poople would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me: So I
gave them up unto their own hea^^s lust, and they walked in their own Counsels.
And what is the issue of such Counsels? David tells us, and that with an
imprecasion, Psalm. 5. 10.
Destroy thou them, o God, let them fall by their own Councels. And this is
meant of such Councels especially, as are taken not only without the Lord, but
against the Lord. Of which David also says, Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Why do the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of
the earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Council together against the
Lord, and against his Christ: Saying, Let us break their bonds a sunder, and
cast away their cords from us. And what follows? He that sits in the
heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak
unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure. For God has set
his King, even the Lord Jesus Christ, upon his holy hill of Sion. This King
has all power in heaven and in earth given into his hand. And he has, as a
golden Scepter sweetly to govern and protect his own people, so an Iron Rod to
break in pieces his enemies, whereupon the Kingly Prophet concludes thus, Be
wise now therefore o ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Eearth: Serve the
Lord in fear and trembling: Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. And what does more kindle
Gods wrath against a State, or Nation, then to Slight and Scorn his Councels,
and with those Giants of old to consult, and confederate, and even make War
against the Lord and his Christ?

And now, o England, thou a^t making a great preparation for War. But of whom
have thou taken Council? Of the Lord? From his mouth? Have thou consulted his
Oracle, his Word? If not, what ever other Council thou take, or followest, it
is but such, whereof David thus speaks, ^ Psalm. 33. 10, 11.
The Lord brings the Council of the Heathen to naught, be makes the devises
of the people of none effect, and casts out the Counsels of Princes. The
Council of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all
generations. And v. 16, 17.
There is no King saved by the multitude of an Host, a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength. An Horse is a vain thing for safety, neither shall
be deliver any by his great strength. Solomon says, By wise Council thou shall
make thy War. And no Council can be wise, which is not taken of God, and much
less, what is taken of enemies against God.

Of whom then do thou take Council for thy Warre^ Hear, o England, examine
thy self. I know the Council of thy heart (as Solomon says is as Pro. 20. 5.
deep waters, into the bottom whereof a vulgar eye cannot elsily pierce. But
yet a man of understanding will draw it out. But if thou will not discover who
is thy Counselor, certainly thy intended actions will bewray and publish to
the world.

And therefore in the Second place, consider the Cause of thy War, that it be
just. I do not mean made seemingly just by false colors, and pretenses, but
that it be really and truly just before God an Men, Otherwise, thou have two
grand Causes of fear, that the issue shall not be prosperous; to wit, not
takiug Council first of God for thy War: secondly, not undertaking it upon a
just Cause or quarrel.

But (to come a little nearer home to the point) is the Cause such, as it will
bear any Consultation, or Communion with God. So as thou may with a good
heart and Conscience seek unto God, to maintain thy Cause? And for what ever
Cause thou indendest thy War, or against whom, surely the Cause being
public, and so concerning the whole Land, such a seeking of God is required,
as is solemn, public, and universal. And we are sure, that as yet, o
England, thou have not sought God, for the good Speed of this thy great and
warlike preparation And then, what good issue can thou expect for?

But thou will say, how shall I seek Counsel and help of God? For this, I
will propound but one example. The whole Tribe of Benjamin stood up in
maintenance of a most wicked and prodigious fact, as that toward the Levites
Wife. He sent her being dead in 12 pieces to all the Tribes of Israel: who
abhorring such a Fact, first sent to their Brethren the Benjamites to punish
the Malefactors. They refused. Whereupon all the Tribes assembled. And first
they ask Counsel of the Lord which of the Tribes, shall go up first against
Benjamin. He Answers, Iuda^. And though the Cause was just, and God councelled
them, yet they were expulsed with the loss of 22 thousand men. They consult
God the Second time; and that with weeping before the Lord until even: the
Lord answers them, Go up, yet this time also they were beaten and lost 18
thousand men. Strange? Well they inquire of the Lord the third time, but in a
better manner then before: for all the People of Israel assemble to the House
of God, weeping and fasting the whole day until even, and offered burnt
offerings, and peace offerings before the Lord; and then asking the Lord, shall
I yet again go to battle against Benjamin, or shall I cease. The Lord
answers them the third time, Go up, for to morrow I will deliver them into thy
hand. Whence it is to be noted, that till this Third time, that they make their
peace with God by burnt-offerings, and peace offerings, God does not give them
an answer of peace, and prosperous success. Hence then, o England; take thy
pattern of seeking God, and asking Counsel of Him. First, do not first
resolve with thy self to fight, and then go ask of God, not, whether thou
shall fight, or no, but only, who shall go up first. For then thou may
speed, as they did. Secondly, think it not sufficient to power forth tears of
worldly sorrow for thy discomfiture, and thereupon resolve to renew the
battle, for which also, though they had an Answer of God for it, yet it was
without any Promise of good Success. But Thirdly, a General Fast must be
Proclaimed over the Land, and a Solemn Day must be kept in offering up the
burnt offerings of an humble and contrite heart, and peace offerings of
reconciliation with God through faith in Christ, joined with a through
Reformation of thy notorious Sins and transgressions, wherewith the whole Land
is burdened and defiled. Then, then (I say) and not before (always provided
the Cause of War be known to be just, as that of the Israelites was against
the Benjamites their Brethren) may thou with a good Conscience and sure
confidence in God make thy War.

But what Sins are those, which thou must reform? In brief, thou must (o
England) call in those wicked and ungodly Books, Orders, Edicts, Declarations,
whereby the Doctrines of Grace have been suppressed, the Sanctification of the
Sabbath cried down, Ministers persecuted, and put out of their places, much
innocent blood has been shed, especially of those 3 banished Close Prisoners;
and to Sum up all in one head-Sinne, to cast out those, who are the maine
Instruments and movers of all these and other outrages in the Land, to wit, the
Prelates, who (as the limbs of Antichrist, and so Christ's adversaries) do of
late especially challenge their Lordly Jurisdiction from Christ alone, Mat. 20.
25. Mark. 10. 42. Luke 22. 25.
which notwithstanding he has expressly forbidden as heathenish, and
tyrennicall: and which his 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. 7. and 3 loh. 9, 10.
Apostles branded for Antichristian, and the Mystery of Iniquity. So as till
these usurpers of Christ's Throne, be cast out, with all their Baggage and
Trumpery of their Cermonies and will worship, be sure, o England, thou can
not look to prosper in any thy undertakings, be they never so just: for in
maintaining thy Prelates, thou maintainest open War against Christ, and his
Kingdom, and (had thou eyes to see it) against thine own Kingdom too, and
the peace and prosperity thereof.

But it will be alleged that thy Reverend Prelates hate a Public Fast, as
being Puritanicall, and consequently any such Reformation, as aforesaid, as
being all Puritanicall: that their Order is most Christian, and consonant to
Civil Government, and most agreeable with the Monarchy; and the like. And
therefore, that thou art bound to defend them, yea though it be by making open
War against all those, that do withstand their Hiearchy. I^ this be thy
resolution, o England, then know this for a certainty that thou caust not long
stand: seeing thy so maintaining of that Antichristian Tyranny is to wage open
War against Jesus Christ, the only King of his Church. And therefore if this
be the cause and end of thy warlike preparations, be sure thou shall not
prosper in why way how art thou so blind, as not to se, how thy prosperity must
of necessity be thy ruin. For as Christ says, Mat. 12. 25.
A Kingdom divided against it self cannot stand. And so if the Island which
consists of two Kingdoms under one King be divided against it self, and the
one Kingdom destroy the other, is it not as with the body when the right hand
cuts off the left? And shall not thou, o England, be hereby exposed to thy
false friends, and deadly enemies without, who could not wish a better
opportunity for the effecting of their long wished desire, then to see this
goodly Island to imbrue her hands in her own bowels and blood? And therefore, if
thou have any such design o England, who could, who would counsel and
instigate thee unto it, but the Spirit of Iezebel of Rome, possessing thy
^relotes, who as those 1 King. 22.
false Prophets, bid thee to go up against Ram^th Gilead, and prosper.

But it will be pretended, they are Rebels whom thou will War against. Wherein
Rebels? For casting our Christ's enemies, those Antichristian usurpers the
Prelates? Indeed thus thou did deal with those 3 above said, as Seditious
Persons, because they convinced the Prelates of their usurped title of
Jurisdiction from Christ, wherein they did not in the least point transgress,
or yet so much as trench upon any of thy Laws, but defended them against the
Prelates. And if in so doing any shall be accounted of thee to be Rebels,
certainly they which do it not, are neither good Christians, nor good
Subjects. But if indeed thou will War against any such, as Rebels, let the
Case first be tried in a fair and Judicial way, a better then which cannot
be, then the present Parliament. And because the Prelates are Parties, let them
be excluded out of the Court, till the matter be deci^ed. For no Reason, that
Parties should sit as Judges, as the Prelates did in the Censuring of those
former three, though they excepted against them in open Court. And if indeed by
such a fair trial any shall be found judicially to be Rebels against their
King, then make War against them, and spare not, and I could wish to be the
foremost in the fight. But if they only stand to defend their ancient Rights
and Liberties and those good Laws of the Land, which as the Ligatures do bind,
unite, and fasten the Head and Body, the King and his Subjects together: and
which both Prince and People are bound by mutual Covenant, and Sacred Oath to
maintain, let the Parliament determine, whether that be Rebellion, or no.

Which, till it be determined, let me crave thy patience, o England, in a few
words; and hearken to the Counsel, that I shall give thee in Gods own Name and
words. And because the present Parliament is the Representative Body of the
whole State of the Land, let me first address my Speech to it, now Assembled
in both the Houses. Now where Gods word says, Pro. 24. 6.
By wise Counsel thou shall make thy War: he immediately adds, And in a
multitude of Councellers there is Safety. And you, most Noble Senate, are a
Multitude of Councellers, whose wisdom and Council is requisite at this time
for the making of War, or not, and much more, for the making of War against
your Brethren, and in the very bowels of the Land. Which War if it be for
the Prelates Hierarchy, let me say, as he did, Judge. 6. 31.
If Baal be a God, let him plead for himself. For otherwise^ the making of
such a War cannot be for safety: and therefore I hope a multitude of such
Counselors will never give their consent, much less their Counsel for such a
War. Yea because as the wise Heathen Statesman and Orator said, Iniquissima
pax justissimo Bello anteponenda est: even an unequal Peace is to be preferred
before a just War: how much more is a most just and Christian Peace to be
preferred before a most unjust and Antichrrstian War; Such as is undertaken
for the maintenance of the Hierarhy, which is merely Antichristian. And
miserable are those Warriers, that fight for the Beasts Kingdom, and for the
Dragon against the Lamb, Jesus Christ. And therefore to prevent this, hearken
to Christ's words, Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the
Children of God. And if any be charged of Rebellion, if it be found so by you,
let the Civil Sword of Justice be drawn, and not the bloody Sword of War, by
which the innocent may as soon suffer, as the nocent. And for the better
making of way for Peace: let the make-bates be removed, those Ackans of Israel,
the troublers and incendiaries of all Estates both Civil and Christian. And who
are those but the Prelates? Solomon says, Judge. 6. 31.
Take away the wicked from before the King, and his throne shall ^e established
in righteousness. This he compares there (v. 4.) to the dross purged away
from the silver; which is not done, but by the fire. So this Separation of
these wicked from the King cannot be, but by a strong and a holy Zeal. And
till this Separation be the Kings throne cannot be established in
righteousness. And as ( Pro. 26. 20.) where no wood is, there the fire goes
out: So where there is no Talebearer, the strife ceasseth. And surely if these
Sycophants^ and Eare-wiggs were removed, we should neither hear of War
between Prince and People, nor fear any Invasion of Foreign Power.

But the Prelates (will some say) are by the Laws of the Land ^^thorised, and
so incorporated into the Body of the State: So as ^tis no easy matter to make
this Separation. It Is true indeed, that an old inbred malignant hun our, or
incorporated Wenne (as Iuniu^ calls the Popedom, and Hierarchy) is not easily
removed from the Body. But to you^ comfort^ most Noble Physicians) the Wenne
has of its own accord star^ed out of his place, So as it is but closing it up,
that it return not. For of late the Prelates have by their very claim of
holding their Jurisdiction from Christ, fallen off from, and disclaimed their
dependence upon either Kings Prerogative, or Law. And how severely have they in
their Courts of late Censured those, that have withstood this their usurped
Title, as Dr. Bastwicke, Mr. Burton, Mr. Pryn. Yea and but the other day, and
within the very smell of the approaching Parliament, was not a Learned Reader
in the Law in the Temple, now a member of the Parliament, inhibited and
suspended from his Reading, because he undertook to prove, that Prelaticall
Jurisdiction was not Iure Divino, by Divine Authority? So as now they having
withdrawn themselves, and flown off from under the protection of Royal
Prerogative, and Law, and having no one Evidence in Scripture for this their
Title, which they are able to produce: they lie naked and exposed to this
present Parliament, quite to casheere and abandon them, and send them with all
their Pomp, Pride, Tyranny, and Antichristian Titles to Rome, from whence,
with the great Antichrist, they had their first Rise and Original. Therefore in
Gods Name cast them out, as notorious Innovators, and enemies of all Laws of
God and Man; for as that 2 Thessalonians. 2^
^ anomos, that Lawless one, they will be tied to none, but tramble upon all.
How have they trampled on the sanctification of the Sabbath, and the morrality
of the 4th Commandment, polluting it with their foul Paws? How have they
dared the Courts of Civil Justice, that no Prohibitions can be obtained for the
most innocent Causes, to fetch them off the hooks of their High Commission? How
have they trampled upon Gods word, and all the Doctrines of Grace, utterly
prohibiting them to be preached, without which Doctrines there can be no true
Preaching? How do they trample upon all godly Ministers and People, hunting
them out of every hole, with their Beagles, So as what a kind of Convocation is
now in being, and what Can^ns they will make, if they be suffered judge you,
especially when they have such a Lawless Pope over them, as now they have. Out
with them therefore, out of hand.

But some will say, they are grown potent in Court, and they have a strong
Faction and Party, so as they are become a Noli me tangere: and no sooner shall
the Parliament begin to meddle with them, but they will procure a hand to knock
them off and break up all.

Is it so? Will they do thus? It is not unlikely, because they have been such
expert practisioners in such kind of fea^es. For all the world shall be set in a
flame and combustion, rather then one Spark shall cindge their Coat. And if
so, what then? Surely then, woe to thee, o England, never look for Parliament
more, but prepare thy neck for the Prelates Iron Yoke. Woe to thee, o
Scotland, i^^case thy Prelates return by a forcible reentry, which shall be my
earnest Prayer, they may never do. Nay I hope, for all their power and pride,
their Kigdom is near at an end in this Hand. For Christ has stirred up all the
good Peoples hearts against them, and their Tyranny. And now, most Noble
Senate, Christ requires, your helping hand, and unanimous votes to cast them
out. Which to effect, first let a league be renewed between Christ and this
Kingdom, by humiliation, by Reformation, by purgation of the Land from all
Romish Altars, Images, and other Superstitions in Churches, and from all manner
of humane Inventions and Ceremonies whatsoever to bind the Conscience of any
man in the service and worship of our God. Then Secondly (the Prelates being
casheered) stand closse to the King, and let him know and feel the boundless
affections of his People, in their free and liberal Contributions, for the
necessary maintenance of the State of the Kingdom. For nothing can Separate
Prince and Peoples affections, but Prelates.

But for conclusion abruptly, if their malice and power prevail so far, as
to cause an untimely and unhappy beeaking up of this Parliament, as formerly
they have done, which has been and is the only cause of all the Calamities of
the Land, which now is drawi^g on to utter ruin and confusion, if not at this
time through Gods mercy, by the means of this present Parliament prevented:
now or never take heart and courage unanimously to do your utmost for the
preserving both of your King and Country. And therefore before you be
dissolved, if you cannot attain to the establishing of so many Acts, yet at
least let these particular Protests^ be left recorded for perpetual memory,
and a Testimony to all the world, to Angels and Men, of your zeal for God, of
your loyalty to your King, and of your love to your Country.

First, Protest against the Hierarchy, as an Antichristian Tyranny over the
Souls, Bodies, and Estates of all the Kings Subjects, and therefore ought to
be rooted out, and not suffered in any Christian Church, or Common Weal.

Secondly, and consequently, Protest against all Altars, Images, and such like
Popish Idolatrous Relics, utterly unlawful to be erected in any true
Christian Church.

Thirdly, Protest against all humane Rites and Ceremonies whatsoever imposed
upon men's Consciences in the worship of God, as being all of them
Antichristian, bringing into bondage men's Souls, which Christ has redeemed
with his precious blood, who is the only Lord of the Conscience, and the only
Lawgiver to his Church for all matters of Faith, and of the worship of God.

Fourthly, Protest against all such general Taxes laid upon the Subjects, as
whereby both their ancient Liberties, and the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom
are overthrown, and so vindicate the Honor both of the King, and of this
noble Kingdom, that it may not be recorded to Posterity for a State of Tyranny
and Slavery.

Fifthly, and consequently, Protest against all those wicked Judges, which have
in such wise declared their opinions for intolerable Taxes expressly contrary
to the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, as thereby they have given occasion
for the betraying of all, and the bringing of the whole Land under perpetual
Slavery.

Sixthly, Protest against that Prelaticall Declaration set forth in the Kings
Name before the 39 Articles, wherein those Articles of the Dostrines of Grace,
are made void, and so all preaching of them suppressed.

Seventhly, Protest against that Book for Sports on the Lords days, as
whereby both the fourth Commandment, and the fifth are most desperately
overthrown: as also against all those Books that have been set forth for the
maintaining of such profanation, as whereby God is greatly dishonored, and his
wrath provoked even to the Spewing out of such a Nation out of his mouth.

Eighthly, Protest against all that Prelaticall Tyranny in oppressing the
preaching of Gods Word on the Lords days in the afternoon, and other days
in the week, and their Antichristian persecuting and putting out of all godly
and painful Ministers, such as will not conform to their lawless Ordinances.

Ninthly, Protest against that most terrible and odious shedding of the
innocont blood of those 3 forementioned, now perpetual Exiles and Closse
Prisoners, even their very Wives most lawlesly detained from them, with a^^
their other severe punishments, one of them being a Minister, who in discharge
of his duty first preached in his own Church, and then published his Sermons in
Print against the Prelates notorious practices and Popish Innovations, for
which he underwent punishments so great, so many, as no Age^ no Christian State
can parallel; so as their blood does incessantly cry against this whole Land,
as guilty thereof (though shed only by the Prelates instigation as aforesaid)
until it be purged.

Tenthly, Protest against that accursed Book, Relation of a Conference, etc.
published in Print, and Dedicated to the King, by the now Prelate of
Canterbury, wherein he belyes, and so blasphemes God, Christ, the Holy Ghost,
the holy Scriptures, the Church of England, in saying it is one and the Same
with that of Rome, of the same Faith and Religion with that Whore of Babylon,
and many such like impious assertions, the whole Book professedly tending to
reconcile England and Rome, and so to bring the whole Land back again to
Popery.

Eleventhly, If this great and Warlike preparation be by the Prelates
Diabolical Instigation (as by no other it can be, except by the Pope and his
Iesuiter, and his Nuncio's Negotiation have also a hand in it) to go against
the Scots, and if the cause shall be found to be no other, but that they have
abandoned, and Remaunded to Rome all their Prelates, as the grand Enemies of
Christ, and his Kingdom, and of the peaceable and prosperous estate of the
Realm, and consequently of the Kings Crown and Dignity; and that they stand
for the maintenance of their just Laws and Liberties, the continuance whereof
is the Kings honor, and the establishment of his throne: If (I say) no other
cause can justly be alleged, and yet they shall be invaded, as Rebels: Protest
against all aid and assistance of such an Invasion, as being against the Law of
God, of Nature, and of Nations, and as being a War directly against Jesus
Christ, in the maintenance of Antichrist, and his Antichristian Hierarchy; and
so such, as must needs recoyle, and that in divine fury upon England it self,
which having burned her neighbors house, exposes her own to the flames. Yea
for England to Invade Scotland for no other cause in truth, then before
mentioned, namely, for their maintaining of the true Faith and Religion of
Christ, and their just Laws and Liberties, which all true Christians, and
Civil States ought to lay down their very lives for; (as the light of Nature
taught the very Heathen, Pugnare pro Aris ac focis; and that Grecian could say,
A'iresomai teleutan mallon, 'e a'neleutheros sun: I choose rather to dye, a
Freeman, then to live a Slave. And the Monarchical estate, governed by good
Laws, was ever preferred, and opposed to Tyranny) were to renounce and give up
her own ancient Liberties, and to betray, and persecute, and destroy the true
Faith and Religion of Christ, and so set up and profess the Infidelity and
Idolatry of Antichrist, and so with him and his cursed Crew, to go into
perdition. The Primitive Christians under Julian the Apostata, served him in
the Wars against his Enemies: but when he Commanded them to go against
Christians, who refused to worship, or offer Incense to his Idols, they cast
down their Weapons, acknowledging the Emperor of heaven. And when Saul 1 Samuel
22.
commanded his Servants to fall upon the Lords Priests, none of them would do
it. And I read of a Secretary to an Empress, who being commanded by her to
draw an Edict againg the Christians, he still found delays: but at length she
growing instant upon him for it, so as he could no longer delay it, he took
off his Military girdle (the Ensign of his service) and cast it at her feet,
and so discharged himself from her Court.

Thus, if you make, and leave these Christian, zealous, and just Protestations
among the Recods of Parliament, in case it shall be by the malice and
enchantments of the Prelates unhappily dissolved, before you can produce them
into a full Act, and establish them for a Law: though otherwise ye cannot
effect a real Reformation of all the mischiefs and maladies, which the
Prelates in special have filled the Land withal: yet forasmuch as you have
thus publicly, both for your own persons, and as the Body representative of
the whole State of the Land, solemnly protested against all these things: there
is no question to be made, but that God in his mercy and favor will accept of
your will for the deed it self, and will still preserve both you and your
posterity, and the whole Land from destruction, and will find out some other
way for the rooting out of the Hierarchy; according to those Prophesies in the
Revelation, the full filling of which cannot be far off.

Now the Lord Jesus Christ guide and govern the Kings heart to the love of God,
and of his truth, and let him clearly see how miseraby he has been abused by
those notorious hypocrites, his flattering and Sycophantising Prelates, and so
take off and divide his Noble heart from them, that being reconciled to God in
reforming the manifold and horrible abuses, which the Prelates, to the
dishonor of God, and of the King, have been the Authors and Instruments of,
and being united to his loving and loyal People, as the Head to the Body, in
this Body representative, the Parliament: he may long reign over this Land,
and all his other Kingdoms in much peace and prosperity. And the same Lord
Jesus Christ so unite the hearts of this Parliament unto God, and to the King,
and among themselves, and so guide them by the wisdom of his Spirit and Grace,
that they may sit, and consult, and conclude such righteous Acts and Decrees,
as may be for the honor of God, and of the King, for the advancement of
Christ's Kingdom, and the establishment of the Kings Throne upon the Pillars of
good Government with justice and mercy^ in punishing the wicked, and relieving
the afflicted and oppressed Innocents, as David in that Psalm penned for his
Son Solomon, a type of Christ, prayed saying, Psalm. 72.
Give the King thy judgemens, o God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings Son.
He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment. He
shall judge the poor of the people, he shall have the children of the needy,
and shall break in pieces the oppressors. Even as the Heathen also said of the
duty of Kings, which was, Parcere subjectis, et debellare superbos: To spare
his Subjects, and the proud beat down. And as they said of Julius Caesar,
Caesar dando subl^vando, ignoscend^, gloriam adeptus est: Caesar by giving,
relieving, and pardoning, got himself a glorious Name. And lastly, the same
Lord Jesus Christ, power his Spirit of Grace and Supplication upon all the
people of the Land, that being sensible both of their own Sins, and of the
National Sins of the Land, as also of the heavy yoke of Anticrhist, and the
burdens of Egypt, wherewith those Taskemasters, the Prelates, have pressed
them down, and broken their backs, and made their lives bitter unto them, they
may truly repent and reform their lives, and cry alowd to the Lord, as his
People in Egypt did against their Taskmasters, and pray incessantly for the
good success of this Parliament, that it may be as a Moses sent of God in the
Cum duplicantur Lateres, tunc venit Moses.
doubling of their Bricks, to deliver them, from the Spiritual Egyptian
bondage of the Prelates: and daily to pray for the King their Sovereign, and
for his happy and truly Religious Reign over them, that they may lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. (...) 2^ 2.
Amen Even so come Lord Jesus and help thy poor England, and thy poor People
therein. Amen.

FINIS.

