Of the knowledge and conducte of wars, two books, latelye written and set
forth, profitable for such as delight in Hystoryes, or martyall affairs, and
necessary for this present time.

Virtuti pariter cunctis contendite neruis: Ignaua (vt scopulos) otia
diffugite.

Seek virtue, noble youth betymes,
Which breadeth honor true:
Base idleness, and all her baytes,
Even as a rock eschew.
In aedibus Richardi Tottelli. vij. die Iunij. Anno Domini. 1578.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.



Go serve thy countreye well, my book,
for that is my desire.
For these good fruits I only look,
and crave none other hyre.
The mighty king of hosts, has sent,
thee unto Bryttyshe land:
Good luck to bear, to prosper well,
the vvarres they take in hand.
God has his bountye shevved, let men
apply their gladd good will,
And serve the Lord, then shall he bless
this realm to floryshe still.
And English noble ensygnes shall,
in foreyne countries far,
Advanced be, and martyall Brute,
Shall Be the king of war.
For Mars now vvaxinge old and lame,
do the mean for to resygne,
his martyall force to English prince,
decreed by doom deuyne.
The Romayne glayue, advanced is,
Thessalyan Horse, and spear:
The Macedonyen pyke, and parthyen bow, well practyzde hear.
The gracyous GOD of might, has sent
a Scepter of renown,
In sign of Empire great, to be
annexed to the Crown.
And father Neptune has within
this coaste laid up in store,
His trydent Mace, of power to rule
the Seas for evermore.
T. P.

The preface.
THe Climate, or Region of the firmament, under which every Country is planted
and settled, has great force and influence, for the temperature and complexion
of men's bodies, which also works sundry effects and motyons in the minds
and disposityons of the^, as for proof: Experience shows, that the Italian
and Frenchman comenlye, is more enclyned to be courtlyke, prompte, and quick
of spirit, then the Dutcheman or Flemyng, and the Spaniard, the Moore or
Libyen, more nimble, more politic, and more subject to choler, envy, and
pride the^ the man of Sweden, or the Muscouyte being more of fleugmatike
constitution of body. The Greeks also, for this purpose, have been noted of
learned men, to be by disposition and motion of nature exquisite searchers of
cunninge in manuel crafts, and very studious in the liberal Sciences. The
Egiptians and Jews (by observation of wise men) are found more given to
superstitions and idolatric, then other nations: The Scythien, the Turk, and
Tartarian addicted to cruelty, and the Persian to delicate life. But to draw
nearer unto our skope, and mark, The English man (for whom this trauaill is
taken) living in a fertile country, and under a temperate Clymate, and
thereby indewed with the more excellent disposition of mind and body, being
by the great bounty and blessing of God not unfurnished of any virtue, that
other people have: So is there principallye seen in him, that yet remains of
the right stamp or race vndegenerate, an honorable desire to the exercise of
arms, having by the prycke of Magnanimity, a victorious mind, affectinge
fame, sovereignty, and honor above other nations. But least I flatter him
whom I love, and would to be warned, Two only points of imperfection,
though not yet, now, notably exceadinge to any great vice, (how? be it some
defectes) are noted to be in a great part of English men, which may well
be reformed. The one is, negligence or security: The other is mutabilitie,
and variable changing of mind, principally showed in delectable things, not
of the greatest importance, as in dainty fare of sundry delicate meats,
diverse curious buyldinges, and most of all in many almost infynite guyses,
sorts, and fashions of habyte, yea and diguysed attire, whearein, oftentimes
is planted and bestowed so much care and study, that, there is the less
employed on virtuous and neadefull exercyses. Yea sometime, while tryfles are
regarded, things most commendable and requisite are neglected. I do not
condemn them, but commend ornaments, they are to be regarded in a sort,
and not to be rejected: but more worthy things to be pla ced before, and with
greatest desire and diligence endeavored. Wear it not to be pytied, that the
great help and benefit of nature geeuen to this nation, in highness of
courage, and noble inclynation to prowess, should be defaced and obscured,
that no light effect, or virtue thereof should appear? yes, but there is an
other thing in it, besides the pittye of the matter, which is the quality and
necessity of this time, wherein we live, which if it be well considered,
will sufficiently persuade (where judgment is, though feawe words be used
hearein) to stir up the sleapinge minds from slewthe, to abandon tryfles,
and fall to the commendable practices meet for men, and necessary for the
troublesome state of the world. For what is in want or let that the
Englisheman, having a strong body, good will enoughe, and a fertyle
country, sufficient to supplye the prouysion and maintenance of a myghtie
army, should not excel other nations in deades and exployctes of Arms, and
extend the victorious forces of this Realm, by renowned conquestes far?
Surely the defectes are, lack of endeavor, and discipline. By these the City
of Rome, from extreme pouertye (having most bare and slender Practice and
skyll. Dido obtay ned so much ground, to build the City upon, as might be
compassed with an oxes hyde, and that she cut in thonges.
beginninges, their territoryes being as short, as the content or bounds of
the smallest shyre within this land) in short time, advanced her Empire over
the whole world, By these likewise, the Carthaginoys, whose town, country,
and dominion, wear first bounded by the circuyte and compassinge of an Oxes
hyde: Soon after, they grew in greatness, to check and encounter the mighty
estate of Rome, and once put the same in danger of a mate, by this skill, the
country of Macedone being not great, under the conducte of the most puissant
Alexander, subdued the mighty Monarchye of the Persians, with a great part of
the world besides, and in his mind had the plott and conquest of the whole,
yea and of an other world, if it had been to be found, but GOD stayed his
victories, (which men could not) by cuttinge of his life, about thyrtie
years of his age. The mighty and victorious Alexander of England, whose most
renoumed battle of Agincourte, and sudry triumphant conquestes in France,
made the whole world to shake, was cut of in like youth, Henrye the fifthe.
from no less hope, then the other great Alexander, after that he had by
most excellent disciplyne of war, in short time obtained many great
victories. By this art and practice, of later time, an other Pirrhus, Prince
of the little Country Epirus in Grecia, resisted the huge and gross powers of
the great Turk: By this, the great G. Scanderbeg. Bajazet.
Tamberlane conquered him, and made him his miserable vassal and captyue, in
feawe years, arysinge from a poor Neteherde, to be Lord over the most
mighty Prince in the world. By this exercise partly, though principallye
by the huge monstrous multitudes of barbarous Scithyens, the Turks in no long
time, have subdued so many kings and countries, and extended their Empire so
far, into all the three parts of the world, and yet prosecuteth and
thrusts the same further daily. Now it is to be remembered that the
knowledge, and practyse of the acts and feats of arms, principally and
properlye are of the profession of noble men, and gentlemen of great
revenues. For and by which, they were first ordained and preferred into that
place, to be a wall and defense for their country. For the poor man has not,
wheareof to live of his own, if he employe time, or expenses hearein. And
thearefore the other, ought to give example, both by his own industrye in
such practices, and also maintain the same in the meanor sort. Securitye and
long peace breadeth idleness, which sucketh the valor out of noble minds. A
plain proof wheareof, and of the hurt that grows theareby, is The art of
Nobility.
had by the Romans, which in xxiiij. years space, between the first and
second wars of Carthage, wear so far grown out of use and good practyse
of arms, that wheare as before, they wear every wheare Conquerours. In the
second wars, they went, always to wrack, till their sundry great losses
drove them unto their old course and Bias again. Thus seeing the causes of
these defectes in English men discovered, the cure is the more plain and
casie, and the rather, if the remedy unto the other impediment be applied,
that is want of skill or discipline, which proceadinge and growing partly upon
the other cause, vz. lack of practice, the rest, is also to be sought for
and supplied. For as use and exercise, makes prompt, ready, and skillful in
many things: So by most just and sure argument, the contrary, which is the
privation, or lack theareof, works, and causes contrary effects: And yet
not always in all things, does ex cercise or labor bring knowledge and
perfection, but theare must be skill with all, which in this matter, is for the
more part to be obtained by collection and judgment of the reports,
historyes, and Chronicles written of wars. For in matters of importance,
which have many Cauteles, difficultyes, and obseruatio^s: yt is necessary that
a way be opened, and a light given unto him, which would be a passynger
hearein, to direct and incline his course unto this knowledge: For otherwise
he shall trauail and wa^der in the dark trades, and unknown paths, like a
blind man, which goes he woteth not whither. And prove, to that there be
diverse grou^des, rules, stratagemes, and enstructio^s to be set down, printed,
and observed in the memory, of good soldiers, as a plot and foundation of
their business: The su^drie books written of these matters in the latin tongue,
and other la^guages, by great learned and expert men, may be a sufficient
argument hearein. Besides that, reason will easelye discuss, that the knowledge
of the ancient orders and government of war, with the sundry sorts and
attire of battle, used among sundry nations, their manners and practices, the
examples of the antiquity, the experience, policies, prudent cou^sailes, most
profitable and pitthye precepts, and admonishmentes, most excellent
experimentes, instructyons, behavior and discipline of the greatest
chyeftaines, and most renoumed conquerours that ever wear, be requisite and
needful unto a good Captain: for what is the experience or opynion of one
man, to the practice and judgment of a great number of such, as have conquered
in all Countries, vanquished great armies, overthrown many mighty battles,
and honorably passed al dangers of war? whose doings be iudicially, and
perfectly noted of most learned and wise men, in sundry great volumes and
writings, for example and profit of the posterity, which the unlearned can
not taste or attain, without some preparatiue by plain plott drawn, or
introductio^ in apt order made, to lead the^ into the knowledge thereof. For
accomplishinge wheareof, though, thoroughe the grossenes of my style, lack of
experience, and sundry kinds of knowledge, whearewith a writer of so wayghtie
a matter, ought to be furnished, together with my study of brevity hearein,
and little leisure, which from mine other affairs I had, one time long after
an other, to accomplish this same, I shall not sufficientlye in all points,
content the exquisite judgments which are to deame heareof: Yet for the
necessity and scarcity of writing in this matter: (A willing mind, and
faithful affection to profit my Countreye, thrusting me forth to bear a
burden to big for my shoulders:) This labor of mine, may be a beginning to
encourage sum other, of their greatest experience, to make larger addition, or
supply hearein. For yet now I find Vegetius one lie, an ancient writer, and
Machiauell of these affairs, well translated into English, which aucthours
being both expert in wars, and also very learned, their industry herein is
of so much the more commendation, as those two qualityes are rare, and seldom
mete to gether: For such a one as has knowledge, ioygned with courage and
experience, is a man worth men, and may avail more then a number: Yet for
that the said Machiauel is deamed sum what diffuse in his treatise, his
opinions also not altogether agreeinge with all men's judgments, nor reachinge
to many matters mete for the state of our English wars: And Vegetius being a
writter, when wars wear used in an other course, then they are now a days:
Yt is therefore wished more to be done in this behalf. And it is maruail to
see, how the studies of many men have been addicted in this our time, having
store of ripe wits, which can do very well: Yet among so many books, as
are written daily, of dreams and fantacies, introductions to pleasure,
familier fruiteles talkinges, eloquent, formal or ations, little material, of
pleasant metinges and fables among women, of Caunterbury, or courser tales,
with diverse iestes, and vain devises: in earnest, there is least labor laid
on that art, wheareby, kings rule, and are ruled and conquered, which
erecteth, buyldeth establishes, increases, beautifieth estates, the end and
fruits whereof, is honor most high, even advanced to the skies, flowinge
wealth, fame never faylinge or forgotten, victory and dominion with out
bounds: The contrary and want wheareof, is Captiuitye, Ruin, Dishonor, and
desolation. VVhearein to persuade by argument that, which every man does
plainelye see, yt wear waste of words and time. And, to stir any man to
the study of this knowledge, Since the worthynes theareof allureth and draws
all right English men, (which by the prick and inclinatyon of nature, do with
great desire run theare unto.) I will thearefore omit to spend further
speech hearein, and draw unto the matter: whearein to make my course the
plainer unto the Reader, I divide this work into two books. Wheareof the
first entreats of the Captain and Soldiers. And the second of the
disciplyne, observations, and admonitions of war: which two books, also for
the better help of memory, I appointe and distribute into certain Chapiters,
branches, or principal points, touching the substance of this matter, as
in my table appears, beginning with the diffinition of wars. (First in
the porche or entrye of this work to be unfolded, before we enter into the
particular, and inner parts theareof,) being the matter whereupon this
buyldinge is founded and framed.

Vale.
Errata.
Page Leaf. Line. Faults. Correccion. 1 1 4 For it is a contention. Read, it
is defined a contention. 2 2 1 Two for Ten 1 4 30 Heard of for Hard 2 18 24
Nobis for Orbis 1 27 27 Avoid for Annoye 2 42 23 Endures for includes.

FINIS.
The Table or contents of the chapters contained in the first book.
1 OF the diffinition of War, and of an Army. Fol. 1 2 Of the valor of the
general Fol. 2 3 Of the virtues, and qualities requisite for the function of
the Captain or general. Fol. 3 4 Of magnanimity and provvesse in the
General. Fol. 4 5 Of Justice. Fol. 5 6 Of Prudence. Fol. 8 7 Of the love and
good affection of the Captain to his soldiers. Fol. 10 8 Whether it be more
expedient to have one General, or many. Fol. 12 9 Of the aucthoritye of the
General, and what ought to be his chief desire, wished fruits, and end of
vvarres, what person, and of what qualities ought to be deamed the best and
most honorable Captain. Fol. 13 10 Of a Soldier and the qualities which he
ought to have. Fol. 18 11 Of what constitution of body, trade, and sort of
life the meetest soldier is to be chosen, and what exercises and practices
are profitable for him to use. Fol. 21 12 Of the sundry sort of weapons used
by diverse nations in the ancient vvarres, and which are now most
necessary, vvythe sum respects of pressing of soldiers. Fol. 25

The Table of the second Book.
Capit. 1. OF the disciplyne and admonitions of war. Folio. 26 2 To break
or disorder the battle of the enemy. Fol. 29 3 Aduertismentes how the Army
that is weaker then the enemies, may grovve stronger, or save it self. Fol.
32 4 How to conducte an army, and proceade with the same in a foreine
Countreye, and of the necessaries thereunto. Fol. 33 5 Whether it be more
profitable to seek for the great Town, or the less, and how best to
vvynne the same. Fol. 36 6 How the excellent Captains have encouraged their
Soldiers unto battle, and made them hardye and valiant in fight. Fol. 37 7
How to use victory, and what clemency is to be used toward the
conquered, and of the hurt that comes by security. Fol. 40 8 Of the
beginning, and just cause of war. Fol. 41 9 Of victories which is the
best, and what truce may behonourablye made. Fol. 45 10 Of the use and end
of vvarres, and of preparation therefore, in time of peace. Fol. 47

FINIS.
The first book.
Of the diffinition of war.
War generallye, is said to be the exercise of arms, against enemies.

But properlye, it is, a Contention between princes or estates, by arms and
force of men, under orders and government, to obtain victory.

Victory consists in three points: in Conquering and subduyng the
dominions, bodies, or goods of the enemies.

The ends of wars, are twain. Immediate, to obtain victory. Mediate, to
live the better afterward in peace and honor.

The division of war.
War is divided into three sorts or kinds. In the open field. By
Incursio^ or skirmish: By battle joined.

Within wall or trench of place fortified. By Navy on the Sea.

THe skill and knowledge of all which, are very necessary for our nation, but
especially of the first and the last. Now for explanation of the diffinition
above, I will go unto the singular parts there of. War is first said to be a
contencion which is deryued of the latin word tendo: it signifies properly
to be^de, so that with this particle, Con, it is by the Etymology or
Interpretation of the word, a be^dyng of the forces, an inclinyng of al
endeavor, a striuinge unto some purpose, between what parties? it follows,
between princes or estates, for if it be between subjects without authority
of the prince, it is a faccion, and if the same be used against the prince, it
is a rebellion, a contention against law, duetye natural, allegeaunce, and
against the common wealth. By what means and instruments is this strife made
and pursued? By arms and force of men, which are to be used for the defense
of the Realm, Territories, Laws, bonds, libertyes and rightes of the same.
And this same power of men, which is the pythe and matter of the war, is also
to receive some form which shapeth things in their perfeccio^: and that
therein is guide and government, for without order and conduct, this force is
not woorthye the name of war: but it is a tumulte, route or assembly of
people, prepared not for victory, but ru^nynge headlong, or rather tumblinge
headless into Ruin. So that it is to be concluded, that a prince for the
ordayninge and waginge of war, is to prepare and gather together a power of
men under orders and gouernmentes, which power so appointed, is called an
army, the several bands and parts whereof must have sundry guydes and
Captains: and over the whole body The diffinition of an army.
of the army, there is to be constituted and ordained one general head or
governor.

Of the general.
WIth the head of this army, we will begin our second chapter, for that the
same consystyng of a Captain, and soldiers, the captain is the pryncipall
part thereof, upon whom the greatest wayght, and hope of the wars lies, not
in the force of his person, which is but one singular man, but in his policy
and skyll, in leadynge and ordering of his army, in using the advantages, and
foreseeynge the preiudices of war. As by sundry examples we shall well
prove, who has not read, that Ninus king of the Assiryens, by industry and
deeds of arms, Ninus.
(wherein he caused his soldiers to be practysed) raised thereby and set up
the first Monarchy or greatest estate of the world. And again, it is as well
known, that the same nation, being effeminate under the dissolute reign of
Sardanapalus, for want of discipline and good guide of war, Sardanapal*
was subdued by the Medes, whom before they had conquered, and their empire
erst honorably advanced, now shamefullie lost and taken from them: where
they were lords, they became vssalles and captyues, by the valor, and good
parts of a Captain. Milciades of Athens, having the conduct of twelve
thousand men, Milciades,
ouerthrewe and vanquished an army of an hundred thousand footmen, and twoe
thousand horsemen, sent by the first Darius, son of Hydaspis, to invade
Grecia. And not long after, Darius
the greatest army that ever was assembled (by report of histories) lead by
Xerxes king of Persia for the same purpose, that the other of Darius was Xerxes.
before into Grecia, amou^ting nighe to the number of ten hundred thousand
men (by the consent of the best writers) was by the politic and valiant
Themistocles vanquished, first in a battle on the Sea, and afterward his
captain Mardonius with his whole power conquered in the field the Mardonius.
Grecia^s, the^ not far exceeding the number of a 100. thousand men. Cimon
also about that time a captain of Lacaedemo^, by like valor and with a less
army, Cymon of Lacedaemon.
prevailed against great powers of the Persia^s by Sea. And Alcibiades the
excellent Captain of Athens being no less ouermatched with number Alcibiades.
of men and munition or furniture of war, with the skattered forces and
repulsed power of Mindaerus and Pharnaebazus. Leonidas with 4000. as some write
Celtae. Bre^nius and Belinus English men, sons of Donwallo a Saxon King.
the Atheniens, both by Sea and land overthrew the Persians and Lacaedemoniens,
under Mindarus and Pharnabazus their Captains. In the beginning of these
wars, the redoubted Leonidas with vj. hundred Lacaedemoniens, slew nigh 20.
thousand of the Persians, at their entryng into Grecia. Furius Camillus, when
the Celtae led by Brennus and Bellinus, had conquered Italy, and sacked Room,
gathering together the dispersed relickes and broken bands of the army before
conquered, by wonderful hardines and prowess, suddenly assayling Furius.
Camillus.
the Celtes in their return homewards, overthrew them, and bereft them of all
the spoils and prises which they had taken before. Martius Coriolanus, the
noble Roman, when he had by Romans, Martius. Coriolanus.
overthrown the Volsciens and conquered of their terrytories and towns, being
afterward ingratefullie banished of his country, and inuading the same with a
power of Volsciens, beeinge the same people, which late before was vanquished,
under an other Captain, now by his conduct, the Romans being over run, and
the enemies at the walls of their City, they are constrained to crave peace,
and to entreat of Martius by all means for their sauftie. The subtle
Hanniball, Hanniball,
which had overthrown many Captains and battals of the Romans by the knackes
and fine fetches of a cunning Captain, yet was he not only matched: but also
mated or wearied by Fabius, by Fabius.
policy, delaying to ioigne battle til he had much worn and spent the other
with trauail and want of necessaries for his army (which could not be sup
plied at all times from Carthage being so far distant) unto Hanniball, as
they might be unto Fabius, at home. But Scipio afterward, going beyond Scipio.
all the cunning of Hanniball, conquered him in his own country. And the
Macidoniens, (for further proof of this theme, for the importance and regard
of the guide and Captain) under the conduct of Alexander the great, they
conquered the greatest part of the world: and the same people not Alexander.
long after, under other government, with their King Perseus, and their
country, were by Paulus Aemelius a famous Captain of the Romans Paulus
Emelius. Perseus.
subdued. So to be short (for that this matter is convenient to be touched
hereafter) The virtue, wisdom, and dyligence of the Captain in taking of
some aduau^tages, and his circumspect dealinge, causes great assurance and
confidence of the army, and his courage and skill in using and moving of
soldiers, makes of a cowardly people, hardy: and the want of the same
makes the hardy people fearful, and of noe force.

Of the virtues and qualities which a Captain ought to understand to be
requisite for that function, and to be endeavored of him.
THe government and charge of a General or Captain is great, and therefore he
ought to be furnished and endewed with great virtues. For an army of
soldiers, which are chosen of the lustyest and strongest men of the realm, of
what importance and regard it ought to be, it is easelye discerned, for it is
the strength of the Realm, the wall of the common wealth, the pillar whereupon
the estates of all men therein do stand. And therefore among other virtues,
these five a good Captain must needs have. That is to say, knowledge, and
judgment in martial affairs, Magnanimity or valiant courage, Justice,
Prudence, and tender affeccio^, diligent care or regard over his soldiers and
army. For knowledge: first, that he consider the manner of the war, the
qualities of the country, and people, against whom he is to fight, that he may
chose, and weapon his soldiers, apoint and order his bands and army
accordinglye, as for example, in plain and open countries, the more shot and
horsemen may avail, especially if there be store of forage with all, and for
Incursion the morelight horse, and less cariages be necessary, the reason is
plain, for that they are to shift from place to place, spedily to annoye then
emie here and there, whereunto in the plain fields they have scope at will,
Captains also have been skillful to train soldiers, to practyse them in
exercyses apt and auaylable for the wars, by excellent and fit means, to
plant and graft in the^ courage. And further, especial regard must be had of
the state and situation of the country, ways, and grounds, for the saufe
passinge co^ductinge and settling of his army or camp, for chosing the field
or place for battle, that he lead not his army into any trappes, ambushes
or streightes. Arterentius Varro was deluded and he^med in by Ha^niball at the
battle of Cannae in Italy: to the utter overthrow and destruccio^ of the
Roman army, and surely, if the general be a man learned, as the For this
purpose great Alexander carried Homer always in his pocket.
most excellent captains have been, he shall read of like things, the
knowledge whereof is most auaylable in the wars, and the experience of the
like heard of, and in long time obtained.

Of Magnanimity and prowess in the general.
THen must there be lynked and joined with knowledge, the second virtue, that
is highness and hardines of courage, to atchiue great and honorable things
which if it be accompanied and furnyshed with valor and force of body in a
Captain, sometimes by his own prowess to give example to the rest it is far
the better. And therefore, it is to be noted that very seldom through out the
histories of all times, a man shall read of any great victories or conquests
had or made, but the general was a man hardy, and able of his own body for
service. I could recompt above an hundred of the greatest captains and
victours, that have been valiant men of person: and among all, I remember some
of the other sort, good guides of war without any great force of body, as
King Numa, Aristides, Eumenes, and some weme^, as Marthesia, Penthesilia, and
diverse of the Amazones, Semiramis, and Thomiris, two Queens, women of weak
bodies, and yet of high and victorious minds, obtained great victories, under
their own conduct, being present in the field. Of latter time the cursed
Machomet, being nothing valiant of person, by diuelyshe sleightes and
enchauntmentes, and thorough the infidelity of others, made sundry great
conquestes. And the ungracious Pucelle of France, in the time of King Henry
the sixth his wars there, by the means of the superstitious minds of the
English men prevailed more in diverse iourneys and attempts against them, then
any general or French Captain before could do by force. These be strange
and rare examples, but generally to conclude: prowess and force in the person
of a Captain is greatly auaylable. For it is Heroicum of most high noblesse or
valor.
a part of Fortitude, and is called Heroique.

Of Justice. Cap. v.
THen follows the third virtue Justice, which is a deuyne motion or affection
of the mind to deal uprightly, and to render unto every man that which unto
him belongs. Yt may be called a deuyne virtue, for that it proceeds
principally of the fear of GOD, who is the head and fountain of all Justice,
by whom al power is geeuen, to be duly used and administered. And he is the
most high and aeternall Judge over all. This virtue Pius in deum. in homines.


is one of the branches of pyetie, by which good and upright men be called
godly, or like un to God. The other part or branch of pietye, is to serve God
religiously, and duly, which because it ought to be a ground work, proper
unto every Christian man: therefore have I not noted the same as a peculier or
particular virtue hear: But I say the more Christian the meater Captain, and
the better he serves God: the better he shall his Prince and Country. In
this virtue of Justice the Captain ought to be very diligent and circumspect
to see as well the just rewards of virtue, as the due punishment and
correction of tumultes, rapyne, iniuryes, disorder and breach of discipline and
laws of war, wherein, the quantity and quality with the circumstances of
time, person, and place, is to be waighed in judgment by the paise of
wisdom, in the balance of endifferency, hanging upon the beam and rule of
right, that reformation may grow, and not confusion follow there of: that by
example of a feaw, many may be warned, and yet no such remiss clemency to be
used, that negligence of Justice should break all good order. But if by fair
means or persuasion, the evil might be won or reformed, it is first so to be
assayed, and when none other remedy, then rygour roughly to be extended: How be
it, often times the greatness of the mischief requires sudden justice. For in
wars, the like time of deliberatio^ and stay in judgment and execution is
not given, as in peace, for the general affairs and state of the army, may
not be stayed or neglected, for private causes. And therefore the Captains
dome, order, or sentence, in this case of spedie Justice, stands for law, and
is called martial law. This law king When martial law is to be used, and
how.
Artaxerxes used toward Artabanus, when he had slain his father Xerxes, and
his brother Darius, conspiring also to dispatche him, and usurp the Empire:
After that he had certain and secret under standing thereof, because that for
the great power of him and his sons, yt was dangerous to apprehende him, he
discloseth the same unto some of his trusty friends, and calling Artabanus out
of the army, fayning that he would change his armor with him, when he had
put of the same, the King remaining still armed, thrust him thorough with his
swerd, and so delivered his estate from danger. King Aswerus likewise, caused
Aman and his sons to be suddenly apprehended and executed, because that
thorough their great power, the stay thereof had been dangerous. How be it
this kind of Justice, is in the greatest extremity. But the martial Law or
sentence, would be used and executed under this form and order, that the
general calling unto him such of the Captains and principal persons of the
Army, as he shall think convenient thereunto, reciting shortly the manner of
the offense, the mischief that might grow thereof, the odiousnes and villanye
of unnatural Treason, and dissension within an army, tending to the
overthrown of most valiant and worthy personages, of most honorable attemptes,
and purposes, the quayling of most great and high endeavors before in that
service used, and to the miserable spoil of the whole army, with the decay and
dishonor of the country of whence they are: and there with all the proofs
being heard, and openly declared, to geeue judgment according to the nature of
the offense, and commit over order, for executing the same. And sometime for
the better satisfiyng of the army (if time permit) it is convenient for the
punishment of criminal causes, to refer the hearing thereof to the
Captains of every band, and certain of them to speak their minds, for the
quality and odiousnes of the offense, with some admonishment at the last to
the Exodus 18. Iethro gave counsel unto Moses to make the like distribution
and commission of the comen affairs unto other, that being eased of a great
part of that burden, he might better attend to the more weighty causes.
rest of the hearers. And sometime, it is policy to commit the same unto
twelve or more of the meaner sort, or commen soldiers, as circumstances may
require. And if the party accused, and under judgment, be a stranger, it is
the better order of Justice, that he have part of his trial by some of his
own Country, if the matter be plain, that they be not to be suspected of
partiality. And the whilst that other have the handling of this matter, the
general may the better attend his greater affairs. For the other part of
Justice, what course is best to be taken in rewarding the valor and well
deserving of those, which with great endeavor, labor for same, to the honor
and advancement of their Country: Hearein the good judgment of the Captain,
is to be exercised, for well noting, and right regarding the dispositions,
endeavors, and doings of each person. For some are geeuen not to make
challenge, or claim, of their Ambition disturbeth well ordered states.
own proper deeds and virtues, other will make large report and ostentation
of that which they do, setting the same artificially forth, to the utter most,
and further, sometime clothing themselves with that which they never sponne,
and thrusting into the glory of other men's deserts. And diverse Envious and
perverse men of disposition.
there are of disposition to extenuate, and seem to make less the virtues of
other, whom they cannot match in valor. And therefore since that honor is the
right reward of virtue (as the Philosophers agree) and that Laudata virtus
crescit, and Honos alit arts: commended virtue increases, and honor is the
nouryce of valor, which makes men to excel in practices, the Captain ought
to be wise, to sifte and perceive such knackes and cunning colors, from
substance, that he be a just distributer of the due salaire, and reward unto
the virtuous, without affection or parciality, that they being encouraged,
increase, and not discouraged, cease from well doing. Moreover for the manner
of rewards, there is co^syderation to be had of the person, thus, if he be
poor, he may be somewhat enryched thereby, if he mean to be a continuer in
the service of war, to give him a more high place, and greater charge in the
army, to call him unto the more wayghtye and secret affairs. If he be one
that needs or seeks not wealth, let him have credit, honor, and
aucthoritye the more, use all curtesye toward him, findinge means to know
his delighte, wherewith, most to glad or gratify him, as with horse, Armor,
some rare Jewel, or other acceptable thing, to give him, where ever he go,
speech of credit, honorable commendation and report: If he desire to become
expert in the knowledge of war: by all curtesye and means to further him
thereunto, so that (as near as may be) every man according to his desire
and mind be contented. And this due form of justice observed, with the
conformity of his other dealinges, shall be unto the Captain, a foundation of
most high enterprises. For the general, performing toward the soldiers, all that on his part is to be performed: he may the better expostulate and require
in them their endeavors and duityes, which also they will the more willingly
do, if they be well paid of their wages, which principally must be provided
for, for money is the synewes of war, and the Captain ought not to suspende
or delay the pay of the same any time, except for especial occasion. When
the general owes not unto the soldier, but he has his wages paid, he may
franklye command him to any service of the wars. Furthermore this virtue of
Justice chiefelie preserves the dygnitie of the Captain, that the souldyers
love him, fear him, and reverence him, for this is the hoope and band that
binds fast together, and strengthens all the state and affairs of the
war. This Justice in the Captain includes two other virtues: that he be
liberal where cause is, and to be temperate and continent of his lust and
affections to any other vanity. Temperance is generally defined in this Latin
verse, Est virtus placitis abstinuisse bonis: A virtue of refrayning or
abstinence from alluring evils, whether it be covetousness, ambition, wanton
pleasures, or such like. For modesty of Magistrates or Governors, due
observation of Justice, and just distributing of honors, preserves states
from sedition. This virtue, great Alexander, to his greatest honor, used
toward the captive daughters of Darius. And Scipio after the expugnation and
winnyng of new Carthage in Spain, the wife of Luceius (a Prince of that
Country) of most rare and excellent beawtye being brought unto him, he sent
her, and all that she had saufe, and untouched, very honorably also
accompanied home unto her husband. The fame of whose singular virtue, and
knightlye part, afterward procured him great honor of the Spanierdes, with
much help and furtherance in his wars there. The want of which virtue,
caused Marcus Antonius to be surprised in the dalyance of Cleopatra, neglecting
his wars, and defense, whereby he was overthrown of Augustus Caesar.
Holifernes by like vice was curtoled of his head, and the huge host of the
Assyrians dyspersed. The valor of Sampson by like doting was cut of. The
Empires and Monarchies of the Assyriens and Persians sonke in delicate
pleasures, and in intemperance were lost, and all is the spoil of the hardy,
manlike, and martial soldier, which ough, tlike the noble knight Hypolitus to
fly the baytes of effeminate wantonness, and synke of inte^perance, seking to
reach the Banner of renown in the highest top of virtues tower, following
valiant exercises, which makes the body strong and healthye, and the person
honorable: the other has contrary effects.

Of Prudence, the fourth virtue in a Captain.
PRudence, is an excellent virtue (as necessary as any thing for our Captain)
which by good advise, and prudent foresight, guydeth the present affairs Wise
Ianus is painted with two faces, one loking toward things past, the other to
that which is to come.
in the best course and state, conferring them with things past, and
prouidinge for things to come. This Prudence must have deliberate
consideration of all circumstances, by judgment to sou^de and search the
depthe of that which is doubtful, it is the Rule almost of all his doings,
whereby he deuiseth, disposes and orders them, as for due consideration of
the quality of his soldiers, good array of his Battailles, diligent espyall of
his enemies doings, due estimation of the^, for the oportunitye, and occasion
of taking of any aduan^tage, and for the auoydinge of all inconveniences, for
the provision of all necessaries for the camp, for using the endeavors of
every one, as he is most mete, for the assocyatinge unto his weighty and
secret counsels and practices, men of judgment wise, of invention politic,
and trust approved. And how to try, and find the trustye: prudence also, by
means discerns. For all thy devises, except they be concealed, and close
kept from the enemy, til the time of practice of the same, they be seeldo^e
auailable, and oftentimes hurtful. And as the good consideration and judgment
of a Captain is to be seen in those points before remembered, and ought ever
to accompanye his doings: So is invention requysite unto him, to deuyse how to
cut of the strength of the enemy, or circumuent him, for by this, many
things have been achieved, which force could not win. What the policye of
Cinon and Ulysses at the battaill of Troy, and Zopyrus among the Babilonians
auayled, it is notoriouslye known. This invention, and cunninge to entrapp the
enemy, Hanniball had at will, and oftentimes plagued the Romans there with
all. but at the last when he had remained diverse years in Italye, wastinge and
destroyinge of the cou^ trey, and the Romans could by no means drive him
forth, Cornelius Scipio found out the way to ryd him, geuinge this prudent
advise unto the Romans, that they should send an army to invade Affricke,
and besyege Carthage, which was the head of the enemies Empire, shewinge that
the stroke at the head as it is most dangerous: so it is most feared: and as
when the heart is afraid, the blood resorteth from other parts, unto the
comfort thereof, as the principal storehouse of life: So said Scipio, the
Carthaginoys pinched with wars at home, will send for their powers abroad
to succor them, and keep saufe the home stall. Which happened and fell out
accordinglye, that Hanniball leauinge Italye, and retourninge into Affricke to
defend his own country, and resist the Roman army ledd thither by Scipio,
was there by him overthrown, Carthage taken, and Affricke subdued. So removed
he the danger and ruin by excellent invention from Room, and carried the same
unto Carthage. was it not a famous policy of Henry the fifth, at the battaill
of Agincourt, when the power of the French me^ stood most upon horsemen armed
with heavy armor, to cause the field to be pitched full of sharp stakes
when they should invade his battle? which withdrawinge, till they were come
upon the stakes, then had he placed his archers in an Island or plott so
inuironned or surrounded, that they might saufelie shoot at the enemy, and
he not come to hurt them, by which train and order, the French host
tumblinge down in disorder, was overthrown: which invention is the more
honorable, for that it is credible to be of the kings own deuisinge. About
the time of the taking of Bullen, by king Henry the eight, this practice was
used by a noble English Captain, for the winninge of a town (which was
defended on the weaker part thereof by a marishe, so that ordinance could not
be planted to batter the same) he caused pieces of light wood to be secretly
made, and cunninglye painted like gunnes, and layinge bordes upon the marishe,
so conveyed over his disguysed ordinance, by terror whereof at the first
summons hastily made, with great manasse and show of the pretended batterye:
the town rendered and yielded up unto him. Great Alexander used this cu^ninge
to get a fort of wonderful strength, he conveyed a few active men unarmed,
up to a rock, not doubted or looked unto of the enemy, for the steepness and
difficulty to be clymmed, and when they had possessed the top thereof,
being nighe the walls, where they might greatly anoy them within the houlde,
making a great shoute, or noise of triumph on a sudden, and aduauncinge their
banners as though there had been a great part of the army with them and all
sure their own, Alexander also on the other side then fiercely skalinge the
walls, the people within, being stryken with great fear, and in a maze, the
Castle was easelie by him surprised and taken. Thus to conclude of this virtue
of Prudence: it is the line of the Captain, to measure his own doings, the
touchestone, and the syue to try and sift the sleightes of the enemy, to
discern the substance from the shadow, to shun his trappe, not to be
abused by any painted or colored craft. And this virtue encludeth in it
constancy, without which, a man is no man, for as well, without reason, as
without judgment or resolution, in time to use the same, after co^sultation
and good aduisement hadd, speadye executyon should follow.

Of the love and diligent regard of the Captain unto his soldiers. Cap. 7.
THe last part of the furniture, which armethe our Captain complete, is a
tender affection and dilligent regard unto his soldiers. So that a good mind
well and virtuously inclined and disposed, serves not, without diligence in
exercysinge and geuinge forth the fruits thereof. And therefore a Captain,
besides his provident care and study of the general and public weal, and
affairs of his army, ought also to respect the state and necessities of
pryuate persons and commen soldiers. And therefore if the governors of
Civil estates, have been called fathers, as the Senators of Room had first
that name, to remember them of the fatherly affeccion and care, which they
ought to bear toward the people: much more ought the general, over his
martial common weal to have a fatherly mind and regard, for the soldier
leaves father, all his friends, and estate of living at home, to follow his
captain in foreine country, committinge his life and all, to the guide and
good fortune of him. And if like desyers, with concord of studies, affeccions,
and continuance of conversation of life, do cause most Causes of affection and
fryndship.
entier love, and strong band and league of frendshyp: much more, ought this
socyetie of minds, linked and joined in honorable desires and purpose, with
the vowed fellowship of bodies in all perils, (yea in life and in death)
unity the hearts of the captain and soldiers, in most dear affection and
amity, which the captain ought to profess toward his soldiers, and they
each toward other, If the soldier be sick or hurt, the Captain must
provide Physicians, of Chirurgien for him, if he be troubled in mind, he ought
to be his friend to visit him, and comfort him, to further his desires, and
endeavors, to encourage him, if he be a worthy soldier, to confer with him
some time familierly of his estate, and to further and devise how to increase
and amend the same, as well in the army, as at home. For perchance he has
none other friend to cherishe, or to have regard unto him in the army, if he
be iniuried, he has not the commen aid, and help of law for his money, as
in peace he may. Therefore the Captain must be his stay, and help in all his
necessities. And least it be objected, that if he had Argos eyes, he cannot
see the wantes of all men, and leisure will not at all times suffer to
discharge the parts above required (to prevent the same) I say, he must only
extend his diligence, as far as may be herein. Xenophon wrote unto king
Cyrus, that a Governor ought to be toward his people kind, as a father
toward his children. To note some examples of this virtue, we read that the
great king Mithridates used such diligence, and had such regard unto all his
comen soldier, that of a great army, he could call every man, priuatelye by
his name, and having people of more then xx. several nations, and languages,
he would talk unto them all familierly in their proper Country speech. The
great king Cyrus before remembered, which founded the Monarchye of the Persians,
used great affability toward his soldiers. The excellent Captain Scipio,
is noted, and honored for this courtesy. Alexander the great, passinge some
days in the deserts, and barre^ dry places of Arabia, where as no water was
to be found, so that both the army and himself wear pained with great thirst,
and almost intolerable, in this neade, a common soldier, had by great
trauayll, gotten one helmet full of water, and brought it unto the king: which
when he had received very thankfullye, he powered it out upon the ground,
showing him self willing to be partaker of the come^ want and necessity of
his army, whereby the rest seeing the abstinence and noble mind of their
Governor, forgott the pinche of their thirst, and prepared them selves to
suffer any hardness, and not to be weryed, but constantly to continue, to
ouercomeall labors and difficulties. The same Alexander no greater in power,
then in noble virtue of mind, an other time passinge a journey in extreme, and
intolerable frost, and sharp weather, with rough and uncomfortable ways,
findinge a soldier stiff, and almost dead with could of the percynge air,
he caused him presentlye to be carried into his tente, and theare being set in
his own chayer, he saw him tenderlye dressed, and cherished, geuinge unto him
of his own clothes to keape him warm. Caius Julius, having Alexa^ders mind
in many things, so did he no less tender and regard his soldiers, when he
went to battle, he would say, come fellow soldiers, go we together, and
call them sometime good friends. Charles the fifthe, being a great Emperor,
and of notable skill, and practice in wars, endued also with sundry noble
virtues, ridynge thoroughe his Camp, to view the state of the same, a commen
soldier sick, and wantinge necessaryes, cried out, and rayled upon him
bitterlye, wishinge a vengeance, and the devil on him, for that in his service
being fallen into infirmitye, and disease, now had he neither knowledge nor
help of him: the Emperor mildelye answered, good words my good soldier,
and thou shall not want the help that may be had. Now to conclude: this
virtue, not paynfull to plant in thy manners, and exercise in actions and
deeds, yet it brings great and happy fruits, for it procures such love and
honor of the Soldier to the Captain, that thereby he possesses the more
safety of person, and quiet of mind, he purchases greater fame at home, and
abroad, his attemptes and affairs proceed the better to effect, for it makes
the endeavor of the Soldier wonderful. Love is the surest armor that a
Governor or Captain can put on, and faithfulness is not by fee, nor fear to
be crased or corrupted.

Whether it be more expedient to have one General, or many. Cap. 8.
NOw to discuss by the examples of antiquity, and arguments of reason, whether
it be convenient to have more then one general, or high Captain of the
Army: Belinus and Brennus two Princes, being brothers, were ioyntlye
governors over their army, with which they subdued a great part of France,
Germayne, and Italye. Fabius, and Porsenna, were likewise constituted over the
Romainearmie, against the same Belinus and Brennus. Romulus and Remus, by
equal authority guyding their army, surprised the City of Alba. King
Mithridates, and Tigranes, jointly, lead their powers against the Romans.
Cassius, and Brutus, were ioygned generalles against Octauius Caesar, and
Antonius. Fabius and Minutius, were thought to be well matched together against
Hanniball: the one grave, and somewhat slow by his age, the other hott,
quick, and lusty, the one excelling in advise and experience, the other better
able to stir and endure pains. So that albeit, it has been more used, to
ordain, and depute one only general over an army, yet twain may do very
well, as it appears by the examples before recited, which may the rather be
allowed, for that the one General being sick, hurt, or slain, yet the Army
is not destitute of a head, or guide. which sometime is the cause of loss of
a battle, the head beeinge stricken and Captain slain, the body of the
army stands in a maze, and is highly discomfited, and oftentimes honorable
attemptes cease thereby, and go backwardes, as Crassus, by Parthian falsehood
slain, the relyques of his army were shortly destroyed. Antonius, in his
great battle on the Sea, against Octauius Augustus, fliyng, or rather
following Cleopatra, his whole army was e^forced to yield unto Caesar. Brennus,
as Iustine writes, being dead of hurtes in battle received in Grecia, his
purposed conquestes in those parts ceased, and his army dyspersed: all that
they had gotten before, was lost for lack of a good guide. Great Alexander
beeinge dead, the glory of Macedonie dyed, their victories proceaded no
farther, their armies returned, and turned to discention and division among
them selves: whereby the Empire was rent and skambled, and shortly after taken
from them by the Romans. So that, where there has been but one head or guide
of the wars, the same being cut of, for the most part the warrfare has
ended and expired with all: whereas if there had been two generals ordained,
joined in authority, or else successiuelye three or four, one after an other
nominated and appointed after the death or loss of the general, to supply
the place, and to establishe the state of the army, the wars might still
proceade, until the purpose and desired fruits thereof be obtained. But more
then two generals of one army at once, I can not find by any good president
allowed. Nicias Alcibiades, and Lamachus, were sent as Generals by the
Atheniens into Sicilia, and achieved littel there, and likewise Tideus
Adima^tus and Mena^der, against the Lacedaemonie^s.

Of the authority of the general, and what ought to be his chief desire,
wished fruits, and end of wars. what person, and of what qualities, ought
to be esteemed the best and most honorable Captain. Cap. 9.
THe place and state of a general is high, his credit, his power, and charge
great, and therefore his authority from the prince by or under who^ he is
deputed and ordained, ought to be great. To punish and pardon, to erect,
exalt, and pull down, to take order, or truce with the enemy, to receive
hostages, remitt prisoners, raunsomes and tributes, to give laws, liberty,
lordshyp, bands, conditions of captivity to the conquered, to ioygne or
break foreine frendshippe upon urgent cause, and not otherwise, to impart unto
the soldiers, frankly of that which is taken and won, to assygne victorious
ensigns and solempnitye of honor and prowess, to give advancement of
degrees and dignities unto the worthy. He may also leuye, for the great
necessity of the army, upon the princes subjects where he serves, and
borrowe or receive aid of the princes friends, and herein extend his masters
credit, and the prince is bound in honor, to ratify, allow, and perform
thus far, the dealinge of the general, by him deputed and appointed, which
is also at all times remouable at the pleasure of the prince, at whose
commandment the wars cease, end, or otherwise be turned. And the Captain,
ought not to make or establish peace without the consent, will, and authority
of the prince, nor to render any town, country, or forte conquered, except
for great advantage or extreme necessity. Hystories are full of examples, to
prove the perticulers before recyted, to be incident to the function of a
general, and therefore in a matter not doubtful, I will cite but only the
large grant of Gaius Martius, general of an army of the Romans: on a time
when a battaill went very hard with him, having in his army, fifteen
hundred hired Soldiers, of whose trust and endeavor he doubted, consyderinge
the strayghtes and danger wherein his army stood, he promised unto his said
strange retinue, that if they would extend their valor to the winning of
the field, to make every man of them a Cytyzen, and free of Room: which in
that time was a thing hyghlie regarded of strangers, for the honor, great
aduauntages, and noble fraunchyses thereof, wherewith beeinge encouraged, they
spared not to hazard their lives, vsinge such endeavor that the field was
won. And notwyth standing that by the ordynaunces of the City, noe man
might be made a Cytizen without the consent of the Senate, yet he alleagynge
before them, that necessytye is above law, and that then time served not to
seek the laws, but rather required to break them, he obtained the granted
freedom unto the soldiers, and honorably his promise was performed. And
it is not inconvenient, that the prince should geeue him credit, power, and
authority in smaller matters, unto whose order and wisdom he has
committed an army, which is the strength of the princes estate. which trust if
it can not saufely be committed unto one, it were better to join an other in
government unto him, then that the place of the general should lack or be
lame of power. Now to see what the general ought to desire or seek to gain
by the wars, infinite examples of the antiquity do show, especially in the
most florishinge estates of Room and Grecia, where virtue and valor were
chiefly fostered, all the most excellent Captains sought and endeavored by
victoryes to purchase fame unto them selves, honor, and advancement unto
their countries, and common wealths which they loved so dearly, and regarded
so highly, that their endeavors (used and employed for the benefit of the
same) seem to sur mount almost the power of men, and also credit. Glad was he
which by dying valiantly, could singulerlye profit his country. As Brutus the
first Consul, Horatius Cocles, the two Decij, Curtius, Atilius Regulus,
Scaeuola, Lucinius Dentatus, Codrus, Leonidas, and iiij. hundred gentlemen of
Lacedaemon with him. And of the spoils and prises of their conquests, the
great captains of Room and Grecia enriched them selves little, but rendered
all to the public treasure, and behoufe of the comen wealth. So that diverse
Dictatoures (which was the place of a great Prince, and Governor, over the
whole Empire, duringe the time of the wars) after the same finished, and
great kings by them conquered, and lead in triumph with all their treasures,
and substance, yet have they returned little the richer (for all that which
passed thorough their hands) to their oulde state, and mean degree of
living, from whence they wear called, not for their Lordship, but for their
virtues. And some of them after, living thriftelye of a little, have dyed
possessed of so short substance: that for the just honor of their funeralles,
due unto parsonages of so great virtues, for want of their own Arist. polit.
3. He loses the name of a good Citizen, which prefers private profit, before
the commen weal.
ability, the commen Treasure has supplied the charges, and expenses
thereunto. And though some esteem fame as a bare reward, without fruits of
profit, yet they regarded nothing of riches in comparison of honor. The
Romans ordained for honor to victours, and co^querours, triumphs, whearein
their General returninge in great pomp from the wars, all his Captains and
spoils following his Imperial charyot, he was with his Army received of his
Country with all joy and honor that might be devised, erectinge also for the
perpetual fame, and memory of such as had greatly advanced their Country,
images set up in open places, with inscriptions: This was the father of his
country. This was the champion of Room, and terror of their enemies. And for
private, and mean soldiers, which first had bourded a ship of the enemies,
entered their camp, or Town, saved a Citizen, slain a Captain of the
enemies, gotten an ancient, broken a rank, or achieved any great exploite,
they ordained crowns of silver, bracellets, and collers of goulde, with such
like conisaunces, the worthy wearinge whereof, the soldiers esteemed as much,
as of great seigniorye. Whereof there is an example, written of a certain
young man, in the Army of Scipio, which had done marvelous deades of Arms in
a battle of his, so that he had deserved such a like reward of prowess, as
is spoken of before, in liewe whereof, Scipio thinkinge better to content him,
gave him a great substance of goulde, exhorting him to continewe manlike and
valiant: but he, very sad, threw down the monye at Scipio his feet, who
demaundinge of him, whether he would rather have the appointed reward, and
ensign of manhood, he answered, that therefore he had trauayled:
preferringe worship above riches. The General ought to give great regard
both by himself, and by others, which without partialitye, may be markers
and obseruers, of such as best deserve in battle. And moreover, the most
expert and valiant men should be from one place, unto another, advanced to
the highest degrees, and offices in the Army, that the commendation, and
reward be duly assigned, according to desert. Also he must observe, and
execute the laws, and orders of war, for theare is no Art without rules,
and in none more necessary rules, then in this: wherein also disorder most of
all hurts, as negligence in the watch, or ward, in espyall for discoueringe
the Country, where the Army soiourneth or is to pass, want of furniture, or
any prouisyon allowed, or charged unto any man, breach of arraye, mutyne,
affraye, ryott, faylinge of duetye in any point, or transgressinge the
Captains commandment, which must stand for a law, and rule unto the
Soldiers. These misdemeanors, and offenses, the victoryous Romans punished
streyghtlye, yea sometime though advantage, and benefit grew unto the
Army, by exceadinge the Generalles commandment, yet the Captain in this
offense, has not spared his own Son, from sharp Justice, and punishment of
the law, and ordinance violated. For the due keepinge of Laws, and orders,
is the stay of all the affairs of War. Also the Captain has much more
neade to be wise in judgment, then the civil Magistrate in peace, for that
he has not so many assystentes, to aid him in counsel, neither like
leisure in deliberation, and advise: Some time having sudden dangerous
coming on, to disturb, and interupt the same. Sudden passions, (say the
Philosophers) troubles, and disordreth the mind, and quiet establishes the
understanding, and ripenethe counsels. The greek Philosopher Isocrates
shows, that two sorts of men theare are to be commended. First he which is
of his judgment, able to give good advise, the other that is of wisdom to
understand good counsel given by an other, and of inclination to follow the
same: diligence and good will supplieth a number of wantes. There has been
diverse Generals of great virtue in trayning of their soldiers, being able
of their own practice, to instruct them in all feats, and points of a
Soldier, as in well vsinge of arms and weapons of wars, both on
horseback, and on foot, in chosinge and appointing fit, and good furniture
for every man, and every purpose to encounter the ordinance and engines of the
adversaries, by policy planting, and hardye, and victorious mind in their
soldiers. In which Cirus, Romulus, Paulus Aemilius, Scipio, Hannibal, and
Caius Caesar, chiefly excelled. How be it that Captain, which is able well to
lead, and govern an army trained, ordered, and martialled to his hand is
also to be commended, and the better, if he use consideration, and diligence in
taking order, that his soldiers may practice the exercises, profitable for
the wars. It is to be regarded, that the Captain be generally of good nature
and disposition, not subject to malicious anger, cruelty, or envy, that he
have his conversation and conference with the most virtuous and best affected
sort, to suppress wrongful dealing and riot, the mother of disorder and
ruin. The Emperor Charles the fifte was commended of great sobriety and
diligence in his affairs, and to be very skillful in settinge and orderinge
his battles, for any advantage. The Captain ought to fly the fault of
infidelity and vntrothe, as from a rock. For there is no regard to be had
of the man that is not just and honest, and firm of his word, but fycle and
variable of promise, which ought always to be performed toward soldiers,
friend, and enemy. The breach whereof has many times bread great myseries,
and brought great wrack: as Laodislaus king of Hungary, upon presumption of
dispensation from the Pope, breakinge his faith geeuen, and league made with
the Turk, fell afterward into his hands and cruelty. The Carthaginoys,
breakinge league made with the Romans, and afterward beeinge in parle, and
toward a composition or end very necessary and greatly desired of the
Carthaginens, the Romans demanded of them what pledges of their trothe they
could geeue, or what new Gods they had now to swear by, and vow the
perfourmaunce of the co^dicions agreed, seeing they had sworn by all their
Gods before, and had deceived in breakinge their oath: Hasdruball a famous
Captain, one of the company, answered, we swear again by the same Godds,
which now both we, and you ought better to regard, for that they have
revenged by you sharply our perjury and oath breakinge: but the Carthaginoys
continued in their falsehode, and eftsoon violated their faith: wherefore the
Romans determined finally, not to cease, or geeue over wars against them,
till they had utterly overthrown them, subverted and destroyed their City
and estate, which their just plague followed. A noble example, for the due
regardinge of his faith, and oath, showed Regulus before mentioned, a general
of the Romayne army, taken prisoner by the Carthaginoys, and dismissed upon
his oath to return, if he did not entreat and obtain of the Senate of
Room, the exchange and delivery of diverse great Captains of Carthage, whom
before he had taken prisoners, which thing him self dissuaded the Romans
from, for the beehoufe of the commen wealth in diverse weighty respects, and
so returned to Carthage unto his determined death. Also the general may do
much the better if he be able to be his own secretary, to endicte orderly,
and aptly, in his affairs, and to persuade in mutiue discention and case of
need, to understand languages, to read with judgment in hystories, of the
dealinges and stratagemes of great princes and captains in like affairs, for
surely, the greatest captains that ever were, and almost all those
chiefetaines and conquerours of antiquity were well learned. An other thing also
there is which makes a captain most honorable, and to be as a father unto
his country, that is, after wars e^ded, if he can frame him self to peace,
good government, and to be as profitable unto the cyuill estate by his
industry and policye, as he was by his valor in the wars. So to conclude,
though it be hard to find a martial man, so farreforth furnished with all
civil virtues as before recyted: yet is it not like Tullies orator, or Sir
Thomas Moors common wealth, which represent a shadow, and not a substance,
discoursing of matter like a dream to be imagined, and not possible to be
followed, or in such perfection as they preciselie picture to be accomplished.
But examples of such chiefetaines as I write of, I have cyted some, affirming
that he may be a good captain, though he want of those parts before declared
some thing, but the more bright and resplende^t light of virtues that he
geeueth forth by his example, the more honorable he is, the more ple^tifull is
the hope of his success, the more prosperously proceade his affairs, the
more good he does to his army, It may well be said, Principis exemplo totus
componitur nobis. According to the president of the prince, or chieftaine, the
subject conformeth his fashions, and endeavors his deeds.

Of a soldier, and the qualities which he ought to have. Cap. 10.
THe Soldier in good course must now follow his captain. And first we are to
show the qualities and disposition of mind requysite unto him.

For all be it, he ought to be affected and enclyned unto virtue, no less
then the Captain, yet is it in an other sort, for the difference of their
places, functions, and doings. For there are diverse things, which appertain
unto the calling and exercise of a Captain, which beelonge not to a common
soldier: as for rule, and government, politic order and judgment in the
general affairs, magnificent and bountiful deeds. But the soldier ought
in like sort, to be a cyuill manne, to fear God, and live orderly in his
degree, as it behooves the Captain, being in daily Deutero. 20.
dangers of death, which are always less feared of him which has an
honest and well prepared mind, void of the horror and burden of lewd and
dissolute dealinges liynge upon his conscience. Such a good soldier was the
Centurion, of whom our Lord and Savior in the viij. of saint Mathaew says,
that he found not greater faith in Israel, then in him. And such was the
devout Cornelius, spoken of in the tenth of the Acts of the Apostles. And it
is seldom or never seen the dissolute person to prove a profitable soldier,
as if he be an idle, unruly, blasphemous, or licentious manne of lyuinge, a
ryotous dyceplayer or iangler, such be more meet for an Alehouse then an
army. Wherefore good sold your, take thy beginning of God, Remember first and
chyefelie to dyscharge thy duetye toward him. For without him noe travail
brings forth fruit, no policy, or purpose planted takes root, or
effect. Then ought thou next to seake with all diligence, the honor,
profit, and saufegard of thy Country, which has bred thee, and nouryshed
thee. The same thou art bound, most stedfastlye in thy mind to hold more
dear then thy life: for the preferrement whereof, and for the general good of
the army, no danger in reasonable sort is to be refused, no endeavor
omitted. For it is better like a man to dye, for the behoufe of many, then by
cowardyse to be slain with many. The Soldier also in his degree, ought to
favor Justice and right, to defend the honest and virtuous from oppression,
to be louinge and helpefull after his power, unto his fellow soldier.
Moreover it is requisite that he be hardye, constant, and valiant, to
endurethe bruntes difficulties, and chances of warrefare. Yt beseems him to
be high minded (I mean not proud, but rather the contrary) to endeavor to
climb to the highest top of virtue, and valor. He ought to use exercises of
arms, for increase of force, and actiuitye, to be diligent, and perfect in
the parts of a soldier, to keape the orders, and laws of war. He must be
tractable, and obedient to the commandment of his Captain, and that without
styckinge, for he is to houlde for assured, that the General, to whom for his
skill, and virtues, the Prince, and counsel, has committed the strength of
the estate, is a person sufficyent well to guide the same, which will by
wisdom, and sound advise, order, and dispose his affairs. Yt is not
commendable in a soldier to be full of tongue, or a busy body, but he
should be secret and sober. It is not convenient for him to be nicelie
accustomed, but to endure hardness of lyuinge, in food and travail. Wherefore
the martial knights of Room, which brought up their children to serve their
country honorably in the wars, they used them not dayntilie in diet, or
curiouslye in clothing, but caused them diligently to be instructed in virtue,
and perfectly practiced in manlike martial exercises. Licurgus expellinge all
idelnes and wantonness, from the well governed estate of Lacedaemon, caused the
youth to dyne and suppe abroad in comen places, with an ordinarye fare; hard
and short, to cut of excess and rvot, the nourice of slouthe, and that they
should not sit long at their Effeminatenes is contrary to force and
manlynesse.
meat, but be soon gone to the public exercyses, and profitable studyes
appointed for them. Delicate custom, and lycentious living spoiled of all
valor, the victorious and most redoubted army of Hanniball, wallowinge one
winter in the pleintifull pleasures, and fine fashyons of the curyous Citizens
of Capua, wheare they soiourned, by which the just reproof followed, and was
imputed unto their Captain, that he had the skill and way to conquer, but
he knew not how to use and prosecute his victories. For if he had pursued the
Romans after the great overthrow which he gave them at Cannae, and not run
his Army on the rock of ryott, restinge out of time, and waxinge restife by
pleasures in Capua: Room had never risen in seigniorye, or Empire to be the
loftye Lady, and Regient of the world, which then beeinge down, when he
oppressed not by his slackenes, she took breath again, and recovered to his
ruin. By ryott and careless rest, in lascyuious lasye pleasures, Marcus
Antonius the most valiant Captain with his Army was spoiled and vanquished.
The great empire of the Affiryens sonke in this vice, under their Prince
Sardanapale, and was subdued. Darius drowned the Persian state in delycate
life. Italye of later time settled in loose and licentious lyuinge, geeuinge
over all virtue, and woorthye excercyses, has offered occasion, to be so often
overcome by the Hunnes, Gotthes, Sayffers, Spanyerdes, and Frenchmen, and so
have fallen, and shall decay as many Nations, as geeue over them selves to
like effeminate beastelyke, and flewthfull life. And thearefore those Princes
which raygne in rest only by fortune, stand upon wheels, roulinge
toward ruin: But the state which has the foundatyon and defense theareof,
upon virtue, is firm, saufe, and permanent. Good Souldyours should lift up
their courages to atchyue most high and hard things, treading abiecte ease,
and poorishe pesauntlike idleness under foot, and flying lasciuyous lewd
intemperaunce as from a Scorpion. They ought to contempne dayntines, as a
womanlike, and childishe thing, for the gluttons body, or mind, is apt for
no good purpose. And yet am I not of his mind, which would have the soldier
in warrefare, to eat no other bread, or meat, but such as him self baketh,
and dresseth, for, time serves not every man always so to do, and some
being more unhandsome in handlinge of the same, their food should be the
less healthsome. And other percha^ce would be over curious, and employe more
time thearein, then in the most weyghtie affairs. But it is necessary that
for a neade, every soldier know how of meal, eggs, otemeale, oil, or
Moderate diet.
butter, to bake, and make his food. Men have had sustinaunce for a time only
by roots, and that without any hurt of health. He is not worthy to enjoy the
bountiful benefits, and plentyfull provision, which GOD has ordained for the
welfare of men, that cannot sometime without grudging endure some hardness. For
all sorts of men are subject unto necessities, travail, and pain, or else
this wear no world wherein we live, but a Heaven, and two heavens a Christian
man is not to look for. Moreover it is the duetye of a soldier with all
affection, to love, and honor his Captain, not to forsake him for any
danger, he ought to keape close the secret affairs, that be committed unto
him, and for no cause to conceate any thing from him, that may be hurtful
unto him, or the estate of the army, but he ought to stretch al his synewes
always to profit the same. He must not be ouermuche scrapinge or covetous of
spoils, for so diverse victorious armies have been spoiled and destroyed,
whilst they only respectinge their gain, have neglected the enemy, till
they have fallen even in his mouth: for sometime, the enemy has left his
camp for a train that the other in spoylinge thereof, might be surprysed in
disorder and easelie vanquished, to mock the^ (with Tantalus his apple, as the
Proverb is,) plucking the bone or possessd pray, out of their jaws. Great
Alexander when he saw his host lade^, surcharged and wearied with rich
spoils, and also the more sharply urged of the enemy, for desire thereof: he
caused all the surplusage of the carryages and stuff to be burned, first
beginning with his own. Be moderate therefore good soldier in thy doings,
and prynt every part of thy duty in pro^pt memory: for surely, I write not
these words of course, but of trothe, with my careful study, searching and
faythfullye examinynge the points needful for thy profit, and I trust our
most gracious God will give fruits of our labors to his honor, and our
countries good service: whose favor and blessinge be with all them, which of
noble courage, zeal of virtue, and cou^tryes love, desire to use arms well.

Of what constitution of body, trade, and quality of life, the best soldier
is to be chosen: and what exercyses and practices are needful of him to be
used. Cap. 11.
Now for the choice of our good soldier, for the lykelihode of his strength,
courage, and actiuitie, to set down a precyse order, for the same by his
shoulders, breast, arms, thyghes, feet, or composition of any other part of
the body: I houlde it most vain: seeinge that good judgment, by the eye
discerns thereof playnelie, and wisdom easelye finds out fit exercyses
for certain proof and trial hereof, and it is not possible to have a great
army of men, so framed in all points, but the courage and mind is as much to
be respected as the body. But it is necessary to be considered, of what
age, trade, and manner of lyuinge, best choice of soldiers may be made. For
their age, the lustiest time of youth for strength, and to endure travail, is
meetest, as between the years of two and twentye, and toward fifty. How be
it, great Alexander had many of his best soldiers, above those years of age.
And for their exercise or trade of life, first it is clear, that the stronger,
better breathed, and harder man of body by nature or custom, is the more
auaylable for wars: and therefore it is to conclude, that men of such
occupations, as are accustomed most to labor with the strength of their arms,
are to be preferred for this purpose, as smythes, butchers, masons, dyggers in
mines, Carpenters, and most principallye the husbandman, both for his wonted
enduringe of hardness in fare, and of all weathers and toil in the field,
beeinge also for the more part, of honest inclination, and thriftie, which be
good parts in a soldier. And the daintier sort of seruinge men and riotous
fellows, are least profitable herein. But the common speech of fencers, that
they be never good soldiers, proceadeth not of judgment. For though there be
of them, as of other men, some faynte fellows, yet for the more part, that
inclynation and delight in the use of weapons, shows some manlike courage,
and the practice and skill therein, breadeth hardines: and albeit there be
other sorts of weapons used in wars, yet the exercise of these, causes
nimblenes and actiuitye to handle any other. And therefore if he be not
otherwise unruly, or naughtelye given, he that is practysed and skillful in
using of weapons, is lykelye to prove a valiant and an excellent soldier.
But he that fears not to receive hurt, except he know how to inflicte
danger and do harms unto the enemy, is not profitable. And therefore, when
there was one commended unto an expert captain (by his many skarres of
wou^des received) that he was a great soldier, and a very man, the captain
asked straight, where is the man which hurt him thus: bring him unto me,
(quod he) and I will entertayne him presently, for in this case I like the
geeuer, better then the taker. Now are we next, to see, what exercyses are
most convenient and expedient to be used of soldiers. And generally, such
are most auaylable in the service of wars, as cause any of these effects:
that is to say, to harden the body, to make it nymbler, stronger, or to be
well breathed, as for the purpose, wrastlynge, shootinge, dartynge, leapinge,
castinge of great stones, vawting, swymminge, and to labor in armor, heauyer
then the commen forte, which is used in service, for custom makes labor
light, as it is pro ued by the practyse of Milo, which beginning to carriea
Calfe into the field to pasture, every day on his neck, he continued with
the same burden, till it was grown a great Ox, adding still increase of
goodwil, to supply the daily growing of his burden, not sufferyng his force
to be sodaynlie so surmounted, that he would at any time shrynke or yield,
unto the travail and burden of the day before passed: So that custom,
seems to alter or excel nature, eftsoon. Now the body being made apt
and nymble, yet do there twoe other exercyses remain, to be put into the
practice of a souldyour, for their skyll and order in wars. The first is,
that he exercise to handle his bow, piece, pyke, or other weapon wherewith he
shall be charged, nimbly, and cu^ningly, that he be able to do his feate
thearewith, and if he be a horseman, skilfullye to use his horse and staff, to
be ready to mount or alight nymblye at a beck, for any purpose or advantage
to be taken of the enemy. The other practice is, to be perfect in keapynge
the arrayes, ranckes, and orders of war, in marching, encampinge, and fight,
or pursuit of thenemye, yea, and in reducing, and bringinge them selves again
into any form of arraye, if perchance they shall be broken or disordered by
force of the enemy, and that speedily, at the voice of the Captain, or sound
of Trumpet, or Drum, (which always stand by him for the same purpose) or by
any other noise, or certain sign, which he uses, sometime secretelie, and
sometime open, to geeue out understanding of his mind, as to march, or
proceade, to retire, to take this way or that. And hearein it is to be
certainlye observed, a thing by all experience always approved, that no force
of men, prouisyon, power, industry, or furniture can prevail, without arraye,
and order of battle, against the One trained soldier, worth ten untrayned.
well appointed, whereof a feaw, shall easelie vanquishe a multitude disordred,
and confusely clusteringe together. The soldier thus expert, and by practice
thoroughlye manned, furnished and made perfect master, and possessour of his
Art, shall boldelye, and courageouslie proceade into the field: For feawe men
fear, or shrink to do that, whearein they are skillfull, and well practiced.
Now for the more endeavor, and exercise to be used and had hearein, thorough
out this land, it is a thing not after any other to be looked upon, and
effectuallye considered unto reformation, least we doing nothing, think to
do much, and beeinge naked under a net, suppose our selves armed, when we
are nothing covered. (For, such is the dullness of some people.) I will recyte
some Examples of the dilygence used by the most excellent estates hearein.
First in the foundation of the greatest Monarchye of the world under Rome,
what ordynaunces, and continual excersyses of war, Romulus established
theare, it is not doubtful. For the Romans always after using the same
orders, which he instituted, and delivered unto their hands, upon the same
foundation proceadynge in prowess, attained to most high honor of Arms,
and erected their famous Empire. Tullus Hostilius, and Ancus Martius kings
theare, bestowed great travail and industrye, in encreasinge the said
Disciplyne of war. In Lacedaemon a City of Grecia, which by excellent
government grew to have dominion over diverse Kingdoms, Lycurgus the
politic Prince, among his Laws and customs, which he established theare,
ordained that all spare time should be expended in virtuous exercises, and
principallye in the noble practyses of Arms, to get honor, and soueraynetye
of the enemies, clean cuttinge of vnthriftye, wastfull ryott, abandoninge
delycate nycenesse, and banyshinge idle, and chyldishe Games, as commen
Cardeplaye, Cayles, Coytes, Slydebourde, Bowls, and Blowepoynt, which wear
thrown out of the commen wealth. From whence also he dyscarded and
expelled, Ianglers, Iesters, Iuglers, Puppetplayers, Pypers, and such like
unprofitable persons, in stead of which wear mayntayned men of valor,
frequenting, and exercisynge actiuitye of wrastelinge, dartynge, throwinge the
Bar, the sledge, vsinge the weapons of War, in skyrmishes, and like acts
to example the practices and exployts of war, as skalynge of Fortes, skillful
ridinge, runninge at the ring, marchinge eftsoons in arraye of battle
Vegetius says, that Gentlemen to whom the profession of arms is proper, as
their art ought from their cradel to their grave, to be practiced thearein.
etc. And public places wear appointed commodiouslye for the commen vsinge
of the same, and most actyue men to be teachers hearein. The honorable
exercyses called Olimpiades, celebrated in Grecia, with concourse of people
from all parts of the world, to try valor, and win the Vyctours Crown,
this contentyon in all practices and qualyties of virtue and commendation,
caused Grecia first above all other nations, to floryshe in honor of arms,
learning, and other laudable trades, wheare the right and excellent
Dyscipline, and order of War was nouryshed and maintened with great
soueraintie and dominion. The famous spectacle of the exercises of Arms, in
Campus Martius, in the latter time of the triumphant estate of Rome was of
great industry, and actiuitie, being always nolesse honorably, then duly
on the holidayes frequented, and observed of al sorts. And at this day under
diverse estates in Germanye, this diligence is used in trayning of soldiers,
and preparation for wars, they divide the inhabiters of every city, or
shire, into certain parts, or ba^des, giving unto them the names of such
weapons, as they will chose to be charged with for their furniture, and
service in the time of wars, as Archers, Pikemen, Demilaunces and such like,
so that theare is no able person, exempted out of these orders, either for
exercise, or supplye, and contribution to the charges of one sort of these
weapons, which companies be thus on their holydaies, and spare times duly
trained and practiced. The Turk also, what numbers he causes from very
young years, to be brought up, and skilfullye practiced unto the feats and
service of wars, and what huge garrisons, and armies of Soldiers, he
continually maintains, it is well known: and with all no Prince, Realm, or
estate more free from Rebellion of subjects, and forewarde in victories Plaut.
Feliciter is sapit, qui alieno periculo sapit.
then he. So to conclude, God grant, that the examples of others, may stir
the flacke, and dull sort, well to use Arms before their harms.

Of the sundric sorts of weapons, used by diverse nations in the ancient
wars, and which are now most necessary, with some respects of pressynge
soldiers. Cap. xii.
THe weapons which the antiquity used in their wars were diverse. They hadd
crossebowes, slings, darts, and hatchettes, all which the harquebus has now
displaced, being more auaylable for the wars. They used also malles like our
pollaxes, glayues, hammers, and battle axes. The Romans used most for their
footmen, the swerd Samuel ca. 13 The Isralites for want of weapons used their
matocks and cowlters.
and target, spears or iauelins. The Macedonien weapon, was a long spear
called Sarissa, which our partisans and pykes well supply. The Parthiens were
all light horsemen, vsinge bows and arrows, by which, in the large plain
countries, where they sought to ioigne battaill, they archieued many notable
conquestes. In stead of the Parthyens bow, me thinks the curryer wear of
better use for some light horsemen, for that he shoots more certainly, and
stryketh more dangerously then the arrowe, and when he has dyscharged, he
may be gone, and remove lightly to charge again, but his horse must be
well managed heareunto, as unto all other feats of the war. Moreover in mine
oppinion, it were an excellent furniture for the pikeman to have a dagge, or a
case of dagges at his girdle, for diverse purposes. But it is needful for
every soldier in the field to have a good sword and dagger, and for the
armed soldier, the same would be but short, with weighty pomells,
strong, and narrow poynted. One other thing I would say, and conclude, for
the regard of soldiers, when a power is to be levied, and men pressed into the
wars, if it stand upon no greater necessity, but that such choice may be
made, it is to be respected, that men of occupation, husbandmen, and such
like, (which after the wars ended, may return to their trades, or else have
somewhat of their own to live ciuillye with all) be first taken. Secondly it
is to be considered, that men having great charge See also Deuteronomy. 20. and 24.
of children, or occupyinge, be the rather spared and exempted from the wars.
For Judas Machabeus the most redoubted Captain of the host of Israel,
dismissed out of his army, such as newely married wives, builded houses, or
planted vineardes, whereby their hearts being left at home, they should be
the less valiant, and more loathe to hazard their lines. Good order must be
taken, that the commen wealth be not pestered with idle and unprofitable men,
and the same once beeinge purged, if none be after taken into the wars, but
such as by their trades or other stay, are like to live conveniently by their
own industry or hauoyr, except so many as may be maintained by the wars,
preferred by pentions, or placed in garrisons afterward: soldiers shall not
be discouraged to see many of that sort, the wars being dissolved, needy,
neglected, and fallen into miseries. For surely the soldier, that is a
civil man with all, is an especial member of his country, to be regarded
more then he which is less able to serve the same, for it is a blessinge of
God, both for the use, necessary, and of valor, worthy estimation. And
therefore principally, the general and Captains ought after the wars
ended, to retain their tender affection toward the soldiers, which have
served them well, and to endeavor as they may, to prefer them. But generally
all good men ought to favor and further honest soldiers, which has a
valiant desire to propulse the enemy, and to purchase honor and sauftie,
unto their native countries.

The second book.
Of the disciplyne and admonitions of war.
AL be it, that there can not be rules appointed, or prescribed to direct all the doings and affairs of war, as well for that there is no leisure, upon
sudden mischiefs to search out preside^tes or ponder lessons and rules, as
also because of the infinite occasions and chau^ces, that happen beyond
expectation. It were therefore an infinite (I may say as Hanniball did by the
dotinge discourse of old Formio) a madd piece of work, to prescribe a
particular order Formio a philosopher.
for every act to be done in the wars, wherein the Captain must follow
the ground and dyrection of his wisdom and experience: But yet some certain
obseruatio^s there are for him most needful: and presidentes of other
excellent captains in great difficulties, may be good warninges and lessons
in the like, to make a foundation and plott of politic invention, and good
judgment, so that the Iron or stuff thereby may be supplied, but the hammer
of the Captains wisdom, must work and frame the same, unto his several
practices and occasions. Now therefore to go into the matter, let us see what
adua^tages, policy, by good experience and sure ground of reason, has taught
us to seek in ioygninge battle, and encounter with the enemy. First, if he
come by sea, to aryue and take his landynge, Cassibellans example shows what
is best to do, who understanding of Julius Caesar's coming out of France to
invade this land of Britayne, he forth with gathered his power together, and
joining them with the aid of Androgeus king of Kent, they proceaded to the Sea
side, wheare valiantly resistinge the arrival of the Romans, they were
repulsed, and driven back to their ships, well laden with blows. Which
declares that great advantage is had to deal with the enemy, before he have
discharged all his power out of the ships, being disordered, and straighted
in rome, and standing on slipperie places, having some impediment of the
water, before they can win the firm shore. The like facility is there to
withstand the enemy, at the mouth or entringe of some streyghtes, or at the
passinge of high stepe hills. Leonidas with Leonidas, and the army of Xerxes.
600. Lacedemoniens keapinge the top of the hill where the huge hoaste of the
Persiens were to pass, and enter into Grecia, at the streyghtes of
Thermopilae, slew theare more then xx. thousand of them. Caesar before
recited, being to conueye his Army over a river in France, the passage
wheareof was defended and kept on the other side by Vergintorix, leader of the
Frenchmen, he there fore knowinge how much the enemy might avoid him, before
he could get over, used this policy to beguyle them: He caused a portion of
his army drawn out of diverse bands, to be priuelye lodged in a wood nighe,
and theare to frame a little bridge, on the sudden to be cast over the river.
the^, down goes he alonge by the shore, as though he sought passage in some
other place. The Frenchmen seeing him remove, bearing the just number of his
ensigns, not doubting any double dealing, follows wayghting upon him alonge
the other side, Caesar, by that the bridge was made, speed lie retourning,
passed over without let or trouble. The like policye may be well used, me
thinks thus: to espy where sum^ part of the river is shallow or otherwise
most conuenientlye to be passed, and the^ to carry away the enemy by color of
some attempt in another place, and after to return unto the same by night, or
secretelie to lodge some sufficient part of the army behind to pass the
same, and invade the enemy on a sudden at their back, while the other part
of the army proceadeth before, in the view, and gaze of the enemy. For the
polityke Captain ought nothing less to pretend in show, then that which
in purpose he intends. For so have famous Cities been surprised on the
sudden unprovided, while a counterfaite preparation has been made by the
enemy, and a power lead an other way, sometime against a secret friend,
being in appara^ce an enemy, till they have both, ioygned to the mischief of a
third party, and so is it a practice at the syege of a Town, to bend and
incline al force and battery in show to one side of the sa^e, when a secret
power is prepared to skale, and surprise it on so^e other part, little
regarded or defended. Hanno a Captain of Carthage, being streightlie besyeged
within a trenche, he enclosed himself most stronglye, as it seemed, on that
part where he purposed to break forth, which he afterward setting on fire,
escaped thorough with his army, the enemies giving no watch unto that place.
Nabides, at the syege of Lacedaemon, set fire on a part of the Town, where
enemies wear entered, and by the trouble thereof, with a fresh assault made of
the Townsmen, drove the^ out again. Hanniball, on a time driven into a
straight by Fabius the Romayne, so that he was enforced by a great
enconuenie^ce to pass a hill, where the army of Fabius lay on the top
thereof, he therefore caused linkes and bra^des, to be fastened unto the horns
of a great number of oxen which wear in the camp, and setting the^ on fire by
night, the cattail were driven with great noise and larum, up to the enemies
camp, which hearing the terrible noise of the beasts, when they felt the
force of the fire, and also being ama zed with the sight, as though they stood
in doubt to fight with the dyuell, that made such a whorlye burly: Hannibal
the whilst, quietly co^ueied over his army. Diverse Captains when they have
been hardly pursued, or let in like passage by the enemy, they have settled
their armies, and begone trenches, as though they would have rested theare,
or ioygned battle shortly, with the enemy, which markinge and obseruinge
the same, has encamped, and made the like preparation, whilst that the other
have used opportunity to pass such ryuers, hills, or gain such ground, as
they desired. Also the excellent Captains have accustomed, when they
understood that the enemy had made strongest the front, or some other
singular part of his battle, they have set against the flank, or weakest
side theareof. Some other, have suffered them selves to be enclosed by the
enemies army, to the end, that the same beeinge brought out of order, they
would break thoroughe the weakest part theareof, which has happened to the
great hurt of the enemy. Many things theare are to be observed, which give
great aduau^tage in the ioygninge of battle, as if thou can train thy
enemy into a straight or valley, and thy self to possess the hills, on
both sides, as Hanniball caught the Roman army at Cannae. And always it is
good policy to have the higher ground of the enemy, and to have the advantage
of the wind, and the sun, for the same being in the face of the enemy, thou
may set furthe a part of thine army to invade his battle on the one side,
or at the back, that their sight being troubled, they shall not perceive
wheare about thou go, wheareby also if thou have any ambushe in any
trenche, wood, or covert laid, as he shall march, he is more apt to come
into the same undiscovered, and then, sudden dangers when they be not known,
or perfectly seen, are the more feared. As the experience hereof was had by
Epaminondas, a famous Captain of Grecia, which supplied this advantage of the
son, another way, he caused his light horsemen, in very dustie ways, to
make an attempt upon the enemy, and shortly to withdraw, and gallop back
before the^, the whilst Epaminondas came about upon them, on the one side,
before they could discern the order of his battle, for the dust that was
raised, and so easelie vanquished them. The like practice may be by a pyle of
wood, or old hedges in the way of the enemies set on fire, to raise a
smoke, for a impedyment of their sight, till some enterprise be atchyeued.
Where the one part is exceading strong, by store of horsemen or of shot, it
is undoubtedly for the advantage and sauftie of the other, to keep in rough
grounds, or near some banks, hills, or woods, and also to keep their
army close that the horse men or shot be very nigh upon them, before they
bring forth their battaill. So shall not the shot have leisure or level to
discharge, likely to hurt, and horses in such grounds disordered, and
leapinge one upon an others back for lack of room, shall loose their force
to take the starte upon the enemy. Great policy also it is, if thou can
come with thy army fresh upon the enemy, wearied with much travail, or
being in any mutine among the^ selves, weakened or discouraged by want of
victualles, or any other perplexity or distress by ill tydinges out of their
country, or some loss else where sustained, before the same be salued or
supplied by any later victory, or other good hap fallen unto them, and it
has been used, cu^ninglie to coygne, and cast abroad, imagined rumors of
mischiefs toward, to appall and dismaye the enemy. Many singular and
famous exploytes and victories have been had and done, when the enemy has
been surprysed on the sudden in disorder, or by night, for want of good
espyall, when he has not doubted any danger, and therefore it is good to
be circumspect and ready, to stand still upon guarde and defense, and little
to trust the enemy duringe the wars. Titus Didius, being weaker then his
enemy which was remouinge to encounter a legion, coming into his aid, to
stay that purpose, he publyshed thoroughe out all his army that he intended
the next day to fight the field, and suffered certain prisoners colourablie
to escape, which freshlie could so orthe those news when they returned into
their camp, whereby the enemy stayed, and the other sauflie received the
succor sent unto him.

To break, or disorder the battle of the enemy. Cap. 2.
OTher policyes there are to be remembered, and practiced, when a battle is
orderly set, to break or trouble the same, and this is one, to give out
with great noise duringe the fight, that the general on the other side, is
slain, or that part of his battle duringe the fight, flies, or to make
some sudden show to be a terror unto them. As Caius Sulpitius, caused a
many of Pages under Roman ensigns, with bad cast horses, carts, and
trumperie, to make a great muster and show sodainelye upon a hill within sight,
while he was a fightinge with the Frenchmen, which thereby being discomfited,
he obtained the victory. But it is of greater effect, if in deed there be a
troop closely conveyed, or an ambushe laid, on the sudden, to invade the
enemies fighting, at their back, which may most conveniently be done,
where there be hills or covert nyghe. Hanniball in a battle against king
Eumenes, threw earthen pottes full of snakes and vipers among his enemies,
wherewith they were presently frighted and disordered. The Spaniardes, against
the army of Plutarch in vita Hannibalis.
the Carthaginoys led by Amilcar, put in their front, Carts full of Towe,
drawn with Oxen, and ioygninge to fight, they kyndeled fire in the same, by
force whereof, the Oxen thrust forth into the battle of the enemies, and
opened it. The Carts hooked, Horsemen.
like has been done with Carts full of hooks, by great power enforced and
driven upon the front of the enemies. For the auoydinge whereof Sylla the
Roman, planted Pyles and stakes before his battle, whereby the Carts were
stopped Stakes.
and did not hurt. The like danger may be avoided by geeuynge way unto
such engyns, thorough spaces prepared in the front or first ranks, till they
may be turned a side, by which practice also, great power and fierce assault
of horsemen has beecome vain. Now to remedy sudden mischiefs, which may
fall, and to stay the army from fearful flight before there be cause: there
be two firm and necessary rules constantly to be kept, the one is, that
no man for any sudden chance, terror show by any practice or assault of
the enemy made by day or by night, take any other way or purpose, but to
fight courageously, till there be certain sign given by the general to
retire, or otherwise to deal. The other rule is, that the Captain
circumuented or deceived by the enemy, seem to Tu ne cede malis, sed co^tra,
audentior esto. Virg.
do the same willingly, which he is enforced unto. Tullus Hostilius, in
battle saying how a band of his hired soldiers was turned unto the
enemy, whereby his men were much troubled and affrayed, he forthwith gave
understanding through out the army, that there was nothing done, but by
his commandment, and for a good purpose, Scipio goinge to invade Affryke,
had before made league and friendship with Syphax king of Numidia, which
afterward reuoltinge, sent him word that he would be a friend unto the other
part, but Scipio concealed this message from his soldiers, and said that
he sent unto him to make haste on the iourneye. Moreover, if part of the
army fly, bebefore the whole battle be moved and broken, the wise and
valiant Captain may by vehement persuasions and means, bring the^ back,
and especially the hardynes and noble courage of the general, may avail
hearein. As Lucius Silla, in a battle against Mithridates, certain of his
legions, or bands being put to flight, he got before the^ with his swearde
drawn, crying, if any ask you of your Captains, say, we left him in the
field figh ting. Phillip king of Macedon, understanding that his men feared
the Scythia^s, placed behind his army, certain of his most trusty horsemen,
and gave commandment to keape in, and turn upon the enemies, such as should
fly, that they might be slain both of them, and of their friends, wheareby
his soldiers determininge rather to dye honorably to the benefit of their
Country, the^ with shame, to the hurt thereof they became Conquerours. Some
Captains to give occasion to the soldiers to use greater endeavor, and to
put out their force thoroughlye, have thrown an ensign amongst the enemies,
and appointed reward to him which could recover it again. And when they
enemy lodges within streyghtes, trenches, or places enuiro^ned with hills,
means may be found to provoke him to battle, by cuttinge of, his foragers,
and provision of victualles, or to feign that thou remouest to some other
enterprise, withdrawinge till he be dislodged. But Paulus Aemilius in
Macedonia to encounter, and deal with the Army of Perses, restinge at the
foot of the hill Olympus, in a place maruailouslye by nature enuironned, and
by art fortified, he Martius against the Dutchmen, and Flaminius against
Phillip king of Macedon, conveyed a troop up a hill, to come down upon the
enemy at their backs, while they were in fight below.
conveyed his army secretelye by night, up the stepe, and unhaunted ways of
the hill, not suspected or watched of the enemy, so that he came down the
more suddenly upon them, to their greater spoil and loss. Cato Mayor by the
very same means, came upon Antiochus, being stronglye guarded and defended,
in the streyghtes of Thermopylae in Graecia, at which enterprise, the king
Antiochus, being greatly hurt with a stone, his army fled. Scipio the
excellent Captain, goinge to subdue Afrique, procured in so great wars, the
aid of K. Masinissa, whom shorthe after his arryuall there, he sent to provoke
Hanno general on the other side, for the Carthaginois to fight, who seeing the
small number with Masinissa led, proceaded against him with all his power on a
heap, and the other after a feawe blows, fayninge to fly, brought the enemy
forth unto Fools baye, upon the host of Scipio, which he had arrayed and
set in excellent order of battle, ready to receive the enemy: So was Hanno
there slain, and his disordered Army put to flyghte. Then Scipio purposinge
the syege of the City Vtica, and hearing of the coming of Hasdruball and
Syphax, with a mighty power against him, he planted his Army upon an hill,
wheare he might save and defend his nauye, and also with sum^ advantage
fight with the enemy. And when he had understanding, that the enemies had
settled both their camps nyghe, and that their tents wear made with wood
and bull rushes warm, for the winter time, he sent Masinissa, and. C. Laelius,
to set fire on the^ by night, and with all to assail Syphax, which done, the
fire also takes Hasdruballes camp, and the Carthaginoys runninge forth in
heaps unto the broyle, they fell all into the Romans hands: So that theare
wear then slain almost. xl. thousand of them. Thus mighty powers be by
policy, smothelie vanquished, and great estates lyghtlie overthrown, and wise
men seeing the rock, wheareon other men wrack, are warned and wax ware,
taking by their loss, a lesson to guide their own affairs.

Aduertysementes how the army that is weaker then the enemies, may grow
stronger, or save it self. Cap. 3.
IT is a policy in this case, to draw unto thee, sum^ of the enemies friends
or aid, by promise of great things, hope of large dominyon, and benefits, to
follow, or by practice to sow disce^tion, or mislike, between the^, as when
Siphax king of Numidia, had ioygned league with the Romans, to aid the^ in
the wars of Afrique, the Carthaginois sent Ambassadors unto him, declaringe
the ambition of the Romans, how by little and little, they sought cu^ninglie
to subdue al other Princes, and being once entered into Afrique, that they would
not cease, till they had obtained it all, wheareof his Countreye was part: and
by other such enducementes, withdrewe him from the Romans, with all his power
to assiste them. The like devise had Hannibal after, to win Antiochus king
of Macedonia, and Prusias king of Bithynia, to the aid of the Carthaginoys.
Also it profits no less, to give occasion unto the enemy, to distrust, or
displace their best friends or Captains. The Atheniens wear always
victours, till they banished their excellent Captain Alcibiades, and shortly
after wear subdued by the Lacedaemoniens. And if the Romans had not banished
Coriolan: The Volsciens before subdued, had not afterward put Rome in danger
of ruin, and utter ouerthowe. Alcibiades used the like practice to make a
jar between Duke Tissaphernes, and his master the king of Persia.
Hanniball wasted and spoiled wheare ever he went in Italye, sauinge only the
possessions of Fabius untouched, which he did, to cause the Romans to houlde
their best Captain suspected. Some have used to the same end, to make many
private confere^ces with the General of the enemies, sending sundry letters
secretelye, and sometime presents, working also that some suspicious letter,
of an imagined conference or practice between the^, may come to the Princes
hands, under whom such General is deputed. By these means, have excellent
Captains been displaced, wars stayed, and the weaker part in the mean time
has gathered strength. Other ways there are to detracte battle, and to
save an army, at need, from the greater power of the enemy, which is to
encampe strongly within some trenche or like place, or else to be backed with
some fenne, maryshe, steep hill, or river, so that the enemy have but one
way unto them: and that being the streyghter, is the more advantage for the
fewer number. Fabius used this way with Hanniball, seekinge and endeuoutinge
daily for thauoydinge of diverse enconueniences, to fight with him: but Fabius
encamped always so cunningly, and with such aduauntages for the field, that
the other without great danger could not deal with him. Marius thus encamped
at the mouth of the river Rhodanus, the infinite multitude of the Duchemen,
durst not invade him, till he brought forth his army into the fields. But
two other ways there are, more certain to be saufe from the enemy. The one
is to puruey thy camp distant at the least a days iourneye from him,
remoouinge always in the open country, that thou be not stayed by hills or
ryuers etc to pass unto the sea side, or such place where thou desyrest to
rest thine army. The other help is, if thou be wylling to assaye the force
of the enemy without any great loss, and to abide him in the field, then it
is best for thee to keep thy self near unto some strong town of thine own,
or thy friends, where thou may withdraw thine army from pursuit of the
enemy, if he prove the stronger in battle. So did Eumenes saufelie retire
into the City Nora, from the army of Antigonus. It is good to provide for the
woorst, as it is common lie said, for the best will save it self.

How to conducte an army, and proceade with the same in a foreyne country,
and of the necessaries thereunto. Cap. 4.
IT is first to be considered, that armed men, victuals, and money, be the
accidents inseparable, or rather the substance and strength of wars. There
must be provided also for an army, store of Iron, and staff timber, to make
weapons of all sorts, with sundry artificers, for diverse purposes, powder
must be had with plenty, carriages, and cattaill good store to follow the
camp, for necessaryes, with vtensyles and such like. And if an army be led
into a foreyne country, there must be the greater store of this provision, and
forage also to be had, and yet may not the camp be pestered with caryages,
for then it can not so lightly remove, as occasions may require. Also when
soldiers have much carriage being greatly enritched with spoils, their
minds are sometime more upon their baggage, the^ upon battaill. And if they
send often of the same into their country, their hearts be also at home.
Great Alexander therefore seeinge his army one time, so laden with booties and
pryses, he burned all the surplusage of the carriages which might encumber
them, being of a great substance. But a more politic and profitable way it
wear, to pro uyde to have some one strong town or twain, where the wars
are, to convey the same into, which shall be moreover a maker of great benefit
and use, daily unto the army, and to the state of the wars diverse ways, as
for relief of such as be hurt from time to time, also to receive such aid
of men, victualles, or other necessaries, as shall be sent from home, to keep
the same till it may be saufelie conveyed into the army, and not surprysed of
the enemy by the way. Also it is a necessary place, to soiourne in winter
time, (for the winter wars be more noisome and tedious then profitable) or to
withdraw into, when the army or store of things is spent, or worn with
wars there, it is a good restinge place till supply be had of their wantes.
And if the same be near unto the Sea side, and toward home, It is far the
more commodious. Now the way to obtain and win such a town or herbour
the more easelie, is in the beginning to make thine aryuall so dayne, and in a
place unlooked for, that the enemy may be surprysed vnfurnyshed. And it is
not best to spend much of thy store of men or pouysion, in the wynninge of
many Towns at the first. For five battayles have been fougheten with loss
of fewer men, them some one City is won withal, and therefore, will not
the wise Captain so weaken him self, before the great necessity and main
force of battle. For it is to be considered withal, that many towns taken,
require ma nie garrisons to be assigned, for the defense and keepinge of the
same, all which dismember an army and put it down, as much as any practice
of the enemy against the same may do. For the army is the assurance of
wars, without which thou can little annoye or terrify the enemy, nor yet
long maintain or defend thy walled towns from him, for if he possess the
country with his men, he shall cut of tyllage, and stop all trades unto
the towns, by which they only may live and be maintained. And therefore
that Prince that possesses strong towns, and dares not, or has not power
to keep the field, and defend his country by battle, if he be cunningly
dealt with, will undoubtedly prove a pesant. And therefore the knowledge to
guide an army into the field, and to order and make battle with skill and
advantage, is misteresse of all dominion and victory, for thereunto all
wars may be brought in the end. And in passinge forth with his army, let
the general avoid streightes, observe good orders, and choose his ground and
ways commodious as he goes. Now let us see, whether policy counsayleth, as
soon as thou art entered into the enemies country, and that he will offer
battle to receive the same, and shortly to try the matter? Herein I am not
of opinion, that it is generally best to detracte battle, except there be some
advantage to be taken and used in ioygning of the same, for so the one may go
about the other long enoughe to little purpose. But other circumstances and
accidents are to be considered in this generaltie. For commonly it is for the
behoufe of him, whose Country is invaded, to seek battle for auoydinge
spoil of the same: But yet it is to be considered, that if the other be like
shortly to be wearied, or be near some mischief by mutine, or for some
wantes forced to forsake the country, and that it should be dangerous to
deal with him for his force, then policye persuades to protracte battle on
that part. And generallye the inuader, as long as he proceadeth with spoil,
to plage the enemy, and to enritche himself, has not necessity to hasten
battle, but may take the time best for his advantage. How be it, occasions
may grow on, otherwise, and be urgent unto him to ioygne battle spedelye, as
by increase of aid coming toward the enemy, or casual empayring of his
own present power. Moreover, unto him which has many hyered soldiers, it is
more requisite to make have unto battle, and to end the wars, as well for
the great charge of that retinue, as for the daily danger of their unsure
service, and doubt of reuoltinge unto the enemy, being money men, by
corruption, or for a greater pay, they lightly leave their master in his
greatest neade. For seldom have theare been great conquestes made by force of
hired men. The Romans, and the Greeks, warred with their own Soldiers
against all nations. Great Pompeye, with the native people of Italy, overcame
Mithridates with his huge Army, of more then twentye Nations. Of later times,
the estates of Italye have been usurped and ouerrunne, by vsinge the help of
hired Soldiers. And the Venetia^s, (having otherwise most excellent
government, and plentyfull prouisyon of all things, both for peace and war)
but for this cause only, had grown to have great Empire. This Realm of
Britayne, has sum^ experience of these hurtes, being sumtime oppressed by the
hired Saxons, under Hengistus. But now to try the trust, and faith of hired
Soldiers before their infidelity, or defection may greatly hurt: It is
good before thy great neade, and day of battle, to send them forth with
a feawe of thine own approved men, to sum^ exploite, supposed to be of great
importance, and to plant priuelie by the way, or to send after them a
sufficient number of trustye Soldiers, to do the same feate, if the other
should be false, or fail in the same. Also it is policye for the same
purpose, to confer with the Captains of them that are suspected of such
matters as thou entendest not to do but in show, to see if they will keape
the same secret, or give priuye aduertysement theareof unto the Enemy. The
like proof is made by delyuering to the leader of the^, letters sealed,
pretending great wayght, and purportinge little, to be sent forth to sum^
friend, to see whether the same should be opened or not saufelye conveyed in
time.

Whether it be more profitable, to seek the great Town, or the less, and
how best to win the same. Cap. 5.
NOw is it further to be known, for taking of houldes within the enemies
dominion, that the larger be rather to be sought for, the^ the less. And
thearefore the City which is of greatest trade to enriche the enemy, or such
large town as is so situate, that it may most annoye him, if thou be able to
furnishe the same with garrisons, is most auaylable for diverse causes.
Alcibiades, the excellent Captain, entering Sicilia to make wars theare,
first took the great City Rhegium, and next besyeged Catina, not far from
Syracuse, the chief City of the Realm. Scipio began his wars in Spain,
with the syege of new Carthage, the principal city there both of trade and
power: And in like sort inuadyng Afrique, he forthwith laid syege unto
Vtica, a famous city, standing on the sea side, wheare he also harbored and
kept his ships, so that he might cut of all aid and succoure, both by land
and sea from the town. Now for the manner of subduing holds, it is to be
agreed, that the best way of wyn ning, is that, which is with most speade,
and least loss. And thearefore, if a Town may not be surprised and taken by
sum^ train or policy, it is less danger to invade and force the enemy, by
famine, then with the swearde. How Zopyrus suttlelie caughte the Babiloniens
(fayninge him self fled from his Prince, for cruelty showed unto him, and
being of them under feigned friendshipe received, betrayed their City,) the
manner theareof is declared at large, in the first book. This shift also has
been used, when a Captain had understanding of aid looked for by the
besyeged, he has apparelled a troop of his own souldyours, under the ensign
of those which should come unto them, and so to have taken the Town. Cimon
of Athens, besieginge a Town, by night set fire on a temple in the suburbs
of the same whearefore sum^ of the Towns men rashelie runninge out to succor
it, the enemy entered in upon the^. Also the besieged are more easelie enduced
to yield, by signifiynge unto them, sum^ great victory latelye had against
their Prince, or other streightes that he is brought into. Sum^ have practiced
to have friends within a town, to persuade them, to issue out upon the
enemy, or to do sum^ other act unto their own overthrow. And such persons
have given intelligence by letters fastened to arrows, and shote forth unto
the enemies, of the state and dealinges within the Town, as of the weakest
part theareof or least defended, of the custom of the watch, when and how
they may be deceived, that the enemy may enter upon them unware. The
Frenchmen corrupted Tarpeia a maiden, to let them in, by a little posterne
door into the Capital of Room. But in this case, diligent examination must
be made by captains, for double dealinge, that they be not abused in their
practices, the same being disclosed unto the enemy: which has sometime
suffered part of the adversaries power, to e^ter within his houlde to their
destruction, having prepared, suddenly to repulse and shutt out the rest. For
the taking of a strong town by famine, it is a good way to win sum^
weaker-nighe, and to turn out the inhabitauntes thereof, that they may be
received into the other, and so their victuals, the sooner consumed. Fabius
suffered the^ of a town, whom he would besiege, to sow their fields, to the
intent that they should have the less corn in store. Sometime, towns be
sieged have desired a parle or truce for a time, to the end that the siege not
being straightly kept, they might in the mean time receive in, aid of me^
or victuals. And therefore the siege ought not to be slacked by such pretense,
but good watch to be always abroad. For it has chanced that an army lying
at the siege of a town, has been on the sudden invaded of enemies at the
back, and withal they of the town have issued forth upon them, to their
overthrow. It must be always holden of the good captain as a principal
ground, that he have diligent espyall of the enemies doings, and keep his
own secret. And therefore he consulteth, and conferreth with many, what is
best to be done: but that which he determines to do, he reuealeth to few or
none. He must also have regard, that his custom or certain order used in
some doings, disclose not any of his purposes un to the enemy, and therefore
the same must be often varied and changed. It is good also to encampe in
such place as the enemy see not what is done within the camp. For if he
perceive that thou receive in, any aid or increase of power, or send forth
any troop to any attempt or exploycte, he armeth him self and provides
accordingly. For as sudden dangers be more dreadful: so a man warned before,
is said to be armed.

How the excellent Captains have encouraged their soldiers unto battle, and
made the^ hardy and valiant in fight. Ca. 6.
IT is to be carefully considered of the captain, that his soldiers be not
afraid when he goes to battaill, but that they may valiantly desire to
encounter the enemy. And therefore such means, as may remove from them
doubt or distruste, and put into them courage and hope, are expedient for him
to find. As for the purpose, some people do stumble much at signs or tokens
which fall before battaill, co^iecturinge there by the determination of God,
and euente or success of the battle. wherefore the wise captain will
chearefullye expound all such chances for his advantage, as if an ancient
happen to fall, upon the Captains head, before the battaill, he says, the
same is a happy sign of the victory fallinge unto him. For they which have
the substance of virtue, are not to be feared by the shadow of conjectures.
It is written of Scipio, that at his landing in Affryque, his feet slipped, so
that he fell down to the ground, where at, when he saw diverse of his army
dismayed, he laughed saying, all is our own, I have hear taken possession of
the land. Other have vsyd by some feigned dream or old prophecy, to put their
soldiers in firm hope and expectation of victory. Marius, when he was to
deal with the Dutchmen, an enemy not accustomed unto the Romans, being
tall big men of person, they were not in clean and quiet conscience with the
matter, but somewhat afraid, which Marius perceauinge, said, those long
bodies show a sure sign, that they be slow, and lasye lowtes, and so stayed
the battaill some days, why lest that the Romans by custom of often sight,
and some skirmishes had with them, were established in stomach, and desired to
fight with the^. It is written of a captain, when his army was in the field
ready to ioygne battle, some of the foremost rank being afraid seeinge the
brave marching of the enemies, he exte^ded and held his cloak before their
faces, saying, now you see nothing to fear, you are saufe, by that means
reproving the^, not to dread before there was cause. Alexander the great,
when he was in the field with his plain soldiers in his first wars, many
of them beeinge poor fellows, having wooden shyeldes, and old weapons used
before in his father Phillip his wars, which seeinge the huge host of
Darius his enemy, with the bravery of the people, their armure and all
things glisteringe, and gorgeous, the noise of a multitude of charyottes and
horses also being terrible unto them, he said to his men, our enemies are
come to make a show or mask, and therefore we must make them dance and run
also. See you those golden armures, gaye weapons, and goodly gear, it is
better to have wooden shyeldes then wooden men to bear them, the spoil of
this glorious host will make you rich and gallant fellows, for all that you
see is yours, if you play the men, and whatsouer king It is written that
Hanniball should use the same speech to king Antiochus, leadinge his galant
army against the Romans.
Darius has besides. Also think you, that this days battle, may geeue us
the dominion and seigniourie over all the world. For who can withstand us, if
we conquer the great king Darius, the fame of which victory will most
swyftlie fly into Graecia, and to the most high honor of your country all
Princes and nations shall know the manhood and prowess of the Macaedoniens,
and where soever you go, the fame thereof shall follow you. Nowesyth that
hither we are come forth to win honor, let not our long trauayles be
frustrate or fruitelesse, and we to run home deluded, and laden with shame.
Our country shall then with dysdayne behoulde you, remembringe how your
ancestors under my father, by force even on their shoulders, lifted up the
dominion thereof over diverse nations, and your selves hunted and chased home,
shall be ashamed to see your frindes. And thearefore if we be here repulsed,
wheare shall we without reproach be received. So that to rest upon, we have
but two ways, wheare of we must determine to take one: that is either to win
the victory, or to dye hear with honor. By these persuasions, (wheare as
Darius thought by his great pomp, and train of men to have daunted and
dismayed the enemy:) Alexander turned the same to be a great encouragement
unto his army. Furthermore, if the soldier be afraid, by store of terrible
ordinance, strange engines, or dangerous deuyses of the enemy, the same must
be by like invention, and industry prevented or encountered, as by settling sum^
ambush priuelie to surprise the same, or by settinge on sum^ band of horsemen,
to interrupte the plantinge theareof, or to make sum^ like exployte as noisome
unto the enemy, that the battle may come on before the same can take effect
to do any great hurt. Thus, must the politic captain make ready, an
Oliver for a roula^de, to remove all stumblinge blocks and impedimentes, from
the good courage of the Soldier, so that without stickinge, most valiantly
he may march to assail the enemy. Julius Caesar excelled other, for
trayninge, and making valiant and noble minded soldiers by notable
examples, politic instructions, and practices which he used to enduce the^
thereunto, and to advance their courages to attempt and atchyeue most high
and honorable things. And with all he showed such courtesy and good affection
toward the^, that never any man had soldiers of greater endeavor and
valor, or more faithful toward their Captain. As it appeared a little
before the great and final battle, between him and Pompeye, when his army
was in such necessitye of victualles, that they had no food, but only of
milk and roots, as they could mingle the same. Yet made they daily
skirmishes with the contrary part, and eftsoons prevailed thearein. An
other time a ship of Caesar's soldiers, beeinge taken by a governor under
Pompeye, which promised unto one of them for the good report which he had of
his manhood; that he should have pardone, and be received to serve Pompeye: he
answered that Caesar's Soldiers used to give life and liberty unto other,
and not to receive the same of alms, or to sell their Captain for crauenous
fear. And so resisting to be apprehended, after that he had slain diverse of
his enemies, he leaped into a river, and escaped by swimming. The soldiers
of Caesar also sustayning so constantly, the great and continual battailles
in France and Germanye, with terrible trauayles over mountains, and hard
passage of ryuers and floodes, in the percyng could, and sharp storms of
winter, showed their invincible courage, and good will to follow their Captain.

How to use victory, and what clemencye is to be used toward the conquered,
and of the hurt which comes by securitye. Cap. 7.
AFter a victory obtained, how to pursue the same, and to deal with the
enemy, two things are to be considered, one is, the enemy being subdued, and
all settled and confirmed in quiet, that tyranny be not showed, but reasonable
laws, orders, and conditions established unto the con quered: The other is,
that theare be no slacknes or negligence used, until the victory be
perfect, and accomplyshed in every part, dangers fled far away, the
force of the Enemy broken down and suppressed. For by securitye, these
myschiefes have grown, that after many battayles with great honor, and
prowess foughten, infinyte trauayles sustained, and sundry Realms subdued,
one days careless securitye and indiscreet dysorder, has subverted all,
turnynge the state of Conquerours into captiuitye. As the Carthaginoys, having
slain the two Scipioes in Spain, and with great ruin repulsed and pulled
down the Romayne power, not regarding those that remained theareof dispersed,
they wear by the relycques of the same army (gathered together under Lucius
Martius) overthrown. Brennus and Belinus before mentioned, beeinge enryched by
the plentiful spoils of Italy, and sack of Rome, as they returned in
security and disorder, wear on the sudden invaded by Camillus, with a feawe
of the people before conquered, and the victory being wrested again out of
their hands, they wear clean bereft the fruits of their former conquest.
The redoubted Cyrus, being the very example of great Alexanders noble
courage, when he had by martial prowess obtained the mighty estate of
Persia, and subdued diverse kingdoms, afterward inuadinge Scythia, wheare he
had a great victory against that fierce nation, by this policye fayning when
he was entered within the Country, that he repented of his attempt, and
making a show of hasty fliynge, left his tents stored with good wynes,
and delicate cheer, which the barbarous people pursuing after, so plied and
typled square, that tomblinge together at night surcharged with wine, and
heavy of sleep, Cyrus not far with drawn, came upon them, and slew them
every mothers son: After which victory, Thomyris Queen of the land, not
discomforted womanlike, (as Cyrus thought, reckoning to rashely with a shrewde
hostis) but purposing and preparing a revenge, by like craft to acquit him,
and over reach him in his own art, she fled far within the country,
fayninge fear, but meaning mischief, to train the enemy followinge in
disorder, and roominge at random into streigtes, where she had priuelye planted
ambushes on the hills on every side, which sodainlye inuadinge Cyrus and his
host, slew them all, so that of two hundred thousand men, there escaped not
one, to make report of the battaill. Marcus Antonius, after many most famous
victories restinge in Egypt out of time, regarded not the dangers at Room,
which seemed so far of removed from him, but soon they came on him, while
he snorted in careless security to his utter overthrow. He that will go
dry, must carrye a cloak for fear of the cloud, which shows from a far.
I will not waste time, to declare the further mischiefs and destructyons
chanced thoroughe rash and ouerhastie reckoninge of unripe victory, and
unsure saufetye. These may suffyce to warn him, which may assure him self
by good order, in arms and battaill to be saufe, and of power invincible, that
by rashness, for lack of guide and circumspect foresyght, he tumble not upon
the enemies sword. After one victory had, forth with the enemy must be
orderly pursued, and not suffered by rest to renew his faintinge force, but
when he staggereth, stryke on still till he be down, and his power fast shutt
up. Then the wars being thoroughlie ended, and the captive living under the
law, and rule of the conqueror, his honor is much increased by shewinge of
clemency, and shunninge of hateful crueltye. For, that humanity requires,
and this, christianitye See Deuteronomy. 20.
commands to do. Sum^ have used their conquestes over such as have yielded
unto their dominion, that sauinge only the change of their prince or
governor, they have suffered no alteration of laws, liberty, estate or
degree. The Romans used to appoint deputies and governors, with competent
garrisons, unto the lands conquered, taxinge them with a mean tribute, and
taking hostages for the same: so they returned, and left the^ quiet. The
noble courtesy, which great Alexander used toward the captyue wife and
daughters of Darius, enlarged and spread abroad his honor, to the furthera^ce
of his conquestes following. What a preparatiue was made unto Scipio his good
success, what a foundation toward the proceadinge of his warrelike affairs,
by his honorable vsinge of prince Luceius his wife, and lyberalitie used
toward Masinissaes nephewe, the great and continual service of those princes
afterward in his wars, as before is recyted, suffy cientlie shows. And
whatsoever laws, fraunchyse or grauntes, the generals of armies have
establyshed and made unto the conquered, the princes and estates, under whom
they were deputed and ordained, have always ratified and inuiolablye observed
and allowed the same compositions.

Of the beginning, and just cause of wars. Cap. 8.
FOr that the just quarrel encouragethe, and commenlye bryngethe prosperous
success: it is to be considered, what may be a good ground and cause to
use weapons, and begin wars, by the law of nature, Justice, and
pryncipallie by the law of God: which ought to be the foundation and rule of
all our doings, of whom we ought to take all our begynninges, by whom
affairs prosperouslye proceade, and happelye end, without whom nothing
encreasethe or grows to any good effect. That wars may be iustlye made,
and how diverse good men have attempted and used the same, we read in the
holy book: Almighty God has stirred up diverse as well Princes, as private
men, or commen persons to take arms, and use force against the wicked. The
children of Israel under Joshua, by Joshua.
the commandment and leadinge of God, conquered the Cananites, expelled the
miscreaunt and idolotrous nations, and possessed their lands. Saul, and
Sampson were raised by him, to plague the Philistynes with battle. The
Assyriens, were King Saul. Sampson.
brought by him into Judea, for the captiuitye of the people, when they ran
at riot, and left to serve the true God, which most meruaylouslye had shown
his power, and most tenderlye his love unto them. Judas Machabeus also, and
Judas Match.
Gedeon, were leaders of the Israelytes against the enemies of God by his
ordinances, by which also, Gedeon.
Iehu, was moved to make wars for the destruction Iehu.
of the house of Ahab. And who sent Titus from Rome, to enuiron Jerusalem,
with the most dreadful and fatal siege, the end and ruin where Titus son
of the emperor Vespatien.
of, was foretoulde by the mouth of the Almighty. But for our purpose, to
show how there may be just cause to levy and prosecute wars, and to
dyscerne of right herein, we are to search for the root and original thereof.
The world, God created and gave unto the sons of men, and this condition,
the geeuer most justly annexed, this he enjoined with all, that no man should
covet, that which to an other belongs, and that to every man belongs,
which he without wrong enjoys. For in the beginning, when there was no
ancient tytles to be made to lands, or lordship: possession caused good
right, this is the law of nature and equality, and it is also in the civil
law allowed, that those things wherein no man has property or interest, are
his, which first possesses them, which he may lawfully houlde, and therefore
ought not by force to be dispossessed of the same. Much less, where
possession is planted, and settled upon ancient right, or grounded on other
good title. A later law there is, of the most high God generally given,
which endures the justice of the first law, that every man should do so,
as he would be done unto. And this is the just measure, the direct rule, and
certain bounds between right and wrong, which beeinge considered, we shall
know how to use wars, and to dyrecte all our doings well. Now let us run
as far as we may, into the course of antiquity, to search the first
beginninges and causes of wars, that we may confer them with the euentes
and success theareof, for the better knowledge and judgment herein. We find,
that Cain the eldest son of Adam, in the first Cain.
time of the world lived so long, that diverse lands in the East parts being
peopled, he builded a city for fear of his enemies, knowinge just cause given
by him to be odious unto men, for the unnatural parricy de and murder of his
brother. For at that time, Iaball the son of Lamech, was grown Iaball.
mighty, and excercised arms against such as used unjust violence or
oppression. Tubalcain was the^ Thubalcain.
the first that wrought on Iron, and forged weapons for that purpose. For as
yet, theare was no kingdom established, nor country by conquest subdued, the
pomp of Princes was not known, men desired not then, soueraintie over
estates, but prepared by arms to shilde their own, in saufetie, when they had
no law to defend them. This beginning of wars was made, in the first age,
and no more we read of, till after the floode: when the three sons of Noah,
with their manifold issue multiplied, possessed the sundry regions of Semin
Asia. Came in Afrique. Iaphet in Europe. Thuball.
the world. Sem settled in Asia, Came came into Afrique, and Iaphet inhabited
Europe, whose offspring shortly spread abroad into the sudry parts, regio^s and
provinces of the same. Then waxed Thuball the son of Iaphet, mighty in
power, and bare rule above the rest. This man renewed again the use of weapons.
Soon after, Nimrod began and aduau^ced Nimrod.
the first kingdom over Chaldea, wheare he buylt the city Babell, subduinge
people and Countreies, by oppression and oultrage of wars, under his
dominion. And thearefore the same violent Empire, lasted not long, but it
shortly sonke, and was drowned in the great estate, which Assure raised in
assirya, the land yet now bearinge his name. Assure.
He buylt the City Niniue, Rezen, and others, by just conquestes, amplifiynge
his seigniorie. After him succeaded Ninus, in the time of the patriarch
Abraham, which enuironned Babylon with a strong wall, and much beawtified
the City, as the chief seat of his estate. He subdued the Bactriens, and
other nations, making unto him self a mighty Monarchye above other Kings,
by honorable, and not injurious wars, as it may appear by the continuance
of this Empire, which remained among the Assiryens, above 1300. years,
until the reign of Sardanapalus, Sardanapalus.
whose estate thoroughe his beastlike lasciuyous life, was taken from him by
Arbactus, a Prince of the Medes. Abraham him self made wars with Arbactus.
Abraham.
the king of Sodom, and four other Princes, vsinge at that time good order
and policye in his battle. And thearefore they that affirm Ninus, Mars, or
Hercules, to be the beginners, Ninus. Mars. Hercules.
and first users of wars, and order of battle, are not learned in reading,
for that theare is large proof of those before alleged. And as for Mars, he
was the son of Saturn, which was king of Crete, at that time when Ianus
raygned in Italye, and that was about the time of Mofes. And Hercules of
Thebes, lived after that, in the time of Saull king of Judea, or a little
before by sum^ writers, which was soon after the buylding of Troy. Mars made
war of ambition, and lordlye mind to rule: But Hercules, the patron of
Justice, and champion of noble prowess, thrust him self into all dangers of
battle, to redress injuries, repress rapyne, and oppression, to root out
tirantes, to maintain and defend right, to spread the valyle of prosperous
peace, and wished saufe securitye over the world, to show example of most
high virtue and valor, punishinge robbers, and purginge countries of
mischeuous malefactors, and v le persons. For which his ryghteous affection,
and just mind, as of deuyne virtue proceadinge, he was after his death
honored and holden as a God. Romulus, to erecte a famous City, and establishe
Romulus.
an happy estate with excellent laws, orders, and government, called people
together, and made wars for the compassinge, and encreasinge thereof. So did
the ancient king Belus of Assiria, and Phoroneus in Grecia, subdue Belus.
Phoroneus.
people to good order and convenient course of life, geuinge unto them laws
for their public benefit and behoufe. In like sort Ianus Ianus. Licurgus.
before recyted, and Licurgus in Lacedaemon, reduced men from idleness, and
leude lasye life, unto good trades, ciuilitye and practyse of virtue, for none
other cause desirynge soueraigntye, but for the good state and profytte of the
people. To this end Minerua, Cecrops, Minerua. Cecrops. Cadmus.
and Cadmus used arms in their times before, (seeing me^ to live in diforder
without government, neither comfortably to the^ selves, nor co^modiouslye one
for an other,) they exte^ded their power and dominion over the^, to refourme
them into an happy and civil sort of life. And diverse nations have
willingly submitted and put them selves under the rule and scepter of such, as
they perceived to be wise, well disposed, and careful of the weal of a
multitude, to be a patron, and a refuge, by their wisdom and experience unto
the^, in their troubles and neades. Thus Plato. Magistratus excellens. Pastor
populi.
seeing that invasion in sum^ cases is tolerable, yelding sufficient matter,
for noble courages to work upon, so that prowess shall never be so shut up,
but it may have a commendable course, if theare be a regard to the fear of
God, for the virtuous direction and good end theareof: the wars for defense
must neades more generally be allowed, whenever wrong is offered, by the
enemy of any estate to the loss, vexation, or empayringe of the same,
wheareby in bodies, goods, minds, possessions, fraunchises, laws,
jurisdictions, credit, honor, or any thing that is of profit or contentation
unto the^, they be anoyed or hurt: the resistinge and encountering wheare of is
just honorable and necessary. The ancient wars of Troy and Thebes, arose
upon great wrongs offered, the first of them, in the time that K. David
raygned, the other, not long after. The Greeks maintained continual wars,
for their liberty, to preserve their public states under elected governors,
and especially to avoid subjection to any foreine nation, which they esteamed
barbarous and rascal, in respect of them selves. The Scythiens, having no
rich or delycate possessions of pleasant or fruitful fields, no substance
or store of goods to loose, yet they fought fiercely to defend the tombs of
their au^cestours (whereof they had their greatest care) from injuries of the
enemy, and defacing. And generally, nature has given to living things, a
desire of defense, and resistinge of wrongs, wherefore that force is better to
be allowed of, the^ invasion. Judas Machabeus said to the Israelites, let us
fight for our lives and our laws. And thus to cut of our course in to the
antiquity of wars, seeing that it is not my purpose now to write thereof,
(yet supposinge thus much not to be impertinent unto him, that would be a
trauayler in the knoweledge and affairs of wars) we conclude by plentiful
proof out of the store of histories, according to our proposition. That
wars justly made, for the more part, grow to good effect, and the violent
empire lasts not long. Battle attempted for pomp, or ambitious desire of
dominion, not regardinge right or wo^ge, seldom has good success: or else the
fruits had thereby, soon fade, such victories take no root. But yet it
remains, to answer one objection, that seems to overthrow and quyte
condemn all our wars, which is, that our Lord Jesus has said, that he
which strikes with the sword, shall perish with the same, which is to be
understood, either of wro^gfull striking', Math. 26.
or else between pryuate persons, which have the sword of the prince and
defense of the law, to remedy their wrongs. Also, where it is commanded,
that he which is stryke^ on the one ear, should turn the other, toreceaue the
like, (it is expounded) whereas the example of such singular patience, may
greatly avail to make such insole^t oultrage, the more odious and detestable,
and that there is a law to punish the same, otherwise wars, and arms may be
used for maintenance and defense of virtue and right, and great good grow
thereof. For in the x, of the Acts of the Act. Apost. 10.
Apostles we read, that the conversation and order of life of the captain
Cornelius, was very well pleasinge and acceptable unto God: and in the tenth
of saint Mathaew, our savior says, I came not to se^d Mathaew. 10.
peace into the earth, but a sword, which proves, that the same may be used
according to the good pleasure of God, thus if we search his will, we shall
find it, and know how to observe and keep it.

Of vyctories, which is the best, and what truce may be honorably made. Cap.
ix.
THat victory is most to be preferred, which may be soonest compassed, and
obtained with least expense, inconvenience and loss, especially of men:
wherein it is to be considered, that the same is made more honorable, and of
greater importance and fame, if perjury, cruel murders, infamous treaso^s,
poysoninge of victuals, or such odious extremities, be not used therein.
Fabius had excellent regard of honor in his conquest, when besieginge a city
of the Faliscyens, a schoolmaster which had the chiefest men's sons of the
town in gouenrme^t and teaching, trained them forth on a time apt for his
purpose, and for hope of reward, brought them into the enemies hands, to the
end that thereby their fathers and friends should be feign to render the
town: But Fabius rewarding him, not iumpe according to his expectation, but
duly for his deserts, he caused the boys to scurge their schole master
well with rods, for betrayinge the trust of their parents, and so sent them
home together singinge unto the citizens, which having his noble virtue in
high admiration, forthwith rendered unto him the town. David, sought not by
murder to wrest the kingdom out of the hands of Saul, but punished him which
had laid hands upon his Lord, anointed and elected of God. Caesar procured
not Pompeye to be slain, but wept when he saw his enemies head. Alexander
pursued Bessus, to revenge the traiterous murder by him committed upon his
enemy, king Darius. The Romans generally, had regard to conquer by
valor and prowess, wherefore they grew most great in Em pire, and were had
in honor and awe of all nations: The Carthagynoys contrarywyse not carynge
how, so they had victory, vsinge foul practices, infidelity, and all bad
shifts to attain the same, shortly lost all. So that the virtue, and
honorable dealinge of the general, shall always avail much to the
prosperous proceadinge of his wars, and more easy accomplyshynge of
victory. He ought to be as a tutor, or rather as a father, tender and
careful over the soldiers committed unto his guide, good order and diligent
providence. The excellent captains of Room, desired rather to save one
citize^ in battle, the^ to destroy many enemies. Cruelty is to be eschued,
except when severity sharply showed may give great example. But where
lenity and prudent means may express and work theffecte of rigor, even
toward enemies, the same is to be used, that they seeinge the excellent
virtue, wisdom, and order of government in the conqueror, may the rather
be allured to commit them selves unto him, when by suffringe exchange of a
ruler, thestate of their welfare, shall not be overthrown or undone, nor
slavery or vile servitude, more odious then death, is not set before them
most obstinately and desperately to be encountered. Now touching occasions
of truce and intermission of wars, Bellum gloriosum, Paci turpi antefevendum.
it is to be considered, that the same be made and done without dishonor, so
that the wars thereby be come not frutelesse, or the army in worse case then
before, as if the enemy crave that for fear, which shall like avail him, and
much encourage the other party. But pollicye wills not to seek truce or
delay, but by constrainte of necessity, or for sum^ auantage to be taken, as
sum^ aid looked for, or in the meanetime to grow into the secrets of the
enemy to sifte his purposes, by conference had with him, to undermine his
doings if he be not very well advised, to search the state of his force and
government. And withal the good captain must be vigila^t and close in his own
affairs. Thus shall not the time be detracted, and the army with great charges
maintained without good purpose or profit.

Of the use, and end of VVarres, and of preparation therefore in time of
peace. Cap. 10,
NOw is it to be determined, that the use of wars ought to be applied for the
defense of right, to shyelde from injuries, and to plant and settle a
commodious state of life, and this use respects and has regard unto a
further effect, to grow thereof: which is the very final end of wars,
that after valiau^t victory or revenge had of the enemy, peace may follow,
and be maintained with honor, free from violence and hostile oppression. So
that other nations, seeing the discipline, and martial prowess of an estate so
well appointed and defended, may fear to offer the^ injuries, and gladlye
desire to have league and favor there, when things in this good stay, and
sauflie are co^fourmed and established, the^ shall learning, and trades
florishe, and crafts men in cunning increase, Goulde^ quiet shall plant good
order to foster frugality, and bring forth the fruits of plenty: where by
the la^d well peopled, good government shall spread the happy state of a
prosperous common weal over al. Good excercises shall be honorably freque^ted,
Plato. Optime tum civitates instituuntur, cum singuli suis operibus incumbunt.
and virtue with all desire and contention endeavored: in which excellent
course of life, we shall find our selves most happy, and do our Lord God best
service, so that our felicity may hereafter endure for ever. One thing more I
would say, and so conclude, that is, for the provision of all things
neadeful, in time of peace, for the mayntenance of wars: for peace is the
nourice of store and increase of things, in which time, if by good providence
respect be not had, to have ready furniture of armor, weapons, money,
munition, men prepared both in minds, and by exercise trained for this
service, it will cause fainte wars: the affairs whereof being premeditate
before hand, proceade the better with out stickinge or strangeness, as the
iourneye, where the way is plain and well known. The time of wars is
troublesome to take counsel in, and more unfit for exactions, but most of
all it is unmeet then to take order and to have things to seek, when they
should be occupied. Also this preparation and furniture for the wars,
would be had of every private manne, according to his ability, as well as
in comen stores of corporations and companies. And such person as is of
wealth, and less able by his person or good counsel for the service and
defense of his Country, ought to extend his good will and forwardnes the
further, for good purueyance to arm and furnishe others theareunto. For he,
that is so sotted in simplicitye, and drowned in baseness of mind, that hopinge
still upon peace, will never advance his consideration or care, for defense,
in time of wars, but employe all his endeavor unto his own private gain or
pleasure, and not lay out any money for the behoufe of the comen state, is
like by his policye to save a fether, and lose the bird, while he snatched at
a shadow, he loses the substance. And the example of such gross careless
security, is very pernicious unto a common weal, for diverse of them, which
have the wealth of the Realm being slack and negligent in this point, it is
not a feawe of the other, though they wear never so careful, or well disposed
and appointed to serve, that can sustain the brunte of wars, and the poor
man can little avail hearein, being thoroughe want of ability, naked both of
armor and experience, having no spare time for the exercise of arms, when
all his endeavor employed to purueye for his necessary lyuinge, can skantlie
suffice theareunto: but his trust is, that thoroughe the circumspecte
providence of them which have whearewithall to do good hearein, he shall
enjoy his pouertye, saufe from captiuitye. So, if the other be unfurnished at
the time of neade, what does he, but bring ruin upon him self, and his dear
Country. Is it not the wished welfare, and a right happy state, wheare
every man may enjoy his own quyetlie, under their natural and gracious
Prince, most careful and tender over the Countreye and people, using such
laws, as the wise men of the Realm, can best deuyse and find out to be
most profitable for all sorts of men: And an horrible miserye more odyous
then any death, to have our Laws, lives, goods, and what soever is dear
unto us, at the list, and under the contempt and rule of the insolent and
cruel enemy, to be spoiled by force, pylled by exactyons, and trybutes, to
live laden with servitude and villanyes. If we will have these avoided, then
must theare be defense Plaut. Libertatem nemo bonus, nisi cum anima simul
amittit.
prepared for the good and prosperous estate: Else is the same by peace enriched
unto spoil, and fatted fit for the tothe of the enemy. For yet never was
theare great and famous estate, whearein arms and laws, civil government,
and martial prowess flourished not together. And now for such as shall serve
in the wars, that they might live honestly and ciuillye after the same
ended, whereby they should less fear to put them selves forth in dangers, if
there wear in every shire of this realm a house ordained for maimed
soldiers, and men worn in the wars, with such provision, that they might
be able to live theare, and not idlelye as A happy common weal, wheare good
laws and arms, are duelye used. Justice and chiualrye maintained.
lasye lorells have done heretofore under cloak of religion, but orderly and
duelye to serve God, and at certain feasts and times convenient, to be
leaders unto the country men, in the orders and arraye of war, and teachers
to the ignorant in the best use of martial weapons and practices: This I
suppose should be well pleasinge unto almighty GOD, and also right honorable,
and profitable unto the Realm.

FINIS.
Tout poiar and louange a Dieu. Amen.

