A LOOKING-GLASS for all LORDLY PRELATES.

WHEREIN THEY MAY Clearly behold the true divine Original and laudable
Pedigree, whence they are descended; together with their holy lives and actions
laid open in a double Parallel, The first, between the Devil; The second,
between the Jewish HighPriests, and Lordly Prelates; and by their double
dissimilitude from Christ, and his Apostles.

ESAIAS LI. I. Look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the
pit whence ye are dug.

JOHN VIII. XXXXIV. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your
Father ye will do; He was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, because there is no truth in him.

MATH VII. XV. XVI. Beware of false Prophets which come unto you in Sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves; ye shall know them by their
fruits.

Printed Anno M. DC. XXXVI.

To the PONTIFICIALL LORDLY PRELATES of England.
MY LORDS,
Being put by your pieties from my Ministry and function, contrary to the
fourth Commandment and Gods sacred Word, To keep my self from idleness, o^
worse employments, I have adventured to draw up and present this
Looking-glass, for a New years gift, to your Lordships, not to defame you
(God is my witness) but to inform, and so reform you (if possible) by the
Parallels therein comprised. If any of the comparisons therein specified, seem
odious, (as commonly most do) to your holiness, you must blame your selves,
not me, who relate only your actions (and compare them with the devils, the
Jewish high Priests, Christ's and his Apostles) but was not the author, nor
occasion of them, And if you amend them and become new men, the Parallels will
soon grow out of date: Neither do I involve you all (...), but coniuctim in
these Parities and disparities; All of you are not alike culpable, But some
more, some less, and some of you (perchance) altogether innocent: I desir^
therefore every of you, to apply so much of it (and no more) to himself as his
own conscience (upon serious examination) shall ascertaine him does appertain
to him. Sure I am, that the whole concerns you all (as united.) And the
greater part, many of you (as divided) God grant you grace to make good use of
it. It is the first degree of reformation, to discover your enormities to you;
(This is my part, not yours; Lo I have here performed it.) The next degree is,
to repent and amend all things amiss; and not to relapse; That is your part
(by Gods concurring grace) I trust, you will speedily execute it; If not, As it
was no railing or slander in Christ, to call Judas a devil John 6. 70. and to
tell the Jews that they wereof their Father the Devil John. 8. 44. So it will
be no reviling, or Scandalum magnatum in me, to say as much to your Lordships,
If your actions prove you such; or to tell you, that you are none of Christ's
Disciples, Sons; or followers, but the devils; None of the Apostles
successors, but the Jewish high Priests, really (though not morally) ceased in
Christ, of whom they were a Tipe. Consider therefore seriously what is here
written, and view your lives and actions in this impartial Glass, and the
Lord give you both understanding, and reformation in all things amiss, (which
now are many) that so you may be Christ's and his Apostles followers and
Disciples in verity, as you are now only in pretense, (as is here in brief
discovered, I hope without offense.

Now least your Lordships should take any just exceptions against any thing I
have written: be it known to you, and all men, by these ptesents, that I am
both able and read^ to make good every particular Parallel against all
gainesayers, by Histories, testimonies, and examples of Lord Prelates, in all
ages, which for breuity sake, I have omitted; the rather, because your selves,
(at leastwise some of your Holinesses) have experimentally ratified all and
every of them past all contradiction. But yet to stop your months, I shall
only acquaint your Lordships what some of our Martyrs have written of Lord
Bishops In his works p. 217. 211.
. Dr. Barnes, our Learned Martyr, recites. That their was no great Clarke in
the Church of God this 400. years, but he complained vehemently against the
pride and lewd living of the Bishops. etc. They say they be ^he successors of
Christ and his Apostles, but I can see them follow none but Judas. For they
bear the purse and have all the money. And if they had not so great
possessions, I am sure an hundred would speak against them, where now dare not
one, for lofse of Promotion. As for this Article, I will overcomme you with the
witness of all the world, you may well condemn it for herefie, but it is as
true, as your Pater noster: Judas sold our Master but once, and you sell him
as often as he comes in your hands. But I would it were, you could prove me a
liar, and that you followed any of the Apostles saving Judas only. Yea, I would
that you were in certain points as good as Judas was, etc. Take it to you and
make the best you can of it. Yea he goes one strain higher. Page 284. 198.
I do reckon (says he) of our English Lord Prelates your Lordships
Predecessors) that you are ten times worse then the great Turk: for he
regards no more, but rule and dominion in this world? and you are not
therewith content, (and I shall say the same to you my Lords) but you will also
rule over men's consciences, yea and oppress Christ and his holy word, and
blaspheme and condemn his word. They call themselves in words, the servants of
servants; but in very deed, they will be Lord over all Lords, and desire to be
taken as Lords and King over al Kings. These truths he sealed with his blood.

In his works p. 116.
John Frith our godly Martyr, writes thus: After that the office of a Bishop
was made so honorable and profitable, they that were worst both in learning and
living, most labored for it: For they that were virtuous would not entangle
themselves with the vain pride of this world. And in conclusion it came so
far, that whosoever would give most money for it, or best could flatter the
Prince (which he knew well all good men to abhor) had the pre-eminence and got
the best Bishopric: and then instead of Gods word, they published their own
Commaundments, and made Laws to have all under them, and made men believe they
could not err, whatsoever they did or said. And even as in the rooms and
steed of Moses, Aaron, Eliazer, Joshua, Calib, and other faithful folk, came
Herod, Annas, Cayphas, Pilate and Judas, which put Christ to death: So now in
steed of Christ, Peter, Paul, James and John, and the faithful followers of
Christ: we have the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, and proud Prelates
with their Proctours, the malicious Minister of their Master the devil; which
notwithanding transform themselves into a likeness, as though they were the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. So
that the body is cankered long ago, and now are left but certain small
members which God of his puissant power, has reserved uncorrupted: and because
they see that they cannot be ca^kered as their own flesh is, for pure anger
they burn them, lest if they continued there might seem some deformity in
there own cankered carcass, by the comparing of these whole members to their
scabbed body. So he.

Mr. William Tyndall, our must devout Martyr; as he terms, Practice of Popish
Prelates p. 343.
the Pope and Lordly Prelates (Especially those who thrust themselves into, or
meddle with temporal Offices and affairs,) Wolfes in a Lambs (Sr. John
Lambs) skin; calling themselves in the title of (...) Cham Seruus Seruorum,
servants of all servants, and are yet found, tyrannus tyrann^rum, of all
tyrants the most cruel. So he determines thus of Lord Bishops. Obedience of a
Christian man p. 114. 138. 135.
Bishops they only can Minister the temporal sword, their Office the preaching
of Gods word laid apart, which they (as your Lordships now) will neither do,
nor suffer any man to do; but slay with the temporal sword (which they have
gotten out of the hand of all Princes) them that would. The preaching of Gods
word is hateful and contrary unto them Why it is; that B. put down preaching.
why? For it is impossible to preach Christ, except thou preach against
Antichrist, that is to say, them which with their false doctrine and violence
of sword enforce to quench the true doctrine of Christ. And as thou can heal
no disease except thou begin at the root, even so can thou preach against
no mischief (mark it) EXCEPT THOU BEGIN AT THE BISHOPS. Kings they are but
shadows, vain names and things idle, having nothing to do in the world, but
when our holy Father needs their help. The Emperor and Kings are nothing now
adays but even hangmen unto the Pope and Bishops, to kill whomsoever they
condemn, without any more ado, as Pilate was into the Scribes and Pharisees
and the high Bishop to ^ange Christ. What Realm can be in peace for such
^urmoilers? Bishops that preach not, or that preach ought save Gods Word, are
none of Christ's, nor of his anointing; but servants of the Beast, whose mark
they bear, whose word they preach, whose Law they maintain clean against
Gods Law. Acts and Monuments edi. 1610. page 462. 463.
The Prelates with the rabble and multitude of their ceremonies, have put away
preaching: and as ignorance made us servants to ceremonies; so ceremonies are
the chief cause of ignorance. Thus and much more, Tyndall. Now because I have
Paralleld your Lordships and the devil together, least this should seem
harsh, or a great Scandalum magnatum to your Honors.

I shall conclude this my Epistle to your Lordships, with that notable Epistle
of Lucifer Prince of darkness, written to your noble Progenitors, by William
Swinderby, or some other Lollard, (as they termed them, and you now call us
Puritans in the selfsame malicious scornful manner,) transcribed by our
laborious Mr. John Fox, out of the Bishop of Hereford his Register, into his
Acts and Monuments in these very words, which suite as pat with your Lordships
as if it had been purposely penned for your selves alone.

The (...) of a certain letter fained under the name of Lucifer Prince of
darkness, writing to the persecuting Prelates of the Popish Clergy.
I Lucifer Prince of darkness and profound The Epifile of Lucifer, to the
proud Prelates of the Popes Clergy.
heaviness, Emperor of the high Mysteries of the King of Achar^nt, Captain of
the dungeon Erebus, King of hell, and controller of the infernal fire: To all
our children of pride, and companions of our Kingdoome, and especially to our
Princes of the Church of this latter age and time (of which our adversary
Jesus Christ, according to the Prophet, says: I hate the Church or
congregation of the wicked) send greeting, and wish prosperity to all that obey
our commandments, as also to all these that be obedient to the Laws of Satan
alrea^y enacted, and are diligent (...) of our behests, and To difference
between the Bishops of primitive Church and of the latter Church
the precepts of our decree. Know ye that in times past eertaine vica^s or
vicegerents of Christ, following his steps in miracles and virtues, living and
(...) in a beggarly life, converted (in a manner) the whole world from the
yoke of our tyranny unto their doctrine and manner of life: to the great
de^ision and contempt of our prison house and Kingdom^, and also to the no
little prejudice and hurt of our Jurisdiction and authority, not fearing to
hurt our fortified power, and to offend the Majesty of our estate. For then
received we no tribute of the world, neither did the miserable Humility
edifieth.
sort of common people, rush at the gates of our deep dungeon as they were wont
to do, with continual Pride destroys.
pealing and rapping, but then the easy, pleasant and broad way, which
leads to death, lay still without great noise of trampling travelers,
neither yet was ^rod with the feet of miserable men. And when all our Courts
were without suitors, Hell then began to houle. And thus continuing in great
heaviness and anguish, was robbed and spoiled. Which thing considered, the
impatient rage of our stomach could no longer suffer, neither the ugly
rechlesse negligence of our great Captain general could any longer endure it.
But we, seeking remedy for the time that should come after, have provided us
of a very trim shift: for in stead of these Apostles and other their adherents
which draw by the ^ame line of theirs, as well in manners as doctrine, and are
odious enemies to us: we have caused you to be Placing of all mischief.
their successors, and put you in their place, which be Prelates of the church
in these latter times, by our great might and subtlety, as Christ has said of
you: They have Thechurch never well governed since the devils ^ere taken of
the Churchmen.
reigned, but not by me. Once we promised unto him all the Kingdoms of the
world; if he would falldowne and worship us; but he would not, saying, My
Kingdom is not of this world, and went his way, when the multidudewould have
made him a temporal King. But to yo^ truly which are fallen from the state of
grace and that serve us in the earth, is that my promise fulfilled: and all
terrene things by our means which we bestowed upon you, are under gov^rment.
For he has said of us ye know: The Prince of this world comes, etc. And has
made us to reign over all children of vnbeleese. Therefore our adversaries
before recited, did patiently submit themselves unto the Princes of the world,
and did teach that men, should do so, saying: Be ye subject to every creature
for Gods cause, whether it be to the King as most chiefest. And again: Obey ye
them that are made rulers over you, etc. For so their Master commanded them
saying: The Kings of the heathen, have dominion over them, etc. But I think it
long till we have powered our poison upon the earth, and therefore fill
yourselves full. And now be ye not unlike those fathers, but also contrary
unto them in your life and conditions, and extol yourselves above all other
Pride in Prelates noted.
men. Neither do ye give unto God that which belongs to him, nor yet to
Caesar that which is his: but exercise you the power of both the swords,
according Popish Pre lates neither give to God no^ Caesar that which belongs
to God and Caesar.
to our decrees, making yourselues doers in wordly matters, fighting in our
quarrel, entangled with segular labors and business. And clime ye by little
and little from the miserable state of poverty, unto the highest seats of all
honors, and the most princely places of dignity by your devised practices,
and false and deceitful wiles and subtlety: that is, by hypocrisy,
flattery, lying perjurie, treasons, deceits, simonie and other greater
wickedness then which our infernal suries may dev^se. Thedouble Jurisdiction
of the Popes tw^ s^ords comes of Lucifer.
For after that ye have been by us advanced thit^er where ye would be, yet
that does not suffice you, but as greedy starvelings more hungry then ye were
before, ye suppress the poor, scratch and rake together all that comes to
hand, perverting and turning every thing topsie (...): so swollen, that ready ye
are to burst for pride, living like Lechers in all corporal dilicatenesse,
Dominus. Sanctus. Sanctijimus.
and by fraud directing all your doings. You challenge to yourselves names of
honor in the earth, calling your selves lords holy, yea and most holy
fathers.

Thus, either by violence ye raven, orelse by ambition, subtillie ye pi^ter
away and wrongfully wrest, and by false title possess those goods which for
the sustentation of the poor members of Christ (whom from our first ^all we
have hated) were bestowed and given, consuming them as ye yourselves list, and
wherewith The lascivious and (...) life of the Romish Clergy.
ye cherish and maintain an innumerable sort of whores, strump^ts, and (...)
with whom ye ride pompous^ie like mighty princes, far otherwise going, then
those poor beggarly Priests of the primitive Church. For I would ye should
build yourselves rich and gorgeous palaces: ye farelike princes, eating and
drinking the most daintiest meats, and pleasantest wines that many be gotten;
ye hoord and heap together an infinite deal of treasure, not like to him
that said, Gold and silver have I none; ye serve and fight for us according to
your wages. O most acceptable society or fellowship, promised unto us of the
Prophet, and of those fathers Vhe whorish latter Church of Rome.
long ago reproved: whilst that Christ called thee the Synagogue of Satan,
and likened thee to the mighty whore which committed fornication with the
Kings of the earth, the adultero is spouse of Christ, and of a chaste Pope
Successor not of Simon Peter, but of Simon Magus.
person made a strumpet. Thou have left thy first love and have cleaved unto
us, O our beloved Bab^lon, O our citizens, which from the transmigration of
Jerusalem come hither: we love you for your deserts, we rejoice over you, which
contemn the Laws of Simon Peter, and embrace the Laws of Simon Magus our
friend, and have them at your fingers ends, and exercise the same publickely
Wicked and unworthy Ministers admitted in the Popes Church Unworthy bestowing
of benefices.
buying and selling spiritual things in the Church of God, and against the
Commandment of God. Ye give benefices and honors by petition, or else for
money, for favor, or else for filthy service. And refusing to admit those
that be worthy, to Ecclesiastical dignity, you call unto the inheritance of
Gods sanctuary, bauds, liers, flatterers, your nephews, and your own
children, and to a childish boy, ye give many prebends, the least whereof ye
deny to bestow upon a poor good man: ye esteem the person of a man and
receive gifts, ye regard money and have no regard of souls. Ye have made the
Extorsion.
house of God a den of thieves. All abuse, extorsion, is Perverting of
Justice.
more exercised, a hundredth fold in your judgment seats, then with any secular
tyrant. Ye make laws and keep not the same, and dispense with your
dispensations as it pleases you; you justify the wicked for reward, Acception
of person.
and take away the just man's desert from him. And briefly, ye perpetrate or
commit all kind of mischief, Bribery.
even as it is our will ye should. And ye take much Love of lucre.
pains for lucres sake in our service, and especially to destroy the Christian
faith. For now the lay people are Dstructio of true faith.
almost in doubt what they may believe, because if ye preach any thing to them
at sometimes (althouhg it be but seldom seen, and that negligently enough,
even as we would have it) yet notwithstanding they believe you not, because
they see manifestly that ye do clean contrary to that ye say. Whereupon the
common The life of Papists contrary to their teaching.
people doing as ye do, which have the government of them, and should be an
example unto them of well doing: now many, of them leaning to your rules, dee
run headlong into a whole sea of vices: and so continually a very great
multitude flocketh at the strong and well fenced gates of our dungeon. And
doubtless, ye send us so many day by day of every sort and kind of people,
that we should not be able to entertain them, but that our insatiable (Choas
with her thousand ravening jaws is sufficient to devour an infinite number of
souls. And thus the sovereignty of our empire, by you has been reformed,
and our intolerable loss restored. The Pope increases hell.
Wherefore, most specially we commend you, and give you most hearty thanks;
exhorting all you, that in any wise ye persevere and continue, as hitherto ye
have done: neither that you slack henceforth your enterprise. For why? by your
helps we purpose to bring the whole world again under our power and dominion.
Over and besides this, we commit unto you no small authority, to supply our
places in the betraying of your brethren; and we make and ordain you our
vicars, and the Ministers of Antichrist our son, now hard Antichrist
at hand, for whom ye have made a very trim way and passage. Furthermore, we
counsel you which occupy the higest rooms of all other, that you work
subtillie, and that ye (fainedly) procure peace between the princes The Pope a
fained procurer of peace between princes.
of the world, and that ye cherish and procure secret causes of discord. And
like as craftily ye have destroyed and subverted the Roman Empire: so suffer
ye no kingdom to be overmuch enlarged or enriched by tranquillity and peace;
lest perhaps in so great tranquillity (al desire of peace set aside) they
dispose themselves to view and eonsider your most wicked works, suppressing on
every side your estate: and from your treasures take away such substance, as we
have caused to be reserved and kept in your hands, until the coming of our
well beloved son Antichrist. We would ye should do our commendations to our
entirely beloved daughters, pride, deceit, wrath, avarice, bellicheere, and
lechery, and to all other my daughters; and especially ho lady Simonie,
which has made you men, and Simony the Popes nurse
enriched you, and has given you suck with her own breasts, and weaned you,
and therefore in no wise see that ye call her sin. And be ye lofty and
proud, because that the most high dignity of your estate does require such
magnificence. And also be ye covetous, for what soever ye get and gather into
your fardell, it is for St. Peter, for the peace of the Church, and for the
defense of your patrimony and the Crucifix; and therefore ye may lawfully do
it. Ye may promote your Cardinals Promoting of proud and rich Cardinals
to the higest seat of dignities, without any let in all the world, in stopping
the mouth of our adversary Jesus Christ, and alleging again, that he
preferred his kins folks (being but of poor and base degree) unto the
Apostleship; but do not you so, but rather call, as Cloked holiness.
ye do, those that live in arrogancy, in haughtiness of mind, and filthy
lechery, unto the state of wealthy riches and pride; and those rewards and
promotions, which the followers of Christ forsook, do ye distribute unto your
friends. Therefore as ye shall have better understanding, prepare ye vices,
clocked under the similitude of virtues. Allege for yourselues the glosses of
the holy Scripture, and wrest them, directly for to serve Wresting of
Scripture.
for your purpose. And if any man preach or teach otherwise then ye will,
oppress ye them violently. With the sentence of excommunication, and by your
censures heaped one upon another, by the consent of your brethren; let him be
condemned as an heretic, and let him be kept in most strait prison, and there
tormented Tyranny and cruelty by the P pe.
till he die, for a terrible example to all such as confess Christ. And
setting all favor apart, cast him out of your temple, lest peradventure the
ingrafted word may save (...) souls, which word I abhor as I do the souls
of o her saithfull men. And do your endeavor, that ye (...) deserve to have the
place which we have prepared for you, under the most wicked dw^lling on of our
dwelling place. Far ye well with such felicity as we desire and intend
finally to reward and recompense you with.

Given at the center of the earth, in that dark place, where all the rablement
of devils were present, specially for this purpose called unto our most
dolorous Consistory, under the the Character of our terrible seal, for the
confirmation of the premises.

Ex Registro Herefordensi ad verbum Ex Registro Hereford.


This letter of Lucif^r to your Lordly Predec^ssors, then, will I trust, excuse
my Epistle and Parallels here dedicated to your Lordships, now; both from the
unjust imputation of calumny, slander, or reviling. And so leaving your
Lordships to Ve^we and reueiw your selves in this new Looking-glass made
purposely for your sweet holy faces, I take my leave of you (as I trust you
will now do of all your Lordlinesse, worldliness, pride, and other vices,
here discovered) till you have exactely trimed yourselves thereby, to make
yourselves more amiablc both to God and man, then now you are.

A notable Jesuiticall Policy of some Lordly Prelates, worthy consideration.
SOme great domineering Lord Prelates to advance their own power, and draw all
men to their party, have of late endeavored to ingrosse into their hands, the
disposal of most Ecclesiastical dignities (as Bishoprics, Deanneres,
Prebendaries, Headships in the Universities, presentations to most great
Benefices, and the like) and of many temporal preferments; together with the
Custody of his Majesty's Treasury. By this policy: First, they keep all men
from preferment (how deserving, learned and pioussoever) but those of their
own faction and creatures. Secondly, they make their own party very great and
strong in all Courts of Justice, and places of the Realm, so as none dare
oppose them in the least measure, no not in cases which highly concern both
GOD, the King, Religion, and the whole Realm. Thirdly, they are more feared
and crowched to then the King himself, or all his Nobles. Fourthly, they would
win all men to their own opinions, humors and superstitions, out of hopes of
preferment, which else they have no way to attain. Fifthly, they have many
Clergy men so wholly at their command, that they will write, preach, practice,
defend, any errors, false Doctrines, Innovations, Superstitions or popish
Ceremonies, their Lordships shall command or desire them, to obtain their
favors and advancement. Sixthly, by this means they gain scouts and spies in
every corner of the Kingdom, in Court, City, Country, and in most Noble-mens,
and Gentlemen's families; (whose Chaplains are now for the most part, naught
else but these great Prelates agents and Intelligencers;) so that nothing can
be done or spoken against them, or intended for their prejudice, but they have
present information of it. Seventhly, by this policy, they keep all men under
their girdles, crush all that dare oppose them, stop the current of Justice;
bolster out all their popish agents and opposing officers, setup Popery again
without much noise or opposition, oppress his Majesty's good Subjects,
extirpate piety and Religion, rob his Majesty, his Nobles and officers of there
Authority, Privilidges and power to prefer well-deserving men, (and so by
consequence, deprive them of much honor, service, respect, observance and
thankfulness for benefits to be received;) advance their own Episcopal power,
jurisdiction, Course, beyond all moderation and bounds, and in a manner do and
say what they list without opposition or control. This Jesuitical stratagem
of theirs (prescribed by Conc' in his Politiques, as one of the chief means
to undermine Religion, and all protestant States and Churches,) is worthy his
Majesty's and his Nobles most serious consideration, and prevention in due
time; for fear it inslave them and the whole Kingdom to the Pope and
Prelates, before they are aware of it.

Great Reverend Lord Prelates are like to that we call a Sir Reverence; the
more they stir and are stirred, the worse, the more they stink. They are
like David's mountains, Ps. 144. 5. If men do but touch them and their vices,
they will smoke, yea storm and rage like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest,
whose waterscast up mire and dirt, Isay. 56. 20. Hence they labor to
suppress, sease and call in all good Books, (yea the Palsgraves New-printed
Declaration in affront to his Highness and his Churches, because it censures
some of their idle Ceremonies and Arminian Doctrines, though tacitly and
moderately by way of Apology;) our Savior himself gives us the true reason,
Why: John 3. 20. For every one that does evil hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be discovered and reprooved; as
their Lord ships now are pretty well, if not to their amendment, yet doubtless
to their shame.

Gentle Reader, ere thou read this Treatise be pleased with thy pen to
correct these Presse-errors.
Page 2. line 2. read Parallels: p. 3. l. 17. for fable, r unstable l. 6. p 4.
Iowne; c drown l. 9 be sure: l. 19. but weeks. p. 8. l 3. mak^s. p. 10. l 7.
and not, r. as not. p. 12. l. 11. traducing: l. 30. that, r. their. p. 14. l.
22. Fathers: p. 15 l. 24. them, r. their p. 16. l. 3. habe^s: p. 17. l. 8
publish: p. 18. l. 25. a practice: p. 19. l. 5. Bayli. l 7. urge this. l. 25.
ancient. l. 29. Crantzius. l. Testium, Aventimus. l. 32. Hypocrites p. 21. l.
9. heart. p. 22. l. 17. bruize, r. bring. p. 23. l. 3. Bacchanals. l. 12.
Rainsford p. 24. l. 13. Ed. 6 p. 25. l. 3. ransant: Banger. l. 5. his: r. her.
p. 26. l. 7. fends. r. feudes. p. 29. l. 25. Newman. r. Nucoman: p. 30. l. 25.
ods. p. 33. l. 37. Altars. p. 34 l. 13. cease. p. 37. l. 30. have. p. 39. l.
28. Postils. p. 40. l. 15. strumpet. p. 41. l. 1. haunt, r saunt. l. 12. Gor. r
Gee. l. 16. hung. l. 19. home. p. 42. l. 9. them. r. then. p. 44. l. 15. 29 set
up: p. 46. l. 8. committing. p. 47. l. 3. power. r. Boner. p. 48. l. 15. their
expunging. p. 51. l. 27. presents, eat, r. persecute, rate. p. 52. l. 2.
drink: r. drunken. p. 55. l. 28. memorable. p. 56. l. 25. this for any answer
of bisp. 59. l. 16. Cant. (...). Court. p. 62. l. 13. Kings. r. (...). l. 23.
condemn. p. 63. l. 8. Thou. r. then: p. 64. l. 2. r. upon one Cross, but the
Bishops nail him again unto. p. 66. l. 13. Archbishops. l. 19. to be. p. 67.
l. 11. bed. l. 22. grace: r. year. p. 83. l. 6. obedient, apparent. l. 13.
Tipes. r. texts. l. 27. friends. r feindes. p. 80. l. 9. bletout, the. l. 30.
early. r. rarely. p. 87. l. 10 deaths. p. 79. l. 22. no doubt. p. 80. l. 8.
enrich. l. 28. pomp. p. 89. l. 26. r, walk directly p. 97. l. 5. for. r.
fore: p. 92. l. 23. etc. and. p. 96. l. 10. money. r. many. l 12. illegal. l.
15. woeful. l. 19. which of. r. whether. p. 97. l. 20. Occupy. 98. l. 10.
thus. r. there. l. 11. birelings. l. 9. blot out are: l. 13. humble, r.
tremble. p. 100. l. 14. or r. 2. 101. l. 18. beats. r. brats. p. 102. 1. his,
r. this. p. 103. l 5. instead. r. infested. l. 13. been. r. beire. l. 22. 1
beseech.

In the Margin.

P. 9. l. 5. r. 414 p. 82. l. 3. 9. sublimiori, columnae. p. 97. l. 24. p. 14.
this is omitted.

A LOOKING-GLASS For all LORDLY PRELATES.
THERE is nothing now more rife in the mouths of many great domineering Lordly
Prelates, then, that their Lordly Episcopal Jurisdiction, Pomp and
Sovereignty, is of divine Institution, and that their Sacred Lordships, are
undoubted, Sons, Successors, heirs of Christ, and his Apostles Which men
might well enough believe, did not their lives and actions most apparently
contradict these their ambicious windy words; But if men may judge of a Tree by
the fruits, (as our Savior concludes they may, Math. 7. 16.) or of men's true
Fathers, and Pedigrees by their works (as he also resolves John. 8. 44.) I
hope these arrogant lofty Prelates, will not be offended with me, if I make it
apparent to them (and others) by their fruits and works, that they are so
far from being the Sons or Successors of Christ and his Apostles, or of
divine Institution, that, they are of their Father the Devil ( for his works
and lusts they do) the successors from the Jewish high Priests, who crucified
our Savior, Persecuted, silenced, imprisoned, excommunicated his Apostles, And
so, of Diabolical ordination; not Divine.

This I shall plainly and briefly demonstrate, in two distinct Parallers. The
first, between the Devil and Lordly Prelates. The second, between the Jewish
high Priests and them.

The 1. Parallel between the Devil and Lordly Prelates.
1. First, the Devil (for his condition and quality) is an Apostate Angel,
who kept not his first estate and (...), and abode not in the truth. Jude 6.
John. 8. 44. Such are all Lordly Prelates and Bishops, both by their own
exposition of Rev. 2. 1. 5. 6. William Bishop of Rochester his first Sermon
before K. James at Hampton Court Sept. 21. 1606.
Where they interpret, B. Downham his consecration Sermon and the defense
thereof: with B. Bancrofts Sermon and others.
the Apostate Angel of the Church of Ephesus, to be the Lord-Bishop of that
Church alleging this Text as the principal Scripture, to prove their
Hierarchy of Divine Institution;) and by common experience: For as Lord
Bishops are fallen from the piety, holiness, humility, poverty, zeal,
meekness, laboriousnesse, heavenly mindedness, charity, and equallity with
other Ministers, that was in the true Christian Bishops of the Primitive Church
and now openly avow the Popish and Arminian Doctrine of The Total and Final
Apostasy of the Saints from grace. So most of them B. Mountague in his Appeal
to Caesar: B. White in ^rabounces (...).
being made Lord Bishops, (to prove this doctrine of Apostasy true by their
practice) fall away from the piety, zeal, holiness, meekenesfe, diligence,
frequency in preaching, and most other virtues which they had or used in verity
or pretense, before they were made Bishops (in case they had any virtue or
goodness in them before, of which too many of them were never guilty,) and
become far worse Christians, ^arre greater Persecutors and enemies to God,
his truth, his people, and more unholy, coveto^s, lasie, vicious in their lives
then ever they were before; as all histories and experience manifest, beyond
all contradiction.

And how many of our present Lord Prelates are turned open Apostates from the
established doctrine and discipline of this Church of England to Popery,
Arminianisme and Romish superstition, and all the zeal, the honesty, the piety
and goodness they had or seemed only to have before they were Lord Bishops, I
leave to every man's experience to determine, some of the best of them being so
strangely warped of late, that it made a great Popish learned Lord confess
openly at the Table this last summer, That if ever he altered ^is Religion,
he would turn Puritan; for Puritans ( says he) are constant to their own
Religion and Tenets, but the Bishops so fable and wavering with the times, that
we know not where to have them, such Apostate Angels are they.

Secondly, the Devil is an unclean spirit, void of holiness, full of all
filthiness and impiety, and is hardly ^ast out of those he once possesses,
Math. 10. 1. 6. 12. 43. Mark 1. Godwins catalogue of Bishops: The Acts of
English Votaries by Bale Centur. Mag. 4. 10. 13. c. 7. and 10.
23, 26, 27. c. 5. 2. 8. c. 7. 25. Luke 4. 33. 36. c. 6. 18. Acts 8. 7. Such
are most Lordly Prelates in all respects, witness their Balaeus and Platina de
vitis Pontificum.
u^cleane, profane, voluptuous, impious, godless lives and actions in all
ages. Of which all histories stincke and surfeit; to omit the present
filthin^sse of many of them: And how hard they are to be cast out where once
they get but footing, our own histories and instant experience too well
demonstrate.

Thirdly, the Devil is a dumb and deaf spirit, making some m^n dumb, yet
never any Preachers that I read of, except Prelates or thos^ that ^ould be
such) d^b, that they cannot speak, and oth^s (...) that they cannot h^re, till
Christ dispossessed them of these Devils, Mark 9. 17 25. Luke 11. 14. Such
are Lordly Prelates for the most part; they are not only d^be themselves, very
seldom or never preaching in their Diocese, or opening their mo^thes in the
Pulpit to teach the people, whom they of^er bite and ^eare with their teeths,
then instruct with their toungues. And also deaf, in turning the deaf care to
the cries, petitions and lamentable complaints of those many godly faithful
painful Ministers and people now most injuriously oppressed, persecuted,
silenced imprisoned vexed ruined, and deprived by them, both of the foo^ of
their souls and bodies: (such inexorable merciless deaf Devils are they, to
these, and all good motions else. But likewise by their ill examples, make
diverse other preaching Ministers dumb and mute, and by their illegal
suspensions inhibitions Injunctions or Excommunications, close up the mouths,
and muzzle up the tongu^s of sundry other the most powerful, frequent constant
preachers whom their examples cannot silence, (as late woeful experience every
where manifests, Especially in Norwich Diocese) By means whereof; as also by
suppressing most weeke-day Lectures, with all afternone Sermons on the Lords
Day in most Countries, and prohibiting people that have no preaching at home,
to go out of their Parishes to hear Gods word abroad, they make thousands
every where so deaf, that they cannot hear the sweet vovce of the Gospel
preached though they desire it: Such dumb yea deaf Devils are many Lord
Prelates now become, whom Christ himself (no ^oubt) and that by miracle will
shortly cast out, that so our dumb silenced Ministers, may once more speak,
and our d^afe people hear his s^cred word, to the vnspeacable comfort and
salvation of their souls.

Fourthly, The devil is an evil spirit, who does nothing else but vex,
torment, tear, torture and disquiet men, of purpose, to destroy them Math. 15.
22. Mark. 9. 18, 20, 22. Luc^e. 6. 18. And have not domineering Lord Prelates
been like the Devil, in this respect, in all ages heretofore, (as the Acts
and Monuments of our Martyrs, collected by Master Fox, sufficiently
demonstrate?) Yea, What else do many of them at this day, (but like so many
tormenting Devils) vex, torment, tear, torture, pill, pole, Pursevant, toss
up and down from Court to Court, prison to prison and disquiet all kinds of
people, Especially godly Ministers and Christians (whom they brand with the
name of Puritans) with their daily Citations, Excommunications, Suspensions,
Pursevants, Apparitors, Chancellors, Officials, Visitors, Archdeacons,
Visitation-Oathes, Articles, Injunctions, new minted Ceremonies, Innovations,
Slauders, false accusations, fines, Sequestrations, Censures, Exactions,
Procurations, Extorted, ^es etc. Of purpose to fleece, Flay, and destroy them?
So like are they in this particular also, to their Father the devil.

Fifthly, The devil casts same of Gods Saints, and Ministers ofttimes into
Prison. Rev. 2. 10. Yea, into the fire sometimes, and sometimes into the water,
to destroy them, Mark. 9. 22. The Lordly Prelates have done the like in all
ages, Witness the French and English Acts and Monuments: of Martirs, Which
record, how many of Gods Saints and Ministers they have imprisoned, cast into
the fire and water burned, drowned; This they still proceed to do in
foreign parts; And though they neither burn nor down them, as yet, here at
home, (not so much for want of will, as Law to do it) Yet like so many Furies,
they now daily silence, excommunicate, deprive, pursivant, imprison, fine,
bannish, and ruin them, as much as in any age whatsoever, And if they cannot
burn them at a Stake, they will sure to crop of their ^res, and shed their
blood on some Pillary, and then mue them up in a Prison all their days, A
lingering la^ing tyranny, far worse then present Mar^irdome.

Yea in this particular instance they far outstrip the very Devil himself;
in two things: For where as, he^ cast but some only of Gods Saints and
Ministers into prison and that, but for ten days, Revel. 2. 10. They commonly
cast not some, but many of them into prison, and that not only for ten days,
weeks, nay months, and years, and ofttimes during life: And whereas Paul
though imprisoned under that most b^oody Devil and Tirant Nero in Pagan Rome,
had so much liberty, as to dwell two years space together in his own hired
house, and (...) receive all that came in unto him: Preaching the Kingdom of
God, and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ with all
confidence NO MAN FORBIDDING them, Act. 28. 30. 31. Neither the Devil, nor
Nero shutting him up close prisonner: Yet these Lord Prelates to show
themselves more cruelly barbarous and Tyrannical then either the Devil or
Nero, have anciently, and yet daily do shut up diverse of Gods Ministers and
people close prisonners, restraining all free access of friends, or company to
them, and are so far from permitting or not prohibiting them to preach in
prison, that they inhibit and forbid them to preach even when they are at
large, such is their fatherly piety, pity, love, and charity, their very
tender mercies (just like the divils) being naught else but cruelties. Pro. 12.
10.

Sixthly. The devil i^ an exceeding feirce and furious spirit, who desires to
have nothing to do with Christ, whose sacred presence torments him before his
time Math. 8. 28. 29. And when he leaves his house for a time, and then
returns and finds it swept and garnished, he takes with him 7. other
spirits more wicket then himself, and they enter in and dwell there, and so
the last estate of that man, in whom^ they reside, is worse ^hen the first.
Math. 12. 23. 24. 25. Luke 11. 24, 25. So most Lord Prelates are exceeding
fiery, fierce, and furious spirits, who will not be crossed or affronted in any
thing be it never so impious See Bishop Whites Treatise of the Sabbath: 7. 266.
or unjust. Noe Kings, Lords, Nobles, being so violent, unreasonable,
outrageous malepart, feirce, chollericke peremptory, or furious in their
designs, or pursuit of their ends as they; moreover they desire to have
little or nothing to do with Jesus Christ, or his sacred Ordinances which the
sincere and diligent reading, preaching discoursing and meditation of his
Pocklington, Heylyn, and others.
word, the due administration of his Sacrements, the strict sanctification of
his sacred Sabbaths (which they count (...) heavy Jewish yoke of bondage etc.)
the ^tation of his (...), imprisoned or disconsolate afflict^d mebers etc. (a
thing Math. 25 ^6. 42. (...). 1. ^7.
from which they are so far themselves, that they make it a piac^lum in
others, to visit godly prisoners.) These petty ^riviall things and Christian
duties are below their Pomp and State, it beseemes not their Lordships honor
(...) See B. L^timers Sermon of the Plough.
to stoop so low as our Saviors (f) Plough-tayle; or to enter into a poor
cottage or Prison to visit a poor me^ne Christian.

These things they put off to the meanest Curates, as overmeane for their Lips;
who scorn to bus^ themselves with lesser matrers, then managing the greatest
State Offices and affairs, waiting at kings own elbowes, following the heels
of rheit Courts to get more preferments; Lording it over their whole Diocese
yea over whole Kingdoms at their pleasures, and that over Lords and knights if
not Kings themselves as well as Ministers, and the meanest Curate^; sitting as
Judges not only in their Consistories, visitations, and High commission Courts,
but at Assizes, Sessions. Yea in Star chamber, and Exchequer-chamber to, See
Bishop ^rens B. Mountagues B. Lauds. Bishop Perces Oaths and Printed
visitation A^icles.
M^king of new Canons, Injunctions, Oaths, Articles, and Printin^ enforcing
them on the subjects with all violence, in their o^e names alone, like absolute
Monarkes, Popes, and Parliaments: These, and such like, are the things that
Lord Prelates busy themselves with all, and in advancing their Jurisdictions,
Revenues, Wealth, Pomp, State; But they will have nothing or very little at
all to do with Christ, whose sacred presence (Either by the powerful
preaching of his word, the Purity of his Ordinances, the reprehe^sion of their
sines, the approach or meditation of the day of death or Judgment, or by the
growth or progress of his true spiritual Kingdom under their noses,) is so
irksome to them, that it ^ments them before the time, and make them frett,
fume, rage, vex, chafe, and play about them like madd men, as appears by the
Book of Martirs, yea, by present experience with out further evidence. And if
at any time after they are made Bishops, they leave their former habitations,
and repair to their Diocese, or be translated from one See to another; they
commonly take with them seven other spirits as bad, ar more wicked themselves,
(to wit, See Fox Acts and Monuments p. 114.
Archdeacons, Chauncellors, Registers, Appariters, howshold Chaplains,
Secretaries, and private Informers against good men) who reside either near or
with them in their Diocese; which are so vexed, pilled, polled, spoiled,
corrupted, by these Horseleaches, and Caterpillars, that the last estate of
them, when they leave them, is commonly far worse then the first, when they
repaired thither; yea their Bishoprics too, are usually so pared by the sale
of woods, renewing of leases, granting of offices, Reversions, and such other
usual devices of these Ghostly Fathers, before their deaths and translations,
that they leave them commonly in far worse estate then they found them; So
like are they to the devil, to make all things worse and worsethey meddle
with; The reason (I take it) of our usual English Proverb, when any Milk or
Broth on the fire is burnt, and thereby marred; that the Bishop has been in
the Pot; Because they commonly mar all things where they come, as the devil
does.

Seaventhly, The devil takes men captive at his will, and few that are taken
by him recover themselves (but with great difficulty) out of his snares, 2 Timothy
2. 26. So domineering, tyrannizing, Prelates, imprison, pursivant, and take men
captive at their pleasures, against all Justice, equity, piety, pity, Laws of
God and man, against Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and all other Acts of
Parliament for the Subjects liberties. Take but one fresh instance; for an
example, instead of hundreds more: on the 26. of this instant January, one
Knight, a Glasse-man in London, for repeating a Sermon in Norfolk, was
conuented before the Archbishop and other High-Commiffioners at Lambeth, and
tend^ed an Ex Officio oath (not warranted by any Law of God or man, and in
direct terms for ever exploded, and not warrantable by the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm in the late Petition of Right 3. Caroll:) he thereupon
answered, that he was not fully satisfied in conscience of the lawfulness of
that oath, and therefore humbly desired his Grace, that he might be satisfied,
first, in point of conscience errehe took it. The Archbishop hereunto replied
like a learned Prelate; You shall be satisfied I warrant you, take him laylor
to ^he Fleet, where he now is: Alas, is this the learned satisfaction, the
argumentation, and sole Logic of our Prelates, to quiet men's consciences, and
remove their doubts. Take him laylor, away with him Purfevant to the Fleet, and
that against the express Petition of Right, which enacts, that no man
hereafter shall be compelled to take SVCH AN OATH, or be confined or molested,
or disquieted concerning the same, or for refusal thereof? Was ever such
language heard out of our Saviors or his Apostles mouths? Take him Iaylor, to
Prison with him, etc. or did they ever give such satisfaction to men's
conscience as this? No verily; This only is the devils language, law and
spiritual satisfaction, Who takes men captive at his will; as these Lord
Prelates now daily do, by his example. And as those who are taken captive by
the devil, can hardly recover themselves out of his snares again: So those
who are thus uniustly imprisoned and apprehended by them, can hardly recover
themselves out of their snares; Such tenacious devils are they.

Eighthly, The Devil goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may
devour. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Job. 1. 7. c. 2. 2. So do Lordly Prelates, their
Officialls, Commissioners, Pursevants, and Apparitors, especially when they
ride about to visit, pill and poll their diocese; only this is the difference,
that the Devil goes and they ride, and coach it about in state.

Ninthly, The devil lays snares and trappes to entangle and catch men, 2 Timothy
2. 26. Rev. 2. 23. So do Lord Bishops lay baits, snares, and spies in every
corner, especially to entrap and catch, betray or inform against godly
Ministers and Professors of Religion, with all other sorts of men of whom they
may gain money or advantage to themselves, or Officers.

10. The devil is, and has been a murderer of men's souls and bodies, from
the beginning till this present, John 8. 44. Such have Lord Prelates been in
all ages from their very beginning to this instant as a^ histories, our Books
of Martyrs and present experience manifests.

11. The devil is a liar, yea the Father of lies, and there is no truth in
him, yea when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own John. 8. 44. Such are
all Lorly Prelates, in raising up a false enormous, schandals, tales, reports,
accusations, and forged calumnies, of all good Ministers and people, in
broaching false Doctrines, Errors, Heresies, and forging many fabulous stories,
false glosses, miracles, tales, and spurious Antiquities, to support their
tottering Hierarchies and usurped Episcopal Jurisdictions; in being treacherous
yea perfideous in all their words and actions both toward God and men,
Especially to their Princes, and those who have most relied on them, as all the
Italian, German, and English Stories, Writers of the lives of Popes and
Prelates, and Mr. Tindals practice of Popish Prelates, testify at large, and
present experience much complains of, there being no such gross Hypocrites,
Machiavils, Equivocators and perfideous faithless persons breathing, as some
Prelates show themselves; and that as well in Divine as temporal affairs and
transactions.

12. The devil is an accufer, ( a false Ruducing calumniator of the Brethren,)
and true Saints of God Reb. 12. 10. whence, false accusers, are styled devils,
in the Original Greek. 2. Tim. 3. 3. Such have malicious Lordly Prelates been
in all ages; and never more then ( See Bishop Whites Treatise of the Sabbath,
Epistle Dedicatory.
) now; accusing all godly, faithful Christians, Preachers and Ministers of the
Golpell (whom they and the Papists now term Puritains) to Kings and great
Officers of State, of seditions, rebellion, disobedience, disloyalty, treason,
schism, inconformity, conspiracy, unlawful conventicles and assemblies, false
dangerous Doctrines, puritanisme, and the like; only for their godly, holy,
just, and blame less lives, their powerful, Zealous, freq^ent, preaching,
praying, the discovering of, or declayming against their idlenesses,
lordlynesses, luxury, persecutions, tyranny, covetousenes, secularity,
Superstitio is Popish Doctrines, Innovations, and intolerable enchroachments
both Superstitions his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Prerogatives, and the Peoples
liberties, consciences, and estates. All this their own and that sworn
creatures daily s^ditious Court Sermons, and Treatises, evidence past all
denial.

13. The Divill envied and maligned holy Job, stripped him of his Children,
Cattle, Servants, estate, health, and all earthly comforts; tormented him with
botches and blaines from top to toe, and persecuted him with the most extremity
of his malice and power; Only because he was a just man that feared God,
Neither was there any like him for goodness in all the earth. Job. 1. and 2. and
3. Thus likewise have done and yet do the Lordly Prelates serve many of the
^minentest, best, yea most godly faithful Ministers and Christians, whose
families and estates they have utterly ruined, depriving them of their
Benefices, freeholds; Iectures, Ministry, lawful callings (contrary to the
fourth Co^maundment) stripping them quitte naked of altheir estates by Fines,
or costly Suites, and then casting them into a nasty Prison, there to rot and
perish, or banishing them the Land, and troubling all such godly Christians who
out of piety or charity dare contribute any thing to there releife, witness
the Mayer, Tounclerke and Aldermen of Gloucester, not long since convented by the
now Archbishop of Canterbury, as most notorious offenders before his Majesty
and the high Commission to, only for granting an annuity to their ancient
Preacher Mr. Workman, which they were enjoined by his Lord-ships Grace to
Cancel. Such cruel, merciless, barbarous, inhumane devils are they
degenerated into, as to make charity and mercy itself to godly Ministers, a
grievous crime.

14. The devil is full of venom, poison, rankor, wiles, devices, craft, and
subtelty, to mischeife and destroy men, seeking and taking all advantages to
hurt them. 2. Cor. 2. 11. Ephesians. 6. 11. Whence he is called a (...), and an
old Sarpent. Isay 27. 1. Cor. 11. 3. Rev. 12. 2. 14. 15. c. 20. 2. So are the
Prelates, as Ecclesiastical Stories, the Book of Martyrs, the History of the
Counsel of Trent te^ifie and experience evidenceth beyond all contradiction,
in our present serpantine, venomous malicious Prelates ( Ier. 4. 22.
) wise only to d^ evil, but to do good they have yet no knowledge; for ought
appears by their daily practices.

15. The devil is the Prince of the world, by usurpation and tyranny. John.
12. 37. c. 14. 30. c. 16. 18. Ephesians. 2. 2. Yea the Prince of the darkenesses of
this world. Ephesians. 6. 12. So are Lord Prelates, who bear chief rule and sway
in all Churches and States where they are, dominering like absolute Pri^es,
Kings, Tyrants in most Christian Realms, exercising all temporal, all
Ecclesiastical Dominion at their pleasure, and Lording it over al men, yea,
over Lords themselves contrary to our Saviors express inhibition Math. 20.
25. 26. 27. Luke 22. 25. 26. 27. Mark. 10. 42. 43. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 23. Yea which
is very observable. Bishop, White, in his late Epistle to the (...) of
Canterbury, before his Treatise of the Saboath, London 1635. is not ashamed to
appropriate that Text of Psalm: 45. ( inste^d of thy Father shall be thy children,
whom thou ma^st make Princes in all the earth,) to Bi^ops only; who (it seems)
have now jointly conspired together in all Countries, to make themselves
Princes in all Kingdoms of the earth; and to engrosse the sole government of
them and the whole worldinto their spiritual hands, as they conspired in this
Manner of old both at home and abroad; ^itnesse 37. Hen. 8. c. 17. 28. H. 8.
c. 10. M^. Tindalls Practice of Popish Prelates, and his Obedience of (...)
Chri^ian man. Moreover they are certainly the Princes of the (...) darkenesses
of this world; both by putting out the glorious lights and Preachers of Gods
word; and sweeping down the brightest stars of our Church from heaven which
their dragonlike tails, in every place; by degrees, and by purging this very
passage out of the first Collect in the last Fast-booke: Thou have delivered us
from superstition and idolatry wherein we were utt^ drowned, and have brought
us into the most clear and comfortable light of thy holy word, etc. of purpose
to bring us back again into superstitious, Romish Hellish darkness, utterly
to drown both our souls and bodies in it. And are they not then pretty
Princes, stars and Angels of darkness?

16. The Devil challenges all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of
them, as his own, and by a (...) and grant of them, tempts Christ himself
to full dow^ and worship him, Math. 4. 8, 9, 10. Luke 4, 5, 6, 7. This not only
the Pope does, in direct terms, (as (...) Crakenthorpe proves at large, in the
first Chapter of the Popes temporal Monarchy,) But the Lordly Prelates
likewise; who anciently have, and now again attempt, to sway and dispose of
all Kingdoms of the world with all dignities, offices, and promotions in them
at their pleasures; and by promise of them, or of Bishoprics, Benefices,
Deaneries, and other preferments to them creatures and agents, tempt diverse
both of the Laity and Clergy, even against their knowledge and conscience, to
fall down, obey fear, serve, and worship them more then God, then Christ,
their Sovereigns or their laws, as woeful experience manifests at this day,
wherein most men in authority, fear and worship our Prelates more then God or
the King, and are more careful to obey, more fearful to offend their
Injunctions, Articles, Edicts, pleasures, then either Gods or the Kings laws,
as I could instance in sundry particulars, in Prohibitions, habens corpora and
other actions against the Lord Prelates, their officers and creatures which I
spare to mention.

17. The devil adventured to tempt Christ himself by several successive
temptations, to draw him to his beck. Math. 4. 1. to 12. Luke 4. 1. 10. So
do Lordly Prelates, adventure by several wiles Stratagems, flateries, promises
and fair pretenses, (yea and by perverting the Scripture it self, as the
devil did here with Christ) to tempt Kings, Princes, Nobles, great officers of
estate, Scholars, Lawyers, and all men of note, (especially the eminent
Preachers and Professors,) to take their parts, to prostitute themselves to
their Papal Institutions, Superstitions, Decretalls, pleasures, Ceremonies,
Innovations and commands; and to protect, uphold, advance their Antichristian
tottering Hierarchy, (as ancient Histories, with present experience, and Mr.
Tindalls Practice of Popish Prelates testify.

18. The devil would have Christ himself to fall down and worship him
notwithstanding Gods express Commandment to the contrary, Math. 4. 8. 9. 10.
Luke 5.. 6. 7. So our Prelates would have all men even against the laws of
God and the Realm to fall down and submit to them and their antichristian
novell Ceremonies, Articles, Injunctions Oaths, Usurpation, Extorsions,
encroachments to bow and cringe to Altars, Images, Crucifixes, Crosses, the
Sacramental Bread and wine, the ver^ name of Jesus etc, and to publish their
Declaration ^or sportes and pastimes on the Lords day, colored only by them
with his Majesty's name, though really none of his in their Parish Churches, as
if it were Gods own (...) and Law, to spur up yea precipitate the people to
al manner of disorder, and the profanation of Gods own sacre^ day, to the
ruin both of their soul^s and bodies. (Yea the overthrow of all piety and
Religon,) silencing, suspending, excommunicating, yea suing such in their
Consistories, and high Commissions, who refuse to puplish it, (though there be
no Law or Canon for it,) notwithstanding Gods Commandments, and many late
examplary Judgments from heaven, (^or which, some Prelates threaten to bind
God Allmighty himself to the peace and good behavior at the next Quarter
Sessions and Assizes, expressly prohibit it: So like are they in this
particular to their Spiritual Father the divill in persuading, enforcing men
to fall down and worship them and their Commandments against Gods own
heavenly Precepts.

19. The divill is a great enemy to the purity of Gods word and ordinances, and
whiles men sleep sows Tares among the wheat and good seed to corrupt and
mar^e them Math. 13. 24. 25. 38. 39. So do Lord Prelates, who sophisticate,
pollute, deprave, yea mar the purity of Gods word, worship. Sacraments, and
other Ordinances with their Idolatrous, Superstitious Antichristian Ceremonies,
vestments, genuflexions additaments, mixtur^s and humane inventions, And whiles
many of our Spiritual Watchmen are a sleep and silenced, they have sown so
many Popish Tares among our wheat that little else but Tares appear now upon
the ground, and by that time Harvest comes, If men awake not the sooner, we are
like to reap nothing but a crop of these pernicious Tares instead of wheat,
being already ledd by some leading Prelates (like the Sirians by the Prophet
Elishah into the midst of Samaria 2. Kings. 6. almost into the uery midst of
Room like persons hoodwinckt, before we are aware of it; as all whose eyes God
has opened plainly se.

20. The devil hinders Gods Ministers to go and preach the Gospel to the
people that they may be saved 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8. So do the Prelates now by
suspending, silencing, excommunicating, imprisoning most of the best and
powerfullest Ministers, and forbidding them to preach unto the people, that
they might be saved (Yea even in the times of Pestilence and mortallity) to
fill np their sins allway, ^or the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.
1. These. 2. 16.

21. Where the divill cannot hinder the preaching of Gods word altogether,
there he comes and steals it away presently out of men's hearts and minds, as
soon as it is sown, that so it may take no root, and bring forth no fruit at
all. Math. 13. 19. So Lord Prelates, where they cannot altogether suppress the
preaching of the word, do (just-like the devil) endeavor pr^ntly to catch
and steal it out of men's hearts, by giving them liberty on the Lords own day,
as soon as ever the Sermon is ended, to fall to their May-games, Morisses,
dancings, sportes, and pastimes, (practice condemned in express terms long
ago by Clemens Alexandrinus, Pedagogil. 3. c. 11. Tertullion de spect^ lib.
and Chrisostom Him. 5. in Math. and by all Divines of note since their age tot
his, as Hellish, Heathenish, Diabolical, impious, and pernicious, depriving
men's souls of the benefit of all Gods Ordinances) and by prohibiting them to
meet together to repeat their Ministers Sermons with their friends,
neighbors, and families punnissing them for Conventicles if they do it,
contrary to St. Paul's, St. Chrisostoms, Theophelacts, Caesarius Arelatensis,
Bishop Jewels, Dr. Boys, Mr. John Sprintes, Bishop, Baglies, and all other
Divines Doctrine that I ever read or heard of, (If not to the Canons, 1571. p.
16. and 1602. Can. 13 and 79) who much vrget his Repetition of Sermons as a
necessary duty on all Christians, though of diverse families) A stupendous
strain of Atheistical profanenes, and desperate impeity which no Prelates
ever aspired to, before these of this last impious age, in affront of all the
Prelates and Clergy of England in H. 8. his days, who prescribe and urge it
much to these Nouellers eternal shame.

22. The divi^l to work his own divellish ends and designs, will sometimes
transform himself into an Angel of light, though he be still a devil in
truth 2. Cor. 11. 14. So the Prelates (the archest Hypocrites breathing) will
sometimes do the like, putting on a counterfeit vizard of piety and
holiness, to cloak their divelish designs, seeming, Angels of light in
show, when as they are still mere Devils incarnate in verity: as appears by
several Popes, by Thomas of Becket, Anselme, Edward, Thomas, and William, of
Canterbury, with diverse of our anuncient English, and late out landish
Prelates, whose lives are at large related in Antiquitates Ecclesiae
Britanicae, Malmesbury and Godwyn, in the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Centuries of Magdeburg (cap. 6. 7. 10. of each) in Crantzins ^is Metropolis,
Catalogus Testuum veritatis, Auealini An: Boiorum, and others; who manifest
Lordly Bishops in all ages, to have been the greatest Pypocrites, dissemblers,
Schizmatickes, Atheists, Traitors, Rebels, Villains, and Monsters of impiety,
under the pretense of Sanctity, that ever had existence in the world; as you
may there read at leisure; and in Doctor John White his way to the true Church
Sect. 55. n. 9, 10. Sect. 57. n. 9, 10, 11. Sect. 38. n. 45, 6. and Defense of
the way, c. 6.

23. The devil is a proud insolent domineering spirit, falling (as most hold)
by this sin of pride and arrogance 1 Timothy 3. 6, 7. Isay. 14. 12, 13, 14, 15.
Such and no other are the Lordly Prelates, witness all stories present
unanswerable experience, and the common Proverb. As proud as a Prelate they
being the most arrogant, insolent, domineering, proud, ambitious, Luciferian
generation of all the Sons of men, trampling all others under their Lordly
feet; when as if they were Christ's members or disciples, they should be the
lowliest and humblest of all oaths both in heart and conversation, as he was
Math 11. 29. An infallible Character that they are none of his institution, but
the Devils, whose pride they imitate, equal, if not transcend, and which sin
(no doubt) will shortly ruin them, Prove. 16. 18. as it did their father the
devil.

24. The devil entered into Iud^s (Christ's Lord Treasurer. John. 12. 6. 13.
29.) and moved him for 30. pieces of silver to betray his M^ster Math. 26. 14,
15. Mark 14 10, 11. Luke 22. 3, 4, 5, 6. John 13. 17, 18, 19. c. 18. 3. So
these Lordly Prelates, for hopes of honor, money, or preferments sell and
betray even Christ himself, his Word, truth, Gospel, Saints, members, to the
Pope, yea the devil himself, or any that will hire them to do it: Nay
hundreds of them (both at home and abroad) have for lucre, honor and money,
betrayed, murdered, deposed, conspired, and rebelled against their own
Sovereigns, (Emperors, Kings, and Princes) (such notable treacherous varlets
have they been in all ages) as sundry Stories manifest at large; yea in former
ages, and this present too, they insinuate into men's heates, with p^omises and
rewards, causing Servants to betray their Masters, Wives their Husbands,
Children their Parents, People their Pastors, Nay one Minister, one Professor
(at least in (...)) another, and cause one friend, one neighbor to accuse,
intrappe, and betray another, whom they malice for their grace and goodness,
or any other occasion) that so they may persecute, hamper, ruin them in their
ecclesiastical or high Commission Courts, or crush them by their temporal
power and greatness at their pleasures, by putting them from their freeholds,
and lawful callings, confining them to some prison, or forcing them to fly
the land, in case they stoop not to their lusts in all particulars; as
hundreds of late Presidents, manifest a^ ^ull.

25. The devil does buffet and bind Gods servants, till Christ by his
infinite power does loose them 2. Cor. 12. 7. Luke 13. 16. So have done, and
yet daily do Lord Prelates buffet and bind Gods people by their Censures,
Excommunications, officers, Pursevants, Iaylo^s, till Christ by his omnipotent
power shall rescue and deliver them from this their tyranny.

26. The devil fills men's hearts to lie to the Holy Ghost Acts 5. 3. So Lord
Prelates with promises and persuasions do the like, by suborning their
instruments in their writings and Sermons before Kings, Princes, Universities,
and the most eminent assemblies, to maintain their Episcopal Jurisdiction,
Lordlinesse, pomp and power, their superstious Popish Ceremonies, Altars,
Crucifixes, Tapers, genuflexions, Conservations, adorations, etc. to be all
Iure divino warranted an^ prescribed by Gods Law and word, of purpose to
deceive the Auditors (when as their consciences know the contrary to be true,
and that they lie against the Holy Ghost in what they preach and write) and to
forge diverse notorious fables and calumnies of Puritans Precizians and godly
Christians out of their own poetical brains (as false as any figments in the
golden Legend) to bring both them, the practice, power, and profession of
Religion into public scorn; that so Popery, Atheism, and Profaneness may
overflo^ the world, A dangerous (yet now a common) sin and practice, which I
wish the guilty would reform by Ananias and Saphirahs exemplary punishments
for this very sin, Acts 5. 3. to. 10.

27. The devil tempts and encourages men to all kinds of sin, of
wikednesse, and to disobey all Gods Commandments, Genesis 3. 1. to. 7. to
^cleanenesse. 1 Cor. 7. 5. to cruelty and implacablenesse 2 Cor. 2. 11. to
wantonness, worldliness, lasciviousness, profaneness, and fleshly lusts
Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. 1 Timothy 5. 15. besides murder, treachery, lying, and other
forenamed sins. So do the Prelates; witness their many late ungodly,
Superstitious, licentious Books and practices, to spur men on to Popery and
superstition, but especially to profane the Saboath, to use dancing, Morrisses,
May-games, erect Ales, May-poles, Bacchavalls, drink, swill, and play the
Epicures, the Pagans, even on Gods own sacred day (and that whiles we lie all
under Gods scourge and plagues for this very sin) to tumble them headlong
into hell, and draw down all Gods wrath and plagues upon us from heaven at
once, to our speedy certain ruin. Take but one fresh instance of this kind:
Master Skinner the Bishop elect of Bristoll, this last S^mmer even in the heat
of the Plague, invited one Sir Garret Ramsford (a prisonner in the Kings Bench)
with his Lady, to dine with him at his Country house on the Lords day, and
charged them not to fail him, for they would be very merry; They came
accordingly, and his elect Lordship, according to promise was so merry, that
he called for Bristow milk (strong Sack) to season him for that diocese,
and sucked it up so freely, that he had almost got the Staggars; and his men
seeing their new Lord set upon so merry a pin, plied him so fast with it,
that at last he bad them take away the Sack for fear they should kill him
with it, and what then should his Majesty do for a new Bishop? (as if enough
would not be reddy to succeed him, if he were gone): Well, their company was
so good, that they must stay at Supper with him too; they did so, and they were
very merry; Supper ended, his Lor^ship calls for a pair of Cards, and to play
they must all go; Sir Garret thereupon answered, My Lord I think you are of
their opinion who hold, that the Saboath ends at six of the clock, that you
will now go to Cards, for I hope you will not play upon the Saboath: No
(says he) I am not of that opinion; but his Majesty commands us to play on
this day. A notorious untruth; For where (I pray) commands his Majesty, or
allows Bishops or Ministers to play at Cards, or Dice, or Tables on the
Lords day, when as he commands; that nothing be done against the Laws and
Canons of the Church, in that very Declaration they would father on his
Highness, and the 73. and 74. Canons expressly pro^ibit Bishops and Ministers
to play at Cards, Dice or any other unlawful games on any day, Much less
then on the Lords day, which the 13 Canon, and the Homily, of the time and
place of prayer, with 5. and 6. E. l. c. 3. and his Majesty's prime Act. 1.
Carolic. 1. will inf^rme them ought otherwise to be spent then in Carding,
Plays and pastimes. Sir Garret replied, that he conceived, it was against the
fourth Commandment: and that his Majesty neither would nor could command any
thing against Gods Law; or if he did; we were not to obey in such cases. His
Lordship replied, that the fourth Commandment was ceremonial and abrogated
long ago. So (said Sir Garret) you may say as well of all the rest; and if his
Majesty should command any thing against the other 9. Would you obey it? That
(said his Lordship) we must dispute when there shall be occasion, (intimating,
that if his Majesty should command any thing against a^y of Gods Commandments
(which we trust he will never do) the Bishops would obey it without any
great dispute.) Well, Sir Garret would not play at that time, and thereupon the
Cards were sent back again. And is not this a man (think you) like to make a
very ho^y Prelate? It may be so, for he has since been consecrated (and that
with some new Popish Ceremonies as is reported.) And in truth he needed a
Consecration, for I remember well, when he was fellow of Trinity College in
Oxford, he after pretty Bes Bauger so long, that he begat a strong kind of
spurious tympany in his belly, for which I never heard, he did any penance, or
made any purgation; But his Consecration (doubtless) has purged this and all
other his sins clean away: Such holy examples are Lord Prelates, whose
doctrine had need convert men's souls, for few of their lives will do it.

28. The devil stirs up Kings to offend God, to the destruction and
prejudice of their subjects 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. and rayseth discordes and
dissentions and disaffections between Kings and their subjects Judges 9. 23.
And have not Lordly Prelates aunciently, yea lately done or endeavored at
least to do the like in Germany, France, that I say not in England too? Their
chief practice (...) always bee^e to ali^nate subjects affectiens from their
Kings, by putting them upon unjust Taxes, (...), Projects, Monopolies,
oppressions, In^ations; by giving them evil counsel, by ^opping the course of
laws, of common Right and Justice, of the preaching power and progress of the
Cospell, by advancing Idolatry, popery, (...), with their own intolerable
(...) and Lordly jurisdiction, by fathering all their unjust (...) upon Kings,
etc. and on the contrary to estrange the Ki^gs hearts ^om their Subjects, by
false Calumnies, by sedicious CourtSermons and by infusing jealousies and
discont^nts into their heads and hearts against their best and loyallest
Subjects without a cause; A divellish practice never more used then in these
our days.

29. Satan will not be divided against Satan for fear his Kingdom should not
stand Math. 12. 10. So these Lordly Prelates will never be divided one against
another in point of their Antichristian Jurisdiction Pomp, and Hierarchy
(which they all concur i^, though they have often many deadly personal and
particular fendes one with another) nor yet against the Pope or Devells
Kingdo^s; for then their o^ne kingdom (a branch and member of the P^pes and
devils, as many of our godly M^rtyrs and Writers have reso^ved) should soon
fall to ruin.

30. The devil (that Red-Dragon) had seven crowns upon his head Revel. 12. 3.
to show his royal power. So have the Popes and other Prelates, Crowns and
Miters o^ their pates, to testify their royalty and Lordly do^inion over Kings
and others, as they vaunted in D. Ba^twicks Censure.

31. The Devil had a seat and Throne in the Church of Pergamus, wherein he
sat in state Revel. 2. 13. So have the Prelates in their Cathedralls and
Chappells; (as they then also boasted:) yea their great Cathedralls are but
ch^ires for these great two legged Foxes Lordly tails to sit in; (...) a
lesser meaner Chair did then c^ntent the devil, who now sits in greater
state, and is far better served and attended in our Cathedrals then ever he
was in the Church of Perga^us.

32. The devil (that Red-Drogon) with his tail drew the third part of the
Stars from heaven and cast them to the earth, Revel 12. 4. So have Lordly
Prelates (the tail of that fell Dragon) anciently, and of late times swept
down the third part or more, of our stars (to wit, of all our faithful,
powerful, pain^full, zealous Ministers) from heaven (to wit, from their Pulpits
and ^hurches) and by their suspensions, excommunications, imprisonments,
deprivations, suppressing of Lectures, persecutions, etc. have cast them to the
ground, nay trampled them under their dragon-like paws, depriving them of
their office and Benefices; thereby robbing God and Christ of the glory, the
poor peoples souls of the fruit and comfort of their Ministry, to their
greatest grief.

33. This great Red Dragon, (the devil) stood before the Woman (the Church)
which was reddy to be delivered of a man-child, for to devour her Child (her
spiritual regenerate Children) as soon as it was borne. Rev. 12. 4, 5. Thus
those Lordly Prelates do; No sooner can the Church be reddy to be delivered of
a man-child, of a godly faithful Pastor, new Minister, or zealous Christian,
but these great redd scarlet Dragons, (w^o can suffer dumb Dogs, deboist,
licentious, dissolute drunken, scandalous Ministers and supersticious Popelings
to sit still and do what they list, without danger or countroll) are at hand
(like P^aroah, and the devil) to devour, silence, suppress, pers^cute, and
destroy them as s^one as they are borne, or ^ginne but once publicly to
appear in the world; as experience too well ^ifieth in most places, where a
godly Minister or Christian can no sooner show his head or begin to do God
faithful service but they presently lay trappes and snares to hamper, or send
Apparitors, Pursevants, with such other Hellish Furies, to seize upon them,
that so their Lordships may swallow them all up at a bit; Yea if any good Book
shall begin to peep out against their tyranny, Prelacy, and Innovations,
Howses, Ships, Studdies, Trunks and Cabinets must be broken up and ransacked
for them: Such ravenous red^ Furious Dragons are they, and such open wide
Sepulchers are their devo^ring throats to swallow (...) all things that any
way make against them.

34. This Dragon, and his Angels make ware in heaven fi^hting with Michaell,
(to wit, our Savior Christ) and his Angels Rev. 12. 7. So the Lordly
Prelates and their Angels (To wit, their Deanes, Archdeacons Officialls,
Chauncellors, Commissaries, Surragates, Advocates, Proctors, Registers,
Pursevanst, Sum^ers, Apparitors, and Howshold Chaplaynes too for the most part)
have in all ages to this very moment, made war in heaven (Gods Church
militant) with Christ and his Angels, To wit, his faithful, po^erfull, godly
Ministers; Preachers, Saints, and Servants; as all Histories, ages witness,
And now this Battle seems to be at the hottest, here amongst us, More godly
Ministers h^ving been silenced, suspended, deprived, driven from their
Ministry, and chased out of the Realm within these 5. years, though
conformable to the established doctrine and discipline of our Church, then in
many ages before.

35. When the devil co^es down among the inhabitants of the earth, and of the
Sea, then woe be to them Rev. 12. 12. So woe be to the kingdoms, Churches,
and people, where Lord Prelates come and bear most sway amongst them, witness
our Book of Martyrs, and Chronicles of England; and to these Diocese wherein
they domineere; Witness Norwich Diocese and others at this present.

36. When this Dragon, and the Devil was cast out to the earth, he persecuted
the Woman (the true Church of God) Rev. 12. 13. So have these Lord Prelates in
all ages; (as the Books of Martyrs record at large) since they were cast out
of heaven (Christ's true spiritual Church) for their Lordly pride.

37. When the Dragon saw the Woman had such swift wings given her, that She
escaped his hands, and fledd into the wilderness, out of his reach and danger,
where She was nourished for a time, then he cast out of his mouth a flood of
water after her, to devour and drown her Rev. 12. 14, 15, 16. So these Lord
Prelates, when any godly Ministers or Christians have escaped their Lordships,
their Apparitors, Pursevants, or other Cathpoles hands by flight, or otherwise;
power out of their mouths a flood of Execrations, Excommunications,
Intimations, Suspensions, Maledictions, reproaches, obloquies, and outrageous
Censures against them, to devour and over whelme them; Yea Excommunications
with agravations, that no man shall buy, sell, trade, eat, drink, or have any
conversation with them; An Hellish Antichristian, tyranny lately practiced, and
revived (against all laws and Statutes of the Realm) against 4. men in
Norwich, Only for not bowing at the name of Jesus; and against Mr. Samuel
Burrowes of Colchester, for Indicting Parson Newman for enforcing the people up
to his new rail to receive.

38. The devil, if stoutly and manfully resisted, will fly from us, ever
raging (like a coward) over those with greatest extremity, that make the least
resistance 1 Pet. 5. 9. James 4. 7. Thus do these Lordly Prelates; where they
are stoutly and manfully withstood in their tyrannical exorbitant procedings
usurpations, and encroachments, by men of courage, there they (for the most
part) fly, and give over; these ever fareing best, that most manfully oppugn
them: Where they are crowched, bowed, and basely submitted to, or faintly
resisted, or not opposed (as late experience too well manifests) there they
rage, tyrannize, triumph most, and make strange havoc in the Church. If
Ministers, or people then will ever be free from the tvranny, bondage,
insolency, rage, or desperate oppressions, the unjust illegal
Excommunications, Suspentions, exacted Fees, Visitation Oaths, Articles,
Ceremonies, Innouations, Citations, Procedings of these outrageous devils,
made in their own names and rights alone, under their propper Seals, without
any Patent or Commission from his Majesty's authorizing them (Contrary to the
express Statutes of 25. H. 8. c. 19, 20, 21. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 27. H. 8. c. 15.
31. H. 8. c. 9, 10. 32. H. 8. c. 26. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1, El. c.
1. 2. 5. El. c. 1. 8. El. c. 1. 13. El. c. 12.) or from their high Co^ nission
ex officio Oaths, Pursevants, imprisonments and Fines, contrary to Magna Carta
c. 29. the Petition of Right. 1 Eliz: c. 1. (on which their commission is
grounded 3 ^oli. and the Laws and Statutes of the Realm (as their very last
High Commission it self expressly resolves; and therefore add a non obstante,
these their ex officio oaths, imprisonments. fines, and censures be contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm; Such is the Prelates Justice,
conscience, piety, fatherly charity, and obedience to his Majesty's Laws, to
foist such a desperate Papal non obstante into their High Commission): Let
then them manfully, courageously, unanimously resist and withstand them to the
uttermost of their power, by all just, warrantable, lawful means that may be
(as loyalty to their King and Country, Charity to themselves and their
posterity, and Conscience toward God, enjoin them) and then these base-borne,
ignoble, cowardly, mushrom Lords and devils (animated, flushed, enraged, only
by men's former cowardice, faint-hartednesse, and strange unchristian sordid
baseness) will flee away shortly from them, and never assault or oppress them
more, in such a tyrannical, unjust, illegal manner, as they have lately done;
as Phil: 1. 27. Iam. 4. 7. resolve and certify us for comfort and
encouragement.

39. There is, and has been from the fall of Adam, to this present, a bitter,
perpetual, implacable enmity and war, between the old Serpent (the devil)
and his feed, and Christ the seed of the Woman, his Church, and her seed, the
elect and regenerate Saints of God: Genes. 3. 15. So has there been between
the Lordly Prelates, their officers, spawne, and generation, and Christ and his
true spiritual seed and faithful members, even from their first original,
till this present; witness the desperate enmity, the implacable malice, and
horrid cruelty of the ancient Lordly Arrian CourtBishops toward the orthodox
Christians of old; Of the Popes, and popish Prelates to the true Ministers,
Professors of the Gospel, and Protestants; and of the ceremonious; pompous,
Lordly English Lord Prelates toward the Puritans, and Precisians (as they)
nickname them) the powerful, painful, zealous, godly Preachers, Ministers,
and Christians since; Of all which, our Books of Martyrs, with other
Ecclesiastical Histories, and late Treatises give ample testimony, which
present experience cannot but subscribe to.

40. The devil is a malicious malignant spirit whose malice is never
satisfied, ended, mittigated, or appeased, but with the ruin of the parties
maligned: as appears in Job. 1. 13. to 22. c. 2. 1. to 8: Where he could not
be satisfied with the destruction of Jobs Children, Oxen, Asses, Sheep,
Camells, Servants, and estate, but he would have had his life too; and when
that could not be obtained; Yet he would torment his body with sore painful
boiles from the Crown of his head to the sole of his foot. So Lordly Prelates
malice and rankor against Gods faithful Ministers, is endless, boundless,
implacable, they cannot be content to vex, molest, and trouble them with
causeless suites, unless they silence and stop their mouths: when that is
done, they are never quiet till they have quite deprived them of their livings
and Ministry, stripped them of all their livelihood, cast them into some nasty
Prison, or bannished them the Realm: When this is accomplished, Yet is not
their rage abated, nor their malice extinguished; even in Prison they will keep
an hard hand against them, use them with all de^pit and rigor, deprive them as
much as may be, of all releife, resort, and comfort, seek out new occasions to
vex and persecute them, But if perchance they escape beyond the Seas, and get
out of their clutches; then they persecute them (as the high Priests did the
primitive Christians) even into strange Cities and Countries Acts 26. 11.
raising up fresh troubles and storms against them by their Catholic agents,
even there, to destroy them; as they did against Mr. Tindall, and other
Martyrs of old; and against some of our godly Ministers of late, being never
at rest or peace, till they have either sucked their blood, or seen them dead
in their graves; A truth too apparent by many present Examples fresh before our
eyes.

41. The divill has his Angels, his Ministering spirits, and spiritual Sons
to do his service, advance his kingdom, and execute his Commandments Math.
25. 41. John. 6. 70. c. 8. 44. 1. John. 3. 8. 10. Yea, to persuade men to
worship the divill and Idols of gold and silver, and brass, and stone, and of
wood, which neither can se, nor hear, nor walk Rev. 9. 20. Math. 4. 8. 9, 10.
Luke 4. 5, 6, 7. 1. Kings 22. 28, 29, 30. So have Lordly Prelates their
Angels, their spiritual Sons, and Ministering spirits, to execute their
several Injunctions and Commandments: Their Angels, (To wit) their howshold
Chaplains (now known Rev. 2. 5. 6.
Apostate Angels from their first faith love and works) and their spiritual
Sons, To wit, their Priests serving at their ^ew erected Altars, (as
themselves now pray, write and preach, who now call themselves the Sons of
the Church; to wit, of the Bishops) who like an Oven heated by the Hose^. 7. 4.
6.
Baker, send out nothing but black fiery A Coal from the Altar. printed An.
1636.
Coals from the Altar, with which, their own tongues, and others Isay. 6. 6.
7.
lips being touched, by these great Seraphins Commandments (according to their
usual forms of prayer, before their Sermons) instead of crying out against
the Idolatrous Altlas of Bethell (as the man of God once did by Gods special
Commandment in the very presence of K. Jeroboam 1. King 13. 2, 3, 4.) they do
nothing else but preach and cry out for Altars, setting up of Altars, Images,
Crucifixes, Tapers, with other Altar-trinkets, even before our most gracious
King himself; and Job. 6. 5. See Pocklingtons Sunday no Sabbath.
Bray like a wild Ass, or rail and scolde like Oyster women, against those
who preach for Lords Tables (which they begin now again to term Acts and
Monuments. Edit. 1631 vol. 3. p. 85. 95. 497.
Oysterboardes, as that turn coat, Dr. White with other Papists did in ^u.
Mary's days, when they did set up Popery afresh) or oppose their Popish
Idoll-Altars, and the turning of our Tables Altar-wise: And not contented to
set up Altars, and Crucifixes, against our Statutes, Articles, Homilies,
Canons, Injunctions, established Doctrine of our Church, to which they have
subscribed, Yea against the very Book of common prayer itself; (which
prescribes only a Table, not any Altar) they crease not to preach continually
at Court, Paules-Crosse, in both our Universities, and else where, Shelford his
Sermon of the Church Sunday no Sabbath. p. 46. ^heeue, and others.
that men (...) and ought to bow down and worship the golden Images, the
stately gilded Altars, Cru cifixes, Images, which their great Dan. 3. 5. 6. 7.
Nabucadonozer, the Lord Prelates, have set up in their own Chappells,
Cathedralls, and other Churches, (as if one Stone, Stock, Image, or dumb
Idol, might not fall down and worship another alone, but all else must
imitate their example, as the Rule of faith and worship (and themselves bow
down and worship before them, as the Idolatrous Isralites and Pagans did
before their Idols and Altars 1. Kings 12. 30. 2. King^. 18. 22. 2. Kings 5.
18. Besides these Angels, and spiritual Sons) who preach nothing now all
most but their Lordships Math. 15. 9
Commandement^ ^de of Gods) they have diverse Ministering spirits; as
Archdeacons, Commissaries, Pursevants, Apparitors, ^ilors, Registers,
Informers, Advocates, Proctors, Spies, and Notaries in all places, to set up
Al^, (...), (...), impose and prescribe n^w Ceremonies, Injunctions, Oaths,
orders, Articles, to suspende silence, excommunicate, imprison, entrap, wailay,
betray, persecute, fleece, and ruin all godly Ministers and people, and
advance their Lordships Monarchy, Honor, Pomp, State, Raveuewes, Kingdom,
and cause al men to fall down and worship them, like some petty Gods descended
from heaven, and their Antichristian fond Injunctions and Popish Innovations,
as Gods sacred Oracles: So like are they to their Father the devil in this
resemblance.

42. The devil was a lying spirit in the mouth of Aha^s Prophets; to persuade
him to what they pleased, against Gods word and true Prophets, etc. to advance
his own designs: 1. Kings 22. 22, 23. So our Lord Prelates anciently were,
and now are as much as ever, lying spirits in the mouths of many false Prophets
(and I would we could not say, in most of his Majesty's Chaplains in
ordinary, and others that preach before his highness, and in other public
places) who preach naught else but their Math. 15. 9.
Lordships pleasures, and those words, those precepts, they cunningly put into
their mouths, (as the 2. Sam. 14. 2. to 22.
Woman of Tekoah spoke Ioabs words to David) to accomplish their own
Antichristian designs, advance their own power and Hierarchy, and cause all
men to adore them as the only Gods, Lords, and Oracles on the earth. (...): and
Dr. John White his Epistle Dedicative to K. James before his De^te of the Way.
Maximus Tirius records, That one P. Sapho dwelling in the parts of Libia,
desirous to be canonized a God, took a sort of prating Birds, and secretly
taught them to sing, P. Sapho is a great God: and having their lesson
perfectly, he let them fly into thee Woods and Hills adjoining, where
continuing there long, other Birds also by imitation learned the same, till the
hedges rang with nothing but P. Saphoes dittie, Great is the God P. Sapho: The
Countrey-people hearing the Birds, (but ignorant of the ^raud) thought Sapho to
be a God indeed, and began to worship him. This ^ame not only has been, but
now is, both the Popes, and Lord Prelates practice; Who desirous to effect
their own ambicious ends, advance their own pretended divine power,
Jurisdiction, Hierarchy, and to be adored and obeyed in all their
Antichristian Innovations, Injunctions, and designs, as Gods, with sweet
promises of preferments (which they have now for the most part monopolized into
their own hands) they procure a company of bold audacious prating Birds (or
Bussards rather) in our Universities, and elsewhere, with their own domesticke
Chaplains, to learn these notes by heart, That the Calling of Lord Bishops is
Iure Divino; that the holy Fathers the Prelates are to order all
Church-affayres, and to be Shelford his Sermon of Gods house A Come from the
Altar. p. 1. 2. 3. etc Rheene his Communion Book (...) expounded Epi^.
Dedicatory p. 20. etc.
obeyed in all their Injunctions and Commands without dispute: that they have
power to decree Rights and Ceremonies, and authorities in Controversies of
faith, a clause lately foysted by them into the 20 Article of our Church,
(being not in the Latin, or English Articles of King Edward the fixed, Queen
Elizabeth; Nor those of Ireland, taken Verbatim out of the English, that we
must have Images, Crucifixes, Altars, Priests, Sacrifices; that men ought to
set their Altars and Tables Altarwise at the East end of the Church, and to bow
down unto them and worship them: that they ought to bow at the naming of
Jesus, Stand up at Gloria Patri, the Gospel, Athanasius, and the Nicene
Creed, read, the 2. service at the Altar, pray with their faces to the East,
submit to the Lord Prelates in all matters of faith and discipline, believing
as they believe, and doing as they do: that they must always declayme and
cry out thus against Puritans (as they now do in all their Sermons) that they
are sedicious factious persons, enemies and rebels to the King and his laws,
(when as the Bishops themselves mere hildebrands ^oth in Church and state, are
such) mere Hipocrites and imposters, men far more dangerous and insufferable
in the State then Priests or Jesuits: that they must magnify auricular
confession, extreme unction, and absolution, as things fitting to be received
in the Church: Maintain a real presence in the Sacrament: Deny the Pope to be
Antichrist, or his Ceremonies to be Antichristian: Cry up the use of dancing,
sports and pastimes on the Lords day: Cry down the strickt ^anctification of
it as Iewdaisme, superticious, and puritanicall: Preach against lectures,
lecturers, often preaching, and Sermons on the Lords day afternoon, as mere
babbling, prattling, and So Dr. Corbet B. Bwrens Chancellor Iately termed
preaching and said he had Scripture for it.
foolishnes; with a world of such like Songs, all which these their prating
Iayes having perfectly learned some two or three years since, they sent them
abroad, not only into the Woods, Hills, and Dales in the Country, but also
unto the Court, City, Universities, and places of greatest refort, to chaunt,
and ^oare out these their Episcopal Ditties; where these singing Birds (or
Decoyes rather) have so well played their parts of late, by preaching, printing,
and chanting out these their lessons, in City, Court and Country, that other
Birds also (by imitatio^ ignorance, or hopes of like preferments as some of
these first Decoyes ha^h attained to,) fall to ^nge the self same ditties every
where, as fast as they; So that now our Cathedralls, Chappells, Churches,
Pulpits, ringe of little else but these Episcopal tunes and songs: which the
people daily hearing every where (being ignorant, of the Prelates fraud and
practice herein who taught those Birds these tunes, of which I now desire all
to take public notice,) begin to think Lord Prelates, and all these their
Romish Doctrines, Ceremonies, and Innovations, to be of divine Institution, and
that their Lordships are to be obeyed in all things without dispute, as if they
were Gods indeed; whereupon, they now fall down and worship them as some
petty, yea the greatest Gods; and these their antichristian doctrines,
C^monies, Innovations, as Gods sacred Oracles and Institutions, they being
far more happy then P. Sapho, in this their stratagem (worthy most serious
consideration and discovery.) That he deceived only the, simple Country people
with this policy, but they, not only Countryclownes, but Citizens, Scholars,
Courtiers, and some great nobles too I fear; who upon the discovery of this
their diobolicall fraud (they speaking in these prating Birds, though Dumb for
the most part themselves, and singing the self same ditties when they speak,
as the Genesis 3 1. 2. 3. 4.
devil spoke of old in the serpent) will no doubt vndeify them again, and
esteem them but as men, or heathenish Idols, not worthy adoration or any
longer credit; and all these their Innouations, Romish Doctrines and
Ceremonies, as mere Jesuitical Impostures.

43. The Devil desires to have all faithful Christians in his clutches
(especially the eminentest Ministers and Preachers of the Gospel) that he may
fifth them like Wheat to the very Branne, to find an hole in their Coats, or
an occasion to destroy them. Luke 22, 31. So have Lordly Prelates desired and
done the like in all ages, and still persist to do it; we need not go far
for Presidents to exemplify it, there being never an eminent sincere Minister
of England whom the Prelates have not thus winnowed, and laid traps for; and
persecuted more or less.

44. The Devil wo^keth most of all, and bears greatest sway in carnal
fleshly men, and in the Children of disobedience. Ephesians- 2. 2, 3. See this
Answer to the great Turks letter An^ 1542. and Bale de vitis Pontificium.
So do the Prelates work most in, with, by, and upon mere Formallists,
licensious, dissolute, carnal men and Ministers, and those who are most
disobedient to the laws of God, of Christ, of Kings and temporal Majestrates,
whose Jurisdictions they have ever labored to eclipse abolish and tread quite
under foot, as one of our Kings, and our whole Parliaments have resolved in 2.
public Acts. 37. H. 8. c. 17. and 28. H. 8. c. 10.

45. The devil comes armed with all power, and signs, and lying wonders,
and with all deceiveablenes of unrighteousness 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. So do the
Popes, and whole ^able of Lordly Prelates, (as the Apostle there resolves,) who
came armed against Gods Church and people both with the temporal and
spiritual Sword; with Ecclesiastical and civil Officers, Pursevants,
Somners, Censures, punishments, ter^ors, and vexations of all sorts; with
signs and lying wonders (of which we have many Instances in Popish legends
Postils and Stories old and new) and with all deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness; As costly Ornaments rich apparel, gilded Images, Stately
Churches, Palaces, Altars, Altar-clothes, sweet sounding Organs, and Church
music, gay (...), specious pretenses, superstitious hipocriticall devotions
etc. apt to cheat and ensnare all ignorant carnal people, The only devices by
which they maintain, support, and increase their pomp, wealth, State and
Lordly power as Bernard longue since resolved, in his Apology to William Abot.

46. The devil does by himself and his instruments endeavor to enchaunt and
bewitch men, to work them to his will Levit, 20. 6, 27. 2. Sam. 28. 1. to 12.
2. Chron. 21. 6. 2. Chron. 33. 6. Thus he bewitched the people of Samaria for a
long time by Simon Magus his Sorceries Acts 8. 9, 11. Thus he bewitched the
Gallatians by false Prophets, that they should not obey the truth Gall. 3. 1.
Thus he permitted the Emperor Mr. Tyndall his Practice of Popish Prelates. p.
350.
Charles the great to be bewitched by a notable Strupet with an enchanted
ringe, having a pearl with some strange imagery graven thereon, so that he
could never be out of her company, or deny her any request whiles She lived,
nor yet suffer her corpse (embalmed wrapped up in lead and carried about after
him whether ever he went) to be out of his chamber or presence, when she was
deed, till the ringe was pulled of her finger, in such sort has the
Antichrist of Rome the Platina and Bale de Vitis Pontificum. Dr. Ioh. Wite his
Way to the true Church. Sect. 57. n. 9. 10.
Pope, and Popish Prelates, heretofore enchanted diverse kings and others with
their sorceries and conjurations, to cause them to give up their royallpower
and prerogatives to these Beasts, as Rev. 17. 2, 17. c. 18, 9. 28. H. 8. c. 10.
Mr. Tindall ^n his practice of Popish Prelates and Officers. relate. Thus did
the p. 368. Antiqu. Ecclesiae Brit. in the life of Archbishop Warh. p. 357. 3.
358.
great Cardinal, Favorite Woolsey, with Negromancy, and an Image made by
sorcery, which he wore about him, enchant King Henry the 8. to bring him to
his beck, which made the King to doat upon and run haunt after him, more then
ever he did on any Lady or gentlewoman, so as the King after that, began to
follow him, as he before followed the King, By means whereof, he ruled all
things at his pleasure, till his black Art did fail him; Hereupon perchance)
it was, that this King afterward made an Act against Conjuration, witchcrafts,
Sorcery, and enchantments to procure unlawful love etc. An. 33. H. 8. c. 8,
This Art has been practiced by many Priests and Jesuits here in England of
late years, upon diverse of their Proselites to seduce them to their faith, of
which Foot out of the same London 1624. p. etc.
M. Gor, regords two stories practiced upon a couple of seduced Maids, I could
add two later, practiced upon two gentlemen (the one a young Devonsher man, of
good estate, so bewitched with an enchanted Crucifix hing by a Priest about his
neck, above 9. year since, that as long as it continued about him, al his
frinds could neither persuade, nor force him either to go to Church, or stay
at home, or continue in the Realm, or to discourse or converse familiarly with
them; but no sooner was it espied, and cut of his neck by his Mother (who
believed it to be a Charm,) but he was presently another man, and wondered how
he could be so strangely bewitched as he was for above 3. months space
besore; Wheither any of our great Lord Prelates have learned this Art from
their familiars, Priests and Jesuits (who have charmed all their zeal and
prosecutions against them, and turned the whole stream of it against the
godlyest Ministers and people, whom they revile and persecute under the name of
Puritans,) I leave to others to inquire after, who are more privy to their
secrets then my self; If they have, I shall only desire them to remember, that
Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, Neither is there any divination
against Israel. numb. 23. 23. and if they have bewitched any men with any
their sorceries, flatteries, misinformations, false delusions, or
enchauntements, to up hold their Lordly pomp and greatenesse or Superstitious
Romish Innouations, Yet this infernal craft (like untempered mortar) will
vndoubtely fail them ar the last, and them shall they (like their Father
Satan) fall suddenly and fearfully from heaven to earth, like Liteninge Luke
10. 18. yea the^, with all their usurped power, lordlynes, po^pe, State, glory,
and multitude, shall forever descend into Hell. Isay 5. 14. as to their propper
place. Acts. 1. 25.

47. The devil is an importunate suitor, who will hardly take any refusal or
denial of his suite; A diligent so^icitor and vigilant prosecutor of his
designs, overslipping no opportunity or means to atcheive ^is ends, and an
impudent shameless miscreant, who will never be shamed, daunted, terrified by
any detection, discovery, or public dislike of his mischievous wiles, plotts,
and attempts against the Ministers, people, O^dinances, Gospel, Kingdom of
God and Christ; as appears by Job 1. 13. to. 22. c. 2. 1. to. 10. Math. 4. 1.
to. 10. Ephesians: 6. 11, 12, 16. 1 Pet: 5. 8, 9. So the Lordly Prelates are
importunate suitors to Princes, and others, for the advancement and
preservation of their Hierarcie, usurpations, Jurisdictions, Ceremonies, and
the suppression of the purity and power of Religion, in which they will have no
denial or foil; they are most vigilant, diligent, and earnest solicitors,
loosing no (...), sp^ring no cost or pains, or promises, to effect any thing
that may make for the advancement of their proffit, honor, power and
Jurisdiction, or suppression of the Puritans (as they term them now) as their
late encroachments upon his Majesty's prerogative, the subjects liberties, the
Common Laws, and other Officers witness, yea, they are impudent, shameless,
most audacious brazen-faced creatures, who will neither blush at, give over,
nor desist the prosecution of their impious Popish designs, though publickely
detected to all the world; witness our present experience: For though the
execrable Romish, ^esuiticall practices of some of our Lord Prelates to usher
in Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, (as by licensing Popish and s^perstitious
Books, purging and altering the Common Prayer-booke, ^ast-booke, and
Gun-powder-treason-boo^e in a most g^osse and shameless (that I say not
traytorly) manner, by erecting Altars, Images, Crucifixes, Crosses, (as the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Arch-Irnovator both in Church and State affairs,
though he will not be thus reputed, has erected Altars and Crucifixes in the
Chappells of Lambeth, Croydon, London-house, Fu^ham, etc. The Bishop of
Coventry and Litchfield D. Wright, this last pestilentiall Summer blotted out
Gods Ten Commandments in the Cathedral at Litchfield, and set up a giont-like
monstrous Crucifix, as big and large as any three men, with an Altar under
it, and also raised the Chauncell; and set up an Altar at Coventry, as one
Knightly, a known Popish Priest in those parts directed; as that Good Man, S.
Godfrey of Gloucester has also erected a Crucifix and Altar in his Cathedral at
Gloucester, and solemnly consecrated Altar-clothes for them. And likewise has set
up a new Cross at ^inzor, with a large glorious Crucifix on the one side, and
the picture of Christ arising out of his grave, with his Body half in and
half out of his Sepulcher in goodly colors, on the other, not fearing to
write thereon in Capital letters, and to give public notice to all the
Realm: That this Cross was repaired and beautified at his costs Anno Domini
1635. contrary to the express Doctrine of Of the Peril of Idolatri p. 41. 42.
61, It is wickedness for a Christian to erect such an Image to God in a Temple,
etc.
our Homelies, which condemned the very making of the picture of Christ, or a
Crucifix as Idolatrous wicked, and a mere lie, to which, he, and all other
our Cross erecting Prelates have often subscribed, and therefore are worthy of
no painted, but a real Cross themselves, for tollerating and erecting such
Crosses and Crucifixes, contrary to their own subscriptions, only to set
Popery:) by silencing, suspending, and persecuting godly Ministers, Suppressing
lectures and powerful preaching in many Diocese, encouraging people to
neglect and profane Gods Saboathes with all Heathenish sportes and impieties,
imposing new visitation O^thes, Articles, Ceremonies, and the like, setting up
the Popes Canon law, railing upon godly Ministers and people, and suppressing
them under the name of Puritans, Magnifying Popish writings, and vilefyinge
Protestant Authors, endeavoring to bring in the Gregorian account, punishing
all those that oppose their Romish Innovations, or indicte or molest them for
it in the high Commission, now made a mere Spanish Inquisition to suppress
our Protestant Religion, and set Popery with an high hand against his Majesty's
Laws and public declaration, and by sundry other such Jesuitical tricks and
stratagemes prescribed long since by the Jesuit Contzen Politiq. liber. 5.
which their Lordships follow to an hairs breadth. Since some, or all these
their execrable practices I say (at which the very devil himself might blush
and hide his head) have been See look about you.
laid open to all the world of late, in such an apparent undeniable manner,
that all the people both clearly see, declayme against, and abhor their
treachery, villainy, and wicked Romish designs, and themselves (had they any
conscience, shame, ingenuity, grace, or modesty in them) would be ashamed to
show their faces either in city, or country, Much more at Court, having so
notoriously abused his Majesty and affronted his Laws and Declarations in all
these particulars, and injured his Highness in his Royal Issues, Sister,
Nephews, in blotting them out of the Collect, late Fast-booke, and Catalogue,
of Gods Elect; Yet these audacious holy Fathers (as blushlesse as their Gowns,
their Rochetts or the devil) are so far from being ashamed, or reforming
these their enormities and impieties, that they proceed on with as great or
greater rage and violence in them then before, silencing more Ministers every
day; yea breaking open the houses, committing close Prisonners and questioning
those with an high hand, as seditious persons and offenders, M. Henry Burton D.
Burges, M. White, and others.
who dare preach or write against, or find fault with those their perfidious,
traytorly, disloyal, impious practices, Purgations, Innovations, Crucifixes,
Altars, Tapers, and proceedings, execrable both to God and man; So like to the
Devil are they grown, in their affronted shameless impudency.

48. The devil has great wrath, because he knows he has but a short
time: Revel: 12, 13. So have Lord Prelates no^, great wrath, and ^xercise
strange unusual rage, persecutions, exorbitances against Gods faithful
Ministers and people, hunting after them with their bloodhounds the
Pursevants, and ri^ing and breaking up their howses, Studies, Coffers, with
unheard of violence, as if they were the archest Traitors breathing, witness
their late proceedings against Master Burton in clapping him up close
prisonner, and convicting his wife and Clarke to several prisons only for
obeying his commands in presenting his Appeals and Sermons to the Lords, For
God and the King, which makes people stand amazed at their tyranny, and causes
the Papists to triumph as if the day now were theirs: whereas Priests and
Jesuits (mere Traitors by our laws) are favored of late, as their darling
Sons, and not molested by them. Therefore doublesse the time of their usurped
tyranny and reign will be but very short, and their sins now grown ripe
withal for the Sickle of Gods Judgments) the fica^l ruin of their
antichristian Hierarchy and more then b^barous tyranny, near at hand.

49. When the great redd Dragon and his Ange^ls were cast out of heaven (Gods
Church) the heavens, and those that dwelt therein, by Gods commandments, did
rejoice, Rev. 12. 12. So when those Lordly Prelates and their forenamed Angels
shall be ca^ quite out of the Church of God, She and all her faithful
members will exceedingly rejoice, they being now her greatest grief and
grievance, of which she is so weary and sick at heart, that she groans to
be delivered from, unb^thened of them, being now intolerable for her to
sustain: Such is their present divellish insolency, pride and open tyranny:
especially of that Arch-wolfe, and mad red Dragon of Canterbury, who now
makes open havocke of Gods Church and Ministers; like another furious power,
against all Laws of God and the Realm, to the amazement of the people.

50. Hell and everlasting torments are prepated for the devil and his Angels,
reserved now in chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the great day, when
they shall be all cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone for
ever: Math. 25. 41. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Revel. 20. 20. So are they prepared
likewise for all proud Lordly, persecuting, Oh that a man had but the view of
hell; (says ^ather Latymer in his Sermons, He should see on one side of it a
row of unpreaching Prelates in their square caps as far as between this and
Dover, I warrant you, as far as between this and Dover.
unpreaching, oppressing, tyrannizing Prelates, who suppress the preaching and
progress of the Gospel, with the Preachers, Ministers, and Professors of it,
and hate them to the death: And if there be any place or torments in Hell,
hotter, deeper, greater, or mo^e insupportable, ^orrid, and loathsome then
other, certainly that shall be reserved for these ungodly Lord Bishops and
false Prophets; who shall have the same condemnation and torments in^icted on
them as the devil himself shall undergo. 1. Tim. 3. 6, 7. Rev. 20. 10. O
that our proud persecuting Lording Prelates would now at last consider this, o
that they would repent and amend in time before they fall down headlong It is
reported of his Arch-Grace of Canterbury, that when he was a poor Scholar in
Oxford he dreamed, that he should first be a Bishop, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, and a great persecutor of Gods Ministers and people: (which (...)
all (...)) and that at last he si^cke do^ne into hell, (...) he awaked, and
then and since often related this dream enough to terrify and a^ake his
Lordship, if true, in the midst of his present furious ^ersecutions.
quick into Hell, Some of them (as their late actions manifest to all the
world) being grown as insolent, as impudent, as desperate professed public
enemies to purity, piety, holiness the sincere preaching and Preachers of Gods
word and power of Religion, as the very devil himself; and some of them I
^eare) worse then any devils. For first all the devils believe Gods threats,
word, Judgments, and tremble at them James. 2. 19. but they (as their
atheistical, unjust, unconscionable, tyranicall lives and actions proclayme to
all men,) do neither believe, nor tremble at them.

2. The devil confessed Paul and his fellow preachers, to be the servants of
the most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation Acts. 16. 16, 17,
18. Lordly Prelates will not confess our godliest faithfullest Preaching
Ministers to be such witness there expung of the Collect in the last
fast-booke beginning thus: It had been good for us etc. Only because it
magnifieth often preaching, and call such preachers, Gods servants.

3. The devil is exceeding diligent night and day, but Lordly Prelates very
lasie and negligent in following of their spiritual Plough, (as B. Latimer
shows at large in his Sermon of the Plough:) and so in those three respects
are worse then he: When as they are parallels and checkmates with him in all
and every of these 50. Particulars. From all which I shall frame this Argument,
discovering the office and calling of Lordly Bishops and Prelates, not to be
from God, nor of divine institution, but from the Devil, and his invention;
which I challenge all great Lord Bishops to answer, if they can.

Those who are altogether like the very Devil, tread in his footsteps, do his
works, and bring forth his propper fruits in all the forecited particulars and
that principally by reason of their function; those ( questionless) are none
of Gods institution, but of their Fathers the Devil, of and from whom they are
Christ himself so expressly resolving: John 8. 44. 1 John 3. 8. Math 7. 16.
20.

Such have Lordly domineering Pontificiall Bishops and Prelates in all ages
been, and that principally by reason of their Lordly functions, as the
premises, all Stories and experience manifest.

Therefore they, and their Lordly function, are none of Gods institution, but
of their father the devils, of and from whom they are.

Yet mistake me not, I pray, as if I concluded every Bishop to be like the
devil in all these particulars, or to be damned; Such uncharitableness and
impiety, be far from me and all good Christians; I know some Bishops have
been godly men, and Gods dear Saints, and I doubt not but there are some few
such now: though their cowardice and silence in Gods cause, in which they now
dare not publicly appear, be inexcusable.

1. But yet this I say withal. First, that they were such before they were
made Lord Bishops.

2. That their Bishoprics never made any of them better or more laborious or
courageous sor the truth then before, but many of them far worse fearefuller
and lasier.

3. That since Bishoprics were endowed with Lordly riches, Jurisdiction,
power, and pomp, I never read of any one man that was ill before, who grew a
good and godly Christian by being made such a Bishop (a thing remarkable;) nor
of any good man before, that ever grew better, more painful, hol^ zealous,
heavenly minded and laborious, but most of them al much ^orse, more idle,
worldly, covetous, proud, luxurious, malicious, oppressive petulant,
selfe-willed, and unjust.

4. That most Lordly Prelates (especially those who have been most
pontificiall, powerful, Lordly, domineering, active and stirring in the Church
and state) have in all ages since they were made Lords, Peers, and B^rons,
been like the devil in all or most of the forecited particulars; and if any
proved good, or became not such, it was only from the overruling sanctifying
grace of Gods spirit in their hearts before and after they were made Lord
Prelates, not from this very Lordly office, pomp, power, and function it
self, which otherwise would have made them such, as it has made most other
Popes and Prelates, as all sto^ies evidence.

5. Finally, I affirm; that if to be a Lord Bishop, be such a thing only as
many now define and make it; Namely, to manage temporal offices, and
state-affaires, to give over preaching, except one Leuten Court-Sermon in a
year or two, not in their proper Dioc sse to their people, to follow and hunt
the Kings Court, to get and dispose o^ Ecclesiastical (and so (...) civil)
osfices and preferments; to suppress Lectures, Lecturers, and often preaching
of Gods Word; Suspend, excommunicate, persecute, imprison, deprive godly
Ministers and Professors for toys and trifles, (yea for their zeal and
piety,) against all Laws of God and man; to consecrate Chapels, Churches, set
up Crucifixes. Altars, Tapers, Crosses, Organs, Images, ^oyle in
Communion-tables Alta^wise, set up Superstition, Popery, and Idolatry; License
Popish and Armenian Books, Corrupt and purge the Common-Prayer-Booke, the
Gunpowder treason Book, the Fast Book, yea the Articles of Religion, ad
normam Romanae fidei, to make and impose new visitation Oaths, Articles, (...)
Orders, Innovations, to make Mini^ers and Churchward^ns (...); to keep
visitations and Consistories without any Patent or Commission from his
Majesty, in their own names and rights alone; to grant out Citations, Process
Excommunications, Probate of wills, Commissions of administration, etc. in
their own names, under their own Seals, not his Majesty's to fine, imprison
censure, and (...) his Majesty's good Subjects, etc. their fellow brethren at
their pleasures; to be coached and barged up and down from place to place (I
am sure seldom to the pulpit) to be courted, capped, attended, clothed like
petty Kings and Princes, to fare deliciously every day, to have stately
Palaces, great possessions, Knights and brave Gentlemen to attend them, Lords
and Earls to crowch unto them, all to fear them, flatter them, none to
rebuke, oppose or control them, (no not in their oppressing and unjust courses)
to bolster out their encroachments upon the Kings Prerogative and Laws, and on
his Subjects Liberties with might, threats, and violence; to tramp^e all Laws
of God and man under foot, and do all things by will and power, not Law or
Canon; to be implacable, unmercifull, pitiless, proud, stately, cruel; to
shake up, terrify and b^ow-beate, imprison, Excommunicate deprive, degrade,
presents their fellow-brethren, and eat them like their Curres; to set forward
all profaneness, disorders, sports and E^hnicke pastimes even on Gods own day,
and make no conscience of it; to do all things like absolute Lawgivers,
Lords, Popes, and Monarks, or rather professed Atheists, fearing neither God
^or man, and breaking all their laws, to bolster up base, drink, idle,
scandalous clergy men, exempting them from secular power and jurisdiction, to
maintain their Officers in (...) open exortions, oppressions, abuses,
exhorbitant misdemeanor and the like: Which is now only to be and play the
Bishop in point of Doctrine and practice: Then thus to be and act the Bi^hop,
is in truth to (...) and play the very devil, and to parallel him in all
forecited respects; let those who are such Lordly. Prelates deny it if they can
or dare.

The second Parallel BETWEEN THE JEWISH HIGH PRIESTS And Lordly Prelates.
AS Lordly Prelates resemble their Father the devil in all the forenamed
particulars, so do they the Jewish high Priests in these ensuing Particulars.

1. The high Priests of the Jews, were ordained of men, to offer gifts and
sacrifizes on the Altar Heb. 8: 3. Exodus 40. Levit. 1. to. 22. So our high
Priests the Lord Prelates, are and will be ordained and also ordain others
high Priests for this end, to offer Sacrifices and gifts at their new erected
Altars (not to preach) the end why they every where erect, advance, consecrate,
and bow down to Altars, which now want nothing but a Mass to grace them
withal.

2. The Jewish high Priests had their Miters, and brave costly pontifical
Robes, ornaments, and attires, whereby they were differenced from other men
Exodus 31. 1. to. 32. c. 28, 2. to 43. So have the Lordly Prelates, and that in
imitation of the Jewish high Priests, from whence they derive them.

3. The Jewish high Priests went but once a year into the second Tabernacle to
offer for the people. Heb. 9. 7. And our Lordly high Priests commonly go but
once a year, (and many of them scarce once in 3. or 4. years, witness both
our present Arch-prelates; and some other unpreaching Bishops examples, into
the Pulpit, to preach unto the people, or to offer sacrifice on the Altar.

4. The Jewish high Priests commanded the Apostles, not preach any more in the
name of the Lord Jesus, to the people, that they might be saved; and
apprehended imprisoned, and scourged them, for do^ng it. Acts 4 and 5. 1 Thessalonians.
2. 16. Our Lordly Prelates heretofore, and at this very day, silence and
suspend our best, our painfullest Ministers from preaching Gods Word unto their
people, that they may be saved (though God, the King, the Books of Ordination
and Statutes of the Realm enjoyne them for to do it,) and threaten to
apprehend, imprison, and fine them if they preach contrary to their
suspensions; as the Apostles did, Who in despite of all the high Priests
threats, inibitions imprisonments, stripes, three times one after another,
Daily in the Temple, and in every house, (which now would be a Conventicle)
ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ- Acts 5. 41, 42. And so would and
should our Ministers (now silenced against Law and Canon too) were they true
successors of the Apostles, and not intoxic^ted with a base unworthy spirit of
carnal fear and cowardice, which makes them betray their liberties, Religion,
Flocks, Brethren to the will and rapine of these beastly ravening Lordly Wolves.

5. The Jewish high Priest granted out warrants or letters missive to Saul
(brea^hing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord,)
that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might
bring them bound to Ierus^em. Acts (...). 2. Lordly Prelates heretofore, and
now, grant the like letters missiue, warrants, and Attachments to their
Pursuivants and other malicious wicked Informers (that breath out threatenings
and slaughter against the Lords disciples) against diverse godly Ministers,
Christians, and all such as they please to style, Puritans and Cowventicklers,
wheither men o^ women, to breaks open and ransacks their houses, take their
bodies, bring them up Prisonners to London, Ye k^, or Durham, before their
Lordships holynesses, to fine, censure, deprive, imprison and undo them though
Christ, his Apostles, and the primitive Bishops never claymed or exercised any
such Lordly secular tyranny or Jurisdiction, but condemned it as unlawful and
unbeseeming Clergiemen.

6. The Jewish High Priest Ananias, when Paul was convented before the Counsel
and began to make his Apology and plead his own cause, commanded them that
stood by to smite him on the mouth, and would not suffer him to speak in his
own defense Acts 33. 1, 2. Thus do our Lord Prelates deal with Gods
Ministers when they come before them in the High Commission or elsewhere; they
will not suffer them to speak in their own defense, or plead their own
causes to the full; but when they offer to speak, enjoyne them silence, or
else command the Pursevant or Iaylour to smite them on the mouth, or take them
away to the Prison, So imperious are their Lordships grown. Take but one fresh
memorables instance instead of many others. One M. Snelling a grave Kentish
Minister, was suspended ab Officio and Beneficio about a veare and half since
by D. Wood, commissary to the Bishop of Rochester, and after that
excommunicated, pursuiuanted and articled against before the High
Commissioners, at Lambet^, only for not reading the Declaration for sports,
fathered falsely upon his Majesty by the Prelates. To which Articles he
drawing up a full answer, showing the reasons both in point of law and
conscience, why he conceived himself not bound to read it, and so not
culpable of any crime; the Register refused to accept or receive his Answer
though tendered to him in writing, saying, it was too long, and he durst not
take it. Hereupon he contracted it into less then a sheet of paper and
tendered it to him as his answer. He refused it the second time; and though he
thus tendered his answer, yet an Attactment issued out against him, for not
answering. The conclusion was, he must put in only such an answer as the
Register should prescribe, without any justification or defense, or mention of
the reasons why he refused to read the Book, telling him that he might and
should put in his reasons in court, by way of defense. Whereupon he gave in a
short answer without any defense at all in a manner; which coming to be
repeated before one of the Commissioners; the Register and he dashed out of
his very answer (against all Law and Justice) what they pleased: which M.
Snelling perceiving, professed he would not acknowledged for his answer none
of his, but their own making; vet notwithstanding this answer must stand as
his. This Hilary term he tenders his defense; the Register and Court at
Informations refused to accept thereof, telling him (...) came too l^te; though
before the cause informed against: At Lambeth he tendered his defense in Court;
the Archbishop refer the consideration of it to Sir Nathaniell Brent, and D.
Guyn whether it were fit to be received; only he told them, he would have no
dispute of the point; which is all one, as if his Grace had said; I will have
no defense at all: This the event has manifested, For he tendering his
defense to these, Referres they refuse, to receive or allow thereof: telling
him that the Sea how these disloyal Officers most unjustly lay the blamt of
all their tyranny, oppression, Innovations and injustice upon his Majesty: to
rob him of his peoples hearts and affections.
King and the Archbishop have decreed that the Book shall and must be read,
and therefore he must submit and read it, and they can allow of no Defense
against it. That the Archbishop has decreed it shall be read, I believe it
without an Oath; but that his Majesty has made any such Dec^ee, they must
give me and all others leave to demurre to it, till they shall be able to
produce such a Decree as this under his Majesty's great seal; which will be ad
Grecas Calendas, lo here the desperate impiety and injustice of our Prelates,
parallel to that of Acts. 22. 1. 2.
Ananias, when he commanded Paul to be smitten on the face as ^ee began to
make his Defense. For first they will make and prejudge the not reading of this
forged declaration, an heinous off^ce, though there be no law, canon or precept
at all for the reading of it; nor any clause at all that it should be read;
much less by the Minister, nor any power given them so much as to question,
much less to suspend, excommunicate, fine or cenfure, any who refuse to read
i^. When as the great question is, whether it be an offense at all? but this
must not be disputed. What now is this but to prejudicate, and not judge men's
causes.

2. No answer must be given or received, but what themselves shall make and
allow and alter at their pleasures. Is not this pretty justice? Who then shall
be, innocent?

3. When the answer is in, no defense must be made or accepted: If so, then the
most innocent man in the world may be condemned. What, no defense made? Christ
himself had liberty to make his defense before Pilate an Heathen Judge: Paul
the like liberty before Felix, Festus and Agrippa, ^eere Pagan Infidel
Magistrates. Yea the veryest Traitors and Rebels in the world, have liberty in
all Courts of justice, to make their defense, and plead the best they can for
themselves, yet this godly grave Minister cmming for such a grand crime as
this, before our Lordly Prelates, must make no defense at all: O devil, o
Jewish High Priests, blush at this impudency, impiety and injustice of these
your sons and successors: A drunkard, an Adulterer, a Symoniacke, any
incarnate devil may put in what answer and defense he please before them; but
this grave Minister every way unspotted in his life and doctrine must not do
it, because they have decreed before hand to condemn him. Is not this right
high Priests justic^?

7. This Jewish high Priest ^te to judge Paul after the law, and commanded him
to be smitten contrary to the Law. Acts 2^. 3. So our Lordly Prelates in their
Consistories, Visitations, and Commissions, sit to judge Ministers and others
his Majesty's Subjects according to the Law, and yet imprison, fine,
excommunicate, suspend, deprive, degrade, tear, fleece, and judge them, for
the most part, contrary both to the Laws of God, the Realm, and their own
Canons; as thousends of Presidents evidence of late.

8. The Jewish high Priest, by Tertullus his Orator, accused St. Paul before
Felix the Governor, for a P^stilent fellow, a mover of sedition among all the
Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, Acts
24. 1. Io^. The self same accusation have the Lord Prelates laid to our
Ministers charge in former ages, and to our zealous godly Ministers and
Preachers now adays, accufing them to the King and his Counsel, and
persecuting yea, suspending: imprisoning them every where as pestilent,
factious, sedicious Witness M. Henry Burton now charged by them, with sedition:
with many others, as was B. Latimer, and all our Martyrs of old.
persons, and ringleaders of Sects and Schism; as many late examples, and some
now in agitation evidence.

9. The Jewish his Priests, informed Festus the Governor against Paul, and
desired favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, that there
they might judge him themselves according to their own law, or else murder
him by the way Acts. 25. 23. c. 24. 6. Our Lordly Prelates (Especially his
Archgrace of Canterbury and other our Cant Bishops) do the like; informing the
King, or temporal Majestrates against godly Ministers and people; and desiring
not Justice, but favor against them, that they would sent for them into their
own Courts or High-Commissions, or not suffer them to appeal, or be released
thence by Prohibitions o^ other means; that so they might judge them after
their own law and wills, and be both enemies, parties delinquents, and Judges
in their own cause, contrary to all reason Justice, equity, and law, both of
God and man; of which we have manylate memorable Instances; and one thing very
observable, that they have caused his clause (derogatory to his Majesty's
royal Justice and supremacy, to make themselves absolute supreme Kings and
Judges) (that there shall be no Appeal or Provocation allowed or admitted from
the high Commission^rs, to be inserted into their last Commission: A strange
clause, to tie up his Majesty's hands and sovereign Justice from being able to
relieve his oppressed or injured subjects, be their causes never so good, their
Judges their censures never so parciall mali^ious exorbitant or unjust.

10. Saul, by authority received from the Jewish chief Priests, shut up many
of the Saints in Prison, and persecuted them even unto strange Cit^es. Acts.
26. 10. 11. 12. Our Lordly Prelates Pursevants, Catchpoles, creatures and
vermin, by like authority warrant and Commission from their Lordships, have
done, and yet do the like, breaking up men's doors and houses with open
violence, as if they were traitors or felons by their High Commission warrants,
in which case if they be slain they have no remedy, neither is it any felony
or murder as all the Judges of England resolved in one Simpsons case 42. Eliz.

11. The Jewish chief Priests came to Festus to Jerusalem Judges of England
resolved in one Smipsons case 42. Eliz.
informing him against Paul, and desiring to have Judgment against him without
more ado; To whom (...) gave this answer. It is not the man^er of the Romans
to deliver any man to die, before he which is accused, have the accusers face
to face, and have license to answer for himself, concerning the crime laid
against him Acts 25. 15. 16. The same do Lord Prelates at this day; they
inform Princes and temporal Majestrates and Judges against godly Ministers
and people, desiring to have present Judgment against them. O that they would
give them such an answer as this; Heathen Governor Festus did the Jews high
Priests; and not condemn them but by lawful witnesses ever bringing both them
and their accusers face to face, which would discover many a false brother and
sly informing knave, who no^ by means of ex Officio Oaths and procedings
never appears face to face to make good his accusation, and passes
undiscovered.

12. Christ foretold his disciples, that he must suffer many things of the
chief Priests. Math. 16. 21. And our go^ly Martirs and writers in all times,
have foretold all godly Ministers and people, that they must and shall suffer
many things of Lordly Prelates for Christ's sake, as they have done for many
ages in all places where they have borne any sway; yea Christ predicted, to his
Disciples that he should be betrayed to the chief Priests, and that they
should condemn him to death Math. 20. 18. The like has been predicted to his
faithful Ministers and servants, concerning Lordly Prelates.

13. The Jews chief Priests sent officers to apprehend Christ, because many
of the people believed on him and harkened to his Doctrine; and were exceeding
angry with the Officers because they did not bring him John. 7. 30, 31. 32, 35.
Lord Prelates in former times, and now adays, have also usually sent out
Officers and Pursevants to apprehend Christ's faithful Ministers, because the
people believe and harken to their Doctrine; and are exceeding angry with them,
if they ^scape their hands and bring them not before them; as appears by many
late examples.

14. The Jews chief Priests consulted how to put Lazarus to death, because
that by reason of him, many of the Jews went away and believed on Jesus John.
12. 10, 11. So Lordly Prelates heretofore have consulted how to put Gods
faithful Ministers to death, and now how to s^lence, suspend, deprive,
imprison and thrust them from their Ministry, because by reason of them many of
the people go away from them and their traditions and believe on Jesus; as
hundred particular examples testify.

15. The chief Priests of the Jews hired Judas for 30. pieces of silver to
betray Christ his Master, and deliver him into their hands, sent a great
multitude with swords and Staves along with him, to apprehend him; which they
did. Math. 26. 14, 15, 47, 48, 49, 50. Mark 14. 10. 43. to 47. Luke 22. 4. 5,
6, 47. to 52. John. 18. 1. to 14. The same have Lordly Prelates done in all
ages, hiring and corrupting godly Ministers and Christians, false disciples,
friends, servants, yea sometimes their very Kings, wives and Children to betray
them into their hands and sending Persevants and a great company of Sherifes,
Constables and other Officers with them to apprehend break open their houses,
doors like thieves, and bring them before them, as the Books of Martirs, and
present experience plentifully evidence, to their shame.

16. The high Priest sought for false witnesses against Jesus our Savior, to
put him to death Math. 26. 59. to 64. Mark 14. 52. to 62. and by their falfe
testimonies seek to contemn him, Ibidem. The same have done and yet do Lord
Prelates; (as Hi^ories and experience manifest) against Christ's faithful
Ministers and servants.

17. When these false witnesses would not steed them, they endeavor to enforce
him to accuse himself by captious questions First, they examined him
concerning his disciples and doctrine; To which he gave them this answer; I
spoke openly to the world, I ever taught in the Synagogues and in the Temple,
wheither the Jews allway resort, and in secret have I said nothing, why ask
thou me? ask them that heard me, what I have said unto them, behold they know
what I said (refuting to accuse himself or his Disciples) John 18. 19, 20, 21,
22. 23. After this, the high Priest said unto him, I adjure thee by the living
God that thou tell us, wheither thou be he Christ, the Son of God. Jesus
says unto him, Thou have said etc. Thou the high Priest rent his ^lothes
saying, he has spoken blasphemy, what farther need have we of witnesses,
behold now ye have heard his blasphemy; What think ye? They answered and
said, he is guilty of death; Then did they spit in his face and buffeted him,
and others smote him with the palm of their hand saying Prophecy unto us thou
Christ, who it is that smote thee, etc. Math. 26. 63. to. 69. After which, they
took counsel together to put him to death, and deliver him bound to Pilate
the Governor, before whom they accuse him; And when Pilate would have released
him to the people, they persuaded them that they should ask Barrabas and
destroy Jesus, and to cry out let him be crucified; And when Pilate yet
pronounced him innocent, and would have discharged him; the chief Priests
replied; If thou let this man go thou art not Caesar's friend, for he speaks
against Caesar; Never leaving him till they had crucified, and sealed him up
fast in his Sepulcher. Math. 27. and 28. John 18. and 19. Thus have Lord
Prelates formerly dealt with the godly ministers and Saints of Christ, and now
deal with his faithful Ministers and Servants; when they have no true or
sufficient witnesses against them, they enforce them against Scriptures,
Counsels Fathers, Decretals Canon, Civil Canon law, the practice of the
primitive Church for above 1300. years after Christ all which time there is
not one precedent extant or story of any such Oaths or proceeding among
Christians) by ex officio Oaths and Articles to accuse and entrap themselves,
of purpose to catch matter of censure and condemnation out of their own
mouths which when they have gotten, then they insult over them spit in their
faces, buffet, revile, deride, and jeare them; take counsel against them to
silence, suspend, deprive, fine, imprison, or destroy them; never ending their
malicious prosecutions, till they see them close prisoners in their grau^s; and
if any temporal Majestrates pronunce them innocent, or are willing to
discharge them at any ti^e then they accuse them as enemies to Caesar, as
factious, sedicious, pestilent fellows and tell them, If they let them go,
they are not Caesar, the Kings or Churches friends; Yea when any time of grace,
release or Pardon comes they can, and do persuade Kings and temporal
Magistrates to pordon and release Barrabas, thieves murderers, whores, bawdes
Priests Jesuits, Adulterers, drunkards, and all other notorious malefactors,
but yet Jesus his innocent Saints and servants must have no grace at all, no
mercy enlargment, grace or justice, but be imprisoned, ruined, molested
destroyed and by this means at last they most unjustly Crucify, vex and ruin
these pure innocent Saints of Christ, as they did Christ himselse. A^ whizh our
Book of Martyrs and daily experience witness to the full, in each particular;
yea, many of our present Prelates do as much as in them lies to crucfiy
Christ himself, and that in a far more barbarous manner then ever the Jews
did: For First, they crucified and set him only unto many Crosses. 2. The Jews
crucified him but once, they often times one after another. 3. They kept him no
longer on the Cross then till he was dead upon it, and then gave Joseph of
Aramathea leave to take him down, beseeching Pilate that he might not hang
thereon till the next day John 19. Our Lord Prelates keep him always hanging
before their eyes, on the Cross, and never take him down, as if he had still
continued on his Cross till now, and never been taken off, buried, raised
again from the dead, and carried into heaven. And why so I pray? First, to
show their cruel and bloody disposition, it being their daily practice to
crucify Christ in his Image and Saints, which makes them so much in love with
the sight of the Crucifix. 2. To ma^st themselves to be the high Priest
undoubted Successors, who crucified Christ. 3. To testify, that they delight so
much in the picture of Christ's death, as they have no care nor thought at all
to imitate him in his paynefull preaching life. 4. To manifest to all men, that
if Christ were now a live in the flesh, they would as certainly crucify him
again as the high Priests did. 5. To tax the Sacra^nt of the Lords Supper, and
Scriptures of much imper^ction; as if they were not sufficient, to show forth
Christ death till he came (without this additament of a Crucifix) to their Dull
Lordships, who seldom receive the one, or seriously meditate of, and preach
the other. 6. To manifest, that they desire not to have Christ to live and
ruleas a King or supreme living Lord in his own Church, which he cannot do as
long as he hangs as a dead manon his Cross; that so they themselves may Lord
it and rule Christ's Church at their own pleasures according to their own
Canons, Lusts, and pleasures, not his word, as the Jewish high Priests did. 7.
To testify, that their Lordships think there is little need to preach Christ
crucified; and, that a dumb blind painted Crucifix, is a far better
preacher of Christ and his death then their Lordships. And if so, what need of
Bishops or Preachers, when we may have store of Crucifixes at a far cheaper
rate?

18. Finally, so^e of the Jews high Priests, were rebels and traitors to
their Sovereigns; as Abi^thar was to Solomon, who there upon deprived him of
his office, but spared his life though he deserved death 1. Kings. 1. 7. c. 2.
26. 27. So many hundred LOrd Prelates in foreign parts, and above 60. of our
own here at some (Especially the Archbishop of Canterbery, and York) have
been notorious Arch-Traytors, Conspirators and Rebels too against their
Sovereigns, Especially those Emperors and Kings, who have most favored
magnified and advanced their secular greatenesse, pomp, and power, A just
Judgment of God upon them, for advancing these Prelates be Lords and temporal
Princes, against Christ's own precept, Math. 20. 25.) and I pray God, all of
them be now faithful to their Kings and Sovereigns, which I have cause to
fear. In all these regards then you see how the Jewish high Priests, and
Lordly Prelates are direct Parallels, and so in verity, their undoubted
Successors; one main argument and pretense to support their Lordly Hierarchy
over their Brethren, being deduced from the high Priests example.

The disparity or Antithesis, between Christ's and Lord Prelates.
IF any now in these Prelates behalf reply, that they are of our Savior
Christ's own institution, his true Disciples, Sons, and followers, not the
devils, (as the First Parallel manifests them;) To disprove this Cavil, let
them a little consider the Antipathie, or disparity between our Savior Christ
and them, in these ensuing particulars.

First, our Savior Christ was so poor, that he had not so much as an house
or kedde of his own whereon to rest his head. Math. 8. 20. Our Lord Prelates,
(though in regard of their birthes for the most part very like our Savior,
borne in a stable, or some poor Obscure Cottage:) yet when once they become
Lord Bishops they have many Manfions, Palaces, and stately princely
habitations, wherein they wallow and take their pleasure, as if they were borne
Prelates or Princes: and yet not content therewith, they still complain their
are poor Prelates, craving and hunting after far more, far greater
Possessions, though not borne heirs to one farthing by the grace, nor
demeriting half so much for their pains or preaching, at the poorest
ten-pound Curate in their Diocese.

Secondly, Our Savior Christ, had but one poor threed-bare-Coate without a
seame, woven from toe to toe, for which the Soldiers cast lots. Math. 27. 35.
John 19. 23. 24. (...) John Baptist (the greatest Prophet that ever was borne
of a Woman) has his (...) of Camels hair (not silk or satin) and a leatherne
(not a brave great silken) girdle about his loins, Math. 3. 4. O^r Lordly
Prelates have many silken, satin, scarlet, G^nes, c^ssockes, robes, coapes,
rochets, hoodes, patched up with ^any sea^es and piebalde colors, with many
new invented Pontifical vestments, disguise and quadrangular ca^s and ^rinkets
peculiar to their Holinesses, which po^re Christ never wore, saw, knew or
dream'te of, and would have certainly disdained to look on, much more to
wear, being as unseemely for, as displeasing to him, as the purple scarlet
^obe, and Crown of Thorns that the Soldiers violently put upon him in
derifi^, when they mocked and Crucified him.

Thirdly, Our Savior Christ, had but course far, and hard diet for himself
and his Apostles and Guests; to wit, a few barley lo^ves and some small fishes
^or the most part served in on the bare ground; it being his chiefest meat and
drink, to do his Fathers will, and to finish his work. John. 4. 31. 34: c.
6. 5. to. 15. Math. 14. 17. to 22. c. 15. 34. to. 38. c. 16. 9. 10. John. 21.
9. 10. 13, Yea, great John Baptists ordi^y food, was naught else but Locusts
and wild honey. Mith. 3. 4. Our Lordly Prelates have all variety of costly
(...), cates, iunkets, wines, drinks, and Provisions, both for themselves,
wives, children, guests, servants, equal to any Barons Lords or Earls of the
Real^e, making commonl^ as sumptuous, great if not more luxu^ feasts then
they. Witness the more then (...) royal excess^e feast of ( Antiq. Ecclesiae
Brit. p. 350. 351. 352. Godwins Catalog. p. 167.
) Wi^liam Warham (...) of Canterbury; at which the great Duke of Buckingham
with his 120; attendants, waited on this Archprelate, as his High-Steward and
Butler, (too mean an office for the greatest Peer then living) going
bareheaded before his Grace, ush ring in his first Service and bowing his body
to his Holiness, as to the Pope of this other world. Witness the( Godwi. p.
611. to 614.
) unparalleld monstrous Feast of George Ne^ell Archbishop of York, the
greatest that England ever knew or heard of; the particulars whereof you may
read at large in Godwins Catalogue, with others, which I pretermit, of which
Antiqui^tes (...) Brit: Godwin, and Sir George Paul in the life of Archbishop
Whitgift, can inform you. And it is so far from being their meat and
drink, that it is their least thought and care, their least desire and
endeavor, their greatest trouble, pain and purgatory to preach Gods Word, and
do his will and work, as Christ our Savior did.

Fourthly, Our Savior Christ was so poor, and so ill stored with moneves,
that he had not so much as a Didrachma (about fiften pence of our money to pay
tribute money for himself and his followers, but was enforced to send Peter to
the Sea to borrow it of a poor Fish, for want of a friend to lend him so much,
he and his whole retinue, not being able to make up so small a sum among
them: Math. 17. 27. But Lordly Prelates, borne-not to a Didrachma, have not
only their hundreds and thousands by the year, (and yet do none, or little
spiritual work for it, most of them all put together, not preaching half so
often as a poor Sti^endiary Curate that has but eight or ten pound by the
veare:) yea their hundreds or thousands lying by them in their bags, besides,
and yet are not contented. So like are they to our Savior i^ this particular.

Fifthly, Our Savior Christ, and his Apostles too, went about on foot from
village to village, preaching the Gospel throughout all Galilee and Judea.
Math. 4. 23. c. 51. 2. c. 10. 5, 6, 7, 9. 10. 14. c. 12. John. 4. 6. Mark 1.
38, 39, Luke 9. 2, 3, 4, 5. c. 10. 3. to. 12. Acts 10. 38. Math. 14. 13. Mark
6. 33. Acts 20. 13. And when he rode (in state) into Jerusalem (which was but
once) he rode but on an Ass. Math. 21. 1. to. 16. But our Prelates when they
go abroad to visit or preach before the King (for they seldom preach in any
Country village in an age) or when they have any business to Court, to
Parliament or any City, yea when they go to their Cathedralls, or a Church
that is necre them, are so far from going a foot, that they seldom ride on
horseback, (and then on a stately Palfray) but in a Coach or Chariot drawn
with four or six pampred horses, with many horses, horsemen and footmen
environing them; and if they meet a poor cart or wagon by the way (or a
lighter meet their Barges on the watter, where they ride in pomp to) if they
stir not presently out of the way to give their Lordships passage, they will
lay the poor Carters and Lighter-men by the heels for their pains (as His
Archgrace of Canterbury.
some of the^ have lately done:) So like are they to our Savior. And here I
cannot pretermit a merry Story. ( In an old Book in H. the 8. his days of the
difference between
) A certain Germain Clown or Boar (as they term him) seeing the Bishop of
Colen ride in state with a great train of horsemen before and after him,
stood gaping on the Bishop as he passed by and smiled to himself; The Bishop
perceiving it, made a stand, and demanded Christ's and antichrists Bishops.
of the Boar why he thus smiled, bidding him speak the truth freely without
fear, for he should sustain no damage, Whereupon the Boar replied, that he
smiled to think with himself, whether St. Martin (Patron and First Bishop of
^olen) ever rode in such state as he did now: The Bishop hereunto answered,
that he was an ignorant silly fellow, for he did not ride in his state, as he
was Archbishop of Colen, but as he was the chief Prince Elector of Germany:
Where upon he wittily retorted; Suppose (said he) my Lord, the devil should
come and fetch away the Prince Elector, I pray what would become of the Bishop,
I fear me he would to Hell too: At which the Bishop being confounded went his
way. Our Prelates may apply it to themselves without my help.

6. our Savior Christ was meek and lowly in heart, full of compassion and
mercy, and gave rest to men's souls and bodies. Math. 11. 28, 29. c. 9. 36.
Luke 10. 33. Heb. 5. 2. Ephesians. 4. 32. Our Prelates (like men exalted from law
degree) are for the most part feirce chollerick, furious, proud, haughty,
insolent, arrogant, malicious, revengefull, implacable, full of merciless and
barbarous inhumanity, vexing and disquieting both the bodies and consciences of
godly Ministers and people; as the Book of Martirs, and experience testify.

Take but this one remarkable fresh instance in leive of many. This last
pestilentiall Somer, the Lord Brook his Lady, was delivered of a child ^t
Dallam in Suffolk within Bishop Wrems D^ocesse of Norwich. The Earls of
Bedford Doncaster, and 3. or 4. Lords more, were here upon invited to the
christning; which being solemnized on the Lords day afternoon, these Lords
earnestly pressed the Lord Brook, that they might have a Sermon then preached
upon this extraordinary occasion. He thereupon desired one Mr. Ash, his
household Chaplain to preach; who knowing the Bishops perverseness, was
unwilling to do it, till at last upon his Lords command to preach, he
condesc^nded, and preached accordingly. Bishop Wren h^aring of it, some two
days after sends his Apparitor with a Citation, to somon Mr. Ash to appear
before him: who being rode that morning to Cambridge, the Appa^itor after he
had been courteously entertained at my Lords house, defired to speak with my
Lord Brook himself, who coming to him; he acquainted his Lorship, that he
had a Citation for his Chaplain, who it seemed was rode abroad and therefore
he would leave the Citation with his Lordship, to serve it on his Chaplain
when he returned: My Lord thereupon, demanded of him, whether he took him to
be an Apparitor, or intended to make him one? He replied, that the Bishop
commanded him to leave it with his Lordship, in case his Chaplain was not
within, and if is Lordship would not receive it, he would sue out an
excommunication against his Chaplain and have it published in the Church the
next Lords day. Upon which he took the Citation; and upon his Chaplains
return rode over with him to the Bishop: who fitting in state like a great
Lord, or demi Pope, my Lord Brook acquainted him, how his Apparitor had left a
Citation with him against his Chaplain, and that he and his Chaplain were
thereupon both come together to his Lordship to know what the business was,
and what his Lordship could object against him; His Lordship thereupon
answered, that his Chaplain had openly affronted him in his Diocese in daring
to presume to preach therein without his special license, and that on the
Lords day afternoon, when he had expressly prohibited all Sermons within his
Jurisdiction: telling Mr. Ash, that he would make him an example to all others,
and that if he could not punish him sufficiently in his own Court, he would
bring him into the The Court our Bishops now abuse to set up their own Papal
Hierarchy, and enforce their unlawful commands.
High Commission for this insolency, unto which my Lord Brook answered, that
his Chaplain was unwilling to preach, and that thereupon h^ commanded him to
do it upon this spe^iall occasion, being importuned by the Earkes and Nobles
then present; defiring his Lordship not to be offended with his Chaplain, for
obeying his command, upon such an extraordinary occasion. The Bishop replied,
that his Lordship did very ill to offer to maintain his Chaplain in this;
that No Lord of England should affront him in his Diocese in such a manner,
and if he did his Majesty stould know of it, and that he would make his
Chaplain an example. My Lord Brook demanded, whether his Lordship could take
any exception either against his Chaplains l^fe or doctrine? He answered no:
Then my Lord, said he, I hope the offense is not great, there being no Law of
God, or the Realm, nor Canon of the Church, that inhibits Ministers to preach
on the Lords day afternoon. (To which he might have added that the very
declaration for Sports, much urged by the Bishop on the Ministers of his
Diocese, as his Majesty's, allows of Sermons every where in the afternoon;
Since it prescribes No Sports to be used but after the end of divine Service,
and AFTERNOON SERMON: as Bishop white confesses in his examination of A and
B. p. 131. and p. 9. of the Declaration: our pleasure is, That the Bishop and
all other inferior Churchmen shall for their parts be careful and Diligent,
both to instruct the igno^ant, and co^vince and reform them that are m^led in
religion etc. Therefore that Bishops and Ministers sho^ preach on the Lords day
afternoon, as well as in the forenoone; and not be questioned, but commended
for doing it:) The Bishop demanded of Mr. Ash, how he durst presume to preach
in his Diocese, without his special License? (though his (...) could preach at
Cambridge, as they say, in Paris his pulpit, without his license:) Mr. A^
answered, that he had a Metropoliticall license from the Arch Bishop to preach
over all his Province: the Bishop bad him produce it: My Lord, said he, I have
it not about me; No, replied the Bishop, nor any such license, and for ought I
know you are no Minister: where are your Letters of Order? My Lord, said he, I
durst not be so bold or dishonest to inform you I had such a license, were I
not able to produce it; and had I no letters of order, or were no lawful
Minister, I presume my Lord would not have entertained me for his Chaplain: m^
Lord, both my license and orders are at home, and I use not to carry them
always with me in my pocket. My Lord Brook int^ed his Lordship to dismiss
his Chaplain and prosecute him no further, all would not do; he would make
him an example, and so after many threatening speeches to him and my Lord, they
departed. The Bishop presently proceeds with all violence against Mr. Ash in
his own Court, no Mediation of Lord and friends would pacify him; till at last
the Earl of Doncaster told him, that if he would not dismiss him his Court,
he would complain to the King against him, since he preached only upon my Lord
Brooks command, and his and other Earls importunity: Hereupon the Bishop
leaving the Chaplain, falls upon the Churchwardens of the Parish for
permitting him to preach without his License; fines them ( Quo iure I know not)
forty shillings a pi^ce, enjoynes them to do public penance in the Church
with a white wand and a paper in their hands; to ask God, and his Lordship
forgiveness, to confess, that their censure was just, and to desire all
others to take example by them, not to offend in like manner; All which the
poor men were enforced to do. O pride! O tyranny.

7. Christ's very yoke is easy, and his burden light. Math. 11. 30. Lord
Prelates yoakes exceeding heavy and intolerable; witness those under which
the whole Kingdom now lie groaning and languishing, with their many late new
invented Ceremonies, Oaths, Articles, Injunctions and Innovations.

8. Christ, whiles he was on earth, went about continually doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed with the Devil. Acts 10. 38. Lord Prelates
when they ride about in circuit, or their vifitations, (not foot it, as our
Savior did,) do no good at all, but only mischief; silence Ministers, set up
Altars and new popish ceremonies, pill and poll both Ministers and people with
new extorted fees and procurations disquiet a^ good men, and instead of
healing, wound and further oppress those like devils that were spiritually
oppressed by the devil before, by exactions, suppressing Gods ordinances
especially powerful pr^aching, which should cast out the devils that
spiritually possess and take them captives at their wills.

9. Our Savior Christ went about all the Country preaching in every Synagogue
where he came, Math. 4. 23. Mark. 1. 38, 39. Our Bishops ride sometimes about
the Country in their trienniall visitations, to fill their guts and purses, and
at other times hawking, hunting, feasting, and recreating themselves, but
seldom or never go or ride thus abroad to preach in any one Church or
Synagogue; inhibiting those Ministers that would, to do it.

10. Our Savior preached daily and constantly in the Temple, beginning early
in the morning, and continuing until evening (and so preached morning and
evening) Luke 19. 47. c. 21. 37, 38. John 8. 2. But yet we find not that ever
he read any common Prayers or Homilies in the Temple or any other Synagogue.
Our Lordly Prelates are so far from preaching daily in our Temples, that few
of them preach monthly, or quarterly; some of them, scarce yearly; some, not
once in three or four years, yea in ten or twelve years together; and other
not at all; and so far are they from preaching, or approving morning and
evening Sermons even on the Lords own Sacred day, much less on others; that
they have suppressed the Lords day early morning Lectures in London, and all
afternoon^ Sermons on the Lords day in many Diocese in the Country, making it
an high offense, deserving both suspension and excommunication, to preach on
the Lords day after dinner. Yea they are not ashamed to license Shelfords
Sermon of uncharitrble Charity, against often preaching, in direct opposition
to our Saviors example, and the very established ^omely of the right use of
the Church. p. 3. 4. to which he and themselves have subscribed. Such undoubted
Sons disciples and followers are they of our Savior in this particular.

11. Our Savior Christ when he preached, read only his Text, and then closed
the Book and gave it again to the minister, and sat down and preached
without book. Luke 4. 17. to. 22. Our Prelates, when ever they chance to
preach, commonly read not only their Texts, but their who^e Sermons too, if
not their very prayers; being so dull of memory, that whereas our stage players
can get their parts by heart though they act every day of the week, yet their
stupid block-headed Lordships cannot conne one Sermon by heart in a year or
two; their doctrine being so far from sinking into their own hearts, that it
never so much as enters into their heads when they preach it, but only into
their books, where they leave and shut it up close prisoner into their lips,
which presently vent it out again: Are they not then very devout Preachers,
very much in ^oue with Gods word, with which they will neither trouble their
brains nor hearts; sweet followers of our Saviors steps, in this particular?

12. Our Savior Christ with fasting, praying, weeping and preaching was so
lean, that he might tell al his bones. Psalm. 22. 17. Our Lord Prelates with
feasting, Lording, laughing, sleeping and loytering are so fat and plumpe (for
the most part) that they or others can neither tell nor feel their bones.

13. Our Savior Christ was full of grace, goodness and truth John 1. 14. Lord
Prelates are commonly ^ul of gracelesnes, profaneness, malice, envy, pride,
ambition, covetousness, idleness, di^imulation, and hypocrisy, having little
real, but only mere titular grace to adorn them.

14. Our Savior Christ made both the deaf to hear, the blind to see, and the
dumb to speak: Math. 9. 33. c. 12. 22. c. 15. 30. 31. Our Lord Prelates make
the hearers of Gods Word deaf for want of preaching, the seeing blind through
ignorance and our preaching Ministers dumb, by silencing and suspending them.

16. Christ sent forth his disciples, not to read Homilies, or divine service
(which every clown or school boy can do as well as the learned Minister)
but to preach the Gospel, Math. 10. 7. 10. 14. Luke 9. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. c. 10.
2. to. 15. and that as well in men's private houses as the public Synagogues,
Ibid. and Acts 5. 42. c. 20. 20. which now (for sooth) our Lordly Prelates
condemn and censure for a conventicle: yea he bid and commanded his disciples
go into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature, teaching them
to observe all things that he had commanded them. Math. 28. 19. 20. M^rke. 16.
15. yea he enjoined them earnestly to seed his flock and Lambs. John 21. 15,
16, 17. Our Lord Prelates silence and suspend Christ's faithful Ministers,
prohibiting them (not only in private houses but in Churches to) to preach the
Gospel to their people, send them about only to read divine service and
homilies; and command them to observe and subscribe to whatsoever Canons,
Orders, Articles, Ceremonies, and Injunctions they shall prescribe them, though
contrary to Christ's; charging them; not to feed, but fleece their Lambs and
Sheep; And are they not then good Pastors?

16. Our Savior Christ was the goo^ Sheopard that laid down his life for his
Sheep^; he knew his Sheep, and was known again of them, and they heard and
knew his voice John 10. 6. 11. to 16. Lord Prelates are rather Wolves then
Sheopards, reddier to take away their Sheep lives then to lay down their
lives for their Sheep; many of them being so far from knowing their Sheep
by name, that they never so much as saw them, the most of their Sheep never so
much as seeing or knowing their faces, much l^sse hearing or knowing their
voices in the Pulpit, many of them (though they have thousands by the year, of
purpose to preach to their Sheep) not so much as bestowing on Sermon on them
in 3. or 4. years space; receiving above 3. or 4000. pounds for every Sermon
they preach, too great a rate sor so little w^rke; Yt thesemen were
Tankard-bearers and should sell their watter at that rare they take for their
Sermons, our water certainly would be far^e dearer then the richest wine; Yet
many of their Sermons for which they take so much, are scarce so good as ditch
watter.

17. Our Savior Christ, though he were equal with God the Father, yet he made
himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a Servant, and was
made in the likeness of men, ^ubling himself for far, that he became
obedient to death even to the dreath of the Cross Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Our Lord
Prelates, though equal commonly in birth to the meanest Peasants, yet (in doubt
in imitation of our Savior) make themselves of so great reputation, that they
take upon them not only the form and title, but the pomp and state of Lords
and Petty Princes, not servants; and as if they were not made in the likeness
of men, but borne Princes, Angels or demi Gods; they become disobedient to all
laws of God and man; and insteede of humbling themselves to death, and the
Cross for Christ's sake, they tyrannically humble their brother Ministers and
other Christians to the Prison, the Pillary, the Cross, and Stocks for Christ.
Witness our Books of Martires, and late experience.

18. Our Savior Christ, though he were rich, yet for our sakes he became
poor, that we through his poverty might be made rich. 2. Cor. 8. 9. Our Lord
Prelates, though poor and beggarly at first, yet for Christ's sake they are
content to become great and rich; that so others through their power, riches,
avarice, tyranny, and extortion may be made poor, to enrigh themselves the
more.

19. Our Savior, when Peter drew his sword to cut of Malchas ear therewith,
immediately healed it again, commanding him to put up his sword into the
Scabbard. John. 18. 10, 11. Luke 22. 50, 51. Math. 26. 51, 22. Our Lord
Prelates now ingrosse both swords into their sacred hands, and insteede of
putting them into the Scabbard, draw them out like valiant men, smiting off
some men's ears and noses with it, and now threaten to maine and mangle more in
like manner, insteede of curing those already maimed by them: Such
swashbucklers and gladiaters are they grown. If we have wars with Spain, we
hope his Majesty will send these hacksters packing to those wars to mangle
and hackle off the Spainards ears and noses, insteede of his loyal Subjects.

20. Our Savior Christ, after he began to preach, refused to inter meddle with
secular affairs, or to devide the inheritance between the too Brethren;
refused the kingdoms, Pomde and glory of this world; affirming openly, that he
and his kingdom were not of his world Math. 4. 8, 9, 10. Luke 12. 13, 14.
Joan. 6. 15. c. 17, 16. c. 18. 36. Our Lord Prelates, after they become Lords
(forgetting their primitive base original and pedigree, with that vow they
made to God in Baptism, to forsake the devil and all his works, the vain
pomp and glory of the world with all covetous desires of the same, and al
carnal desires of the flesh, so that they will ^ot follow nor be ledd by them;
and that (...) of St. John. 1. John. 2. 15, 16. Love not the world nor the
things of the world, if any man love the world, the love of the Father, is not
in him. For all that is in the world, (the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and pride of life) is not of the Father but is of the world) entangle
themselves in worldly, secular state affairs and off^s, become Lords T^mporall
instead of Spiritual; ^meddle with all (...) affairs, hunt after the
Kingdoms, government, honor, pomp, state, and pleasures of this world with
all greediness and diligence, i^steed of preaching the Gospel and converting
souls to God: ing^sse all power and temporal Jurisdiction into their hands,
smite with both swords at once like madde-men on every side, and though they
pretend their Lordly calling to be of God, yet they and it are plainly of
this world, and ^ot o^ Christ, as their actions manifest.

21. Christ both (...), and administered the Sacrament to his disciples, in his
ordinary apparel, sitting at a Table, and that standing in the midst of the
^me, Math. 26. 26, 27, 28, 29. Mar^ 14. 18. 22, 23 24. Luke 22. 14. to: 21. I^n
13. 4. 25. 28. ^or. 10. 21. c. 11. 23, 24, 25. Yea, when he sent abroad his
disciples to preach he sent them in their usual (...), expressly ^hibiting
them, to provide them, either silver or gold in their purses, or to take or
wear two Coats Math. 10. 9. 10. Mark 8. 8, 9. Luke 9. 3, 4, 5 c. 10. 4.
(Therefore certainly they wore no cass^cks, hoods, gowns, coats or surpluses
( alias surplusages) or rochets on their backs, or any such new, Massing,
masking vestments, as our Prelates have since invented and prescribed, under
the severest penalties, for Ministers to preach, to administer the Sacraments
and read their divine Service in) our Lord Prelates when they preach, or
administer the Sacrament themselves, or by others, preach and ad^inister it in
their Pontificalibus, coapes, surplusses, hoods, cassocks, gowns, rochets,
with other disguized extraordinary apparel; Yea, they administer the Lords
Supper in these holy vestments, only at an Altar standing at the East wall not
a Table, in the Septem Diaconi subliuior gradu caeteris proxime circa aram Dei
quasi columniae Altaris assisterent I^dor, and Concilium Aquisgra^se.
midst of the Q^ire, as of of old, commanding all to receive the Sacrament of
Christ's Supper, kneeling, not sitting, (and why not Baptism then as well as
it?) the betrer to adore the Eucharist; condemning Christ's and the Apostles
gesture of sitting, as irreverend, unmannerly, and undecent; adoring the very
Altar, and bowing to it even to the ground. when as they have the consecrated
Bread and Wine in their hands, as if it were more honorable and worshipful
then that, for which they say they bow unto it. All, which antichristian Popish
vestments ceremonies and ^opperies Thom^s Becan has learnedly refuted, in his
display of the Popish Mass, to which I shall refer you; only I shall answer
a Scripture or two, which they allege for their white rochets and surplesses;
To wit, Revel. 3, 4, 5. 18. c. 6. 11. c. 7. 9. 13. c. 19. 11. Where Ibidem.
the Saints and Martyrs, are said to be clothed in white linen robes;
Therefore Bishops ought toweare white rechets, and Ministers white surplesses.
A learned argument if well prosecuted.

1. For, these white linen robes and garments mentioned in these Texts, were
no rochets or surplesses (as these fond men dream,) but the spotless white
robes of Christ's own merits and innocence, wherewith these Saints (who had put
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and made their robes white in his precious blood)
were invested, as is obedient by Rev. 19. 18. c. 3. 18. 4. 5. c. 7. 13. 14.
compared with Pom. 13. 14. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. which kind kind of sacred white
rochet or surplesse, few Lord Prelates ever yet wore upon their backs, o^
gown^ eves. 2. These white robes were not worn only by Bishops, Ministers,
Clergy, and Cathedral men as rochets and surplesses are, but by all the
Saints and Martirs of Christ alike. If these Tipes then prove any thing, it is
only this. That all men ought to wear rochets and surplesses not Bishops and
Church men only. 3. These white robes were their ordinary daily garments which
they never put of upon any occasion, no not when they rode in ^riumph upon
white horses, ^ev. 19. 14. Therefore no argument for rochets and surplesses
which are put on only upon special occasions and not ever worn as ordinary
apparel, These Lordly Prelates perscribing only black gowns and garments,
wearing none but such out of the Church and their supplisses and rochets (to
testify their spotless purity and holiness) for the most part only in the
Church, to testify that they are only white Saints in show whiles they are in
the Church and Quier, but black friends and devils for the most part in all
places else, in their lives and actions. The true significant reason, as I
conceive, why they wear white robes and rochets only in the Church in time of
divine services (where they commonly leave and put them off with all their
seeming purity and holinesses with their surplesses) but black coats and
vestments under them and in all places else. A thing worthy observation. 4.
These robes were not worn by these, or the Martyrs, on earth, whiles they
lived; but put upon them in heaven, after they were dead. Therefore no argument
for, but against the wearing of rochets and surplesses here. 5. The Disciples
and Apostles when they were sent to preach had c^rtainely but o^e Coat and
garment on the them, and that undoubtedly no white rochet, nor surp^esse; These
Scriptures therefore make nothing for both, or either of them. 6. These Saints
are said, to ride upon white horses only, and in these their white linen
garments. Revel. 19. 14. I may therefore better argue hence; That Bishops and
Ministers ought ever to ride upon white ho^ses and no other, and that in their
rochets and surplesses, not their Canonical coats cloakes or halfe-gownes;
then they thence inf^r: That they ought to preach and read prayers in their
surplesses. But of these surplesages enough and too much: I proceed.
22. Christ professes of himself, that he came into the world, of purpose for
to preach the Gospel, Mark. 1. 38. Luke 4. 18. Lord Prelates profess, that
they were not ordained Lords or Bishops, to preach Gods Word, but to rule,
govern, and Lord it over their fellow Brethren and their diocese:

23. Our Savior Christ makes continual prayer and intercession to his Father
for all his chosen people, Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. Our Lord Prelates, as they
seldom preach, so they early or never contend earnestly or make interc^ssion
unto God in earnest hearty fervent prayer for their people that they may be
saved and converted: Yea some of them (as Bishop Wren) contrary to the practice
of all former ages, begin to prohibit Ministers under pain of suspension and
excommunication, to make any conceived prayers before or after their Sermons,
suspending, and excommunicating them if they do it; ounparalleld impiety! o
atheistical Novelty! We know that Moses, David, Solomon, Ezra, Jeremiah,
Daniell, with the Saints and Prophets in the old Testament used conceived, but
no set forms of prayer, that we read of, the like did Christ and his Apostles
in the New T^stament; prayer being a special gift of Gods Spirit, given to all
his children, upon all their several necessities and occasi^ns. 1 Kings 8. 38.
45. 49. 54. Neh. 1. 6. 11. Ps. 102. 7. Ps. 141. 2 Ezeh. 12. 10, 11. Acts 1. 14.
c. 6. 4. c. 10. 31. c. 12. 5. 1 Cor. 7. 5 Phil. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 11. Col. 4. 2
Iam. 5. 15. 16. Ephesians. 6. 18. Romans 8. 15. 26, 27. Jude 20. Thus did the
Ministers and Preachers of Gods Word in Justin Martyrs and Tertullians days,
(as appears by both their (...)) both (...) and after their Sermons and
love-feastes: Thus did the Fa^ers, as appears b^ their works; and the
Primitive Christians and Martyrs upon all occ^sions, as Ecclesiastical
Historians (...). Thus did our Martyrs of old witness M. Fox his Acts and
M^uments. Yea, Archbishop Sands of York, before and after his Sermons; and B.
Pilkington of Durham before and after his Sermons on Nehemiah, Obadiah, etc.
with other of our Bishops used conceived Pray^rs o^ different for^es, according
to the variety of their Texts, and the (...) occasions; which the^ published in
print, for others imitation. Thus have all our Ministers, generally done in all
ages and places, especially from the beginning of reformation to this present,
till a ge^eration of upstart unpraying Lordly Pre^ates and lasy Docto^s, (who
know not how to pray, or make a conceived prayer out of their own heads and
hearts upon any occasion, no more then a child that is newly borne,) have cried
down all extemporary conceived Prayers, (as well as studied Sermons and
frequent preaching,) endevoring utterly to extinguish this most heavenly gift
of Prayer, not only in all private Christians, but also in all those godly
Ministers whom God has endowed with this eminent faculty, by confining them
only to the very words of the Canon; which are no more a prayet then the Creed
or ten Commandments, (which many ignorant people mumble over, as good prayers)
and has made many great Doctors unable for to pray without the help of a
Common Prayer book, upon any urgent occasion. For proof whereof, I shall
instance only in two late examples. When the Earl of Castle haven was to be
beheaded, there came two great learned Deanes and Doctors of Divinity, to his
lodging, to pray with him before his death. Where calling for A Common Prayer
Book they read over the Letanie to him, (which was all the Prayers (they could
make) and so concluded their devotions. The Earl much grieved and discontented
therewith, brake forth into these speeches. Alas, what do these Doctors mean
to trouble themselves, or me, in praying to God, to deliver me, from lightning
and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle and murder, and
from sudden death, who am now presently to die and lose my head? Or, what does
their praying, to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all women
laboring with child, all sick persons and young children, etc. concern either
me or my present condition, who am now ready to perish and be destroyed?
Miserable comforters are they. This he spoke with tears in his eyes; and
there upon desired the company there present with him to go with him from
these Deanes into another room, where he made such an heavenly fervent
extemporary Prayer, pertinent to his present dying condition, as ravished all
the Auditors, and drew rivers of tears both from their eyes and hearts, which
these nonpraying Doctors Letany could not do. When the honorable religious
Lord Veere some two years since, was suddenly struck with death arrow at Sr.
Henry V^ne his table at White Hall, as he sat at dinner, and carried from
thence into a withdrawing chamber adjoining where he dyed, a grand Dr. of
Divinity (one of his Majesty's Chapplaines being there present, was upon this
unexpected occasion desired to kneel and pray with the company. The Dr.
Hereupon calls for a Commonprayer-booke, and answer being mad that there was
none present; he replied, that he could not pray without a Book. Whereupon a
Knight there present took him by the gown, and forced him to kneel down
telling him, that my Lord was dying, and he must needs say some prayer or
other; upon this he begins Pater noster, for other prayer could he none: Which
the Knight hearing, bads him hold his peace, for my Lord was dead, and he was
but a dead Divine. Who knew not how to pray. Such wooden Doctors and Prelates
have we now adays, that know not how to pray upon any sudden occasion;
because (like little children) they ever confine themselves to a set form of
prayer, proceeding neither from their heads nor hearts but their lips only,
which every Schoole-boy can read with as much devotion, as they. So unlike are
they to our Savior Christ and his Apostles, who who were able to pray ex
tempore, with all mann^r of supplications, and prayers upon all occasions, and
would have all Ministers and private Christians, to be thus able too. Ephesians. 6.
18. 1. Tim. 2. 1, 28. Phil, 4. 6. 1. Pet. 4. 7. Iam. 1. 5. 6. c. 5. 14.

24. Finally, our Savior Christ whiles he was on earth, suspended, silenced,
deprived, censured, imprisoned, and close imprisoned no Ministers or
Christians, whiles he was on earth: (yea, he was so far from this, that he
was anointed and sent by the spirit of the Lord God, to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound. Isay. 61. But Lord Prelates silence, suspend,
deprive, censure, imprison, and close imprison both Ministers and good
Christians at their pleasures; but never bind up the brokenhearted, or
proclaim liberty to the Captives, or the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, Take him Iaylor. Catch him Pursuiuant; Away with him to the Fleet,
the Clinke or Gate House; I set a thousand pound fins upon his head; etc.
bring their usual mercy, language, and Lordly tone. Christ had no Prisons,
Counters, Gate-houses, Cole houses, to imprison and mue up Christians or
Ministers in, for discharging a good consciences, or obeying God rather then
men, or refusing to take an unlawful ex officio Oath: No consistory or
High Commission to convent men in, no visitation or ex officio Oaths Articles,
Procurations, Dispensations, Tot-quots, Licenses to preach or keep school; No
Deanes, Archdeacons, Vicars general, Chancellours, Commissaries, Surrogates,
Officials, Registers, Pursuiuants. Apparitors, Informers, but only 12.
preaching Disciples attending on him. Lord Prelates have all and every of
these, and would not think themselves Bishop without them. Christ thought his
written word and precepts, sufficient to govern and instruct his Church, to
the end of the world, without any Prelates Canons. Math. 28. 19. 20. Lord
Prelates think not so, but deem their own Canons and Injunctions without his
word, the only laws whereby to govern and direct the Church. Christ was
persecuted, imprisoned, scoffed at, crucified by the high Priests, and yet
prayed for his enemies, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps
Ephesians. 4. 32. 1. Pet. 2. 21, 23. Luke 23, 24. Lord Prelates are not thus
persecuted, imprisoned, scoffed at, and crucified, but persecute, imprison,
scoff at, crucify, and burn others for Christ's sake; and insteede of
following Christ's footsteps in praying for their enemies, they excommunicate,
banne, curse, anathematize them to the very pit of Hell, with Bell Book and
Candle, and sometimes offer this unchristian violence to their very ashes,
bones, and v^ines; as our Book of Martires manifests. Since therefore Lord
Prelates in these and infinite other particulars are so contrary opposite, and
unlike to our Savior Jesus Christ, I may safely conclude them to be none of
his institution, Sons, or followers: For he that is truly Christ's, and says
that he abides in him, ought himself also to walk even as Christ walked 1.
John. 2. 6. But Lord Prelates walked but directly contrary to him in all these
particulars: Therefore they are none of his, and abide not in him what ever
vaunts they make to the contrary: And if they be none of Christ's institution,
Sons, Disciples or followers, then certainly none of his Apostles (the next
thing I shall succinctly illustrate.

The opposition and contrariety between Christ's Apostles and Lordly Prelates.
FIrst our Saviors Apostles yea Peter (the Prince of all the rest, as the
Papists vaunt) had neither silver nor gold Acts 3. 6. Lord Prelates have plenty
of both: yea do little or no work for it, and less good with it, unless it
be out of a vaineglotious humor to get themselves applause by some Pontifical
stately structure, or monument of their ambicion pomp and pride.

2. These Apostles were poor, and vet made many rich, as having nothing and
yet possessing all thing 2. Cor, 6. 10. Lord Prelates are rich, and yet by
their oppression, tyranny injustice, great Fines, imprisonments, extortions and
griping Officers make many Ministers and good Christians poor; they have all
things their hearts can wish, and yet through covetous ambicion and desire of
more, and il^ use of what they have, truly possess nothing.

3. The Apostles were made a spectacle unto the world unto Angels, and to men
1. Cor. 4. 9. Lord Prelates are not made but make others such for Christ's sake.

4. The Apostles to their dying days, did both hunger and thirst and were
naked, buffeted, despised, accounted fools, defamed, reviled and persecuted,
Yea they were made the very silth of the world and the ofscouring of all things
for Christ's sake, being in stripes often, in imprisonments, perils, and death
often, in watchings often, in labors more abundant for Christ 1. Cor. 4. 10,
11, 12, 13. 2. Cor. 6. 5, c. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26. Lord Prelates are in no such
condition at all, they sustain no such hardship for Christ; but they eat and
drink of the best, are gorgeously clad, courted, yea flattered, honored and
accounted great Lords, praised above measure, feasted, promoted and made the
greatest Peers the most swaying overruling Lord controllers of the world, and
Primates of all others for Christ's sake; being never in stripes etc. But only
in voluptuous pleasures, stately Palaces, Princes Courts, down beds, and lazy
idleness for Christ; and when persecution or affliction for the Gospel come;
they either turn chief persecutors, or turne-coates, rather then they will
undergo any stripes, imprisonments, perrills, or deaths for Christ, by whom
they enjoy so much honor, pomp, wealth and worldly pleasures.

5. The Apostles had no certain dwelling place and labored, working whith
their own hands, and yet never gave over preaching for want of maintenance 1.
Cor. 4. 11, 12. Acts 20. 34. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8. Lord Bishops have
diverse certain Palaces, Sees, Manors, and Pontifical Mansions; their
hundreds and thousands by the year; never labor with their hands (and
seldowne with their tongues or brains) to get their livings; and yet preach
not so often in 2. or 3. years, as Paul and other Apostles did in a week, when
they labored to.

6. The Apostles were troubled on every side, for Christ, yet not distressed;
perplexed, but not in despaires persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but
not destroyed; always bearing about in the body the mark; of the Lord Jesus,
and being always delivered unto death for Jesus sake: 2 Cor. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Lord Prelates never were in such extremities, never suffered such things, as
all or any of these for Christ, but have usually brought others into the
Apostles condition far specified for Christ's sake; As the Book of Martyrs, and
experience manifest.

7. The Apostles were called from the receipt of custom, from all other
secular employments, and separated for the Gospel of Christ; forsaking all
other things to preach and propagate it alone as soon as they were called to
be Christ's Apostles and disciples, Math. 4. 18. to. 23. c. 9. 9. Mark 10. 28,
29. Romans 1. 1. Acts 13. 2. Lord Prelates when they are made such, intrude
themselves into secular offices and employments, call themselves back again to
the receipt of custom shouldring themselves into Lord Treasurerships Lord
Chancellorships and other such great temporal offices, tosupport and maintain
their part, power and antichristian throne; erect Popery and Romish
superstition, and rule all things at their pleasures: yea they almost wholly
separate themselves from Christ, and the preaching of his Gospel, lay aside
and give over their Ministry, etc. Preaching, that so they may wholely addict
themselves to the world, the pleasures honors and preferments of it, to Court
and State affairs, and Lord it over all men both in Church and State.

8. Christ's Apostles, were all equal among themselves, and Lorded it not one
over the other, nor yet over their fellow brethren, or the Lords inheritance
never Pursevanting, imprisoning, fining, banishing or depriving of them like
Pagan Princes, they being expressly prohibited so to do, Math. 20. 25. 26. 27
Luke 22. 25, 26. 2. Cor. 1. 24. (...). Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. Lord Prelates Lord
it one over another and are not equal among themselves, witness their Popes,
their Patriarchs, Cardinal, Bishops, Metropolitanes, Archbishops, Bishops,
and Bishops Suffragans, al subordinate unto another; they claim a superiority
Iure diuino over their fellow Presbiters (their equals, and all one with
themselves by divine law and institution Acts 26. 17. 28. Phil. 1. (...). 1. 7
^m. 3. 1, 2, 3. c. 5. 17. Titus 1. 5, 7. 1. Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3. Math. 20. 25, 26,
27, c. 28. 19: 20.) Yea they Lord and tyrannize it over their fellow Ministers,
Diocese, and the Lords inheritance suspending, silencing, excommunicating,
pursevanting, fining, imprisoning reviling, depriving them, prescribing new
Ceremonies, Injunctions, Articles, Oaths, Orders, and fining and punnishing
them for the violation of them at their pleasures, like absolute Popes, Kings,
Monarks, Parliaments, against all laws of God, and the Realm; as ancient, and
(above all others) present experience testifies; So like are their Lordly
Sanctities to the Apoftles, or rather to their holy-Father the Pope and devil.

9. The Apostles preached daily the Lord Jesus, and his Gospel, to the
people, because Christ, and God himself enjoined them to do it,
notwithstanding the high Priests and whole Counsels suspencions inhibitio^s,
threats, imprisonments, and scourgings to hinder and deter them Acts 4 and 5.
1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16, 17. Lords Prelates (on the contrary) are so far from
imitating their examples, that they every where against the laws of God and
the realm, yea contrary to the very Book of ordination and charge there given
them when they were ordavned,) suspend and prohibit Ministers from preaching
Christ and his Gospel to the people, that they may be saved, threatening to
imprison deprive and ruin them if they do it; notwithstanding Christ and his
Apostles have expressly commanded them, (and their Lordships to if Christ's
Ministers, or their Successors) to do it under pain of eternal woe (which
Bishop wren commanded to be blotted out of a Church wall in Ipswich Mat. 28.
19 20. Mark. 16. 15. Acts. 20. 281. Cor. 9. 16, 17. 1. Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Timothy 4. 13. c. 5. 17. The very highth of al iniquity and impiety 1 Thessalonians. 2.
15, 16. Yea, money base fainthearted Ministers forgetting this President of the
Apostles, set now silence under these illegal impious suspensions, and some of
them, like hirelings f^e from their flocks, and leave them to be devo^vred of
these raging wolves, as full experience manifests, whereas if they were true
Sheopards and faithful Ministers, they would rather lay down their lives then
fly or give over preaching upon such ungodly, unjust Suspentious, merely void
in law, which of Common, Civil, Canon or Divine.

10. The Apostles daily in the Temple; and in every house (which now fotsooth
were a Conventicle) ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ Acts 5. 42.
(and that notwithstanding all the high Priests inhibitions, suspensions and
imprisonments) Nay S. Paul as he spread and preached the Gospel of Christ
almost over all the world ever from Jerusalem round about to Illyricum and
where Christ was not once so much as named before, Romans 15. 19. 20. So he
disputed and preached daily in the School of one Tyrannus for two years
space, Acts 19. 9. 10. Yea for three years space together, he ceased not day
and night to warn every one at Ephesus, with tears, teaching them publicly
and from house to house, (now a dangerous unlawful conventicle in our Lord
Prelates judgment) Acts 20. 20. 21. 31. he, and the rest of the Apostles, by
their daily preaching and holy lives, converting thousands unto God and
planting and watering many eminent Churches; as the Acts and Epistles of the
Apostles, witness. Our Lordly Prelates are so far from not ceasing thus to
preach daily, themselves, that few of them preach monthly, or quarterly, and it
is much if they preach annually, and then only at Court: Others of them (as our
great Archprelates) not in three or four years space or more; some not at
all, (as the dumb Bishops of Oxford, Landaffe, and others:) yea, they do all
they can to preach, write and cry down frequent preaching, as hurtful and
superfluous; suppressing all or most weeke^day Lectures, with Sermons on Lords
days afternoon in many Diocese, (o impiety!) inhibiting all painful, godly
Ministers from preaching, some totally, other at least half so often as they
desire to do, or more: and, (which is a thing almost incredible, and most
impious) suppressing Lectures and preaching in all infected places, and that on
the solemn Fast Day, as a means to spread the pestilence, even then, when all
former ages, and an eminent ancient Popish Council, have cried them up as most
necessary and useful; the sick having far more need of spiritual physic
and Physicians, then the whole: Math. 9. 12. 13. As for preaching from house to
house (be it by a Minister in his own parish only) our holy Lord Prelates are
so far from practicing or approving it, though Apostolical, that they most
unchristinaly prohibit, most impiously condemn, most severely punish it, and
the repetition of Sermons for a dangerous Conventicle, deserving imprisonment,
excommunication, fining, deprivation and what not, is a clowd of late examples
testify. Such holy successors of Christ's Apostles are these ghostly Lords
spiritual; I will not say, carnal, worldly, and diabolical, as some too
truly style them: This being one of Satan the great dragon his An Answer unto a
letter sent by the Great Turk etc. compiled and imprinted by John Mayler, an.
1542,
principal instructions to the heard-men of his goats, Bishops and
Archbishops; to see that they hate, despise and blaspheme both the word of God,
and the true Preachers and lovers thereof, and not to suffer the truth and
freedom of Gods Law to be known, but to keep it under as much as they can: to
suffer no true Preachers to abide in their Diocesses, but quickly to bring them
into great thraldom, charge and penury; and never to cease till they have
driven them away and set up in their rooms and places Doctor Ignorance Domine
drunkard, Sir John Lacke-latin, with Sir William Wilde-oathes that hunteth
after whores, and such also as can play dissembling hypocrites, whereby the
devils empire of darkness does exceedingly flourish, which much decayed in
all places by the true and frequent preaching of Gods Word. As for their
planting or watering of Churches, and converting store of souls to God, by
their diligent frequent zealous preaching and pious lives, Alas, which of our
great Archprelates can truly say, that he ever yet truly converted one soul
to God by his life or doctrine? Which of all our Lordly loyterers can show me
one man that he thoroughly convetted to Christ or reduced to an holy life since
he became a Prelate? (scarce one or two, I fear, of the whole paeke.) Or what
men are they this day living in England who can say with comfort, that a Lord
Bishop was the means of their true conversion? Such converts doubtless are so
rare, that all their names, I fear, (like the good Roman Emperors) may be
engraven in one ring; whereas the souls they have murdered and tumbled into
Hell by their ill examples, unjust, ungodly, tyrannical, atheistical lives,
supressing of preaching Lectures, godly Ministers, repetition of Sermons,
private Fasts, and Christian private assemblies in all places; declamations
against purity, Puritans, piety and preciseness, making and countenancing
ungodly, unworthy scandalous Ministers; stirring men up to profane the Lords
own day by Dancing sports, etc. As woeful experience witnesses past all
denial. O that these unprofitable Lord Prelates would consider that excellent
saying of Pope Gregory the first. Pensemus ergo etc. Let us therefore
diligently consider, who have ever been converted by our preaching; who being
reprehended for their perverse actions, have repented upon our reprehension:
who out of our instruction has for saken his luxury; who declined his
covetousness, who his pride? Let us consider what gain we have brought into
God, who receiving a talent are sent by him to negociate with it. For he says;
Occupis till I come. Behold he now comes; behold he requires gain out of
our negotiation What gain of souls shall we show unto him out of our
negotiation? How many sheaves of souls shall we bring before his sight out of
the croppe of our preaching? Let us set before our eyes that day of so great
distress, wherein the Judge shall come and exact a strict account of those
servants to whom he has committed talents. There, shall Peter appear with
converted Iudaea, which he has drawn after him: There, Paul, leading, that I
may so speak the converted world. There, also Andrew shall lead Achaia after
him; there, John Asia, Thomas India converted by them, and present them to the
view of the Judge. There all the Rams of the Lords flock shall appear with
the gains of souls, who by their holy Sermons draw a converted subdued flock
after them. When therefore so many Shepherds shall come thus with their
several flocks before the presence of the eternal Shepherd, what shall we
poor wretches (what shall cur unpreaching, unprofitable Lord Prelates) say,
who after our negotiation return empty to our Lord; who have the name of
Pastors, and yet have no sheep at all to show whom we have nourished and
converted. Here were we are called shepherds, and yet thus we lead no flock
at all^ therefore we shall then be reputed (...) hireling and murderers, not
as Pastors. A speech which should make all our Lordly Prelates humble and give
over their Lording, loytering and secular employments, to fall a preaching and
win some souls to God.

11. Paul, (Christ's most laborious Apostle) preached not only in the morning,
but also in the evening on the Lords day, and continued his Sermon until
midnight. Acts 20. 7. Our godly devout Lord Prelates, not only give over
preaching themselves on Lords day evenings, but professedly prohibit it as
unlawful, by their printed visitation articles, suspending those that dare to
preach, (though they catechize also) on the Lords day evening, that so the
profane vulgar may have more liberty, and spend that time in dancing and
playing, which this Apostles spent in preaching. And are they not then his
undoubted Successors.

12 Finally, the Apostles had no quadrangular Ca^s for their round pates, no
stately Miters for their heads, no rochets, Surplesses, Stoles, or other
Pontifical disguised vestments for their backs or arms, no rings or Crosiers
for their hands and fingers, no Altars for their Sacrament of the Lords Supper
no Tapers, vestment Images, Crucifixes Altar clothes, Organs, or Arras
hangings, Singing men, Cheristers, Prebends, Petty Canons, Canons, Deanes or
Chapters for their Cathedralls or private Chappells (which they wanted) no
Vicars general, Commissaries, Officialls, Registers, Purseuants, high
Commissions, visitation Oaths, Articles, Orders, Injunctions, Canon laws or
Canonists for their Diocese, no Coaches, Chariots, pamper^ Palfreys, Footmen,
Horsemen, Cooks, Butlers, Keepers Hunters Falkners, and train of attendants
for their pleasure, State, iournies, or hospitallity; no cringings and bowings
to Altars, Tables, Crucifixes, or the name of Jesus, no standing up at Gloria
Patri, Athanacius and the Nicene Creed, no kneeling at the Sacrament, no
Procurations; Letters of Ordination, licenses to preach, or keep Schools,
Probate of wills, Commissions of administration, Seals of arms, Tit'es of
your Grace, your Lordship, your Holiness, your Father hood, Primate,
Patriarch, Metropolitan, Archbishop, most reverend Father in God etc. Alas
poor silly Fishe^s and Michaniks, they neither had, nor knew, nor ever
dreamed of all these Pontifical Inventions, ceremonies, vestements, Ornaments,
Titles, which our Lord Prelates claim, enjoy, enforce by divine authority as
their Successors, in which they place the very honor, luster, life and essence
of their Episcopalities and Lotdlyresse; They; poor men, thought the Canon of
the Scripture (as did their Master Christ) sufficient to rule and guide the
Church to the end of the world Math. 28. 19, 20, Gal. 6. 16. Sufficient to make
them wise to salvation, to build them up, to give them an inheritance among
them that are sanctified, and to bring them safe to heaven Acts 20. 32. Gal. 6.
16. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Yea all sufficient for doctrine, reprooffe, correction,
instruction inrighteounesse, that the man of God may be perfect thoroughly
furnished unto all good works 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. without any other Canons,
Decretalls, Articles, Injunctions etc. Lord Prelates are of a quite contrary
faith and judgment. They, poor silly Creatures, in their First general
Counsel at Jerusalem, would impose no Ceremonies at all upon the Gentiles, nor
lay no other but these necessary things, as a burden on them, to abstain from
fornication, and from blood, and things strangled Acts 25. 28, 29. And Paul
himself, without express Command from God, would not enjoyne or single
unmarried life to any, but only advise it, Yet so, as to leave every man to his
own free liberty and discretion 1. Cor. 7. 8. 9. 25. 26. 27. 28. to 40. Yea
else where; He beats down all humane Traditions and Constitutions as no
ways obligatory in divine, or Ecclesiastical matters. Col. 2. 20. 21. 22. 1.
Cor. 7. 23. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Gal. 1. 10. c. 2. 9. to 20. c. 3. 1. 2.
c. 5. 1, 2. But our Lordly Prelates far wiser and statelier then they, who
were no Lords nor Peers, of their several divided heads without advise of
Kings and Parliament, by their own Lordly authorities in their own names, can
forge, prescribe enjoin, and that upon Oath and subscription, many hundred
unnecessary Ceremonies, Articles and injunctions, not any where commanded by
Christ; and impose them upon Ministers and people under pain of suspension,
excommunication, imprisonment, deprivation, and what other penalties their
royal Papal Majesty's please, to inflict, enforcing Churchwardens (contrary
to Gods Law, by the very Rhemists If thou be put to an Oath to accuse (...)
they ought to do, or to utter any innocent man, to Gods enemies and his, thou
ought to refuse such unlawful Oeaths: but if thou have not constancy and
courage so to do, yet know, that such oaths bind not at all in conscience
and law of God, but may and must be broken under pain of damnation. For to
take such vows or oaths is one sin and to keep them is another far
greater. Rhenists Notes on Acts 23. v. 12. A shrod blow to all visitation and
ex officio Oaths.
own doctrine) to present the infringers of them upon Oath, (whereas they
enjoin them not to present the violaters of Gods own Ten Commandments, Or
any of Christ's, or his Apostles precepts (as they are such upon oath, which God
himself never enforced to b^ enquired or presented upon oath; a thing
considerable) Such Gods, Popes, Kings, Tyrants, and absolute Lords are they now
grown over men's consciences, souls, bodies and estates, all now made captive
to their more then divine, Imperial, Papal, pleasures; as experience every
where testifies to our grief and pain.

Judge now even you Lordly Prelates, and all ye people of the realm, by all
the premised Parallels; wheither these great Lords and their Prelacie be of
diabolical or divine institution, wheither they are of Christ or the devil;
the impes and spurious beats of the one; or Sons and genuine Children of the
other; the successors and followers of the I^wish High Priests, or of the
Apostles: Judge, I say, of these things, not with passion or affection, but
with imparciallitie and conscience; not by opinion or fancy, but by experience
and truth; not with malice or prejudice either way, but with downright
sincerity, as you desire CHRIST shall Judge you at the day of Judgment, and as
your selves then shall judge. And when you have done his, then let our Lordly
Prelates give up that verdict of themselves and others of them, as their souls
and consciences shall sincerely dictate; And then I doubt not, but their
pretended Ius diuin^m for their Lordly Hierarchy, will be a non est inuentus,
and all their Lordlynesse, pomp, power, state, Pride, Canons, Articles,
Oaths, Ceremonies, Titles, Innovations, Suspensions, and present
fore-specified practices, cast and sentensed for ever to the pit of Hell, from
which they sprung, if my poor weak Judgment does not misinforme me.

John Rupescissa (a bold prophetical preaching Friere) told the Ro^ish
Cardinals and Prelates some 300. years since, that they were the Peacocke whom
all the birds had enriched with their feathers, whereby she was grown so
proud, that she would never know herself, till the Kings and Princes of the
earth that had decked and enriched her, should come, and taking every one of
them his own feather, leave her as bald and naked as they found her, and then
as their pride and wealth was the beginning of all the errors, Schisms and
corruptions in religion that troubled the world, so their humiliation and fall
should be the end of them. I may apply his Prophecy to our Lordly Prelates
now: they are the only proud Peacockes of the world so adorned and swollen with
worldly honor, power wealth, pomp, pride and greatness, that they will
ne-ver know either God or themselves till the King and temporal Lords who have
decked and enriched them with these gorgeous plumes, shall come, and taking
every one of them his own feather, leave them as bald and naked as they found
them. And then as their pride, pomp, Lordlinesse, power and worldy wealth has
been the errors, Schisms, Innovations, corruptions in Religion that have
troubled our Church and the whole world; (yea, of all the grievances,
oppressions, Tallayes, and mischeifes, that have instead our state of later
years) so their humiliation and fall shall be the end of them. Up therefore o
most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, and all ye English Nobles, without
more delays, and unp^ume these luciferian proud Peacocks of all those royal
Lordly feathers, they have unjustly stolen and usurped from you: and since
they claim all of them from a divine Right and Title, (without any shadow or
ground of truth, as I have been demonstrated in the preceding Parallels,
beyond all contradiction,) and will no longer enjoy or claim them as from your
grace and bounty, leave them not one feather more to hide their nakedness, but
what Gods word has clearly endowed them withal; then certainly they will be
so bald and naked, that they will never play the devils, Lords or high Priests
more. And that this dunghill generation of Lordly Peacockes may no more inf^
either our Church or state; beseech you, follow the Counsel, that one
Curghesis once gave to the King of Meth, when he demanded of him, hom he
might destroy certain noisome birds then lately came into Ireland, where they
did much harm to the Country? Nidos eorum ubique destruendos: Let their Nests
be every where destroyed, I mean, their pompous, papal unprofitab^e,
unuseful Sees and Cathedralls, (now their very chaires of pestilence, the
Seminaries of Popery, superstition, idolatry, pride, lasines, Nonresidency,
Epicurisme and profaneness,) or else turned to some better uses, as were our
Abbeys, Priories, Monasteries, Nunneries and Chauntries hertofore; else though
they be cast out for a time, yet they will (as Popery now does) creep in again
by degrees, and hatch more Lordly Peacockes, Ravens, Rookes noisome birds, as
bad, as ravenous and pernicious as themselves, to the utter subversion both of
our Church and state, which now lie gasping out their last breath under their
Papal pride and tyranny without some speedy rescue.

FINIS.

