A Chain of Pearl. OR A Memorial of the peerles Graces, and Heroic Virtues
of Queen Elizabeth, of Glorious Memory.

Composed by the Noble Lady, Diana Primrose.

Dat ROSA mel apibus, qua sugit ARANEA virus. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pain,
and are to be sold by Philip Waterhouse, at his shop at the sign of St.
Pauls-head in Canning-street near London-stone. 1630.

TO ALL NOBLE LADIES, and GENTLE-WOMEN.
TO You the Honor of our Noble Sex,
I send this CHAIN, with all my best Respects:
Which if you please to wear, for her sweet sake,
For whom I did this slender POEM make.
You shall erect a Trophie to her Name,
And crown your selves with neuer-fading Fame.
Devoted to your Virtues, DIANA P.

TO THE EXCELLENT LADY, the Composer of this Work.
SHine forth (Diana) dart thy Golden Rays,
On Her blessed Life and Reign, whose Noble Praise
Deserves a Quill plucked from an Angels wing,
And none to write it but a Crowned King.
She, She it was, that gave us Golden Days,
And did the English Name to Heaven raise:
Blessed be her Name! blessed be her Memory!
That England crowned with such Felicity.
And Thou, the Prime-Rose of the Muses nine,
(In whose sweet Verse ELIZA'S Fame does shine,
Like some resplendent Star in frosty night)
Have made thy Native Splendour far more bright;
Since all thy PEARLS are peerles-orient,
And to thy self a precious Ornament.
This is my censure of thy ROYAL CHAIN
Which a far better Censure well may claim.
DOROTHY BERRY. THE INDVCTION.
AS Golden Phoebus with his radiant face
Enthroned in his Triumphant Chair of State,
The twinkling Stars and Asterismes does chafe
With his Imperial Scepter, and does hate
All Consorts in his Starry Monarchy,
As prejudicial to his Sovereignty.
So Great ELIZA, Englands brightest Sun,
The Worlds Renown and everlasting Lamp,
Admits not here the least Comparison;
Whose Glories, do the Greatest Princes dampe.
That ever Scepter swai'd or Crown did wear,
Within the Verge of either Hemispheare.
Thou English Goddess, Empress of our Sex,
O Thou whose Name still reigns in all our hearts,
To whom are due, our ever-vowd Respects!
How shall I blazon thy most Royal parts?
Which in all Parts did so divinely shine,
As they deserve Apollo's Quili (not mine.)
Yet, since the GODS accept the humble Vows
Of Mortals; daigne (O Thou Star-crowned Queen)
TO accept these ill-composed Pearly-Rowes:
Wherein, thy Glory chieflty shall be seen:
For by these Lines so black and impolite,
Thy Swan-like Luster shall appear more white.
Thy Imperial Majesty's eternal Votary, DIANA.

A CHAIN OF PEARL, OR A Memorial of Q. Elizabeth.
The first Pearl. RELIGION.
THE goodliest Pearl in fair Eliza's Chain;
Is true Religion, which did chiefly gain
A Royal Luster to the rest, and ti'de
The Hearts of ALL to her when Mary di'de.
And though She found the Realm infected much
With Superstition, and Abuses, such
As (in all humane Judgment) could not be
Reformed without domesticke Mutiny,
And great Hostility from Spain and France;
Yet SHE undaunted, bravely did advance
Christ's Glorious Ensign, maugre all the Fears
Or Dangers which appeared: and for ten years
SHE swaid the Scepter with a Ladies hand,
Not urging any Romist in the Land,
By sharp Edicts the Temple to frequent,
Or to partake the holy Sacrament.
But factious Romanists not thus content,
Their Agents to their holy Fathersent,
Desiring him, by sollemne Bull, proclaim
ELIZABETH an Heretic, and name
Some other Sovereign, which might erect
Their masking Mass, and hence forthwith eject
The Evangelicall Profession,
Which flourisht under her Protection.
The Pope to this Petition condescends,
And soon his Leaden Bull to England sends,
Which by one FELTON, on the Bishops Gate
Of London was affixed; But the STATE
For that high Treason punished him with death,
That would dethrone his Queen, ELIZABETH.
Yet was this Ball of Wildfire working still,
In many Romanists which had a will,
The present State and Government to change;
That they in all Idolatry might range.
And hence it came that Great Northumberland,
Associate with Earl of Westmerland,
And many more, their Banners did display
In open Field; hoping to win the Day.
Against these Rebels, Noble SUSSEX went;
And soon their bloody Purpose did prevent.
Westmerland fled, Northumberland did die,
For that soul Crime, and deep disloyalty;
Having engaged Thousands in that Cause.
After which time, the QVEENE made stricter Laws.
Against Recusants; and with Lions heart,
She banged the Pope, and took the Gospells part.
The Pope perceiving that his Bull was baited
In such rude sort, and all his hopes defeated:
Cries out to Spain for help; who takes occasion
Thereby t'attempt the Conquest of this Nation.
But such Sage Counselors ELIZA had;
As, though both Spain In vltimam rabiem fureremque conversi.
and Rome were almost mad
For grief and anger, yet they still did fail,
And against England never could prevail.
The second Pearl. CHASTITY.
THE next fair Pearl that comes in order here,
Is Chastity, wherein SHE had no peer.
Among all the Noble Princesses which then
In Europe were the Royal Anadem.
And though for Beauty SHE an Angel was,
And all our Sex did there in far surpass;
Yet did her pure unspotted Chastity
Her heavenly Beauty rarely beautify.
How many Kings and Princes did aspire,
To win her Love? In whom that Vestall Fire
Still flaming, never would She condescend
To Hymen's Rihtes, though much She did commend,
That brave French MONSIEUR who did hope to carry
The Golden fleece, and fair ELIZA marry.
Yea Spanish PHILIP, Husband to her Sister,
Was her first Suitor, and the first that mist her:
And though he promised that the Pope by Bull
Should license it, SHE held it but a Gull
For how can Pope Yet his Canonists say; Been dispensal Dominus Papa contra
Apostolum Extrae. de Renunc. Ca. post translationem.
with Gods own Law dispense?
Was it not time such Popes to cudgel hence?
Thus Her impregnable Virginity,
Throughout the World Her Fame did dignify.
And this may be a Document to all,
The Pearl of Chastity not to let fall:
Into the filthy dirt of foul Desires,
Which Satan kindles with his Hell-bred fires:
For whether it be termed Virginal
In Virgins, or in Wives styled Conjugall,
Or Viduall in Widows, God respects
All equally, and all a like affects.
And here I may not silent overpasse
That Noble Lady of the Court, which was
Solicited by TAXIS that great DON,
Ambassador for Spain (when SHE was gone)
Who to obtain his will, Primo Iacobi.
gave her a Chain
Of most rare Orient Pearl, hoping to gain
That Worthy Lady to his Lust; Related by thehonotable Knight. and Baronet, SIR
Richard Hou^ghton of Houghton Tower.
But She
That well perceived his Spanish Policy,
His fair Chain kept, but his foul Offer scorned,
That sought (thereby) her Husband to have horned:
TAXIS repulst, sent to Her for his Chain,
But (as a Trophie) She did it retain;
Which Noble President may all excite,
To keep this Pearl, which is so Orient bright.
The third Pearl. PRVDENCE.
HOW prudent was her Government appeard
By her wise Counsels, by the which SHE steered,
In the most dangerous Times that ever were,
Since King or Queen did Crown in England wear.
Her choice of Famous Councellers did show,
That She did all the Rules of Prudence know:
For though her Wit and Spirit were divine;
Counsels ( She knew) were best, where more combine:
That for Experience and deep Policy
Are well approved; whose Fidelity
Retains them in the bonds of Loyal Love,
And no great Pensions from their Prince can move.
Thus ruled SHE prudently with all her power,
With Argus Eyes foreseeing every hour
All dangers imminent, least any harms
Should us befall by Spanish Arts or Arms:
This Gift in her was much more emminent,
In that it is so rarely incident
To our weak Sex: And as a precious stone,
Deep set in Gold, shines fairer, then alone,
Or set in Lead; so did all Graces shine
In Her more gloriously, because Divine:
For Kings are Gods, and Queens are Goddesses
On Earth, whose facred Virtues best expresses
Their true Divinity: wherein, if WE
Them imitate, it is our Felicity.
This Pearl of Prudence then, We all should prize
Most highly, for it does indeed comprise
All Moral Virtues, which are resident
In that blessed soul, where this is president.
The fourth Pearl. TEMPERANCE.
THE Golden Bridle of Bellerephon
Is Temperance, by which our Passion,
And Appetite we conquer and subdue
To Reasons Regiment: else may we rue
Our yielding to Men's Syren-blandishments,
Which are attended with so foul Events.
This Pearl in HER was so conspicuous,
As that the Edward
King Her Brother still did use,
To style HER His sweet Sister Temperance;
By which Her much admired Selfe-governance,
Her Passions still SHE checked, and still SHE made
The World astonished, that so vndismaid
SHE did with equal Tenor still proceed
In one fair course, not shaken as a reed:
Semper eadem.
But built upon the Rock of Temperance:
Not daz'd with fear, not mazed with any Chance;
Not wiih vain Hope (as with an empty Spoone)
Fed or allured to cast beyond the Moon:
Not with rash Anger to precipitate,
Not fond to love, nor too too prone to hate:
Not charmed with Parasites, or Sirens Songs,
Whose hearts are poisoned, though their sugared Tongues
Swear, vow, and promise all Fidelity,
When they are bruing deepest Villainy.
Not led to vain or too profuse Expense,
Pretending thereby State Magnificence:
Not spending on these momentany pleasures
Her precious Time: but deeming her best Treasures
Her Subjects Love, Omnibus incutiens bland^^ per pectorae amorem.
which SHE so well preserved,
By sweet and mild Deameanor, as it served
To guard Her surer, then an Army Royal;
So true their Loves were to Her, and so Loyal:
O Golden Age! O blessed and happy Years!
O Music sweeter then that of the Spheres!
When Prince and people mutually agree
In sacred Concord, and sweet Symphonie!
The fifth Pearl CLEMENCY.
HER Royal Clemency comes next in view,
The Virtue which in HER did most renew
The Image of Her Maker, who in that
Exceeds himself, and does commiserate
His very Rebels, lending them the light
Of Sun and Moon, and all those Diamonds bright.
monstrae, teterrima monstra.
So did ELIZA cast Her Golden Rays
Of Clemency, on those which many ways
Transgrest Her Laws, and sought to undermine
The Church and State, and did with Spain combine.
And though by Rigor of the Law She might
Not wronging them, have taken all Her right
Yet Her Innate and princely Clemency
Moved Her to pardon their Delinquencie,
Which sought Her Gracious Mercy, and repented
Their Misdemeanors, and their Crimes lamented.
So does the the Kingly Lion with his foe,
Which once prostrate, he scorns to work his woe.
So did this Virtues sacred Auri flame,
Immortalize our Great ELIZA'S Name.
The sixth Pearl; JUSTICE.
HER Justice next appears, which did support
Her Crown, and was her Kingdoms strongest Fort.
For should not Laws be executed well,
And Malefactors curbed, a very Hell
Of all Confusion and disorder would
Among all States ensue. Hereto unfold
The exemplary Penalties of those,
Which to the Realm were known, and mortal Foes:
And as some putrid members pared away,
Least their transcendent Villainy should sway
Others to like Disloyalty; would ask
A larger Volume, and would be a Task
Unfit for Feminine hands, which rather love
To write of pleasing subjects, then approve
The most deserved slaughtering of any;
Which justly cannot argue Tyranny.
For though the Pope have lately sent from Rome,
Strange Books and pictures painting out the Doom
Of his pretended Martyrs: as that they
Were baited in Bears skins, and made a prey
To wild Beasts, and had Boots with boiling Lead
Drawn on their Legs, and Horns nailed to their head;
Yet all our British world knows these are fables,
Chimaera's, Phantasm's, Dreams, and very Bables
For Fools to play with: and right Goblin-Sprights,
Wherewith our Nurses often their Babes affrights.
His Holiness these Martyrdomes may add
To the Golden Legend; for they are as mad,
That first invented them, as Vappa Voraginosa.
he that write
That branelesse Book: and yet some credit it.
For Cruelty and fond Credulity,
Are the maine Pillars of Romes Hierarchy.
The seventh Pearl. FORTITVDE.
THIS goodly Pearl, is that rare Fortitude,
Wherewith this Sacred Princess was endu'd.
Witness Her brave undaunted Look, when Parry
Was fully bent SHE should by him miscarry:
The Wretch confessed, that Her Great Majesty
With strange amazement did him terrify.
So Heavenly-Gracefull, and so full of Awe,
Was that Majesticke Queen, which when some saw,
They thought an Angel did appear: SHE shon
So bright, as None else could Her Paragon.
But that which does beyond all Admiration
Illustrate Her, and in Her, this whole Nation;
Is that Heroicke March of Here Is and Speech
At Tilbury, where She did All beseech
Bravely to fight for England, telling them
That what their Fortune was, should Hers be then.
And that with full Resolve She thither came,
Ready to win, or quite to loose the Game.
Which words delivered in most Princely sort,
Did animate the Army, and report
To all the World Her Magnanimity,
Whose haughty Courage naught could terrify.
Well did She show, Great Henry was Her Sire,
Whom Europe did for Valor most admire,
Amongst all the Warlike Princes which were then
Enthronized with Regal Diadem.
The Eight Pearl. SCIENCE.
AMong the Virtues Intellectual,
The Van is lead by that we Science call;
A Pearl more precious then the Egyptian Queen,
Quaft off to Anthony; of more Esteem
Then Indian Gold, or most resplendent Gemmes,
Which ravish us with their translucent Beams.
How many Arts and Sciences did deck
This HEROINA? Who still had at beck
The Muses and the Graces, when that She
Gave Audience in State and Majesty:
Then did the Goddess Eloquence inspire
Her Royal Breast: Apollo with his Lyre,
Never made such Music; On her Sacred Lips
Angels enthroned, most Heavenly Manna sips.
Then might you see her Nectar-flowing Vein
Surround the Hearers; in which sugared Stream,
SHE able was to drown a World of men,
And drowned, with Sweetness to revive again.
Alasco, the Ambassador Polonian,
Who perorated like a mere Slavonian,
And in rude rambling Rhetoric did roll,
SHE did with Atticke Eloquence control
Her Speeches to our Academians,
Well showed She knew among Athenians,
How to deliver such well-tuned Words,
As with such Places punctually accords.
But with what Oratory-ravishments,
Did She imparadise Her Parliaments?
Her last most Princely Speech does verify,
How highly She did England dignify.
Her Loyal Commons how did She embrace,
And entertain with a most Royal Grace?
The ninth Pearl; PATIENCE.
NOW come we Her rare Patience to display;
Which, as with purest Gold, did paue her way
To Englands Crown; for when her Sister ruled,
She was with many great Afflictions schoold:
Yet all the while Her Mot, was Tanquam Ovis,
Nor could her Enemies prove ought amiss
In Her, although they thirsted for her blood,
Reputing it once shed, their Sovereign good.
Sometime, in Prison this sweere Saint was pent,
Then hastily away She thence was sent
To Places more remote, and all her Friends
Debarred access; and none but such attends,
As ready were with poison, or with knife,
To Sacrifice this Sacred Princess life,
At bloody Bonners beck, or Gardiners nod;
Had they not bin pre^ented by that GOD,
Who did Susanna from the Elders free,
And at the last, gave her, her Liberty.
Thus by her patient bearing of the Cross,
She reaped greatest Gain from greatest Loss,
(For he that loses his blessed Liberty,
Has found a very Hell of misery:)
By many Crosses thus She got the Crown;
To Englands Glory, and her great Renown.
The tenth Pearl. BOVNTY.
AS Rose and Lilly challenge cheifest place,
For milke-white Luster, and for Purple Grace:
So Englands Rose and Lilly, had no Peer,
For Princely Bounty shining everywhere.
This made her Fame with Golden Wings to fly
About the World, above the Starry Sky.
Witness France, Portugal, Virginia,
Germany, Scotland, Ireland, Belgia;
Whose Provinces and Princes found her Aid
On all Occasions; which sore dismayed
Spaines King whose Europaean Monarchy,
Could never thrive during her Sovereignty;
So did She bear him with her Distaffe, so
By Elisabethae fuit Terrae Regina Marisque. Primo Iacobi.
Sea and Land She him did overthrow;
Yea, so that Tyrant on his knees She brought
That of brave England Peace he * begged, and thought
Himself most happy, that by begging so
Preserved all Spain from Beggary and Woe.
Here all amazed my Muse sets up her rest,
Adoring HER was so Divinely blessed.
At nos horrifico cinefactam TE prope Busto,
Insatiabiliter deslebimus, aeternumque.

FINIS.

