XVI. NEW QVAERES Proposed to our Lord PRAELATES.

Printed in the Year M. D. CXXXVII.

To our Holy Ghostly Fathers, the Lord Praeliglates of England M. E. sends
greeting.
MY Lords temporal far more then spiritual, I have heard you often crack
exceedingly, on your own dung-hills, both of your great learning, and likewise
of your arch-love and loyalty (yet invisible) to his Majesty and his
prerogatives Royal, as if he could not be a King unless you were Lord
Bishops: I shall therefore not challendge, but beseech your Holiness, to give a
real demonstration to the world, both of your profound learning, and pretended
peerlesse zeal and duetifullnes to his Majesty, in publishing a speedy full;
and satisfactory answer to these few Questions here propounded to you of
purpose to resolve them. Your Lordlynesses have had above half a years time
(almost half as much space as most of you take to penn or conne your annual
or bieniall Sermons, and yet cannot get them perfect into your heads or hearts,
into which they seldom sink, but only into your Books:) and yet have given
no resolution to them, as people exspected you should or would have done: which
makes many suspect, they have put you to a Non plus; either therefore answer
them now, at this second Somony and publication, or else I and thousands more
shall proclaim to all the world, you cannot do it, and so are open enemies to
his Majesty, his Imperial Crown, Laws, Subjects, and in several
premunires, for all you bear your heads so high, like petty Kings and Popes:
Yea I dare pronounce you perjured to his Majesty in the highest degree, by
infringing your oaths of Supremacy, so often reiterated: And as you are the
first men enjoined to take this oath, by the Statute of 1. Eliz. c. 1. because
the likelyest of all others to violate it, so you are more guilty of the
frequent, open, and professed violation thereof, then all other his Majesty's
subjects put together, who seldom infringe this oath, but either by your
coaction or occasioning of them, by force or flatery to break it, be sure you
now give a fatherly satisfactory complete answer to them with speed, at your
utmost perils, and lay all other worldly employments and affairs aside (as
you have laid preaching by, long ago) till you have done it, else these.
Quaeligres will prove fatal to your Popedomes, Episcopalities, Consistories,
Visitations, and elegall Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions, and proceedings, and so
I commit you to your studies for the present, as you (no doubt in imitation of
your Savior Christ and his Apostles, who had not any Pursevaunts, Iaylors,
Messengers, and Catch-poales, attending at their heels upon every occasion,
and many Jaoles and Prisons, to commit poor Christians and Ministers too at
their pleasure, as your Lordships their Successors now have, though we read
not of them in any Author) commit others to your prisons and dungeons, and
would do me no doubt, if you could catch me napping, as Mose did his Mare,
even for presuming to propound these questions to you in the behalf of my
Sovereign and Country.

M. E.

16. New Quaeligres proposed to our Lord Praeliglates.
I.
QUO IURE: Can our Archbishops, Bishops, and their Officialls grant Lycenses,
for money, to any of his Majesty's Subjects to marry without asking Banes, it
being directly contrary to the Statutes of 2. and 3. Ed. 6. c. 21. 5. and 6.
Ed. 6. c. 12. And to the Rubricke before the form of solemnization of
Matrimony in the Common Prayer book, confirmed by Parliament, 1. Eliz. c. 2.
which prescribes thus: First that the Banes must be asked three several
Sundays or Holy Days in the time of service, the people being present, after
the accustomed manner; and if the persons that should be married dwell in
diverse Parishes, the Banes must be asked in both Parishes, and the Curate of
the one Parish shall not solemnize Matrimony, between them, without a
Certificate of the Banes being thrice asked from the Curate of the other Parish.

Whether if Marriage be a Sacrament (as the Papists hold, who yet deny it, as
an unholy-thing, to all their holy Cleargie-men, and religious persons, a
strange contradiction) or an Ecclesiastical thing, as our Praeliglates deem
it (though common to pagans, and some kind of fowls and beasts, and so truly
civil and natural, rather then Ecclesiastical, if it be not See Summa
Angelica and Summa Rosella tit. Simonia.
Symony in them to sell Licenses, and take money for Marriages, and whether his
Majesty, who can only dispense with Laws, and this Rubricke in the
Common Prayer Book, it being a chief branch of his Prerogative Royal) may
not justly call all our Praeliglates, and their Officers to an account for all
the money taken for such Licenses (and also for Lycenses to marry in prohibited
times, as they term them, as mere oppressions and device to get money, there
being no Law of the Realm nor Canon of our Church, prohibiting marriages in
those or any other seasons whatsoever, which are always free and lawful for
marriages, as well as for Christnings and Burialls etc.) from 21. Jacob. till now
(which money amounts at least to 40000. p. or more) they having no right or
title to it by any Law or Patent extant?

II.
By what Law can our Praeliglates (as now they begin to do) consecrate
Churches, Chapples, or Churchyards, as if they were unholy and common places
before, unfit to be prayed in: contrary to Acts 10. 14. 15. 1. Tim. 2. 8. John
4. 20. to 25. contrary to the practice of Christ and his Apostles, who
consecrated no Churches or Churchyards, and gave no such commission to Bishops
or any others to do it, but men together in private houses, and unconsecrated
places to receive the Sacraments and preach Gods word, Acts 2. 46. c. 5. 42. c.
20. 7. 8. 9. c. 18. 7. 11. c. 19. 9. 10. c. 28. 30. 31. Romans 16. 5. 1. Cor. 16.
19. Col. 4. 15. Philem. 2. Mark 14. 12. to 27. Luke 22. 16. to 24. contrary to
the practice of the primitive Christians for above 300. years after Christ (as
the third part of the Homily against the peril of Idolatry p. 66. 67.
resolves.) Contrary to the Statute of 15. R. 2. c. 5. which adjudgeth it
Mortmaine, and contrary to the Statute of 3. and 4. Ed. 6. c. 10. 1. Eliz. c.
2. 8. Eliz. c. 1. which abolisheth and inhibites all other Rites, Ceremonies
and forms of consecration (with all Popish Ceremonies and Pontificalls,
wherein the manner of consecrating Churches, Chappells, and Churchyards is
prescribed) but such as are only prescribed in the Books of Common Prayer and
ordination, in which there is not one syllable of consecrating Churches,
Chappells, or Churchyards, or any one Statute of the Realm, or Canon of our
Church since the beginning of Reformation prescribing or allowing it.

If they say, that the Temple at Jerusalem was dedicated, and that the
Tabernacle and Altar among the Jews was also consecrated. Ergo our Churches,
Chappells and Churchyards must be consecrated by their Lordships. I answer.

First, That the 2. Chron. 6 etc. 7. 7.
Temple was consecrated by Solomon: and the Exodus 30. 22. etc. etc. 40.
Tabernacle and Altar by Moses, the one a King, the other a temporal
Magistrate, (who consecrated Aaron also and bis sons, and ordained them
Priests) neither of them a Bishop or High Priest, therefore if any such
consecrations are to be made, the King and temporal Magistrates ought to make
them, not their Lordships, as Hospinian prooves at large, de Origin
Obedirationum c. 1. fol. 104. where he concluds thus: Hoc autem authoritas
antiquitus semper fuit Politici Magistratus: and that as well among the Pagans
as Christians.

Secondly, They had a command from God for the one; but their Lordships have
none for the other.

Thirdly, These Consecrations and purifyings were part of the Ceremonial Law;
and so quite abolished by Christ, Acts 10. 14. 15. John 4. 20. to 26. 1. Tim.
2. 8. Col. 2. 13. to the end. Heb. 8. and 9. therefore not now to be used.

Fourthly, The Temple, Tabernacle and Jewish Altars were consecrated and
hallowed, because Types of Christ, of which our Churches, Chappells and
Churchyards are no Types.

Fifthly, The Jews never consecrated their Synagogues (in which they had no
Altars) nor yet their Burying-places, in lieu of which our Churches and
Churchyards succeed: Therefore if their Lordships will imitate them, they must
not consecrate Churches, Chapples or Altars, nor yet have any Altars in our
Churches, much less take 20. 30. or 40. p. for consecrating them, as some of
them have done, it being Summa Angelica and Rosella tit. Simonia and
consecratio Ecclesiaelig.
Simony in the highest degree, and nothing due by the Cannon Law but a dinner.

III.
By what Law of the Land can our Bishops, Archdeacons and their visitors in
their visitations take money for procurations of those Churches which they
visit not in person, or more money for procurations, then will defray their
diet and horse-meat, there being no Lindwode de Censibus and procurationibus,
where all this is resolved.
more due by their own Canon Law, and that only for the Churches they
personally visit: Or by what Law or Canon can they take money of Ministers or
Scholemasters for showing their letters of order, or lycenses to preach, or
teach school; or of Churchwardens and others for presentiments. There being
not one Lindwode ibid. and 23. Eli. c. 1.
penny due by Law or Canon to them, much less by Patent or grant from the
King? And whether may not his Majesty lawfully call all our Archbishops,
Bishops, Archdeacons, and their visitors to an account for all the money and
extorted Fees, thus taken by them in their visitations, and likewise in their
Consistories, for probate of wills and Letters of administrations, where they
take twice, thrice, yea 4. or 5. times as much as the Statute of 21. H. 8. c.
5. allows them, (which is but 5. s. at the highest, where the goods amount to
40. p. or upwards) and punish them all in Star Chamber for extortion (as he
has lately done many Officers in his temporal Courts, since these their
execrable extortions, taken duering his Highness raygne, will amount at least to
100000. p. as much as the Clergy gave to King Henry the 8. to exempt
themselves from that praemunire they had incurred by submitting themselves to
Cardinal Woollseyds power legatine.

IV.
Quo Iure: Can any D. of the civil Law, or other Chancellor, Vicar general,
Official or Commissarie to any Prelate or Archdeacon, exercise any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under them, without special lycense and Patent
from his Majesty or his predecessors Royal, it being directly contrary to the
expres Statute of 37. H. 8. c. 17. which ordaines, that the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors shall ordain, constitute, and depute all Bishops and
Archdeacons, Chauncellors, Vicars general, Commissaries, Officialls, Scribes
and Registers (or else it gives them no power to execute any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction) and that by special letters Patents, (as appears by 1. Eliz. c.
1. and 8. Eliz. c. 1.) which Patents they all now wanting, cannot exercise any
such Jurisdiction, and so all their proceedings are merely void, and their
places in his Majesty's disposal, to whom they ought to be accountable for all
the proffits they have already unjustly received in these their usurped offices.

V.
Whether is it not now meet and convenient for his Majesty to appoint one of
his Nobles, or some other learned Layman, to be his Vicegerent general for
good and due ministration of Justice to be bad in all causes and cases,
touching the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and for the godly Reformation, and
redress of all errors, heresies and abuses in our Church, to take place of and
sit above the Archbishop of Canterbury, and all other Lord Bishops in all
places; according to the Statute of 31. H. 8. c. 10. yet in full force; to
bridle the pride, curb the insolences, redress the usurpations,
Extravagances, Innovations, and take away the pretended Ius Divinum, of our
Lordly Prelates, directly repugnant to this Act, and to 26. H. 8. c. 1. 28. H.
8. c. 10. 31. H. 8. c. 9. 31. H. 8. c. 31. 34. and 35. H. 8. c. 17. 35. H. 8.
c. 1. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. On which I
would desire their Lordships to chew the cudd, to abate their favor.

VI.
By the Statute of 37. H. 8. c. 6. Every person or persons that shall cut out,
or maliciously cause to be cut out the tongue of any person, or shall
maliciously cut off, or cause to be cut of the ear or ears of any his
Majesty's Subjects, is to render trible damages to the party, and so forfeite
10. p. sterling for every such an offense to the Kings Majesty and his Heirs:
And 5. H. 4. c. 5. makes it felony for any man maliciously to cut off any man's
tongue, or put out his eye. Whether then our Lord Prelates and their Officers
for cutting out our faithful Ministers tongues, and closing up their mouths
that they may not preach Gods word to their people, and cutting of some Laymens
ears, and threatening to have the ears of more, that they may not hear Gods
word, (and that maliciously against the Laws and Statutes of the Realm) are
not fellons within the latter of these two Acts, and Malefactors in the first,
to render ireble damages to the parties greeved, and maimed by them, and to
make a fine to his Majesty, is a question worthy resolution.

VII.
Whether these Lordly Prelates that have stood mute for one, two, or three
years space and more, and never preached, nor given answer to these
Quaeligres; refusing to put themselves to the trial of God and their Country,
for their Episcopal pretended Ius Divinum, and other their forementioned
usurpations and exactions upon his Majesty and his Subjects, are not by the
28. Ass. 19. 40. Ass. 40. 43. Ass. 30. Stamford. l. 2. c. 60. Fitz. Ca. 27. 30.
36. 51. 53. 56. 58. 71. 72. 191. 218. 225. 233. 283. 359. Br. Pa. 1. 2. 4. 5.
8. 9. 12. 13. 14. 15. 19.
Common Law of the Land, to be pressed for Mutes, as other malefactors that
stand mute and silent, are in like cases.

VIII.
Whether if the Apostles were now in England, and should preach Jesus Christ
daily in our Temples and from house to house, without ceasing, as they did Acts
5, 42. our Lord Prelates would not presently silence, suspend, and pursevant
them into the high Commission, and there fine and imprison them for
Convinticleers: And if they should preach notwithstanding their Lordships
inhibitions, (as they did notwithstanding the chief Priests command to do
it,) whether their Lordships would not thereupon be filed with indignation, and
put them in the Common-prison, and there keep them fast, and beat them too, as
their predecessors the High Priests did, Acts 5. 17. 18. 40. 41. since they
thus serve our Godly faithful Ministers for the same causes.

IX.
Whether if our Savior Christ himself were now on earth, and should be
convented before our High Priests, as he was once before the Jews High
Priest, and they should offer to put him to an Ex officio oath, and examine him
concerning his Disciples and Doctrine; and Christ should refuse to take such an
oath, and answer them as he did the High Priest: (I spoke openly to the world,
I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whether the Jews and people
always resort, and in secreet have I said nothing. Why ask thou me? Ask
them that hear me, what I said unto them: Behold they know what I said:)
refusing to bring in a coppie of his Sermons, or to accuse himself, would not
their Lordships Pursevants Officers upon such an answer as this stricke Jesus
with the palm of their hands, (as the High Priests Officer did) Saying:
Answerest thou the High Priest (our Lord Archbishop and Bishops) so? John 18.
19. 20. 21. 22. And would not their Lordships for such an answer (which
satisfied the High Priest) commit our Savior forthwith to prison, to the
Clinke, the Gate House, Fleet, New-prison, Kings Bench or Counter, as they
committed Petition to Q. Eliz. p. 77.
Mr. Bambridg and Mr. Johnson of old, and many of Christ's Ministers since, for
the same answer.

X.
Whether if St. Paul were now alive, and should preach so diligently in
England, as he did amongst the Jews, our High Priests, the Prelates, would not
lay the selfsame accusation against him before the Kings Majesty, as Ananias
(the Jews High Priest) did by Tertullus his Orator before Felix, and inform
his Majesty, that they had found this man a pestilent fellow, and a moover of
sedition among all the Jews (now English men) throughout the world, or
Kingdom, and a Ringleader of the sect of the Nazarens (the Puritanes as they
term them, Acts 24. 5.) since they lay the selfsame accusations to the chardge
of most Godly Ministers, as many late instances evidence.

XI.
Whether if Christ himself should preach Luke 19. 47. c. 20. 1. c. 21. 37. 38.
c. 22. 53.
daily in some of our Prelates Diocoese, as he did in the Temple and Jewish
Synagogues, and St. Paul Acts 20. 20. 21. 31. c. 19. 9.
preach night and day (morning and evening) in our Churches, as he did at
Ephesus, against our Prelates inhibitions, and the people flock from all parts
and Parishes to hear them, as they did to them; our Prelates would not
forthwith suspend them from preaching, and clapp them by the heels, and
likewise present and punish all their hearers, for goeing out of their own
Parishes, where they had no sermons, to hear them, since they thus use our
painefullest Preachers and hearers, who imitate their examples, contrary to the
very doctrine of our Homilies of the right of the Church, p. 3. 4. which
themselves have subscribed too, but refuse to practice?

XII.
Whether if our Savior should now descend in person from heaven, and give his
precept to our Lord Prelates, which once he gave to his Apostles Luke 22. 25.
26. Mat. 20. 25. 26. 27. ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them: But
it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be great among you, let him be
your Minister, and whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant,
etc. they would presently convent and arraigne him for it, as an open oppugner
of their Lordly Jurisdiction and temporal Offices and power, and censure him
as severely as ever they did Dr. Bastwick, or any other, that has writ
against their pretended Divine right to their Lordly Hierarchy?

XIII.
Whether these several actions and writs at Common Law (mentioned in the
Register) will not lie against the Prelates? Namely; The write entitled Ad
Iura Regia, for violating the Kings Laws and prerogative Royal, by their own
extravagant Laws, Articles, Decretalls, and Canons, to reduce them to the
Kings Laws, in Ad quod damnum, to inquire, what great damages they have done
to his Majesty's Subjects souls, bodies, estats, and to inform his Majesty
what Nusances they are: An Apostata capiendo: to imprison them, for their
Apostatie, from the doctrines and faith of the Church of England, to the faith
and Ceremonies of the Church of Rome, and casting off their spiritual cares
and functions, to follow temporal affairs and manage offices like so many
temporal Lords: An assisa de nocumento: for the great musances they have
lately done to our Religion, Church, State, Ministers, and people? A writ of
Association, to rank Ministers and temporal Lords in aeligquipage with them,
over whom they now so much Lord it, like Lords paramount over all other people.
Regist. par. 2. f. 36. Ras. Prohibition 5.
An Attachment on a prohibition: That Laymen shall not be cited before them to
take any oath, or make any recognition, unless in matters of Testament and
Marriage usual in former ages, and necessary now: An Attachment against them
for refusing to admit prohibitions in cases whereby Law they lie, and stopping
the current of this write: An Audita Quarela, to hear the Ministers and
peoples several complaints against them: An Acquiet ando de Servitijs, to free
the Ministers and people from their late imposed Ceremonies, services, and
vassaladge: A Cautione admittenda, to make people more wary of them, and to
procure absolutions for their unjust Censures: A Cercierari, to remoove them
from their temporal offices and employments, and have spiritual and temporal
causes out of their unlawful Consistories and visitations (kept in their own
name without Patent or Commission from his Majesty into the Kings own
temporal Courts: A Cessavit de cantaria and Servitijs, per biennium; for not
preaching in their Diocoese to their people by two years space and more (the
case of diverse of them.) De Clerico admittendo, to enforce them to admite our
suspended, silenced Ministers to preach again freely, as in former times: De
Clerico infra sacros ordines constituto non eligendo in officium; to hinder
them from being chosen, and being thrust into temporal offices and affairs,
incompitable with their functions: De Cognitionibus admittendis; to hinder them
from meddling with all causes and affairs of which they have no cognizance: A
writ of Collution and deceit; for their hypocrisy and juggling, both with
God, his Majesty, and his Subjects, and for seeming holy, pious, just,
religious, yea Fathers and Pillars of our Church, our faith, and being nothing
less: An Action of the case; for vexing, excommunicating, suspending and
silencing Ministers and others against Law, and without just cause: An Action
of account; to call them to an account for all their extortions and
usurpations, both upon the King and Subject: An Action upon the Statutes
against Ingrossers, Regraters, and Forestallers; for forestalling all good
Books against their Papal Antichristian Hierarchy, Jurisdiction, extortion,
injustice, and other Episcopal virtues, both at the Press and Porth, and
engrossing them all into their own Hucksters hands, of purpose to enhaunse the
prises of them, and deprive the Kings good Subjects benefit of them. A writ
of Conspiracy; for conspiring together against the Kings Ecclesiastical
Prerogative, and the Subjects Liberties, and to set up new Ceremonies,
innovations and taxes: A Contra formam collationis; for mis-using their
jurisdiction and office, and mis-imploying their temporallities and revenues
(which should be spent in releeving the poor) upon their children, kindred,
purchase of greater dignities and preferments, or maintenance of their own
pomp, pride, state, luxury, venery, and lust. A copia libelli deliberanda; to
enjoin them to give coppies of Libells and Articles to his Majesty's Subjects,
beforethey force them to swear or answer to them. A Curia claudenda; to cause
them to shut up their Consistories, visitations, and Ecclesiastical Courts,
till they have a Patent from his Majesty to keep them in his name and right
alone, and grace to use them better, and to better purposes then hitherto they
have done. A Quo warrento: to question them by what authority they keep their
Consistories, Visitations, and make out process, private Articles, impose new
oaths, Ceremonies, and Jurisdictions in their own names upon his Majesty's
Subjects. De custode Amovendo and alio admittendo; to remoove them from their
Bishopprickes, and put better and other kind of men in their places. An
Ejectione custodiaelig, for suspending and ejecting Ministers from their
Churches and Cures: An Errore corrigendo; to cause them to amend their manifold
errors, both in life, doctrine, practice and proceedings. An essendo quietum de
Theolonia; to exempt Ministers and people from their intolerable exactions,
extortions, and new imposed Fees and Contributions, both in their visitations
and Consistories. An Excommunicato deliberando: To cause them to absolve and
free all those Ministers and people they have most unjustly excommunicated. An
Executione judicij; To get some judgments in Star Chamber and other his
Majesty's temporal Courts executed against them, and their most unjust
proceedings. Ex gravi querela; To hear the grievous complaints, both of
Ministers and people, against their tyranny, Lordlynes, pride, oppression,
impiety, and other vices, their Altars, Crucifixes, Popish Ceremonies, Ex
officio, and visitations Oaths, Articles, proceedings and late dangerous
Innovations. A writ of false judgment; For their wrong late unjust Censures,
Excommunications, Suspencions, Sentences, and determinations, both in their
Consistories, Visitations, and high Commission, and resolving their Episcopal
Lordlynes and Jurisdiction to be Iure Divino; contrary to the express Acts of
25. H. 8. c. 19. 21. 26. H. 8. c. 1. 31. H. 8. c. 9. 10. 37. H. 8. c. 17. 1.
Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 8. Eliz. c. 1. and other Statutes, as 1. and 2.
Phil. and Mary c. 8. resolving the contrary. De fine Adnullando; To anull their
several fines illegally imposed upon his Majesty's Subjects in their High
Commissions, and lately in their Consistories and Visitations, where they have
gotten a trick to fine Churchwardens and others, contrary to Law, as is
resolved Fitzh Not. Brevium fol. 50. P. 51. K. 52. ff. 53. A. 14. H. 4. 88. A.
20. E. 4. 10. B. 22. E. 4. 20. 12. H. 7. 22. 23. Artic. cliri. c. 4. Cook 4.
Report to 6. 22. Ass. 70. A fieri facies Episcopa; To cause them diligently to
preach, and follow their spiritual Ministerial functions. An habeas corpora
and homine Replegianda; To free the Subjects wrongfully imprisoned by them and
their Pursevants. An habere facias seseinam and possessionem; To restore good
silenced, deprived, and suspended Ministers again, to the seisine and
possession of their livings and lectures, and the exercise of their Ministry.
An habere facias visum; To cause them to show men their Articles in their
Courts and high Commissions, before they put them to answer, or take an oath.
An Idemptitate nominis; To restore Ministers to their ancient style and titles
of Bishops, which they have engrossed to themselves, though the Scripture gives
only to Ministers and Presbyters, Acts 20. 17. 28. Phil. 1. 1. 1. Timot. 3. 1.
2. 3. Tit. 1. 5. 7. 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. and knows no other Bishops, but them
alone of Divine institution. De intrusione in hereditatem; To show by what
Divine title they have intruded themselves into the Church, Christ's own
inheritance, into temporal Offices, employments, and State affairs, and into
those great Lordships and honors they now possess. Ad Inquirendo de damnis; To
inquire what great hurt and damages they have done to their several Diocoese,
his Majesty's Prerogative, his peoples Liberties and estates, the Ministers and
Preachers of Gods word, our Religion and to the whole state of England. An
Inquirendo de vasto; To inquire of the great waste and havocke they have made
of late amongst the Ministers and Preachers of Gods word, and the purity of his
Ordinances, and thereupon to render treble damages A Leproso amovendo; To
remoove these Leopards out of our Church, before they have so far infected it
with the leven and leprosy of Rome, that she become incurable, and to remoove
them far from his Majesty's Court, no place for Lepers. A liberate; To free
both Ministers and people from their late encrochments, visitations, Articles,
Oaths, Altars, Bowings, Ceremonies, and unjust Censures, and proceedings. A
libertatibus allocandis; To enforce them to allow and no ways to encroach upon
the Subjects Liberties. A mandamus; To command them to give over Lording and
Loyetering, and set themselves to frequent and diligent preaching. A melius
inquirendo; To inquire better of their pretended Ius Divinum, their
oppressions, exorbitances, lives, proceedings, and underhand juglings, and to
certify them into the Star Chamber, or some other Court of Record. An Action
upon the Statute of Monopolies; For engrossing all temporal and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, the sale of Letters of order, lycenses to marry,
preach, keep school, etc. (all gross Symony into their own hands.) A ne
admittas; To prohibit them to admit any Altars, Images, Crucifixes, Taxers,
new Articles, Ceremonies, Doctrines, or innovations into our Church. A ne
injuste vexes; To restrain them from all unjust vexations, suspentions,
excommunications, and proceedings against Ministers and others. A writ of
nusans; To remoove their late nusances, Altars, Crucifixes, new Oaths,
Articles, Innovations, Rayles, Ceremonies, Arminian and Popish Doctrines, out
of our Church. A non distringas ad respondendum, sive breve Regis: To force
them to summon all their visitations by the Kings writ, as they ought, 25. H.
8. c. 19. And to make out all process, Citations, Commission of Administration,
Probat of wills etc. in the Kings name and sti^e alone, and under his Seal,
according to 1. Ed. 6. c. 2. 1. Eliz. c. 1. A non molestando; to hinder them
from molesting good Ministers, Preachers, people, and other his Majesty's
Subjects without just cause. A moderata misericordia; to moderate their
illegal and excessive fines, and teach these holy Fathers more mercy: A writ
of false imprisonment; for pursevanting and imprisoning men against Law, which
they have no power at all to do: A writ de odia and atia; to examine their
malicious unjust accusations, imprisonments, and proceedings of and against his
Majesty's Subjects. A parco fracto; for breaking the pales and hedges, both of
the Laws of God and the Realm, and ruling only by their mere lusts and
wills. A perambulatione facienda: to bound out the true limits of their
Ecclesiastical and Episcopal Jurisdiction, Courts, and power, and to cause
them to give those prisoners they have a long time shut up: and the common Law
and course of Prohibitions, which they have pent up of late, to walk freely
abroad. A ponendo in Ballyam; to enforce them to dischardge and bail those
they have unjustly imprisoned. A praeligcipe in capite; to render to God and
the King those their several rights, Jurisdictions, and prerogatives, they
have a long time unjustly detayned from them as their own. A Prohibition: to
hinder all their Innovations, Oaths, Visitations, Articles, extravagant
proceedings, fines, imprisonments, extortions, excommunications, suspentions,
encroachments on the Common Law and the like. A Pro rata portione; to give them
only that power and authority, and such competent maintenance as Gods Laws
allows them, and no more. A Quale jus: to examine their Divine title of their
Bishopprickes, what right it is? A Quare impedit; to force them to show good
cause, why they hinder Ministers from preaching to their people, and prohibit
those to hear Sermons abroad, who have none at home. A Quare incumbravit; to
show cause why they have lately incombred our Churches, Ministers, people, with
so many innovations, Alterations, Injunctions, Articles, Oaths, Fees, Taxes,
Rayles, Ceremonies, Erroneous, and licentious Books, and false doctrines, and
to censure them severely for doing it. A Quare non admisit: to show cause why
they permit not Ministers to preach on Lords days afternoon, on lecture
days, and other occasions, or so osten as heretofore, and why they resuse to
admit those into the ministry, or to livings, who will not subscribe to their
new Innovations, and those Articles they secretly tender to them under hand. A
Quod permittat: To permit the Lords table to stand quietly in the midst of the
Church or Chauncell, without being rayled in and remooved Altar-wise against
the wall, and to suffer Ministers to preach, and people to hear and receive
the Sacrament, in such manner as they have formerly used. A Querela coram Rege,
and consilio discusiendo and terminando; to bring all these Quaeligres and the
complaints of the Subjects against the Bishops, and their Officers, before the
King and his Counsel, to be there heard and determined by them. A Quo Iure: To
examine by what Law they have turned Communion Tables into Altars, set up
Crucifixes, silenced our Ministers, put down Lectures, and preaching, made and
printed new Oaths, Articles and Injunctions in their own names etc. and by
what Law, and in what Court they may be punished for them. A Restitutione
abstracti ab Ecclesia: To restore our silenced Ministers and Preachers to their
Chruches. A salva conductus; to suffer his Majesty's Subjects to go peaceably
and safely about their business, and Ministers without danger of their
Pursevants and Catch-poles. A Securitate pacis; to bind them to the peace and
good behavior, that they may no longer disturb the peace, both of our Church,
State, and people. A supersedeas; to stay all their Innovations, and
proceedings in their Consistories and visitations, till they have a Patent and
Commission under the Kings great Seal, to keep them in his name and right
alone. A writ of trespase against them, and their Pursevants, for rifling and
breaking up men's Howses, Clossets, Trunckes, Chests, and carrying away their
Books and Papers violently, against Law and Justice, as if they were Felons
and Traitors. An Action upon the Statute of vagarant Rogues and Vagabonds; for
wandering abroad from their own callings Ecclesiastical, Employments, and
Diocoeligse, into temporal carnal worldly State affairs, and following the
Court like a company of flattering fawning Beggars, hunting after greater
preferments and revenues, and being seldom resident at their Cures. A writ of
ventre inspiciendo; To inquire after and inspect, how many great Bellyes their
Lordships with their Officers, and servants have impregnated of late years,
and to take the full measure of their Lordships pampered bellyes, which they
only feed and take care of; which must needs be monstrous great, when as their
very tails are so vaste, as to require an whole Cathedral Church to make a
seat for them; Paul's it self, being little enough to make a Lord Prelates
Chair; and two or three sheires scarce able to make up one Diocoeligse, or
Parish big enough for his oversight. A vi laica removenda; To remoove all lay
force and violence out of the Church, and take away the temporal power of
fining, imprisoning, pursevating, breaking open men's houses, etc. from their
Lordships, with all other lay power and Jurisdiction now crept into the Church.
And A fieri facias; For their Lordships to show cause, why they with their
oppressing Archdeacons, Commissaries, Registers, and other Officers, should
not forthwith be indicted and convicted in a Praemunire (and that Ex officio by
his Majesty's Atourney general and his Judges) or deeply fined in
Star Chamber, for all their several misdemeners specified in the premises.

XIV.
Whether those bloody Prelates, who out of their desperate malice to our
Savior (to evacuate the use of this his last Supper, instituted purposely by
himself to show forth his death till he come, 1. Cor. 11. 25. 26. Coll. 3. 1.
(which now these Crucifixes must do as if this Sacrament were not sufficient
to do it, no not when it is administered, unless there be a Crucifixe then
standing on or over the Altar) and to reduce us back again to Rome) now
crucify him daily in their new erected Crosses and Crucifixes, both in
Cathedralls, private Chapples, and elsewhere, and that in the direct opposition
to the 35. Article of our Church, and the Homily of the peril of Idolatry;
which they have prescribed ost times too; (expressly prohibiting the very making
and setting up of Crucifixes, and other Images in Churches, or Chappells, as
unlawful and Idolatrous: Yea to his Majesty's Declarations prohibiting all
Innovations and backesliding unto Popery in the least degree:) To be guilty of
perjury to God, and disobedience to his Majesty in the highest degree, and to
be deprived of their Bishopprickes for it, by the Statute of 13. Eliz. c. 12.
confirming the said Articles of Religion and Homilies? And whether their
Cathedralls, Chappells and Churches, wherein they have set up such Crosses to
crucify their Savior own (whose holy, paynefull, daily, preaching life, they
have never before their eyes; and therefore represent his death in these dumb
Pictures, because they are grown so lazy, that they seldom or never preach
it) be not ipso facto forfeited to the King by the Statute of 13. E. 1. c. 33.
against setting up of Crosses and Crucifixes, and their very Bishopprickes too;
which they better deserve to loose for this their open insolent erecting of
Crucifixes, Altars, Tapers, and other Romish superstitions to usher in Popery,
then any Godly Ministers to be deprived of their livings for not wearing of a
Surpluse, or not bowing at the Name of Jesus, or not kneeling at the Sacrament,
or not yielding to any other late Innovations, for which their Lordships
against all Law and conscience have deprived, and suspended so many of their
Godly Brethren, more worthy a Bishoppricke, and far more innoxious, pious,
obedient to his Majesty's and Gods Laws, then themselves?

XV.
Whether the Prelates, for disguising themselves with strangevestments,
disguises vizors, and play like apparel, as Rochetts, Copes, Stoles, Abbeys,
and other massing trincketts to difference themselves from all other men, and
daunceing, cringing and playeing the Mummers, with diverse new antique gestures,
piping Organs and Minstrelsy, before their new erected Altars, hopping, limping
and dancing before them like the ancient Pagan Priests about their Idolatrous
Altars, or like Mummers about a cobloase, and putting on a mere vizor of piety
and gravity on their faces, when as they have neither of them nor any other
true Christian graces in their hearts; and under these disguises doing greater
hurt and mischiefs, both in Church and State, be not finable, and to be
imprisoned for the space of three months without buyle or mayneprise; for
every time they shall be thus masked and disguised, by the expres words of 3.
H. 8. c. 9. entitled: An Act against Mummers and Delinquents within that Law:
And whether the best use these Lord Bishops, thus disguised in their
Pontificallibus, can be put unto, be not to make Skarrecrowes in some
Cornefeild or other, or to stand in the Church Porch to keep out Dogs, from
their holy consecrated Temples, which would be so affrighted with their mumming
vestments and disguises, that they never durst come near the Corn or Church,
for fear of these terrible Lordly Bugbears and Skarrecrowes.

XVI.
Whether by the Statutes of 25. Ed. 1. c. 4. and 34. Ed. 1. c. 5. every
Archbishop and Bishop of England, ought not personally to read the Statutes of
Magna Carta, and of the Forest, with King Edward the first his Confirmations of
them, in their several Cathedral Churches twice every year, and upon the
reading thereof, openly to denounce, excommunicated, banned, and accursed, all
those that willingly do or procure to be done any thing contrary to the
tenor, force and effect of them, or either of them, by word, deed, or
counsel: Whether they ought to be destrayned, suspended and excommunicated for
not doing of it, with far greater justice and reason, then themselves suspend
and silence Ministers, for not reading their Lordships Declaration for Sports
on the Lords day (coulored over with his Majesty's Name, to dishonor his
Highness, and excuse themselves) these two Statutes enjoining them, the one in
express terms, and inflicting these Penalties on them for neglecting it, but
no Law, Precept or Canon prescribing Ministers the other, nor yet that Book it
self? Whether their Lordships both by word, deed and counsel infringing Magna
Carta, these Statutes sundry ways, especially by their imprisoning, fining,
excommunicating, suspending and depriving men against Law, and by their new
invented Taxes, and Talleges, to pill and poll the Subjects, and in procuring
Judges and others by menaces, flatery, or ill counsel, to deny Prohibitions,
and habeas corpore, to do many things against the tenor and effect of these
good Laws, now miserably everywhere trampled under feet, be not ipso sacto
excommunicated by diverse ancient excommunications, fulminated against such
desperate infringers and transgressors of those Acts in a most direful manner
by their Predecessors, and by the tenor of these Statutes themselves, and so
altogether Irreguler, and to be shut out of all Churches, his Majesty's Court
and Chapple, all Christian men's society, and sequestered both from their Office
and Benefice, till they have done public penance, and given sufficient
satisfaction to the whole Realm of England, for their enormious daily
multiplied crimes, under which both Church and Kingdom groan and languish at
this present.

FINIS.

